
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
                           royal blazon or coat of arms
                        
                        SEMPER EADEM
                        IOHN HVIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN. his Diſcours of Voyages into ye Easte & West Indies.
                        Diuided into Foure Bookes
                        Printed at London by IOHN WOLFE Printer to ye Honorable Cittie of LONDON
                        
                           Willms Rogers ciuis Londinensis Inventor et ſculptor.
                        IW
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  To the Right VVorshipfull IVLIVS CAESAR Doctor of the Lawes, Iudge of the High Court of Admiralty, Maſter of Requeſts to the Queenes Maieſty, and Maſter of Saint Katherines.
                  
                     RIGHT VVORSHIPFVLL: The manyfolde Curteſies, which it hath pleaſed you from time to time to multiply vpon mee, haue made me ſo greatly beholden vnto you, that they can neuer dye, but remaine freſh in my remembrance during my Life: So that I muſt enforce my ſelfe with all my beſt Endeuours openly to acknowledge the ſame, and by all the meanes that poſſibly I can, to bee thankefull for them; otherwiſe I might iuſtly be noted with the blacke ſpotte of Ingratitude, the moſt odious vice that can raigne amongſt men: which vice to auoyde, I haue ſtudied earneſtly to finde out ſome way, wherby I might make knowne vnto your Worſhip that duetifull reuerence and affection, which I owe vnto you in that reſpect. But hauing hitherto had no fit oportunitie or good occaſion to declare the ſame, I haue beene conſtrayned

to remaine in this debt, vntill now at laſt it hath pleaſed God to offer me a meane which I hope will not be diſpleaſing vnto you. About a Tweluemonth agoe, a learned Gentleman brought vnto mee the Voyages and Nauigation of John Huyghen van Linſchoten into the Indies written in the Dutche Tongue, which he wiſhed might be tranſlated into our Language, becauſe hee thought it would be not onely delightfull, but alſo very commodious for our Engliſh Nation. Vpon this commendation and opinion, I procured the Tranſlation thereof accordingly, and ſo thought good to publiſh the ſame in Print, to the ende it might bee made common and knowen to euery body. And calling to minde the vſuall cuſtome of Writers and Printers in theſe daies, who do commonly ſhelter and ſhrowde their works vnder the credit of ſome ſuch as are able to Patronize the ſame, your Worſhip repreſented it ſelfe before mee, and did (as it were of right) challenge the Patronage hereof, as being a Matter that appertaineth to your Iuriſdiction. For this Dutchman arriuing here in England after his long trauell and Nauigation, and bringing rare Intelligences with him from Forreyne parts, good reaſon it is that hee ſhould bee examined by ſuch as are in place and Authority appointed for ſuch purpoſes. And to whome can hee be directed better then to your ſelfe, whome it hath pleaſed her moſt excellent Maieſtie to authorize for Iudge in Sea matters and Admirall cauſes. And therefore I haue brought him vnto you, with earneſt requeſt, that you will be pleaſed to examine him accordingly, and if you ſhall finde him any way beneficiall to our

Countrey and Countrey men, vouchſafe him your good countenance, and giue him ſuch intertainment as he ſhall deſerue. Thus am I bold with your worſhip to acknowledge my dutie after this homely manner, hauing none other meane to ſhew my ſelfe thankefull, but by preſenting you with this ſlender fruite of my abilitie & facultie, which I beſeech you to accept in good part, and I ſhall not ceaſe to pray to God, that hee will bleſſe you with long life, and proſperous health, to the great comfort of many her Maieſties Subiects and Suppliants that are daylie to bee relieued by your good meanes.
                  
                     Your Worſhips euer moſt bounden. IOHN VVOLFE.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  TO THE READER.
                  
                     
                        LVcian in one of his Dialogues intituled 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , or Surueyers, writeth of Charon the old Ferrie-Man of Hell, that vpon a great deſire which he had conceiued to view this world and the Actions of men therein, hee begged leaue of Pluto, that hee might haue a playing day, and bee abſent from his boat, to the end he might ſatisfie his thirſty humor, that troubled him ſo eagerly. Meeting with Mercurie his fellow Boatſwayne, (for he alſo conducteth Soules in Charons Barge) they two concluded together, like the two Sonnes of Alcëus, to clap the Mountaine Pelius vpon Mount Oſſa, and when they found that they were not high inough to take the ſurueigh, they added Mount O Eta vnto them, and Parn
                           •
                        us ouer them all. Vpon the toppe wherof, hauing ſetled themſelues, they did at leyſure and pleaſure take a view not onely of the Seas, and Mountaines, and Cities of the world: but alſo of the Inhabitants therof, together with their Speeches, Actions and Manners. The ſame Author in another Dialogue called Icaro-Menippus diſcourſeth of the Cinike Menippus, who being troubled with the ſame humor tooke vnto him the right wing of an Eagle, and the left wing of a Vulture, and hauing faſtened them to his body with ſtrong and ſturdie thongs, mounted vp firſt to the Acropolis or Capitol of Athens, and then from Hymettus by the Gerania to Acro-Corinthus, and ſo to Pholoë, and Erymanthus, & Taygetus, and at laſt to Olympus: where he grew ſomewhat more bragg and audacious, then before he was, and ſoared higher vpwards till he had reached the Moone, and then the Sunne, and from thence the Habitation of Iupiter and the reſt of the Gods: a ſufficient flight (as he ſaith) for a well truſſed Eagle to performe in a day. There he reſted himſelfe, and diſcouered all the world and euery particularity thereof, to the end he might the more freely & like a Scoggan taunt & ſcoffe at the Actions of men in their ſeuerall kinds. But to leaue theſe Poeticall Fictions, and vaine Fables, which doo but declare the Nature of Man to bee deſirous of Nouelties, and curious to know thoſe things whereof he is ignorant; let vs come to thoſe that being neither coniured out of hell, nor rapt into the heauens, but of their owne honourable diſpoſition and inſtinct of Nature, haue not onely compaſſed Sea and Land in their own perſons to learne and beholde Nations, Realmes, Peoples & Countries vnknowne, for the augmentation of their owne priuate skill and cunning, but alſo haue committed their knowledge and labours to writing for the propagation of the ſeruice and glorie of God in Pagan and Heathen places, and the great pleaſure, profit & commodity of their Countrymen. Of this kinde and ſort of famous men, there hath beene great ſtore in al ages, but ſpecially at the firſt, Homer, Anaximander, Hecataeus, Democritus, Eudoxus, Timaeus, Eratosthenes, Polybius, Posſidonius, Dionyſius, Strabo, Solinus, Pomponius Mela, Maximus Tyrius, Ptolomée, & an infinite number of other ancient Authors, that haue imployed

their wits & induſtries in this behalf to the ſingular benefit of our later times, wherein there haue beene moſt excellent and exquiſite followers of them, as Munsters, Mercators, Theuets, Belonies, Ortelies, Villamonts, & many moe, that by the light and good meanes of thoſe their Predeceſſors, haue run beyonde them many degrees, and diſcouered ſuch New worlds as were neuer knowne to our Fathers & Forefathers; and therefore doo deſerue the greater commendation. No doubt, it is very troubleſome and laborious to iourney by land for the attaining to this knowledge: but to trauell by Sea, is not onely moſt dangerous, but alſo in a maner almoſt a deſperate eſtate, conſidering eſpecially the great perils wherevnto it is hourely ſubiect, as namely, Rockes, Flats, Sandes, Gulphes, Stormes, Tempeſts, beſides the continuall Watching and care in obſeruing the Poles Arctike, and Antarctike, the Aequinoctiall Line, the Altitude and Degrees of the Meridian, the Circle of the Zodiake, the Horizon, the Tropikes, the Longitude and Latitude of Heauen and earth, the Paralleles, the Hemiſphere, the Zenith, the Centre, and a Rablement of ſuch curioſities, that are able to breake the braines of the ſoundeſt man aliue. To theſe if you will add the intollerable paines, and infinite diſeaſes that doo ſpend their bodies, you muſt needs ſay, that they are the moſt miſerable Creatures of the worlde: So that you cannot chooſe but bee of the opinion of Anacharſis that Noble Philoſopher, who beeing demaunded whether Number was the greater, that of the dead or that of the Liuing, did redemaund againe, In which Number do you recken thoſe that trauell on the Sea? Signifiyng thereby, that ſuch as trauell vpon the Sea are in ſo great danger of death, that they doo continually dye liuing, and liue dying. And therefore well ſayd Bias (one of the ſeuen Sages) that Saylers vppon the Sea were alwayes within two ynches of their death: & true it is, which the Latyn Lyrike Poet writeth, That Man had a Hart of Oke, and was fenced with a triple Corſlet of Braſſe, that firſt aduentured to commit a ſlender Boat to the raging Sea. A Type and Patterne of all which miſeries, together with the cunning and skilfull Art of Nauigation, is compriſed in this Volume which wee haue in hand, being a moſt perfect deſcription of the Eaſt and Weſt Indies, or (as they are commonly called) the Portugall and Spaniſh Indies: A Worke aſſuredly very profitable, and commodious for all ſuch as are deſirous & curious louers of Nouelties.
                  Of theſe Indies, though not in diſtinguiſhed tearmes of Eaſt and Weſt, ſundry Hiſtoriographers and Authors of the old World haue made an honourable Mention, & left an exceeding commendation thereof, for the wonderfull and rare matters, that were diſcouered by the ſeuerall Trauels & Nauigation of diuers famous Captains: as namely, Alexander the great, Seleucus, Antiochus, Patrocles, and Oneſicritus, who had been all in the ſaide Indies, inſomuch as one of them held them to be the Third part of all the Land that is inhabited, in regard of the great Prouinces, puiſſant Cities, and vnmeaſurable Ilands that are found therein: all very fruitfull, and yeelding ſuch treaſure and rich Merchandize, as none other place of the whole world can afford. And althogh the curioſity and labour of theſe auncients was very great, yet greater hath beene the trauell and induſtry of thoſe which of late time, and in our age hath beene imployed therein. For the auncient Trauellers had in deede a certain kind of knowledge of this Countrey and People; but it was very vncertaine and vnperfect: Whereas we in our times are thoroughly learned and inſtructed by our owne experience, in the Prouinces, Cities, Riuers, Hauens and Trafficks of them all: So that nowe it is become knowne to the whole world. Firſt the Portingalls (being great Merchants by reaſon of their skil in Nauigation, which in our dayes is growne to a more full perfection, then euer it hath beene in times paſt:) they I ſay firſt diſcouered

the Waſt and Deſert Part of the Indies, cauſed their King to be entertayned & honoured among the People, encreaſed and enhaunſed their credit and Name exceedingly, and the ſundry commodities of their ſeuerall fruits and ſpices haue diſperſed & communicated not onely to their owne Countrymen, but alſo to all Nations vnder the Sunne. But here the Matter ſtayed not: For then came the Engliſh (a People that in the Art of Nauigation giueth place to none other) and they were incited to take this Indian Voyage in hande, and to make it generally knowne vnto their Iſland: & therevpon Syr Francis Drake, & Maſter Thomas Candiſh did not only ſayle into the ſayde Indies, but alſo trauelled round about the world, with a moſt happy and famous ſucceſſe. Whoſe examples diuers honourable Gentlemen and valiant Captaines of England haue followed, to their vnſpeakeable praiſe and commendation, & the exceeding glory of their Country: as namely the Right Honourable Earle of Cumberland, the Lord Thomas Howard, Syr Francis Drake, Syr Martin Frobiſher, Syr Richard Greenefield, Syr Iohn Hawkins, and Syr Walter Raleigh, with diuers others named and mentioned in this Booke, And laſt of all, the People of the Lowe-Countreys beeing inſtructed by the diligent ſearch and trauell of the Engliſh Nation, fell to the like trafficke into 
                        •
                     he Indies, and haue performed many Honourable and profitable Voyages. Among whom the Author of this B
                        •
                     oke, Iohn-Hugh Linſchote of Harlem was one, that continued in India for the moſt part of nine yeares, and had good oportunity of ſure and certaine intelligences by reaſon of his ſeruice vnder Vincentius da Fonſeca, a Fryer Dominican, & by K. Philip created Archbiſhop of all India. This Man Hugh Linſchote behaued himſelfe ſo honeſtly and warily during the time of his abode there, that he was not onely in high fauour of his Lord and Maiſter, but he was alſo ſingularly and generally beloued of all the Inhabitants of the places where hee was moſt reſiant. He did moſt diligently and conſiderately obſerue and collect together all occurrents and accidents that happened in his memory & knowledge, and the ſame hath committed to writing in the Dutch Tongue with all faithfulnes, to his owne euerlaſting praiſe, and to the benefit of his Countrey, together with the ſeuerall Mappes and deſcriptions of the Countreys, Cities and Townes, & all the commodities therevnto belonging. Which Booke being commended, by Maiſter Richard Hackluyt, a man that laboureth greatly to aduance our Engliſh Name and Nation, the Printer thought good to cauſe the ſame to bee tranſlated into the Engliſh Tongue.
                  The Volume conteyneth in it foure ſeuerall Treatiſes: The Firſt is,
                     The Firſt Booke. The Voyage or Iourney by Sea of the ſayde Hugh Linschote the Author, into the Eaſt or Portingall Indies, together with all the Sea-Coaſts, Hauens, Riuers and Cre
                           •
                        kes of the ſame, their Cuſtomes and Religion, their Policie and Gouernement, their Marchandiſes, Drugges, Spyces, Hearbs, & Plants, the vertues whereof are explaned by the Annotations of Doctor Paludanus, the learned Phiſitian of En
                           •
                        khuyſen: And laſt of all, a Memoriall of ſuch Accidents as fell out during the Authors aboade in India.
                  
                  
                     The Second Treatiſe is,
                     The Second Booke. The Deſcription of Guinea, Manicongo, Angola, Monomotapa, &c. with a diſcouery of the great Iſland of Madagaſcar, and all the Shallowes, Cliffes and Iſlands of the Indian Seas: The moſt part whereof was collected before by one Pigafetta from the mouth of Edward Lopez, and publiſhed in Engliſh the laſt yeare.
                  
                     The Third Treatiſe is,
                     The Thi
                           ••
                         Booke. The Nauigation of the Portingales into the Eaſt Indies: & from thence to Malacca, China, Iapon, Iaua and Sunda: And from China to the Weſterne or Spaniſh Indies, and all the Coaſt of Braſilia, &c.
                  
                  
                     The Fourth and laſt Treatiſe is,
                     The Fourth Booke. A moſt true & exact Summarie of all the Rents, Demaynes, Tolles, Taxes, Impoſts,

Tributes, Tenths, Third-pennies, and generally all the Reuenues of the King of Spayne, ariſing out of all his Kingdomes, Lands, Prouinces and Lordſhips, as well of Portugall as of Spayne, collected out of the Originall Regiſters of his ſeuerall Chambers of Accompts: together with a briefe deſcription of the gouernment and Pedegree of the Kinges of Portugall.
                  
                  I doo not doubt, but yet I doo moſt hartely pray and wiſh, that this poore Tranſlation may worke in our Engliſh Nation a further deſire and increaſe of Honour ouer all Countreys of the World, and as it hath hitherto mightily aduanced the Credite of the Realme by defending the ſame with our Wodden Walles (as Themiſtocles called the Ships of Athens·) So it would employ the ſame in forraine partes, aſwell for the diſperſing and planting true Religion and Ciuill Conuerſation therein: As alſo for the further benefite and commodity of this Land by exportation of ſuch thinges wherein we doe abound, and importation of thoſe Neceſſities whereof we ſtand in Neede: as Hercules did, when hee fetched away the Golden Apples out of the Garden of the Heſperides; & Iaſon, when with his luſtie troupe of couragious Argonautes hee atchieued the Golden Fleece in Colchos.
                  
                  Farewell.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE FIRST BOOKE.
                  
                     CHAPTER. I.
                     
                        The Voyage and trauailes of Iohn Hugen van Linſchoten into the Eaſt or Portingales Indies: Setting downe a briefe diſcourſe of the ſaid Landes, and ſea coaſtes, with the principall Hauens, Riuers, Creekes, and other places of the ſame, as yet not knowne nor diſcouered by the Portingales: Deſcribing withall not onely the manner of apparrell of the Portingales inhabiting therin, but alſo of the naturall borne Indians, their Temples, Idols, houſes, trees, Fruites, Hearbes, Spices, and ſuch like: Together with the cuſtomes of thoſe countries, as well for their manner of Idolatrous religion and worſhipping of Images, as alſo for their policie and gouernment of their houſes, their trade, and traffique in Marchandiſe, how and from whence their wares are ſold, & brought thether: With a collection of the moſt memorable and worthieſt thinges happened in the time of his beeing in the ſame countries, very profitable and pleaſant to all ſuch as are welwillers, or deſirous to heare and read of ſtrange thinges.
                     
                     
                        BEeing young, and liuing idlelye in my natiue Countrie, ſometimes applying my ſelfe to the reading of Hiſtories, and ſtraunge aduentures, wherein I tooke no ſmall delight, I found my minde ſo much addicted to ſée & trauaile into ſtrange Countries, thereby to ſéeke ſome aduenture, that in the end to ſatiſfie my ſelfe I determined, & was fully reſolued, for a time to leaue my Natiue Countrie, and my friendes (although it gréeued me) yet the hope I had to accompliſh my deſire, together with the reſolution, taken in the end ouercame my affection and put me in good comfort, to take the matter vpon me, truſting in God that he would further my intent. Which done, being reſolued, thereupon I tooke leaue of my Parents, who as then dwelt at Enckhuyſen, and beeing ready to imbarke my ſelfe, I went to a Fléet of ſhips that as then lay before the Taſſell, ſtaying the winde to ſayle for Spaine, and Portingale, where I imbarked my ſelfe in a ſhip that was bound for S. Lucas de Barameda, beeing determined to trauaile vnto Siuill, where as then I had two bretheren that had continued there certaine yeares before: ſo to helpe my ſelfe the better, & by their meanes to know the manner and cuſtome of thoſe Countries, as alſo to learne the Spaniſh tongue.
                     And the 6. of December, in the yere of our Lord 1576 we put out of ye Taſſel,Anno 1576 the 6. of December we ſailed from the Taſſell. (being in all about 80. ſhips) & ſet our courſe for Spain, and the ninth of the ſame month, wee paſſed betwéene Douer and Callis, & within thrée dayes after wee had the ſight of the Cape of Finisterra, and the fiftéene of the ſame moneth we ſaw the land of Sintra, otherwiſe called the Cape Roexent, from whence the riuer Tegio, or Tagus, runneth into the maine Sea, vppon the which riuer lieth the famous citie of Lisbone, where ſome of our Fleet put in, and left vs. The 17. day wee ſaw the Cape S. Vincent, & vppon Chriſtmas day after we entred into the riuer of S. Lucas de Barameda, where I ſtayed two or thrée dayes, and then trauailed to Siuill, & the firſt day of Ianuarie following, I entred into the citie, where I found one of my brethren,

but the other was newly ridden to the Court, lying as then in Madrill. And although I had a ſpeciall deſire preſently to trauaile further, yet for want of the Spaniſh tongue, without the which men can hardlie paſſe the countrie, I was conſtrained to ſtay there to learne ſome part of their language: meane time it chanced that Don Henry (the laſt King of Portingale) died: by which meanes a great contention and debate hapned as then in Portingale, by reaſon that the ſaid King by his Will and Teſtament, made Phillip King of Spaine, his Siſters Sonne, lawfull Heire vnto the Crowne of Portingal. Notwithſtanding ye Portingals (alwaies deadly enemies to the Spaniards,) were wholly againſt it, and elected for their king, Don Antonio, Prior de Ocrato, brothers Son to the King that died before Don Henry: which the King of Spaine hearing, preſently prepared himſelfe in perſon to goe into Portingale to receaue the Crowne, ſending before him the Duke of Alua, with a troupe of men to ceaſe their ſtrife, and pacifie the matter: ſo that in the end, partly by force, and partly by mony, hee brought the Countrie vnder his ſubiection. Whereupon diuers men went out of Siuill and other places into Portingale, as it is commonlie ſéene that men are often addicted to changes and new alterations, among the which my Brother by other mens counſels was one: Firſt trauelling to the borders of Spaine, being a cittie called Badaios, ſtanding in the frontiers of Portingale, where they hoped to finde ſome better meanes, and they were no ſooner ariued there, but they heard news that all was quiet in Portingale, and that Don Antonio was driuen out of the countrie, and Phillip by conſent of the Land receyued for King. Wherevpon my Brother preſently changed his minde of trauelling for Portingale, and entred into ſeruice with an Ambaſſador, that on the Kings behalfe was to goe into Italie, with whome he rode: and ariuing in Salamanca hee fell ſicke of a diſeaſe called Tauardilha, which at that time raigned throughout the whole Countrie of Spaine, whereof many thouſands died: and among the reſt my Brother was one.
                     
                        This ſickneſſe being very contagious, raigned not onely in Spaine,
                        
                        Annotatio D. Pa
                              •
                           l. 
                        but alſo in Italie, Germany, and almoſt throughout all Chriſtendome, whereof I my ſelfe was ſicke being as then in Italie, and by them it was called Coccolucio, becauſe ſuch as were troubled therewith, were no otherwiſe troubled then in the throat, like vnto Hennes which haue the pip, after the which followed many peſtilent feuers, with diuers ſtrange fits, which continued not aboue foure dayes.
                     
                     Not long before, the plague was ſo great in Portingale, that in two yeres ſpace there died in Lisbone to the number of 80. thouſand people: after the which plague the ſaide diſeaſe enſued, which wrought great deſtruction throughout the whole Countrie of Spaine.
                     
                     The fift day of Auguſt in the ſame yeare, hauing ſome vnderſtanding in the Spaniſh tongue, I placed my ſelfe with a Dutch gentleman, who determined to trauaile into Portingal, to ſée the countrie, and with him ſtayed to take a more conuenient time for my pretended voyage.
                     Vppon the firſt of September following we departed from Siuill, & paſſing through diuers Townes and Villages, within eight dayes after we ariued at Badaios,
                        This was a twinne of my forenamed brother deceaſed. where I found my other Brother following the Court. At the ſame time died Anne de Auſtria Quéene of Spaine, (Siſter to the Emperour Rodulphus, and Daughter to the Emperour Maximilian) the Kings fourth and laſt wife, for whom great ſorrow was made through all Spaine: her body was conuaied from Badaios to the Cloyſter of Saint Laurence in Eſcuriall, where with great ſolemnitie it was buried. We hauing ſtayed certaine dayes in Badaios, departed from thence, and paſſed through a Towne called Eluas about two or thrée miles off, being the firſt towne in the kingdome of Portingale, for that betwéene it and Badaios, the borders of Spaine and Portingale are limited: from thence we trauailed into diuers other places of Portingale, and at the laſt ariued at Lisbone, about the twenty of September following, where at that time wee found the Duke of Alua beeing Gouernour there for the King of Spaine, the whole Cittie making great preparation for the Coronation of the King, according to the cuſtome of their countrie. Wee beeing in Lisbone, through the change of aire, and corruption of the countrie I fell ſicke, and during my ſicknes was ſeauen times let blood, yet by Gods help I eſcaped: and being recouered, not hauing much preferment vnder the gentleman, I left his ſeruice, and placed my ſelfe with a Marchant vntill I might attaine to better meanes. About the ſame time the plague not long before newly begunne, began againe to ceaſe, for the which cauſe the King till then had deferred his enterance into Lisbone, which wholly ceaſed vppon the firſt day of May, Anno 1581
                        1581. hee entred with great triumph and magnificence into the cittie of Lisbone, where aboue all others the Dutchmen

had the beſt and greateſt commendation for beautiful ſhews, which was a Gate & a Bridge that ſtood vppon the riuer ſide where the King muſt firſt paſſe as hee went out of his Gallie to enter into the cittie, being beutified and adorned with many coſtly and excellent thinges moſt pleaſant to behold, euery ſtréet and place within the cittie being hanged with rich clothes of Tapiſtrie and Arras, where they made great triumphes, as the manner is at all Princes Coronations.
                     The ſame yere the twelfth of December, the Duke of Alua died in Lisbone in the kings pallace, being high ſteward of Spaine, who during his ſicknes for the ſpace of fourtéene dayes, receaued no ſuſtenance but only womens milke: his body beeing ſeared and ſpicen was conuaied into his countrie of Alua.
                     
                     The ſame month (the King beeing yet at Lisbone) died Don Diego Prince of Spaine and Portingale, the kings eldeſt ſon: his body béeing inbalmed, was conuaied to Madril, after whoſe death the king had but one Sonne named Don Phillip, and two Daughters liuing.
                     About the ſame time there ariued at Lisbone the kings ſiſter, widdow to the deceaſed Emperour Maximilian, and with her one of her daughters who beeing lame was after placed in a Monaſterie of Nuns, they with great triumph were likewiſe receaued into the cittie. After the death of Don Diego the kings eldeſt ſonne, all the Lordes and States of Spaine and Portingale, as well ſpirituall as temporal aſſembled at Lisbone, and there in the kings preſence (according to the ancient cuſtome and manner of the countrie) tooke their oathes of faith and allegiance vnto Don Phillip the young Prince of Spaine, and next heire and lawfull ſucceſſor of the lung his Father, in his dominions of Spaine, Portingale, and other landes and countries.
                     
                        1582.The next yeare Anno 1582. a great nauie of ſhips was prepared in Lisbone, whoſe generall was the Marqueſſe de ſancta Cruce, accompanied with the principall gentlemen and captaines both of Spaine and Portingal: who at their own coſts and charges therein to ſhew the great affection and deſire they had to ſerue their Prince, ſayled with the ſaid Nauie to the Flemmiſh Ilandes, to fight with Don Antonio that lay about thoſe Iles with a Fléet of frenchmen, whoſe Generall was one Phillip Strozzi: Theſe two Fléets méeting together, fought moſt cruelly to the great loſſe of both parts, yet in the ende Don Antonio with his French men was ouerthrowne, and many of them taken priſoners: among the which were diuers gentlemen of great account in France; who by the Marquis commandement were all beheaded in the Iſland of Saint Michaels. The reſt being brought into Spaine, were put into the Gallies, Don Antonio himſelfe eſcaped in a ſmall ſhip and the General Strozzi alſo, who béeing hurt in ye battail died of the ſame wound. By this victory the Spaniards were ſo proud, that in Lisbone great triumph was holden for the ſame, and the Marquis de Sancta Crus, receiued therin with great ioy: which done and all thinges being pacified in Portingale, the King left his Siſters ſonne Don Albertus Cardinall of Auſtria Gouernour of Lisbone, and the whole Countrie; and with the ſaide Cardinals mother returned, and kept Court at Madrill in Spaine.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 2. Chapter. The beginning of my voyage into the Eaſt or Portingale Indies.
                     
                        STaying at Lisbone, the trade of Marchandize there not beeing great, by reaſon of the newe & freſh diſagréeing of the Spaniards and Portingales, occaſion being offered to accompliſh my deſire, there was at the ſame time in Lisbone a Monke of S. Dominicks order, named Don frey Vincente de Fonſeca, of a noble houſe: who by reaſon of his great learning, had of long time béene Chaplen vnto Sebaſtian King of Portingale, who beeing with him in the battaile of Barbari
                              •
                           , where King Sebaſtian was ſlain, was taken priſoner, and from thence ranſomed, whoſe learning and good behauiour beeing knowne to the King of Spaine, hee made great account of him, placing him in his own Chappel, and deſiring to prefer him, the Archbiſhopricke of all the Indies beeing voide, with confirmation of the Pope he inueſted him therewith, although he refuſed to accept it, fearing the long and tedious trauaile hee had to make thether, but in the end through the Kings perſwaſion, hee tooke it vpon him, with promiſe within foure or fiue yeares at the furtheſt to recall him home againe, and to giue him a better place in Portingale, with the which promiſe he tooke the voyage vpon him. I thinking vpon my affaires, vſed all meanes I could to get into his ſeruice, and with him to trauaile the voiage which I ſo much deſired, which fell out as I would wiſh: for that my Brother that followed the Court, had deſired his Maſter (beeing one of his Maieſties ſecretaries) to

make him purſer in one of the ſhips that the ſame yere ſhould ſaile vnto the Eaſt Indies, which pleaſed me well, in ſo much that his ſaid Maſter was a great friend and acquaintance of the Archbiſhops, by which meanes, with ſmall intreatie I was entertained in the Biſhops ſeruice, and amongſt the reſt my name was written downe, wee being in all forty perſons, & becauſe my Brother had his choiſe which ſhip he would be in, he choſe the ſhip wherein the Archbiſhop ſayled, the better to help each other, and in this manner we prepared our ſelues to make our voyage, being in all fiue ſhips of the burthen of fourtéene or ſixtéene hundreth Tunnes each ſhip, their names were the Admirall S. Phillip: the Vize Admirall S. Iacob. Theſe were two new ſhips, one bearing the name of the King, the other of his ſonne, the other thrée, S, Laurence, S. Franciſco, and our ſhippe S. Saluator.
                     
                     
                        1583.Vpon the eight of Aprill, beeing good Friday in the yeare of our Lorde 1583. which commonly is the time when their ſhips ſet ſayle within foure or fiue dayes vnder, or ouer, wee altogether iſſued out of the Riuer of Lisbone and put to ſea, ſetting our courſe for the Ilands of Madera, and ſo putting our truſt in God, without whoſe fauour & helpe we can doe nothing, and all our actions are but vaine, we ſayled forwards.
                  
                  
                     Chapter 3. The manner and order vſed in the ſhips in their Indian Voyages.
                     
                        THe ſhippes are commonlye charged with foure or fiue hundred men at the leaſt, ſometimes more, ſometimes leſſe, as there are ſouldiers and ſaylers to bée found. When they go out they are but lightly laden, onely with certaine pipes of wine & oyle, and ſome ſmall quantitie of Marchandize other thing haue they not in, but balaſt, & victuals for the company, for that the moſt and greateſt ware that is commonly ſent into India, are rials of eight, becauſe the principall Factors for pepper doe euery yere ſend a great quantitie of mony, therewith to buy pepper, as alſo diuers particular Marchants, as being the leaſt ware that men can carry into India: for that in theſe rials of eight they gaine at the leaſt forty per cento: when the ſhips are out of the riuer, and enter into the ſea, all their men are muſtered, as well ſaylers, as ſouldiers, and ſuch as are founde abſent and left on land, being regiſtred in the bookes, are marked by the purſer, that at their returne they may talke with their ſuerties, (for that euery man putteth in ſuerties,) and the goods of ſuch as are abſent, béeing found in the ſhip are preſently brought foorth and priſed, and an Inuentorie thereof béeing made, it is left to bee diſpoſed at the captaines pleaſure. The like is done with their goods that die in the ſhip, but little of it commeth to the owners hands, being imbeſeled and priuily made away.
                     The Maſter and Pilot haue for their whole voyage forth and home againe, each man 120. Millreyes, euery Millreyes being worth in Dutch money ſeauen guilders, and becauſe the reckoning of Portingale monie is onely in one ſort of money called Reyes, which is the ſmaleſt money to bee founde in that countrie, and although it bee neuer ſo great a ſumme you doe receaue, yet it is alwaies reckoned by Reyes, whereof 160. is as much as a Keyſers gilderne, or foure rials of ſiluer: ſo that two reyes are foure pence, and one reye two pence of Holland money▪ I haue thought good to ſet it downe, the better to ſhew and make you vnderſtand the accounts they vſe by reyes in the countrie of Portingale. But returning to our matter, I ſay the Maſter and the Pilot doe receaue before hand, each man twenty foure millreyes, beſides that they haue chambers both vnder in the ſhip, and cabbins aboue the hatches, as alſo primage, & certaine tunnes fraught. The like haue all the other officers in the ſhip according to their degrées, and although they receaue money in hand, yet it coſteth them more in giftes before they get their places, which are giuen by fauour and good will of the Proueador, which is the chiefe officer of the Admiraltie, and yet there is no certaine ordinance for their payes, for that it is dayly altered: but let vs reckon the pay, which is commonly giuen according to the ordinance and maner of our ſhip for that yeare.
                     The chiefe Boteſwain hath for his whole pay 50. Millreyes, and receaueth ten in ready money: The Guardian, that is the quarter maſter hath 1400. reyes the month, and for fraught 2800. and receaueth ſeuen Millreyes in ready money: The Seto Piloto, which is the Maſters mate, hath 1200. reyes, which is thrée duckets the month, and as much fraught as the quarter Maſter: two Carpenters, & two Callafaren which helpe them, haue each man foure duckets a month and 3900. Millreyes fraught. The Steward that giueth out their meate and drinke, and the Merinho, which is he that impriſoneth men aborde, and hath charge of all the

munition and powder, with the deliuering forth of the ſame, haue each man a Millreyes the month, and 2340. reyes fraught, beſides their chambers and fréedome of cuſtome, as alſo all other officers, ſaylers, pikemen, ſhot, &c. haue euery man after the rate, and euery one that ſerueth in the ſhip. The Cooper hath thrée duckets a month, and 3900 reyes fraught: Two Strinceros, thoſe are they which hoiſe vp the maine yeard by a wheele, and let it downe againe with a whéele as néedis, haue each man one Millreyes the month, and 2800. reyes fraught: Thirty thrée ſaylers haue each man one Millreyes the month, and 2800. reyes fraught, 37. rowers, haue each man 660. reyes the moneth, and 1860. reyes fraught, foure pagiens which are boyes, haue with their fraught 443. reyes the month, one Maſter gunner, and eight vnder him, haue each man a different pay, ſome more, ſome leſſe: The ſurgion likewiſe hath no certaine pay: The factor and the purſer haue no pay but only their chambers, that is below vnder hatches, a chamber of twentie pipes, for each man ten pipes, and aboue hatches each man his cabbin to ſléepe in, whereof they make great profit. Theſe are all the officers and other perſons which ſayle in the ſhip, which haue for their portion euery day in victuals, each man a like, as well the greateſt as the leaſt, a pound and thrée quarters of Biſket, halfe a Can of Wine, a Can of water, an Arroba which is 32. pound of ſalt fleſh the moneth, ſome dryed fiſh, onyons and garlicke are eaten in the beginning of the voyage, as being of ſmall valew, other prouiſions, as Suger, Honny, Reaſons, Prunes, Ryſe, & ſuch like, are kept for thoſe which are ſicke: yet they get but little thereof, for that the officers kéepe it for themſelues, and ſpend it at their pleaſures, not letting much goe out of their fingers: as for the dreſſing of their meate, wood, pots, and pans, euery man muſt make his owne prouiſion: beſides all this there is a Clarke and ſteward for the Kings ſouldiers that haue their parts by themſelues, as the ſaylers haue.
                     This is the order and manner of theyr voyage when they ſayle vnto the Indies, but when they returne againe, they haue no more but each man a portion of Biſket and water vntill they come to the Cape de Bona Eſperance, and from thence home they muſt make their own prouiſions. The ſouldiers that are paſſengers, haue nothing els but frée paſſage, that is roome for a cheſt vnder hatches, and a place for their bed in the or loope, and may not come away without the Viceroyes paſſeport, and yet they muſt haue béene fiue yeres ſouldiers in the Indies before they can haue licence, but the ſlaues muſt pay fraught for their bodies, & cuſtome to the King, as in our voyage home againe we will at large declare.
                     The 15. of Aprill we eſpied the Iland of Madera and Porto Sancto, where the ſhips vſe to ſeperate themſelues, each ſhip kéeping on his courſe, that they may get before each other into India for their moſt commodities, and to diſpatch the ſooner; whereby in the night, and by tides they leaue each others company, each following his owne way.
                     The 24. of Aprill we fell vpon the coaſte of Guinea which beginneth at nine degrées, and ſtretcheth vntill wee come vnder the Equinoctiall, where wee haue much thunder, lightning▪ and many ſhowers of raine, with ſtormes of wind, which paſſe ſwiftly ouer, & yet fall with ſuch force, that at euery ſhower we are forced to ſtrike ſayle, & let the maine yeard fall to the middle of the maſt, & many times cleane down, ſometimes ten or twelue times eueryday: there wee finde a moſt extreame heate, ſo that all the water in the ſhip ſtinketh, whereby men are forced to ſtop their noſes when they drinke, but when wee are paſt the Equinoctiall it is good againe, & the nearer wee are vnto the land, the more it ſtormeth, raineth, thundreth and calmeth: ſo that moſt commonly the ſhippes are at the leaſt two monthes before they can paſſe the line: Then they finde a winde which they name the generall winde, and it is a South eaſt winde, but it is a ſide wind, and we muſt alway lie ſide waies in the wind almoſt vntill wee come to the cape de Bona Speranza, and becauſe that vpon the coaſt of Braſillia about 18. degrées, on the ſouth ſide lieth great ſlakes or ſhallowes, which the Portingales call Abra
                              •
                           hos, that reach 70. miles into the ſea on the right ſide, to paſſe them, the ſhips hold vp moſt vnto the coaſt of Guinea, and ſo paſſe the ſaid Flattes, otherwiſe if they fall too low and keepe inwardes, they are conſtrained to turne againe vnto Portingale, and many times in danger to be loſt, as it hapned to our Admirall Saint Phillip, which in the yeare 1582.
                        1582. fell by night vpon the Flats, and was in great danger to be loſt, yet recouered againe, & ſayled backe to Portingale, and now this yeare to ſhunne the Flats ſhee kept ſo neare the coaſt of Guinea, that by meanes of the great calmes and raynes, ſhee was forced to driue vp and downe two months together, before ſhee could paſſe the line, & came two months after the other ſhips into India: Therefore men muſt take heed, and kéepe themſelues from comming too neare the coaſt, to ſhun

the calmes and ſtormes, and alſo not to hold too farre of thereby to paſſe the Flats & ſhallowes, wherein conſiſteth the whole Indian Voyage.
                     The 15. of May being about fiftie miles beyond the Equinoctiall line Northwardes, we eſpied a French ſhip, which put vs all in great feare, by reaſon that moſt of our men were ſicke, as it commonly hapneth in thoſe countries through the excéeding heate: & further they are for the moſt part ſuch as neuer haue beene at Sea before that time, ſo that they are not able to do much, yet we diſcharged certaine great ſhot at him, wherewith he left vs, (after he had played with vs for a ſmal time) and preſently loſt the ſight of him, wherewith our men were in better comfort. The ſame day about euening, wee diſcried a great ſhip
                           •
                        , which wee iudged to bee of our Fleet, as after wee perceiued, for it made towards vs to ſpeake with vs, and it was the Saint Franciſco, wherewith wee were glad.
                     The 
                           
                              •
                           6. of May, wee paſſed the Equinoctiall line which runneth through the middle of the Iland of Saint Thomas, by the coaſt of Guinea, and then wee began to ſée the ſouth ſtar, and to looſe the north ſtar, and founde the ſunne at twelue of the clocke at noone to be in the north, and after that wee had a ſouth eaſt wind, called a general wind, which in thoſe partes bloweth all the yeare through.
                     The 29. of May being Whitſonday, the ſhips of an ancient cuſtome, doe vſe to chuſe an Emperour among themſelues, and to change all the officers in the ſhip, and to hold a great feaſt, which continueth thrée or foure dayes together, which wee obſeruing choſe an Emperour, and being at our banket, by meanes of certaine words that paſſed out of ſome of their mouthes, there fell great ſtrife and contention among vs, which procéeded ſo farre, that the tables were throwne downe and lay on the ground, and at the leaſt a hundred rapiers drawne, without reſpecting the Captaine or any other for he lay vnder foote, and they trod vpon him, and had killed each other, and thereby had caſt the ſhip away, if the Archbiſhop had not come out of his chā
                        ber among them, willing them to ceaſe, wherwith they ſtayed their hands, who preſently commaunded euery man on paine of death, that all their Rapiers, Poynyardes, and other weapons ſhould bee brought into his chamber, which was done, whereby all thinges were pacified, the firſt and principall beginners being puniſhed & layd in irons, by which meanes they were quiet.
                     The 12. of Iune we paſſed beyond the afore ſaid Flats and ſhallowes of Braſillia, whereof all our men were excéeding glad, for thereby we were aſſured that we ſhould not for that time put backe to Portingale againe, as many doe, and then the generall wind ſerued vs, vntill wee came to the riuer of Rio de Plata, where wee got before the wind to the cape de Bona Speranza.
                     
                     The 20. of the ſame month, the S. Franſiſcus that ſo long had kept vs cōpany▪ was againe out of ſight: and the eleauenth of Iuly after, our Maſter iudged vs to bee about 5
                              •
                           . miles from the cape de Bona Speranza: wherefore he was deſired by the Archbiſhop to kéepe in with the land, that wee might ſée the Cape. It was then miſtie weather, ſo that as we had made with the lād about one houre or more, wee perceiued land right before vs, and were within two miles thereof, which by reaſon of the darke and miſty weather we could no ſooner perceiue, which put vs in great feare, for our iudgement was cleane contrarie, but the weather beginning to cleare vp, we knew the land, for it was a part or bank of the point called Cabo Falſo, which is about fiftéene miles on this ſide the cape de Bona Speranza, towards Moſſambique the cape de Bona Speranza lieth vnder 34. degrées ſouthward, there wee had a calme and faire weather, which continuing about halfe a day, in the meane time with our lines we got great ſtore of fiſhes vppon the ſame land at ten or twelue fadoms water, it is an excellent fiſh much like to Haddocks, the Portingales call them Peſcados.
                     
                     The twenty of the ſame month wee met againe with Saint Franciſco, and ſpake with her, and ſo kept company together till the 24. of Iune, when wee loſt her againe. The ſame day wee ſtroke all our ſayles, becauſe wee had a contrarie wind, and lay two dayes ſtill driuing vp and downe, not to looſe anie way, meane time wee were againſt the high land of Tarradona
                              •
                           al, which beginneth in 32. degrees, and endeth in 30. and is diſtant from Capo de Bona Speranza 150. miles, in this place they cōmonly vſe to tak
                           •
                         counſell of all the officers of the ſhip, whether it is beſt for thē to ſayle through within the land of S. Laurenſo, or without it, for that within the land they ſayle to Moſſambique, and from thence to Goa, and ſayling without it they cannot come at Goa, by reaſon they fal down by meanes of the ſtreame, and ſo muſt ſayle vnto Cochin, which lieth 100. miles lower then Goa, and as the ſhips leaue the cape, then it is not good to make towards Moſſambique, becauſe they cannot come in time to Goa, by reaſon of the great calmes that are within the land, but

                        
                        
they that paſſe the Cape in the month of Iuly, may well goe to Moſſambique, becauſe they haue time inough there to refreſh themſelues, and to take in freſh water and other victuals, and ſo to lie at anker ten or twelue dayes together, but ſuch as paſſe the cape in the month of Auguſt, doe come too late, and muſt ſayle about towardes Cochin, thereby to looſe no time, yet it is dangerous & much more comberſome, for that commonly they are ſicke of ſwolen legges, ſore bellies, and other diſeaſes. The 30. of Iuly, wee were againſt the point of the cape called Das Corentes, which are 130. miles diſtant from Terra Donatal, and lieth vnder 24. degrées Southwarde, there they begin to paſſe betwéene the Ilands.
                     
                        The Ile Madagaſcar, otherwiſe called Saint Laurence.
                        
                        map of Madagascar
                     
                     
                        (The Iland of S. Laurenſo, is by Marcus Paulus named the great Iland of Magaſtar, by Andrea Theuet it is called Madagaſcar, and is the greateſt of all the Eaſt Ilandes, for it is greater in compaſſe then eyther of the Kingdomes of Caſtile or Portingale, and lieth on the other ſide of Africa as we paſſe the cape de Bona Speranza, it containeth in length (as Theuet deſcribeth) 72 degrees, and in bredth eleauen degrees, and is in cōpaſſe (as ſome hold opinion) 3000 Italian miles, and as ſome write 4000. which ſhould bee ſixe or eight hundred Dutch miles. This Iland is iudged to be very temperate, and therefore well peopled, but beleeue in Mahomet. Marcus Paulus ſayeth, that the Iland is gouerned by foure ancient men, it is full of wilde beaſts and ſtrange foules, whereof he writeth many fables, not worthie the rehearſall. This Iland hath Elephants & all kind of beaſts which haue but one horn, wherof one is called an Indian aſſe, with whole feet vnclouē, an other is called Orix, with clouen feet: it hath many ſnakes, efftes, & great ſtore of woodes of redde Sandale, which are there little eſteemed for the great abundance, there the Sea yeeldeth much Amber: it aboundeth alſo in Rice, Barley, Oranges, Lemons, Citrons, & Millons, which are ſo great that a man can hardly gripe them, both red, white, & yellow, and better then ours, and much ginger which they eate greene, Hony & Sugar in ſuch abundance, that they know not whether to ſend it, Saffron, many medicinable hearbs, and Indian nuts. It likewiſe yeeldeth Siluer, and hath manie Riuers, beautifull Fountaines, and diuers Hauens, whether many Saraſins & Mores doe bring their Marchandiſe, as clothes of gold & Siluer, Linnen made of cotton, wooll, and ſuch like.)
                     
                     From S. Laurenſo to Moſſambique, which lieth from the firme land of Das Corentes 120. miles, and is an Iland of 220. miles long, ſtretching north & ſouth, and in breadth 70. miles, beginning from the firſt point, vntill you come at the cape in 26. degrees,

and endeth in the North in 11. degrées. The people of the Iland are blacke like thoſe of Moſsambique, and goe naked, but the haire of their heades is not ſo much curled as theirs of Moſsambique, and not full ſo blacke. The Portingales haue no ſpeciall traffique there, becauſe there is not much to be had, for as yet it is not very well known. The 1. of Auguſt we paſſed the flats called os Baixos de Iudea, that is, the Flats of the Iewes, which are diſtant from the cape das Corentes, 30. miles, and lie betwéen the Iland of S. Laurence & the firme land, that is from the Iland fiftie miles, and from the firme land ſeauenty miles, which Flats begin vnder 22. degrées and a halfe, and continue to twentie one degrées: there is great care to bee taken leſt men fall vpon them, for they are very dangerous, and many ſhips haue bin loſt there, and of late in Anno 1585.
                        1585. a ſhip comming from Portingale called S. Iago beeing Admirall of the Fleet, and was the ſame that the firſt voiage went with vs from Lisbone for vice Admirall, as in another place we ſhall declare.
                     The fourth of Auguſt we diſcried the land of Moſsambique, which is diſtant from the Flattes of the Iewes nintie miles vnder fifteene degrées ſouthwards. The next day we entred into the road of Moſsambique, and as we entered we eſpied the foreſaid ſhip called S. Iago which entered with vs, and it was not aboue one houre after we had deſcried it, beeing the firſt time wee had ſéene it ſince it left vs at the Iland of Madera, where we ſeperated our ſelues. There wee found likewiſe two more of our ſhips, Saint Laure
                              •
                           zo and Saint Franciſco, which the day before were come thether with a ſmall ſhip that was to ſayle to Malacca, which commonly ſetteth out of Portingale, a month before any of the ſhips do ſet ſayle for India, only becauſe they haue a longer voiage to make, yet doe they ordinarily ſayle to Moſsambique to take in ſweete water & freſh victuals as their voiage falleth out, or their victuals ſcanteth: If they goe not thether, thē they ſaile about on the back ſide of ye Iland of ſaint Laurenſo, not ſetting their courſe for Moſsambique. Being at Moſſambique wee were foure of our Fléete in company together, only wanting the Saint Phillip, which had holden her courſe ſo nere the coaſt of Guinea, (the better to ſhun the Flats of Bracillia that are called Abrollios, whereon the yere before ſhe had once fallen,) that ſhe was ſo much becalmed that ſhe could not paſſe the Equinoctiall line in long time after vs, neyther yet the cape de Bona Speranza without great ſtorms & foule weather, as it ordinarilie happeneth to ſuch as come late thether, whereby ſhee was compelled to compaſſe about & came vnto Cochin about two months after we were al ariued at Goa, hauing paſſed and endured much miſery and foule weather, with ſicknes and diſeaſes, as ſwellings of the legs, and the ſcorbuicke, and paine in their bellies &c.
                  
                  
                     The 4. Chapter. The deſcription of Moſſambique, which lieth vnder 15. degrees on the South ſide of the Equinoctiall line vppon the coaſt of Melinde, otherwiſe called Abex or Abexim.
                     
                     
                        
                           MOſſambique is a Towne in the Iland of Praſio with a ſafe, (although a ſmall) hauen, on the right ſide towardes the cape: they haue the golden mines called Sofala, on the left ſide the rich towne of Quiloa: and by reaſon of the foggie miſtes incident to the ſame, the place is both barren & vnholſome, yet the people are rich by reaſon of the ſituation. In time paſt it was inhabited by people that beleeued in Mahoomet, being ouercom & kept in ſubiection by the tirant of Quiloa, & his lieftenant (which the Arabians called Zequen) that gouerned them.
                     
                     
                        Moſſambique is a little Iland, diſtant about halfe a mile from the firme land, in a corner of the ſaid firme land, for that ye firme land on the north ſide ſtretcheth further into ye ſea thē it doth, & before it there lie two ſmal Ilands named S. George
                         & S. Iacob, which are euen wt the corner of the firme land, and betwéene thoſe two Ilands not inhabited, & the firme land the ſhips doe ſayle to Moſſambique leauing the Ilands ſouthward, on the left hand, and the firm land 
                           •
                        n the north, and ſo without a Pilot compaſſe about a mile into the ſea to Moſſambique, for it is déepe enough, and men may eaſily ſhun the ſands that lie vpon the firme land, becauſe they are openly ſéene. The ſhips harbour ſo neare to the Iland and the 
                           •
                        ortreſſe of Moſſambique, that they may throw a ſtone out of their ſhip vppon the land, and ſometimes farther, and lie betwéene the Iland and the firme land, which are diſtant halfe a mile from each other, ſo that the ſhips lie there as ſafely as in a riuer or hauen. The Iland of Moſſambique is about halfe a mile in compaſſe, flat land, and bordered about with a white ſand: Therein growe many Indian palmes or nut trées, & ſome Orange, Apple,

                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
Lemmon, Citron, and Indian Figge trées: but other kindes of fruit which are common in India are there verie ſcarce. Corne and other graine with Rice and ſuch neceſſarie marchandizes are brought thether out of India, but for beaſts and foule, as O
                           •
                        en, ſhéep, Goats, Swine, Hennes, &c. there are great aboundance and very good and cheape. In the ſame Iland are found ſhéepe of fiue quarters in quantitie, for that their tayles are ſo broad and thicke, that there is as much fleſh vpon them, as vpon a quarter of their body, and they are ſo fatte that men can hardlie brooke them. There are certaine Hennes that are ſo blacke both of feathers, fleſh, and bones, that being ſodden they ſéeme as black as inke: yet of very ſwéet taſte, and are accounted better then the other: whereof ſome are likewiſe found in India, but not ſo many as in Moſſambique. Porke is there a very coſtly diſh, and excellent faire and ſwéete fleſh, and as by experience it is found, it farre ſurpaſſeth all other fleſh: ſo that the ſicke are forbidden to eate any kinde of fleſh but onely Porke, becauſe of the excellency thereof.
                     
                        
                           MOſſambique ſignifieth two places, one which is a whole kingdome lying in Africa, behinde the cape of Bona Speranza, betweene Monomotapa & Quiloa, the other certaine Ilands herafter drawne and deſcribed, lying on the ſouth ſide of the Equinoctiall line vnder 14. degrees and a halfe, whereof the greateſt is called Moſſambique, the other two Saint Iacob and Saint George. Theſe Ilands lie almoſt in the mouth of a riuer which in Africa is called Moghincats.
                        
                     
                     
                        About Moſſambique is a verie great & a ſafe hauen, fit to receiue and harbour all ſhips that come and goe both to & from Portingal & the Indies, and although both the Kingdome and the Iland are not very great, yet are they very rich and abundant in all kinde of thinges, as appeareth in the deſcription of the ſame.
                     
                     
                        
                           Moſſambique the chiefe & greateſt of them is inhabited by two maner of people, Chriſtians and Mahometanes, the Chriſtians are Portingales, or of the Portingales race, there is alſo a caſtle wherin the Portingales keepe garriſon, from whence alſo all other caſtles and fortes thereabouts are ſupplied with their neceſſaries, ſpeciallie Sofala, where the rich mine of Gold lieth: there the Portingale ſhips doe vſe to harbour in winter time, when of wind or by meanes of foule weather, they cannot accōpliſh their voiage.
                     
                     
                        The Indian ſhips doe likewiſe in that place take in new victuals and freſh water.
                     
                     
                        This Iland beeing firſt diſcouered by the Portingales, was the only meanes that they found the Indies: for that frō thence they vſed to take Pilots, which taught them the way: touching the manner and cuſtomes of theſe people, read the Authors deſcription at large, they are good ſhooters in musket and caliuer, and expert Fiſhermen.
                     
                     
                        Sayling along further by the coaſt towardes the Indies you paſſe by Quiloa (which in times paſt was called Rapta) not great but verie faire by reaſon of the great trees that grow there, which are alwaies freſh and greene, as alſo for the diuerſities of victuals, & it is alſo an Ilande lying about the mouth of the great Riuer Coauo, which hath her head or ſpring out of the ſame lake from whence Nilus doth iſſue. This Iland is inhabited by Mahometans, and they are all moſt white apparelled in ſilk and clothes of cotton wooll: their women weare bracelets of gold and precious ſtones about their neckes and armes: they haue great quantitie of ſiluer workes, & are not ſo browne as the men, & well membered: their houſes are commonly made of ſtone, chalke, and wood, with pleaſant gardens of all kind of fruit and ſweet flowers: from this Iland the kingdome taketh his name. This point asketh a larger diſcourſe, which you ſhal finde in the leafe following.
                     
                     They haue no ſwéet water in this Iland to drinke, but they fetch it from the firme land, out of a place called by the Portingales Cabaſer, and they vſe in their houſes great pots which come out of India, to kéepe their water in.
                     The Portingales haue therein a verie faire and ſtrong caſtle which now about 10. or 12. yeares paſt was fullie finiſhed, and ſtandeth right againſt the firſt of the vnhabited little Ilands, where the ſhips muſt come in, and is one of the beſt and ſtrongeſt built of all the Caſtles throughout the whole Indies, yet haue they but ſmall ſtore of ordinance or munition, as alſo not any ſouldiers more then the Captaine and his men that dwel therin. But when occaſion ſerueth, the married Portingales that dwell in the Iland, which are about 40. or 50. at the moſt, are all bound to kéepe the Caſtle, for that the Iland hath no other defence then onely that Caſtle, the reſt lieth open and is a flat ſand. Round about within the Caſtle are certaine

                           〈1 page missing〉
                        
                        
                        
whollie accuſtomed therunto as if they were Horſes, Moyles, or Aſſes. I haue ſpoken with men that came from thence, and haue ſéen them, and affirme it for a truth.
                     But returning to our matter of the gouernmement and vſage of the Portingales and their Captaine, I ſay that the Captaine maketh the commoditie of his place within thrée yeares ſpace that hee remaineth there, which amounteth to the value of 300. thouſand Duckets, that is nine tunnes of golde: as while we remained there, the Captaine named Nuno Velio Perena himſelfe ſhewed vs, and it is moſt in gold that commeth from Sofala & Monomotapa as I ſaid before, from Moſſambique they carrie into India Gold, Ambergris, Eben wood, and Iuorie, and many ſlaues both men and women which are carried thether, becauſe they are the ſtrongeſt Moores in all the Eaſt coū
                        tries, to doe their filthieſt and hardeſt labor, wherein they onely vſe them: They ſayle from thence into India but once euery year, in the month of Auguſt till half September, becauſe that throughout the whole countries of India they muſt ſayle with Monſſoyns, that is with the tides of the year, which they name by the windes, which blow certaine monthes in the yeare, whereby they make their account to goe and come from the one place to the other, & the time that men may commonly ſayle betwéene Moſſambique and India, is 30. dayes little more or leſſe, and then they ſtay in India till the month of Aprill, when the winde or Monſſoyn commeth againe to ſerue them for Moſſambique, ſo that euery yeare once, there goeth and commeth one ſhippe for the Captaine that carrieth and bringeth his marchandiſe, and no man may traffique from thence into India, but only thoſe that dwel and are married in Moſſambique, for that ſuch as are vnmarried may not ſtay there by ſpeciall priuiledge from the King of Portingall graunted vnto thoſe that inhabite there, to the end the Iſland ſhould be peopled, and therby kept and maintained.
                     Behind Moſſambique lyeth the countrey of Preſter Iohn, which is called by them the countrey of Abexines, wherevpon the coaſt of Moſſambique vnto the red ſea is commonly called the coaſt of Abex, and diuers men of Preſter Iohns land do ſend men of that country, ſome being ſlaues, and others tree into India, which ſerue for Saylors in the Portingalles ſhippes, that traffique in thoſe countries frō place to place, whoſe pictures & counterfets, as alſo their religiō, maner of liuing, and cuſtomes doeth hereafter follow in the pictures of India. This coaſt of Abex is alſo by the Portingalles called the coaſt of Melinde, becauſe that vpon the ſame coaſt lyeth a towne and a Kingdome of that name, which was the firſt towne and Kingdome that in the Portingals firſt diſcouerie of thoſe countries, did receiue them peaceably without treaſon or deceit, and ſo to this day doth yet continue.
                     Wee ſtayed at Moſſambique for the ſpace of 15. dayes, to prouide freſh water and victuails for the ſupplying of our wants, in the which time diuers of our men fel ſicke and died, by reaſon of the vnaccuſtomed ayre of the place, which of it ſelfe is an vnholſome land, and an euill aire by meanes of the great and vnmeaſurable heat.
                     The 20. of Auguſt wee ſet ſaile with all our companie, that is, our foure ſhippes of one fléete that came from Portingall, and a ſhippe of the Captaines of Moſſambique, whoſe thrée yeares were then finiſhed, his name was Don Pedro de Caſtro, in whoſe place the aforeſaide Nuno Velio Pereira, was then come. The ſaid Captain Don Pedro returned wt his wife & family again into India, for that the Kinges commandement and ordinance is, that after the expiration of their thrée yeares office, they muſt yet ſtay thrée years more in India at the commandement of the Vice Roy of India, in the kings ſeruice, at their owne charges, before they muſt returne into Portingall, vnleſſe they bring a ſpeciall patent from the King, that after they haue continued thrée yeares in their office, they may returne into Portingal againe, which is very ſeldome ſéene, vnleſſe it be by ſpeciall fauour, and likewiſe no man may trauell out of India vnleſſe hee haue the Vice Royes Paſport, and without it they are not ſuffred to paſſe, for it is very narrowly looked into.
                     The 24. of Auguſt in the morning wée deſcryed two Iſlandes, which are called Inſula de Comora, and Inſula de Don Ian de Caſtro. The Iſlande Comora lyeth diſtant from Moſſambique 60. miles, Northwardes vnder 11. degrées on the South ſide is a very high land, ſo high that in a whole dayes ſaile with a good winde wee could not loſe the ſight therof, the ſame day the ſhippes ſeperated themſelues againe, according to the ancient manner, for the occaſions aforeſaid.
                     The third of September we once againe paſſed the Equinoctiall line, which runneth betwéene Melinde and Braua, townes lying vppon the coaſt of Abex, and the line is frō 
                        Moſſambique Northwards 230. miles, and from the line to the Cape de Quardafum are 190. miles, and lyeth vnder 12. degrées

on the North ſide of the Equinoctiall, vpon this coaſt betwéene Moſſambique, and the Cape de Guardafum, lyeth theſe townes, Quiloa, in time paſt called Rapta Mombaſsa, which is a towne ſituate in a little Iſland of the ſame name, which ſheweth a farre off to be high ſandie downes, and hath a hauen with two fortes to defende it, Melinde, Pate, Braua, and Magadoxo, each being a kingdome of it ſelfe, holding the lawe of Mahomet: the people are ſomewhat of a ſallower colour then thoſe of Moſſambique, with ſhining hayre, gouerning their Citties after the manner of the Arabians, and other Mahometanes. This corner or Cape of Guardafum is the ende of the coaſt of Abex or Melinde, and by this cape Eaſt Northeaſt 20. miles within the Sea lyeth the rich Iſland called Socotora, where they find Aloes, which taketh the name of the Iſlande being called Aloe Socotorina, and is the verie beſt, being cloſe and faſt, and from thence is it carried and conueyed into al places.
                     By this corner and Iſland beginneth the mouth or enterance of the 
                           
                              •
                           ſtreito de Mecka, for that within the ſame vpon the coaſt of Arabia lyeth the citie of Mecka, where the body of Mahomet hangeth in the ayre in an iron cheſt, vnder a sky made of Adamant ſtone, which is greatly ſought vnto, & viſited by many Turkes and Arabians. This entery is alſo called the redde ſea, not that the water is redde, but onely becauſe there are certain redde hilles lying about the ſame, that yéeld redde marble ſtones: and becauſe the ſand in ſome places is redde, it is the ſame ſea which Moyſes with the children of Iſrael paſſed through on dry land.
                     From the hooke or cape de Guardafum, which leſſeneth, and is narrow inwardes towardes Sues, in time paſt called Arſinoe, (which is the vttermoſt town where the narrowneſſe or ſtraight endeth) are 360. miles, and from thence ouer land to the Mediterranean ſea in Italie are 90. myles, the ſtraight or narrownes is in the entrāce, & alſo within the broadeſt place 40. miles, and in ſome places narrower: it hath alſo diuers Iſlands, and on the one ſide inwarde by Sues Northward Arabia deſerta, on the other ſide ſouth ward Aegipt, where the riuer Nilus hath her courſe, and ſomewhat lower towardes the Indian ſeas Arabia Felix: and on the other ſide right againſt it, the countrey of Abexynes, or Preſter Iohns land, vpon the hooke or corner of Arabia Felix, the Portingals in time paſt helde a fort called Aden, but nowe they haue none, whereby at this preſent the Turks come out of the ſtraight or mouth of the redde ſea, with Gallies that are made in Sues, and doe much hurt and iniurie vppon the coaſt of Abex or Melinde, as when time ſerueth we ſhall declare.
                     Hauing againe paſſed the line, we had the ſight of the North Star, whereof vpon the coaſt of Guinea, from the Iſland of S. Thomas vntill this tyme, wee had loſt the fight. The 4. of September wee eſpyed a ſhippe of our owne fléete, and ſpake with him: it was the S. Franciſco, which ſayled with vs till the 7. day, and then left vs. The 13. of September wee ſaw an other ſhippe which was the S. Iacob, which ſailed out of ſight again and ſpake not to vs.
                     The 20. of September we perceiued many Snakes ſwimming in the ſea, being as great as Eeles, and other thinges like the ſcales of fiſh, which the Portingals call Vintijns, which are halfe Ryalles of ſiluer, Portingall money, becauſe they are like vnto it: theſe ſwimme and driue vpon the ſea in great quantities, which is a certain ſign & token of the Indian coaſt.
                     Not long after with great ioy we deſcried land, and found ground at 47. f
                           •
                        dome déepe, being the land of Bardes, which is the vttermoſt ende and corner of the enterie of the Riuer Goa, of being about thrée miles from the Citie: it is a high land where the ſhippes of India do anker and vnlade, and from thence by boates their wares are carryed to the towne. That day we ankered without in the ſea about thrée miles from the land, becauſe it was calme, and the fludde was paſt; yet it is not without danger, and hath round about a faire and faſt land to anker in, for as then it beganne in thoſe places to be ſummer.
                     The 21. being ye next day, there came vnto vs diuers boats called Almadias, which borded vs, bringing wt thē all maner of freſh victuailes from the land, as freſh bread & fruit, ſome of them were Indians that are chriſtened: there came likewiſe a Galley to fetch the Archbiſhoppe, and brought him to a place called Pangijn, which is in the middle way, betwéene Goa and the roade of Bardes, and lyeth vpon the ſame Riuer: Here hee was welcommed and viſited by the Vice Roy of India, named Don Franciſco Maſcarenias, and by all the Lordes and Gentlemen of the countrey, as well ſpirituall as temporall: The Magiſtrates of the towne deſired him to ſtay there ten or twelue dayes, while preparation might bee made to receiue him with triumph into the cittie, as their manner is, which hee granted them. The ſame day in the afternoone we entred the Riuer, into the roade vnder the lande of Bardes, being the 21. of September Anno 1583. being

                        
                        
fiue monthes and 13. dayes after our putting forth of the Riuer of Lisbone, (hauing ſtayed 15. daies at Moſambique (which was one of the ſpéedieſt and ſhorteſt voyages that in many yeares before and ſince that time was euer performed: There we founde the ſhippe named Saint Laurence, which arriued there a day before vs: The 22. day the S. Iacob came thither, and the next day after arriued the S. Francis.
                     
                     There dyed in our ſhippe 30. perſons, among the which, ſome of them were ſlaues, and one high Dutchman, that had beene one of the King of Spaines garde: euery man had beene ſicke once or twice and let bloode. This is commonly the number of men that ordinarily dyed in the ſhips, ſometimes more ſometimes leſſe. About ten or twelue years ſince it chaunced that a Vice Roy for the King, named Ruy Lorenſo Detauora ſayled for India, that had in his ſhippe 1100. men, and there happened a ſicknes among them, ſo that there dyed thereof to the number of 900. and all throwne ouer borde into the ſea, before they came to Moſambique the Vice Roy himſelfe being one. Which was an extraordinarie ſickneſſe, and it is to be thought that the great number of men in the ſhip were the cauſe of bréeding the ſame: therefore in theſe dayes the ſhippes take no more ſo many men into them, for that with the number they carrie, they haue ſtinking ayre, and filth enough to clenſe within the ſhippe.
                     The 30. of September the Archbiſhoppe my maiſter with great triumph was brought into the towne of Goa, and by the Gentlemen and Rulers of the countrey, led vnto the cathedrall Church, ſinging Te Deum laudamus, and after many ceremonies and auncient cuſtomes, they conuayed him to his pallace, which is cloſe by the Church.
                     The 20. of Nouember our Admirall S. Phillip arriued at Cochin without ſtaying to land in any place, hauing indured much miſerie by the meanes before rehearſed, hauing béene ſeuen monthes and twelue daies vnder ſaile.
                     The laſt of the ſame month of Nouember the ſhippes ſayled from Goa to the coaſt of Malabar, and Cochin, there to receiue their lading of Pepper and other ſpices: ſome take in their lading on the coaſt of Malabar, as at Onor, Mangator, Cananor, &c. and ſome at Cochin, which can alwayes lade two ſhippes with Pepper. Cochin lyeth from Goa Southwarde about 90. miles: The ſhippes vnlade all their Portingall commodities in Goa, where the Marchantes, and Factors are reſident, and from thence the ſhips do ſayle along the coaſt to take in their lading in Pepper, and to Cochin as it is ſaid before. Each ſhippe doeth commonly lade eyght thouſande Quintales of Pepper, little more or leſſe Portingall waight: euery Quintale is 128. pound. Then they come to Cochin, whither the Factors alſo do trauell and lade in them Cloues, Sinamon, and other Indian wares, as in my voyage homewarde I will particularly declare, together with the manner of the ſame.
                     In the monthes of Ianuary and Februarie Anno 1584.
                        1584. the ſhippes with their lading returned from Cochin, ſome before, ſome after, towards Portingall, with whom my brother went, becauſe of his office in the ſhippe, and I ſtayed with my maiſter in India certaine yeares, to ſée and learne the maners and cuſtomes of the ſaid lands, people, fruites, wares, and merchandiſes, with other thinges, which when time ſerueth, I wil in truth ſet downe, as I my ſelfe for the moſt parte haue ſéene it with mine eyes, and of credible perſons, both Indians, and other inhabiters in thoſe Countries learned and required to know, as alſo the report and fame thereof is nowe ſufficiently ſpread abroade throughout the world by diuers of our neighbour countries and landes which traffique and deale with them, namely our countrey, the Eaſt Countries, England, Fraunce, &c. which likewiſe are founde and knowne by the Portingalles themſelues, which dayly trafficke thither. But before I beginne to deſcribe Goa, and the Indies, concerning their manners, traffiques, fruites, wares, and other thinges, the better to vnderſtande the ſituation of the Countrey, and of the coaſts lying on the Eaſt ſide, to the laſt and higheſt part of the borders of China, which the Portingales haue trauelled and diſcouered, together with their Ilandes, I will firſt ſet downe a briefe note of the Orientall coaſtes, beginning at the redde, or the Arabian ſea, from the towne of Aden to Chinae and then the deſcription of the coaſtes before named.
                  
                  
                     Chapter 5. The deſcription of the coaſt of Arabia Felix, or the red Sea, to the Iland and fortreſſe of Ormus.
                     
                     
                        
                           ADen is the ſtrongeſt and faireſt towne of Arabia Felix,
                        Annotatio D. Pall. 
                        ſituate in a valley, compaſſed about vpon the one ſide with ſtrong mines, on the other ſide with high mountaines, there are in it

fiue Caſtles laden with Ordinance, and a continuall Garriſon kept therein, becauſe of the great number of ſhippes that ſayle before it, the Towne hath about 6000. houſes in it, where the Indians, Perſians, Aethiopians, and Turkes doe trafique: and becauſe the Sunne is ſo extreame hotte in the daye time, they make moſt of their bargaines by night. About a ſtones caſt from the towne there is a hill with a great Caſtle ſtanding thereon wherein the Gouernor dwelleth. In times paſt this towne ſtoode vpon the firme land, but nowe by the labour & induſtrie of man, they haue made it an Iland.
                     
                     
                        Aden lieth on the North ſide, at the entrie of the red Sea on the coaſt of Arabia Felix, or fruitfull Arabia, and reacheth 60. miles more inwards then the corner or Cape de Guardafum the fartheſt part or corner of Abex, or Melinde as I ſaid before: but the coaſt of Arabia, which taketh the beginning from Aden, is much more inwarde. Aden lieth vnder 13. degrées on the North ſide, and from thence the coaſt lyeth Northeaſt and by Eaſt till you come to Cape de Roſalgate, which lyeth vnder 22. degrées, and is the further corner of the lande of Arabia Felix, lying on the Indian Sea, which is diſtant from Aden 240. miles: the towne of Aden ſtandeth by the hill called Darſira, which men affirme to bee onely Cliffes of hard ſtones, and red Marble, where it neuer rayneth. The people of this coaſt of Arabia, are tawnie of colour, almoſt like thoſe of the coaſt of Abex or Melinde, frō that Countrie they bring great numbers of good horſes into India, and alſo Frankenſence, Mirhe, Balſam, Balſam woode, and fruite, and ſome Manna, with other ſwéete wares and Spices: they hold the law of Mahomet after the Perſians manner.
                     From the Cape of Roſalgate inwardes, following the coaſt North-weſt to the Cape de Moncado, in times paſt named Albora are 70. miles. This point lyeth right againſt the Iland Ormus vnder 26. degrées. There beginneth the entrance of the ſtraights of Perſia, called Sinus Perſicus, and the Iland Ormus lyeth betwéene them both, hauing on the one ſide Arabia, and on the other ſide Northward the Countrie of Perſia, and is in breadth 20. miles. From the Cape de Moncadon, coaſting the Arabian ſhore inwardes to the Iland of Barem, are 80. miles, and lyeth vnder 26. degrées & a halfe. There the Captaine of Ormus being a Portingal, hath a factor for the King, and there they fiſh for the beſt Pearles in all the Eaſt Indies, and are the right orientall Pearle. Coaſting along this ſhore from Barem inwardes to the fartheſt and outermoſt corner of Perſia, or Sinus Perſicus, lyeth the towne of Balſora, which are 60. miles: this Towne lyeth vnder 30. degrées, and a little about it the two ryuers Tigris and Euphrates do méete and ioyne in one, and runne by Baſſora into the aforeſaide Sinus Perſicus. Thereabout do
                           •
                         yet appeare the decayed buildings, and auncient Ruines of old Babylon, and as many learned men are of opinion, thereabout ſtoode the earthly Paradice. From the towne of Balſora the coaſt runneth againe Northward towards Ormus, which is vnder the Dominion of the Perſian, this Sinus Perſicus is about 40. miles broad, not much more nor much leſſe, and hath diuers Ilands, and in the mouth therof lyeth the rich Iland Ormus, where the Portingales haue a Forte, and dwell altogether in the Ile among the naturall borne countrimen, and haue a Captaine and other officers euery thrée yeares, as they of Moſſambique.
                     
                  
                  
                     Chapter 6. Of the Iland and Towne of Ormus.
                     
                        
                           ORmus lyeth vpon the Iland Geru, in times paſt called Ogyris, and it is an Iland and a kingdom which the Portingales haue brought vnder their ſubiection, whereas yet their King hath his reſidence, that is to ſaye, without the towne where the Portingales inhabite. Theſe people obſerue Mahomets law, and are white like the Perſians. And there they haue a common cuſtome, that he which is King doth preſently cauſe al his brethren and his kinſmen of the Male kinde to haue their eyes put forth, which done they are all richly kept and maintained during their liues, for that there is a law in Ormus, that no blinde man may bee their King nor Gouernour ouer them. Therefore the King cauſeth them all to haue their eyes put out, ſo to be more ſecure in their gouernmentes, as alſo to auoide all ſtrife and contention, that might ariſe, and to hold and maintaine their countrey in peace.
                     The Iſland is about thrée miles great, very full of cliffes and rockes, and altogether vnfruitfull. It hath neyther gréene leafe nor hearbe in it, nor any ſwéete water, but onely rockes of ſalte ſtones, whereof the walles of their houſes are made: it hath nothing of it ſelfe, but only what it fetcheth from the firme lande on both ſides, as well out of Perſia as

from Arabia, and from the Towne of Baſſora, but becauſe of the ſituation, and pleaſantnes of the Iland there is al things therein to bee had in great abundance, and greate traffique for that in it is the ſtaple for all India, Perſia, Arabia and Turkie, and of all the places and Countries about the ſame, & commonly it is full of Perſians, Armenians, Turkes and all nations, as alſo Venetians, which lie there to buy Spices and precious ſtones, that in great abundance are brought thether out of all parts of India, and from thence are ſent ouer land to Venice, and alſo carried throughout all Turkie, Armenia, Arabia, Perſia and euery way. There are likewiſe brought thether all manner of marchandiſes from thoſe Countries that is from Perſia: out of the Countrie named Coracone and D
                              •
                           a
                              •
                           , and other places, great ſtore of rich Tapeſtrie & Couerlets, which are called Alcatiff
                              •
                           s: out of Turkie all manner of Chamlets: out of Arabia diuers ſortes of Drugges for Po
                           •
                        icaries, as Sanguis draconis, Manna, Mirre, Frankinſence & ſuch like, diuers goodly horſes, that are excellent for bréeding, all manner of moſt excellent Orientall Pearles out of Maſcatte a Hauen lying betwéene the Cape of Roſelgate and Moncadon, vppon the coaſt of Arabia, diuers ſorts of Dates, and Marmelades, which from Ormus is carried into India, and all places are ſerued therewith: likewiſe the money called Larynen, (which hath as it were two legges, ſtretching out like a péece of ſiluer wide that is beaten flat, printed about with certain ſmall Characters, which is coyned in Perſia at a place called Lary, being fine Siluer) is brought thether in great quantities, wherby there is as great dealing with them, as with other marchandiſes, becauſe of the greate gaine that is gotten by them and in India they goe very high.
                     Now to know the cauſe of ſo great traffique, and concourſe of people in this Ilande of Ormus, you muſt vnderſtand that euery yeare twice there commeth a great companie of people ouer land which are called Caffiles or Car
                              •
                           anes, which come from Aleppo, out of the Countrie of Surie thrée daies iornie from Tripoli which lyeth vppon the coaſt of the Mediterranean Sea, this companie of people, or Caffila obſerue this order, that is, euery yeare twice in the months of Aprill and September. There is a Captaine and certain hundreths of 
                           
                              •
                           anniſaries, which conuaye the ſaid Caffila vntill they come to the Towne of Baſſora, from whence they trauaile by water vnto Ormus. The marchants know the times when the Caruana or Caffila will come, ſo that againſt that time they make and prepare their marchandiſes in a readineſſe, and then are brought thether diuers Cammels, Dromedaries, Moyles and horſes euerye man his troope, which are there likewiſe to bee ſolde, ſo that there are aſſembled at the leaſt fiue or ſixe thouſand perſons all together, and ryde all in order like a battell that marcheth in the fielde two and two vpon a Cammell, or elſe ware hanging on both ſides of the Cammel, as you ſhal ſée in the Picture that followeth. With a good garde of 
                           
                              •
                           aniſaries, becauſe they are often times ſet vpon by the Arabians which are great théeues, and come to robbe them, for they muſt trauaile in the woods at the leaſt fortie daies together, wher in euery thrée or foure dayes they finde wels or pits, from whēce they prouide themſelues of water which they carrie with them in beaſtes ſkins tanned, whereof they make Flaſkes and Botles.
                     
                        The people nowe of late yeares haue left off their robbing and ſtealing in the hiph waies, but long before the birth of Chriſt, they vſed it, as the Prophet Ieremie doth witnes ſaying in his third Chapter and ſecond verſe, Lift vp your eyes, and behold what fornicatiō you commit in euery place, you ſit in the ſtreetes, and ſtay for your companions like the Arabian in the woodes &c. I remember that wee fell among many thouſande of theſe people, which in great pouertie dwell within the woodes, and ſandie downes, that are altogether barren, where they liue, in the heate of the Sunnes lying with their Cammels, getting their lyuing only by robbing and ſtealing, their meate and beſt breade are Cakes which they bake vnder Cammels dung dried in the Sunne, which the Sand maketh hotte, and Cammels Milke and fleſh, with ſuch like vnprofitable meate, to conclude they liue like miſerable men, as in truth they are.
                     
                     Likewiſe ther are certaine victualers that follow this companie, which carrie all kinde of things with thē
                        ▪ as Honie, Dates, Shéepe Goates, Hens, Egges &c. and all other ſorts of victuals and prouiſion, ſo that for money they may haue what they will, euery night they lie ſtill and haue their Tents, wherein they ſléepe, kéeping good watch, in this manner they trauaile to the Towne of Baſſora, and paſſe through Babylon now called Bagedet, and through other places. Being at Baſſora, they ſtay their certaine daies, wher againe they aſſemble themſelues, to returne

home, and trauaile in the like ſorte backe againe vnto Aleppo, whereby all manner of marchandiſes, out of all places are brought thether in great aboundance, by great numbers of traueling Marchants, of al nations whatſoeuer, except Spaniards, Portingals, and the King of Spaines ſubiects, which are narrowly looked vnto, although diuers times many of them paſſe among the reſt, vnder the names of French men, Engliſh men, or Venetians, which nations haue their factors and ſeruants continually reſident in Aleppo, as alſo in Tripoli, where their dayly traffique is from Venice, Marſellis and London and in Tripoli they vnlade their wares, and there the ſhippes take in their lading, and from thence they ſend their marchandiſes by land to and from Aleppo, where they vſe great traffique, and haue many priuiledges and freedomes graunted them by the great Turke.
                     And for that wee are nowe ſpeaking of Turks, I muſt not forget to ſhew you how, and in what ſort the great Turke hath euery day newes and letters from all his kingdomes & Countries that are ſo great, wild, waſt, and ſpread ſo farre abroad one from the other. You muſt vnderſtand, that throughout the whole Countrie of Turkie, they vſe Doues or Pigeons, which are brought vp & accuſtomed thereunto, hauing rings aboute their legges. Theſe Doues or Pigions, are borne from Baſſora, and Babylon, vnto Aleppo and Conſtantinople, and ſo from thence backe againe, and when there is any great occaſion of importance to bee aduertiſed or ſent, they make the letter faſt vnto the ring, that is about the Pigions féete, and ſo let them flie, whereby the letter with the Doue is brought vnto the place whither it ſhould goe, and they flie ſometimes a thouſand miles, which men would thinke impoſſible, but yet it is moſt true, and affirmed by ſuch as come from thence: I haue ſéene of the Doues in India, that a Venetian my good friend ſhewed me, which for the ſtrangeneſſe thereof had brought of them with him into India.
                     
                     But let vs now returne vnto our matter of the Ile of Ormus, which lyeth vnder 27. degrées, and in Sommer time is ſo vnreaſonable and intollerable hotte, that they are forced to lie and ſléepe in wooden Ceſterns made for the purpoſe full of water, and all naked both men and women, lying cleane vnder water ſauing only their heads: al their houſes are flat aboue, and in the toppes therof they make holes to let the ayre come in, like thoſe of Cayro, and they vſe certaine inſtruments like Waggins with bellowes, to beare the people in, and together winde to coole them withall, which they call Cat
                              •
                           auentos.
                     
                     
                        Cayrus hath very high houſes, with broad peint-houſes, to yeelde ſhadowe,
                        
                        Annotatio D. Pall. 
                        therby to auoide the heate of the Sunne: in the middle of theſe houſes are greate Pipes of ten cubites longe at the leaſt, which ſtand Northward, to conuaye and ſpread the colde ayre into their houſes, ſpecially to coole the loweſt romes.
                     
                     In winter time it is as colde with them as it is in Portingale, the water that they drinke is brought from the firme land, which they kéepe in great pots, (as the Tinaios in Spaine) and in Ceſternes, whereof they haue verie great ones within the fortreſſe, which water for a yeare, or a yeare and a halfe, againſt they ſhall neede, like thoſe of Moſſambique. They fetch water by the Iland of Barein, in the Sea, from vnder the ſalt water, with inſtruments foure or fiue fadome déepe, which is verie good and excellent ſweete water, as good as any fountaine water.
                     There is in Ormus a ſickeneſſe or common Plague of Wormes, which growe in their legges, it is thought that they procéede of the water that they drink. Theſe wormes are like vnto Lute ſtrings, and about two or thrée fadomes longe, which they muſt plucke out and winde them▪ aboute a Straw or a Pin, euerie day ſome part therof, as longe as they féele them creepe: and when they hold ſtill, letting it reſt in that ſort till the next daye, they binde it faſt and annoynt the hole, and the ſwelling from whence it commeth foorth, with freſh Butter, and ſo in ten or twelue dayes, they winde them out without any let, in the meane time they muſt ſit ſtill with their legges, for if it ſhould breake, they ſhould not without great paine get it out of their legge, as I haue ſéen ſome men doe.
                     
                        Of theſe wormes Alſaharanius in his practiſe in the 11. Chapter writeth thus▪ In ſome places there grow certaine Wormes betweene the skinne and the fleſh,
                        Annotatio. D. Pall. 
                        which ſickneſſe is named the Oxen paine, becauſe the Oxen are manye times grieued therewith, which ſtretch themſelues in great length, & creepe vnder the skin, ſo long till that they pearce it, the healing thereof conſiſteth in purging the body of corrup fleame, &c. Reade further.
                     
                     In my maſter the Archbiſhops houſe we had one of his ſeruants borne in Ormus newly come from thence which drewe thrée or
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     The 8. Chapter. Of the towne, fortreſſe and Iſland of Diu, in times paſt called Alambater.
                     
                     
                        THe Towne and Ilande of Diu lyeth diſtant from the ryuer Indo 70. miles vnder 21. degrées, cloſe to the firme land: in times paſt it belonged to ye King of Cambaia, in whoſe land and coaſt it lyeth, where the Portingals by negligence of the Kinge, haue built a fortreſſe, & in proceſſe of time haue brought the Towne and the whole Iland vnder their ſubiection, and haue made it very ſtrong, & in a manner inuincible, which fortreſſe hath béene twice beſieged by ſouldiers of Cambaia and their aſſiſtants, firſt in Anno 1539.
                        1539. and ſecondly in Anno 1546.
                        1546. and hath alwaies béene valiantly defended by the Portingals, as their Chronicles rehearſe. This Towne hath a very great Hauen, and great traffique, although it hath verye little or nothing at all of it ſelfe, more then the ſituation of the place, for that it lyeth betwéen Sinde and Cambaia, which Countries are abundant in all kind of things, wherby Diu is alwaies ful of ſtrange nations, as Turks, Perſians, Arabians, Armenians, and other countrie people: and it is the beſt & the moſt profitable reuenue the King hath throughout all India, for that the Banianen, Guſaratten, Rumos and Perſians, which traffique in Cambaia, & from thence to Mecca, or the red Sea, doe commonly diſcharge their wares, and take in their lading in Diu, by reaſon of the ſituation thereof, for that it lyeth in the entrance of Cambaia, and from Diu it is ſhipped and ſent to Cambaia, and ſo brought backe againe to Diu.
                     
                     The Towne of Diu is inhabited by Portingals, together with the natural borne Countrimen, like Ormus and al the townes & places holden by the Portingals in India, yet they kéepe their fortreſſe ſtrong vnto themſelues. This Iland aboundeth, and is very fruitfull of all kind of victuals, as Oxen Kine, Hogges, Shéepe, Hennes, Butter, Milke, Onions, Garlicke, Peaſe, Beanes, and ſuch like, whereof there is great plentie, and that very good, and ſuch as better cannot be made in all theſe Low-countries, but that the Fuell is not ſo well dreſt: they haue likewiſe Chéeſes, but they are very drie and ſault, much Fiſh which they ſault, and it is almoſt like vnto ſalt Ling, or Codde, and of other ſortes they make hanged fleſh which is very good, and will continue for a whole Viage: of all theſe victuals, and neceſſarie prouiſions they haue ſo great quantity that they ſupply the want of all the places round about them, eſpecially Goa, and Cochin, for they haue neither Butter, Onyons, Garlicke, Peaſe, Oyle nor graine, as Beanes, Wheat, or any ſéede: they muſt all bee brought from other places thether, as in the orderly deſcription of the coaſt as it lyeth, I will ſhew you, what wares, goods, marchandiſes, victuals, fruites and other things each lande, Prouince or Countrie yéeldeth and affordeth.
                     From Diu ſayling along by the coaſt about fiftéene or ſixtéene miles, beginneth the mouth of the water that runneth to Cambaia, which is at the entrie, and all along the ſaid water about 18. miles broade, and 40. miles long, and runneth in North-eaſt and by North, and at the farther ende of the water is the Towne of Cambaia, whereof the whole Countrie beareth the name, and lyeth vnder twentie thrée degrées, there the King or Solden holdeth his Court.
                  
                  
                     The 9. Chapter. Of the kingdome and land of Cambaia.
                     
                     
                        THe land of Cambaia is the fruitfulleſt Countrie in all India, and from thence prouiſion of neceſſaries is made for all places round about it: whereby there is a greate traffique in the Towne, as well of the inhabitants, as other Indians and neighbors, as alſo of Portingals, Perſians, Arabians, Armenians &c. The King obſerueth the law of Mahomet, but moſt parte of the people that are dwellers and naturall borne Countrimen, called Guſarates and Baneanem, obſerue Pythagoras law, & are the ſubtileſt and pollitiqueſt Marchauntes of all India, whoſe counterfets and ſhapes are placed in this booke by thoſe of India, with a deſcription of their liuing, ceremonies & cuſtomes, as in time and place ſhall be ſhewed. This lande of Cambaia aboundeth in all kinde of victuals, as Corne, Rice and ſuch like grain, alſo of Butter and Oyle, wherewith they furniſh all the Countries round about them. There is made great ſtore of Cotton Linnen of diuers ſorts, which are called Cannequins, Boffetas, Iorims, Chau
                              •
                           ares and Cotonias, which are like Canuas, thereof do make ſayles and ſuch like things, and many other ſortes that are very good and cheape.

They make ſome therof ſo fine, that you can not perceyue the thréedes, ſo that for fineneſſe it ſurpaſſeth any Holland cloth, they make likewiſe many Carpets, called Alcatiffas, but they are neyther ſo fine nor ſo good as thoſe that are brought to Ormus out of Perſia, and an other ſort of courſe Carpets, that are called Banquays, which are much like the ſtriped Couerlits that are made in Scotland, ſeruing to lay vpon cheſtes & cubbords: They make alſo faire couerlits, which they call Godoriins Colchas, which are very fair and pleaſant to the eye, ſtitched with ſilke, and alſo of Cotton of all colours and ſtitchinges: pauilions of diuers ſorts and colours; Perſintos that are ſtringes or bands, wherewith the Indians bind and make faſt their bedſheddes, thereon to lay their beds: all kind of bedſteds, ſtooles for Indian women, and other ſuch like ſtuffes, coſtly wrought and couered with ſtuffes of all colours: alſo fine playing tables, and Cheſſebordes of Iuory, and ſhields of Torteux ſhelles, wrought and inlaide very workemanlike, many fayre ſignets, ringes, and other curious worke of Iuorie, and ſea horſe téeth, as alſo of Amber, whereof there is great quantitie: They haue likewiſe a kind of mountain Chriſtall, wherof they make many ſignets, buttons, beades and diuers other deuiſes. They haue diuers ſorts of precious ſtones, as Eſpinellē, Rubies Granadis, Iaſnites, Amatiſtes, Chryſolites, Olhos de gato, which are Cattes eyes, or Agats, much Iaſper ſtone, which is called bloud and milke ſtone, and other kindes of ſtones: alſo many kindes of Drognes, as Amfion, or Opium, Camfora, Bangue, and Sandale wood, whereof when time ſerueth, I will particularly diſcourſe, in ſetting down the ſpices and fruites of India, Alluijn, Cane Sugar, and other merchandiſes, which I cannot remember, and it would be ouer long and tedious to rehearſe them all: Annell or Indigo groweth onely in Cambaia, and is there prepared and made ready, and from thence carried throughout the whole world, whereof hereafter I will ſay more: but this ſhall ſuffice for the deſcription of Cambaia, and now I will procéede.
                     At the ende of the countrey of Cambaia beginneth India & the lands of Decam, and Cuncam, the coaſt that is the inwarde part thereof on the Indian ſide ſtretcheth from Cambaia to the coaſt of India, where the ſaid inward part hath the beginning, which coaſt ſtretcheth Weſtwardes, Southweſt, and by South to the Iſlande lying on the coaſt or entry of the ſaid place, called Inſula das Vaquas, being vnder 20. degrées, vpon the which corner and countrey, on the firme land ſtandeth the towne and fortreſſe of Daman which is inhabited by the Portingalles▪ and vnder their ſubiection, diſtant from the Towne of Diu Eaſt and by South fortie miles.
                  
                  
                     The 10. Chapter. Of the coaſt of India, and the hauens and places lying vpon the ſame.
                     
                        THe coaſt of India hath the beginning at the entry or turning of the lande of Cambaia from the Iſlande called Das Vaguas, as it is ſaide before, which is the right coaſt, that in all the Eaſt Countries is called India: but they haue other particular names, as Moſambique, Melinde, Ormus, Cambaia, Choramandel, Bengala, Pegu, Malacca, &c. as when time ſerueth ſhall be ſhewed, whereof a part hath already béene deſcribed. Now you muſt vnderſtande that this coaſt of India beginneth at Daman, or the Iſland Das Vaguas, and ſtretcheth South and by Eaſt, to the Cape of Comoriin, where it endeth, and is in all 180. miles, vppon the which coaſt lie the towns and hauens hereafter following which the Portingals haue vnder their ſubiections, and ſtrong fortes therein: firſt Daman from thence fiftéene miles vpwardes vnder 19. degrées and a halfe the towne of Baſaiin, from Baſaiin ten miles vpwardes vnder 19. degrées the Towne and fort of Chaul, from Chaul to Dabul are tenne miles, and lyeth vnder 18. degrées: from Dabul to the town and Iſland of Goa are 30. miles, which lyeth vnder 15. degrées and a halfe: all theſe Townes and fortes aforeſaide are inhabited by the Portingalles, except Dabul which they had, and long ſince loſt it againe: The coaſt from Goa to Daman, or the turning into Cambaia, is called by thoſe of Goa the Northerne coaſt, and from Goa to the Cape de Comoriin, it is called the ſouthern coaſt, but commonly the coaſt of Malabar.
                     
                     Concerning the towne of Goa and the ſituation thereof, as alſo the deſcription of Decam & Cuncam, as touching their kings and progenies we will in another place particularly declare, with many other memorable thinges, as well of the Portingalles, as of the naturall countrimen. Wherefore for this time we will paſſe them ouer, and ſpeak of the other principal towns and hauens, following along the coaſt.
                     You muſt vnderſtand that all the townes

aforeſaid, Daman, Baſaiin and Chaul, haue good hauens, where great traffique is done throughout all India: all theſe townes and countries are very fruitfull of Ryce, Peaſe, and other graines, Butter, and oyle of Indian Nuttes: but oyle of Oliues is not to be found in all the Eaſt Indies, onely what is brought out of Portingall, and other ſuch like prouiſions is there very plentifull: they make alſo ſome Cotton linnen, but very little. The towne of Chaul hath great traffique to Ormus, Cambaia, to the redde ſea, to Sinde Maſquate, Bengala, &c. & hath many rich Marchants, and ſhippes: there is a place by Chaul, which is the old towne of the naturall borne countrymen, where diuers kindes of ſilkes are wouen, of all ſortes and colours, as Grogeran, Sattin, Taffata, Sarſcenet, and ſuch like ſtuffes, in ſo great aboundance▪ that India and all other places bordering the ſame▪ are ſerued therewith: whereby the inhabitantes of Chaul haue a great commoditie, by bringing the raw ſilke out of China, ſpinning and weauing it there; and againe being wouen, to carrie and diſtribute it throughout all India. There are likewiſe made many and excellent faire deſkes, bedſteds, ſtooles for women, couered with ſtuffes of all colours, and ſuch like marchandiſes, whereby they haue great traffique: There is likewiſe great ſtore of Ginger, as alſo all the coaſt along, but little eſtéemed there: This land called the North part, hath a very holeſome and temperate ayre, and is thought to be ye ſoundeſt & healthſomeſt part of all India, for the towne of Diu, and the coaſt of Malabar is very vnholeſome. Theſe Indians, as alſo thoſe of Cambaia which are called Benianen, and Guſarrates, and thoſe of the lande that lyeth inwardes from Decam, which dwell vpon the hill, called Ballagatte, which are named Decaniins, and Canaras, are altogether of yellowe colour, and ſome of them ſomewhat whiter, others ſomewhat browner, but thoſe that dwel on the ſea coaſt, are different and much blacker, their ſtatures▪ viſages and limmes are altogether like men of Europa, and thoſe of the coaſt of Malabar, which ſtretcheth and beginneth 12. miles from Goa Southward, and reacheth to the cape de Comoriin, whoſe naturall borne people are called Malabaren, which are thoſe that dwell vpon the ſea coaſt, are as blacke as pitch, with verie blacke and ſmoth haire, yet of bodies, lims and viſages, in all thinges proportioned like men of Europa: Theſe are the beſt ſoldiers in all India, and the principall enemies that the Portingalles haue, and which trouble them continually.
                     But the better to know the ſituation of the countrey, you muſt vnderſtande that all the coaſt ſeuered from India, is the low land lying 8. or 10. miles vpon the coaſt, which is that whereof we ſpeake, and is called Cuncam, and then there is a high or hilly Countrey, which reacheth almoſt vnto the skies, and ſtretcheth from the one ende vnto the other, beginning at Daman or Cambaia to the Cape de Comoriin, and the vttermoſt corner of India, and all that followeth again on the other coaſt called Ghoramandel. This high land on the top is very flatte and good to build vpon, called Ballagatte, and Decan, and is inhabited and diuided among diuers Kings and gouernors. The inhabitants and natural borne countrimen, are commonly called Decaniins, and Canaras, as in the deſcription of Goa and the territories thereof ſhalbe particularly ſhewed, with the ſhapes, faſhions and counterfeites of their bodies, Churches, houſes, trées, Plantes, and fruites, &c.
                  
                  
                     The 11. Chapter. Of the coaſt of India, that is from Goa to the cape de Comoriin, and the furtheſt corner of the lande, which is called the coaſt of Malabar.
                     
                     
                        THe coaſt of Malabar beginneth from Cape de Ramos, which lyeth frō 
                        Goa Southwardes ten myles, and endeth at the Cape de Comoriin, in time paſt called Corii, which is 100. and 7. or 8. miles, whereon lie the places hereafter following, which are inhabited by the Portingals, and kept with fortreſſes: firſt from the ſaid Cape de Ramos to the fortreſſe of Onor are tenne miles, lying full vnder 14. degrées, and is inhabited by the Portingalles. There is great quantity of Pepper, for that they are able euery yeare to lade a ſhippe with 7. or 8. thouſand Quintalles of Pepper, Portingal waight, & it is the beſt and fulleſt berries in all Malabar or India. This land belongeth to a Quéene named Batycola, which is a towne not farre from thence inwardes wherin ſhe kéepeth her Court: it is ſhe that ſelleth the Pepper, and deliuereth it vnto the Marchantes Factors, that lie in Onor, but they muſt alwaies deliuer their money ſixe monthes before they receyue their Pepper, otherwiſe they get it not: then ſhe deliuereth the Pepper, which by one of the Factors is

receyued and laid vp within the fortreſſe, till the ſhippes of Portingall come thether to take in their lading of Pepper: There is likewiſe much Ryce. This fortreſſe is not much frequented, but onely in the time of lading of their Pepper. which within fewe yeares hath béene vſed to be laden there, for before they vſed not to lade any in that place.
                     From Onor to the towne of Barſelor are 15. miles, and lyeth vnder 13. degrées: it is alſo inhabited by Portingalles as Onor is: there is great ſtore of Ryce & Pepper: from Barſelo
                              •
                           
                         to Mangalor are 9. miles, and lyeth vnder twelue degrées, and a halfe, which alſo is a fortreſſe inhabited as the others are by Portingals, and hath great ſtore of Pepper and Ryce.
                     From Mangalor to Cananor are 15. myles, which lyeth right vnder 11. degrées and a halfe. This is the beſt fortreſſe that the Portingalles haue in all Malabar, and there is much Pepper: The Malabars without the fortreſſe haue a village, with many houſes therein, built after their manner; wherein there is a market holden euery day, in the which all kindes of victuailes are to be had, which is wonderfull, altogether like the Hollanders markets. There you find Hennes, Egges, Butter, Hony, Indian Oyle, and Indian figges, that are brought from Cananor, which are very great, and without exception the beſt in all India: of the which ſorts of victuailes, with other ſuch like they haue great quantities: alſo very faire and long maſtes for ſhippes, ſuch as better cannot be found in all Norway, and that in ſo great numbers, that they furniſh all the countries rounde about them. It is a very gréene and pleaſant lande to beholde, full of faire high trées, and fruitfull of all thinges, ſo is the whole coaſt from Malabar all along the ſhore. Among theſe Malabars the white Mores do inhabite that beléeue in Mahomet, and their greateſt traffique is vnto the redde ſea, although they may not doe it, neyther any other Indian without the Portingalles paſport, otherwiſe the Portingals army (which yearly ſaileth along the coaſts, to kéepe them cleare from ſea rouers) for the ſafetie of their marchants, finding them or any other Indian or nation whatſoeuer, at ſea without a paſport, woulde take them for a prize, as oftentimes it happeneth that they bring ſhippes from Cambaia, Malabar, or from the Ile of Sumatra, and other places that traffique to the redde ſea. Theſe Mores of Cananor kéepe friendſhippe with the Portingalles, becauſe of the fortreſſe which holdeth them in ſubiection, yet couertly are their deadly enemies, and ſecretly contribute and pay great ſummes of money to the other Malabars, to the ende that they ſhoulde miſchiefe and trouble the Portingalles, by all the meanes they can deuiſe, whoſe forme and images do follow after thoſe of Goa and Malabar.
                     
                     From Cananor to Calecut are 8. miles, which lyeth full vnder 11. degrées: This towne of Calecut hath in times paſt béene the moſt famous Towne in all Malabar or India, and it was the chiefe towne of Malabar where the Samoriin, which is the Emperour, holdeth his Court, but becauſe the Portingalles at their firſt comming and diſcouering of India, were oftentimes deceyued by him, they reſorted to the King of Cochin, who as then was ſubiect to the Samoriin, being of ſmall power. But when the Portingals began to proſper in their enterpriſe, and to get poſſeſſion in the countrey, and ſo became maiſters of the ſea, Calecut beganne to decay, and to loſe both name and traffique, and nowe at this time it is one of the townes of leaſt account in all Malabar and Cochin to the contrarie, their King being very rich, and richer then the Samoriin, ſo that now he careth noe for him, by means of the fauour and help he findeth at the hands of the Portingalles.
                     From Calecut to Cranganor are tenne myles, and lyeth vnder tenne degrées and a halfe: there the Portingalles haue a Fortreſſe.
                     From Cranganor to Cochin are tenne miles, and lyeth not full vnder tenne degrées. The towne of Cochin is inhabited by Portingals, and naturall borne Indians, as Malabars and other Indians that are chriſtened: it is almoſt as great as Goa, very populous, and well built with faire houſes, Churches, and cloyſters, and a fayre and moſt pleaſant Riuer, with a good channell, and a hauen: a little beyonde the towne towards the land runneth a ſmall riuer or water, where ſometimes men may paſſe ouer dry footed: on the further ſide whereof lyeth a place called Cochin Dacyma, and it is aboue Cochin, which is in the iuriſdiction of the Malabars, who as yet continue in their owne religion: there the King kéepeth his Court: It is very full and well built with houſes after the Indian manner, and hath likewiſe a market euery day, where all kind of thinges are to be bought, as in Cananor, but in greater quantities. The land of Cochin is an Iſland, and it is in many places compaſſed about, and through the Iſle with ſmall Riuers.
                     Right ouer againſt Cochin Northwarde lyeth an other Iſland called Vaypiin, which

is likewiſe compaſſed about with water, like the fortreſſe of Cranganor, all theſe landes and Countries are low and flat land like the Countrie of Holland, but haue no ditches nor downes but onely the flat ſhore vpon the Sea ſide, and within the ſhore & the Strand of the ryuer, nor without any high ground or ſhelters, and ſo it ſtill continueth. The Countrie is verye great and pleaſant to behold▪ full of woodes and trees, it hath alſo woods of Cinamon trées, which are called Canella de Ma
                                 •
                              es, that is wilde Cinamō, which is not ſo good as the Cinamon of Seylo
                              •
                           , for when the Cinamon of Seylo
                              •
                           
                         is worth 1
                              •
                           0. Parda
                              •
                           ē
                         or Dollers that Cinamon is worth but 5▪
                         or 3
                              •
                           . Parda
                              •
                           wen, and is likewiſe forbidden 
                           •
                        o bee carried into Portingale, notwithſtanding: There is euery yeare great quantitie thereof ſhipped, but it is entred in the Cuſtome bookes for Cinamon of Seylon, whereby they pay the King his full Cuſtome for the beſt, Cochin hath alſo much Pepper, and can euery yeare lade two ſhips full, other ſhippes lade along the coaſt, at the fortreſſe aforeſaid, & vſe to come vnto Cochin, after they haue diſcharged all their Portingal wares and Marchandiſes, at Goa, and thether alſo come the Factors and Marchants and lade their wares, as in my Voyage homewards I will declare. Without Cochin, among the Malabares, there dwelleth alſo diuers Moores that belieue in Mahomet, and many Iewes, that are very rich, and there liue fréely without being hindred or impeached for their religion, as alſo the Mahometans, with their churches which they cal Meſquiten, the Bramanes likewiſe (which are the Spiritualitie of the Malabares & Indians) haue their Idols and houſes of Diuels, which they call Pagodes. Theſe thrée nations doe ſeuerally holde & maintaine their lawes and ceremonies by them ſelues, and liue friendly and quietly together kéeping good pollicie and iuſtice, each nation béeing of the Kinges counſell, with his Naires which are his gentilmen and nobilitie: ſo that when any occaſion of importaunce is offered, then al thoſe thrée nations aſſemble themſelues together, wherein the King putteth his truſt: of the which King and his Naires, Malabare
                        ▪ and Ba
                              •
                           amenes &c. with their maners, cuſtomes, aparrell, Idols, pagodes, and ceremonies, in an other place I will ſhewe you more at large, together with their pictures & coūterfetes: and for this time I ceaſe to ſpeake thereof, & wil procéede in the deſcription of the coaſts, which I haue already begū.
                     From Cochin to Coulon are 12. myles, and lyeth vnder 9 degrées: it is alſo a fortreſſe of the Portingals, where likewiſe euery yere they lade a ſhip with pepper: from Cou
                              •
                           on to the cape de Comori, are 20. myles: this corner lieth full vnder 7. degrées & a half, which is the end of the coaſt of Malabar & of India.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 12. Chapter. The deſcription of the kings, the diuiſion of the land and coaſt of Malabar, and their originall.
                     
                        TO vnderſtand the gouernment and diuiſions of the lād of Malabar, you muſt know that in tymes paſt, (but long ſithence) the whole land of M
                              •
                           labar was ruled by one King, being then but one kingdome, where now are manie, and as the Malabares ſaye, the laſt king that ruled the whole coūtry alone, was named Sarama Perimal, in whoſe time the Arabian Mahometanes much frequented the coūtrie of Malabar, becauſe of the great trafique of Spices, which as then were ſent from thence to the red ſea, and ſo conueyed into all places of the world. Thoſe Arabians by their ſubtilties delt in ſuch manner with the King, that they perſwaded him and many of his coūtry to beleue in the lawe of Mahomet, as they did almoſt throughout whole India, and other orientall coūtries and Ilands, which is one of the principaleſt occaſions why they can hardly be brought to beleue in Chriſt, but rather ſeeke by all meanes to ouerthrowe the Chriſtians, and to fight againſt the Portingales in thoſe countries, as in the Portingal Chronicles and Hiſtories of the firſt diſcouery and conqueſt of the Indies▪ is at large deſcribed. But returning to our matter, this King Sarama was ſo déepely rooted in his new ſect of Mahometes law, that he determined in him ſelfe to leaue his kingdome, and goe on pilgrimage to Mecca, to ſee Mahomets graue and there to ende his lyfe in ſo holy an exerciſe, thinking thereby to be ſaued, which in the end he brought to effect. And becauſe he had neither childrē nor heyres to poſſeſſe his kingdome, he deuided the ſame among his chiefeſt & beſt ſeruāts & friēds, giuing to one Cochin, to an other Cananor, to the third Chale, to the fourth Coulon &c. and ſo he delt with all the other places of his dominions, making euery one of thoſe places a kingdome: The town of Calicut he gaue to one of his beſt beloued ſeruāts together with the title of Samoriin, which is as much to ſay as Emperour

and chief of al the reſt, and commanded that they ſhould all acknowledge him as their Soueraigne; and they his vaſſalles, and at his commandement: whereby, euen vntill this time, the King of Calicut holdeth the name of Samoriin, with the commandement and authoritie ouer the other kings throughout the whole countrie of Malabar, by ſuch means as you haue heard before, which done the king wēt on pilgrimage to Mecca, wher he ended his dayes: and the Samoriin with the other kings, continued each man in his newe kingdome, whoſe ſucceſſors vntill this day doe continue, and gouerne the ſaid kingdomes, onely the Samoriin is ſomewhat imbaſed, and the king of Cochin exalted, ſince the Portingals ariued in the Indies, as it is ſaid before.
                     Theſe Malabares are excellent good ſoldiours, and goe naked, both men and women, onely their priuy members couered, and are the principalleſt enemies that the Portingals haue, and which doe them moſt hurt: and although commonlie they haue peace with the Samoriin, and hold ſo many forts vpon the land, as you haue heard before, yet the Malabares haue their hauens, as Chale, Calicut, Cunhale, Panane, and others, from whence with boates they mak roads into the ſea, and doe great miſchief, making many a poore merchant. The Samoriin likewiſe, when the toy taketh him in the head, breaketh the peace, & that by the counſell of the Mahometanes, who in all things are enemies to the Chriſtians, & ſéeke to do them miſchief: and becauſe of the Malabares inuaſions, the Portingall fléet is forced euery yeare to put forth of Goa in the ſummer-time, to kéepe the coaſt, and to preſerue the merchants that trauaill thoſe coūtries from ye 
                        Malabars, for that the moſt traffique in India, is in Foiſts like galleyes, wherein they traffique from the one place to the other, which is their daylie liuing & occupations, as it ſhalbe ſhewed at large: and yet there are continuall pyracies committed on the ſea, what order ſoeuer they take, wherby poore marchāts are taken priſoners, & robbed of all they haue. The land throughout is very fruitfull, gréene and pleaſant to beholde, but hath a very noyſome and peſtiferous ayre for ſuch as are not borne in the countrie, and yet pepper doth onely growe on this coaſt, although ſome groweth by Mallacca in certāe parts of the land, but not ſo much, for from hence is it laden and conueyed throughout the whole world.
                  
                  
                     The 13. Chapter. Of the Ilands called Maldyua, otherwiſe Maldyua.
                     
                     
                        RIght ouer againſt the cape of Comoriin 60. miles into the ſea weſtward, the Ilands called Maldyua doe begin, and from this cape on the North ſyde they lie vnder 7. degrées, & ſo reach ſouth ſouth eaſt, till they come vnder 3. degrées on the ſouth ſide, which is 140. myles. Some ſay there are 11000. Ilands, but it is not certainely knowne, yet it is moſt true, they are ſo many, that they can not be numbred. The Inhabitants are like the Malabares: ſome of theſe Ilands are inhabited, and ſome not inhabited, for they are very lowe ground, like the countrie of Cochin, Cranganor. &c. and ſome of them are ſo lowe, that they are commonlie couered with the ſea: the Malabares ſay, that thoſe Ilandes in time paſt did ioyne faſt vnto the firme land of Malabar, & were part of the ſame land, and that the Sea in proceſſe of tyme hath eaten them away, & ſo ſeparated them from the firme land. There is no merchandize to be had in them, but only coquen, which are Indian nuttes, and cayro, which are the ſhelles of the ſame nuts, & that is the Indian hemp, wherof they mak ropes, cables, and other ſuch like commodities: thoſe are there to be found in ſo great aboundance, that with them they ſerue the whole country of India, and al the oriental coaſt: of the wood of the ſame trées they make themſelues boats after their manner, with all things to them belonging: of the leaues they make ſayles, ſowed together with ſtrings made of the nutſhelles, without any iron nayles, and ſo being laden with the nuttes and other parts of the ſaid trées, they come and trafficke with thoſe of the firme land, their victuals in the ſhip being the fruite of the ſame trée: ſo that to conclude, the boate with all her furnitures, their marchandiſes and their victuals is all of this palme trée, and that maintaineth all the inhabitants of the Ilands of Maldyua, and therewith they trafficke throughout India: there are ſome of theſe nuttes in the ſaid Iland that are more eſtéemed then all the nuttes in India, for that they are good againſt all poyſon, which are verie faire and great, and blackiſh: I ſaw ſome that were preſēted vnto the vice roy of India, as great as a veſſell of 2. tūnes Indian meaſure, and coſt aboue 300. Pardawen, which were to ſend vnto the King of Spaine
                        ▪ Of this trée and her fruites, together with the vſage thereof, I will diſcourſe more

at large in the declaring of the Indian trées & fruites, meane time I will returne to the deſcription of the coaſts with their ſituations.
                     From the cape of Comoriin the coaſt beginneth North eaſt to turne inwards again, till you come to the Cape of Negapatan, which lyes vnder 11. degrées, and is 60. myles diſtant from the cape of Comoriin.
                     
                     From the cape of Comoriin South eaſt & by South about 40 miles into the ſea, lieth the furtheſt corner of the great Iland of Seylon, and ſo reacheth North and by eaſt, vntill you come right ouer againſt the cape of Negapatan, being diſtant from the firme land & the ſame cape 10. miles, and betwéene the firme land and that Iland there lyeth ſome drie groundes or lytle Ilands, whereby it is manie times dangerous for the Shippes that ſayle vnto Bengala and the coaſt of Cho
                              •
                           amandel, which commonly paſſe through that way. The Iland of Seylon is in length 60. miles, and in breadth 40. miles, from the firſt and vttermoſt corner North & by eaſt, about 18. miles vnder 7. degrées and an halfe, lyeth a fort belonging to the Portingals, called Columbo, which by méere force & great charges is holden and maintained, for that they haue no other place or péece of ground, no not one foot, but that in all the Iland: it is but a ſmall fort, yet very ſtrong and well guarded: The ſoldiers that are therein, are commonly ſuch as are baniſhed for ſome offence by them cōmitted, or ſuch as haue deſerued death: and ſome diſhoneſt women, for ſome euill fact, are put in there to beare them company. They fetch al their neceſſaries out of India, and are often times aſſailed by their enemies, the Inhabitants of the Iland, and often times beſieged, but alwaies valiantly defend themſelues.
                  
                  
                     The 14. Chapter. Of the Iland of Seylon.
                     
                     
                        THe Iland of Seylon is ſaid to be one of the beſt Ilands that in our time hath béene diſcouered, and the fruitfulleſt vnder the heauens, well built with houſes, and inhabited with people, called Cingalas, and are almoſt of ſhape and manners like to thoſe of Malabar, with long wyde eares, but not ſo blacke of colour: they goe naked, onely their members couered: they were wont to haue but one King, but hauing murdered their king, they deuided their countrie into manie kingdomes, and not long ſince, a ſimple barber murthered their chief king, & with great tyrannie brought the kingdome vnder his ſubiection, driuing the other kings out of the countrie, whereof one that was a Chriſtian, fled into India, and dwelleth at Goa, where he is kept & maintained at the kings charge. This barber, as it is ſaid, hath made himſelfe king, and the whole Iland vnder his ſubiection, his name was Raju, he liueth verie warily, and is verie ſubtill, a good ſoldier, but truſting no man: the Chingalans are not his good friends, & yet they liue in obediēce vnder him, more through force and feare, then for loue or good wil: for that he cauſeth them with great tyrannie to be executed, ſo that no man dareth ſtirre againſt him: he is likewiſe a deadly enemie to the Portingall, and about a yeare before I came from India, he had beſieged the fort of Columbo with a great nū
                        ber of Elephants, and men, but by meanes of ye Portingals that came thither out of India, he was conſtrayned to breake vp his ſiege before the fortreſſe.
                     The Iland is full of hils, and there is one hill ſo high that it is reported to be the higheſt hill in all India, and is called Picode Adam, The Indians hold for certane that Paradice was in that place, and that Adam was created therein, ſaying that yet vntill this daye, there are ſome of his footſteps foūd vpon that hill, which are within the ſtones, as if they were ingrauen, and neuer goe out.
                     The Iland is full of all ſorts of Indian fruites and of al kind of wild beaſts, as harts, hindes, wild bores, hayres, coneys, and ſuch like in great abundance, of all ſorts of foules, as peacoks, hennes, doues and ſuch like: and for oringes, lemons, and citrons, it hath not onely the beſt in al India, but better then any are found either in Spaine or Portingal, to conclude, it hath many and almoſt all things that are found in India through all the ſeuerall prouinces and places thereof: it hath alſo manie Indian palme trees, or nut trees, which are called cocken: and certane credible perſons doe affirme, which told it mée, that in the ſame Iland are nutmegges, Cloues, and Pepper trées, although there is no certaintie thereof, for that as yet they haue not béene brought, or vttered to ſell among the Chriſtians, but the beſt Cinamon in all the eaſt countries is there to be had, where it groweth in whole woodes, and from thence is diſperſed into all places of the world. The Captaine that kéepeth the fort is forced by ſtealth in the night time to iſſue forth & fetch this Cinamon into his fort, whereof he maketh his principal profite, for much more profite hath he not. This Iland hath likewiſe al kindes of precious ſtones, except Diamonds,

but Saphires, Rubies, Topaſ
                           •
                        es, Sp
                           •
                        nelen, 
                           •
                        ranaden, Rob
                           •
                        ſſen. &c. the beſt in all the Eaſt: it hath likewiſe a fiſhing for Pearles, but yet they are not ſo good as thoſe that are at Bareiin by Ormus: it hath likewiſe mynes of Gold, ſiluer, and other metals. The Kings of the Iland will not digge it forth, but kéepe it for a great ſtate & honor, I thinke rather it is but Latte
                           •
                        , becauſe no man ventureth for it: it hath alſo yron, Flaxe, Brimſtone, and ſuch like ware, alſo many Iuorie banes, and diuers Elephantes, which are accounted for the beſt in all India, and it is by daylie experience found to be true, that the Elephantes of all other places and coūtries being brought before them, they honour and reuerence thoſe Elephantes: the natural borne people or Chingalas are very cunning workmen in Gold, Siluer, Iuory, Yron, and all kindes of metal, that it is wonderful: they are much eſtéemed for the ſame through al India, and beare the name and prayſe aboue all the reſt of the Indians: they make the faireſt barrels for péeces that may be foūd in any place, which ſhine as bright as if they were Siluer. My maiſter the Archbiſhop had a crucifixe of Iuorie of an elle long, preſented vnto him, by one of the inhabitants of the Ile, & made by him ſo cunningly & 
                           •
                        rkmanly wrought, that in the hayre, beard, and face, it ſéemed to be aliue, & in al other parts ſo neatly wrought and proportioned in limmes, that the like can not be done in all Europe: Whereupon my maiſter cauſed it to be put into a caſe, and ſent vnto the king of Spaine, as a thing to be wō
                        dered at, and worthy of ſo great a Lord, to be kept among his coſtlieſt Iewels. In ſuch things they are very expert and wonderful, and maruelous nimble and expert in iugling, as well men as women, and trauell throughout the countrie of India, to get money, carying hobbyhorſes with thē, very ſtrange to behold. And this ſhall ſuffice at this preſent for the deſcription of the Ile of Seylon, & now I will procéede to ſhewe you of the coaſt of Choramandel, where wée left before, being at the cape of Negapatan.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 15. Chapter. Of the coaſt of Choramandel and the kingdome of Narſinga or Biſnagar.
                     
                     
                        THe coaſt of Choramandel beginneth from the cape of Negapatan, and ſo ſtretcheth North & by Eaſt, vnto a place called Muſulepatan, which is 90. miles, and lieth vnder 16. degrées and a half. Betwéene theſe two places, vpon the ſame coaſt, lyeth a place called S. Thomas, vnder 13. degrées & an halfe, and is 40. miles diſtant from Negapatan. This place and Negapatan are inhabited by the Portingales, and in al the other places along the coaſt, they haue traffique and deali
                           •
                        
                        ▪ The aforeſaid place called S. Thomas was in time paſt a towne of great traffique, and as then called by the name of Meliapor, and belonged to the kingdome of Narſinga, whoſe king is now commonly called king of Biſnagar, which is the name of his chief Citie where he kéepeth his court. This Towne lieth within the land, and is nowe the chief
                           •
                         cittie of Narſinga and of the coaſt of Choramandel. The naturall countrimen, are for manners, cuſtomes & ceremonies, like thoſe of Ballagate, decamin
                              •
                           
                         & Canaras, for they are al one people, but only ſeparate by ſeueral places & kingdoms: and ye better to vnderſtand wherefore this place was named S. Thomas, the Indians ſay, that in the time, when the Apoſtles were ſent & ſpread abroad to preach the Goſpell of our ſauiour Chriſt throughout the whole world, that S. Thomas the apoſtle came into that kingdome of Narſinga, after he had bene in diuers places of India teaching & preaching the word of God vnto thoſe Indians and vnbeleuing people, but litle profited therein, for ſo ſay the Chriſtians that are come of thoſe ſame Countriemen, which S. Thomas conuerted and baptiſed in the faith of Chriſt, whom the Portingals found there at ſuch time as they entered into the country and yet find many of them obſeruing the ceremonies of the Gréek Church in the Chaldean tong, that by no meanes will ioine with the Portingales in their ceremonies: but not long ſithence at the time of my béeing in India, there was one of their Biſhops, that by land trauelled to Rome, and there ſubmitted himſelf to the Romiſh Church, yet obſeruing and holding their ancient ceremonies and cuſtomes, which by the Pope was ſtill permitted vnto them: and when my Lord the Archbiſhop held a prouinciall counſell within the citie of Goa, where his ſuffraganes were aſſembled, that is to ſay, ye biſhops of Cochin, Malacca, and China, to authorize the ſame, the aforeſayd Biſhop was likewiſe called thether, who as then was newlie come from Rome, being made an Archbiſhop, and was perſonally in the counſell, but would not in any ſort conſent vnto the altering or changing of anie points of his Religion, or ceremonies from the ſuffraganes & from his Chriſtians, which were commonly called S. Thomas Chriſtians. But returning to our matter, they ſay that when S. Thomas had long preached, and taught in the kingdome of Narſinga,
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     
                        From Muſulepatan the coaſt runneth again Northeaſt and by Eaſt, to the kingdom of Bengalen, which is 120. miles, and it is the lande and kingdome of Orixa, which ſtretcheth along the ſame coaſt vnto the Riuer of Ganges, the beginning of the kingdom of Bengalen. This coaſt of Narſinga, Biſnagar and Orixa, are by the Portingalles commonly called (as alſo the coaſt of Negapatan and Saint Thomas) Choramandel, vntil you come to Bengalen, where the Portingalles haue great traffique, for that it is a very rich and plentiful Country of all things, as Ryce and all manner of fowles, and beaſts in great abundance. It is alſo a holeſome countrey and a good ayre for ſtrange nations, for that the Portingals and other countreymen can better brooke it then other places in India: From theſe coaſtes they vſe great traffique vnto Bengala, Pegu, Sian, & Malacca, and alſo to India: there is excellent faire linnen of Cotton made in Negapatan, Saint Thomas, and Muſulepatan, of all colours, and wouen with diuers ſorts of loome workes and figures, verie fine and cunningly wrought, which is much worne in India, and better eſtéemed then ſilke, for that it is higher priſed then ſilke, becauſe of the finenes & cūning workmāſhip: they are called Rechatas & Cheylas, wherof the Chriſtians & Portingals in India do commōly make bréeches. They likewiſe make clothes thereof for women to put about them from their nauelles downeward, bound about their bodies, which they weare within the houſe, very finely made, the beſt ſort are named clothes of Saraſſo, ſome being mingled with thréedes of golde and ſiluer, and ſuch like ſtuffe of a thouſand ſortes, very beautifull to behold, wherewith they cloath themſelues in very comely manner. In this coaſt growe the great and thicke réeds, which are vſed in India to make the Pallankins, wherein they carry the women, as in the Indian figures you ſhall ſée, which are ſo thicke, that a man can hardly gripe them with both his handes, very faire to looke vpon, and very high, being of diuers colours, as blacke, redde, &c. Whereof in an other place I will ſay more.
                  
                  
                     The 16. Chapter. Of the Kingdome of Bengalen, and the riuer Ganges.
                     
                        AT the ende of the Kingdome of Orixa and the 
                           •
                        aſt of 
                           
                              •
                           horamandel beginneth the Riuer Ganges in the kingdom of Bengalen: This is one of the moſt famous Riuers in all the world, and it is not knowne from whence it ſpringeth. Some are of opinion that it commeth out of the earthly paradiſe becauſe of an old ſpeech of the Bengalers, which is, that in time paſt a certaine King of Bengalen was deſirous to know frō whence the riuer Ganges hath her beginning, to the which ende hee cauſed certaine people to bee brought vp and nouriſhed with nothing but rawe fiſh, and ſuch like foode,A fable of the people of Bengalen concerning the heade or ſpring of ye riuer Ganges. thereby to make them the apter to accompliſh his deſire, which people (hauing made boats fitte for the purpoſe) he ſent vp the riuer, who were certain monthes vpon the water, ſo long til they came where they felt a moſt pleaſant and ſwéete ſauour, and founde a very cleare and moſt temperate skie, with ſtill and pleaſant water, that it ſéemed vnto them to bee an earthly paradiſe, and being deſirous to rowe further vpwardes they could not, ſo that they were compelled (ſéeing no remedie) to returne againe the ſame way that they came, and being returned, certified the King what they had ſéene. They that will not credit this are hard of beliefe, for my parte I leaue it to the readers iudgement.
                     This Riuer hath Crocodiles in it, like the riuer of Nilus in Aegipt, the mouth or entry thereof lyeth vnder 22. degrées, and the coaſt runneth Eaſt and by South; to the Kingdome of Aracan, which is about 80. miles: it is an vneuen coaſt full of Iſlandes, ſholes, hookes, and créekes, for the lande of Bengalen lyeth inwards of the gulf, which is called Bengala, for that frō 
                        Aracan, the coaſt beginneth againe to runne South and Eaſt outwardes towardes Malacca, and to the vttermoſt hooke which is called Singapura: But returning to Bengala and the Riuer Ganges, you muſt vnderſtand that this riuer is holden and accounted of all the Indians to be a holy and a bleſſed water,The ſuperſttious opinions of the Indians concerning the Riuer of Ganges. and they do certainely belieue, that ſuch as waſh and bath themſelues therein (bee they neuer ſo great ſinners) all their ſinnes are cleane forgiuen them, and that from thenceforth they are ſo cleane and pure from ſinne, as if they were newe borne againe, and alſo that hee which waſheth not himſelf therein cannot be ſaued, for the which cauſe there is a moſt great and incredible reſorte vnto the ſame, from all the partes of India & the Eaſt countries, in great troupes, where they vſe diuers ſtrange ceremonies, and ſuperſtitions, moſt horrible to heare, for they doe moſt ſtedfaſtly beléeue that they ſhall thereby merit eternall life.
                     From th
                           •
                         Riuer Eaſtward 50. miles lyeth the towne of Chatigan, which is the chief towne of Bengala: The naturall borne people of Bengala are in a manner like thoſe of

                        Seylon, but ſomewhat whiter then ye 
                        Chingalas: they are a moſt ſubtill and wicked people,The 
                              〈…〉
                            Beng
                              •
                           ns. and are eſtéemed the worſt ſlaues of all India, for that they are all théeues, and the women whores, although this fault is common throughout all India, no place excepted. They haue a cuſtome that they neuer dreſſe or ſéeth meat twice in one pot, but haue euery time a new pot.The Beng
                              •
                           lians 
                              •
                           aw for adultery▪
                         Whenſoeuer they are found in adulterie, they haue their noſes cut off, and from that time forwarde they muſt leaue ech others company, which is moſt narrowly looked vnto by their law. The countrey is moſt plentiful of neceſſary victuails ſpecially Rice, for that there is more of it in that countrey then in al the caſt countries, for they do yearly lade diuers ſhippes therewith, which come thether from all places, and there is neuer any want thereof▪ and all other things in like ſort, and ſo good cheape that it were incredible to declare; for that an O
                           •
                        e or a Cowe is there to be bought for one Lari
                           •
                        n, which is as much as halfe a Gilderne, Shéepe, Hens, and other things after the like rate, a Candit of Ryce,Victuailes good cheap in Bengala. which is as much, little more or leſſe as fourteene buſhelles of Flemmiſh meaſure, is ſold there for halfe a Gilderne, and for halfe a Doller: Sugar and other ware accordingly, whereby you may wel conceiue what plentie they haue. The Portingalles deale & traffique thether, and ſome places are inhabited by them, as the hauens which they call Porto grande, and Porto pequeno, that is, the great hauen and the little hauen, but there they haue no Fortes, nor any gouernement, nor policie as in India they haue, but liue in a manner like wild men, and vntamed horſes, for that euery man doth there what hee will, and euery man is Lord and maiſter, neyther eſtéeme they any thing of iuſtice, whether there be any or none, and in this manner doe certayne Portingalles dwell among them, ſome here, ſome there ſcattered abroade, and are for the moſt part ſuch as dare not ſtay in India for ſome wickedneſſe by them committed: notwithſtanding there is great trafficke vſed in thoſe partes by diuers ſhips and marchants, which all ye year diuers times both go come to and from all the Orientall parts.
                     Beſides their Ryce, much Cotton linnen is made there which is very fine, and much eſtéemed in India, and not only ſpread abroad and carryed into India and al the Eaſt parts, but alſo into Portingal, and other places: this linnen is of diuers ſorts, and is called Sarampuras, Caſſas, Comſas, Beatillias, Satopaſſas, and a thouſande ſuch like names: They haue likewiſe other linnen excellently wrought of a hearbe, which they ſpinne like yearne: this yearne is to be ſ
                           •
                        ene at the houſe of Paludanus: it is yealowiſh, and is called the hearbe of Bengalen, wherewith they do moſt cunningly ſtitch their couerlits, pauilions, pillowes, carpets, and mantles, therein to chriſten children, as women in childbed with vs vſe to doe, and make them with flowers and branches, and perſonages, that it is wonderfull to ſée, and ſo finely done with cunning workemanſhippe, that it cannot be mended throughout Europe: likewiſe they make whole péeces or webbes of this hearbe, ſometimes mixed and wouen with ſilke, although thoſe of the hearbe it ſelfe are dearer and more eſtéemed, and is much fayrer thē the ſilke. Theſe webs are named Sarrijn, and it is much vſed and worne in India, as well for mens bréeches, as dublets, and it may be waſhed like linnen, and being waſht it ſheweth and continueth as faire as if it were new.
                     From Bengala commeth much Algallia, or Ciuet, but by the ſubtiltie and villany of the Bengalians it is falſifyed, & mixed with filth, as ſalt, oyle, and ſuch like ſtuffe, whereby it is not much eſtéemed. Alſo in Bengala are found great numbers of the beaſts, which in Latine are called Rhinocerotes, and of the Portingalles Abadas, whoſe horne, téeth, fleſh, blood, clawes, and whatſoeuer he hath, both without and within his bodie, is good againſt poyſon, and is much accounted of throughout all India, as in an other place ſhall be ſhewed more at large. There groweth likewiſe marble coloured Réedes, whereof you may ſée many ſortes in the cuſtodie of Paludanus, which the Portingalles call Canas de Bengala, that is, Réedes of Bengala: within they are full of pith, and are about the thickneſſe of Spaniſh réedes, but ſomewhat thinner, and when they are gréene they bowe and bend like Willow twigges: they are outwardly of diuers colours and ſpeckled as if they were painted. They vſe them in Portingall for olde women to beare in their handes when they goe abroad or vppon the ſtones. There is another ſorte of the ſame réeds which they call Rota: theſe are thinne like twigges of Willow for baſkets, whereof Paludanus can ſhewe you great numbers, with the which in India they make many faire baſkets, and a thouſande other curious deuiſes, Sugar, Butter, and ſuch like ware they haue in great quantitie as I ſaid before: but this ſhall ſuffice for Bengala, whereof we leaue to ſpeake, and returne to the deſcription of the coaſt as it lyeth along the ſhore.
                  
                  
                     
                     The 17. Chapter. Of the coaſts and lands of Aracan, Pegu and Sian, to the Cape of Singapura, & the towne and fortreſſe of Malacca.
                     
                        BEyond the kingdome of Bengala, beginneth the kingdomes of Aracan & Pegu, which coaſt ſtretcheth from Bengala ſouth and by Eaſt to the town and hauen of Martauan, in the land of Pegu, and is 70. miles: Martauan lyeth vnder 16. degrées, from whence beginneth the kingdome or land of Sian: theſe kingdomes of Aracan and Pegu are very rich & fruitfull of all things, beſides Gold and precious ſtones, as Rubies, Eſpinels, Saffires, Iacinthes, Emeraldes, Granates, and ſuch like, as it is well knowne by the great numbers that are dayly brought out of thoſe countries into all places. Likewiſe they make harde ware, which is carried throughout the world: There are greater number of Elephantes in thoſe countries, then in any other place of India, or the Orientall countries; & the Portingalles that traffique there, affirme that the king of Pegu hath a white Elephant which hee prayeth vnto, and holdeth it to bée holy. The Peguans haue a cuſtome, that when any ſtranger commeth into their land to deale and traffique with them,Strange cuſtoms of the Peguans. of what nation ſoeuer he bee: they aſke him how long he meaneth to ſtay there, and hauing tolde them, they bring him many maides, that of them he may take his choice, and make contract and agrée with the parentes of the maid that liketh him beſt, for the vſe of her during his continuance there: which done he bringeth her to his lodging, and ſhe ſcrueth him about all his affaires, both by day & by night, like his ſlaue or his wife, but hee muſt take heede that in the meane time hee keepeth not company with other women, for thereby hee may incurre great daunger, and ſtand in perill of his life. When the time of his reſidence is ended, he payeth the friendes or parents of the maid as much as he agreed for with thē, which done he departeth quietly away, and the maid returneth with credite home againe vnto her friendes, and is as well eſtéemed of as euer ſhe was before: and if after that the ſame maide chance to marrie, were it with the principalleſt of the Countrey, and that the aforeſaid ſtranger ſhold come to traffique in the ſame place againe, hee may againe demand his woman, and he ſhall haue her without reſiſtance of her huſband, or any ſhame vnto him, and ſhe remaineth by the ſtranger as long as he abideth there, and he trauelling from thence, ſhe goeth home againe vnto her huſband, which among them is holden for a moſt ſure and inuiolable law. Likewiſe when any gentleman or noble man will marrie with a maide, hee goeth to ſéeke one of his friendes, or a ſtraunger, and intreateth him to lie with his bride the firſt night of their mariage, and to take her maydenhead from her, which he eſteemeth as a great pleaſure & honour done vnto him, that another man wold take vpon him to eaſe him of ſo much payne: This cuſtome is not onely vſed among the Gentlemen and chiefe nobilitie of the lande, but by the King himſelfe. Alſo diuers of the Peguans weare a bell vpon their yarde, and ſome two, as bigge as an Acorne, which is made faſt betweene the fleſh and the skinne. Of the like Belles Paludanus can ſhew you one, which I brought out of India, and gaue it him; which bels haue a very ſweet ſounde: This cuſtome of wearing Belles was ordained by them, becauſe the Peguans in time paſt were great Sodomites, and vſing this cuſtome of belles, it would be a meane to let them from the ſame. The women go altogether naked, onely with a cloth before their priuie members, which (as they go) openeth & vncouereth, ſhewing all they haue, which is by them ordayned, to the ende that by ſuch meanes it ſhould tempt men to luſt after women, and to auoid that moſt abhominable & accurſed ſinne of Sodomie. There are likewiſe ſome among them that doe ſowe vp the priuie member of their female children as ſoone as they are borne, leauing them but a little hole to auoid their water; and when ſhe marrieth the huſband cutteth it open, and maketh it as great or as little as hee will, which they with a certaine oyntment or ſalue can quickly heale. I ſaw one of thoſe women in Goa whom the Surgeon of my Mayſter the Archbiſhops houſe did cut open: men would iudge all theſe thinges to be fables, yet they are moſt true, for I doe not onely knowe it by the dayly trafficking of the Portingalles out of India thether, but alſo by the Peguans themſelues, whereof many dwell in India, ſome of them being Chriſtians, which tell it and confeſſe it for a truth, as alſo the neereneſſe of place and neighbourhood maketh it ſufficiently knowne. The people of Aracan, Pegu, and Sian are in forme, manner, and viſage, much like thoſe of China, onely one difference they haue, which is, that they are ſomewhat whiter then the Bengalon, and ſomewhat browner then the men of China: The pictures

                           〈2 pages missing〉
                        
                        
ſongs after their manner whereby they are wondred at, which maketh them proude, and hee that dwelleth in India, and can not ſpeake the Malayans ſpeach, wil hardly with vs learne the French tongue, their forme and figures are heere ſet downe, together with thoſe of the Ilands of Iaua, whereof hereafter we will ſpeake more.
                  
                  
                     The 19. Chapter. Of the Iland of Sumatra, in times paſt called Taprobana.
                     
                     
                        SVMATRA INSVLA
                        map of Sumatra
                     
                     
                        RIght ouer againſt Malacca, Southeaſt about 20. miles from the firme land by Malacca, wher the ſtraight is at the narroweſt, lieth the 
                           •
                        amous Ilande of Taprobana, now called Sumatra, by ſome Hiſtoriographers named Cherſone
                              •
                           o Aurea, others affirme it to be Ophir, from whence Salomon had his Golde, as the Scripture rehearſeth, and ſay that in times paſt it was firme land, and ioyned vnto the Countrie of Malacca. The Iland beginneth from the firſt pointe which lyeth right againſt the Gulfe of Bengala vnder fiue degrees, on the North ſide, and ſtretcheth alſo before Malacca, South Southeaſt, vntill it paſſeth by the Iland called Iaua Maior, where it endeth vnder 6. degrées on the South ſide, and is in length 170 miles, and in breadth 60. miles. The Portingals dwell not therein in any place, but deale and trafique in ſome places thereof, yet very few, for that the inhabitants themſelues doe bring many of their commodities vnto Malacca.
                     
                     The Iland hath many Kings, the principalleſt is the King of D. chem, which lyeth vpon a point of the land, vnder 4. degrees and a halfe on the North ſide. This Dachem is very mightie and a great enemie to the Portingals, he hath often beſieged Malacca, and done it great miſchiefe, as it happened in the time of my biding in India, by ſtopping the paſſage of all victuals and other Marchandiſe comming to Malacca, as alſo by kéeping the paſſage of the ſtraight betwéene Malacca and Sumatra, ſo that the ſhippes of China, Iapen, and the Ilande of Molucco, were forced to ſayle about, whereby they paſſed much danger, to the great diſcommoditie and hindrance of trauelling Marchants, and they of Malacca and India, had many Gallies in the ſtraights of Malacca, which ſome accurſed Chriſtians that haue no reſidence, had taught them to make, whereby they did great miſchiefe▪ and yet dayly doe, but by Gods helpe and the Portingals ayde out of India, all places were freed, and reduced into their priſtinate eſtate, as in another place we ſhall declare. It was long ſithence concluded & determined by the King of Portingale and his Viceroye, that the Ile of Sumatra ſhould bee conquered, and at this preſent there are certaine Captaines, that to the ſame end haue the Kings pay, with the title

                        
                        
                           
                              Malachae incolae ſermone et moribus quam reliqui Indi cultioribus et magis comes.
                           
                           
                              In woonders van Mallacka welcke alle andere Indianen in taele courtoſije en amoreushcÿt te boven gaen.
                           
                           
                              
                              Inſulanus e Iava gens durae cervicis. Een cÿlander wt 
                                    •
                                 ava welcks volck is hart: neckich en opſtinaet.
                           
                        
                        
                        
of Generals and chiefe Captaines, or Adelantado of this conqueſt, but as yet there is nothing done therein, although they doe ſtill talke thereof but doe it not.
                     The Iland is very rich of mynes of Gold, Siluer, Braſſe, (whereof they make greate Ordinance) precious ſtones, and other mettall: of all kinde of Spices, ſweete woode, rootes, and other medicinable Herbes and Drugges: it hath a hill of Brimſtone that burneth continually, and they ſaye, there is a fountaine which runneth pure & ſimple Balſame, it hath likewiſe great ſtore of Silke. At the laſt beſieging and troubles of Malacca, the Kinge of Acheijn ſent a péece of Ordinance, ſuch as for greatnes length and workmanſhip, the like is hardly to bee found in all Chriſtendome, which hee gaue in marriage with his daughter to the King of Ior, a town lying by Malacca, vpon the coaſt of Sian, but this péece with his daughter were taken vpon the way by the Portingals, and brought into Malacca, which péece was after laden in the Ship that ſayleth euery yeare from Malacca to Portingale, and ſent vnto the King for a preſent, being ſo heauie that they were forced to lay it in the Balaſt of the ſhip. The ſame péece lyeth at this preſent in the Ile of Tarcera, becauſe the ſaid ſhippe ſtayed there, being in our companie as I returned out of India, alſo the Towne of Ior vpon the ſame occaſion was by the Portingals beſieged, and at the laſt wonne and by them raſed to the ground, and for euer made waſt, wherin they found about 150. Braſſe péeces ſmal & great, ſome of them beeing no greater then a Muſket, and ſome greater, and ſo of all ſorts, verie cunningly wrought with Flowers and perſonages, which I haue purpoſely ſet down to let you know that they haue other kindes of Mettals, and know howe to handle them.
                     But returning to our matter, There are ſome places in this Iland where the Portingales doe traffique, which are thoſe that vſe to traffique to Malacca, as a Towne called Pedir, which lyeth 20. miles from Achejin, vppon the coaſt right ouer againſt Malacca, from whence commeth much Pepper and Golde, & from an other place called Campar, which lyeth almoſt vnder the Equinoctiall line, vppon the corner on the South ſide, on the ſame ſide on the Weſt coaſt of the Iland lyeth a place called Manancabo, where they make Poinyards, which in India are called Cryſes, which are very well accounted and eſtéemed of, and is thought the beſt weapon in all the Orient, whereof thoſe of Iaua & Malacca do make gret prouiſion for thēſelus.
                  
                  
                     The 20. Chapter. Of the Iland of Iaua Maior, with their wares, Marchandiſes, and trades, waights, myntes, and prices thereof with other particularities.
                     
                        IAVA MAIOR
                        map of Java
                     
                     
                        SOuth Southeaſt right ouer againſt the laſt point or corner of the Ile of Sumatra, on the ſouth ſide of the Equinoctiall line lyeth the Iland called Iaua Maior, or great Iaua, where there is a ſtraight or narrow paſſage betweene Sumatra and Iaua, called the ſtraight of Sunda, of a place ſo called, lying not far from thence

within the Ile of Iaua: this Iland beginneth vnder 
                           •
                         degrées on the ſouth ſide, and runneth eaſt and by ſouth 150 miles long, but touching the breadth, it is not found, becauſe as yet it is not diſcouered, nor by the Inhabitants themſelues well knowne. Some thinke it to be firme land, and parcell of the countrie called Terra incognita, which being ſo, ſhoulde reach from that place to the Cape de Bona ſperāce, but as yet it is not certainly known, & therefore it is accoūted for an Iland: the inhabitants ſay that within the land there is a Riuer, wherin if any wood doth fal, it turneth into ſtone. Through this ſtraight or narrowe paſſage Thomas Candiſh an Ingliſh captaine paſſed with his Ship, as he came out of the ſouth parts, from Noua Spaigne. This Iland aboundeth with Rice, and all manner of victuals, as oxen, kyne, hogges, ſhéepe and hennes, &c. alſo Onyons, Garlicke, Indian nuttes and with al kind of Spices, as cloues, Nutmegges, and mace, which they carry vnto Malacca. The principall hauen in the Iland is Sunda Calapa, whereof the ſtraight beareth the name: in this place of Sūda there is much Pepper, and it is better then that of India or Malabar, wherof there is ſo great quantitie, that they could lade yearlie from thence 4 or 5 thouſand kintales Portingale waight: it hath likewiſe much frankinſence, Beniom of Bonien called Folie, Camphora, as alſo Diamantes, to which place mē might very well traffique, without any impeachment for that the Portingales come not thether, becauſe great numbers of Iaua come themſelues vnto Malacca to ſell their wares.
                     And although it be beſyde the matter, yet doe I not eſteeme it vnneceſſary in briefe to ſhewe, in what ſort they vſe to buy, ſell, and deall with ware, money and waight ſeing we are now in hand with the ſaid Iland of Iaua. You muſt vnderſtand that in Sunda there is no other kind of money then certaine copper mynt called Caixa, of the bignes of a Hollā
                        des doite, but not half ſo thicke, in the middle whereof is a hole to hang it on a ſtring, for that commonlie they put two hundreth or a thowſand vpon one ſtring, wherewith they knowe how to make their accounts, which is as followeth▪ 
                        200 Caixas is a Sata, and 
                           •
                         Satas are 1000 Caixas, which is as much as a Cruſado Portingale money, or 3 Keyſars guilders, Netherlandiſh money, Pepper of Sunda is ſolde by the ſacke, and each ſacke wayeth 45 Catten waight of China: euerie Catte is as much as 20 Portingale ounces, and euerie ſacke is worth, as it is ſolde there, 5000 Caixas, and when it is at the higheſt, 6 or 7 thowſand Caixas, Mace, Cloues, nutmegges, white and bla
                           •
                        k Beniamin, & Camphora, are ſolde by the Bhar, each Bhar of Sunda weigheth 330 Catten of China. Mace that is good is commonlie worthe 100 or 120 thowſand Caixas, and good Cloues after the rate, but bad or foule Cloues of Baſton are worth 70 or 80 thowſand Caixas the Bhar. Nutmegges are commonly worth 20 or 25 thowſand Caixas the Bhar: white and black Benioin is worthe 150 and 180 thowſand Caixas & 200 thouſand the Bhar. The wares that are there by them deſired in barter for their ſpices, are as hereafter followeth, diuers and different ſorts and colours of cotton lynnen, which come out of Cambaia, Choramandel and Bengala, as Saraſles de G
                              •
                           ba
                              •
                           es, and painted Tapen from S. Thomas, of fyue elles the péece: they are clothes ſo called out of Bengala, white Cotton lynnen, viz Sarampuras, Caſſas, Satepoſas, & blacke Satopaſen, and ſome browne vnbleached lynnen: out of Cambaia black Cannequiins red Turiaes, which are all clothes of cotton lynnen red Beyramen great and litle▪ which is verie like vnto Cambricke: and I am perſwaded, if Clothe of Holland were there to be ſoulde, it would be more eſtéemed then Cotton lynnen out of India. Theſe Iauens are of a verie fretfull and obſtinate Nature, of colour much like the Malayers, brown, and not much vnlike the men of Braſilla, ſtrong and well ſet, big limmed, flatte faces, broad thicke chéekes, great eyebrowes, ſmal eyes, little beard, not paſt 3 or 4 hayres vpon the vpper lippe & the chinne: the hayre on their heades very thyn and ſhort, yet as blacke as pitche whoſe picture is to be ſéen by the picture of the M
                              •
                           layen of Malacca, becauſe they dwell & trafficke much together.
                     Returning againe vnto the coaſt, Eaſt & by ſouth about 25 miles beyond Iaua Maior, beginneth the Ilād of Iaua Minor or litle Iaua, and ſomewhat further the Iland T
                              •
                           or, (wher ſanders groweth in great abundance) and a thouſand other Ilands bordering all about, which I can not particularly ſet down, yet are they all inhabited, and full of people, and are like the Iauer.
                     
                     From Malacca they trauell to the Ilandes of Molucca, Banda & Amboyna, where the Portingales haue both ſorts & captaines and trafficke with them: their way is from Malacca ſouth eaſt and by ſouth, aboue 100 miles, betwéene many Ilands and th
                           ••
                        ugh many ſhallowes, ſo that they muſt anker euerie night, to auoyd danger of ſandes, which continueth almoſt all the waye to Mol
                              •
                           cca, and hauing in that ſort paſſed thoſe hundreth miles, they ſet their courſe eaſtward, and eaſt and by north, 250 miles, to the Iland called Banda, which lyeth vnder 5 degrées on the

ſouth ſide. In this Iland the Portingales doe trafficke, for in it are the beſt Nutmegges & Flowers. There likewiſe they doe preſerue nutmegges, and make oyle thereof, which is brought to Malacca, and from thence into all other places: the trafficke there conſiſteth moſt in bartering, as it doth in Sūda & Iaua, but they are not to be truſted, you muſt kéep good watch, and goe not on land, but ſtay abord the ſhippe, whether the Ilanders bring their marchandiſes, and deale with men as I ſaid before, for it happeneth diuers times that they deceaue the Portingales, which truſt them ouer much, for that one of my acquaintance and my friend being there, for captaine in a ſhippe, the ſhippe being caſt away vpon that coaſt, was with all his men taken & put in priſon, where for the ſpace of two yeares he indured a moſt miſerable life, and in the end was ranſomed. All theſe voyages to Banda, Moluca, & thoſe Ilands, and alſo any other way whatſoeuer in India, may no man make, without licence and ſpeciall fauour of the King of Portingall, and their offices are giuen them in recompence of their ſeruice in the Indies, as alſo all other offices, as in an other place ſhall be declared.
                     About 20 miles beyond Banda North weſt, lieth the Iland called Amboyna, where the Portingales haue a ſmall fort: this Iland hath not much ſpice, but the ſhippes that ſayle from Malacca to Maluco, doe ſtay there, and take in freſh water. From this Iland Northwarde 70 miles, lyeth the Iland Tydor, vnder one degrée 
                           •
                        th, and i
                           •
                         the firſt Iland of the Moluca
                              •
                           
                         
                        
                           •
                        xe miles northward lyeth Malaco, & not farre thence Tarnate, and the Ilands of Cloues.
                  
                  
                     The 21. Chapter. Of the Iland of Maluc
                              •
                           .
                     
                     
                        THe Ilandes of Maluco are fiue, viz. Maluco, Tarnate, Tydor, Geloulo, and an other where the Portingales haue 2 forts, that is in Tarnate and Tydor, which long ſince were diſcouered and wonne, where they trafficke from Malacca & out of India. The Spaniards haue ſought diuers meanes to haue traffique there, and came from thence out of Noua Spaigne, into the Iland called Tarnate, where in a ſtorme they loſt their ſhippe, and ſo could not get from thence againe, whereby they were by the Portingales moſt of them ſlayne, and the reſt taken and ſent priſoners into Portingale, whereupon the King of Spaine and Portingale had a long quarrell and contention, touching the diuiſion of their Conqueſts, and diſcouery of the ſeas, which by the Popes meanes at the laſt was ended, in ſuch ſort▪ that at this preſent onely the Portingale trafickes to thoſe Ilands. Theſe Ilands haue no other ſpice then cloues, but in ſo great abundance, that as it appeareth, by them the whole world is filled therewith. In this Iland are found 
                           •
                        ie hilles, they are very dry & burnt land, they haue nothing els but victuals of fleſh and fiſh, but for Rice, Corne, Onyons, Garlicke, and ſuch like, and all other neceſſaries, ſome are brought from Portingale, and ſome from other places thereabout, which they take and barter for cloues. The bread which they haue there of their owne baking is of wood or rootes like the men of Braſillia, and their cloathes are of wouen ſtrawe or herbes, faire to the eye: in theſe Ilands onlie is found the bird, which the Portingales call paſſaros de Sol, that is Fowle of the Sunne, the Italians call it Manu codiatas, & the Latiniſts, Paradiſeas, & by vs called Paradice birdes, for ye beauty of their feathers which paſſe al other birds: theſe birds are neuer ſéene aliue, but being dead they are found vpon the Iland: they flie, as it is ſaid, alwaies into the Sunne, and kéepe themſelues continually in the ayre, without lighting on the earth, for they haue neither féet nor wings, but onely head and body, and the moſt part tayle, as appeareth by the birdes that are brought from thence into India, and ſome from thence hether but not many, for they are coſtlie. I brought two of them with me, for Doctor Paludanus, which were male and female, which I gaue vnto him, for his chamber. Theſe Ilands lie among diuers other Ilands, and becauſe there is no ſpeciall notice of them, by reaſon of the ſmall conuerſation with them: I let them paſſe, and turne again vnto the coaſt of Malacca, which I left at the Cape of Singapura, and ſo will ſhewe the Coaſt along.
                  
                  
                     The 22. Chapter. From the Cape Singapura to the towne of Sian, and the coaſt of Cambaia, and Cauchinchina, and the Iles of Borneo, Luſons, Manillios or Philippinas.
                     
                     
                        FRom the Cape of Singapura to the hooke named Sinoſura eaſtward, are 18 miles, 6 or 7 miles from thence lyeth a cliffe in ye ſea called Pedra bianque, or white Rock, where the ſhippes that come and goe to and from China, doe oftentymes paſſe in great danger

and ſome are left vpon it, whereby the Pylots when they come thether are in great feare, for that other way then this they haue not.
                     From this hook Sinoſura Eaſt & by South 40. miles beginneth the firſt corner of the Iſland Borneo, vnder one degrée in ye North, and ſtretcheth 120. myles North eaſt till you be vnder 7. degrées, the breadth as yet is not knowne nor diſcouered. This Iſle is full of trées from whence Camfora is taken, and is the beſt in all the Eaſt countries. From Sinoſura the coaſt reacheth North 30. miles to the towne of Pan, which lyeth vnder thrée degrées and a halfe: ten miles further by the ſame c
                           •
                        urſe the coaſt runneth againe North Northweſt for 50. miles, where the towne of Patane lyeth vnder 7. degrees and a halfe: Theſe two towns Pan and Patane are kingdomes, but contributarie to Sian: From theſe places comes the wood called Pala Dagula, and the coſtly ſwéet woode called Calamba, which being good, is waid againſt Siluer and Gold: they alſo haue Camphora, but not ſo good as that of the Iſland Borneo. There is founde ſome gold, and the ſtone called Bezars ſtone, which is very coſtly and proued to be good againſt poyſon. There are likewiſe ſome Diamants, and alſo Nutmegs and flowers, and the wood Sapon, whereof alſo much is brought from Sian, it is like Braſill to die withall.
                     From Patane 120. myles North, the coaſt runneth backe againe vnto Sian, which lyeth vnder 14. degrées and a halfe from Sian, from the turning in South weſt 15. myles: The coaſt runneth again ſouth eaſt 70. miles to the towne of Cambaia: this towne lyeth vnder 10. degrées. From thence the coaſt runneth againe Northeaſt 60. miles, and 60. miles Northweſt: frō whence it runneth Weſt North weſt to the furtheſt parte inwarde of the créeke of Cuchinchina: This coaſt of Cambaia is alſo called the coaſt of Chāpaa, this land hath much of ye ſwéet wood Calamba: Through this kingdome runneth the riuer Mecom into the ſea, which the Indians name Captaine of all the Riuers, for it hath ſo much water in the Summer, that it couereth and watereth all the countrey, as the riuer Nilus doth the countrey of Aegypt. The people of Cambaia beléeue that all creatures both men and beaſtes of what ſort ſoeuer they be, do here receyue reward for their worke whether it be good or bad. Vpwards in the land behind Cambaia and Sian are many ſeuerall nations, as Laos, which are a great and a mightie people, others named Auas and Bramas, which dwel by the hilles: others that dwell vpon the hils called Gueos, which liue like wild men, and eat mans fleſh, and marke all their bodies with hote iron, which they eſtéeme a fréedome: Theſe countreymen are ſuch as are knowne, beſides diuers others that are vnknowne.
                     From the coaſt of Cambaia or Champaa Eaſt or to ſeaward about 100. myles little more or leſſe lie ye Iſlands called the Luſſons or Luſſones, which were firſt diſcouered by the Spaniardes out of newe Spaigne, in an▪ 1564. and were called alſo las Manillas or Philippinas, becauſe the principalleſt Hauen and Towne is called Manillia, and of others Luſſon, whereof alſo they are named the L
                              •
                           ſſons
                        ▪ and the Spaniardes gaue them the name of the King of Spaine, calling them ye 
                        Philippinas. This towne of Luſſon or Manillia lyeth vnder 14 degrées, by this towne and Iland of Luſſon lie a great number of Ilands, which are all called the Manillians, Luſſons or Philippinas, and are all at the commandement of the Spaniardes, whoſe Gouernour or Captaine lyeth in the towne of Manillia or Luſſon, who was ſent thether out of Noua Spaigne in the behalfe of the king of Spaine, and alſo a Biſhop, as head ouer all the reſt.
                     All theſe Ilands haue in time paſt béene vnder the crown of China, and vpon ſome occaſion left it, whereby there was no policie nor gouernment among the Inhabitants of the ſame, for that he that was the richeſt and of moſt power amongſt them was maiſter, and liued together like beaſtes, whereby the Spaniardes had 
                           〈◊〉
                         ſmall labor to ſubdue them, whereof manie they baptiſed, and made them Chriſtians, which euerie day increaſed: it is a very fruitful land, and hath much corne and al ſorts of wilde beaſtes, as harts, hynd
                           •
                        , & ſuch like: alſo cattle, as buffels, oxen, kyne, hogges, goates &c. they haue manie muſke cattes, all kinde of fruites, as in China, abundance of hony and fiſh: it is ſaid alſo that there is all kindes of ſpices, but as yet there is no certaintie thereof, but onely that the Spaniardes giue it forth ſo: but you muſt thinke they doe it becauſe they wil extol and ſet forth their things aboue all others, as their māner is. Thoſe of China trafficke with theſe Ilāds, and bring thether all ſortes of commodities out of their country, as al ſilkes, cottons, porſelynes, powder for ſhot, ſulphur, brimſtone, yron, ſtéele, quicke ſiluer, and other metals, coper, meal nuttes, chaſnuttes, biſquit, dates, al ſorts of lynnen cloth, deſkes, and ſuch like, and of all curious things that may be found, & there cometh frō 
                        China thether euery year at leaſt 20 ſhippes, and from thence is their marchandiſe by the Spaniardes ſhipped and ſent into newe Spaine, & to Mexico, which

                           〈1 page missing〉
                        
                        
                        
countrie of Spaine. The land by meanes of ye good ayre and temperatenes therof is fo fruitfull, that al things are there to be had in great abundance, as Corne, Rice, and other ſuch like graine or ſéedes, and is both ſowen and mowed continually al the yeare long. Within the land ther are ſome Elephants, Lyons, Tygers, and ſuch cruell beaſtes. There are alſo many beaſts of Moſeliaet, that is to ſay, Muſke Cattes, which are of the bigneſſe and likeneſſe of a little Dogge, which they kill and burie for certaine daies, and being rotten, and well bruſed with blowes, whereby the fleſh and bloud are mixed together, they make many round Balles of the ſame fleſh & bloud ſo mixed, each Ball of an ounce waight, by the Portingals called Papo, which they carrie into all places. There are alſo in that land many Cattes of Algallia, or Ci
                              •
                           et Cattes, and ſome Amber. They haue alſo horſes, but ſmaller then the horſes in Europe. Géeſe, Hennes, Duckes and ſuch like, are there in great aboundaunce, ryuer, and ſea Fiſh are likewiſe plentifull, and all kind of neceſſaries whatſoeuer. The countrie hath many mines of Golde and Siluer, but the King letteth it not commonly be carried out of the countrie, but kéepeth it in his houſe for treaſure, therefore they ſeeke and procure all things to bee brought into the land: notwithſtanding they haue great riches in their houſes, of Gold, Siluer, and other common Iewels, they eſteeme more of Siluer then of Golde, becauſe the Golde is of many values and prices, and the Siluer is alwaies of one price. It hath alſo many Pearles and Alioffar, which come out of the Iland and Prouince of Aynao, alſo much Quick-ſiluer, Copper, Iron, Steele, Blick, Tin, Leade, Brimſtone and other ſuch like mettales, and Amber, beſides all theſe riches, and innumerable rents that the King of China hath, it is ſaid that he hath in euery chiefe ſhire or Prouince towne a great and vnknowne treaſurie. It is a common cuſtome in that countrie to weare, as we doe here, courſe and common cloth and linnen, as alſo Silke▪ Satin and Brocado, which is cloth of Golde and Siluer, with faire workes and borders, downe to their ſhooes, which they commonly vſe, becauſe of the great quantitie of Silke, that is within the countrie, for it is affirmed for a truth, that only from the town of Canton there is yearely carried into India, aboue thrée thouſand Quintals of Silke, which are ſold by waight, beſides the Silkes that are yearely carried to the Ilands of Iapa
                              •
                           , Lucon, or Phillippinas, and to the land of Si
                              •
                           n, and other countries bordering about the ſame: and yet there ſtayeth ſo much within the countrie, that therewith might bee laden whole Fléetes of ſhippes, and would not be miſſed: there is alſo much Flax and Cotton, and ſo good cheape, that it is almoſt incredible: the earthen Pots, Cuppes and veſſels that are made there, are not to bee numbred, which are yearely carried into India, Portingall, Noua Spaignia, & other waies, but the fineſt ſorte may not be carried out of the land vpon paine of death, but ſerue onely for the Lords and Gouernours of the countrie: which are ſo fine that Chriſtall is not comparable vnto it. Theſe Pots and Cups are made inwards in the lande, of a certaine earth that is verie hard, which is beaten ſmal and then layed to ſtéepe in Ceſterns of ſtone full of water, made for the purpoſe, and when it is well ſtéeped and often ſtirred, (as we do milke to make Butter) of the fineſt thereof which driueth or ſwimmeth on the top they make the fineſt worke, and vſe the courſer accordingly▪ whereof ſome they paint, and then they are dried and baked in Ouens.
                     
                        The maner to make Earthen Pots and Cups (called Porcelleyn-Cuppes) by Scaliger is ſet downe in his Booke of Subtilties in this manner. In the 92. Exerciſe. The Cups and earthen Pots that are called Porceleynes, whereof alſo the Earth hath her name, are firſt beaten to ſmall Poulder, which they ſteepe in water, and then forme their Pots, Cuppes and veſſels out of the ſame, which done they burne them vnder the earth, and hauing layen in the earth 100, yeares, being then full baked and made, they are digged foorth and ſoulde, ſome ſay, that not the Cuppes &c. but the ſtuffe is buried, although Iohn Huyghens opinion ſeemeth to be true and according to their maner, ſaying, that they are made of Earth, as other Pots and Cannes are made in our countrie.
                     
                     The land alſo aboundeth in Honie, Suger and Waxe, of all ſorts of Spices, rootes and plantes as alſo fruites, and much more then in Spaine: and other kindes of fruites alſo which are not knowne heere: there are Oranges that are ſwéeter then Suger: there is a kind of fruit called Lechyas, which are like Plums, but of another taſte, and are very good & much eſtéemed, whereof I haue eaten, to conclude it hath of all things that man can wiſh or deſire.
                     The rents and reuenewes of the King of China are ſo great, that it is incredible, for he hath onely in cuſtome out of a riuer in the Prouince of Canton, for Salt that is made there, yearly a million and a halfe of Golde, whereby men may eſtéeme the reſt accordingly. All the Townes in that Countrie are walled about with ſtone walles, and haue

Ditches of water round about them for their ſecuritie, they vſe no fortreſſe nor Caſtles, but onely vppon euery Gate of the Towne they haue ſtrong Towers, wherein they place their Ordinance for defence of ye towne. They vſe all kinde of armes, as Caliuers, Bowes, Pikes of diuers ſortes, Rapiers, like Falceons, Cortlaſſes and Targets. The ſouldiers when they goe to warre, weare Coates downe to their knées, lyned with Cotton, ſo that the thruſt of a Pike or a Rapier will not readily enter, ſuch as are ſouldiers are paide by the King, which are knowen by wearing a red or a yellow Hat, whereof there are ſo many, that the number is not knowne, they haue Captaines of 10. of 100 of 1000. 10000. 20000. &c. Which Captaines may bee knowne by certaine tokens, one from the other, whereby they know how many men he hath vnder him. Euery month they Muſter and are paide with Siluer money, for they haue no other Coyne, and they are péeces of cut Siluer, in which ſort they pay & receiue all their money, for the which purpoſe they doe alwayes carrie about them a paire of Ballaunce with an inſtrument to cut the Siluer. A ſouldier hath euery moneth, the value of a Ryall and a halfe of Spaniſh money in ſiluer, which is more in that countrie (as the value and price of all things goeth there) then foure Ducates or twelue Guilders with vs. For Religion and ceremonies they are Heathens, without any ſparke or point of Mahomets law, or of any other ſects.The men of 
                              •
                           hina pray the Deuil In many places they pray to the Diuell, onely becauſe hee ſhoulde not hurt them. When any man lieth on his death bed, they ſet the picture of the Diuell before him, with the Sunne in his left hand, and a poinyard in the right hand, which Diuell is painted with a very fierce looke: and therfore they deſire the patient or ſicke man to looke well vpon him, that hee may bee his friend in the world to come, and that yeare hee may not hurt him. They pray to the Sunne and the Moone, which they thinke, are man and wife, and when any Eclipſe happeneth, they make great ſacrifices, fearing that God will take their liues from them, and cleane ouerthrow them, whereby they are in great feare. They doe all belieue the immortalitie of the ſoule, and that after their deathes, they ſhall receiue either good or euill reward in the world to come according to their workes. Wherefore they vſe faire and coſtly Graues, and beléeue that in the world to come men ſhall neuer more die, but liue for euer, there are alſo in this land many and diuers faire Vniuerſities, and Schooles for learning, where they ſtudie Philoſophie, and the lawes of the land, for that not any man in China is eſtéemed or accounted of, for his birth, family or riches, but onely for his learning and knowledge, ſuch are they that ſerue in euery Towne, and haue the gouernment of the ſame, being ſerued and honoured with great ſolemnities, and worthineſſe, liuing in great pleaſure and eſtéemed as gods. They are called Lo
                              •
                           ias, and Mandorijns, and are alwaies borne in the ſtréetes, ſitting in Chariots which are hanged about with Curtaines of Silke, couered with Clothes of Golde and Siluer, and are much giuen to banketing, eating, drinking & making good cheare, as alſo the whole land of China. No man may rule, gouerne, or vſe any Office of Iuſtice in the Towne or place where he was borne, which they ſaye, the King doth, becauſe their friendes or parents ſhould not mooue or perſwade them to doe any thing contrarie to Iuſtice, or to the hinderance of the Kings ſeruice. When any of the aforeſaide gouernours or rulers die in China, they kill diuers of their ſeruants and wiues, and cauſe all kinde of victuals and neceſſaries with diuers Iewels to bee put into the Graue with them, whereby they thinke themſelues well prouided, and to haue good companie with them, to liue withall in the other world.
                     The Countrie is verie temperate & good ayre, for it beginneth vnder 19. degrées, and is in ſome places higher then 50. degrées, whereby it is to be preſumed, that it muſt of force be fruitfull, a great helpe thereunto is the earneſt and continuall labour the countrimen and inhabitants take, to build houſes in their land, whereby there is not one foote of land loſt, or that lyeth waſt, for euen to the verie mountaines, it is both plowed & planted, becauſe there are ſo many people in the Countrie. It is not in mans memorie, that euer there was plague in that Countrie, and they haue a law which is very ſtraightly holden, that no man may goe or depart out of the Countrie without licence, nor yet that any ſtranger may come into the land without leaue vpon paine of death. Likewiſe no man may trauaile through the Country to begge, whereof they haue a great care, and looke néerely vnto it. The people are well formed, and commonly fat and well liking of body, broade and round faces, ſmal eyes, great eyebrowes, broad foreheads, ſmall and flat noſes, litle beards, ſeauen or eight hayres aboue their lippes and vnder their chinnes, and verie blacke haire, which they eſtéeme verie much, & haue great care in ye keming thereof, and in keeping it cleane, as well men as women, and weare it as long as it will growe, and then binde it in a knot on the top of their

heads, and vpon it they put a péece of Silke netting. Thoſe that dwell on the Sea ſide, with whome the Portingals traffique, that is in Machau and Canton, are a people of a browniſh colour, like the white Moores in Africa and Barbaria, and part of the Spaniards, but thoſe that dwell within the land, are for color like Netherlanders & high Dutches. There are many among them that are cleane blacke, which haue great eyes and much beard, but verie few of them, as it may well bee thought, and as the men of China themſelues report. Their ofſpring was out of 
                           
                              •
                           artaria, or from other of their neighbours of ſtraunge Countries, at ſuch time when they had licence to trauaile into thoſe Countries, and to haue conuerſation with them by trade of marchandiſe, which nowe they may not doe, as it is ſaide before. They vſe to weare the nayles of their left hands very long, and on the right hand ſhort, which they hold for an auncient ceremonie of their law and beliefe. Their apparell (as I ſaid before) is moſt of Silke of all colours, that is ſuch as are of welth, & indifferent rich, others & ſuch as are poore, do weare apparel of Cotton linnen, & of blacke and coloured Sayes, and ſuch like ſtuffe: Cloth made of Wooll nor Veluet they can not make in all China, although there wanteth no wooll, and they haue many ſhéepe: notwithſtanding, they know not how to vſe it, and wonder much at it when the Portingalles bring it thether. The women goe verie richly apparelled, with long and wide Gownes, they weare many Iewels on their heades, within their haire, and alſo vppon their bodies, they doe commonly hold their hands couered, they are but little ſéene abroad, but ſit moſt part within the houſe, and eſtéeme it for a great beautifying vnto them to haue ſmall féete, to the which end they vſe to binde their féete ſo faſt when they are young, that they cannot grow to the full, whereby they can hardly goe, but in a manner halfe lame. Which cuſtome the men haue brought vp, to let them from much going, for that they are verie iealous, and vnmeaſurable leacherous and vnchaſt, yet is it eſtéemed a beautifying and comlineſſe for the women. Thoſe that are of any wealth or eſtate, are born in chaires through the ſtréets, hanged and couered with Silke, Sattin, and Damaſke Curtins, wouen with ſiluer and golde thréedes, and haue ſmall holes to looke through, ſo that they may ſée and not be ſéene.
                  
                  
                     The 24. Chapter. Of the Prouinces, Townes, and other things worthie of memorie in the kingdome of China.
                     
                     
                        THe kingdome of China is deuided into 15 prouinces, euery one being as great (as it is reported & founde written) as the beſt kingdome in Europe, and are gouerned by a Viceroye or Gouernour, which by the Chinaes is called Cochin. Two of the ſaid Prouinces are ruled by the King himſelfe and his Councell, which are Tolanchia and Paguia, wher the King is alwaies reſident. The other Prouinces are called Foquiem, Olam, Sinſay, Xanſay, Oquiam, Aucheo, Hona, Canton, Quicheo, Chequeam, Saxi, Aynaon, Suſ
                              •
                           an. Moſt of theſe Prouinces haue riuers and waters running through them, & haue conference and familiaritie by buying and ſelling with each other both by water and by land. It is recorded by the Chinaes themſelues in their Chronicles, that in theſe fiftéene Prouinces ther are 591. chiefe Citties 1593. other Citties, beſides villages: whereof ſome are ſo great as Citties: whereby you may conſider the greatneſſe of the land. Moſt of the Townes are built vppon riuers and running ſtreames, and cloſed about with broade ditches, and thicke ſtone walles, Without the Walles betwéene them and the Ditches, is a walke, where ſixe men on Horſe backe maye ryde in ranke, and the like within, which ſpace is made to mende and repaire the Walles when néede requireth, whereof they are very carefull, and looke warily vnto them. The high waies and foote pathes throughout the whole kingdome, are fairely paued, and all along euen and ſmoth till you come to the hils, and the entrance or Fronteſpicio of the Citties, verie coſtly and workmanly built with thrée or foure Gates one by the other, all ſtricken ouer full of Iron, and the ſtréetes within the Citties and Villages very fairely paued, and playned as ſtraight as a line, and euen in breadth, ſo that if you ſtand at the ende of a ſtréete, you may ſée to the other ende, by reaſon of the ſtraightnes bee it neuer ſo long. At the end of euery ſtréete, are certaine Vaults made, wherein are wares and marchandiſes of all coſtly things, and prices that man can wiſh or deſire. Ouer euery ſtréete there are diuers Arches made of ſtone, verie finely and cunningly Painted, which are ſet in the

ſtréetes, becauſe that all their feaſ
                           •
                        es, p
                           •
                        ayes and ſpirituall ceremonies are done by night, and then thoſe Arches are placed full of lights and Torches, which maketh a goodly ſhew. The houſes commonly haue three doores to goe in at, whereof that in the middle is the greateſt, the other ſomewhat leſſe, they are commonly low without Sellers vnder groūd but within very large and broad, with great roomes and faire Gardens, full of all pleaſure and delight. The towne where the King is reſident, is called Xuntien or Taybjin which ſome men call Quinzay, this name Xuntien is as much to ſay in Chiniſh ſpeach, as heauenly Cittie, and lyeth in the Prouince of Paguia: of the greatneſſe whereof they write wonders, for they affirme that within the walles the Towne is as long, from the one end to the other as a man on horſebacke may ride vpon a day, with a thouſand other wonders, which for breuitie I omit. In this town the King hath his Palace, with all pleaſures that may or can bee deuiſed, both for him ſelfe, his wiues, and his Courte. His wiues little or neuer goe abroad, ſo that they are ſeldome or neuer ſéene, thereby to maintaine their authoritie, as alſo fearing that any miſchiefe ſhould happen vnto them, there are not in all the countrie any Noble men of name or title, as Earles, Dukes, Viſcounts or ſuch like, nor that haue any vaſſales, commandements, Iuriſdictions, or proprieties to themſelues, other then ſuch as are giuen by the King, and when they die, it returneth again
                           •
                         vnto the King, and if hee wil, he may take it from the children, but commonly hee letteth them haue it, ſo they be fit for the place, and that with a new gi
                           ••
                         and bond to ſerue the King. In all the principall townes where the Viceroyes or Gouernours hold their ſtates, there hangeth a picture of the King, couered with a Curtaine of cloth of Golde, whereunto all Officers, Commaunders, Loi
                              •
                           as, Mandorijns &c. dayly reſort and doe it all reuerence and honour, ſuch as belongeth to a King of ſuch eſtate, as if the King himſelfe were there in perſon▪ the Kings title is, King and Lord of the world, and Sonne of heauen.
                     
                     No man throughout all China may beare any weapons, nor yet haue them in his houſe but ſuch as are appointed thereunto, and receiue the Kings pay, as ſouldiers, whoſe children ſucceed their fathers in their places. The men of China are great and cunning workemen, as may well bee ſéene by the workmanſhip that commeth from thence. They make and vſe waggons or Cartes with ſayles (like Boates) and with wheeles ſo ſubtilly made, that being in the fielde they goe and are driuen forwards by the winde, as if they were in the water, they are verie wittie in buying and ſelling. All the traders that kéepe ſhops, haue a Table hanging at their doores wherein is written euery kind of ware they haue to ſell. All Officers or handicrafts men haue either of them a ſtreete alone, and dwell by themſelues, and their children muſt vſe the like trade after their Fathers deaths, whether they were ſouldiers, Iuſtices or Gouernours. When any man is very rich, he is licenced not to work notwithſtanding he muſt keepe workmen, and keepe open ſhoppe, the money that is vſed throughout all China is Golde and Siluer vnſtamped, but cut in ſmal peeces to the value of a penie, and ſo receiued by waight, and in like ſorte payed. Alſo all wares, of what ſort ſoeuer they bee, not ſo much as Hennes, Géeſe, Fiſh, and ſuch like, but are bought and ſolde by waight. They haue one wife which they call their lawfull wife, and as many other as they can well maintaine, the ſonne of the lawfull wife inheriteth moſt part of their goods, and that which remaineth is equally deuided among the other children, they marrie with whome they will, except it be with their Siſters, or their Vncles children. The Bridegrome before he fetcheth the Bride home to his houſe, muſt indowe her with certaine goods, which he giueth to the Bride her ſelfe, and ſhee giueth them vnto her Father or mother in recompence of their charges for bringing her vp in her youth, which done ſhee goeth home with the Bridegrome, and the parents may do what they wil with that which they haue ſo receiued for their daughters dowrie, and ſpend it as they thinke good, and what remaineth thereof after the parents are deade, returneth againe vnto the daughter, whoſe huſband gaue the ſame for his wife, ſo that he which hath moſt daughters, is the richeſt, as it is reported, by the Pictures heereafter following you may ſee the forme and manner of thoſe of C
                              •
                           , as wel men as women, as alſo of the Mandorijns and mightie men or Gouernours, as they are carried in the ſtréetes, and goe to ſport vppon the ryuers, where they refreſh themſelues with all kinds of dainties.
                     The men of China haue manie ſpéeches, but in writing they vnderſtand each other in euerie place for they write euerie thing with figures and characters, whereof their alphabets are ſundrie and innumerable: theſe figures with their paper of diuers colours, as alſo penne and inke, you may ſee at D. Paludanus houſe, ſo that men had need of a good memorie, and long exerciſe, before they can vnderſtand them all, and read what it is, which

is the cauſe that among them ſuch as are learned are ſo much eſteemed. Their paper is like that of Auro
                              •
                           a, but not ſo white, but thinner and ſmoother: they make alſo of all colors, which is very ſaire, they write with pennes of Reedes, wherein there ſticketh a penſell, ſuch as Painters vſe. Printing, painting & gun-powder, with the furniture thereto belonging, haue beene vſed in China many hundreth yeares paſt, and very common, ſo that it is with them out of memorie when they firſt began. Their Chronicles ſhewe that their firſt king, being a great Nigromancer, who raigned manie thouſand yeares paſt, did firſt inuent great ordinance with all things belonging thereunto: Printing is likewiſe very auncient with them, for that there are bookes found in thoſe countries of China, which were printed at the leaſt fiue or ſixe hundreth yeares before printing was in vſe with vs in Europe, ſo that it is not founde when it firſt began there. And there are many bookes in China, for that they are very curious and deſirous to write and regiſter all thinges, as well that which is done in their kingdome, or which belongeth thereunto, as alſo other memorable things, cūning and fine deuiſes, lawes and ordināces, al policies & gouernments in their townes, wherein they much reſemble and ſurpaſſe the ancient Grecians and Romans. The manner of their banquetings and feaſtes are thus, as many perſons as are inuited, ſo many tables are prepared and made ready, although they be a hundreth: the tables are verie faire and finely painted▪ with all kynd of imagerie and flowers, moſt pleaſant to behold, ſo that they vſe no table-clothes, but round about the edges of the table there hangeth a cloth down to the ground, of ſilk, damaſke, gold or ſiluer, euerie one according to his eſtate, and at the corners of the tables there hang diuers faire baſkets full of all ſorts of ſweete flowers, with ma
                           •
                        c
                           •
                        paine ſtuffe of all formes and faſhions, gilded & very cunningly made. In the middle of the tables they place the meats, very coſtlie and well dreſt, and in good order, all in diſhes of fine earth, or els ſiluer. The meat both fiſh and fleſh, or whatſoeuer it is, is all cut in peeces, the bones and ſinewes cleane taken forth, which they neuer touch with their fingers, but onely vſe to take it vp with two litle peeces of blacke wood made round, whereof you may ſee ſome at D. Paludanus 
                        
                           •
                        o
                           •
                        ſe, that I gaue him: and theſe they vſe in ſtead of 
                           •
                        orkes, which with them is ſo ready, yt there falleth not one bit or crūme vpon the table, whereby they vſe no napkins to wipe their handes, for they need them not, neither doe the
                           •
                         ſoule either hand or mouth. Their drinke is wyne made of Rice, and brewed as we brew beer. They drinke often, but verie litle at a time, and will drinke at the leaſt 20. times in one ſmal cup before it be empty: whē they are at their Feaſts and banquets they haue much muſicke. They haue likewiſe many manners & cuſtomes of curteſies, which are theſe: The common people as they méet together, they ſhut their left hand, and couer it with their right hand, and ſo hold them together on their breaſt, with much bowing & ſtooping with their heads downwards, thereby to ſhewe that they loue each other, and are as faſt bound and vnited together in loue, as their hands are faſt knit together, and that with all their harts, wherewith they vſe manie courteous ſpéeches. Among the Nobles or Mandoriins, when they méet together, they preſently ſhut both handes, and lay their fingers each vpon the other, and ſo with their armes make a hoop or bowe, and ſo ſtād ſtill ſtooping and bowing their heads and bodies with great curteſie, making choiſe who ſhal firſt go by, with many other ceremonies vſed among the Nobles, which were ouer long to rehearſe. Wherefore at this preſent I will leaue them; and ceaſe to write any further of their ceremonies, and other cuſtomes, as neceſſitie requireth, for that if I ſhould deſcribe them all at large, it would be ouer tedious, and a hundreth quiers of paper would not ſuffice: yet if any man be deſirous to ſée more hereof, let him read the booke made by a Spaniſh Fryer named Fray Iuan Gonſales de Mendoſa, of the deſcription of China, which booke is tranſlated out of Spaniſh into Latine, although there are ſome falts, by wrong information giuen vnto the Author: notwithſtanding it conteyneth many particular things worthie the reading.
                  
                  
                     The 25. Chapter. Of the town and Iland of Machau in China, where the Portingales haue their reſidence, and trafficke with their marchandiſes, wares, and ſome prices therof, and the waight, meaſure, and money as well of China, as of Malacea, which continually come thether.
                     
                        THe Iland and Towne of Machau or Makau, is inhabited by Portingales, together with the naturall borne Countrimen of China. They trafficke with the men of Canton, from whence the Chinayes bring all their marchandiſes, and reſort

                        
                        
                           
                              Habitus e China regno pretioſae elegantiae et rerum omnium affluentiſsimum
                           
                        
                        
                           〈1 page missing〉
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                           
                              Lectuli, et ratio, quibus Chinae proceres primarij▪ Mandorinos vocant gestantur, cvmbae
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  quibus ad oblectationem per fluvios vehuntur▪
                              
                           
                           
                              
                              Maniere als haer die Mandoryns van China welcke het princepael governement hebben laten draegen en op die revieren vermeyen vaeren.
                           
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                           
                              Naves e China et Iava velis ex arundine contextis et anchoris ligneis.
                           
                           
                              
                              Schepen van China en Iava met rietten ſeyſen en houten anckers
                           
                        
                        
                        
ſort thether to buy wares, but the Portingals may not goe thither, but as any ſhippe commeth out of India to Machau, it is by the Mandorijn or Gouernour of Machau preſently meaſured both breadth, length, and depth, which done, they know how to make their account for the receipt of their cuſtome, and then they may lade what and how much ſo euer they will, without paying more, or concealing any Cuſtome. They ſuffer the Portingals to chuſe a Factor among themſelues, who in all their names is licenced to goe to Canton, there to buy what they deſire: but in the night time hee muſt lye in the Suburbs without the towne, vpon paine of great puniſhment. This towne of Machau, hath a Portingall Biſhop, who is Suffragan to the Archbiſhop of Goa, as I ſaide before: thither commeth a ſhippe yearely out of India, by the King of Portingals particular licence the Captaines place whereof is giuen to a man of great authoritie, as the Captains places of the fortreſſes. And from Makau the ſaide ſhippe ſayleth to Iapen and there diſchargeth▪ and then returneth againe to Makan, and from thence to Malacca, and ſo to Goa. No man may ſayle that way but onely ſuch as haue ſpeciall licence from the Ringe, ſome one time, ſome an other, for that there muſt but one ſhip ſayle that v
                           •
                        age euery yere, which is likwiſe giuen in recompence of ſome ſeruice done in India, as all other Officers in like ſort are. But to China and Malacca onely, euery Marchant may fraight as many ſhips as they can, alwaies remembred, that to Iapen no man may do it but by the Kings permiſſion, and in China or Malacca no man may lade nor vnlade, before ſuch ſhips as are there for the King, haue receiued in the whole fraight, and are ready to depart, and after they haue laden euery man may doe his beſt, in what ſhips hee will, that is from China to Malacca and Goa. The Captaine of the ſhip that ſayleth to Iapen doth greatly profit by his Voyage, for hauing a good ſumme of money to traffique thither withall, in a good ſhip which commonly is of 14. of 16. hundreth Tunnes, hee may well gaine 15
                              •
                           . or 200. thouſand Ducats by the Vyage, which continueth at the leaſt three yeares. For in April they depart from Goa to Malacca, wher they muſt ſtay a certaine time for the winds, which at a certaine time blowe certaine months together: and theſe winds are called Monſoins. From Malacca they ſayle to Makan, wher they ſtay at the leaſt 9. Months for the Monſoins, and then they ſayle to Iapen, where they muſt likewiſe ſtay certaine Moneths againe, to returne with the Monſoins to Makau: wher againe they ſtay, as in their Viage outwards: ſo that the time of three yeares is fully expired before they haue made their Viage to and from Iapen. And all the time of the Captaine of this ſhip his reſidence as well in Iapen as Makau, he is there chief Ruler and Gouernour of the place, like the Viceroye in India, and the ſeuerall Captaines in their Forts, for that when the one departeth from Makau to Iapen
                        ▪ there commeth an other to Makau from Goa
                        ▪ to make the ſame Viage, after the other hath performed his Viage. And when hee returneth againe from Iapen to Makau, the other ſayleth to Iapen, and ſo the firſt continueth Gouernour againe at Makau, vntil he departeth from thence to Malacca, and ſo to India, and in this ſorte there is alwaies a Gouernour within the Towne of Makau, as I ſaide before.
                     The marchandiſe or ware that they carrie frō 
                        Makau to Iapen, are ſilks, & from Iapen they return nothing but ſiluer, whereby they doe greatly profit. And ſeing we are in hand with their trafficks, from Makau, I think it not impertinent to rehearſe ſome of the ware which the Portingals vſe commonly to buy there▪ and to traffique withall, together with the ordinarie prices therof, as alſo the waight and monyes, as well of China as of Malacca, becauſe of the neereneſſe and common traffique that they dayly vſe with each other, more then any other places of 
                           
                              •
                           ndia, which I ſet downe in this place, becauſe this waight and reckoning differeth from that of Portingall and India. It is to be vnderſtoode that in China there are three ſorts of Silkes, that is, one ſort called Lankijn which is eſteemed for the beſt. The ſecond called Fulcan, which is good alſo. The third and worſt Silke is called Lankam, beſides theſe there are other ſorts of Silke, as Silke vnſpunne, called raw Silke, and Silke that is ſpunne and made in thréedes, which the Portingals call Retre
                              •
                           
                         The white vnſpunne Silke of Lankijn is worth the Pico (which is a certaine waight) which hereafter I will ſhew you about 1
                              •
                           5 or 150. Ryals of eight, or Rikes Dollors accounted after the rate of that money. The white vnſpunne Silke of Fulcan is worth the Pico, 140. or 145. Ryals of eight, the vnſpunne Silke of Lankam, is woorth the Pico 75. or 80. Ryals of eight, the Retres white Silke of Lankij is worth the Pico 150. or 170. Ryals of eight, the Retres white, and other Silke of Fulcam and Suſuam, is worth the Pico 130. or 135. Ryals of eight, the Retres white of Canton is worth the Pico 50, or 55. Ryals of eight, the wrought Silke of al colours at the ſame price, the vnſpunne Canton Silke in colours

is worth the Pico 50. or 60. Ryals of eight, white Lamparden Silk of 14. Els the péece are commonly worth one yeare with the other, 50. or 55. Ryalls of eight. The hundred, the Moſſeliat or Muſke is commonly worth one yeare with the other the Caete, which is 20. ounces, ſixe or ſeuen Ryalls of eight, other fine wares and marchandiſes of China, haue their different prices accordingly, as the time ſerueth, and are not ſo common as theſe Silkes, for that with the Silks aforeſaid is the Portingalles trade, and the principalleſt riches, that are brought out of C
                              •
                           ina to the countries bordering about it.
                     As touching the waight and money of China and Malacca, you muſt vnderſtand, that the waight which in Malacca is called a Bha
                              •
                           , is three Picos, and euery Pico is 66 
                              •
                            Caetes, ſo that 
                           •
                        . Picos which is a Bhar, are 200. Caetes, as well great as ſmall waight, a Bhar of China is 300. Caetes, which waigh as much as 200. Caetes at Malacca ſmall waight: for that three Caetes of China, are in Malacca, two Caetes ſmall waight: a Caete of China is 16. Taeys Chiniſh waight, which are 14. Taeys in Malacca which is as much as 20. Ounces 
                           •
                         Portingall waight. They vſe likewiſe a waight which they cal a Hant, euery Hant is twelue Caetes ſmal waight and euery Caete is 22. Taeyes, and 16. Hantes and 8. Caetes, are iuſt 200. Caetes which is a Bhar of ſmall waight, ſo likewiſe a Tael of Malacca is 16. Maſes, and 10. Maſes and ¼
                        ▪ is an Ounce of Portingall waight, and an Ounce and a halfe is iuſt 16. Maſes, and the eight part of a Maſe, by theſe Maſes they ſel the Bezars ſtones, for euery Maſe two or thrée Ducats, according to their greatneſſe and goodneſſe. In Malacca are two ſortes of waights, great and ſmall, which heereafter follow. A Bhar great waight, is 200. Cates, and one Cates 26. Taeys, and one Taey is one Ounce ½
                        ▪ hard waight of Portingall, the ſmall waight is a Bhar, which is alſo 200. Caetes, and one Caetes is 22. Taeys, and a 
                           
                              •
                           ael is a full Ounce and a halfe Portingal waight. With their great waight they weigh P
                           •
                        per, Cloues, Nutmegs, Folio, red & white Sanders, Indico, Alum, Sanguis, draconis, Palo Dauguila, Siet, and Sapon. With the ſmall waight they waigh Quickſiluer, Vermilion▪ Coper▪ Blie, Iuorie bones, Silk, Muſke, Amber, Calamba, or Lignum Aloes, Tin, Lead, Lancua, Oyle of Nutmegs, and of flowers, Verdette, Roſamallia, Beſoun▪ and Camphora &c. The marchandiſes that the Portingals carrie to China, whereof they make moſt profite is Ryals of eight, which in China are worth aboue ſix teſtones, not for that they had rather haue it then other Siluer, but for that it is all Siluer▪ for it is preſently cut in péeces, to pay it out after their manner as it is ſhewed before, they carrie likewiſe ſome Wines both Portingal and Indian Wine, and ſome Oyles of Oliues, which are there deſired. Veluet, Cloth of Scarlet, whereof they haue none, nor yet can make any, although they haue both ſheepe and wooll enough. Looking glaſſes, Iuorie bones, and all kinde of Chriſtall and Glaſſe, are well ſolde there. But this ſhall ſuffice for that which concerneth the land of China, now I will procéede to the deſcription of the Iland of Iapan, which is the fartheſt Viage and laſt Orientall place by the Portingals diſcouered or at this day knowne.
                  
                  
                     The 26. Chapter. Of the Iland of Iapan.
                     
                     
                        THe Iland or the land of Iapan is many Ilands one by the other, and are ſeperated and deuided only by certaine ſmall Créekes and riuers, it is a great land, although as yet the circuite thereof is not knowne, becauſe as yet it is not diſcouered▪ nor by the Portingalles ſought into, it beginneth vnder 30. degrées, and runneth till you come to 38 degrées, it lyeth Eaſt from the firme land of China, about 80. miles, and from Maccau by the waye that the Portingalles trauaile Northeaſt warde, is about 300. miles, and the Hauen where commonly the Portingals vſe to traffique, is called Nangaſache. They haue likewiſe other places where they traffique and deale. The countrie is cold, procéeding of much rayne, Snow and Ice▪ that falleth therein, it hath ſome Corne lande, but their common Corne is Ryce. In ſome places the land is verie hillie and vnfruitfull, they eate no fleſh but the fleſh of wilde beaſts, and ſuch as is hunted, wherein they are verie expert, although there are Oxen, Cowes, Sheepe, and ſuch like Cattell good ſtore, yet they vſe them to other things about their labours, and becauſe it is tame fleſh, which they cannot brooke, they refuſe it as wee doe horſe fleſh, they doe likewiſe refuſe to eate Milke, as wee doe bloud, ſaying that Milke although it is white, yet it is verie bloude. They haue much Fiſh, whereof they are verie deſirous, as alſo all kinds of fruites, as in China. Their houſes are commonly couered with wood, and with ſtrawe, they are 
                           〈◊〉
                         and workmanlike builte, ſpecially the rich

mens houſes, they haue their Chambers hanged and flowred with Mattes, which is their beſt hangings. The Iapens are not ſo curious nor ſo cleanly as the men of China, but are contente with a meane, yet for the moſt part they goe verie well apparelled in Silke, almoſt like the Chinos. The countrie hath ſome mines of ſiluer, which from thence is by the Portingals yearely brought vnto China, and there bartered for Silke, and other Chiniſh wares, which the Iapeans haue néede of. The countriemen are verie ſkilfull to ſearch for Siluer, and to ſell their wares. They haue among them verie good handicrafts men, and cunning workemen in all kind of handie workes, they are ſharpe witted, and quickly learne any thing they ſée, as by experience it is found in thoſe parts which the Portingales haue diſcouered. The common people of the lande are much different frō other nations, for that they haue among them as great curteſie and good policie, as if they had liued continually in the Court, they are verie expert in their weapons as néed requireth, although they haue little cauſe to vſe them, for that if anye of them beginneth to brawle or to drawe his ſworde, hee is put to death, they haue not any priſons, for that who ſoeuer deſerueth to be impriſoned, is preſently puniſhed, or baniſhed the countrie. When they meane to lay holde vpon a man, they muſt doe it by ſtealth and by deceipt, for otherwiſe he would reſiſt and doe much miſchiefe. If it bee any Gentleman or man of great authoritie, they beſet his houſe about with men, and whether hee chaunce to ſlay himſelfe or not, they enter the houſe by force, and kill al they find therin. Which to auoid, he ſuffereth himſelf often times to be killed by his ſeruantes. And it is often ſéene that they rip their own bellies open, which often times is likewiſe done by their ſeruants for the loue of their Maſters, therein to ſhew their Maſters the loue they beare vnto them, ſo little eſtéeming their owne liues, to pleaſure and ſerue them. The like doe young Boyes in preſence of their parents, onely for griefe or ſome ſmall anger. They are in all their actions very patient and humble, for that in their youthes they learne to indure hunger, colde, and all manner of labour, to goe bare headed, with few cloathes, as well in Winter as in Summer, and not onely the common people, but the principall Gentlemen and Nobles of the countrie. They account it for great beautie to haue no haire, which with great care they doe plucke out, onely keepe a bunch of haire on the crowne of their heades, which they tie together. Touching their traffique, manners, ſpeach, and all their ceremonies, concerning life and curteſie, they are cleane contrarie vnto all other nations, ſpeciallie from thoſe of China, and till this day obſerue the ſame as an infallible law, which groweth vpon this occaſion.
                     A long time ſince, there was in China a great & mightie familie, which together with all their friends and acquaintance ſecretly conſpired and agréed to ryſe vp againſt the King of China, to driue him out of his kingdome and to kill him, and hauing ſo done, to place themſelues therein: but it could not ſo ſecretly be contriued and wrought, but in the end it was knowne: whereupon the king puniſhed them moſt gréeuouſly, and cauſed diuers of the principall conſpirators to be put to death, and all others he found to be conſenting therunto ſhould haue felt the like paine, which gréeued the Counſell and other Noble men of the countrie, for that diuers of their néereſt kinſmen were of that conſpiracie, ſo that with humble and long petition to the King, they beſought him to let them liue, and to puniſh them with ſome eaſier puniſhment then death: but that which they ſought & deſired at the king, all things conſidered, was little better then death, which was that he would baniſh them and all their poſteritie for euer out of the countrie, into the Ilands of Iapen, which as then were not inhabited, and this as they deſired was done: whereby there is ſo great enuie and hatred betwéene them and the men of China, that they hate each other to the death, and doe all the miſchief one vnto the other that they can imagine or deuiſe, euen vntill this time. The men of Iapen haue done much miſchief vnto the men of China, and many times fallen vpon their coaſts, and put all to fire and ſword, and now at this preſent haue not any conuerſation with them, but onely they trafficke with the Portingales, and to ſhewe themſelues whollie their deadlie enemies, in all their actions they are cleane contrary vnto the men of China, and to the ſame end haue changed all their cuſtomes, ceremonies and manners of curteſie from the men of China. To recite the particulars would be ouer long, yet I will in briefe ſet down ſome fewe examples of the cuſtomes and manners therein. One is where the China vſeth the curteſie of ſalutation to a man with the head and hand, whē they méet together: the Iapens to the contrarie put off their ſhoes, whereby they ſhewe them reuerence, and as the Chinaes ſtand vp when they minde to receyue any man▪ and to doe him reuerence, they to the contrarie ſet themſelues down, accounting it a verie vnſéemely thing to receyue or bid a man welcome ſtanding on their féet: and as we put on

our clokes when we meane to goe abroad into the towne or countrie, they put them off when they goe forth, putting on great wyde bréeches, and coming home they put them off again, and caſt their clokes vpon their ſhoulders: and as among other nations it is a good ſight to ſee men with white and yealow hayre and white teeth, with them it is eſtéemed the filthieſt thing in the world, and ſéeke by all meanes they may to make their hayre and téeth blacke, for that the white cauſeth their grief, and the blacke maketh them glad. The like cuſtome is among the women, for as they goe abroad they haue their daughters & maydes before them, and their men ſeruants come behind, which in Spaigne is cleane contrarie, and when they are great with childe, they tye their girdles ſo hard about them, that men would thinke they ſhuld burſt, and when they are not with Childe, they weare their girdles ſo ſlacke, that you would thinke they would fall from their bodies, ſaying that by experience they do finde, if they ſhould not doe ſo, they ſhould haue euill lucke with their fruict, and preſently as ſoone as they are deliuered of their children, in ſtéed of cheriſhing both the mother and the child with ſome comfortable meat, they preſently waſh the childe in cold water, and for a time giue the mother very little to eate, and that of no great ſubſtance. Their manner of eating and drinking is: Euerie man hath a table alone, without table clothes or napkins, and eateth with two peeces of wood, like the men of China: they drinke wine of Rice, wherewith they drink themſelues drunke, and after their meat they vſe a certaine drinke, which is a pot with hote water, which they drinke as hote as euer they may indure, whether it be Winter or Summer.
                     
                        Annoint. D. Pall.
                        The Turkes holde almoſt the ſame māner of drinking of their Chaona, which they make of certaine fruit, which is like vnto the Bakelaer, and by the Egyptians called Bon or Ban: they take of this fruite one pound and a half, and roaſt them a little in the fire, and then ſieth them in twentie poundes of water, till the half be conſumed away: this drinke they take euerie morning faſting in their chambers, 
                              •
                           ut of an e
                              •
                           rthen pot, being verie hote, as we doe here drinke aquacompoſita in the morning: and they ſay that it ſtrengtheneth and maketh them warme, breaketh wind, and openeth any ſtopping.
                     
                     The manner of dreſſing their meat is altogether contrarie vnto other nations: the aforeſaid warme water is made with the powder of a certaine hearbe called Chaa, which is much eſtéemed, and is well accounted of among them, and al ſuch as are of any countenance or habilitie haue the ſaid water kept for them in a ſecret place, and the gentlemen make it themſelues, and when they will entertaine any of their friends, they giue him ſome of that warme water to drinke: for the pots wherein they ſieth it, and wherein the hearbe is kept, with the earthen cups which they drinke it in, they eſteeme as much of them, as we doe of Diamants, Rubies and other precious ſtones, and they are not eſteemed for their newnes, but for their oldnes, and for that they were made by a good workman: and to know and kéepe ſuch by themſelues, they take great and ſpeciall care, as alſo of ſuch as are the valewers of them, and are ſkilfull in them, as with vs the goldſmith priſeth and valueth ſiluer and gold, and the Iewellers all kindes of precious ſtones: ſo if their pots & cuppes be of an old & excellēt workmās making, they are worth 4 or 5 thouſād ducats or more the peece. The King of Bungo did giue for ſuch a pot, hauing thrée feet, 14 thouſand ducats, and a Iapan being a Chriſtian in the town of Sacay, gaue for ſuch a pot 1400 ducats, and yet it had 3 peeces vpon it. They doe likewiſe eſtéeme much of any picture or table, wherein is painted a blacke trée, or a blacke bird, and when they knowe it is made of wood, and by an ancient & cūning maiſter, they giue whatſoeuer you will aſke for it. It happeneth ſome times that ſuch a picture is ſold for 3 or 4 thouſand ducats and more. They alſo eſtéeme much of a good rapier, made by an old and cunning maiſter, ſuch a one many times coſteth 3 or 4 thouſand Crowns the péece. Theſe things doe they kéeepe and eſtéeme for their Iewels, as we eſtéeme our Iewels & precious ſtones▪ And when we aſke them why they eſtéeme them ſo much, they aſke vs againe, why we eſtéeme ſo well of our precious ſtones & iewels, whereby there is not any profite to be had, and ſerue to no other vſe, then only for a ſhewe, & that their things ſerue to ſome end.
                     Their Iuſtice and gouernment is as followeth: Their kings are called Iacatay, and are abſolutely Lords of the land, notwithſtanding they kéepe for themſelues as much as is neceſſary for them and their eſtate, and the reſt of their land they deuyde among others, which are called Cunixus, which are like our Earles and Dukes: theſe are appointed by the King, and he cauſeth them to gouerne & rule the land as it pleaſeth him: they are bound to ſerue the King as well in peace, as in warres, at their owne coſt & charges, according to their eſtate, and the auncient lawes of Iapan. Theſe Cunixus haue others vnder them called Touis, which are like our

Lords and Lieutenants, with whome likewiſe they deuide and part the land by the king giuen vnto them. And theſe Toms doe yet deuide their parts among their friends & ſuch are their ſoldiers, and take an oath to be redie at the commandement of their heads and chief gouernors, as wel in peace as in warre at their own proper coſtes & charges: & euery one muſt maintayne himſelf, and be content with that part which is allotted vnto him: wherewith euerie one of them according to his eſtate and qualitie may liue well, and euerie one of them hath ſo much power and authoritie ouer thoſe that are vnder him, that he may puniſh, baniſh, and put them to death, and doe with them, if they offend, as it beſt pleaſeth him, be it with right or with wrong, without any appeale or anſwering before any man: this power is not giuen onely to the Gouernors, Captaines and Officers ouer their ſubiects, Vaſſalles and Soldiers vnder their charges, gouernments and offices (as I ſaid before) but alſo to maiſters of houſes and fathers ouer their children, ſeruants & family: ſo that they may kill, beate, 
                           •
                        acke & hewe thē as they thinke good, and at their pleaſures, without any reſiſtance or correction for the ſame.
                     The rents and reuenues belonging to the King are very ſmall, and are nothing elſe but rice, which is their liuing: he hath euery yere onelie 500 thouſād packes or ſackes of Rice, and not any other cuſtomes, rents and reuenues, whereof he giueth to 10 or 12 Cunixu
                              •
                           
                         each man 30 or 40 thouſand ſackes, the reſt is for his owne coſtes and charges, to the maintenance of his eſtate, and the Cunixus muſt diſtribute of their parts among the Toms, and the Toms among the ſoldiers, wherewith they maintaine themſelues, euery man in his eſtate. Their ſpéech is different from the Chiniſh, ſo that they vnderſtand not each other, but in writing they differ not, for that they vſe all the ſelf ſame figures and characters: they vſe likewiſe manie kindes of vowels, and in their writing manie courteous ſpéeches, to euery man according to his eſtate & calling, with ſeuerall titles & words: whereby their ſpéech is hardly to be learned by a ſtraunger. Their religion is much like vnto thoſe of China: they haue their Idolles and their miniſters, which they call Bonſes, and hold them in great eſtimation: but ſince the time of the Ieſuites being among them, there haue bene diuers baptiſed and become Chriſtians, which daylie doe increaſe, among the which were 3 Kings, that is the king of Būgo, which is one of the principalleſt kings of Iapan, although there are many in the countrie, wherewith the Portingales, as yet haue had no conference: the ſecond the King of Arryma: the third, the King of Omura
                        ▪ Thoſe thrée Kings ſent their ſonnes and Nephewes with the Ieſuites into India, from thence to trauell into Portingale, and ſo to Rome, to ſubmit themſelues vnto the Pope, and departing out of Iapan, in anno 1582.
                        15
                              •
                           2 they ariued in India, in the citie of Goa An. 1583.
                        158
                              •
                           
                         the ſame yeare that I ariued in India, ſo that we found them yet in Goa, and the next yeare after they ſayled vnto Portingal, & from thence to Madril, where by the king & nobles of Spaine, they were with great triumph & honour welcomed and receiued, and preſented with many gyftes. From thence they trauelled to Rome vnto the Pope, who likewiſe did them great honor, and beſtowed many preſents vpon them, as alſo all the Cardinals and Lords of Italie, for that they trauelled throughout all Italie to Florence, Venice, Ferrara, &c. which being done, they returned againe vnto Madril, with letters from Pope Sixtus, and ſome holie reliques of the croſſe that Chriſt died vpon, to preſent the ſame vnto the Chriſtian Kings of Iapan, as an holie preſent: in the end they ariued in India againe, during my being there, which was in anno 1587,
                        158
                              •
                           
                         being with great ioy receiued, and ſo ſet ſayle vnto Iapan, where they ariued again with great admiration of all the men of Iapan: which the Ieſuites did, to the end (as they ſaid) the better to moue the Iapans to be chriſtened, and to make them knowe the magnificence of the countrie of Europa, becauſe they would not beléeue it being ſhewed them: but the principalleſt cauſe and intent of the Ieſuites was, thereby to reape great profit, and to get much praiſe and commendation, for that moſt of the gifts which the princes of Iapan had giuen them, fell to their ſhares: they likewiſe obtained of the Pope and the king of Spaine, that no mā might dwell in Iapan, either Portingale or Chriſtian, without their licence and conſent, ſo that in all Iapan there are no other orders of Munkes, Fryers, Prieſts, nor any other religious perſons remaining or reſident there, but Ieſuites alone. They haue onely among them certaine handie crafts men, by them brought out of India, with whome they haue to doe, but for other men, as marchants and others, they may but goe and come, and not ſtay there, without the Ieſuites licence. They haue almoſt all the countrie vnder their ſubiection, ſuch I meane as are conuerted to the faith of Chriſt, as well ſpirituall as temporall, making the Iapans beléeue what they liſt, wherby they are honored like gods, for that the Iapans make ſo great account of them, that they doe almoſt pray vnto them,

as if they were Saints. They had obtained ſo much fauour of the Pope, that hee granted them a Biſhoppe of their order, (which is contrarie to their profeſſion) who came out of Portingale to be Biſhop in Iapon, but dyed in the way, betwéene Portingale and India: Since that they haue procured an other, ſo that to conclude, they haue all the praye vnder their clawes. As likewiſe they doe enioy and poſſeſſe the principalleſt places of Religion in all India, where they builde moſt princely houſes, which no man dareth withſtand or refuſe them, neither any of the Religious orders, haue the meanes or wealth to doe the like. This they know full well howe to bring to paſſe, for that there is not any thing, from whence they will not ſucke or draw out ſome profit or aduantage, or elſe they haue the ſlight, and cunning how to get it as well from the King, and from other Noblemen and eſtates as alſo from the common people, it ſéemeth in a manner that they bewitch men with their ſubtill practiſes and deuiſes, and are ſo wel practiſed and experimented in trade of marchandiſes, that they ſurpaſſe all worldly men. To conclude, there is not any commoditie to be had or reaped thoroughout all India, but they haue their part therein, ſo that the other orders and Religious perſons, as alſo the common people, doe much murmur thereat, and ſéeme to diſlike of their couetous humors.
                     A little beyond Iapon vnder 34. and 35. degrées, not farre from the coaſt of China, lyeth an other great Iland, called Inſula de Core, whereof as yet there is no certaine knowledge, neither of the greatneſſe of the countrie, people, nor wares that are there to be found.
                     From Makau Eaſt Northeaſt, diſtant aboue 90. miles lye certaine Ilandes, called Lequeo Pequeno, or little Lequeo, and lye about 20. miles diſtant from the firme land of China, and 90. miles farther in the ſame courſe, lye other Ilands, called Lequeo Maior, or great Lequeo. All theſe Ilandes are trauelled vnto, and inhabited by thoſe of China, whereof we will now ceaſe to ſpeake, till an other time, (hauing particularly made a briefe diſcourſe in an other place, of all their manners, cuſtomes, wares, and marchandiſes, according to the trueſt inſtructions I could find) and ſo will returne againe to the deſcription of Goa, together with the places bordering about the ſame.
                  
                  
                     The 27. Chapter. A ſhort relation of the land lying behind Goa: in the iuriſdiction whereof lyeth the ſaid towne of Goa, and of the Originall of their Kings and Gouernours, with their names, by true information giuen by the inhabitants themſelues, together with their Hiſtories.
                     
                        BEfore I begin to write of the towne and Ilande of Goa, with the coaſtes, ſuperſtitions, and other cuſtomes of the countrie, lying behinde and rounde about Goa, as well where the Portingales inhabit, as where the natiue countrie men are reſident, I thought it conuenient to begin with the ſame ſomwhat further off, then at the preſent time, the better to vnderſtand the originall of the people, together with the principall cauſes of the diuiſions of the ſame countries and nations, as alſo their Kings names and ſurnames. Then you muſt vnderſtand that about 300. yeares paſt, there was a mightie King of the countrie of Deli, which lyeth within the land behind Goa on the Northſide, and bordereth vpon the land of Coracone, belonging to the King of Perſia, wherein are made the rich Couerlets and hangings, by the Portingales called Alcatyffas, which land of Deli is verie colde, and hath Snow and Ice in it like the Netherlands. This king of Deli brought vnder his ſubiection, all the countries bordering about him, among the which were Decam, Cuncam, Ballagate, and the lande of Goa. At the ſame time the countrie of Cambaia, which is diſtant from Goa about 100. miles Northward, was ouerrunne and taken f
                           •
                        rcibly by the Moores, & Mahometans, and brought the naturall countrimen, called Reysbutos being heathens, with great tyranie vnder their ſubiection. The land of Ballagate, and Decam was before inhabited by heathens, that were verie mightie and of great power, whoſe ſucceſſors are now called Veneſares, and others that yet dwell within the countrie called Colles: which Colles, Veneſares, and Reysbutos of Cambaia doe yet liue by robbing and ſtealing, and thoſe of Cambaia pay tribute to the ſaide Reysbutos, becauſe they ſhould not robbe and ſpoyle them, but ſuffer them to liue in peace. The Colles and Veneſares alſo receiue tribute of the men of Decam and Ballagate: for that the Kings could neuer as yet ouercome

them, although they make no ſhew thereof, but ſtill diſſemble with them, for that of what ſoeuer they robbe and ſteale, they haue their parts. After this King of Deli had brought all theſe kingdomes and countries vnder his ſubiection: then came the Tartarians, which the Indians call Mogoren, and ouercame moſt part of the countrie of Deli. At the ſame time there dwelt in the kingdome of Bengalen a Noble Gentleman, whoſe brother the King of Bengallen had wrongfully put to death, whereby this Gentleman ſought and deuiſed all the meanes hee could to bee reuenged, and did not onely bring it to paſſe by bereauing the King of his life, but alſo tooke the whole kingdome from him, and brought it vnder his ſubiection, and being in this ſorte become abſolute Lord and King of Bengalla, was not therewith content, but deſiring to augment his kingdome, and thereby to win great fame, did inuade the countrie of Deli, (bordering vpon him) with a great armie of men, and by force draue the Tartarians or Mogoros out of the countrie, and ſo conquered both that lande and all the countries bordering thereabouts, as Decam, Ballagate, and Cuncam, as farre as to the kingdome of Cambaia, and for a time was the greateſt Prince in all thoſe quarters. For the Indians affirme that hee had in Compaſſe vnder his ſubiection aboue 800. miles of land. This King raigning for a time ouer al theſe lands and countries, in the end deſiring to liue quietly, and to returne vnto his kingdom of Bengala, thinking it too troubleſome for him to rule ſo great a countrie, did inueſt one of his coſins, with the countries of Decam, Ballagate, and Cuncam, with the land of Goa, and the countries bordering about the ſame, which done, he returned into his land of Bengala, leauing his ſaide coſin King and commander of the aforeſaid countries. This man was alwaies a great friende and wel-willer to ſtrange nations, as Arabians, Turkes, Ruynes, and Coraſones, & parted his countries among Gouernours and Captaines, to on whereof beeing called Idalham, whome the Portingales call Hidalcam, he gaue the Gouernment of Angedina, which lyeth 12. miles from Goa Southwards, ſtretching towards the North, till you come to a place called Siffardan which are 60. miles, wherein is contained the towne and Iland of Goa: to an other Captaine called Niſa Maluco, hee gaue the coaſt of Siffardan ſtretching Northwards, to Negotana which are 20. miles, and lyeth inwards to the land of Cambaia: ſo that thoſe two Captaines had their gouernments in the countrie of Cuncam, which lyeth on the Sea coaſt, and ſeperateth it ſelfe from the land of Decam, by great and high hils, called Guate. Theſe hils are verie high, and haue many corners and hookes of land, and doe ſtretch towardes Cambaia, to the Cape de Comorin, and from thence backe againe to the coaſt of Choramandel. The hill of Guate is ſo high, that men may eaſily ſée it within Goa, and all the coaſt along, though commonly it is couered with clouds, and it is the more to bee wondred at, for this reſpect, becauſe all other hils are vneuen, high and low, and this is faire and flat land on the top, with great & goodly fields: & is by the Indians called Ballagate, that is to ſay, aboue the hill, for Balla is aboue, and Gate is a hill, whereby the Portingals doe commonly cal the whole countrie Ballagate, although the principall part, and the land it ſelfe is called Decam, and alſo Canara, wherof the inhabitants are called Decanijns and Canaras, as the Kings alſo in times paſt vſed to beare titles, and call themſelues Kings of Decam.
                     
                     But returning to the diuiſion of the reſt of the countries, he deuided likewiſe the land of Ballagate or Decam, into Prouinces, giuing one part to Imademaluco, by the Portingales called Madremaluco, and an other part to Cotalmoluco, and an other to Melique Verido. All the ſaid Captaines were ſtrangers, as Turkes, Ruines, and Coraſones, except Niſamalucode, who was Sonne to a Gentleman of the Kings houſe, and becauſe the King had laine with the mother of Niſamaluco, therefore hee boaſted himſelfe to be of the linage of the king of Decam, all the other Captaines were ſlaues and ſeruants, which the King had brought, and placed in thoſe roomes, as putting great truſt in them, thinking that they would acknowledge it, and bee thankfull vnto him for the ſame. But it fell out otherwiſe, as wee ſee it commonly doth, and that good is requited with euill, for theſe Captaines in time, getting credite, authoritie and power, were in great eſtimation, and as it were, abſolute Kings and Gouernours of their Prouinces, for that the king neuer troubled himſelfe therwith, but layde all the charge vppon them, whereby they beganne to bee puffed vp with pride, and determined to vſurpe the Prouinces vnder him, for them and their ſucceſſors: And becauſe it grieued them to be in ſubiection to an other, and at his commaundement, they all met together, and among them, agréed to take their Lord and King priſoner, and ſo euery one of them to be ſole commanders of the coūtries they had in charge, which they eaſily brought to effect, for that they had all the meanes they would wiſh or deſire, as

                           〈1 page missing〉
                        
                        
                        
did honour them with the name of Xa, which is to ſay a King, whereby they had the names of Adelxa, Niſamoxa, and Contumixa, and all the Kings continued ſo with the name of Xa, which in Perſia is a King, and Iſmael is a proper name, whereby Xa Iſmael, and Xa Thamas are as much to ſay as King Iſmael, and King Thamas, and of the Turkes and Rumes are called Suffy or Soffy, which ſignifieth a great Captaine. The Kings of Decam alſo haue a cuſtome when they will honor a man, or recompence their ſeruice done, and rayſe him to dignitie and honour. They giue him the title of Nayque, which ſignifieth a Captaine, as Salua Nayque and Acem Nayque. And whē they will giue a man an honourable title, or ſalutation, they call him Rau, as Chitarau, which is to ſay, ſtrong King, and ſuch like titles, which among them is a great honour. Alſo Adelham or Hidelcam, is called Sabayo, which ſignifieth Seigneur or Lord, for the Iland of Goa had a Captaine or Gouernour, that was Lord of the towne, when the Portingales wanne it firſt, called Sabayo, as the Portingales Chronicles of their Indian conqueſts doe make mention, whoſe houſe or Palace to this day in the Cittie of Goa, is the inquiſition houſe, and a place which ſtandeth betwéene the great Church and the ſame houſe, is as yet called the Pallace of Sabayo.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 28. Chapter. Of the towne and Ilande of Goa, chiefe Cittie of India.
                     
                        THe Citie of Goa, is the Metropolitan or chiefe Cittie of all the Orientall Indies, where the Portingales haue their traffique, where alſo the Viceroye, the Arch biſhop, the Kings Councel, and Chauncerie haue their reſidence, and from thence are all places in the Orientall Indies, gouerned and ruled. There is likewiſe the ſtaple for all Indian commodities, whether all ſorts of Marchants doe reſort, comming thether both to buy and ſell, as out of Arabia, Armenia, Perſia, Cambaia, Bengala, Pegu, Sian, Malacca, Iaua, Molucca, China, &c. The Cittie and Iland of Goa, lyeth vnder 15. degrees, on the North ſide, and is diſtant from the Equinoctiall, (by the way that the Portingales ſhippes do come thether from Moſſambique) 400. miles. It is an Iland wholly compaſſed about with a riuer, and is aboue thrée miles great, it lyeth within the coaſt of the firme lande, ſo that the Iland, with the Sea coaſt of the firme land, doe both reach as farre each as other into the Sea. It is only ſeperated from the firme land, by an arme of the Sea, or of the ryuer, that runneth in by the North ſide of the towne, and ſo round about the Iland to the South ſide, where it entereth againe into the Sea, and is in forme almoſt like a halfe Moone. The ryuer runneth euen vnto the Towne, and is indifferent broade, there are betwéene the firme land and the Iland, certaine ſmall Ilandes that are all inhabited by the naturall borne countrimen, and on the other ſide of the town the ryuer is there ſo ſmall, that in Summer time, by wading to the knées in water, a man may paſſe it ouer on foote. On the which ſide the Iland hath a wall with certaine Bulwarkes, which ye Portingales of late yeares haue cauſed to be made, to defend them from the firme land in time of warre, as it often happeneth, for it hath diuers times béene beſieged by Dialcan or Hidalcam, at the mouth and the entrie of the ryuer. On the North ſide lyeth the land of Bardes, which is high land, vnder which land the Portingales doe Anker ſafely out of all danger, and there they haue a place to lade and vnlade their wares. This land of Bardes is alſo vnder the Portingall ſubiection, and is full of Villages inhabited with people that are of the firme land, lying aboue it, called Canarijns, who for the moſt part are Chriſtians, but obſerue their owne manner of apparell, which is to goe all naked, their priuie members onely couered. This land is full of Indian Palme trées, whereon the Indian Nuts called Cocos doe grow, as alſo all the other Ilands lying in the ryuer. This land of Bardes, is ſeperated from the firme land by a ſmall riuer, which is ſo little, that it cannot almoſt be diſcerned from the firme land. On the South ſide of the Iland of Goa, wher the riuer runneth againe into the Sea, there commeth euen out with the coaſt a land, called Salſette, which is alſo vnder the ſubiection of the Portingales, and is inhabited, and planted both with people and fruite, like the land of Bardes, and is likewiſe parted with a little ryuer from the firme land. Betwéene this land of Salſette, & the Iland of Goa, lie alſo ſome ſmall Ilands, all full of Indian Palme trées, and by the mouth or iſſue of the ryuer, lyeth an Iland which is called Goa Velha, that is old Goa, from whence there commeth no ſpeciall thing, neither is it much inhabited. Thoſe lands of Bardes and Salſette, are by the Kings of Portingale let out to farme, and the rents therof are imployed to the payment of the Archbiſhop, Cloyſters, Prieſts,

Viceroy, & other the Kings Officers, yearely ſtipends, which is graunted them, by ſpeciall Priueledges and Patents from the King. The Iland is verie hillie, and in ſome places ſo deſert and rough, that on ſome ſides men can hardly trauell ouer land (but with great labour) to the towne of Goa, the Iland euen to the Sea ſide is full of Villages, and inhabited by the Canarijus, which are the naturall borne people of the land, and doe altogether liue by working vpon the land, and by their Palme trees. The villages and dwellings of theſe Canarijus, are moſt rounde about the Iland, and on the water ſides, or by ſmall Lakes, whereof there are ſome fewe, within the Iland, and the cauſe why they dwell thus, is for that the Palme trées will not grow in any other place but vpon low ground, by the waters, ſpecially in ſandie ground: ſo that there are no Palme trées to be found on the high land within the countrie vnleſſe it bee vpon ſandie groundes on the Sea coaſt, or ryuers ſides. On the Eaſt ſide of the towne of Goa vpwardes, into the ryuer, about thrée miles from the towne of Bardes, lyeth a place wher the Portingals ſhips doe Anker, the ryuer hath ſome créekes, and a ſhip of 200. Tunnes or there abouts, may eaſily diſcharge before the Towne, but the Portingales great ſhips muſt diſcharge them ſelues at Bardes: which being done, they may i
                           •
                         they will fréely goe and lie before the town. The towne is well builte with faire houſes and ſtréetes, after the Portingall manner, but becauſe of the heate they are ſomewhat lower. They commonly haue their Gardens and Orchards at the backe ſide of their houſes, full of all kinde of Indian fruites: as alſo the whole Iland through, they haue many pleaſant Gardens and farmes, with houſes to play in, and trées of Indian fruites, whether they goe to ſport themſelues, and wherein the Indian women take great delight. The towne hath in it all ſortes of Cloyſters and Churches as Lisbone hath, onely it wanteth Nunnes, for the men cannot get the women to trauell ſo farre, where they ſhould be ſhut vp, and forſake Venus, with whome (ſo that they may enioy and fulfill their luſtes) they had rather looſe their liues, whereof they make ſmall account. The Iland is both winter and Summer all alike gréene, and hath alwaies ſome kinde of fruite in ſeaſon, which is a great pleaſure, the towne lyeth vppon ſome hils and dales like Lisbone, it hath in times paſt béene verie ſmall, and walled, with a drie Ditch round about it, wherein there is no water, but when it rayneth, the walles are yet ſtanding, but no Gates remaining, and the towne is now built round about with houſes, ſo that it is, at the leaſt twice as big without the walles, as it is within, and lyeth open without walles or cloſures, ſauing onely that the Iland hath a wal on the Eaſt ſide, which beginneth ouer againſt the land of Salſette, and ſo runneth along vntill you come at Bardes, and is onely to defend them from the firme land, where the Portingales haue no commaundement. The whole Iland hath no other defence, but onely vpon the corner of the land of Bardes, at the mouth of the ryuer, where there ſtandeth an olde ruinous Caſtle, wherein lyeth two or thrée Iron péeces, and one man that in the night time kéepeth the watch, the Iland on the Sea ſide is verie high, full of ſtonie Cliffes, but the land of Bardes hath on the Sea ſide a verie faire white Sand, about halfe a mile long, and ſomewhat more: the defence of the Ilande conſiſteth herein, that on the Eaſt ſide there are thrée or foure paſſages or Gates, that ſtand vpon the water ſide, on the vttermoſt part of the Iland, right againſt the firme land, Salſette and Bardes, euerie gate or paſſage hath a Captaine and a clarke, which kéepe watch, that no man may paſſe into the other ſide, but by their licence. And the Indians, Decanijus, and other Moores and heathens, that are reſident in Goa, and therein haue their habitation, when they goe into the firme land to fetch their neceſſarie prouiſions, comming to thoſe places which are called Paſſos, they muſt euerye man haue a marke, which is Printed on their naked armes, and ſo they paſſe ouer to the other ſide, and at their returne againe they muſt ſhew the ſame marke, whereby they may fréely enter, for the which they pay two Baſarukes, which is as much as a Hollanders Doit, and this is the profit that the Captain and Clarke of the ſaid Paſſos doe make. In the night they haue a Boy, that kéepeth watch, and hath a ſmall Bell, which hangeth ouer the gate, which Boylyeth downe, and tieth the ſtring of the Bell at his foote and ſo ringeth it often times, to ſhew that hee watcheth, which is all the watch they hold thoroughout the whole Iland. There are fiue of theſe Paſſos, one vpon the South ſide of the Iland, where men paſſe to the firme lande, and to the land of Salſette, and is called Beneſterijn, commonly named Paſſo de Saint Iago, becauſe the Pariſh of Saint Iacobs ſtandeth ther: The Tebe de Paſſo is on the Eaſt ſide of the Iland, where men doe onely paſſe into. The firme land called O Paſſo Secco, which is the drie paſſage, for in that place the ryuer is at the narroweſt and ſhalloweſt. The third Paſſo on the South ſide of the Iland, ioyneth almoſt to the Towne,

called O Paſso de Daugijn, or of Madre de Deus, and ſo farre goeth the wall, beginning at Paſso de Beneſterijn, or S. Iago, and from thence the whole Iland is without any wall or cloſure: from this Paſso, right ouer againſt it, they paſſe ouer to an Iland, which is hard by the firme land, where is alſo a Paſso called O Paſso de Norwa: the fift or laſt Paſso lyeth in the middle way of the Riuer downwards towards Bardes, which is the ſtrongeſt of them all, and beſt looked vnto, but no otherwiſe made then all the reſt, & is called O Paſso de Pangijn, frō thence they paſſe to Bardes, and alſo all the boates and ſhips that paſſe in and out of the riuer, muſt ſtay there & be ſearched, and this is all their watch and ſtrentgh in the Iland.
                     Touching the Portingales iuſtice and ordinances, as well in worldly as ſpirituall cauſes, they are al one as they are in Portingale. They dwell in the towne among all ſorts of nations, as Indians, Heathens, Moores, Iewes, Armenians, Guſarates, Benianes, Bramenes, and of all Indian nations and people, which doe all dwell and traficke therein, euerie man holding his owne religion, without conſtrayning any man to doe againſt his conſcience, onely touching their ceremonies of burning the dead, and the liuing, of marrying & other ſuperſtitious & deueliſh inuentions, they are forbidden by the Archbiſhop to vſe them openly, or in the Iland, but they may fréelie vſe them vpon the firme land, and ſecretly in their houſes, thereby to ſhunne and auoid all occaſions of diſlike that might be giuen to Chriſtians, which are but newlie baptiſed: but touching the worldly policie or good gouernement of the countrie, and executing of iuſtice, as alſo for the ruling of the townes men in the citie: it is common to them all, and they are vnder the Portingales law, and he that is once chriſtened, and is after found to vſe any heatheniſh ſuperſtitions, is ſubiect to the Inquiſition, what ſo euer he be, or for any point of Religion what ſo euer.
                     The Iland hath nothing of it ſelf to nouriſh it withall, but onely ſome cattle, hennes, goates, doues, &c. but very fewe, becauſe of the barrenneſſe and euil ſituation of the place, which is a moſt hillie, barren, and wild countrie, and full of waſt ground: all their neceſſaries, as beaſtes, hennes, hogges, egges, milke, &c. come from Salſette and Bardes, but moſt part out of the firme land, Corne, Rice, and other grayne: alſo Oyle, and all other neceſſaries come from other countries, and are brought in by the Riuer, as frō 
                        Cambaia on the North ſide, and from the coaſt of Malabar and other places, as in the deſcription of the coaſt we haue in part declared: of wyne called wyne of palme trées, they haue inough, and ſo much that they haue to ſpare for other places. They haue but little freſh water, but only one Well called Banganiin, which ſtādeth about a quarter of a mile with out the Cittie, wherewith the whole towne is ſerued, which the ſlaues fetch in pots & ſel it in the towne, and is verie good to drinke: for water to dreſſe meat, waſh, and doe other thinges withall, they commonly haue Wels within their houſes: the land of it ſelf is verie ſtonie and drie, hauing a kinde of red earth, ſo that ſome Italian Alchymiſtes haue promiſed to get Copper & Gold out of the ſame, which neither ye king nor Vice-roy would euer cōſēt vnto, fearing leaſt the report of ſuch treaſure would be occaſion of greater troble vnto them by their enemies that are round about them, through the deſire that they haue of riches, and therefore they haue deferred to ſéeke for it: by the mappe hereafter following you may ſée the ſituation of the Iland and Towne of Goa, with all the ſtréetes, Churches and places liuely deſcribed.
                  
                  
                     The 29. Chapter. Of the cuſtomes of the Portingales, and ſuch as are iſſued from them, called Mesticos, or half countrimen, as wel of Goa, as of all the Oriental countries.
                     
                        THe Portingales in India, are many of them marryed with the naturall borne women of the countrie, and the children procéeding of them are called Meſticos, that is, half countrimen. Theſe Meſticos are commonlie of yelowiſh colour, notwithſtanding there are manie women among them, that are faire and well formed. The children of the Portingales, both boyes and gyrls, which are borne in India, are called Caſtiſos, and are in all things like vnto the Portingales, onely ſomewhat differing in colour, for they draw towards a yealow colour: the children of thoſe Caſtiſos are yealow, and altogether like the Meſticos, and the children of Meſticos are of colour and faſhion like the naturall borne Countrimen or Decaniins of the countrie, ſo that the poſteritie of the Portingales, both men and womē being in the third degrée, doe ſéeme to be naturall Indians, both in colour & faſhion. Their liuings and daylie traffiques are to Bengala, Pegu, Malacca, Cambaia, China, and euerie way, both North and South: alſo in Goa there is holden a daylie aſſemblie or

méeting together, as wel of the Citizens and Inhabitants, as of all nations throughout India, and of the countries bordering on the ſame, which is like the méeting vpō the burſe in Andwarpe, yet differeth much from that, for that hether in Goa there come as well Gentlemen, as marchants and others, and there are all kindes of Indian commodities to ſell, ſo that in a manner it is like a Faire. This méeting is onely before Noone, euerie day in the yeare, except Sondayes and holie dayes: it beginneth in ye morning at 7. of the clocke, and continueth till 9. of the clocke, but not in the heate of the day, nor after Noone, in the principal ſtréete of the Citie, named the ſtraight ſtréete, and is called the Leylon, which is as much to ſay, as an outroop: there are certain cryers appointed by the Citie for ye purpoſe, which haue of al things to be cryed and ſold: theſe goe all the time of the Leylon or outroop, all behangd about with all ſorts of gold chaines, all kindes of coſtly Iewels, pearles, rings, and precious ſtones: likewiſe they haue running about them, many ſorts of captiues and ſlaues, both men and women, young and old, which are daylie ſould there, as beaſts are ſold with vs, where euerie one may chuſe which liketh him beſt, euerie one at a certaine price. There are alſo Arabian horſes, all kinde of ſpices and dryed drugges, ſweet gummes, and ſuch like things, fine and coſtly couerlets, and many curious things, out of Cambaia, Sinde, Bēgala, China, &c. and it is wonderfull to ſée in what ſort many of them get their liuinges, which euery day come thether to buy wares, and at an other time ſel them again. And when any man dieth, all his goods are brought thether & ſold to the laſt pennie worth, in the ſame outroop, who ſoeuer they be, yea although they were the Viceroyes goods: and this is done to doe right and iuſtice vnto Orphanes & widdows, and that it may be ſold with the firſt, where euerie man may ſée it, ſo that euerie yeare there is great quantitie of ware ſold within that Citie, for that there die many men within the Towne, by meanes of their diſordered liuing, together with the hotenes of the coū
                        try: the like aſſemblie is holden in all places of India, where the Portingales inhabite. There are ſome married Portingales, that get their liuings by their ſlaues, both men and women, wherof ſome haue 12, ſome 20, and ſome 30, for it coſteth them but little to kéepe them. Theſe ſlaues for money doe labour for ſuch as haue néede of their helpe, ſome fetch freſh water, and ſell it for money about the ſtréetes: the women ſlaues make all ſorts of confectures and conſerues of Indian fruites, much fyne néedle worke, both cut and wrought workes, and thē their maiſter ſend the faireſt and the youngeſt of them well dreſt vp with their wares about the ſtréetes to ſell the ſame, that by the neatnes & bewtie of the ſaid women ſlaues, men might be moued to buy, which happeneth more for the affection they haue to the ſlaues & to fulfill their pleaſure with them, then for any deſire to the conſerues or néedle workes: for theſe ſlaues doe neuer refuſe them, but make their daylie liuing thereby, and with the gaines that they by that meanes bring home, their maiſters may well kéepe and maintaine them. There are others that vſe exchanging of moneyes, and to buy money when it cometh, as tyme ſerueth to fell it againe, for they buy the Rials of eight, when the ſhippes come from Portingale, whereof ſome buy at the leaſt 10 or 12 hundreth, and kéepe them till the Moneth of April, which is the time when the ſhippes ſayle to China, for then are the Rials of eight ſought for to carry thether, and are commonly worth 25 or 30 in the hundreth profite, and then they receiue for them a certain money, which at the ſame time is brought frō 
                        Ormus, called Larriins, that come out of Perſia, which they buy for 8 or 10 in the hundreth profite, & kéepe them til the Portingales on the moneth of Septē
                           ber come thether, and ſo deliuer them againe for 20 or 25 in the hundreth profite, in exchange for Rials of eight, as I ſaid before, for they muſt haue theſe Larriins with them to Cochin, to buy pepper and other wares, for that it is the beſt and moſt profitable money. There are yet other ſorts of money called Pagodes, Venetianers, & Santhones, which are gold, al which they doe likewiſe buy & ſel, ſo yt there are manie that doe nothing els, & become rich, ſpeciallie he that hath a good ſtocke. This exchange cometh moſt cōmonlie from the Spiritualtie, who do ſecretly vſe it, by other mens meanes, without any let or hinderance. Some there are that liue vpon their rents which they haue by their palme trées, whereon the Indian nut called Cocus doth grow, whereof they may very well liue and haue well to maintaine themſelues, for that it is the principall commoditie of that Iland.
                     There are ſome that let out their trées, and haue euery day for each trée half a Pardawe or more, which is as much as a Carolus Guilderne, and ſome haue 300 or 400 trées and more vpon one ground, which they let out vnto the Canariins, as we let out our paſtures, medowes & corn grounds. The Portingales and Meſticos in India neuer worke, if they doe, it is but very little,

                        
                        
                           
                              Indorum caſae, villae, et vici circa Goam.
                           
                           
                              
                              Indiſche hutte Lanthuÿsen en dorpen ontrent Goa.
                           
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page missing〉
                        
                        
                           
                              Contenancijen en habyten der Portugeeſers ſo burgers als Soldaten in oost Indien als ſe op die ſtraten comen.
                           
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                           
                              Hoc habitu, qui e Luſitanis Nobilitate aut dignitate clariores in India fere conſpiciuntur per plateas obequitant.
                           
                           
                              
                              Op deſe maniere ryden gemeenlick over ſtracten die Portugeeſche Edellieden Regierders en̄ Raetsheeren.
                           
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                           
                              Hac forma Luſitanorum nobiliores et qui opulentiores ſe gestari jubent
                           
                           
                              
                              Op deſe maniere laeten haer die Portugeeſen draegen die van affcomtſte en vermoegen zÿn.
                           
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page missing〉
                        
                        
                           
                              Fusten welcke die Portugeeſen en haer vianden dic Malabaren gebruÿcken ter oorloch, en om coopmanſchap te voeren
                           
                        
                        
                        
and that not often, but the moſt part of them liue in ſuch ſort, as I haue ſhewed you, although there are ſome handie crafts men, as Hat-makers, Shoe-makers, Saylemakers, and Coopers: but moſt of them haue their ſlaues to worke in their ſhops, and the maiſters when they walke vp and downe the ſtréetes, goe as proudlie as the beſt: for there one is no better then an other, as they think, the rich and the poore man all one, without any difference in their conuerſations, curteſies and companies. All other handie crafts men and workmen, are moſt Indians, Heathens, and Chriſtians of the land: no man is permitted to the liberties of being a frée Citizen of the towne, but ſuch as are marryed and reſident therein.
                     There are among them but two manner of people, that is, married men and ſoldiers, for that all young men vnmarried are named ſoldiers, which is the beſt name that a man can haue, not that the ſoldiers are any waies bound or vnder the commandement and regiment of any Captain, which throughout India, is not vſed but when the Portingalles come into India out of Portingall, and are ariued there, euery man goeth where hee thinketh beſt, although in Portingall euery mans name that goeth in the ſhippe is written and regiſtred, which is done in this ſorte: euery man is written vp, both his name and ſirname, with a note what pay they receyue of the King, whereof ſome beare the tytle of Fidalgo da Caza del Rey noſſas Senor, that is, a Gentleman of the Kinges houſe, which is the chiefeſt title: there are others named Mozos Fidalgos, which is alſo an honorable title, and they are commonly Gentlemens ſonnes, or by the kinges fauour aduaunced therevnto: There are yet others that are named Caualhiero Fidalgo, which is not ſo much as the other two, yet it is an honorable title, and is the title of a knight, who for ſome valiant act by him done is made knight, which they do for a ſmall matter: for that if he do any act to be accounted of, or bee in a manner at ſuch an action doing, preſently he is of a Captaine or a Gentleman made a knight, whereof they much boaſt themſelues: and it is nowe growne ſo common among them, that very Cookes boyes and others as meane as they, are made knightes: there are others alſo that are named Moſos da Camara, do Numero, e do Seruiço, which is ſeruantes to the King, ſome of his chamber, ſome of his accounts, and ſome for his ſeruice, this is the firſt title or degrée of credite, whereby through their good ſeruice they attaine vnto better, and are more glorious of their titles, then of all the riches in the world. There are alſo that are named Eſcuderos Fidalgos, that is Eſquires, which is likewiſe a degrée of credit: Others are named Hommes honorados, which is mē of honor, and the pooreſt among them (which are not named by any title) are ſet downe for ſoldiers, which are the common and raſcall ſort: theſe are euery man paide their wages according to their titles, and may each man in his qualitie (by long ſeruice, or ſome good action, but moſt by fauour) riſe to higher degrée; for that according to their tytles their ſeruice is rewarded. The Portingalles which ſaile for India, being thus regiſtred & written downe, the ſaid Regiſter at their arriuall there, is deliuered to be kept by one of the kinges Officers therevnto appointed, which euery three yeares is likewiſe changed, as other offices are, and is called the chiefe Clearke of the Matricola Generall, and hath thrée or foure vnder Clearks at his commandement. Now in India when ſummer time commeth, and that it is néedefull or neceſſary to ſend out an armie for ſome expedition to be done, or for to kéepe the coaſt, to conuoy and ſafe-conduct the trauelling Marchants that dayly ſayle to and from India, thereby to defend them and to let the Malabares their enemies from iſſuing forth to hurt them (as notwithſtanding they yearly doe:) then againſt September (which is the beginning of their Sommer) the drum is ſtricken vp, and it is proclaimed, that whoſoeuer will ſerue the king in his fléete by ſea, let him come to the Matricola Generall to receyue his money, and then by the Viceroy there is ordained a chiefe Captaine, and other vnder Captains for euery Fuſte and Galley: and in euery galley there is about a hundreth men, and in euery Fuſte thirtie men, little more or leſſe. Theſe are all paide by the Matricola, according to their tytles euery man as they are regiſtred, when they come out of Portingal: and this pay is made euery quarter, each quarter contayning thrée monthes, that is, the common ſoldier ſeuen Pardawen, called Xeraffins (euery Pardawe thrée teſtones Portingall money) and a man of honor nine Pardawen. The Moſo da Camara or ſeruant of the chamber eleuen Pardawen, & ſo by degrées: which done the Captaines bidde their ſoldiers to a banket, and of their own purſes giue them ſomething beſide their pay, for that euery Captaine ſéeketh to haue the beſt ſoldiers, and buy much victuailes and other thinges at their owne charges, thereby to haue their ſoldiers good willes, and to vſe them wel. They ſit altogether at one table in the Fuſtes or Gallies, where the Captaine vſeth the ſoldiers with great fauour and curteſie, for otherwiſe they woulde not much eſtéeme

him, nor yet obay him. The fléet being out, it ſayleth backewarde and forwards along the coaſt, and ſometimes into ſome hauens till the Month of Aprill, and about the laſt of that Month they enter againe into the riuer of Goa, where they winter, and then the ſoldiers are frée, and euery man goeth his way, without any further pay of the king. Then the Viceroy maketh a certificate for the Generall of the fléete, wherein he teſtifieth that ſuch a Captaine by his commaundement hath béene ſo many Monthes in the kings ſeruice at ſea, & hauing done any matter of importance, it is therein ſet down at large, and how that hee out of his owne purſe hath ſpent and laid out much money for the ſeruice of his Maieſtie, and according to this certificate the Captaine Generall maketh certificates for euery one of his vnder Captaines and ſoldiers, in the ſame ſort. There are likewiſe ſome Gentlemen that in winter time keepe open houſhold for all ſoldiers that will come thether to meate, whereof alſo they haue certificates, and for all things that they doe, which certificates they kéepe till they be ſome ten, twelue, or twentie, and with the Viceroyes licence go therewith to Portingall, aſking ſome recompence for their ſeruices, according to their certificates: withall they muſt bring a certificate from the Matricola General of that their reſidence in India, and that there hath not any deuiſe or ſubtilty béene vſed about ſetting downe their titles. The like muſt they haue from all other officers, receiuers and accountants both for munition and armour wherewith they ſerued in warre, for victuails alſo and ſuch like, whereof many times the captaines and ſoldiers doe make but badde accounts, and many of them are aforehande with the king, which is preſently regiſtred vnder the title of him that hath committed the fault: from theſe Officers alſo they muſt haue certificates, that there is no ſuch thing committed by them: with theſe certificates they ſayle to Portingall, where there is an office of remembrances, to aſke their rewardes by, as their qualities and ſeruices are or ſhalbe rewarded: but if they haue any friend in the court to ſpeake for them, & by greaſing their hands to procure diſpatch: then doe they obtaine thoſe offices for thrée yeares as Captaynes, Factors, Clearkes, Iudges, &c. and all other offices and places in India, but they muſt ſerue the place themſelues in perſon. Some of them by fauour get licences to paſſe them away, to ſell them, or to giue them with their daughters in mariage, and then the patent for ſuch offices are regiſtred in the Kings Chancery, and ſent into India where they muſt be confirmed by the Viceroy. Theſe offices are alwaies giuen in reuerſion after him that hath it promiſed before them, and then the Regiſter is ſearched, to ſée how many are before him that aſketh the ſaid places, & when their time is out, or that they chaunce to die before they come to it, or be abſent (as many times it happeneth) then he which is next in reuerſion hath the place, and is ready to receyue it. And this in briefe is the manner of their gouernement and policie for martiall affaires: their other gouernment for iuſtice and equitie is as they vſe it in Portingall. By the table hereafter following you may ſée the deſcription of the ſtrait ſtreete in Goa, with the dayly méeting therein, which they call Leylon, liuely portrayed.
                  
                  
                     The 30. Chapter. Of the Portingalles and Meſticos, their houſes, curteſies, mariages, and other cuſtomes and manners in India.
                     
                     
                        THe Portingals, Meſticos, and Chriſtians kéepe worſhipfull and bountifull houſes, hauing commonly (as it is ſaid before) fiue, ſixe, ten, twentie, ſome more, ſome leſſe ſlaues, both men and women, in their houſes euery man according to his eſtate and qualitie, I meane maried men. They are very cleanly and ſwéet in all things belonging to their houſes, ſpecially in their linnen, for that euery day they change ſhirtes and ſmockes both men and women, and their ſlaues and ſeruants likewiſe with other thinges that they weare, which they doe becauſe of the great heat in that land. The Portingals are commonly ſerued with great grauitie, without any difference betwéene the Gentleman & the common Citizen, townesman or ſoldier, and in their going, curteſies, and conuerſations, common in all thinges: when they go in the ſtréetes they ſteppe very ſoftly and ſlowly forwards, with a great pride and vaineglorious maieſtie, with a ſlaue that carrieth a great hat or vaile ouer their heads, to keepe the ſunne and raine from them. Alſo when it raineth they commonly haue a boy that beareth a cloke of Scarlet or of ſome other cloth after them, to caſt ouer them: and if it bee before noone, hee carrieth a cuſhin for his maiſter to knéele on when hee heareth Maſſe, and their Rapier is moſt commonly carried after them by a boy, that it may not trouble them as they walke, nor hinder their

                        
                        
                           
                              Goenſi ſe quanta foro viden area pandat Plana frequens tectis ſplendida dives opum?
                           
                           
                              
                              
                                 Ʋt mercem hic properet gemmis auroque nitentem Ille abducta procul vendere mancipia?
                           
                           
                              Congesta huc videas Ga
                                    •
                                  
                                 
                                    〈…〉
                                  Inſulae et Eoo max
                                    •
                                  
                                 
                                    〈…〉
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                              Fori Goenſis tabernarum mercium et mercatorum illud frequentantium aperta explicatio per 
                                    •
                                 Linſchoten.
                           
                           
                              
                                 〈…〉
                              
                           
                        
                        
                        
                        
grauities. When they méete in the ſtréetes a good ſpace before they come together, they beginne with a great Beſolas manos, to ſtoope with their bodies, and to thruſt forth their foot to ſalute each other, with their hattes in their hands, almoſt touching the ground: likewiſe when they come into the Church where they haue their ſtooles ready, which their ſlaues haue prepared for them: all that are by him that commeth in do ſtande vp, and with the ſame manner of bowing of their bodies doe him great reuerence, and if it chaunceth that any doeth him reuerence (as the manner is) & that he to whom it is done doth not greatly eſtéeme thereof, ſo that he doeth him not the like curteſie, they do altogether for that cauſe go after him, and cut his hatte in péeces, ſaying that he had diſgraced the partie, wherein it is not for them to aſke wherfore they ſhold ſo do; for it would bee the greateſt ſhame and reproch in the world vnto them if they ſhould not reuenge ſo great an iniury: & when they ſeeke to bee reuenged of any man that hath ſhewen them diſcurteſie, or for any other cauſe whatſoeuer it bee, they aſſemble ten or twelue of their friends, acquaintance or companions, and take him whereſoeuer they find him, and beat him ſo long together, that they leaue him for dead, or very neare dead, or els cauſe him to be ſtabbed by their ſlaues, which they hold for a great honor and point of honeſtie ſo to reuenge themſelues, whereof they dare boaſt and bragge openly in the ſtréetes, but if they deſire not to kil him, they baſte him well about the ribs and all his body ouer with a thicke réede, as big as a mans legge, which is called Bambus, whereby for eyght dayes after and more he hath inough to do to kéepe his bed, and ſometime in that manner they leaue him for deade. This is their common cuſtome, and is neuer looked vnto or once corrected. Alſo they vſe long bagges full of ſand, wherewith they will giue ſuch blowes each vpon other, that therewith they will breake each others limmes, and for euer after make them lame. When any man goeth to viſite an other in his houſe, although he which is viſited be one of the principal Gentlemen of the Citie, and the viſitor but a ſimple ſoldier, or ſome other man, it is the manner that hee which is viſited commeth vnto the doore of his houſe, with his hatte in his hand, and with great curteſie to receyue him that commeth to viſite him, and ſo leadeth him vp into his hall or chamber, wherein he will ſpeake with him, where hee offereth him a chaire to ſitte downe, and then hee himſelfe ſitteth by him, then hee aſketh him what hee woulde haue, which hauing vnderſtoode hee bringeth him downe againe to the dore in the like ſort, and ſo with a Beſolas manos biddeth him farewel, and if he ſhould not doe ſo, or when hee giueth him a ſtool, ſhold giue him one vnlined, or one yt is leſſe or lower then that hee taketh for himſelfe, he that viſiteth him woulde take it in euil parte, eſtéeming it a great ſcorne, & ſéeke to be reuenged on him for the ſame.
                     When they haue any weddinges and are married, whoſoeuer they be if they haue any wealth, all the friendes and neighbours come together, euery man on horſebacke, and hee that hath not a horſe wil borrow one, and are euery man very coſtly apparelled, at the leaſt ſome 50. or 100. horſes little more or leſſe, as the perſon is of qualitie, and ſo they ride altogether in good order vnto the Church with their ſeruantes, and euery man his hatte for the Sunne, the parentes and friendes in the hinder part, and in ye laſt row the bridegroome betwéene two of them, whom they call goſſops: after them followeth the bryde betwéen two Commeres, each in their Pallamkin, which is moſt coſtly made, and after them followe the ſlaues both men and women going in troupes, as if they ranne to hunt, and ſo comming to the Church, and being married according to the order vſed in the Church of Rome: they are in the ſame order brought home again, and paſſing through the ſtréets, the neighbours leaning vppon Indian Carpets looke out of the windowes, and throwe Roſe water vpon the Bryde & Bridegroome, and other ſweet ſmelling waters, with Roſes and Sugar Comfets, or corne. In the mean time their ſlaues play vppon Shalmes and Trumpets moſt pleaſant and melodious to heare, and comming to the houſe where the Bride and the Bridegroome dwel, with great reuerence and curteſie bowing downe their bodies, they take their leaues of all the company, which are all on horſebacke about the dore. And ſo the Bride, the Bridegroome and the Commeres go vp & ſit with great grauitie in a window, and then beginne the horſemen that led them to Church, in honor of the married couple, one after the other to runne a courſe, the goſſops beginning firſt, and the reſt following twice or thrice one after the other, with continuall playing on Shalmes, which are very common in India, for that he which is of any wealth hath them of his own within his houſe. This being ended, they all paſſe before the window where the Bride and Bridegroome ſit, with a great reuerence, and ſo paſſe on all ſauing the Goſſoppes, for they go vp to the Bride and Bridegroome, and bid God giue them ioy, then is there ſome Comfets and Marchpane brought forth, to drinke a cuppe of water withall, and after ſome curteous ſalutations and congratulations to the

                        
                           〈…〉
                         couple, they take their leaues & 
                           〈…〉
                         ſo there remaineth with the Bride & 
                           •
                        idegroom but three or four of their neareſt friendes and kinſemen, for whome there is a dinner prepared, with little meate, yet very coſtly, which they paſſe ouer very lightly, and not many wordes, which done they preſently bring the Bride to bed, without any other ceremonies or charges, wherewith the mariage is done and ended. Oftentimes it chaunceth that they go to bed at ye leaſt two houres before Sunne ſetting, not hauing the patience to ſtay ſo long as we do in theſe countries. When a childe is to be chriſtened, it is likewiſe in the ſame ſorte led to Church with horſes, & laſt of all commeth the father alone, after whom followeth two men on foote, the one with a great ſiluer or guilt veſſell full of bread baked like cracklinges, which in Portingall are called Roſquilhos, and in the middle a great Ware candle, well made and gilded, thruſt through with ſome peeces of money of golde and ſiluer, for an offering to the Prieſt that baptiſeth the childe, and all ouer ſtrowed and couered with Roſes: the other carryeth a great ſiluer or gilt ſaltſeller in one of his handes, and a lampe of the ſame ſtuffe in his other hande, each with rich and coſtly Towels on their ſholders: after that followeth two Pallamkins, on the one ſide ye 
                        Commere, on the other ſide the Midwife with the child, couered with a coſtly mantle, made for the purpoſe, and ſo the ceremonies of baptiſme being ended in the Church, it is againe in the like ſort brought home, and beeing there, they haue the like manner of muſicke and ſhalmes, running and leaping with their horſes before the window where the Commere ſitteth, with the ſame ceremonies as at the wedding. This is the manner and cuſtome of thoſe that are married and keepe houſe.
                     But concerning the ſouldier that is vnmaried, thus it is. They goe in the ſummer time into the Armado lying on the water, and being within the townes and on the land, they are very ſtately apparrelled, and goe verie grauely along the ſtreets with their ſlaues or men hired for the purpoſe, that beare a hatte ouer them for the ſunne and raine: for there are many Indiās that are daily hired for the purpoſe, and haue 12. Baſarucos the day, which is as much as two ſ
                           •
                        iuers or a ſtoter, & they ſerue ſuch as haue no ſlaues, and that will not keepe any to that end. The ſouldiers dwell at leaſt ten or twelue in a houſe, where they haue among them a ſlaue or hi
                        
                           •
                        ed Indian or two which ſerueth them, and waſheth their ſhirts, and haue foure or fiue ſtooles with a table, and euery man a Bedde. Their meate is Rice ſodden in water, with ſome ſalt fiſh, or ſome other thing of ſmall value (without breade) and cleare fountaine water for their drinke, wherewith they are well pleaſed. They haue amongſt them all one or two good ſutes of apparell, all of ſilke as the manner is there, and when one goeth abroad, the other ſtay at home, for in the houſe they haue no néede of clothes, (but ſit whoſoeuer they bee) in their ſhirts & a paire of linnen bréeches, and ſo as it were naked by reaſon of the great heate, for if ſome of them haue occaſion to goe out twenty times in one day, they muſt ſo often lend him their apparel, and hee muſt likewiſe put off his clothes, as often as he commeth home againe. Some ſouldiers haue a Gentleman or Captaine to their friendes which lendeth them monie to apparell themſelues withall, to the end when ſummer time commeth, they may be ready to goe with them in Fléet to ſea, as alſo to haue their friendſhip, by night and at other times to beare them company, or to helpe them to bee reuenged of any iniury by them receiued, as I ſaid before: for that he which in India hath moſt ſouldiers to his friends, is moſt regarded and feared. So that to bee ſhort, in this manner they doe maintaine themſelues in common, whereby they are able to come in preſence of the beſt of the countrie. Manie and moſt of them haue their chiefe maintenance from the Portingales and Meſticos wiues, as alſo the Indian Chriſtians wiues, which doe alwaies beſtow liberall rewardes and giftes vppon them to ſatiſfie and fulfill their vnchaſte and filthie deſires, which they know very well how to accompliſh, and ſecretly bring to paſſe. There are ſome likewiſe that get their liuings by their friends, trauelling for them from place to place with ſome wares and marchandiſes, and they are called Chattims. Theſe doe giue ouer and leaue the office of a ſouldier in the Fléete, and the Kinges ſeruice: for as it is ſaid, there is no man compelled thereunto, although their names be regiſtred in the office, yet doe they ſtill keepe the name of ſouldier, as long as they trauaile abroad and are not married. The ſouldiers in theſe dayes giue themſelues more to be Chattims, and to deale in Marchandiſe, then to ſerue the King in his Armado, becauſe the Captaines and Gentlemen begin to be 
                           •
                        lacke in doing good vnto them, as in times paſt they vſed to doe. Alſo they giue themſelues to reſt and pleaſure: wherefore if they can deuiſe any meanes for it, they had rather trauaile & deale in trade of Marchandiſe, and to marie and be quiet, in reſpect that the common ſouldiers in theſe dayes are but ſlackely paide: for that when they haue at the leaſt ten or twenty certificates to ſhew

for their former ſeruices, then haue they not the meanes to furniſh themſelues with prouiſion to make a voyage into Portingale, or to take any preſents with them there to beſtow them: for without ſuch meanes, they are neyther heard nor yet regarded, and if it fall out that they doe procure the reuerſion of any offices, it is ſo long before the time commeth that they doe enioy them, beeing many in reuerſion, that oftentimes they die before they can obtaine them. Againe the long trauaile and great voyage maketh many to ſtay in India, and to employ their time to other trades, as they can beſt prouide themſelues. By theſe meanes the wars in India are not ſo hot, nor ſo throughly looked into, neyther any other countries ſought into or founde out, as at firſt they vſed to doe. Now they doe onely ſtriue to get praiſe and commendation, and to leaue a good report behinde them: and now likewiſe they are all giuen to ſcraping & catching, as well the Viceroy, Gouernours, and others, as alſo the Church men and ſpiritualtie, little paſſing or eſteeming the common profit or the ſeruice of the King, but only their particular profits, making their account, that the time of their abode is but thrée yeares: wherefore they ſay they will not doe otherwiſe then thoſe that were before them did, but ſay that others which come after thē ſhall take care for all: for that the King (ſay they) gaue them their offices, thereby to pay them for their ſeruices in times paſt, and not for the profit of the common wealth: therefore there is no more countries in India won or new found out, but rather heere and there ſome places loſt, for they haue enough to doe, to hold that they haue alreadie, and to defende it from inuaſion, as alſo that they doe ſcoure the Sea coaſtes, and yet many Marchants haue great loſſes euery yeare, by meanes of the ſea rouers, and together with the euill gouernment of the Portingales, and it is to be feared, it will bee worſer euery day then other▪ as it is euidently ſéene. This ſhall ſuffice for the manners and cuſtomes of the Indian Portingales, and their warlike gouernments, which is commonly by ſea, for by land they cannot trauaile, by reaſon of the different kingdomes, and nations conſiſting of diuers ſeuerall ſortes of people, which are alwaies enemies, and neuer liue in peace, and ſome of them being friends, other enemies to the Portingales: for the Portingales haue only ſome Townes, places and fortreſſes, with their Hauens on the ſea coaſt, without holding any thing within the land, as in the deſcription of the coaſt wee haue alreadie declared.
                     By the pictures hereafter following may be ſéene the formes and portraitures of the Portingales that are maried, and of the ſouldiers in India, as they walke in the ſtreetes: as alſo howe they ride, not onely gentlemen, but euery man that hath the abilitie to keepe a horſe, as well Marchantes as handicraftes men▪ of what ſort ſoeuer they bee, and howe they cauſe themſelues to bee carried in P
                              •
                           llamkins, in the ſtreetes and throughout the townes, when they will not ride nor goe on foote. You may likewiſe ſée their fuſtes wherwith they go to warre vpon the water which the Malabares their enimies doe likewiſe vſe, (for they haue no other ſorts of ſcutes nor ſhippes,) and doe much miſchiefe therewith: they are verie light, as well to ſaue as to row, they vſe them alſo for Marchandiſe, becauſe of the fitnes of the ſame, to paſſe from place to place.
                  
                  
                     The 31. Chapter Of the maner and cuſtomes of Portingale and Meſticos women in India.
                     
                        THe Portingales, Meſticos, and Indian Chriſtian women in India, are little ſéene abroad, but for the moſt part ſit ſtill within the houſe, and goe but ſeldome forth, vnleſſe it be to Church▪ or to viſit their friends, which is likewiſe but verie little, and when they goe abroad, they are well prouided not to be ſeene, for they are carried in a Pallamkin couered with a mat or other cloth, ſo that they cannot be ſeene.
                     When they goe to church, or to viſit any friend, they put on very coſtly apparrell, with bracelets of gold, & rings vpon their armes, all beſet with coſtly Iewels & pearles, and at their eares hang laces full of Iewels. Their clothes are of Damaſke, Veluet, and cloth of gold, for ſilke is the worſt thing they doe weare. Within the houſe they goe bare headed, with a waſtcoate called Baju, that from their ſhoulders couereth their nauels, and is ſo fine that you may ſee al their body through it, and downewards they haue nothing but a painted cloth wrapped three or foure times about their bodies. Theſe clothes are very faire, ſome of them being very coſtly wrought with loome worke, and diuers figures and flowers of all colours, all the reſt of the body is naked without any hoſe, but onely bare footed in a paire of moyles or pantoſ
                           •
                        es, and the men in like ſort. This is their manner in the houſe both old, and young, rich, & poore, none excepted, for they goe forth but very little, and then they are both couered and carried,

and what they néed abroad, that the ſlaues both men and women doe fetch in. The women eate no bread or very little, nor yet the ſlaues, not that they refuſe it for the dearenes or want of bread, (for they haue enough and great aboundance) but they are ſo vſed to eate rice, that they deſire no other, which they ſeeth with water and eate it with ſome ſalt fiſh, or a kinde of ſalt fruit called Mangas, or with ſome other compoſition both of fiſh and fleſh, with pottage which they powre vpon it, and ſo eate it with their handes: for there they eate nothing with ſpoones, and if they ſhould ſée any man doe ſo, they would laugh at him. When they drinke they haue certaine pots made of blacke earth very fine and thin, much like thoſe that we vſe in Holland for flower pottes, hauing in the necke thereof a partition full of holes with a ſpout, (and theſe cruſes are called Gorgoletta,) to this end, that when they drinke, they may hold the potte on high, and touch it not with their mouthes, but the water running from the ſpout falleth into their mouthes, neuer ſpilling drop, which they doe for cleanlineſſe, becauſe no man ſhould put it to his mouth, & when any man commeth newly out of Portingall, and then beginneth to drinke after their manner, becauſe he is not vſed to that kinde of drinking, he ſpilleth it in his boſome, wherein they take great pleaſure and laugh at him calling him Reynol, which is a name giuen in ieſt to ſuch as newlie come from Portingall, & know not how to behaue them ſelues in ſuch graue manner, and with ſuch ceremonies as the Portingales vſe therein India: ſo that at the firſt they are much whooped and cried at in the ſtréets, vntill by vſe and practiſe they haue learned the Indian manner, which they quicklie doe. The men are very iealous of their wiues, for they will neuer bring any man into their houſes, how ſpeciall a friend ſoeuer hee bee, that ſhall ſée their wiues or their daughters, vnleſſe it bee ſome goſſip or any other married man with his wife in companie. When they will goe together to ſome place to ſport and ſolace thē
                        ſelues, they are alwaies well garded by their ſlaues, both men and women both for their ſafety and ſeruice. If any man commeth to the doore to aſke for the maſter of the houſe, preſently the wiues and their daughters run to hide them, and ſo leaue the man to anſwer him that ſtandeth at the dore: likewiſe they ſuffer no man to dwell within their houſes, where the women and daughters bee, howe neere kinſman ſoeuer he be vnto them, being once 15. yeares of age, nor their owne ſons, but haue certaine chambers and places beneath, or beſides their houſe where they lye, & may in no ſort come among the women, and thether they ſend them their meate and other prouiſions, for it hath oftentimes béene ſéene in thoſe countries, that the vncles ſonne hath laine by his aunt, and the brother by the brothers wife, and the brother with his ſiſter: whereof I haue knowne ſome that haue bin taken with the manner, and that both they and the woman haue beene ſlaine by the huſbands. The women are verie luxurious and vnchaſte, for there are very few among them, although they bee married, but they haue beſides their huſbands one or two of thoſe that are called ſouldiers, with whome they take their pleaſures: which to effect, they vſe al the ſlights and practiſes they can deuiſe, by ſending out their ſlaues and baudes by night, and at extraordinary times, ouer walles, hedges, and ditches, how narrowlie ſoeuer they are kept and looked vnto. They haue likewiſe an hearbe called Deutroa, which beareth a ſéed, whereof bruſing out the ſap, they put it into a cup or other veſſell, and giue it to their huſbands, eyther in meate or drinke, and preſently therewith, the man is as though hee were halfe out of his wits, and without feeling, or els drunke, doing nothing but laugh, and ſometime it taketh him ſleeping, whereby he lieth like a dead man, ſo that in his preſence they may doe what they will, and take their pleaſure with their friends, and the huſband neuer know of it. In which ſort he continueth foure and twentie houres long, but if they waſh his féete with colde water hee preſently reuiueth, and knoweth nothing thereof, but thinketh he had ſlept.
                     
                        Deutroa of ſome called Tacula, of others Datura, in Spaniſh Burla Dora, in Dutch Igell Kolben, in Malaba Vumata Caya, in Canara Datura, in Arabia Marana, in Perſia and Turkie Datula. Of the deſcription of this hearbe and fruit you may read in the Herballes, if any man receaueth or eateth but halfe a dramme of this feed, hee is for a time bereaued of his wits, & taken with an vnmeſurable laughter.
                     
                     There are many men poyſoned by their wiues, if they once be mooued: for they know howe to make a certaine poyſon or venome, which ſhall kill the perſon that drinketh it, at what time or houre it pleaſeth them: which poyſon being prepared, they make it in ſuch ſort, that it will lye ſixe yeres in a mans body, and neuer doe him hurt, and then kil him, without miſſing halfe an houres time. They make it alſo for one, two, or thrée yeares, monthes or dayes, as it pleaſeth them beſt, as I haue ſeene it in many, and there it is very common. There are likewiſe many women

                        
                           
                           
                              
                                 Ʋirginis Luſitanae in India gestus et amictus.
                           
                           
                              Cleedinge en dracht van een Portugeeſche Dochter ofte Maecht in Indien.
                           
                           
                              Matronarum et conjugatarum foras prodeuntium veſtitus et ornatus.
                           
                           
                              Der Portugeeſen gehoude Ʋrouwen, habyt en cÿraet.
                           
                           
                              
                              Viduarum Luſit. amictus quem iterum nuptae deponunt reſumpto nuptar habitu.
                           
                           
                              Cleedinge en dracht der Portugeeſcher We duwen welcke weder houwende afleggē. weder aen nemende der gehouder dracht
                           
                           
                              Vestitus et comptus Mulierum cujus cunque ordinis et aetatis intra aedes.
                           
                           
                              Der Ʋrouwen cleedinge en hulſel binnen ſhuys van wat ſtaet en ouder dom die zyn.
                           
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                           
                              Lectuli quibus Vxores et Filiae Luſitanorum contecte gestantur▪
                              
                           
                           
                              
                              Coetskens daer de Portugeeſche Ʋrouwen en Dochters bedeckt in gedraegen worden.
                           
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                           
                              Ratio qua coelo pluvio et alias Luſitanae gestantur comutantibus ante retro et utrium
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  famulis
                           
                           
                              
                              M
                                    •
                                 aniere vandie Portugeeſche vrouwen en dochters te draegen alst regent en oock op ander tyden met haer ſlaven en dienaers voor achter en beſyden
                           
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                           
                              Luſitana▪ templa noctu inviſura, comitata marito, et ſervis.
                           
                           
                              
                              Een Portugeeſche vrouwe verſelſchapt met harc man en ſlaven des ſnachts die kercken beſoeckende.
                           
                        
                        
                        
brought to their ends by meanes of their huſbandes, and ſlaine when ſoeuer they take them in adulterie, or that they doe but once ſuſpect them, if they doe preſently they cut their throats, and bring three or foure witneſſes to teſtifie that ſtrange mē entred into their houſes by night, at vnaccuſtomed times, or els by day, and had their pleaſures of their wiues, or in other ſort as they will deuiſe it, whereby they are preſently diſcharged of the crime according to the lawes and ordinances both of Spaine and Portingall, and preſently may marrie with another wife. This notwithſtanding is no meanes to make the women feare, or once to leaue their filthie pleaſures, although there are euerie yeare manie women without number ſo diſpatched and made away by their huſbands, and it is ſo cō
                        mon with them, that no man thinketh it ſtrange, or once wondereth thereat, becauſe of the cuſtome. The womē alſo for their part ſay and 
                           ••
                        atly affirme, that there can be no better death, then to die in that manner, ſaying that ſo they are ſacrificed for loue, which they thinke to be a great honour vnto them. The women are by nature verie cleanelie and neat, as well in their houſes as in apparell, for that although all whatſoeuer ſhe putteth on her bodie euery day, is both white, cleane and freſh: yet they haue a manner euerie day to waſh themſelues all the body ouer, from head to foote, and ſome times twyſe a day, in the morning and at euening: and as often as they eaſe themſelues or make water, or elſe vſe the companie of their huſbands, euerie time they doe waſh themſelues, were it a hundreth times a day and a night: they are no great workers, but much delighted in ſwéet hearbs, and in perfumes and frankincenſe, and to rub their bodies and their foreheads with ſwéet ſāde
                           ••
                         and ſuch like woods, which with water they doe ſtéep or breake in péeces: alſo the whole day long they d
                           •
                        e nothing, but ſit and chawe leaues or hearbes, called B
                              •
                           ttele, with chalke and a certaine fruite called Arrequa, whereof in an other place among fruites and hearbs I wil ſpeake more. This Arrequa, ſome of it is ſo ſtrong, that it maketh men almoſt drunke, & wholly out of ſenſe, although in ſhewe and in taſte it is almoſt like wood or rootes: theſe 3 thinges they ſit all the whole day chawing in their mouthes, like oxen or kyne chawing the cud: they let the ſap goe down into their throats, and ſpit the reſt out of their mouthes, whereby they make their mouthes ſo red and blackiſh, that to ſuch as know it not it is ſtrāge to ſée: all which, with their waſhing, frankinſcence, and rubing with ſ
                           •
                        nders, they haue learned & receiued of the Indian Heathens, which haue had thoſe cuſtomes of long time, and yet till this day vſe them: they ſay it pr
                           •
                        
                        ſerueth the téeth, and kéepeth them ſound, good for the mawe, and againſt a ſtincking mouth and euill breath, inſomuch as they are ſo vſed to chaw it, that whereſoeuer they goe or ſtand, they muſt alwaies haue of thoſe leaues carryed with them, and the women ſlaues do likewiſe goe alwaies chawing, and are ſo vſed thereunto, that they verily thinke, that without it they can not liue, for their commō worke is to ſit all day, when their huſbands are out of doores, behind the mat, which hangeth at the window, alwaies chawing the hearbe Bettele, ſéeing thoſe that paſſe by in the ſtréetes, and no man ſéeth them: but as any man paſſeth by which liketh them, & they will let them haue a ſight, they lift vp the mat, whereby they doe the paſſinger a great fauour, and with that manner of ſhewing themſelues and caſting lookes, they make their beginnings of loue, which by their ſlauiſh women they bring to effect: to the which end they haue all deueliſh deuiſes that poſſible may be inuented, for that both night and day they do practiſe nothing elſe, but make it their onely worke, and to make nature more liuely to abound and moue them thereunto, they do vſe to eate thoſe Betteles, Arrequas & chaſk, and in the night it ſtandeth by their bed ſides, this they eate whole handfuls of Cloues, Pepper, Einger, and a baked kind of meat called 
                           
                              •
                           hachunde, which is mixed and made of all kindes of Spices and hearbs, and ſuch like meates▪ all to increaſe their leache
                           •
                        y.
                     
                        Cachunde in m
                                 •
                               opinion is made of the mixtures called Galiae Moſcat
                              •
                           ,
                        Annotat. D. Pall. 
                        with the ſape of ſweet wood: they are blacke cakes whereon certaine characters are printed, at the firſt very bitter of taſte, but in the end verie pleaſant and ſweet, they ſtrēgthen the hart & the mawe, and make a ſweet breath.
                     
                     And they are not content therewith, but giue their huſbandes a thouſand hearbs for the ſame purpoſe, to ea
                           •
                        e, they not knowing thereof, thereby to fulfill their pleaſu
                           •
                        es, and to ſatiſfie their deſires, which can not by any meanes be ſatiſfied. They are likewiſe much vſed to take their pleaſures in Bathes, by ſwimming therein, which they can very well doe, for there are very few of them, but they would eaſilie ſwimme ouer a riuer of halfe a myle broad.
                     This ſhall ſuffice for their women now I will proceed to other matters. And the better to vnderſtand the ſhapes and formes of their women, together with their apparell, you may behold it here, when they goe to Church and els where, both wiues, maids and widdows,

euerie one by themſelues, as alſo how they goe in their houſes, with their diſh of Bettele in their hands, being their daylie chawing worke: alſo how they are carried in Pallākins through the ſtréet, with their women ſlaues round about them: alſo with their huſbands and ſlaues by night, going to anie ſport, or els to Church, which they vſe after ye māner of pilgrimes, for thē they go on foot, whereby they thinke to deſerue greater reward, which by day is not permitted them, for they are not ſo much truſted: theſe viſitatiōs or night pilgrimages they hold & eſtéem for a great recreation and fréedome, for that they hope, watch and looke for the ſame, as children doe for wake-dayes and other playing times: likewiſe the women ſlaues doe make ſome account thereof, becauſe they doe neuer go abroad, but only at ſuch times, or to Church on feſtiuall dayes behind their Pallamkins, vpō the which dayes they aduertiſe their louers, and leaue their miſtreſſes in the Churches, or ſlip into ſome ſhoppe or corner, which they haue redie at their fingers endes, where their louers méet them, and there in haſt they haue a ſport, which done they leaue each other: and if ſhe chance to haue a Portingal or a white man to her louer, ſhe is ſo proud, that ſhe thinketh no woman comparable vnto her, and among themſelues doe bragge thereof, and will ſteale both from maſter & miſtreſſe to giue them, with the which manie Soldiers doe better maintaine themſelues, then with the kinges pay: and if it chaunceth that theſe ſlauiſh women be with child, they are their maiſters children, who are therwith very wel content, for ſo they are their captiues, but if the father be a Portingale, or ſome other frée man, when the childe is borne, he may within 8 dayes challenge it for his, paying the maiſter a ſmall péece of money for it, as much as by law is thereunto ordemed, and ſo the child ſhall euer after be frée, but not the mother: but if he ſtay aboue 8 or 10 dayes, and within that time no man cometh to challenge it, although it be a free mans child, and he after that ſhall come to aſke it, then it is the mothers maiſters ſlaue, and he may hold it at as high a price as pleaſeth him, without conſtraint to ſell it, and it falleth out verie little, or elſe neuer that the mother deſtroyeth her child, or caſteth it away, or ſendeth it to the father, be ſhe neuer ſo poore free or captiue, for they delight more in their children, and take more pleaſure in carrying them abroad, ſpecially when it is a white mans child, then in all the riches of the world, and by no meanes will giue it to the father, vnleſſe it ſhould be ſecretly ſtollen frō her, and ſo conueyed away. The nurſing and bringing vp of the Portingales Meſticos children is, that from the time of their birth they are kept naked onely with a little ſhort ſhyrt (like the womens Bain, which they weare about their bodies,) and nothing elſe, till they be of yeares to weare breches, or other clothes. Some of them are nurſſed by their ſlaues, and ſome by Indian women, which they hire, whoſe ſhape and forme you may ſée, following the Palamkin wherein the wife is carried, euen as they goe bearing their children.
                  
                  
                     The 32. Chapter. Of the Viceroy of Portingall, and of his gouernment in India.
                     
                        EVerie 3. yeares there is a new Viceroy ſent into India, and ſome time they ſtay longer, as it pleaſeth the King, but verie few of them, hee continueth in Goa (which is the chiefe Cittie of India) where he hath his houſe and continuall reſidence, and from thence all other townes in India: haue their direction and gouernment. From Goa euerie yeare the Portingall armie is prepared and ſent out, as I ſaid before, he hath his counſell, Nobles, Chancerie, and Iuſtices, as they vſe in Portingall, and all lawes and Iuſtice, are by him executed and fulfilled in the Kings nam
                           •
                        , yet if there be any matter of importante, which concerneth the Ciuill lawes, they may appeale to Portingall, but in criminall cauſes no man may appeale, but ſuch as haue the degrée of a Gentleman, ſuch the Viceroy may not iudge, but being priſoners, ſend them into Portingall, vnleſſe it be by the Kings commaundement, he is verie magnificent in his eſtate, and goeth little out, but ſometimes on Sundaies, or holy daies, when hee goeth to Church, and when hee goeth out of his houſe, the Trumpets and Shalmes, ſtanding in the Gallerie of his houſe do ſound, he is accompanied by all the Gentlemen and townes men of Goa, that haue or kéepe horſes, with a Ga
                           •
                        de of Halbardiers on foote, both on each ſide and behinde him, and being in the Church, he
                           •
                         hath his ſeate in the Quier, lyned with Veluet, and nayled with gylt nayles, and a cloth with two Veluet cuſhins, vnder his féete and knées, and before him a bench, with a Veluet Cuſhen to leane his armes vpon, his Gentlemen ſit by him, but without the Quier, and by him ſtandeth his Chaplen, that prayeth for him. The Archbiſhop (when hee is at the Church) ſitteth on his left hand, in

the ſame manner, vpon Carpets, Cuſhens, and bench of Veluet, where they are ſerued in all ceremonial order, as the Kings of Portingall in their Churches vſe to be, and when he commeth home againe, the Trumpets and Shalmes doe ſound, as when he went out. In the hall of his Palace ſtand the Gard, and in the great hall, where his Councell ſit, are painted all the Viceroyes, that haue gouerned in India, ſince the firſt diſcouery and conqueſt thereof, and as they new come, their pictures are likewiſe placed there. Alſo in the entrie of the Palace are painted al the ſhips, that ſince the firſt diſcouerie of India, euer came out of Portingall into thoſe countries, euery yeare by it ſelfe, and the names and ſurnames of their Captaines, with a note ouer euerie ſhippe which was caſt away, or had any miſchaunce, all liuely ſet foorth, for a perpetuall memorie, and euerie yeare as any ſhip commeth thether, they are ſet by the reſt.
                     The Viceroyes in the laſt yeare of their gouernment, do vſe to viſite the Forts lying round about the countrie, fiftie, ſixtie, or eightie miles long, on the North and South ſide of Goa, to ſee how they are gouerned, they looke well vnto them, but commonly an other ſupplyeth their place, and if they doe it themſelues, it is more to fill their purſes, and to get preſents, then to further the commonwealth, theſe Viceroyes haue great reuenewes, they may ſpend, giue, and kéepe the Kings treaſure, which is verie much, and doe with it what pleaſeth them, for it is in their choyſe, hauing full and abſolute power from the King, in ſuch ſort, that they gather and horde vp a mightie quantitie of treaſure, for that beſides their great alowance from the King, they haue great preſents & giftes, beſtowed vpon them. For it is the cuſtome in thoſe countries, when any Viceroy commeth newly ouer, that all the Kings bordering about Goa, and that haue peace and friendſhip with the Portingales, do then ſend their Ambaſſadours vnto him, to confirme their leagues with great and rich preſents, therewith likewiſe to bid the Viceroy welcome, which amounteth to a great maſſe of treaſure: theſe preſents in this ſort giuen, the Ieſuites by their practiſes had obtained of the King, and for a time enioyed them at their pleaſure (looking verie narrowly vnto them, that they might not bee deceiued) vntill long time ſince, a Viceroy named Don lois de T
                              •
                           ide Earle of Atougia came thether, and refuſed to let them haue them, ſaying that the King being in Portingall knew not what was giuen him in India, and that thoſe preſents were giuen vnto the Viceroy and not to the King, and ſaid the King had no power to giue them to the Ieſuites: ſo that hee kept them for himſelfe, which the Ieſuites tooke in euill part▪ and ſaid, the Viceroy was an hereticke. Yet from his time euer ſince, the Viceroyes haue vſed to keepe them for them ſelues. When the Viceroyes haue continued out their time, which is aſſone as an other Viceroy ariueth at Bardes, or any other Hauen in the countrie, they doe preſently diſpatch their Leiuetenants▪ with full power and authoritie in the name of their maiſters, to receiue poſſeſſion of the gouernment of India, and prepare the Palace for him, ſo that there ſtayeth not a ſtoole or bench within the houſe▪ nor one pennie in the treaſure, but they leaue the houſe as bare and naked as poſſible may be, ſo that the new Viceroy muſt make prouiſion for to furniſh it, and gather a new treaſure. In the ſame ſhippe wherein the new Viceroy commeth thether, the old returneth home, and becauſe their time of gouernment is ſo ſhort, and that the place is giuen them in recompence of their ſeruice, and thereafter not to ſerue any more, there is not one of them, that eſteemeth the profit of the commonwealth, or the furtherance of the Kings ſeruice, but rather their own particular commodities, as you may verie well thinke, ſo that the common ſpeach in India is, that they neuer looke for any profite or furtheraunce of the common wealth by any Viceroy, as long as the gouernment of thrée yeares, is not altered. For they ſay, and it is found to be moſt true, that the firſt yeare of the Viceroyes time, hee hath enough to doe to repaire and furniſh his houſe, and to know the manners and cuſtomes of the countries, without any further troubling of himſelfe. The ſeconde yeare to gather treaſure, and to looke vnto his particular profits, for the which cauſe he came into India. The third and laſt yeare to prepare himſelfe and ſet al things in order, that he bee not ouertaken or ſurpriſed by the new Viceroy when he commeth, but that he may returne into Portingall with the goods which he had ſcraped together. The ſame is to bee vnderſtoode of all the Captaines in the Fortes, and of all other officers in India. Wherefore it is to bee conſidered, how they vſe themſelues in their places and the Kings ſeruice, whereof the inhabitants and married Portingales doe continually ſpeake, but they are farre from the Kings hearing, who knoweth not, but that his Officers doe him good ſeruice, whereby there is ſmall remedie or amendement to be hoped for.
                  
                  
                     
                     The 33. Chapter. Of the heathens, Indians and other ſtrangers dwelling in Goa.
                     
                        IN the towne and Iland of Goa, are reſident many Heathens, Moores (which are Mahometans) Iewes, and all ſtrange nations bordering thereabout, euerie one of them vſing ſeuerall cuſtomes, and ſuperſtitions in Religion. The Moores hold Mahomets law, and the Iewes Moyſes law. There are alſo many Perſians, Arabians, and Abexij
                              •
                           s, ſome of them Chriſtians, and ſome of them Moores. There is in Goa many Armenians that are Chriſtians, and others that goe and come to traffique there, as Perſians, Arabians, Banianes, of Cambaia, Guſarates, and Decani
                              •
                           ns &c. The Moores eate all things except Swines fleſh, and dying are buried like the Iewes, but the Heathens, as Decani
                              ••
                           s, Guſarates, and Canaras, and other Indians being dead, are burnt to aſhes, and ſome women being aliue are burned with them, that is ſuch as are Gentlemen or Noblemen, and the wiues of the Bramenes, which are their Idolatrous Préeſtes. Alſo for the Marchantes ſome of them eate all things, except Cowes or Buffles fleſh, which they eſteeme to be holy Others eate not any thing whatſoeuer, that hath either life or bloud in it, as thoſe of Guſarata, and the Banianes of Cambaia, which obſerue Pythagoras lawe: moſt of them pray vnto the Sunne and Moone, yet they doe all acknowledge a God that made, created and ruleth all things, and that after this life there is an other, wherein men ſhall be rewarded according to their workes. But they haue Idoles and Images, which they call Pagodes, cut and formed moſt vgly, and like monſtrous Deuils, to whome dayly they offer, and ſay, that thoſe holy men haue béene liuing among them, whereof they tell ſo many miracles, as it is wonderfull, and ſay that they are interceſſors betwéene them and God. The Deuill often times anſwereth them out of thoſe Images, whome they likewiſe know, and doe him great honour by offering vnto him, to keepe friendſhippe with him, and that hee ſhould not hurt them. They haue a cuſtome, when any maide is to bee married, and that they will honour their Pagode, for the more credite to the Bridegrome, they bring the Bride with great triumph and Muſicke before their Pagode, which is made with a Pinne of Iuorie bone, to whome the neereſt friends and kinſwomen of the Bride, together with the Bride doe goe, and by force make the Image to take the Brides maydenhead, ſo that the bloud remaineth ſtill vpon the Image, for a remembrance thereof, and then after other deueliſh ſuperſtitions and ceremonies, hauing made their offrings, they bring the Bride home, where ſhe is deliuered to the Bridgrome, he being verie ioyfull and proud, that their Pagode hath honored him ſo much and eaſed him of ſo much labour. They haue for the moſt part a cuſtome to pray vnto the firſt thing they méete withal in the morning, and all that day after they pray vnto it, be it Hogge, or any other thing▪ And if in the morning when they goe out, they chaunce at the firſt ſight to ſée a Crow, (whereof there are great numbers in India) they will not goe forth of their doores all that day, no not for all the goods in the world, for they eſtéeme it an euill ſigne, and an vnluckie day. They pray likewiſe to the new Moone, and when ſhee firſt appeareth, they fall vppon their knées, and ſalute her with great deuotion, there are among them certaine people called Iogos, which are ſuch as we call Hermits, and thoſe doe they eſtéeme for holy men, theſe men liue a verie ſtrict life with great abſtinence, and make the common people belieue many ſtrange things. They haue likewiſe many Southſayers and Witches, which vſe Iugling, and trauell throughout the countrie, hauing about them many liue Snakes, which they know how to bewitch, and being ſhut vp in little baſkets, they pull them out and make them daunce, turne, and winde at the ſound of a certaine Inſtrument, wheron they play, and ſpeake vnto them. They winde them about their neckes, armes, and legges, kiſſing them, with a thouſand other deuiſes, onely to get money. They are al for the moſt part verie ſkilfull in preparing of poyſons, wherewith they doe many ſtrange things, and eaſily poyſon each other, their dwellings and houſes are verie little and lowe, couered with ſtraw, without windowes, and verie low and narrow doores, ſo that a man muſt almoſt créepe vpon his knées to goe in, their houſhold ſtuffe is Mats of ſtraw, both to ſit and lie vpon, their Tables, Table-clothes, and Napkins, are made of the great Indian Figge leaues, they ſerue them not onely for Tables, Shéetes, and other linnen, but alſo for Diſhes, wherein they put their meate, which you ſhall likewiſe ſée in the Grocers, and Pothecaries ſhops, to put and wrap in all things whatſoeuer they haue within their ſhops, (as we doe in paper.) They likewiſe ioyne them together in ſuch ſort, that they can put both butter, oyle, & ſuch liquid ſtuffes

therein▪ and alſo whatſoeuer cōmeth to hand. To dreſſe their meat they haue certaine earthen pots wherein they ſéeth Rice, and make holes in the ground, wherein they ſtampe it, or beate it with a woodden peſtel made for the purpoſe, and they are ſo miſerable, that they buy the Rice in the Huſkes, as it groweth on the grounde, and ſome of them haue Rice ſowen behinde their houſe to ſerue their neceſſarie vſe. They vſe to drinke out of a copper Canne with a ſpout, wherby they let the water fall downe into their mouths, and neuer touch the pot with their lippes. Their houſes are commonly ſtrawed with Cowe dung, which (they ſay) killeth Fleas. They are verie cleane on their bodies, for euery day they waſh themſelues all their body ouer, as often as they eaſe themſelues or make water, both men and women, like the Moores or Mahometans. They waſh themſelues with the left hand, becauſe they eate with the right hand, and vſe no ſpoones. They doe kéepe and obſerue their ceremonies and ſuperſtitions, with great deuotion, for they neuer goe forth without praying, when they trauaile by the way. They haue on euery hill, cliffe, hole, or denne their Pagodes and Idols in moſt diuiliſh and deformed ſhapes, cut and hewed out of the ſtones and rockes, with their furniſes hard by them, and a ceſterne not farre from them, which is alwaies full of water, and euery one that paſſeth by, waſheth their féete therein, and ſo fall downe before their Idoll, ſome ſetting before him for an offering fruits, Rice, Egges, Hennes, &c. as their deuotions ſerue, & then commeth the Bramenes their Prieſt and taketh it away and eateth it, making the common people beléeue that the Pagode hath eaten it.
                     When they will make a voyage to Sea, they vſe at the leaſt fourtéene dayes before they enter into their ſhips, to make ſo great a noyſe with ſounding of Trumpets, and to make fiers, that it may be heard and ſeene both by night and day, the ſhip being hanged about with flagges, wherewith (they ſay) they feaſt their Pagode, that they may haue a good Voyage. The like doe they at their returne for a thankeſgiuing fourtéene dayes long, and thus they vſe to doe in all their feaſtes, affaires, mariages, childbirths, and at other times of the yeare, as ſowing, and mowing, &c.
                     The heatheniſh Indians that dwell in Goa are verie rich Marchants, and traffique much, there is one ſtréete within the towne, that is full of ſhops kept by thoſe Heatheniſh Indians, that not onely ſell all kindes of Silkes, Sattins, Damaſkes, and curious workes of Porſelyne from China and other places, but all manner of wares of ve
                           •
                        
                        uet, Silke, Sattin and ſuch like, brought out of Portingall, which by meanes of their Brokers they buy by the great, and ſell them againe by the péece or elles, wherein they are verie cunning, and naturally ſubtill. There are in the ſame ſteéet on the other ſide, that haue all kindes of linnen, and ſhirts, with other clothes ready made for all ſortes of perſons, as well ſlaues as Portingales, and of all other linnen worke that may bee deſired. There are Heathens that ſell all kindes of womens clothes, and ſuch like wares, with a thouſand ſorts of clothes and cottons, which are like Canuas for ſayles and ſackes. There is alſo another ſtreet where the Benianes of Cambaia dwell, that haue all kinds of wares out of Cambaia, and all ſortes of precious ſtones, and are verie ſubtill and cunning to bore and make holes in all kinds of ſtones, pearles, and corrals, on the other ſide of the ſame ſtreet dwell other heathens, which ſell all ſortes of bedſtéedes, ſtooles, and ſuch like ſtuffe, very cunningly couered ouer with Lacke, moſt pleaſant to behold, and they can turne the Lacke into any colour that you wil deſire. There is alſo a ſtréet full of gold and Siluer Smithes that are Heathens, which make all kinde of workes, alſo diuers other handicrafts men, as Copperſmithes, Carpenters, and ſuch like occupations, which are all heathens, and euery one a ſtréet by themſelues. There are likewiſe other Marchantes that deale all by great, with Corne, Rice, and other Indian wares and Marchandiſes, as wood and ſuch like. Some of them farme the kinges rents and reuenewes, ſo that they are ſkilfull euery way to make their profites. There are alſo many Heathen Brokers, very cunning and ſubtill in buying and ſelling, and with their tongues to pleade on both ſides.
                     The Heathens haue likewiſe their ſhops with all kinde of ſpices, which they ſell by retaile, both by waight and meaſure, as Grocers and Potticaries doe with vs, and this is onely vſed among them. They haue likewiſe of al ſorts of wares whatſoeuer, but yet with leſſe curioſitie then with vs, for it is mingled with duſt and garbiſh. Theſe are commonlie the Brainenes, which ſerue likewiſe for Prieſtes and Idolatrous Miniſters, & haue their ſhops throughout the Cittie. In euerie place and corner, and vnder pentiſes, whereby euery man may haue to ſerue him at his néed.
                     There are likewiſe many barbers, which in euery end of the ſtreetes doe call to thoſe that haue cauſe to vſe them. They kéepe no ſhoppes, but for a ſmall peece of money come

                           〈1 page missing〉
                        
                        
                        
In the Month of September when winter endeth, the bankes of ſand doe fléete and vade away out of the Riuer, ſo that not onely ſmal ſhippes may come in and go out, but alſo the great Portingall ſhips of 1600. tunnes may fréely enter without a Pilot, for it is déepe enough and without daunger. In winter it is a heauie and melancholike being there, for there is no other exerciſe to be vſed, but onely to ſitte in their ſhirtes, with a paire of lin
                           •
                        en bréeches, and goe & paſſe the time away with their neighbours, in playing and ſuch exerciſes, for that throughout the whole town there is no other doing. The women and Meſticos take great pleaſure in the winter time when it rayneth, with their huſbandes and ſlaues to go into the fieldes, or ſome garden, whether they carry good ſtore of victuailes, & there in their gardens haue many Ceſternes or pondes of water, wherein they take their delightes to ſwimme and to bath themſelues. In this time moſt of their Indian fruit is in ſeaſon. The ſummer beginneth in September, and continueth till the laſt of Aprill, and is alwaies clear sky & fair weather, without once or very little raining: Then all the ſhips are rigged and made ready to ſaile for all places, as alſo the Kinges armie to kéepe the coaſt, and to conuoy Marchantes, and then the Eaſt winds beginne to blow from off the lande into the ſeas, whereby they are called Terreinhos, that is to ſay, the land windes. They blow very pleaſantly & coolly, although at the firſt by chaunging of the weather they are very dangerous, & cauſe many great diſeaſes, which do commonly fall in India, by ye chaunging of the time. Theſe winds blow alwaies in ſummer, beginning at midnight, and continue till noone, but they neuer blowe aboue tenne miles into the ſea, from off the coaſt, and preſently after one of the clocke vntill midnight the weſt winde bloweth, which commeth out of the ſea into the lande, and is called V
                              •
                           raſon. Theſe winds are ſo ſure and certaine at their times, as though men helde them in their handes, whereby they make the land very temperate, otherwiſe the heate would bee vnmeaſurable. It is likewiſe a ſtrange thing that when it is winter vpon the coaſt of India, that is from Di
                              •
                           
                         to the Cape de Comorin, on the other ſide of the Cape de Comorin on the coaſt called Choramandel, it is cleane contrarie, ſo that there it is ſummer, and yet they lye all vnder one height or degrées, and there is but 70. miles by land betwéene both the coaſts, and in ſome places but 2
                              •
                           . miles, and which is more, as men trauel ouer land from Cochin to S. Thomas (which lyeth on the ſame coaſt of Choramandel) and comming by the hill of Ballagatte where men muſt paſſe ouer to goe from the one coaſt vnto the other: on the one ſide of the hil to the top thereof it is pleaſant clear ſunne ſhining weather, and going downe on the other ſide there is rayne, winde, thunder and lightning, as if the worlde ſhould end and be conſumed: which is to be vnderſtood, that it chaungeth from the one ſide to the other, as the time falleth out, ſo that on the one ſide of the hilles it is Winter, and on the other ſide Summer: and it is not onely ſo in that place and countrey, but alſo at Ormus, on the coaſt of Arabia Felix by the Cape of Roſalgatte, where the ſhippes lie: it is very ſtill, cleare, and pleaſant water, and faire ſummer time, and turning about the Cape on the other ſide, it is raine and wind with great ſtormes and tempeſts, which with the times of the yeare doe likewiſe change on the other ſide, and ſo it is in many places of the Orientall countries.
                     The ſickneſſes and diſeaſes in Goa, and throughout India, which are common, come moſt with the changing of the times and the weather, as it is ſaid before: there raigneth a ſickneſſe called Mordexim, which ſtealeth vppon men, and handleth them in ſuch ſorte, that it weakeneth a man, and maketh him caſt out all that he hath in his bodie, and many times his life withall. This ſickneſſe is very common, & killeth many a man, whereof they hardly or neuer eſcape. The bloody Flixe is there likewiſe very common and daungerous, as the plague with vs. They haue many continuall feuers, which are burning agues, and conſume mens bodies with extreame heate, whereby within foure or fiue dayes they are eyther whole or dead. This ſicknes is common and very daungerous, & hath no remedie for the Portingalles but letting of blood: but the Indians and heathens do cure themſelues with hearbes, Sanders, and other ſuch like oyntments, wherewith they eaſe themſelues. This ſicknes conſumeth many Portingalles euery yeare, ſome becauſe they haue little to eat, & leſſe to drink of any meat or drink that is nouriſhing, & vſe much company of womē, becauſe ye land is naturall to prouoke thē thervnto, as alſo ye moſt part of the ſoldiers by ſuch means haue their liuing and their maintenance, which often times coſteth them both life and limme, for although men were of iron or ſteele, the vnchaſte life of a woman, with her vnſatiable luſtes were able to grinde him to powder, and ſwéep him away like duſt, which coſteth many a mans life, as the Kinges Hoſpitall can wel beare witnes, wherein they lodge, whenſoeuer they are ſicke, where euery yeare at the leaſt there entered 500. liue men, and neuer

come forth till they are dead, and they are only Portingals for no other ſick perſon may lodge therin, I mean ſuch as are called white men, for the other Indians haue an Hoſpitall by themſelues. In this Hoſpitall they are verie well looked vnto by Ieſuites, and Gentlemen: whereof euery month one of the beſt is choſen and appointed, who perſonally is there by them▪ and giueth the ſicke perſons whatſoeuer they will deſire, and ſometimes ſpend more by foure or fiue hundred Duckats of their owne purſes, then the Kings allowance reacheth vnto, which they doe more of pride and vaine glorie, then for compaſſion, onely to haue the praiſe and commendation of liberalitie. It is no ſhame there to lie in the Hoſpitall, for many men go thether willingly, although they haue wherewith to keepe themſelues in their houſes, and haue both wife and children. Theſe Hoſpitals in India are very neceſſarie for the Portingals, otherwiſe they ſhold conſume away like miſerable men, but by ye means they are relieued, whatſoeuer they haue, eyther ſickneſſe, wounds, ſecrete diſeaſes, pockes, piles, or any ſuch like, there they are healed, and ſometimes viſited by the Viceroy himſelfe, when he thinketh vpon them, and that his commodities come in. He that wil not lie there, and hath any woundes▪ or priuie diſeaſes, may come thether twice euery day and be dreſt, & goe his way againe without any queſtion or deniall. When they die therein, they are by two ſlaues carried into the Church yarde, without eyther ſinging or ringing, onely one man followeth after them, & throweth ſome holy water vppon the graue: but if the ſicke man chanceth to leaue any goods behind him, and ſpeaketh vnto the Prieſtes to bring him to his graue, and to ſay Maſſes for his ſoule, then they runne thither by heapes, and burie him like a man of countenance eyther in the Church or chauncell, according to his will, and then hath hee ſinging and ringing enough.
                     But returning to our matter of ſickneſſe, pock
                           •
                        s and piles, with other ſecret diſeaſes, they are in thoſe countries verie common & not hidden or concealed, for they thinke it no ſhame, more then to haue any other diſeaſe. They heale them with the roote China: there are ſome that haue had them at the leaſt thrée or foure times, and are not any thing at all ſhunned or diſliked for the ſame, but dare both boaſt and bragge thereof. It is not any thing perillous for the bodie, inſomuch that they had rather haue them, and feare them leſſe then any of the foreſaid diſeaſes. The plague hath neuer béen in India, neither is it known vnto the Indians, but poyſoning, witchcraft, & ſuch like, whereby ſome loſe their healthes, and ſome their liues, is their dayly exerciſe, and very common with them. The ſtone grauel, and rupture raigneth much among them, ſpecially among married men, by reaſon of the great quantitie of water that they drinke being giuen to all pleaſure and riotouſnes, enioying all what their hearts deſire, ſitting alwayes with their bellies open in their ſhirtes in a gallerie, recreating themſelues with the wind which cooleth them, ſometimes hauing a ſlaue to ſcratch and pare their nayles and féete, another the head, the third holds a Fan to driue away the flées. Their is the common vſe for two houres after noone, where likewiſe they take an afternoones ſléepe, and euer as they haue thirſt, they bring him a diſh of conſerues, or other comfets, that the water ſhoulde not worke too much in his bodie, but taſte the better. With ſuch and the like exerciſes they do paſſe the day til night comes on, ſo that commonly they haue all ſwollen bellies like Bacchus, whereby the ſoldiers and other Indians call them Barrigois, that is, bellies, or great bellies.
                     The day both Summer and Winter is there all of a length, not much difference, onely in the chaunge they haue about an houres difference. The ſunne riſeth at ſixe, and ſetteth at ſixe. When it is noone, commonly they haue the Sunne in the middle of the element iuſt ouer their heades, and it giueth no ſhadowe, although it ſtretcheth ſomewhat out as the Sunne taketh his courſe. In Goa you may ſée both the Poles of the world, the North and South ſtarres ſtande not farre aboue the Horizon. And this ſhall ſuffice for the times and ſeaſons of the yeare, ſickneſſes and other diſeaſes in India, as breuitie requireth.
                  
                  
                     The 35. Chapter. Of the money, waight, and meaſure of India, and Goa.
                     
                     
                        THe principall and commoneſt money is called Pardaus Xeraphiins, and is ſiluer, but very braſſe, and is coyned in Goa. They haue Saint Sebaſtian on the one ſide, and thrée or foure arrowes in a bundle on the other ſide, which is as much as thrée Teſtones, or thrée hundred Reijs Portingall money, and riſeth and falleth little

leſſe or more, according to the exchange. There is alſo a kinde of reckoning of money which is called Tangas, not that there is any ſuch coined, but are ſo named onely in telling, fiue Tangas is one Pardaw, or Xeraphin badde money, for you muſt vnderſtande that in telling they haue two kinds of money good and badde, for foure Tangas good money are as much as fiue Tangas bad money. Wherfore when they buy and ſell, they bargaine for good or badde money. There is likewiſe a reckoning of Vintiins, which is not likewiſe in coyne, but onely named in telling: of theſe foure good, and fiue badde doe make a Tangas. The loweſt and ſmalleſt money is called Bazaruco, theſe are fiftéene badde, and eightéene good to a Vintiin, and three Bazarucos are as much as two Rei
                              •
                           s Portingal money: It is molten money of badde Tinne, ſo that 375. Bazarucos are one Pardaw or Xeraphiin. There is alſo a kinde of money out of Perſia, called Lariins, which are long, very good and fine ſiluer, without any allay. Theſe are worth 105. and 108. Bazarucos, as the exchaunge goeth, little more or leſſe. They haue a kind of money called Pagodes, which is of Gold, of two or three ſortes, and are aboue eight Tangas in value. They are Indian and Heatheniſh money, with the picture of a Diuell vpon them and therefore are called Pagodes. There is another kinde of gold money, which is called Venetianders: ſome of Venice, and ſome of Turkiſh coine, and are commonly 2. Pardawes Xeraphins. There is yet another kind of golde called S. Thomas, becauſe Saint Thomas is figured theron, & is worth about 7. & eight Tangas: There are likewiſe Rialles of 8. which are brought from Portingal, and are called Pa
                              •
                           
                           dawes de Reales: Other money of Portingall is not currant there. They are worth at their firſt comming out of Portingall 436. Reyes of Portingall, and after are rayſed by exchaunge, as they are ſought for when men trauell for China, but they are worth neither more nor leſſe. They vſe in Goa in their buying and ſelling a certaine maner of reckoning or telling. There are Pardawes Xeraphins, and theſe are ſiluer. They name likewiſe Pardawes of Gold, and thoſe are not in kinde or in coyne, but onely ſo named in telling and reckoning: for when they buy and ſell Pearles, ſtones, golde, ſiluer and horſes, they name but ſo many Pardawes, and then you muſt vnderſtand that one Pardaw is ſixe Tangas: but in other ware, when you make not your bargaine before hand, but plainely name Pardawes, they are Pardawes Xeraphins of 5. Tangas the péece. They vſe alſo to ſay a Pardaw of Lariin
                              •
                           , and are fiue Lariins, for euery Pardaw
                        ▪ This is the money and reckoning of Goa, wherewith they buy, ſell, receiue, and pay. Many of them know wel how to gaine by theſe kinds of moneys, by exchanging, buying and ſelling of them. There is great falſhoode in the Pardawes Xeraphins, which is the principalleſt and curranteſt money: wherefore there are in euery ſtréete and corner of the Cittie, Iewes that are Chriſtians, called Xaraffes, who for verie ſmall profit looke vppon the moneyes, & are ſo perfect therein, that as they let the money paſſe through their handes in telling, they knowe the falſe peeces without once looking vpon them, or taking them vp: yea although it lay among a thouſande peeces: and if another ſhould take it in their handes and tell it a thouſande times, yet coulde they neuer perceiue it, but in ringing it, a man may know it very well. Theſe are coyned in the firme lande by the Heatheniſh Indians, to deceyue the Portingalles withall, wherefore no man dares receiue money, were it but halfe a Pardaw, except he ſhew it to thoſe Xaraffes. They tell money very readily and ſwiftly, and telling it do looke vpon it to ſée if it be good, and do giue their promiſe that if it be found too ſhort, or any falſe money therein after they haue tolde it, they will make it good howe much ſoeuer it be. They are alſo very ready to exchange money, or to doe whatſoeuer men néede touching the ſame. They ſitte at the corners of the ſtréetes, and before mens houſes, and a table with heapes of money ſtanding before them, euery heape being a Tanga, which is 
                           
                              •
                           5. Bazarucos, & when any man will change a Pardaw, they giue him two or thrée, ſometimes 8. or 10. Bazarucos more then the 375. Bazarucos, for they know how to make it vp againe, and ſo do they with all other money according to the rate.
                     The waight of Goa is alſo in diuers kinds, as in Portingal, with Quintales, Arrobas, and poundes. They haue likewiſe another wayght called Mao, which is a Hand, and is twelue pounds, with the which they weigh Butter, Hony, Sugar, and all kind of wares to be ſolde by waight. They haue likewiſe a waight wherewith they weigh Pepper & other ſpices, called a Bhar, and is as much as thrée Quintales & a halfe Portingal waight. They haue a meaſure called Med
                              •
                           da, that is to ſay, euen waight. It is about a ſpanne high, and halfe a finger broade, whereof 24. meaſures are a Hand, and 20. Handes are one Cand
                              •
                           il, and one Cand
                              •
                           l is little more or leſſe thē 
                        14. buſhels, wherewith they meaſure Ryce, Corne, & all graine, or other commodities to be ſold by meaſure, and the ſhips

are fraighted after the ſame rate, for they ſay a ſhippe or ſente of ſo many Cand
                              •
                           ls or ſo many P
                              •
                           l
                              •
                           r
                              •
                           . There is Rice, which they ſell by the 
                           
                              •
                           rden: it is broght in round bundels, wrapped in ſtrawe, and bounde about with cordes: Euerie Fardo is commonly thrée 
                           
                              •
                           nd and a halfe. This Rice is better then that which commeth not in Fardens, and is called G
                              •
                           raſall, Ryce, which is the beſt, and beareth the higheſt price: and there is another ſorte, which is of a leſſe price & ſlighter called Chambaſal. Ther are alſo diuers other ſorts of Rice, of a leſſe price & ſlighter then the other Ryce, and is called Batte, and is almoſt like Barley▪ it hath but little huſke. This is commonly the dayly foode of the countreymen in the villages called Canariins, & of the common and poorer ſort which ſtampe and beate it themſelues. It ſerueth alſo for Hennes and Doues to eate in ſtead of Barley. There are diuers particular ſortes of moneyes in many places of India, and inwardes in the lande among the heathens, which are currant onely among them, euery coine in their ſeueral places: For by Bengala they haue in place of B
                              ••
                           aru
                              •
                           os a ſmall kinde of money called Amandeles, wherewith they get their liuings, and buy and ſell therewith, and diuers other ſuch like coines in ſeuerall places of the Orientall countries, but the money waights and meaſures aforeſaid, are thoſe which they doe generally and ordinarily vſe throughout all 
                           〈◊〉
                        , and principally in Goa, being the heade towne and ſtapell of all the Orientall countries.
                  
                  
                     The 36 Chapter. Of the Indians called Bramenes, which are the miniſters of the Pagodes, & Indian Idoles, and of their manner of life.
                     
                        THe Bramenes are the honeſteſt and moſt eſtéemed nation amonge all the Indian heathens: for they doe alwaies ſerue in ye chiefeſt places about the King, as Receyuers, Stewards, Ambaſſadors, and ſuch like offices. They are likewiſe the prieſtes and miniſters of the Pagodes, or diueliſh Idoles. They are of great authoritie among the Indian people, for that the King doth nothing without their counſell and conſent, and that they may be knowne from other men, they weare vppon their naked body, from the ſhoulder croſſe vnder the arme ouer their body downe to the girdle, or the cloth that is wrapped about their middle, 
                           •
                        . or 4. ſtrings like ſealing thréede, whereby they are knowne: which they neuer put off although it ſhoulde coſt them their liues, for their profeſſion & religion will not permit it. They go naked, ſauing onely that they haue a cloth bounde about their middles to hide their priuie members. They wear ſometimes when they go abroad a thinne cotton linnen gowne called Caba
                              •
                           a, lightly caſt ouer their ſholders, and hanging downe to the grounde like ſome other Indians, as Benianes, Guſarates, and Decaniins. Vpon their heads they weare a white cloth, wounde twice or thryce about, therewith to hide their haires, which they neuer cut off, but weare it long & turned vp as the women do. They haue moſt commonly rounde rings of golde hanging at their ears, as moſt of ye Indians haue. They eat not any thing that hath life, but féed them ſelues with hearbes and Ryce, neyther yet when they are ſicke will for any thing bee let blood, but heale themſelues by hearbes & ointmentes, and by rubbing their bodies with Sanders, and ſuch like ſwéet woods. In Goa and on the ſea coaſts there are many Bramenes, which commonly doe maintaine themſelues with ſelling of ſpices and other Apothecarie ware, but it is not ſo cleane as others, but full of garbiſh and duſt. They are very ſubtil in writing and caſting accounts, wherby they make other ſimple Indians beleeue what they will.
                     Touching the pointes of their religion, wherein the common people beléeue them to be Prophetes: whatſoeuer they firſt meete withal in the ſtreets at their going forth, that doe they all the day after pray vnto. The women when they goe forth haue but one cloth about their bodies, which couereth their heades, and hangeth downe vnto their knées: all the reſt of the body is naked. They haue ringes through their noſes, about their legs, toes, neckes, and armes, and vpon each hand ſeuen or eight ringes or bracelettes, ſome of ſiluer and gilt, if they be of wealth and ability: but the common people of glaſſe, which is the common wearing of all the Indian women. When the woman is ſeuen yeares olde, and the man nine years, they do marrie, but they come not together before the woman bee ſtrong enough to beare children. When the Bramenes die, all their friends aſſemble together, and make a hole in the ground, wherein they throw much wood and other things: and if the mā be of any accompt, they caſt in ſwéet Sanders, & other Spices, with Rice, Corne, and ſuch like, and much oyle, becauſe the fire ſhould burne the ſtronger. Which done they lay the dead Bramenes in it: then cometh his wife with Muſike & many of her néereſt frēds all ſinging certain prayſes in commendation of her huſbands life, putting her in comfort, & encouraging her to follow her huſband, & goe with him into the other world. Then ſhe taketh

al her Iewels, and parteth them among her frends, & ſo with a chéerefull countenance, ſhe leapeth into the fire, and is preſently couered with wood and oyle: ſo ſhe is quickly dead, & wt her huſbands bodie burned to aſhes: and i
                           •
                         it chance, as not very often it doth, that any womā refuſeth to be burnt with her huſband, then they cut the haire cleane off from her head: and while ſhe liueth ſhe muſt neuer after wear any Iewels more, & from that time ſhe is diſpiſed, and accounted for a diſhoneſt woman. This manner and cuſtome of burning is vſed alſo by the Nobles and principalleſt of the Countrey, and alſo by ſome Marchantes: notwithſtanding all their dead bodies in generall are burnt to aſhes, and the women after their huſbands deathes doe cut their haire ſhort, & weare no Iewels, whereby they are knowne for widowes. The firſt cauſe and occaſion why the women are burnt with their huſbandes, was, (as the Indians themſelues do ſay) that in time paſt, the women (as they are very leacherous and inconſtant both by nature and complexion) did poyſon many of their huſbands, when they thought good, (as they are likewiſe very expert therein:) thereby to haue the better means to fulfill their luſts. Which the king perceiuing, & that thereby his principal Lords, Captains, and Souldiers, which vphelde his eſtate and kingdome, were ſo conſumed and brought vnto their endes, by the wicked practiſes of women, ſought as much as hee might to hinder the ſame: and therevpon he made a law, and ordayned, that when the dead bodies of men were buried, they ſhold alſo burne their wiues with them, thereby to put them in feare, and ſo make them abſtaine frō poyſoning of their huſbands: which at the firſt was very ſharply executed, onely vpon the nobles, gentlemen and ſouldiers wiues, as alſo the Bramenes (for that the common people muſt beare no armes, but are in a manner like ſlaues.) So that in the ende it became a cuſtome among them, and ſo continueth: whereby at this day they obſerue it for a part of their law and ceremonies of their diueliſh Idoles, & now they do it willingly, being hartened and ſtrengthened thereunto by their friendes. Theſe Bramenes obſerue certain faſting daies in ye year, and that with ſo great abſtinēce, that they eat nothing all that day, and ſometimes in 3. or 4. daies together. They haue their Pagodes and Idoles, whoſe miniſters they are, whereof they tell and ſhew many miracles, and ſay that thoſe Pagodes haue béen men liuing vpon earth, and becauſe of their holy liues, and good workes done here in this world, are for a reward therof, become holy mē in the other world, as by their miracles, by the Diuel performed, hath béene manifeſted vnto them, and by their commandementes their formes and ſhapes are made in the moſt vgly & deformed manner that poſſible may bee deuiſed. Such they pray and offer vnto, with many diuiliſh ſuperſtitions, & ſtedfaſtly beléeue yt they are their aduocates & interceſſors vnto God. They beléeue alſo that there is a ſupreame God aboue, which ruleth all things, and that mens ſoules are immortall, and that they goe out of this worlde into the other, both beaſtes & men, and receyue reward according to their workes, as Pythagoras teacheth, whoſe diſciples they are.
                  
                  
                     The 37. Chapter. Of the Guſarates, & Banianes of Cambaia.
                     
                     
                        THe Guſarates and Banianes are of the country of Cambaia: many of them dwel in Goa, Diu, Chaul, Cochin, & other places of India, becauſe of their trade and traffick in marchā
                        diſe, which they vſe much with all kindes of wares, as corne, cotton linnen, anil, Rice, and other wares, ſpecially all kinde of precious ſtones wherein they haue great ſkill. They are moſt ſubtill and expert in caſting of accounts, and writing, ſo that they do not onely ſurpaſſe and goe beyond all Iewes and other nations thereabouts, but alſo the Portingals▪ & in this reſpect they haue no aduantage, for that they are very perfect in the trade of marchandiſe, & very ready to deceiue men. They eate not any thing that hath life or blood in it, neither would they kil it for all the goods in ye worlde, how ſmall or vnneceſſarie ſoeuer it were, for that they ſtedfaſtly beléeue, ye euery liuing thing hath a ſoule, & are next after men to be accounted of, according to Pythagoras law, & know it muſt die: and ſometimes they do buy certain fowles or other beaſtes of the Chriſtians or Portingals, which they meant to haue killed, & whē they haue bought them, they let them flée and run away. They haue a cuſtome in Cambaia, in the high wayes, & woods, to ſet pots wt water, and to caſt corne & other graine vpon the ground to féed birds & beaſtes withal: & throughout Cambaia they haue hoſpitals to cure and heale all maner of beaſts & birds therein whatſoeuer they a
                           •
                        le, & receiue them thether as if they were men, and whē they are healed, they let them flie or run away whither they will, which among them is a work of great charity, ſaying, it is don to their euen neighbors. And if they take a flea or a Lowce, they wil not kil it, but take or put it into ſome hole or corner in the wall, and ſo let it go, & you can do them no greater iniury then to kil it in their preſence, for they wil neuer leaue intreating and deſiring withall curteſie not to kill it, and that man ſhoulde not

ſéeme to commit ſo great a ſinne, as to take away the life of that, to whom God had giuen both ſoule and body: yea, and they will offer much money to a man to let it liue, and goe away. They eate no Radiſhes, Onions, Garlicke, nor any kinde of hearbe that hath any colour of red in it, nor Egges, for they thinke there is blood in them. They drinke not any wine, nor vſe any vineger, but onely water. They are ſo dangerous of eating and drinking with other men which are not their Countriemen, that they would rather ſtarue to death then once to doe it. It happeneth oftentimes that they ſaile in the Portingales ſhips from Goa to Cochin to ſell their wares, and to traffique with the Portingales, and then they make their prouiſions for ſo long time as they thinke to ſtay vpon the way, which they take aboard with them, and thereupon they féede, and if the time falleth out longer, then they made account of their water and prouiſion beeing all ſpent, as it hapned when I ſailed from Goa to Cochin, they had rather die for hunger and thirſt then once to touch the Chriſtians meate, they waſh themſelues before they eate, as the Bramenes doe, as alſo euery tyme when they eaſe themſelues or make water. They are of a yellowe colour like the Bramenes and ſomewhat whiter, and there are women among them which are much whiter and clearer of complection than the Portingale women. They are formed and made both in face, limmes, and all other thinges like men of Europe, colour only excepted. Their apparrell is a thinne white gowne vppon their naked bodies, from the head to the féet, and made faſt on the ſide vnder their armes, their ſhooes of red leather, ſharp at the toes, and turning vp like hookes, their beardes ſhauen like the Turkes, ſauing only their mouſtachios, they weare on their heades a white cloth thrée or foure times wrapped about like the Bramenes, and vnder their haire a ſtarre vpon their foreheads, which they rub euery morning with a little white ſanders, tempered with water, and 3. or 4. graines of rice among it, which the Bramenes alſo doe as a ſuperſtitious ceremonie of their law. Their bodies are commonly annoynted with ſanders & other ſwéet woods, which they doe very much vſe, as alſo all the Indians. Their women are apparelled like the B
                              •
                           amenes wiues, they eate like the Mahometans, and all other Indians vpon the ground. In their houſes or aſſemblies they ſit on the ground vppon mattes or carpets, and alwaies leaue their ſhooes without the dore, ſo that they are alwaies barefoote in their houſes: wherefore commonly the héeles of their ſhooes are neuer pulled vp, to ſaue labour of vntying or vndoing them; they haue a thouſand other heatheniſh ſuperſtitions which are not worth the rehearſall, whereof we haue told you the moſt principall and therby you may well enough vnderſtand what the reſt are.
                  
                  
                     The 38. Chapter. Of the Canaras and Decanijns.
                     
                        THe Canaras and Decaniins are of the countrie of Decam, commonly called Ballagate, lying behinde Goa. many of them dwell in Goa, where their wares and ſhops are, of all ſorts of Veluets, Silkes, Sattins, and Damaſkes, which they buy by great of the Portingales, alſo al kinds of cotton linnen, porſelyne, and all kindes of wares and marchandiſes of Cambaia, China, Bengalla, &c. which they likewiſe buy of the Portingales, and other nations, and ſell it againe by retaile: for the which purpoſe they haue brokers of their owne Countrimen, which looke for all kindes of wares and commodities. Theſe bring likewiſe all victuals and neceſſaries out of the firme land, into the towne and Iſland of Goa. They haue their Indian ſhips wherewith they traffique to Cambaia, Sunda, and the read ſea. Many of them are gold and ſiluer ſmithes, & worke in Copper, wherein they are very cunning. They haue alſo diuers other handicrafts, as Barbers, Phiſitions, Carpenters, and ſuch like, as dwell in Goa, ſo that they are almoſt as great a number as the Portingale Meſticos, and Chriſtians. Their apparrell is like the Guſurates & Benianes, except their ſhooes, which they weare like Antiques with cut toes, and faſtned aboue vpon their naked féete, which they call Alparcas. They weare their beards and their haire long, as it groweth without cutting, but only turne it vp, and dreſſe it as the Benianes and Bramenes vſe to doe, and are like them for colour, forme, & making. They eate all thinges except Kine, Hogges, and Buffels, fleſh and fiſh. They account the Oxe, Cow or Buffel to be holie, which they haue commonly in the houſe with them, and they beſméere, ſtroke, and handle them with all the friendſhip in the world, and féed them with the ſame meat they vſe to eate themſelues, and when the beaſtes eaſe themſelues, they hold their hands vnder their tails and ſo throw the dung away. In the night time they ſléepe with them in their houſes, & to conclude, vſe them as if they were reaſonable creatures, whereby they thinke to doe God great ſeruice. In their eating, ſitting in the houſe, waſhing, making cleane, and other

ceremonies and ſuperſtitions they are altogether like the Bramenes, Guſurates, and Banianes. In their mariages they contract ech with other at 7. yeres, & at 11. or 12. yeares they are maried, and dwell together. When they are to be maried, they begin fourtéene dayes before to make a great ſound with trumpets, drummes and fires, which continueth day and night for all thoſe fourtéene dayes, with ſo great a noiſe of ſongs and Inſtruments, that men can neyther heare nor ſée: On the w
                           •
                        dding day, all the friends and kindred on both ſides doe aſſemble together, & ſit vpon the ground, round about a fire, and goe ſeauen times about it vttering certaine wordes, whereby the wedding is done. They giue their daughters no houſhold ſtuffe, but only ſome Iewels, as bracelets, eare-rings, and ſuch like of ſmall valew, wherewith their huſbands muſt bee content, for the Daughters are no heires, but the Sonnes inherite all, but they kéep and maintaine their daughters and ſiſters till they marie: when they die, they are likewiſe burnt, and ſome of their wiues with them, but not ſo many as of the Bramenes. Euery one of them followeth his fathers occupation, and marieth with the daughters of ſuch like trades, which they name kindreds. They haue their faſting daies, and ceremonies like the Bramenes, for they are as the laytie, and the Bramenes as the ſpiritualty, the Miniſters, Prieſts, & Prophets of their Idols. They hire and farme the cuſtomes and rents of the Portingales, & the Kings reuenewes in the land of Bardes, Salſette, and the Iſland of Goa, ſo that often times for any queſtion or ſtrife they muſt appeare in law, where they alwaies come without Counſellor or Atturney, and knowe ſo well how to place their words, according to the lawes of Portingall, not onely temporall but ſpirituall, that they are able to ſet downe, and ſhew where it ſtandeth written, as well as any Counſellor could doe, & make their petitions & requeſts without any mans aduiſe, that the Portingales doe wonder at their readie wits, as I haue oftentimes found in them. When they are to take their othes to beare witnes with any man, they are ſet within a circle made of aſhes vpon the pauement where they ſtand, ſtill laying a fewe aſhes on their bare heades, holding one hand on their heads, the other on their breaſts, and then in their own ſpéech ſweare by their Pagode, that they wil tell the truth without diſſimulation, whatſoeuer ſhall bee aſked them, for that they certainely beleeue they ſhould be damned for euer, if as then they ſhould not ſay the truth, but conceale it. Theſe are their principall cuſtomes and ceremonies, yet are there many others, which for breuity I omit
                  
                  
                     The 39. Chapter. Of the Canarijns and Corumbijns of India.
                     
                        THe Canarijns & Corumbjins are the Countrimen, and ſuch as deale with tilling the land, fiſhing & ſuch like labors, to get their liuings, & look vnto the Indiā
                         Palme trées, whereon the Cocos doe grow. There are ſome among them that doe nothing els but waſh cloathes, which is there vſed like another occupation, they are called Maynattos: there are others that are called Patamares, which ſerue onlie for Meſſengers or Poſts, to carie letters from place to place by land, in winter time when men can not trauaile by ſea. Theſe Canarjins and Corumbjins are the moſt contemptible, and the miſerableſt people of al India, and liue very poorely, maintaining thē
                        ſelues with little meate. They eate all kinde of things, except Kine, Oxen, Buffels, Hogs, and Hens fleſh, their religion is like the Decanijns and Can
                              •
                           ras, for they are all of one Countrie and cuſtome, little differing: they goe naked, their priuie members onely couered with a cloth. The womē go with a cloth bound about their middles beneath their nauels, and hanging downe to the middle of their thighes, and the other end thereof they caſt ouer their ſhoulders, wherby halfe their breaſts are couered. They are in a manner blacke, or of a darke browne colour, many of them are Chriſtians, becauſe their chiefe habitation and dwelling places are on the Sea ſide in the countries bordering vpon Goa, for that the palme trées doe grow vpon the Sea coaſts, or vpon ye bankes by riuer ſides. The rice is ſowed vppon low ground, which in winter time is couered with water, wherewith thoſe Canarijns doe maintaine themſelues: theſe bring hennes, fruit, milke, egges and other ſuch like wares into the towne to ſell. They dwell in little ſtraw houſes, the dores whereof are ſo low, that men muſt créepe in and out, their houſhold ſtuffe is a mat vpon the ground to ſléepe vpon, and a pit or hole in the ground to heate their rice in with a pot or two to féeth it in, and ſo they liue and gaine ſo much as it is a wonder. For commonly their houſes are full of ſmall children, which crall and créepe about all naked, vntill they are 7. or eight yeares old, & then they couer their priuie members. When the Women are readie to trauaile with Childe, they are commonly deliuered when they are all alone, and their huſbands in the fieldes, as it fortuned vppon a time, as I and ſome other of my friends went to walke in the fieldes, & into the villages where the Canarijns dwell

and hauing thirſt, I went to one of the Canarijns houſes to aſke ſome water, therewith to refreſh vs, (which they commonly drinke out of a Copper Canne with a ſpout, thereat to drinke without touching it with their mouthes, which is all the mettell they haue within their houſes,) & becauſe I was verie thirſtie, I ſtooped downe and thruſt my head in at the doore, aſking for ſome water, where I eſpied a woman alone within the houſe, tying her cloth faſt about her middle, & before her hauing a woodden trough, (by the Portingales called Gamello) full of water, where ſhe ſtood and waſhed a childe, whereof as then ſhe had newly bin deliuered without any help: which hauing waſht, ſhe laid it naked on the ground vpon a great Indian figge leafe, and deſired mee to ſtay and ſhee would preſently giue mee water. When I vnderſtood by her that ſhe had as then newly béene deliuered of that Child without any help, I had no deſire to drink of her water, but went vnto another to aſke water, and perceiued the ſame woman not long after going about her houſe, as if there had bin no ſuch matter, and the children are brought vp in that manner cleane naked, nothing done vnto them, but onely waſhed and made cleane in a little cold water, and doe in that ſort proſper and come vp as well as man would wiſh, or as any child within theſe countries can do with all the tending they haue, & liue many times vntill they be a hundreth yeares old, without any headach, or toothach, or looſing any of their téeth. They weare onley a tuſke of haire on the toppes of their heads, which they ſuffer to grow long: the reſt of their haire is cut ſhort, they are very expert in ſwimming and diuing, they row vp and downe the Riuers in boates called Almadias, whereof ſome of thē are hewen out of a péece of wood, and ſo narrow that a man can hardly ſit in them, and it chanceth oftentimes that they turne ouer & ouer twice or thrice before they paſſe the riuer, and then they leape out into the water and turne them vp, and ſo powring out the water they get into them again. They are ſo miſerable, that for a penny they would indure to be whipped, and they eate ſo little, that it ſéemeth they liue by the aire, they are likewiſe moſt of them leane and weake of limmes, of little ſtrength & very cowardes, whereby the Portingales doe them great outrage and villanie, vſing them like dogges and beaſts. In their mariages and deathes they obſerue the manner of the Decan
                              •
                           ins & Canaras, as alſo in their religion & ceremonies. When the man is dead his body is burnt, and the woman cuts her haire off, and breaketh all her Iewels, although they be but few & ſmall, for they are moſt of glaſſe.
                     By the pictures following you may ſee the Decanijns or Canaras, or the Marchantes of Goa, alſo the Banianes or Guſurates of Cambaia, with the Bramenes & his wife, in what ſort all the women doe goe, as wel Benianes as Decaniins, Moores & Indian women that inhabite the countrie. How thoſe of Goa and Ballagate kéepe their weddings among the Decaniins and Canaras, with the manner how the liuing women burne themſelues with their dead huſbands, what eſtate the Embaſſador of Hidaleam holdeth in Goa, & how he is caried in the ſtréets, alſo a true deſcription of the Canariin with his wife, & the manner how the Indian heatheniſh children are brought vp: alſo of the ſoldier of Ballagate, which is called Laſcariin, with the heatheniſh whore called Balliadera, who is a dancer, becauſe ſhee is commonly vſed therevnto, in any feaſt or open playes, & are ready to be hired for a ſmall péece of mony, whereof many of thē dwell in Goa, with the maner of the dwellings & houſes of the Decaniins, Canariins, & Corumbiins, & how they row in the riuers with their ſcutes, whereby I haue placed the maner of the boats vſed by thoſe of the Malabares in Cochin, ſo that I ſhall not néede to make a ſeuerall Chapter of them by themſelues.
                  
                  
                     The 40. Chapter. Of the Arabians and Abexiins dwelling in India.
                     
                        THere are many Arabians & Abexiins in India. The Arabians obſerue Mahomets law, & the Abexiins ſome are Mahometans, ſome chriſtians, after their manner, for they are of Preſter Iohns land, which ſtretcheth behind Moſambique in Aethiopia vnto the red ſea, and the riuer Nilus in Egypt, and by their common traffique and conference with the Moores and Mahometans, there are diuers of them infected with the ſame ſect. There are many of them in India that are ſlaues and captiues, both mē and women which are brought thether out of Aethiopia, & ſold like other Oriental Nations, the Abexiins that are chriſtians haue on their faces 4. burnt markes in manner of a Croſſe, one ouer their noſe in the middle of the forehead, betwéene both their eyes, on each of their chéekes one, betwéene their eies, and their eares, and one vnder their neather lip, downe to the chin: and this is their Baptiſme, when they are made Chriſtians, which they vſe in ſtead of water. Theſe Abexiins, and Arabians ſuch as are frée doe ſerue in al India for ſaylers and ſea faring mē, with ſuch marchants as ſaile from Goa to China, Iapon, Bengala, Mallaca, Ormus, and all the Oriental coaſt: for that there they haue no other ſaylers, nor there are no other becauſe

the Portingalles (although they ſerue for Saylers in the Portingalles ſhippes that come into India, and haue neuer bene other in Portingale but Saylers, yet are they aſhamed to liue in that order, and thinke it a great diſcredite vnto them, together with a great diminiſhing of their authorities & eſtimations, which they account themſelues to hold in India, ſo that they giue themſelues out for maiſters of ſhippes, and by their captaines are alſo called Pilots and chief Boteſonnes, but not lower: for if they ſhould deſcend but one ſtep lower, it would be a great blot and blemiſh vnto them all their liues after, which they would not indure for anie thing in the world. Theſe Abexijns and Arabians ſerue for ſmall money, and being hyred are verie lowlie and ſubiect, ſo that often times they are beaten and ſmitten, not as ſlaues, but like dogs, which they beare very patientlie, not once ſpeaking a word: they cō
                        monlie haue their wiues and children with them in the ſhippe wherein they are hyred, which continually ſtay with them, what voyage ſoeuer they make, and dreſſe their owne meat, which is Rice ſodden in water with ſalt fiſh among it. The cauſe why the women ſayle in the ſhip, is, for that in Summer and not elſe, their ſhippes goe to ſea, whē they alwayes haue calme water and faire weather, with good windes: they haue commonlie but one Portingale or two for Captaine, maiſter and Pilote, and they haue a chief Boteſon, which is an Arabian, which they cal Mocadon, and he is ruler of the Arabians & Aberijns, that are ſaylers, whome he hath vnder his ſubiection, euen as if they were his ſlaues or ſubiects. This Mocadon is he that conditioneth and maketh bargaine with the owners of the ſhip▪ to haue ſo manie ſaylers, and he receiueth the monethlie money for their wages, and accounteth with the ſaylers particularlie, but for gouernment of the ſhip he hath not to doe, neither troubleth himſelfe therewith. The ſhippes when they ſayle, vſe no caſke for water, becauſe there is not any throughout all India, nor any made there, ſaue onely ſuch as come out of Portingall, and vſed in the Portingall ſhippes: but in ſtéed of pypes they vſe a great foure cornered woodden ceſterne, yt ſtādeth by the main maſte, at the very foote therof, vpon the keele of the ſhippe, which is verie well pitched, and made faſt, wherein they lade as much water as they thinke will ſerue them for their voyage. The captaine, maiſter or Pilote, Marchants and paſſingers, haue euerie man their meat by themſelues▪ and their water in great Indian pots called Martauans, whereof in ye deſcription of Pegu I haue alreadie ſpoken. Theſe people are ſo ſeruiceable and willing to doe any thing, that if there chanceth but a hat, or any other thing, to be blowen ouer, or fall into the water, they will preſently leape, cloathes and all into the ſea, to fetch it again, for they ſwimme like fiſhes, when the ſhips lie within the hauen or riuer, and that they will all goe on land, then they goe into the boate, and ſo row to ſhore, which done one of them roweth backe againe with the boate, which he tyeth faſt to the ſhip and ſwimmeth to land: and when they will goe abord again, if any of the ſaylers be vnwilling to ſwimme to fetch the boate, they are by the Mocadon or the maiſter, with ſtrokes compelled to doe it: but they cōmonlie neuer ſtay till it cometh ſo 
                           •
                        arre, but rather ſtriue who ſhall be firſt in the water to ſhew their diligence: and when they doe any thing abord, as hayling ropes and other things, they ſing & anſwere each other very ſweetlie, ſo yt it ſéemeth to be very good Muſick. Their exerciſe on land is, all the day to drinke, and to ſit in tipling houſes with their wiues and children, and then they goe hand in hand through the ſtréets, réeling here and there, making a great noiſe with ſinging and gaping after their manner: there womē weare breeches like the Arabians and Mahometans.
                  
                  
                     The 41. Chapter. Of the blacke people of Moſambique, which are called Caffares, and of their manners and cuſtomes.
                     
                        THe black people or Ca
                              •
                           fares of the land of Moſambique, and all the coaſt of Ethiopia, and within the lād to the Cape de bona Sperāza, go al naked, although thoſe of Moſambique, (that is the women) do a little couer themſelues, which they do by meanes of the daylie conuerſation they haue with the Portingales, who for Gold, ſiluer and Iuory bones, and ſuch like, doe exchange Cotton lynnen brought out of India, that within the land, and to the cape, they vſe in thoſe countries: otherwiſe they couer themſelues with the like apparell that Adam and Eua did weare in Paradice. They are all as black as pitch, with curled and ſinged hayre, both on their heads and beards, which is very little, their noſes broad, flat and thicke at the end▪ great bigge lippes: ſome haue holes, both aboue & vnder in their lippes, and ſome times beſides their mouthes through their cheekes, wherein they thruſt ſmall bones, which they eſteeme a bewtifying: there are ſome among them that haue their faces and

all their bodies ouer raſed and ſeared with irons, and al figured like raſed Sattin or Damaſke, wherein they take great pride, thinking there are no fairer people then they in all the world, ſo that when they ſee any white people, that weare apparell on their bodies, they laugh and mocke at them, thinking vs to be monſters and vgly people: and when they will make any deueliſh forme and picture, then they inuent one atfer the forme of a white man in his apparell, ſo that to conclude, they thinke and verily perſwade themſelues, that they are the right colour of men, and that we haue a falſe and counterfait colour. There are among them that file their téeth as ſharp as nedles, which they likewiſe eſtéeme for a great ornament. Many of them hold the law of Mahomet, that is to ſay, ſuch as dwell on the coaſt of Abex or Melinde, and round about thoſe places, as alſo in Moſambique, by reaſon the red ſea is ſo néere vnto them, together with the Arabian Mahometans, with whome they dayly traffique, as they alſo did in al places, & Ilāds throughout the Orientall countries, before the Portingales diſcouery and conqueſt of India, whereby all the Orientall countrie where they trafficked, was infected with their deueliſh law, and their poyſon ſpread and throwne abroad in all places, which is one of the principall occaſions that the Goſpell taketh no better effect in thoſe countries, their peſtiſerous law beeing as it were rooted and ingrafted in their mindes. There are ſome of them that are become Chriſtians ſince the Portingales came thether, but there is no great paines taken about it in thoſe coūtries, becauſe there is no profite to be had, as alſo that it is an infectious and vnholeſome countrie: and therefore the Ieſuites are wary inough not to make any houſes or habitations therein, for they ſée no great profite to be reaped there for them, as they doe in India & the Ilands of Iapan, & in other places, where they find great quantities of riches, with the ſap whereof they increaſe much and fill their beehyues therewith to ſatiſfy their thirſty & inſatiable deſires: moſt part of the Caffares liue like beaſtes or wild men, yet they haue their houſes in troups or heaps, like coū
                        try vilages▪ wher they aſſēble & dwel together and in euery Village they haue a Lord or King, to whome they are ſubiect and obedient, they are commonly in warres one with an other, and one place or Village againſt an other, and haue law and Iuſtice among them with ſome ſmall Policie, concerning their worldly affaires and gouernment: but as concerning Religion and faith, they know not what it meaneth, but liue like beaſtes without any knowledge of God, or any likelyhoode or ſhadow thereof, they maintaine themſelues by hunting, which they doe in the woods, where they take all that they finde, they eate Elephants fleſh and all other kind of wild beaſtes, and of the Elephants téeth, they make their weapons, inſtéede of Iron and Stéele, they doe commonly make warre one againſt the other, and ſome of them eate mens fleſh, and ſome there are alſo that eate it not, but ſuch as deale with the Portingals. When they take any man priſoner in the warres, they ſell him to the Portingales, or exchaunge and barter him for Cotton linnen, and other Indian wares. They haue a cuſtome among them, that when they goe to warre againſt their enemies, if they win the battaile, or ouerthrow each other, he that taketh or killeth moſt men, is holden and accounted for the beſt and braueſt man among them, and much reſpected, and to witneſſe the ſame before their Kings, of as many as they haue ſlaine or taken priſoners, they cut off their priu
                           •
                        e members, that if they bee let goe againe, they may no more beget children, which in proceſſe of time might miſchiefe them, and then they drie them well, becauſe they ſhould not rot: which being ſo dried, they come before their Kings with great reuerence, in the preſence of the principall men in the Village, and there take theſe members ſo dried one by one in their mouthes, and ſpit them on the ground at the Kings feete, which the King with great thankes accepteth, and the more to reward and to recompence their valour, cauſeth them all to bee taken vp and giuen to them againe, for a ſigne and token of honour, whereby euer after from that time forwards they are accounted as Knights, and they take all thoſe members, wherewith the King hath thus honoured them,A co
                              •••
                           e kynde of chaine 
                              〈◊〉
                            women 
                              〈◊〉
                            wea
                              •
                           e. and tie them all vpon a ſtring like a Bracelet or Chaine, and when they marrie, or go to any wedding, or feaſts, the Bride or wiues of thoſe knights doe weare that Chaine of mens members about their neckes, which among them is as great an honour, as it is with vs, to weare the golden Fléece, or the Garter of England, and the Brides of ſuch Knightes, are therewith as proude, as if they were the mightieſt Queenes in all the world.
                     From Moſambique great numbers of theſe Caffares are caried into India, and many times they ſell a man or woman that is growne to their full ſtrength, for two or three Ducats. When the Portingales ſhips put in there for freſh water and other neceſſaries, then they are dearer, by reaſon of the great numbers of buyers, the cauſe why ſo many ſlaues and Captaines of all nations

are brought to ſell in India, is, becauſe that euerie ten or twelue miles, or rather in euery Village and towne, there is a ſeuerall King, and ruler of the people, one of them not like an other, neither in law, ſpéech nor manners, whereby moſt part of them are in warres, one againſt the other, and thoſe that on both ſides are taken priſoners, they kéepe for ſlaues, and ſo fell each other like beaſtes: hee whoſe euill fortune is ſuch, that hee is one of the captiues, muſt be patient, wherein they ſhew not much diſlike, for when they are aſked, how they can content themſelues with that yoke of bondage, they anſwere that they can beare it well enough, ſéeing their Planet will haue it ſo, and for that their friends and neighbours ſhall reuenge their cauſe againſt thoſe that haue done it. Alſo in time of pouertie or dearth the fathers may ſell their children, as it happened in my time, that there was ſuch a dearth, and ſcarſitie of victualls in the firme lande, and countries bordering vppon Goa, that the men of India came to Goa (and other places where the Portingales are reſident) to ſell their children, in great numbers, and for ſmall prices▪ to buy them victuals. I haue ſéene Boyes of eight, or ten yeares, giuen in exchange for fiue or ſixe meaſures of Rice, and ſome for thrée or foure Ducats the péece, and ſome came with their wiues and children to offer themſelues to bee ſlaues, ſo that they might haue meate and drinke to nouriſh their bodies. And becauſe the Portingales haue traffique in all places, (as we haue béene in many) it is the cauſe why ſo many are brought out of all countries to be ſolde, for the Portingales doe make a liuing by buying and ſelling of them, as they doe with other wares. What concerneth the Caffares in Moſambique, I haue in an other place declared, in the deſcription of Moſambique. Hereafter followeth the pictures of the Arabians and Abexijns, with their wiues, as they goe in India, alſo the pictures and manners of the Caffares, both men and women, as they goe in Moſambique, all liuely portracted.
                  
                  
                     The 42. Chapter. Of the Malabares and Nayros in India, with their manners and cuſtomes.
                     
                        THe Malabares are thoſe that dwel on the Sea caoſt, betwéene Goa, & the Cape de Comorijn Southward from Goa, where the Pepper groweth. They haue a ſpéech by themſelues, and their countrie is diuided into many kingdomes, as in the deſcription of the country, we haue already declared, theſe are the greateſt, and worſt enemies that the Portingales haue, and by Sea doe them great miſchiefe, they are ſtrong and very couragious, they goe all naked onely their priuie members couered, the women likewiſe haue but a cloth from their Nauell downe to their knées, all the reſt is naked, they are ſtrong of limmes, and verie arrogant and proude, of colour altogether blacke, yet verie ſmoth both of haire and ſkin▪ which commonly they annoint with Oyle, to make it ſhine; they weare their haire as long as it will grow, tyed on the top or crowne of their heads with a Lace, both men and women: the lappes of their eares are open, and are ſo long that they hang downe to their ſhoulders, and the longer & wider they are, the more they are eſtéemed among them, and it is thought to bee a beautie in them. Of face, body, and limmes, they are altogether like men of Europ, without any difference, but onely in colour, the men are commonly verie hayrie, and rough vpon the breaſt, and on their bodies, and are the moſt leacherous and vnchaſt nation in all the Orient, ſo that there are verie few women children among them, of ſeuen or eight yeares olde, that haue their maiden-heades: They are verie readie to catch one from an other, though it bee but for a ſmall penie. In their houſes they are not verie curious, their houſes and houſhold ſtuffe, differeth not much from the Canarijns & Corumbijns of Goa. Their Idolatrie, ceremonies and ſuperſtitions, are like the other Heathens. Of theſe Malabares there are two manner of people, the one is Noblemen or Gentlemen, called Nayros, which are ſouldiers▪ that doe onely weare and handle armes, the other is the common people called Polias, and they may weare no weapons, nor beare any armes, the Nayros muſt in all places where they goe or ſtand, weare ſuch armes as are appointed for them, and alwaies bee readie at the Kings commaundement, to doe him ſeruice, ſome of them doe alwaies beare a naked Rapier or Courtelas in their right hands, and a great Target in their left hand, thoſe Targets are verie great, and made of light wood, ſo that when they wil they can couer their whole bodies therewith, they are ſo well vſed thereunto, that they eſteme it nothing to beare them, and when they trauell on the way, they may be heard a great way off, for that they commonly make a great knocking with the Hilt of their Rapier, againſt the Target, becauſe they would bee heard. There are ſome that carrie a bow and a venimous arrow vppon

their ſhoulder, wherein they are verie expert, others carrie long Pikes, ſome Péeces, with the Match readie lighted, and wound about their armes, and haue the beſt lockes that poſſible may bee found in all Europe, which they know ſo well how to vſe, that the Portingales can haue no aduantage againſt them. Whereſoeuer they goe, they muſt alwaies haue their armes with them, both night and day. Not any of them are married, nor may not marrie during their liues, but they may freely lie with the Nayros daughters, or with any other that liketh them, what women ſoeuer they bee, yea though they be married women. When the Nayro hath a deſire thereunto, hee entreth into a houſe where he thinketh good, and ſetteth his armes in the ſtréete without the doore, and goeth in and diſpatcheth his buſineſſe, with the good wife or the daughter, the doore ſtanding wide open, not fearing that any man ſhould come in to let him, for whoſoeuer paſſeth by, and ſéeth the Nayros armes ſtanding at the doore, although it be the goodman himſelfe, hee goeth by, and letteth him make an end▪ and hauing done, he taketh his armes and departeth thence, and then the huſband may come to the houſe, without making any words, or once moouing queſtion about it. In that manner they goe where they will, and no man may denie them. As theſe Nayros goe in the ſtreetes, they vſe to crie Po, Po, which is to ſay, take héede, looke to your ſelues, or I come, ſtand out of the way, for that the other ſort of people called Polyas, that are no Nayros, may not once touch or trouble one of them, and therefore they alwaies crie, becauſe they ſhould make them roome, and know that they come, for if any of the Polyas ſhould ſtand ſtill, and not giue them place, whereby hee ſhould chaunce to touch their bodies, hee may fréely thruſt him through, and no man aſke him why he did it. And when they are once touched by any Polya
                              •
                           , or by any other nation except Nayros, they muſt before they eate, or conuerſe with other Nayro
                              •
                           
                         waſh and clenſe their bodies with great ceremonies and ſuperſtitions. Likewiſe they muſt not bee touched by any Chriſtian, or any other man. And when the Portingales came firſt into India, and made league and compoſition with the King of Cochin, the Nayros deſired that men ſhold giue them place, and turne out of the way, when they mette in the ſtréetes, as the Polyas and others vſed to doe, which the Portingales would not conſent vnto, thinking it to be againſt their credits and honors, for them to be compared to the Polyas and vnprofitable ſort of people, whereas they eſtéemed themſelues better then the Nayros, both in perſon and armes: therefore they would haue the Nayros to giue them place, whereby they could not agrée, in the end it was concluded, (to pacifie the matter, and to kéepe peace and quietnes among them) that two men ſhould be choſen, one for the Nayros, and the other for the Portingales, that ſhould fight body to body, and he that ſhould be ouerthrowne, that nation ſhould giue place vnto the other, this was done in the preſence of both nations, and the Portingall ouercame the Nayro, whome hee ſlew, whereupon it was agréed, that the Nayros ſhould giue place vnto the Portingall, and ſtand a ſide vntill hee be paſt, where ſoeuer they meete. The Nayros weare the nayls of their hands very long, wherby they ſhew that they are Gentlemen, becauſe the longneſſe of the nayles doth let and hinder men from working or doing any labour. They ſay likewiſe that they do it, the better and faſter to gripe a thing in their hands, and to holde their Rapiers, which ſome Portingales and Meſticos doe likewiſe vſe, and hold the ſame opinion with the Nayros, whereof there are many in India, which let their nayles grow for the ſame cauſe. The principalleſt or chiefeſt of thoſe Nayros, which are leaders or Captaines of certaine numbers of Nayros, weare a Gold or Siluer bracelet, or ring about their armes, aboue their elbowes: as alſo their Gouernours, Ambaſſadours, and Kings, whereby they are knowne from other men, for otherwiſe they goe all naked. Alſo their Kings, rulers, and other Captaines and leaders, when they goe abroad, are garded and accompanied by other Nayros. They are verie good and ſtout ſouldiers, and wil ſet vpon a man verie fiercely, they are alſo verie full of reuenge, ſo that whenſoeuer they fight againſt their enemies either by water or by lande, and that they chaunce to bee thruſt into the body with a Pike, they are not preſently therewith content to lie downe, but if they cannot ſpéedily plucke the Pike forth, they will not ſpare to pull it forth with both their hands, and draw it through their bodies, therewith to ſet vpon them that gaue them the wound, and to be reuenged on them.
                     The King may not iudge nor execute thoſe Nayros openly, for if they haue deſerued death, he cauſeth them by other Nayros to be put to death. The daughters of the Nayros, may not haue the companie of any man, but onely of Nayros, although ſecretly they haue the company of many Portingales and Chriſtians, but if the Nayros once perceiued it, or find them in the déede doing, they might kill them without further queſtion. In euerie

                        
                        
                           
                              Habitus et facies Mercatorum Goenſium Indorum▪ qui mutandis mercibus valde induſtrij
                           
                           
                              Habyt en gedaente der 
                                    •
                                 ndiaenſche Coopluyden welcke in hare handel ſeer cloeck zyn
                           
                           
                              Banjanes e Cambaja populus 
                                    •
                                 ſ
                                    •
                                 andis gemmis, ſcribendo, ſupputandoque valdé 
                                    •
                                 ercitatus.
                           
                           
                              Banjanen vun Cambajen int ke
                                    •
                                  van geſteenten ſchryven en rekenen zeer ge
                                    •
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                              Bramenes Idolorum in India Sacerdotes
                           
                           
                              Bramenes der Indiuenſcher affgoden Papen ofte Prieſters.
                           
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page missing〉
                        
                        
                           
                           
                              M
                                    •
                                 aniere van bruyloſt int Lant van Ballagate achter Goa gelegen.
                           
                        
                        
                           
                           
                              Bramenes cum mortuus est. ſecundum eorum legem crematur. uxor autem ejus. proe amore. ſese vivam in ignem cum illo conjicit.
                           
                           
                              
                              De Bramene doot weſende wort nae haer wet verbrant. en zyn vrouwe wt liefde haers mans. verbrant haer levendich met hem.
                           
                        
                        
                           
                           
                              Agricola Indus Canaryn dictus
                           
                           
                              Een Indiaens ſant ofte bouwman genaemt Canaryn
                           
                           
                              Indorum liberi pro eorum conſuetu
                                    ••••
                                 , pudendis tantum rariori tela contectis
                           
                           
                              Indiaenſche kinderen als ſlants manier is 
                                    〈…〉
                                 en die ſcha: melheyt met een dun linnen doecksken be
                                    〈…〉
                                  hebbende.
                           
                           
                              
                              Miles Indus quem lascarin nominant
                           
                           
                              Een Indiaens ſoldaet lascarin geheeten.
                           
                           
                              Inda meretrix, ſaltando et canendo victum queritans.
                           
                           
                              Een Indiaenſche lichte vrouwe met dans sen en ſingen haer cost winnende.
                           
                        
                        
                           
                           
                              Legati Regis Ballagatte in urbe Goa comitatus.
                           
                           
                              
                              Die ſtaet des Ambaſſateurs van den Coninck van Ballagatte binnen Goa
                           
                        
                        
                           
                           
                              Scaphae piscatoriae Goenſium et Cochinenſium, alterae ex ſolido trunco exca vatae, alterae, e pluribus funibus coagmentatae, priores Almadias, alteras Tones et Paleguas vocant. implent et hash
                                    •
                                 drijs aquae recentis, quam ad naves deferentes di vendant. quarum magnus illic numerus.
                           
                           
                              
                              S
                                    〈…〉
                                 huÿten diemen te Goa. en Cochÿn. gebruÿckt om te viſſchen, d'eene wt een hout wtgeholt. lander wt veel ſtruÿcken, met coorden tſamen gebonden. déerſte worden Almadias. 
                                    •
                                 'andere Tones, en Paſeguas, genaemt, die daer in groot getal zÿn, welcken verladen 
                                    •
                                 et cruÿcken vol ſoet waters daer in geſtort. om aende ſchepen te vercoopen
                           
                        
                        
                           
                           
                              Naute Arabes quibus naves ſuas regendas Luſitani committunt in quibus cum uxoribus ut plurimum habitant.
                           
                           
                              Ar
                                    •
                                 biſcher ſcheepluÿden, welcke die Portugeeſen. haer ſchepen vertrouwen te regeren. in welcken ſij oock met haer wyven meeſt woonen.
                           
                           
                              
                              Habitus Abiſsinorum quibus loco S. Baptiſmatis frons nutiritur
                           
                           
                              Habÿten der Abiſsÿnen wt paep tan ſlant welcke in plaets van doop gebruÿcken brantmercken int aenſicht.
                           
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page missing〉
                        
                        
                        
                           
                              Moerianen wt Mocambÿcke en die omliggende contreÿen diemen Caffres noemt ſommighe zÿn Chriſtenen ſommighe Heydenen en t
                                    •
                                 neeſtendeel Machometiſten.
                           
                        
                        
                        
place where they dwell, they haue a pit or Well digged, wherein they doe holde water, which ſtandeth openly in the way, where euerie man paſſeth by, wherein euery morning when they ryſe, they waſh themſelues all ouer, beginning firſt at the foote and ſo ryſing vp to the head, as well men as women, without being aſhamed to be ſéene of ſuch as goe by, or looke vpon them, and the King himſelfe likewiſe: which water is ſo gréene, ſlymie and ſtincking, that a man can not chuſe but ſtop his noſe as he goeth by it: and they certainlie beléeue, that when ſoeuer they ſhould forget to waſh themſelues in that water, that they ſhould then be whollie vncleane and full of ſinne: and this waſhing or making cleane muſt not be done in any running water, but it muſt be in a place where the water ſtandeth in a pit or Well, and by their Bramenes coniured with many words and ceremonies, otherwiſe it were of no vertue but whollie vnprofitable, for their Idolatrous ſeruices. They are like the other Heathens, and are burned when they are dead: their ſonnes may not be their heyres, becauſe they haue no wiues, but vſe al womē, where and when they will, doubting which is their owne ſonne: for the Bramenes alſo haue the kings wyues at their pleaſures, and doe him great honour when it pleaſeth them to lye with their Quéene. Their heyres are their ſiſters ſonnes, for they ſay, although they doubt of their fathers, yet they know their ſiſters are the mothers of them. This much touching the Nayros and Gentlemen or Soldiers.
                     The other common people of the Malabares, called Polyas, are ſuch as are the coū
                        trie huſband men and labourers, men of occupations, fiſhers, and ſuch like: thoſe are much contemned and diſpiſed, they liue very miſerably, and may weare no kind of weapon, neyther yet touch or be cōuerſant with the Nayros, for as the Nayros go on the ſtréetes, and they heare him call, they ſtep aſide, bowing their armes, and ſtooping with their heades down to the ground, not daring ſo much as once looke vp before the Nayros be paſt: in other thinges they obſerue the cuſtomes of the other Indians, for that euery man followeth the occupation of his Elders, and may not change it for any thing.
                  
                  
                     The 43. Chapter Of the Moores and Iewes in India.
                     
                     
                        THere are great numbers of Moores and Iewes in al places of India, as at Goa, Cochin, & within the land, ſome coming out of other places, and the reſt borne of Iewes and Moores in that country, and ſo by birth right Indians, who in times paſt by conuerſation and company of thoſe Iewes & Moores, haue bene brought to their ſect and opinion. In their houſes and apparell they follow the manner of the land wherein they are reſident: amongſt the Indians they haue their Churches, Synagogues and Meſquitas, wherein they vſe all ceremonies according to their law: but in the places where the Portingales inhabite and gouern, it is not permitted vnto them to vſe them openly, neither to any Indian, although they haue their families and dwelling houſes, and get their liuings, and deal one with the other: but ſecretly in their houſes they may doe what they will, ſo that no man take offence thereat: without the townes and where the Portingales haue no commandement, they may fréely vſe and exerciſe their ceremonies and ſuperſtitions, euery one as liketh him beſt, without any man to let or deny them: but if they be founde openlie doing it in the Portingales townes and iuriſdictions, or that they haue any point of Chriſtian ceremonies mingled among theirs, both men and womē die for it, vnleſſe they turne vnto the chriſtian faith, as it oftentimes happeneth without the towne of Cochin, where the King kéepeth his Court: there the Iewes and Moores haue frée libertie to vſe their ſects and ceremonies openlie, for there the Iewes haue made and built very fair ſtone houſes, and are rich marchants, and of the king of Cochins néereſt Counſellers: there they haue their ſynagogue with their hebrue Bible, and Moſes Lawe, which I haue had in my hand: they are moſt white of colour, like men of Europa, & haue many faire women. There are manie of them that came out of the country of Paleſtina & Ieruſalem thether, and ſpeake ouer all the Exchange verie perfect and good Spaniſh: they obſerue the Saboth day, and other iudiciall ceremonies, and hope for the Meſsias to come.
                     The Moores like wiſe haue their Meſquitos, wherein they pray, and aboue the Church they haue manie ſellers and galleries, where they learne their children their

principles of Religion before they goe to Church: they waſh their féet, for the which purpoſe they haue alwaies a ceſterne with water ſtanding without the Church, & leaue their Alparcos (which are their ſhoes) ſtanding at the Church dore before they goe in, and being in the Church they fall flat on the ground vpon their faces, and ſo with their armes & handes lifted vp, make manie counterfait faces. They are alſo circumciſed like the Iewes, & eate no hogges fleſh, and when they are dead they are buried. In their churches they haue not any Images, but onelie ſome ſtones or round pillers ſtanding vpright with certaine Chaldean letters (out of their Alcaron) grauen vpon them. As I and a friend of myne chāced to go out of the town, we were deſirous to ſée their Mahometicall Church, and their manner of ſeruice, which was denyed vs by the kéeper of the dore, that bad vs put off our ſhoes, but becauſe wee would not, he ſaid it was not lawfull for vs to enter in that ſort into the Church: but to let vs ſée it, he ſuffered vs to ſtand within the dore, and opened ſome of the windowes, that we might ſée what was within it: then the Portingale aſked him for their God & their Saintes which they vſed to pray vnto, becauſe he ſawe the Church emptie, as I ſayd before: then the Moore anſwered him, that they vſed not to pray to ſtockes and ſtones, but to the liuing God, which is in Heauen, and ſaid that the proude Portingale Chriſtians, and the Heathens were all of one Religion, for that they prayed to Images made of wood and ſtones, and giue them the glorie which onely appertaineth to the liuing God: with the which anſwere the Portingal was ſo angrie, that he began to chide & make a great noyſe, and to giue him manie hard words, wherewith manie Iewes & Moores aſſembled about them, ſo that there had growne a great quarrell, had it not bene for me, that got him to hold his peace, and ſo brought him away, and let the matter reſt in that ſort. Theſe Moores traffique much with ſpices to the red ſea, and other places, both by water and by land. And although manie of them dwell among the Portingales and traffique much with them, yet ſecretly they are their moſt deadly enemies, and doe them much miſchief, and are the principal occaſion that there are no more Chriſtians conuerted to the faith of Chriſt, ſéeking all the wayes and meanes they can to withdraw and diſſwade them from it, whereby the Indians doe both vſe and followe their cuſtomes and Religion.
                     By the Picture following you may ſée the ſtate and maieſtie of the king of Cochin ſitting vpon an Elephant, when he rydeth abroad with his Nayros, or Gentlemen and ſoldiers that guard and conduct him, alſo the other Malabares, both men and women, called Polyas, which the Mores and Mahometans that dwell in Cananor, among the Malabares, as I ſaid before. You ſhall alſo ſée the Chriſtians that are called S. Thomas Chriſtians, whereof many dwell among the Malabares, with one great legge, as they are borne, as in the deſcription of the coaſt I haue alreadie ſhewed, likewiſe the picture of the men of Pegu, and the Ilandes of Molucos.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 44. Chapter. Of the Pagodes and Indian Idoles forming, keeping ceremonies and ſuperſtitions in generall, brieflie deſcribed.
                     
                        THe Pagodes and Images are many and innumerable throughout the Orientall countries, whereof ſome are holden in great reuerence & eſtimation, more then the cō
                        mon ſort, and from all places are ſought vnto▪ and viſited both by Indians & Heathens, in manner of pilgrimages to purchaſe pardons, which aboue all others, are verie coſtly made and richlie ſet forth: of thoſe onlie doe I meane to ſpeak as néed requireth, that you may know them from the reſt. By the towne of Baſſaym, which lyeth northwards from Goa, vpō the coaſt of India, and is inhabited by Portingalles, there lyeth an Iland called Salſette. There are two of the moſt renowmed Pagodes, or temples, or rather holes wherein the Pagodes ſtand in all India: whereof one of their holes is cut out from vnder a hill of hard ſtone, and is of compaſſe within, about the bignes of a village of 400. houſes: when you come to the foote of the hill; there is a Pagodes houſe, with Images therein cut out of the very rockes of the ſame hill, with moſt horrible and fearefull formes and ſhapes, whereat this day the Gray Fryers haue made a Cloyſter called S. Michaels: and as you goe in vnder the hill, in the firſt circle you may ſée many Pagodes, and ſtepping ſomewhat higher it hath an other circle or Gallerie of Chambers and Pagodes, & yet higher it hath ſuch an other Gallerie of Chambers and Pagodes, al cut out of the hard rockes: and by theſe chambers ſtandeth a great ceſterne with water, and hath certain holes aboue, wherby ye rain water falleth into it: aboue that it hath an other

                        
                           
                           
                              Cochini Rex elephante vectus, cum procerum comitatu, quos Nairos vocant.
                           
                           
                              
                              Die Coninck van Cochin op een elephant geſeeten verſelſchapt met ſijn edelen diemen Nairos noemt
                           
                        
                        
                           
                           
                              Provinciae Pegu incola, auri adamantum et rubinorum ferax, undelacca ſigillatoria advehitur,
                           
                           
                              Een wt Pegu, waer veel gout diamanten en robynen gevonden en het zegellack gemaeckt 
                                    •
                                 ort
                           
                           
                              Incola ex Inſulis Moluco▪ ubi Carijop
                                    •
                                 ijlla magnâ copiâ crescunt, quorum veſtes e ſtramine ſunt factoe.
                           
                           
                              Een inwoonder wt die Eylanden van Mo
                                    •
                                 uco, daer die Garyophyl nagelen over vloedich groÿen▪ welcks cleede
                                    •
                                 en van ſtroy zyn▪
                              
                           
                           
                              
                              Penequais familioe, a Divo Thoma execratae intotam ut Indi referunt pro geniem
                           
                           
                              
                                 Ʋan penekays geſlachten van S. Thomas als die 
                                    •
                                 dianen ſeggen gantſelicken vervlocekt
                           
                        
                        
                           
                           
                              Inquilini e Cananor Mahometani infectiſſ. Luſitanorum hostes
                           
                           
                              Die Machometiſten van Cananor en doot vianden vande Portugeeſen
                           
                           
                              
                              Incolae Malabarae maritimi inter Goam et Cochina apud quos piper naſcitur▪
                              
                           
                           
                              Inwoonders van Malabar tuſſchen Goa en Cochyn aende Zeecant daer die peeper waſt
                           
                        
                        
                           
                           
                              Horrendae Idolorum effigies, quae in omnibus viarum angulis obuia Indi proſtrati paſsim adorant et donarijs proſequutur, a Bramenis ſacerdotibus, ob ſapientioe opinionem, apud illos magni habitis. Pagodes dicta.
                           
                           
                              Scrickelicke be
                                    •
                                 deniſse der Indiaenſche affgoden geſteſt op alle hoccken van de weegen welcke ſij ha
                                    •
                                 r offer hande doen en ſeer de voetelicken aenbidden van haer papen Bramenes die om opinie van wysheyt daer ſeer geacht ſijn Pagodes genaemt
                           
                           
                              
                              Mesquita ſeu templum Indorum Mahometiſtarum quae ſecta totum fere, orientem pervaſit.
                           
                           
                              Mesquita ofte tempel der Machometiſche Indianen welcke ſeckte bynaer geheel Orienten doordrongen heeft
                           
                        
                        
                        
Gallery with Chambers and Pagodes, ſo that to be briefe, all the chambers and houſes within this compaſſe or foure Galleries, are 300. and are al full of carued Pagodes, of ſo fearefull, horrible and deueliſh formes and ſhapes, that it is wonderful to behold. The other temple or hole of Pagodes in this Ilād, is in an other place, hewed alſo out of hard rockes, and very great, al ful of Pagodes, cut out likewiſe of the ſame ſtones, with ſo euill fauored and vglie ſhapes, that to enter therin it would make a mans hayre ſtand vpright. There is yet an other Pagode, which they hold & eſtéem for the higheſt & chiefeſt Pagode of all the reſt, which ſtandeth in a little Iland called Pory
                        ▪ this Pagode by the Portingals is called the Pagode of the Elephant. In that Iland ſtandeth an high hill, & on the top thereof there is a hole, that goeth down into the hill, digged & carued out of the hard rock, or ſtones as big as a great cloyſter: within it hath both places and ceſternes for water, very curiouſly made, and round about the wals are cut out & formed, the ſhapes of Elephāts, Lions, tigers, and a thouſand other ſuch like wilde and cruel beaſts: alſo ſome Amazones and many other deformed thinges of diuers ſorts, which are all ſo well and workmanlike cut, that it is ſtrange to behold. It is thought that the Chinos (which are verie ingenious workemen) did make it, when they vſed to traffique in the Countrie of India. Theſe Pagodes and buildings are now whollie left, ouergrowne, and ſpoyled, ſince the Portingales had it vnder their ſubiections. By theſe places may it bee coniectured, that their Pagodes are ſtill within the land, euen till this day, ſpeciallie where the Kings and gouernours are all of that Religion, and keepe their Courtes and Palaces.
                     In the Iland of Seylon, whereof I haue alreadie ſpoken, there is a high Hill called Pico d'Adam, or Adams Hill, vpon the top whereof ſtandeth a great houſe, as big as a Cloyſter: wherein ſtandeth a Pagode of great account. In this place in time paſt there was a Toothe of an Ape, ſhrined in Gold and precious ſtones, and therein was kept this Toothe, which for coſtlynes and worthynes was eſtéemed the holyeſt thing in all India, and had the greateſt reſort vnto it from all the countries round about it: ſo that it paſſed both S. Iames in Galiſia, and S. Michae
                              •
                           s Mount in France, by reaſon of the great indulgences & pardons that were there daylie to be had: for which cauſe it was ſought vnto with great deuotion by all the Indians within 4 or 500 miles round about in great multitudes: but it happened an. 1554 whē ye Portingales made a road out of India and entred the Iland of Seylon, they went vp vpon the hill, where they thought to finde great treaſure, becauſe of the fame that was, ſpread abroad of the great reſort and offering in that place, where they ſought the Cloyſter and turned vp euerie ſtone thereof, and found nothing but a little Coffer, made faſt with many coſtly precious ſtones, wherein laye the Apes tooth. This bootie or relique they tooke with them vnto Goa, which when the Kings of Pegu, Sion, Bengala, Biſnagar, and others heard of, they were much grieued that their ſo coſtly Iewell was in that manner taken from them, wherupon by common conſent they ſent their Ambaſſadors vnto the Viceroy of India, deſiring him of all friendſhip, to ſend them their Apes tooth againe, offering him for a ranſome (beſides other preſents, which as then they ſent vnto him) 700. thouſand Ducats in Golde, which the Viceroy for couetouſneſſe of the money was minded to doe. But the Archbiſhop of Goa called Don Gaſpar, my Lords prediceſſor, diſſwaded him from it, ſaying, that they being Chriſtians, ought not to giue it them againe, being a thing whereby Idolatrie might be furthered, and the Deuill worſhipped, but rather were bound by their profeſſion, to roote out and aboliſh all Idolatrie and ſuperſtition, as much as in them lay. By which meanes the Viceroy was perſwaded to change his mind,An Ape
                              •
                            Tooth had in great eſtimation and flatly denied the Ambaſſadours requeſt: hauing in their preſence firſt burnt the Apes tooth, the Aſhes whereof hee cauſed to bee throwne into the Sea. Whereupon the Ambaſſadors fearing ſome further miſchief, tooke their leaue and departed, being much aſtoniſhed that hee refuſed ſo great a ſumme of money, for a thing which hee ſo little eſtéemed that hee burnt it, and threw the Aſhes into the Sea. Not long after there was a Beniane (as the Benianes are full of ſubtiltie) that had gotten an other Apes tooth, and made the Indians and Heathens belieue, that hee had miraculouſly found the ſame Apes tooth, that the Viceroye had, and that it was reuealed vnto him by a Pagode in a viſ
                           •
                        on, that aſſured him it was the ſame, which hee ſaid the Portingales thought they had burned, but that he had béene there inuiſible and taken it away, laying an other in the place. Which the Heathens preſently belieued, ſo that it came vnto the King of Biſnagars eares, who thereupon deſired the Beniane to ſend it him, and with great ioy receiued it, giuing the Beniane a great ſumme of Golde for it, where it was againe holden and kept in the ſame honour and eſtimation, as the other that was burnt, had béene.
                     
                        In the kingdome of Narſinga, or the coaſt called Ch
                              •
                           ramandel, there ſtandeth a Pagode, that is verie great, excéeding rich, and holden in great eſtimation, hauing manye Pilgrimages and viſitations made vnto it from all the countries bordering about it, where euerie yeare they haue many faires, feaſtes, and proceſſions, and there they haue a Wagon or a Carte, which is ſo great and heauie, that thrée or foure Elephants can hardly draw it, and this is brought foorth at faires, feaſtes, and proceſſions. At this Carte hang likewiſe many Cables or Ropes, wherat alſo all the countrie people, both men and women of pure deuotion doe pull and hale. In the vpper part of this Carte ſtandeth a Tabernacle or ſeate, wherein ſitteth the Idoll, and vnder it ſit the Kings wiues, which after their manner play on all inſtruments, making a moſt ſwéete melodie, and in that ſort is the Carte drawne foorth, with great deuotions and proceſſions: there are ſome of them, that of great zeale and pure deuotion doe cut péeces of fleſh out of their bodies, and throwe them downe before the Pagode: others laye themſelues vnder the whéeles of the Carte, and let the Carte runne ouer them, whereby they are all cruſhed to péeces, and preſſed to death, and they that thus die, are accounted for holy and deuout Martyrs, and from that time forwardes are kept and preſerued for great and holy Reliques, beſides a thouſand 
                           •
                        ther ſuch like beaſtly ſuperſtitions, which they vſe, as one of my Chamber fellowes, that had ſeene it, ſhewed me, and it is alſo wel knowne throughout all India.
                     
                     Vpon a time I and certaine Portingales my friends hauing licence from the Viceroy were at a banket and méeting, about fiue or ſixe miles within the firme land, and with vs wee had certaine Decanijns, and naturall borne Indians, that were acquainted with the countrie, the chiefe cauſe of our going, was to ſee their manner of burning the deade Bramene, and his wife with him, being aliue becauſe we had béene aduertiſed, that ſuch a thing was to be done. And there among other ſtrange deuiſes that we ſaw, wee came into ſome Villages, and places inhabited by the Indians where in the way, and at euerie hil, ſtonie Rocke or hole, almoſt within a Pater noſter length, wee found a Carued Pagode, or rather Deuils, and monſters in helliſh ſhapes. At the laſt wee came into a Village, where ſtoode a great Church of ſtone, wherein wee entered, and found nothing in it but a great Table that hung in the middle of the Church, with the Image of a Pagode, painted therein ſo miſhaped and deformed, that more monſterous was neuer ſéene, for it had many hornes, and long téeth that hung out of his mouth down to the knées, and beneath his Nauel and belly, it had an other ſuch like face, with many hornes and tuſkes. Vppon the head thereof ſtoode a triple Crowned Myter, not much vnlike the Popes triple crown, ſo that in effect it ſéemed to be a monſter, ſuch as are deſcribed in the Apocalips. It hung before a Wall, which made a partition from an other Chamber, in manner of a Quier, yet was it cloſe made vp without windowes, or any place for light, in the middle whereof was a little narrow cloſe doore, and on both ſides of the doore, ſtoode a ſmall Furnace made within the wall, wherein were certaine holes or Lattiſſes, thereby to let the ſmoke or ſauor of the fire to enter into that place, when any offering ſhould bee made. Whereof wee found ſome there, as Rice, Corne. Fruites, Hennes, and ſuch like things, which the Indians dayly offered, but there came ſo filthie a ſmoke and ſtincke out of the place, that whoſoeuer went néere it, was almoſt readie to choke, the ſaid place being all black, ſmerie and foule there with Before this doore being ſhut, in the middle of the Church, there ſtoode a Calfe of ſtone, whereon one of our companie leaped, and laughing, began to crie out, which the Bramene that kept the Church, perceiuing, began to call and crie for helpe, ſo that preſently many of the neighbours ranne thether, to ſée what the cauſe might bee, but before the thrung of people came, we dealt ſo well with the Bramene (acknowledging our fault, & ſaying it was vnaduiſedly done) that he was well content▪ & the people went home againe. Then wee deſired the Bramene to open vs the doore that ſtoode ſhut, which after much intreatie he yeelded vnto, offering firſt to throw certaine Aſhes vpon our foreheads, which we refuſed, ſo yt before hee would open vs the doore, wee were forced to promiſe him that we would not enter further in, thē to the doore. The doore of their Sancta Sanctorum, or rather Diabolo
                              •
                           ū, being opened, it ſhewed within like a Lime kill, being cloſe vaulted round about, ouer the heade without either hole or window to caſt in light, but onely at the doore, neither was ther any light in al the Church, but that which came in at the doore we entered by. Within the ſaid cell or vault, there hung at the leaſt 10
                              •
                           . burning Lamps, in the middle whereof ſtoode a little Altar and couered ouer with cloth made of cotton wool, & ouer that with pure golde, vnder the which (as the Bramene told vs ſat the Pagode being of cleane golde, of the bignes of a Puppet or a Baby ſolde in faires: hard by the Church without the great doore, ſtood within ye Earth a great foure cornered or ſquare Ceſterne,

he wed out of frée ſtone, with ſtaires on each ſide to goe downe into it, full of gréene, filthie and ſtinking water, wherin they waſh them ſelues when they meane to enter into the Church to pray. From thence we went further, and ſtill as we went, in euery place wee found Pagodes hewed out of hard ſtones, & ſtanding in their holes, of ſuch liuely ſhapes and figures as wee tolde you before. Theſe ſtand in the waies vnder certaine couertures, without the Churches, and haue hard by each of them a ſmall Ceſterne of water, cut out of the ſtone to waſh their féete, with halfe an Indian Nut, that hath a handle and hangeth there to take vp water withall. And this is ordained for the trauellers, that paſſe by, who commonly at euerie one of thoſe Pagodes do fall downe and make their praiers, and waſh their féete in thoſe Ceſternes. By the ſaid Pagodes, commonly doe ſtand two little Furnaces, with a Calfe or Cow of ſtone, before the which they ſet their offerings, which are of ſuch things, as are to be eaten, euerie man as his deuotion ſerueth, which they think the Pagode eateth in the night, but it is taken away by the Bramene. We found in euerie place ſuch offerings ſtanding, but we had little deſire once to taſte therof, it looked ſo filthily, and as we had ſufficiently beholden their miſhapen figures and monſtrous Images, we returned againe vnto the village, wherein we ſaw the ſtone Church, becauſe the Bramene. had aduertiſed vs, that the ſame day about Euening, the Pagode ſhould be caried in proceſſion, to ſport it ſelfe in the fieldes, and to fetch a circuite, which we deſired to ſée. And about the time which he appointed, they rung a little Bell, which they had gotten of the Chriſtians, wherewith all the people began to aſſemble, and tooke the Pagode out of his diabolicall Cell, which with great reuerence, they ſet in a Palamkin borne by the chiefe men of the towne, all the reſt with great de
                        
                           •
                        otion following after, with their vſual noyſe and ſounds of Trumpets and other inſtruments, wherewith they went a reaſonable way round about a field, & then brought him to the ſtone Ceſtern, where waſhing him verie cleane (although he were verie filthy ſtinking) they caried him againe into his Cel, leauing him ſhut herein withall his Lampes, to make good cheare, and hauing made a foule ſmoke and ſtincke about him, and euery man left his offering behind him, they went home to their houſes, leauing the Bramene alone, who in ſtéed of the Pagode, made good cheare at their coſts, with his wife and family.
                     This is the maner of their ceremonies and daily ſuperſtitions, worſhippings of falſe gods, wherein the Deuill hath ſo blinded them, that thereby they are without all doubt perſwaded to obtaine eternall life, and tell many miracles of their Idols, whereby wee are mooued and put in mind, to call to remembraunce how much herein we are bound to God, and to giue him thankes, that it hath pleaſed him to illuminate vs, with the truth of his holy Goſpel, and that we are not borne or brought vp among thoſe Heathens, and diueliſh Idolaters, and to deſire God that it would pleaſe him of his gracious goodneſſe, to open their eyes, and to giue them the truth of his holy word among them, as hee is our onely truſt, for they are in all things like vs, made after Gods owne Image, and that when his good pleaſure is, hee will looſe them out of the bands of Sathan, and giue both them and vs that which is moſt neceſſarie for our ſoules, Amen. The better to vnderſtand the maner of their diueliſh ſhapes and figures of Pagodes, I haue hereunto annexed the picture thereof, euen as they openly ſtand in the high wayes or hilles, with a Cow or Calfe of ſtone by them, alſo their Church called Meskita, belonging to the Mahometans and Moores, dweling in Malabar, with the Ceſterne of water wherein they waſh themſelues.
                  
                  
                     The 45. Chapter. Of all the kinde of beaſtes, Cattell, and foules in India.
                     
                        THere is ouer all India great ſtore of Cattell, as Oxen, Kine, Shéepe, Hogges, Goates, Kids, and ſuch like, and verie good cheape, and in great aboundance, although the fleſh is not of ſo good a taſt as that in Europe, which procéedeth from the heate of the countrie, & therfore it is not much eſtéemed. A man may buy the beſt Cow in Goa, for fiue or ſixe Pardawes. Oxen are there little killed to eate, but are moſt kept to til the land, all other things as hogges, ſhéepe and goates, are ſold after the rate. Mutton is little eſtéemed of, and not much vſed to be eaten for it is forbidden to ſuch as are ſicke, & the Hogs fleſh is much better & ſounder, which is rather permitted vnto ſicke perſons then Mutton. Ther are ſhéepe in that countrie of fiue quarters in quantity, for that the tayle is as great, & hath as much fleſh vpon it, as any of the quarters, there are many Buffles, but nothing good to be eaten, vnles it be by poore people, but their Milke is very good, and is very well ſolde and ordinarily eaten, for you ſhall ſée the ſlaues & Canarijns in great numbers, all day going about the ſtréetes to ſell the Milke of Buffles,

and Goates, and excellent ſwéete Creame, and freſh butter in ſmall péeces. They make likewiſe ſome ſmall white Cheeſes, but they are very ſalte and drie: wilde Bores, ſome Hares, Conies, Harts and Hindes are there alſo to be found, but not many▪ Cockes, Capons, Pheaſantes and Doues are there in great abundance and good cheape. In the Iſland of Goa and there about are Sparrows, and ſome other ſmall birdes, yet not many: but on the coaſt of Cochin and Malabar there are very few Sparrows, nor any ſuch like ſmall birdes. There are in India many Battes, and ſome of them ſo great, that it is incredible to tell. They doe great miſchiefe to trées, fruites and hearbes, whereby the Canariins are conſtrained to ſet men to watch in their trées, and yet they can hardly ridde them away. The Indians eate them, and ſay they are as good meat as a Partridge. There is a moſt wonderfull number of black Crows, which do much hurt, and are ſo bold, that oftentimes they come flying in at their windowes, and take the meat out of the diſh, as it ſtandeth vpon the table, before them that are ſet downe to eate: and as I my ſelfe ſate writing aboue in a chamber of the houſe, the windowes being open, one of thoſe Crowes flew in at the window, and picked the cotton one of mine Inke horne, and blotted all the paper that lay on my table, do what I could to let him. They ſitte commonly vppon the Buffles backes, and pecke off their haire, ſo that you ſhal find very few Buffles that haue any haire vpon their backes, and therefore to auoide the Crowes they get themſelues into mariſhes, and watrie places, where they ſtand in the water vppe to the neckes, otherwiſe they could neuer be rid of them. There are likewiſe great numbers of Rattes, and ſome as bigge as young Pigges, ſo that the Cattes dare not touch them. Sometimes they digge downe the houſes, for that they vndermine the walles & foundations through and through, wherby many times the houſes fall downe and are ſpoyled. There is another ſort of Rattes, that are little and reddiſh of haire: They are called ſweet ſmelling Rattes, for they haue a ſmell as if they were full of Muſke. Of Ants or Piſmires there is ſo great aboundance throughout al India, and ſo noyſome, that it is incredible to ſuch as haue not ſeene it: for that men may ſet nothing whatſoeuer it be▪ that is to be eaten, or fattie, nor yet their clothes nor linnen, but you ſhall preſently find at the leaſt a thouſand vpon it, and in the twinckling of an eye they wil preſently conſume a loafe of bread: wherefore it is the manner throughout India, to make all the Cubbords wherein they kéep their victualls, and cheſts, where their linnen and apparrell lyeth, with foure féete or pillers, and vnder euery foot or piller a ſtone or woodden Ceſtern full of water, and place the Cubbord or cheſt in the middle of the roome, not néete the wall, whereby they cannot come at it, otherwiſe it would be ſpoyled, and if they do neuer ſo little forget to powre water into the Ceſternes, if it be but a Pater noſter while, preſently ther will be ſo many Piſmires crawling all ouer it, that it is wonderfull: ſo that it ſéemeth to bee a curſe or plague of God ſent vppon that countrey. There are ſome likewiſe that vſe ſuch Ceſternes of water vnder their bedſtéed, becauſe they wold not be troubled with them as they lie in their beds, and alſo vnder their tables. Some men which kéep Canary birds, or ſuch ſmall fowles (that are brought thither from Portingall, or out of Turkey and Perſia for their pleaſures) are forced to ſet them on a ſticke or pearch made for the purpoſe, with a Ceſterne of water vnder it, otherwiſe it would preſently be killed by the Piſmires: and though it hangeth in the top of the houſe, yet they will come at it, if it haue a ſtring, to hold it by. The ſoldiers and poore people that haue not the meanes to buy Cubbordes with Ceſternes) put the bread and other victua
                           •
                        les which they leaue (which is not ouer much) into a cloth tyed on knots, and hang it on a nayle againſt a wall, and make a circle about it of Charcoale, ſo that the Piſmires cannot get ouer, nor come at it. There is another ſorte of Piſmires which are almoſt a finger long, and reddiſh of colour: they runne into the fields & do great hurt to the herbes, fruites and plants. Moathes & wormes which créepe and eate through mens cloathes, are there in great aboundance, whereby men muſt vſe no more cloathes nor linnen in thoſe countries then that he neceſſarily and dayly weareth on his back, otherwiſe they are preſently moatheaten and ſpoyled. They can hardly kepe any paper or bokes from wormes, which are like eare wormes, but they do often ſpoyle & conſume many papers & euidences of great importance. There are alſo many Wall-lyce.They are called W
                              •
                           -lyce, becauſe the breede 
                              〈◊〉
                            wal
                              •
                           : B
                              •
                            in true E
                              •
                           
                           gliſh the
                              •
                            are called M
                              •
                           dges, in Latin, C
                                 •
                              mice
                                 •
                              .
                         There is a kind of beaſt that flyeth, twice as bigge as a Bee, and is called Baratta: Theſe creatures alſo do much hurt, and are commō
                        ly in Sugar, Hony, Butter, Oile, and al fatte wares and ſwéet meats. Many of them likewiſe come into their cheſtes among their clothes and linnen, which they doe alſo ſpoyle and ſpot. They are in great numbers and verie hurtfull. There can bee nothing ſo cloſe ſhut or made faſt, but they wil get in & ſpoile it, for where they lie or be, they ſpot all things with their egges, which ſtick as faſt as ſirop vpon a paper, ſo that ther may bee eſtéemed

                           〈3 pages missing〉
                        
                        
                        
they are to draw, they binde the fat or packe faſt with a rope that he may féele the waight thereof, and then the keeper ſpeaketh vnto him: whereuppon hee taketh the corde with his ſnout, and windeth it about his teeth, and thruſteth the end into his mouth
                           •
                        , & ſo draweth it hanging after him, whether they deſire to haue it. If it be to be put into a boate, then they bring the boate cloſe to the ſhore of the Key, and the Elephant putteth it into the boate himſelfe, and with his ſnout gathereth ſtones together, which he laieth vnder the fat pipe, or packe, & with his teeth ſtriketh & thruſteth the packe or veſſell, to ſee if it lie faſt or not. It will draw any great ſhot or other Iron work, or mettall being made faſt vnto it, be it neuer ſo heauie, they draw fuſtes, ſmall Gallies, and other great boats, as Caruels, and ſuch like, as eaſily out of the water vpon the land, as if no man were in them: ſo that they ſerue their turnes there, euen as our ſlids or carts with horſes doe here to carrie our wares and marchandiſes, their meat is rice and water, they ſléepe like kine, oxen, horſes, and all foure footed beaſtes, and bow their knées and all their members as other beaſts doe. In winter when it beginneth to raine, then they are vnquiet, and altogether mad, ſo that their kéepers cannot rule them, and then they are let ſome whether out of the towne to a great trée, and there tyed vnto it by the legs with a great iron chaine, where they cary him meate, and ſo hee lieth in the open aire, as long as he is mad, which is from Aprill to September, all the Winter time when it raineth, and then he commeth to him ſelfe, and beginneth to ſerue againe as tamely, that a mā may lie vnder his bellie, ſo you doe him no hurt: but he that hurteth him, hee muſt take héede, for they neuer forget when any man doth them iniurie, vntill they be reuenged. Their téeth which is the Iuor bone, is much vſed in India, ſpecially in Cambaia, whereof they make many curious péeces of workemanſhip▪ the women weare manillas, or arme bracelets therof, ten or twelue about each arme, whereby it is there much worne, and are in great numbers brought out of Aethiopia, Moſambique and other places. In the Iſland of Seylon and Pegu, they fight moſt vpon Elephants, and bind ſwords vpon their teeth, they haue likewiſe woodden Caſtles vppon their backes, wherein are fiue or ſixe men that ſhoot out of them with bowes, or peeces, and alſo caſt out wildfire. They doo no other hurt but onely ſerue to put the enemie out of order, and to ſcatter them out of their rankes, but if any one of them once turneth his backe, then they all begin to turne & runne ouer their owne people, and put them all out of order. They are very fearefull of a rat or a mouſe, and alſo of the Piſmyres, becauſe they feare they would créepe into their ſnouts. They are likewiſe afraide of gunne ſhot and of fire, vnleſſe by length of time they be vſed vnto them. When they haue the companie one of the other, the male Elephant ſtandeth vpon the higher ground, and the female ſomewhat lower. As they goe along the way, although you ſee them not, you may heare them a farre off by the noyſe of their féet and clapping of their eares, which they cōtinually vſe. They are as ſwift ingoing almoſt as a horſe, and are very proud, and deſirous of honour. When there is any great feaſt or holiday kept in Goa, with ſolemne proceſſion, commonly the Elephants go with them, the yong before, and the old behind, and are all painted vppon their bodies with the Armes and Croſſes of Portingall, & haue euery one fiue or ſix trumpetters or players vpon the Shalmes, ſitting vppon them that ſound very pleaſantly, wherewith they are as well pleaſed, and goe with as great grauitie, and in as good order as if they were men. It hapned in Goa, that an Elephant ſhuld draw a great fuſt out of the water vnto the land, which fuſt was ſo great and heauie, that hee could not doe it alone, ſo that they muſt haue another to help him: whereupon the keeper chid him, vſing many hard wordes, ſaying, that he was idle and weak, and that it would be an euerlaſting ſhame for him, that they muſt fetch another to helpe him, wherewith the Elephant was ſo deſperate, that he thruſt away his fellow (which was brought to help him) and beg
                           •
                        n freſhly againe to draw, with ſo great a force, more then hee was well able to doe, that with extreame labour hee burſt and fell downe ſtarke dead in the place. At ſuch time as I was to make my voyage frō 
                        Cochin to Portingall, the Rudder of our ſhip was out of order, ſo that it muſt of force be brought on land to make it fit againe, and ſo it was drawn to the riuer ſide at the ſterne of the boat, which the Elephant ſhould draw on land vppon two bordes, that it might ſlide vp, and becauſe it was heauie, (as the Rudder of a ſhip of 1400. or 1600. tunnes requireth) as alſo that the Elephant was as yet but yong, and not growne to his ful ſtrength, ſo that he could not draw it out alone, yet he did the beſt hee could: but ſeeing hee could not doe it, he fell on his fore legges, and began to crie and weepe, that the teares ran out of his eyes, and becauſe many of vs ſtoode vpon the ſhore to behold this ſight, the kéeper began to chide him, and with hard words to curſe him, becauſe he ſhamed him thus in preſence of ſo

many men, not to be able to draw vp ſuch a thing: but what ſtrength or labour ſoeuer the Elephant vſed, he could not doe it alone, but when they brought another Elephant to help him, they both together drewe it halfe out of the water, ſo that it lay partly vppon the bordes. The firſt Elephant, perceiuing that with his head and teeth thruſt the other Elephant away, and would haue no more helpe, but drew it out himſelfe: whereby it may bee conſidered, that they are in vnderſtanding, and deſire of commendation like vnto men.
                     They are likewiſe very thankefull and mindfull of any good done vnto them. When new yeares day cōmeth, their kéepers vſe of cōmon cuſtome to aſke new yeres gifts of the Viceroy, the Archbiſhop, and other gouernours and Gentlemen, and then the Elephants come to the dore and bow their heads downe, and when any thing is giuen, they knéele on their knees with great lowlineſſe, and thankefulneſſe, for the good déedes ſo done vnto their keepers (which they thinke to bee done vnto themſelues.) They vſe as they paſſe by ſuch houſes, to bow their heads at the dores, as alſo when they paſſe by the Church doores, and by Croſſes, which their Maſters teach them. They haue a cuſtome that they goe often into the market where herbes are ſold, as Reddiſh, Lettice, Colworts, and ſuch like ſtuffe, and thoſe that are liberall to the Elephant, doe vſe to throw ſomething before him. Among the reſt there was one Hearb wife which alwaies vſed to throw ſomething of her wares before the Elephant. Now whē the time came on that the Elephant groweth mad, as I ſaid before, they vſe to goe with them thrée or foure dayes or a weeke about the ſtréets before they bind them vp, (beeing as then but halfe mad) to aſk ſomething of euery body for the féeding of the mad Elephāt in the winter time. And going thus about the ſtréetes, the maſter is not able to rule him, for hee runneth about with his head downeward, and by his roaring giueth the people warning to beware, and when he findeth or ſéeth no man, hee leapeth and ouerthroweth whatſoeuer he méeteth withall, whereby he
                           •
                         maketh great ſport and paſtime, much like to the baiting of Oxen in Spaine, which neuer ceaſeth, vntil one, two, or more of them be ſlaine, the like rule is kept with the mad Elephant in India. It chanced in this running about, that the Elephhnt ran through the ſtréets, and in haſte at vnwares came into the market, throwing downe all that was in his way, whereat euery man was abaſht, and leauing their ware, ranne to ſaue themſelues from being ouer run by the Elephant, and by meanes of the noyſe and preaſe of people, they fell one ouer another, as in ſuch caſes is commonly ſeene. Among them was this woman, that alwaies vſed to giue the Elephant ſome thing to eat, which had a little childe in the market lying by her in a baſket, and by the haſtie riſing vp and throng of the people, the woman ran into a houſe, not hauing time to ſnatch vp her Child, and take it with her, and when the Elephant was alone in the market place, where he roared vp and downe, ouerthrowing all thinges that were before him, hee came by the child (that as I ſaid) lay ſtill in the market, and as euery man looked, ſpecially the mother, which cried out, & verily thought that the Elephant had taken it and caſt it on his ſhoulder and ſpoiled it as he did all other thinges. Hee on the contrarie notwithſtanding all his madneſſe, béeing mindfull of the good will and liberalitie of the childes mother dayly vſed vnto him, tooke vp the child handſomlie and tenderly with his ſnout, and layde it ſoftly vpon a ſtall by a ſhop ſide, which done, hee began againe to vſe the ſame order of ſtamping, crying, and clapping as he had done at the firſt, to the great wondering of al that beheld it, ſpecially to the eaſe and ioy of the mother, that had recouered her child ſound and well againe. Theſe and ſuch like examples do often happen in India, which would be too long to rehearſe, and therfore I thought good onely to ſet theſe thrée or foure before your eyes, as things worthy memorie, thereby to teach vs to bee mindfull of all good déeds done vnto vs, and with thankfulnes to requite them, conſidering that theſe dumbe beaſtes doe ſhew, vs as it were in a glaſſe, that wee ſhould doe ſo as they doe, not onley when they haue their ſence and vnderſtanding, but (which is more to bee wondred at) when they are out of their wits & ſtarke mad: whereas men many times hauing all their vnderſtanding, and their fiue wits ſoūd, do caſt the benefits, which they haue receiued behind their backs, yea, and at this day doe reward all good déedes with vnthankfulneſſe, God amend it.
                  
                  
                     
                     The 47. Chapter. Of the Abadas or Rhinoceros.
                     
                        THe Abada or Rhinoceros is not in India, but onely in Bengala, and Patane. They are leſſe and lower than the Elephant. It hath a ſhort horne vpon the nole, in the hinder part ſōwhat big, & toward the end ſharper, of a browne blew, and whitiſh colour, it hath a ſnout like a hogge, and the ſkin vppon the vpper part of his body is all wrinckled, as if it were armed with Shields or Targets. It is a great enemie of the Elephant. Some thinke it is the right Vnicorne, becauſe that as yet there hath no other bin found, but only by heareſay, and by the pictures of them. The Portingales and thoſe of Bengala affirme, that by the Riuer Ganges in the Kingdome of Bengala, are many of theſe Rhinoceros, which when they will drinke, the other beaſts ſtand and waite vpon them, till the Rhinoceros hath drinke, & thruſt their horne into the water, for he cannot drink but his horne muſt be vnder the water, becauſe it ſtandeth ſo cloſe vnto his noſe, and muzzle: and then after him all the other beaſtes doe drinke. Their hornes in India are much eſtéemed and vſed againſt all venime, poyſon, and many other diſeaſes: likewiſe his teeth, clawes, fleſh, ſkin and blood, and his very dung and water and all whatſoeuer is about him, is much eſtéemed in India, and vſed for the curing of many diſeaſes and ſickneſſes, which is very good and moſt true, as I my ſelfe by experience haue found, but it is to be vnderſtood, that all Rhinocerotes are not a like good, for there are ſome whoſe hornes are ſold for one, two, or thrée hundred Pardawes the péece, and there are others of the ſame colour and greatnes that are ſold but for three or foure Pardawes, which the Indians know and can diſcerne. The cauſe is that ſome Rhinocerotes, which are found in certaine places in the countrie of Bengala haue this vertue, by reaſon of the hearbes which that place only yéeldeth and bringeth foorth, which in other places is not ſo, and this eſtimation is not onely held of the horne, but of all other things in his whole body, as I ſaide before. There are alſo by Malacca, Sion, and Bengala ſome goates that are wild, whoſe hornes are eſtéemed for the beſt hornes againſt poyſon, and all venime that may bee found: they are called Cabras de Mato, yt is, wilde Goates. Theſe hornes are of great account in India, and much eſtéemed, and are oftentimes by experience found to bee verie good, wherof I my ſelf am a good witnes, hauing prooued the ſame. In the yeare 1581. as king Phillip was at Lisbone, there was a Rhinoceros and an Elephant brought him out of India for a preſent, and he cauſed them both to be led with him vnto Madril, where the Spaniſh Court is holden. This ſhal ſuffice as touching beaſtes and birdes in thoſe countries, although there are many others which are not ſo well knowne: therefore I haue heere ſet downe none but ſuch as are dayly ſéene there in the land, and well known by euery man in the countrie.
                  
                  
                     The 48. Chapter. Of the Fiſhes and other beaſtes in the Seas of India.
                     
                        FIſh in India is verie plentifull, and ſome very pleaſant and ſwéete. The beſt Fiſh is called Mordexiin, Pampano, and Tatiingo. There is a fiſh called Piexe Serra, which is cut in round péeces as we cut Salmon, and ſalt it. It is very good, and wil indure long to carie ouer ſea in ſhips for victuals. Moſt of their fiſh is eaten with rice, that they ſéeth in broth which they put vpon the rice, and is ſomewhat ſowre, as if it were ſodden in gooſeberries, or vnripe grapes, but it taſteth well, and is called Car
                              •
                           iil, which is their dayly meat, the rice is in ſtead of bread: there are alſo good Shads, Soles, and other ſortes of fiſhes. The Garnaten is the beſt & greateſt that euer I ſaw any, for that with a dozen of them a man may make a good meale. The Crabs and Creuiſhes are verie good and maruellous great, that it is a wonder to tell, and that which is more wonderful, when the moone is in the full, here with vs it is a common ſaying, that then Crabbes, and creuiſhes are at the beſt, but there it is cleane contrarie: for with a full moone they are emptie and out of ſeaſon, and with a new moone good and full. There are alſo Muſkles and ſuch like ſhelfiſhes of many ſorts, oyſters very many, ſpecially at Cochin; & from thence to the cape de Comoriin. Fiſh in India is very good cheape, for ye with the valew of a ſ
                           •
                        iuers of their money, a man may buy as much fiſh and rice to it, as will ſerue fiue or ſixe men for a good meale, after the Spaniſh manner, which is very good cheape, in reſpect

of their victuals in Spaine and Portingall.
                     
                     There is in the riuers and alſo in the Sea along the coaſt of India great ſtore of fiſhes, which the Portingalls call Tubaron or Hayen. This fiſh doth great miſchiefe, and deuoureth many men that fiſh for pearles, and therefore they dare not ſwimme in the riuers for feare of theſe fiſhes, but doe vſe to bath themſelues in ceſternes, made for the ſame purpoſe, as I ſaid before. As our ſhip lay in the Riuer of Cochin, readie to ſayle from thence to Portingall, it hapned that as we were to hang on our rutter, which as then was mended, the maſter of the ſhip, with 4 or 5. ſaylers, went with the Boat to put it on, and an other Sayler beeing made faſt with a corde about his middle, and tied to the Ship, hung downe with halfe his body into the water to place the ſame vpon the hookes, and while he hung in the water, there came one of thoſe Hayens, and bit one of his legs, to the middle of his thigh, cleane off at a bit, notwithſtanding that the Maſter ſtroke at him with an oare, and as the pore man was putting downe his arme to feele his wound, the ſame Fiſh at the ſecond time for another bit did bite off his hand and arme aboue the elbow, and alſo a péece of his buttucke.
                     The Maſter and all the Saylers in the Boate not being able to help him, although they both ſtroke and flang at it with ſtaues and oares, and in that miſerable caſe the pore man was carried into the Hoſpitall, where we left him with ſmall hope of life, and how he ſped after that, God knoweth, for the next day we ſet ſayle and put to Sea. Theſe and ſuch like chances happen dayly by thoſe fiſhes in India, as well in the ſea, as in the Riuers, ſpecially among the Fiſhers for Pearles, whereof many looſe their liues.
                     In the Riuer of Goa in Winter time when the mouth of the Riuer was ſhut vp, as commonly at that time it is, the fiſhermen tooke a fiſh of a moſt wonderfull and ſtrange forme, ſuch as I thinke was neuer ſeene eyther in India, or in any other place, which for the ſtrangenes therof was preſented to my Lord the Archbiſhop, the picture whereof by his commandement was painted, and for a wonder ſent to the King of Spaine.
                     
                     It was in bignes as great as a middle ſized Dogge with a ſnout like a hogge, ſmall eies, no eares, but two holes where his eares ſhould bee, it had foure féet like an Elephant, the tayle beginning ſomewhat vppon the backe broad, and then flatte, and at the verie end round and ſomewhat ſharpe. It ranne a a long the hall vppon the flore, and in euerie place of the houſe ſnorting like a hogge. The whole body, head, taile, & legs being couered with ſ
                           •
                        ales of a thumb breadth, harder than Iron, or ſteele: Wee hewed and layd vppon them with weapons, as if men ſhould beate vpon an Anuill, and when wee ſtroke vppon him, hee rouled himſelfe in a heape, head and féete altogether, ſo that hee lay like a round ball, wee not beeing able to iudge where hee cloſed himſelfe together, neyther could wee with anie inſtrument or ſtrength of hands open him againe, but letting him alone and not touching him, hee opened himſelfe and ranne away as I ſaid before.
                     And becauſe I am now in hand with Fiſhes of India, I will here declare a ſhort and true Hiſtorie of a Fiſh, although to ſome it may ſeeme incredible, but it ſtandeth painted in the Viceroyes Pallace in India, and was ſet downe by true and credible witneſſes that it was ſo, and therefore it ſtandeth there for memorie of a wonderfull thing, together with the names and ſurnames of the ſhip, Captaine day, & yere when it was done, and as yet there are many men liuing at this day, that were in the ſame ſhippe and aduenture, for that it is not long ſince, and it was thus. That a ſhip ſayling from Moſambique into India, and they hauing faire weather, a good fore winde, as much as the Sayles might beare before the winde for the ſpace of fourteene dayes together, directing their courſe towards the Equinoctiall line, euery day as they tooke the height of the Sunne, in ſtead of diminiſhing or leſſening their degrées, according to the Winde and courſe they had and held, they found them ſelues ſtill contrarie, and euery day further backewards then they were, to the great admiration and wondering of them all, and contrarie to all reaſon and mans vnderſtanding, ſo that they did not only wonder theraf, but were much abaſht beeing ſtedfaſtly perſwaded that they were bewitched, for they knew very well by experience, that the ſtreame or courſe of the water in thoſe countries did not driue them backe, nor withholde them contrarie to all Art of Nauigation, whereupon they were all in great perplexity and feare, ſtanding ſtill and beholding each other, not once knowing the cauſe thereof.
                     At ye laſt the chiefe Boteſon whō they call the maſters mate, looking by chance ouerbord towards the beakhead of the ſhip, he eſpied a great broad taile of a Fiſh that had winded it ſelfe as it were about the beakehead the body therof beeing vnder the keele,

and the heade vnder the Ruther, ſwimming in that manner, and drawing the ſhippe with her againſt the wind and their right courſe: whereby preſently they knewe the cauſe of their ſo going backewards: ſo that hauing at the laſt ſtricken long with ſtaues and other weapons vppon the fiſhes taile, in the ende they ſtroke it off, and thereby the fiſh left the ſhip▪ after it had layne 14 dayes vnder the ſame, drawing the ſhip with it againſt wind and weather: for which cauſe the Viceroy in Goa cauſed it to be painted in his pallace for a perpetuall memory, where I haue often read it, with the day and time, and the name both of the ſhippe and Captaine, which I can not well remember, although it bee no great matter.
                     There are many other fiſhes in thoſe ſeas and riuers. In the Riuer of Bengala called G
                              •
                           a
                              •
                           , and by Malacca there are Crocodiles, and other ſea Serpents of an vnſpeakeable greatnes, which often times doe ouerturne ſmal fiſher boates and other ſentes, and deuoure the men that are therein: and ſome of them creeping out of the water vnto the lande do ſnatch vppe diuers men, which they hale after them, and then kill them and eate them, as it dayly happeneth in thoſe Countries. There are by Malacca certaine fiſh ſhelles found on the ſhore, much like Scalop ſhelles, ſo great and ſo heauie that two ſtrong men haue enough to doe with a Leauer to draw one of them after them. Within them there is a fiſh which they of Malacca do eate. There were ſome of thoſe ſhelles in the ballaſt of the ſhippe that came from Malacca, & kept company with vs from the Iſland of S. H
                              •
                           len
                              •
                           , to the Iſlande of Tercera, where the ſhippe was caſt away, and ſome of the ſhelles taken out of her, which the Ieſuites of Malacca had ſent vnto Lisbone, to ſet in the wals of their church and Cloyſter, which they there had cauſed to bee made, and moſt ſumptuouſly built. The like happened to a ſhippe called S. Peter, that ſayled from Co
                           
                              •
                           
                         towardes Portingall, that fell vpon a ſande, which at this day is called after the ſame ſhips name S. Peters ſande lying from Goa South Southeaſt vnder 6. degrees vpon the South ſide, where it was caſt away, but all the men ſaued themſelues, and of the woode of the ſhippe that was caſt away, they made a ſmall Barke or Caruell, wherewith they all arriued in India: & while they were buſied about building of their ſhip, they found ſuch great Crabbes vpon that ſand, and in ſo great numbers, that they were conſtrained to make a ſconce, and by good watch to defend themſelues from thē, for that they were of an vnreaſonable greatnes, ſo that whomſoeuer they got vnder their claws, it coſt him his life: this is moſt true and not long ſince done, for that in the ſame ſhippe wherein I came out of India into Portingal, there were two of the Saylors that had beene in the ſame ſhippe called S. Peter, and affirmed it for a truth, as it is likewiſe paynted in diuers places in Goa, for a perpetual memory, which I thought good to ſet downe, to ſhewe the ſtrangeneſſe of thoſe fiſhes: and it is to be thought that there are many other fiſhes and ſea monſters, as yet to vs not known, which are dayly found by ſuch as continually vſe to ſea, and doo often meete with them. And this ſhall be ſufficient for the fiſhes & ſea monſters of India.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 49. Chapter Of all fruits, trees, plants, and common hearbs in India, and firſt of a certain fruit called Ananas.
                     
                     
                        
                           ANanas by the Canarijns called Ananaſa,
                        Anno
                              •
                           . D. P. by the Braſilians Nana, and by others in Hiſpaniola Iaiama: by the Spaniards in Braſilia Pinas, becauſe of a certain reſemblance which the fruite hath with the Pineapple. It commeth out of the Prouince of Sancta Croce, firſt brought into Bra
                              •
                           lia, thē to the Spaniſh Indies, and afterwardes into the Eaſt Indies, where nowe they grow in great abundance, of the bignes of Citrones, or of a common Melon. They are of a faire colour, of a yellow greene, which greennes when it is ripe vadeth away. It is ſweet in taſte, & pleaſant in ſmell, like to an Abricot, ſo that by the very ſmell of them a man may know the houſes wherein theſe fruites are kept. A far off they ſhew like Artich
                              •
                           kes, but they haue no ſuch ſharpe prickes on their leaues: the plants or ſtalkes whereon they grow are as bigge as a Thiſtle, and haue a roote alſo like a Thiſtle, wheron groweth but one Nut in the middle of the ſtalke, and rounde about it certaine ſmall ſtalkes whereon ſome fruite likewiſe doeth often times grow. I haue had ſome of the Slips here

in my garden, that were brought mee out of Braſilia, but our colde countrey could not brooke them. This fruite is hot and moiſt, and is eaten out of wine like a Peach, light of diſgeſture, but ſuperfluous in nouriſhing: It inflameth and heateth, and conſumeth the gums; by reaſon of the ſmall threedes that run through it. There are many ſortes of this fruite among the Braſilians, which according to the difference of their ſpeeches haue likewiſe differēt names, whereof three kindes are ſpecially named and written of. The firſt called Iaiama, which is the longeſt & the beſt of taſte, and the ſubſtance of it yellow. The ſecond Bomama, that is white within, and not very ſweet of taſte. The thirde Iaiagna, which is whitiſh within, and taſteth like Reniſh Wine. Theſe fruites likewiſe do grow ſome of themſelues as if they were planted, and are called wilde Ananaſſes, and ſome growe in gardens, whereof we now make mention. The wilde growe vppon ſtalkes of the length of a pike or Speare, rounde, and of the bigneſſe of an Orange, ful of thorns: the leaues likewiſe haue ſharpe pricks, and round about full of ſoft 
                           〈…〉
                         the fruite is little eaten, although they are of an indifferent pleaſant taſte. The whole plantes with the rootes are ful of iuyce, which being taken about ſeuē or eight of the clocke in a morning, and drunke with Sugar, is holden for a moſt certaine remedie againſt the heate of the liuer and the kidneyes, againſt exulcerated kidneyes, mattery water and excoriation of the yarde. The Arabians commend it to be good againſt Saynt Anthonies fire, and call it Queura. He that is deſirous to reade more hereof, let him reade Coſta in the proper Chapter of Ananas, and Ou
                              •
                           edius in the eight booke, and eighteenth Chapter: and Theuetius in his obſeruations of America, in the ſix and fortieth Chapter. Ananas preſerued in Sugar are like Cocumbers, whereof I haue had many.
                     Ananas is one of the beſt fruites, and of beſt taſte in all India, but it is not a proper fruit of India it ſelfe, but a 
                              〈…〉
                            fruite, for it was firſt brought by the 
                              •
                           ortingalles out of Braſill
                           •
                        , ſo that at the 
                              〈◊〉
                            it 
                              •
                            is ſold for a noueltie, at a 
                        
                           〈…〉
                        , and ſometimes more, but now there are ſo many growen in the Countrey, that they are very good cheape. The time when they are rype is in Lent, for then they are beſt and ſweeteſt of taſte. They are as bigge as a Melon, and in forme like the heade of a Diſtaffe, without like a Pine apple, but ſofte in cutting: of colour redde and greeniſh: They growe about halfe a fadome high from the grounde▪ not much more or leſſe. the leaues are like the Hearbe that is brought out of Spayne, called Aloe, or Semper viua, becauſe it is alwayes greene, and therefore it is hanged on the beames of houſes, but ſomewhat ſmaller, and at the endes ſomewhat ſharpe, as if they were cut out. When they eate them, they pull off the ſhell, and cutte them into ſhees or peeces, as men deſire to haue them dreſt. Some haue ſmall kernelles within them, like the kernelles of Apples or Peares. They are of colour within like a Peach, that is ripe, and almoſt of the ſame taſte, but in ſweeteneſſe they ſurpaſſe all fruites. The iuyce thereof is like ſwéete Muſte, or newe Reniſh Wyne: a man can neuer ſatiſfie himſelfe therewith. It is very hotte of nature, for if you let a knife ſticke in it but halfe an houre long, when you draw it forth again, it will bee halfe eaten vppe, yet it doeth no particular hurte, vnleſſe a man ſhoulde eate ſo much thereof, that hee ſurfet vpon them, as many ſuch greedie and vnreaſonable men there are, which eate all thinges without any meaſure or diſcretion. The ſicke are forbidden to vſe them. The common way to dreſſe the common Ananaſſes, is to cut them in broad round cakes or ſlyces, and ſo being ſtooped in wine, it is a very pleaſant meat.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     The 50. Chapter. O
                           •
                         
                        Iaqua or Iaacca.
                     
                     
                        
                           THis fruite groweth in Calecut, and in ſome other places of India, neere to the Sea,
                        Anno
                              •
                           a. D. Pa
                              •
                           l. 
                        and vpon ryuers or waters ſides. It is a certaine fruite that in Malabar is called Iaca, in Canara and Guſurate, Panar and Panaſa, by the Arabians, Panax, by the Perſians, Fanax. This fruite groweth vpon great trees, not out of the branches like other fruites, but out of the body of the tree, aboue the earth, and vnder the leaues. The leaues are as bigge as a mans hand, greeniſh, with a thick hard veine that goeth cleane thorough the length of them. The ſmalleſt of this fruite, ſpecially that which groweth in Malabar, and is the beſt of all, is greater then our greateſt Pumpians, (I meane of Portingall.) They are without couered with a hard ſhell, of colour greene, otherwiſe it is much like the Pine apple, ſaue onely that the ſhell or huske ſeemeth to be ſet ful of pointed Diamants, which haue certaine greene and ſhort hookes at the endes, but at the verie points are blackiſh, and yet are neither ſharpe not pricking although they ſeeme ſo to be. Theſe fruites are like Melons, and ſometimes greater, outwardly greene, and inwardly Yelow, with many ſoft prickles, apparrelled (as it were) like a Hedgehog. Thoſe that grow in Goa are not ſo good, nor of ſo good a taſte as thoſe in Malabar. This fruit being ripe, which is commonly in December, ſmelleth very ſweete, and is of two ſorts, wherof the beſt is called Barca, the other Papa, which is not ſo good, and yet in handling it is ſoft like the other. The beſt coſt about 40. Maruedies, which is ſomewhat more then a Ryall of plate, and being ripe they are of a blackiſh colour, and with a hard huske, the outward part thereof which compaſſeth the Nut, is of many taſtes, ſome times it taſteth like a Melon, ſomtimes like a Peach, and ſomewhat pleaſanter, (but in taſte it is moſt like vnto the Peach) ſomtimes like a Hony Combe, ſometimes like a Citron, but they are hard to digeſt, & doe commonly come vp againe out of the ſtomacke vndigeſted, euen as they were eaten. This fruit being cut vp and opened longwiſe in the middle, is white within, and full of meate, with many partitions ful of long Nuts, thicker and greater then Dates, with a graye s
                              •
                           n, the Nut white, like our Cheſnuts. Being greene they eate earthy, and ſharpe of taſte, and ingender much Wine, but being roſted or ſoden they are like our Cheſnuts & are verie pleaſant▪ they increaſe luſt, for the which cauſe they are moſt vſed to bee eaten: They ſtop the Flux of the belly, the skin about them is heauie for the maw, and corrupting therein, doth breed many euil and peſtilent humors, wherof ſuch as eate much of this fruit, doe eaſily get the Plague, which the Indians call Morxi. He that deſireth to ſee more hereof, let him Reade Lodouicus Romanus, in his fifth Booke and fifteene Chapter of his Nauigations, and Chriſtopherus a Coſta in his Cap. of Iaca, & Gracia ab Horto, in the ſecond booke and fourth Chapter.
                     
                     
                        Iaaca grow on great trées like Nut trees, & onely on the ſea ſhores, that is to ſay, in ſuch countries as border on the ſeas, cleane contrarie vnto al other fruites, for they grow aboue the earth, vpon the trunkes or bodies of the trees, & vpon the great thick branches, but where the branches ſpread abroad, being ſmall and full of leaues, there groweth none: they are as big as a great Melon, and much like it of faſhion, although ſome of them are as great as a man can well lift vp, and outwardlie are like the Ananas, but ſmoother, and of a darke gréene colour, the fruit within is in huſkes, like Cheſnuttes, but of an other forme, and euerie huſke hath a Nutte, which is half white, the reſt yealowiſh, and ſticketh to a mans handes like honnie, when it is in the beehyues among the waxe, and for toughneſſe & in taſte for ſweetnes not much vnlike. The fruite is on the out ſide like a Cheſnutte, and in forme or faſhion like an Acorne, when the gréene knob that groweth vnder it is taken away, and of that bigneſſe and ſome what bigger: this fruite that is outmoſt

being eaten, the reſt is good to be roſted or ſodden, and are not much vnlike in taſte to the Cheſnuts of Europa. There are of theſe huſkes in euery Iaacca a hundreth and more, according to the greatnes thereof. There are two ſorts of them, the beſt are called Giraſal, and the common and leaſt eſtéemed, Chambaſal, although in faſhion and trées there is no difference, ſaue that the Giraſals haue a ſwéeter taſte. By this name Giraſal & Chā
                           baſal, the Indians doe make difference of their Ryce, and other things: they call the beſt Giraſal and the worſt Chambaſal, after the which names they haue their prices: the Iaaccas continue all the yeare.
                  
                  
                     The 51. Chapter. Of Mangas.
                     
                     
                        
                           MAngas growe vppon great trees like Iaca trees, they haue many branches, and are of quantitie as bigge as a great Gooſe Egge,Annota. D. Pall. and in ſome places of India doe weigh two pounds, and more the peece. And many times there are of ſeuerall colours vpon one tree, ſome being a light green, others Yelow, & ſome a reddiſh green, and for ſmel and taſte pleaſant, and not being periſhed, are of better taſt then any Peach. As touching their name, they are commonly called Mangas, in Canarijn Ambo, of the Turkes and Perſians, Amba. They beare fruit vpon the trees, from Aprill to Nouember, according to the ſituation of the place, they growe in many places, but the beſt in Ormus, where before all other fruites they are deſired, next vnto them are thoſe that grow in Guſarate, which for their goodnes are called Guſarates, they are ſmaller then the other, but of better taſte & ſauor, within they haue a ſmall Nut, or kernell. A thirde ſort there is that groweth in Balagatte, and thoſe are the greateſt, for there are of them that waigh two pound & a quarter, of a verie pleaſant taſte. Euen ſo are thoſe that grow in Charanna, Quindor, Madanagor, and Dultabado, being the chiefe townes in the kingdome of Niſamoxa, and like vnto them are the Mangas of Bengala, Pegu, and Malacca. The ſhel of them being taken off, is eatē in ſlices with wine▪ and alſo without Wine, as wee eate Peaches, they are alſo preſerued; the better to keepe them, either in Suger, Vineger, Oyle, or Salt, like Oliues in Spaine, and being a little opened with a Knife, they are ſtuffed with greene Ginger, headed Garlike, Muſtard or ſuch like, they are ſometimes eaten only with Salt, and ſomtimes ſodden with Rice, as we doe Oliues, and being thus conſerued and ſodden, are brought to ſell in the market. This fruite is colde and moyſt, although commonly they eſteeme it to bee hotte, & ſay, it ingendereth a paine and griping in the maw, of ſuch as eate it, and more ouer the Heathen Phyſitians ſay, it is hotte, and reiecte, or refuſe it, becauſe it ingendereth Saint Anthonies fire, Carbuncles, hotte burning Feauers, and ſwellings, with ſcabbes and ſcuruines: which I thinke happeneth to men that eate this fruite, and being eaten, lyeth corrupted in their Mawes, or rather by reaſon of the great heate and ſeaſon of the yeare. At the time when this fruite is ripe, many doe fall into the forenamed diſeaſes, although they eate none of this fruite. Before this fruite is fully ripe, it is ſomewhat hard of taſte, ſpecially the inner part next to the Nut, but being ripe, verie ſweete and ſauorie. The Nut that is within it, hath a hard huske or ſhell, with hard threeds about it, wherein groweth a long Nut, as big as an Acorne, white within, and outwardly couered with a thin white skin. Being raw it is bitter of taſt, therefore it is good againſt wormes, and looſenes of the belly: againſt wormes when it is eaten raw, and againſt looſeneſſe of the belly when it is roſted, and then it taſteth like a roſted Acorne. There is an other kinde of this fruite without ſtones which is very pleaſant. There is alſo a third ſorte, which is wilde, called Mangas Brauas, and is verie poyſon, wher-with they poyſon each other, for whoſoeuer eateth but a ſmall quantitie thereof, dyeth preſently. They doe

ſometime mingle Oyle with it, to make it ſtronger, and being taken in that ſort, howſoeuer it be, it killeth very quickly, and as yet there was neuer any remedie found againſt it. This fruite is light greene, and ſomewhat bright, full of white milky Iuice, and but a litle meate. The Nut is couered with a hard ſhel as bigge as a Quince.
                     Mangas groweth vpon trées like Iaaca trées: they are as big as a great Peach, but ſomewhat long, and a little crooked, of colour cleere, gréen, ſomewhat yealowiſh, and ſome times reddiſh: it hath within it a ſtone bigger then a Peach ſtone, but it is not good to be eaten: the Mangas is inwardly yealowiſh, but in cutting it is wateriſh, yet ſome not ſo much: they haue a verie pleaſant taſte, better then a Peach, and like the Annanas, which is ye beſt & ye moſt profitable fruit in al India, for it yeeldeth a great quātity for food & ſuſtenance of the countrie people, as Oliues do in Spaine and Portingale: they are gathered when they are gréene, and conſerued, and for the moſt part ſalted in pots, and commonlie vſed to be eaten with Rice, ſodden in pure water, the huſke being whole, and ſo eaten with ſalt Mangas, which is the continuall food for their ſlaues and cōmon people, or elſe ſalt dryed fiſh in ſtéed of Mangas, without bread, for Rice is in diuers places in ſtéed of bread. Theſe ſalted Mangas are in cutting like the white Spaniſh Oliues, and almoſt of the ſame taſte, but ſomewhat ſauorie and not ſo bitter, yet a little ſowre, and are in ſo great abundance, that it is wonderful: there are others that are ſalted and ſtuffed with ſmall péeces of gréene Ginger, and Garlike ſodden: thoſe they call Mangas Recheadas or Machar: they are likewiſe much vſed, but not ſo common as the other, for they are coſtlie and more eſteemed: theſe are kept in pots with Oyle and Vineger ſalted. The ſeaſon when Mangas are ripe is in Lent, and continueth till the Moneth of Auguſt.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 52. Chapter. Of Caions.
                     
                     
                        THis fruite groweth on great trees, not much vnlike Apple trees (but the yong trees haue leaues, like Lawrell or Bayleaues) they are of a pale greene and thicke, with white bloſſoms like Oringe trees, but thicker of leaues, yet not ſo ſweete of ſmell. The fruit is in greatneſſe and forme like a Gooſe Egge, or a great Apple, verie yellow & of good ſauor, moyſt or ſpungie within, and ful of Iuice, like Lemmons, but without kernels: ſweete of taſte, but yet harſh in a mans throate, they ſeeme not to haue beene common in Eaſt India, but brought thether from Braſillia, where thoſe Nuts are much eaten, although Theuet in his deſcription of America (61. Chapter) writeth otherwiſe. At the end of this fruit groweth a Nut, of forme like the Kydney of a Hare, whereof I had many brought me by a Pylot of Portingall of an Aſh colour, or when they are ripe of a reddiſh Aſh colour. Theſe Nuts haue two partitions, betweene which two partitions, there is a certain ſpongious fattie matter like Oyle, hotte and ſharpe, but in the innermoſt part thereof is a white kernell very pleaſant to eate, like Piſtaccios, with a gray skin ouer it, which is pulled off. Theſe Nuts being a little roſted are eaten in that ſort, & vſed to prouoke luſt. The fruit and alſo the Nuts are vſed in bankets, being eaten with wine & without wine, becauſe of their good taſte. They are good for the weakneſſe of the Maw, and againſt perbreaking, and loathing of meate, but ſuch as will not vſe them to that ende, doe eate them only dipped or ſteeped in a little water, the ſharpe Oyle betweene both the partitions is verie good for Saint Anthonies fire, and flaſhing in mens faces. The Braſilians vſe it againſt ſcurffes, this tree was at the firſt planted of the very Nut but the firſt and greateſt fruite, had neither ſeede nor kernell, ſome thinke it to bee a kind of Anacardy, becauſe it is very like it, for the ſharpe iuyce that is betweene the partitions. Reade more hereafter in Carolus Cluſius his obſeruations vppon Graciam. (firſt Booke and third Chapter.)
                     Cajus groweth on trées like apple trées, and are of the bignes of a Peare, at one end by the ſtalk ſomewhat ſharp, and at the head thicker, of a yelowiſh colour, being ripe they

are ſoft in hādling: they grow very like aples, for wher the apples haue a ſtalke, theſe Cajus haue a Cheſnut, as big as the fore ioynt of a mans thumb: they haue an other colour and faſhion then the Cheſnuts of Iaqua, and are better & more ſauorie to eate, but they muſt be roſted: within they are white like ye Cheſnuts of Europa, but haue thicker ſhelles, which are of colour blewiſh and dark gréene. When they are raw and vnroſted, you muſt not open them with your mouth, for as ſoone as you put them to your mouth, they make both your tongue and your lippes to ſmart, whereby ſuch as know it not are deceiued: wherefore you muſt open their ſhelles with a knife, or roſt them, and then they wil péele. This fruite at the end wher the ſtalke groweth, in the eating doth worke in a mans throate, and maketh it ſwel, yet it is of a fyne taſte, for it is moyſt and full of iuice, they are commonlie cut in round ſlices, and layd in a diſh with water or wyne, and ſalt throwne vpon them, for ſo they do not worke ſo ſtrōglie, but are verie good and ſauorie to eate: the time when they are ripe is in Lent, and in Winter time, like Mangas, but not ſo good as Mangas or Ananas, and of leſſe account. They are likewiſe in great numbers ouer all India.
                  
                  
                     The 53. Chapter. Of Iambos.
                     
                     
                        IN India ther is an other fruit that for the beautie, pleaſant taſte,Annota. D. P. ſmell, and medicinable vertue thereof, is worthie to bee written of, and is of great account in India, being firſt brought out of Malacca into India. The tree whereon this fruite groweth, is as great as the greateſt Orange tree in all Spaine, with manye branches which ſpread verie broade, and make much ſhadow, and is faire to behold. The bodie and great branches thereof haue an aſh colour-gray barke, the leaues are faire & ſoft, longer then the breadth of a hand, they are ſomewhat like the point of a Speare or Pike, with a thicke threed or veine in the midle, and many ſmall veines or branches in the ſides: outwardly verie greene; and inwardly ſomewhat bleaker, with bloſſomes of a liuely darke Purple colour, with many ſtreekes in the middle, verie pleaſant to beholde, and of taſte like the twynings or tendrels of a Vine. The fruite is as bigge as a Peare, or (as ſome are of opinion) of the bigneſſe and colour of a great Spaniſh Wal-nut, they tooke their name of a King. Ther are two ſorts of this fruit, one a browne red, ſeeming as though it were blacke, moſt part without ſtones, and more ſauory then the other which is a palered, or a pale Purple colour, with a liuely ſmell of Roſes, and within it hath a little white hard ſtone not verie rounde, much like a Peach ſtone, white, and couered with a rough skin. This is not ful ſo great as the other, yet are they both fit for ſuch as haue daintie and licorous mouthes. They ſmel like ſweete Roſes▪ they are colde and moyſt, and altogether ſoft, couered with a thinne Rinde, which cannot be taken off with a knife. The Iambos tree taketh deepe roote, & within foure yeares after it is ſet, doth beare fruit, and that many times in one yeare, and is neuer without fruite or bloſſomes, for that commonly euerie branch hath both ripe and vnripe fruit, and bloſſomes all at once, contrarie to the nature of all other trees: and euerie day as the bloſſomes fall (whereby the earth vnder it ſeemeth to bee painted red) there growe new on, and when ſome of the fruite begin to grow, then others are almoſt ripened, and others being ripe are greater. The tree being lightly ſhaken, the ripe fruit falleth eaſily off, by reaching the nether bowes. This fruite is ordinarily eaten, before other meate be ſet vpon the Table, and alſo at all times of the day. The Malabares and Canarijns, call this fruite Iamboli, the Portingales inhabiting there, Iambos, the Arabians, Tupha Indi, the Perſians Tuphat: the Turkes Alma, the trees are called by the Portingales Iambeiro. The bloſſomes and the fruite are conſerued with Suger, and are vſed for hotte Agues to c
                           •
                        le mans thirſt.
                     
                        The trées whereon the Iambos do grow are as great as Plumtrees, and verie like vnto them: it is an excellent and a verie pleaſant fruite to looke on, as bigge as an apple: it hath a red colour and ſomewhat whitiſh, ſo cleare

and pure that it ſeemeth to be painted or made of waxe: it is very pleaſant to eate, and ſmelleth like Roſe water, it is white within, and in eating moyſt and wateriſh, it is a moſt daintie fruite, as well for bewtie to the ſight, as for the ſwéet ſauour and taſte: it is a fruite that is neuer forbidden to any ſicke perſon▪ as other fruites are, but are freelie giuen vnto ſicke men to eate, that haue a deſire thereunto, for it can doe no hurt. The bloſſomes are likewiſe very faire to the ſight, and haue a ſwéet ſmell: they are red and ſomewhat whitiſh of colour. This trée beareth fruite thrée or foure tymes euery yeare, and which is more wonderfull, it hath commonly on the one ſide or halfe of the trée ripe Iambos, and the leaues fallen off, and on the other ſide or half it hath all the leaues, and beginneth againe to bloſſome, and when that ſide hath fruite, and that the leaues fall off, then the other ſide beginneth again to haue leaues, and to bloſſome, and ſo it continueth all the yeare long: within they haue a ſtone as great (and very néere of the ſame faſhion) as the fruite of the Cipres trée.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 54. Chapter. Of other fruites in India.
                     
                        
                           THere is a fruite called Iangomas, which groweth on trées like Cherrie trées: they are in bignes like ſmal roūd plūmes of a darke red colour, they haue no ſtones in them, but ſome ſmall kernels: they are of taſte much like plūmes, whereof there are very many, but not much eſteemed of.
                        Annota. D. Pall.
                     
                     The fruit Iangomas groweth on a tree not vnlike in greatneſſe and faſhion to our Plum trees, as alſo in leaues and white bloſſoms, ſaue onely that theſe trees are ful of Prickles or thornes, they grow of them ſelues in euerie place, & alſo in gardens at Bachaim, Chaul and Balequala, the fruits are like Sorben ſmal and round, they are harſh in the throat like Slowes or vnripe Plums, and haue no ſtone within them, but ſome ſmall kernels, when they come firſt out, they are like Piſtaccios. The fruit being ripe, muſt firſt bee bruſed and cruſhed with mens fingers, before it can bee eaten, yet it looſeth thereby none of his vertue of binding, and therefore they are thought good to ſtop the Flux withall, although they are but little eſteemed by the Indians. They ſay, that this fruite is eaten by certaine foules, and being voyded out againe & ſet in the ground together with the ſame Birdes dung, it wil grow the ſooner and be the fruitfuller.
                     
                        There is an other fruite called Carambolas, which hath 8 corners, as bigge as a ſmal aple, ſower in eating, like vnripe plums, and moſt vſed to make Conſerues.
                     
                     The fruite which the Malabares and Portingales call Carambolas, is in Decan called Camarix, in Canar,
                        Anno
                              •
                            
                           D. 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           . 
                        Camarix and Carabeli: in Malaio, Bolumba, and the Perſians Chamaroch. It groweth on trees that are like Quince-trees, hauing leaues greater and longer then our apple-trees, verie greene and bitter of taſte, with ſmall bloſſomes, of fiue leaues a peece, reddiſh without any white, and of no ſpeciall ſmel, but faire to the eye, and of taſte like Sorrell. The fruit is like a great Hond
                              •
                           s bey, long and yellow, and as if it were parted into foure parts, the Coddes are ſomewhat deepe, & preſſe the fruite together, in the middle they haue ſome ſmall kernels, which for the ſharp taſt are pleaſant to eate. This fruit is conſerued in Suger, & much eaten in medicines, and with meate. The ripe are vſed for hotte Feauers, in ſteede of Sirop of Vineger, which wee vſe in theſe countries. The Canarijns vſe the Iuyce with other medicines, there growing which are mixed with it, to make colours thereof, wherewith they take ſpots and blemiſhes out of mens eyes. Coſta writeth that he knew a midwife in India, which vſed this fruite dryed and beaten to poulder, with Bettele leaues, to make women to auoide their dead fruite out of their wombes, this fruite is al
                           •
                        o kept in pickle, becauſe it is pleaſing to the taſte, and procureth an appetite.
                     
                        There are yet other fruites, as Brindoijns, Durijndois, Iamboloe
                           •
                        , Mangeſtains, and other ſuch like fruites, but becauſe they are of ſmall account, I thinke it not requiſite to write ſeuerallie of them, but onelie of two of them.
                        Annota. D. Pall
                     
                     There is alſo in Eaſt India a fruit called

                        
                        
                           
                              Fructuum Mangas, Cajus, Iambos, Iaquas, et Annanas, qui in India nascuntur, qui eſuſuaves, et Zimziberis, cujus e copia magna illic vilitas, virentis viva imago.
                           
                           
                              
                              Die fruyten die in Indien waſsen en ſeer lieffelick zyn om te eten als Mangas▪ Cajus▪ Iambos▪ Iaquas. en Annanas met die Gember welcke om der menichte weynich geacht is affconterfeytinge naert leeven gelyck die ſtaen en waſsen.
                           
                        
                        
                        
                        Brindoijns, which outwardly is a little red, and inwardly bloud red, verye ſowre of taſte. There are ſome alſo, that are outwardly blackiſh, which proceedeth of their ripeneſſe, and not ſo ſower as the firſt, but yet as red within. Many Indians like well of this fruit, but becauſe of the ſowreneſſe, it is not ſo well accepted of. The dyers doe vſe this fruite.
                     
                        The Barkes of theſe trées are kept and brought ouer ſea hither and are good to make Vineger withall, as ſome Portingales haue done.
                     
                     
                        Of the fruit called Iambolijns.
                        
                        
                           The trees that beare this fruit, haue a barke like Lentiſcus or the Maſtick tree to the ſhew much like a Mirtle,
                           
                           Annota. 
                                 •
                              . Pall. 
                           but in leaues, like the Arbutus of Italy. It groweth of it ſelf in the wilde fields, the fruit is like great ripe Oliues of Cordoua, and harſh in a mans throate. This fruite is little vſed by Phyſitions, but is much kept in pickle, and eaten with ſodden Ryce, for they procure an appetite to meate, but this fruit (as alſo Iaka) is by the Indians not accounted among wholeſome fruits.
                        
                        There is alſo a fruite that came out of the Spaniſh Indies, brought from beyond ye 
                           Philippinas or Luſons to Malacca, & frō thence to India, it is called Papaios, and is very like a Mellon, as bigge as a mans fiſt, and will not grow, but alwaies two together, that is male and female: the male trée neuer yéeldeth any fruite, but onely the female, and when they are deuided, & ſet apart one from the other, then they yéeld no fruite at all. It is a trée of the hight of a man, with great leaues. This fruite at the firſt for the ſtrangenes thereof was much eſtéemed, but now they account not of it. There are likewiſe in India ſome fig trées of Portingal, although the fruite doth neuer come to good perfection. Oranges, Lemons, Citrons, and ſuch like fruite, are throughout all India in great abundance, and for goodnes and taſte ſurpaſſe thoſe of Spaine. Grapes are not ther to be found, but onelie vpon ſome houſes, as we haue thē in netherlād: yet againſt Chriſtmas and Lent, there are rayſins brought into Goa, by the Decanaes and Indians out of the firme land, and from Ballagate, but they are not ſo good as thoſe in Spaine, and verie fewe they are, but for price as good cheape as other fruites. There are alſo in India manie Melons, but not ſo good as thoſe in Spaine, for that they muſt be eaten with Suger, if you wil haue any ſwéetnes in thē: but ther is an other ſort like Melons, called Patecas or Angurias, or Melons of India, which are outwardlie of a darke gréene colour, inwardlie white with blacke kernels: they are verie wateriſh and hard to byte, and ſo moyſt, that as a man eateth them, his mouth is full of water, but yet verie ſwéet, and verie cold and freſh meat, wherfore manie of them are eatē after dinner to coole men. Cucumbers and Radiſhes are there in great numbers, alſo Colewortes, but not ſo good as in Europa, for the Colewortes neuer grow to their full growth, but are looſe with their leaues open. They haue likewiſe ſome ſallet hearbs, but verie little: hearbs whereof men make Porridge are not there to be had, nor manie ſwéet ſmelling hearbs nor flowers, as Roſes, lillies, roſemary, or ſuch like ſorts of flowers & plants there are none, yet they haue ſome fewe Roſes, and a little Roſemarie, but of no great ſmell. The fields neuer haue any other flowers in them, but onelie graſſe, and that is in Winter when it rayneth, for in Sūmer it is cleane burnt off with the excéeding heat of the Sunne. There is onelie a kinde of bloſſomes of trées, which grow all the yeare long, called Fulle, that ſmell verie ſwéet: the women doe ordinarily throw them among their Lynnen and apparell to make them ſwéet. They likewiſe make Collers or ſtrings ful of them, which they weare about their necks, and ſtrew them in their beds, for they are verie deſirous of ſwéete ſauors, for other ſorts of ſwéet flowers & hearbs, whereof thouſands are found in Europe, they are not in India to be had: ſo that when you tell them of ye ſweet flowers and herbes of theſe countries, they wonder much thereat, and are verie deſirous of them.
                        By theſe pictures you may ſée the forme and faſhions of the fruites called Iaacka, Ananas, Mangas, Caius, & Iambos, which are the fyue principalleſt & moſt eſtéemed fruites in all India, for others are but of ſmall account: of Ginger alſo as it groweth, whereof in an other place I will ſay more, when I make mention of the ſpices and drie wares of India: all which are ſet down according to the life, although the leaues are not altogether ſo proportionable with their ſtrings and veynes, as they ſhould be, or as the Phyſitions and Doctors in their Herbals haue deſcribed them, hauing onely ſhewed the forme and growth of the fruites, as I haue ſeene and vſed them,
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     The 55. Chapter. Of the Indian Figges.
                     
                        INdian Figges there are manie & of diuers ſorts, one better thē the other, ſome ſmall, ſome great, ſome thicke, ſome thin, &c. but in generall they are all of one forme and colour, little more or leſſe, but the trées are all one, and of the height of a mā: the leaues are of a fadome long, and about 3 ſpannes broad, which the Turkes vſe in ſtéed of browne paper, to put pepper in. In the trée there is no wood, but it may rather be called a réed then a trée. The bodie of the trée (I meane that which couereth the outwardpart when it beginneth ſomewhat to grow) is in a manner verie like the inner part of a ſyue made of hayre, but in ſhew ſomewhat thicker, and is (as it were) the barke of it: but when you open it, it is ful of leaues, cloſed and rouled vp together, of the hight of half a mans length, and ſomewhat higher. Theſe leaues do open and ſpread abroad on the top of the trée, and when thoſe that are within the bodie doe in their time thruſt themſelues forth vpwardes out of the innermoſt part of the trée, then doe the outmoſt leaues begin to drie, and fall off, vntill the trée be come to his full growth, and the fruite to their perfect ripeneſſe. The bodie of the trée may be a ſpan thicke at the moſt. The leaues haue in ye middle of them a very thick & gray vein which rūneth clean through them, and deuideth them out of the middeſt of the leaues, which are in the innermoſt part of the trée at their ſpringing vp, there cometh forth a flower, as big as an Eſtrige egge, of colour ruſſet, which in time groweth to be long, with a long ſtalke, and it is no wood, but rather like a Coleworte ſtalk: This ſtalke groweth full of figges, cloſe one by the other, which at the firſt are in faſhion like gréene beanes, when they are yet in the huſkes, but after growe to half a ſpan in length, and 3 or 4 inches broad, as thicke as Cucumbers, which ſtalke beareth at the leaſt, ſome two hundreth figges, little more or leſſe, and grow as cloſe together as grapes: the cluſters are ſo great as two men can ſcarcely beare vpon a ſtaffe, they are cut off when they are but half ripe, that is to ſay, when they are as yet half gréene, and half yealow, and hanged vp in their houſes vpon beames, and ſo within 4 or 5 dayes they will be fullie ripe and al yealow. The trée or plant yéeldeth but one bunch at a time, which being ripe, they cut the whole trée down to the ground, leauing only the roote, out of the which preſently groweth an other, and within a Moneth after beareth fruite, and ſo continueth all the yeare long, and neuer leaueth bearing: they are in all places in ſo great abundance, and ſo common throughout all India, that it is wonderfull, being the greateſt meat and ſuſtenance of the countrie: they are of a maruellous good taſte: when they eate them, they pul off the ſhelles, for that they haue ſhelles ſomewhat like the coddes of beanes, but thynner and ſofter, within whitiſh, and ſoft in byting, as if it were meale and butter mixed together, and ſwéetiſh, ſo that in bréef, they are very good and pleaſant of taſte: they may ſerue both for bread & butter, and a man may verie wel liue thereon, without other meate, if néed were, as manie in India doe liue therewith, & haue but little other things to eate. The moſt and commoneſt ſort are by the Portingals called Figos dorta, that is, garden figges, thoſe are ſomewhat thicke, there are others which are ſmaller, and thyn without, and are called Senoriins, which are of the beſt ſort: they ſmell well, and are very good of taſte. There is an other ſort called Cadoliins, which are likewiſe well eſteemed, but the beſt of all are called Chincapoloyns, and are moſt in the countrie of Malabar: theſe are but a little yealow, but they continue commonlie on the outſide gréene, and are ſmall and long, with a ſpeciall ſwéet ſmell, as if they were full of roſe water. There are yet manie other ſorts, ſome that are verie great, about a ſpan long, and in thicknes correſpondent: theſe grow much in Cananor, and in the coaſt of Malabar, and are by the Portingales called figges of Cananor: and by reaſon of the great quantitie thereof are dried, their ſhelles being taken off, and ſo being drie are caryed ouer all India to be ſold. Theſe when they are ripe are moſt roaſted, for they are but ſeldome eaten raw, as other figges are, they are ſome what harſh in ſwallowing, and inwardly red of colour, and being roaſted they are ſhalled or pille like the others, and ſo cut in ſlices, which done, they caſt ſome beaten Sinamon vpon them, ſtéeping them in wine, & thē they taſte better then roaſted Quinces, they are cut vp in the middle, as all the other kynde of figges vſe to be, and then boyled or fryed in Suger, which is a very daintie meat, and very common in India: to conclude, it is one of the beſt and neceſſaryeſt fruites in all India, and one of the principalleſt ſuſtenances of the common people, they are found in all places of the Indies & Oriental countries, as alſo in Moſambique, Ormus, on the coaſt of Abex, Malabar, Malacca, Bengala, &c. The Guſurates, Decanijns, Canarijns,
                        
                        
                        
                           
                              Nuces Indicae, magni in India usus et ques tuosae, cibum et potum homi nibus ſuaves et navibus materiam prebent idon
                                    •
                                 am quibus e aedem et onerantur et aluntur nautae
                           
                           
                              Indiaenſche nooten ofte Palmboomen welcke in Indien veel opbren gen want geven ſoete ſpijs en dranck▪ ſtoff tot ſcheepen▪ ſenſen en touwen en daer die ſelffde ſcheepen met gelaeden en die ſchip luyden mede gevoet werden▪
                              
                           
                           
                              Ficus Indica per totum annum ferens fruct
                                    •
                                  cop
                                    •
                                 ose 
                                    •
                                 entes quotidianam mul to rum escam▪
                              
                           
                           
                              Een plante draegende het qeheele Iaer vruch
                                    •
                                 n. d
                                    ••
                                 men India
                                    •
                                 nsche vygen no
                                    •
                                 
                                 ▪ ſeer vo
                                    •
                                 den
                                    •
                                  
                                 en 
                                 
                                    •
                                 en daegelickſe ſpijse der Indianen.
                           
                           
                              
                              Fructuum icon quos Arrecca sive Faufel vocant▪ et Bettele folia, quos pauco calcis ſubactos integrum diem masticant▪ ſuccum deglutientes ad corporis purgationem alias
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  utilitates.
                           
                           
                              Eruyten diemen Arrecca ofte Faufel noemt en die blaeden Bet telle, welcke met wat calcks vermen
                                    •
                                 t die Indianen een gant ſchen dach kauwen het ſay doorſwelgen om 
                                    •
                                 lichaem te purge ren en ander haerder crachten.
                           
                           
                              Piperis frute
                                    •
                                  haederae non abſimilis.
                           
                           
                              Orientaelſche Peeper waſschen de 
                                    •
                                 inuer cruyt niet ongelyck
                           
                        
                        
                        
and Bengalers call them Quelli, the Malabares, Palan, and the Malayens of Malacca, Pyſan. They are alſo found in Arabia and are called M
                              •
                           ſa, as alſo in Ieruſalem, Damaſco, and Cayro, as I haue béene truly informed by credible perſons, which dayly trauell and traffique into India. And they do belieue that this is the ſame fruite, which Adam did eate when hee ſinned firſt, but I ſhould rather thinke this Figge trée to be of the ſame, whereof we reade in the old Teſtament in the bookes of Moſes, which the ſpies that were ſent out by the children of Iſrael, brought out of the land of promiſe, hanging vpon a ſtaffe, & born by two men, & are taken for grapes, which I many times thought of, when I ſaw them brought in that maner for a preſent to my Lords houſe, for it is altogether in forme and faſhion like a bunch of grapes, yet I meane not to be iudge therein, but leaue it vnto others of greater experience and trauell then my ſelfe.
                     
                        Indian Figges are by the Arabians called Moris and not Muſa, not Amuſa, and the tree Daracht Moris,
                        
                        
                           
                              •
                           nnota. D. Pall. 
                        by the Braſilians Pacona, and the tree Paquouer, by Brocardus in his deſcription of the holy land, Paradiſe Apples, by Ou
                                 •
                              edus in the Hiſtorie of India, in his eight Booke and firſt Chapter Platanus, in Guinea Bananas, in Malauar Patan, in Malayen Pican, in Canara, Decan, Guſurate, and Bengala, Quelli, Auicenna, Serapio, and Rhaſis haue likewiſe written certaine Chapters heereof. Auicenna in his ſecond Booke and 491. Chapter, writing of the properties and qualities of this fruite, ſayeth, that it yeeldeth but ſmall ſuſtenaunce, that it ingendereth Choller and Flegme, and that it ſpoyleth the ſtomake, wherefore he counſelleth ſuch as are of a hotte conſtitution, after they haue eaten theſe Figges, to take ſome Honie and Vinegar, ſodden together with cold ſeeds. They are good againſt heate in the ſtomake, Lungs, and Kydnies, and prouoke Vrine. Rhaſis, of the ſame in his thirde Booke of Phyſicke, and twentie Chapter, ſayth alſo, that they are hurtfull for the maw, which I alſo found being in Syrie, when I vſed them, they make men to haue an euill appetite to their meate, & a deſire to eaſe their bodies, and doe qualifie the rawneſſe of the throate. Serapio in his Booke of Phiſicke in the 84. Chapter ſayth, that this fruit is in the ende of the firſt degree warming, and moyſtning, and that they are good againſt the heate of the ſtomake and Lungs, but for him which eateth many of them, they breede a heauineſſe in his Mawe, but by meanes of their haſt
                              •
                           e ripening, they are good for the Kidnies, prouoke Vrine, and make men apt for leacherie. The Indian Phiſitians doe vſe this fruit in medicines for Feauers and other diſeaſes. The opinion, (as I thinke) why this fruite is called Paradiſe Apples, is partly for the pleaſantnes of taſte, ſmell and colour, for the taſte is betweene ſweete & ſower, the ſmell ſomwhat like Roſes, and the colour a faire yelow and green: & partly alſo becauſe this fruit being cut in the middle, haue certaine veines like a croſſe, whereon the Chriſtians in Siria doe make many ſpeculations and diſcourſes, which many ſtrangers that haue trauelled in thoſe countries doe verifie. He which deſireth to reade more heereof, let him reade the worthie and learned Commentaries of Carolus Cluſius vpō 
                           Garſia ab horto, wher he ſhall receiue good contentment and ſatisfaction.
                     
                     There grow in India many Iniamos and Batatas. Theſe Iniamos, are as bigge as a yelow roote, but ſomewhat thicker and ſuller of knots, and as thicke on the one place, as in the other, they grow vnder the earth like earth Nuts, and of a Dun colour, and white within like earth Nuts, but not ſo ſwéete.
                     
                        Iniamos were this yeare brought heth
                                 •
                               out of Guinea,
                        Annota▪ 
                           D. Pall 
                        as bigge as a mans legge, and all of a like thickneſſe, the outward part is Dun coloured, within verie white, roſted or ſodden they are verie pleaſant of taſte, and one of the principal meates of the Black-Moores.
                     
                     The Batatas are ſomewhat red of colour, and of faſhion almoſt like the Iniamos, but ſwéeter, of taſte like an earth Nut. Theſe two fruits are verie plentifull, ſpecially Iniamos, which is as common and neceſſarie a meate as the Figges, they eate them for the moſt part roſted, and vſe them commonly for the laſt ſeruice on the boorde, they 
                           •
                        eth them likewiſe in an other ſort for 
                           •
                        orrage, and ſ
                           •
                        eth them with fleſh like Colwortes or Turnops, the like doe they with Batatas.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     The 56. Chapter. Of the Palme trees, whereon the Indian Nuts called Cocus doe grow.
                     
                        THeſe Trées are commonlie called by moſt of the Indians, Perſians, and Arabians, Maro, & the nuts Nare
                              •
                           . The Malabares call the Trees Tenga Maran, and the fruite being ripe, Tenga, but vnripe, and being as yet greene, 
                           〈◊〉
                        . In Goa 
                              •
                           anha, the Portingalls call this fruit Coquo, by reaſon of the thrée holes that are therein, like to a Munkies head. Auicenna calleth theſe Ia
                              •
                           ial-Indi, that is, Indian nuts. The Malayans of Malacca call the trees Trican, and the fruit Nihor. This is the moſt profitable tree of all India, as in order I will declare vnto you the profit that ariſeth thereby, they grow moſt in the Iſlands of Maldiua, and in Goa, and the countries round about them, as alſo through the whole coaſt of Malabar, whereby they traffique with them into all places, as to Cambaia, Ormus, &c. The tree wareth very high and ſtraight, of the thickenes of a ſmall ſpanne little more or leſſe, it hath no branches but in the vppermoſt part thereof, & in the top grow the leaues, which ſpread like vnto Date trées, and vnder the leaues cloſe to the tree grow the Coquos together, commonly ten or twelue one cloſe by another, but you ſhall ſeldome finde one of them growing alone by it ſelf. The bloſſome of this fruite is very like the bloſſome of a Cheſtnut. The wood of the tree is very ſappy like a ſpunge, and is not firme, they doe not grow but on the ſea ſides, or bankes of riuers cloſe by the ſtrand, and in ſandie grounds, for there groweth none within the land. They haue no great rootes, ſo that a man would thinke it were impoſſible for them to haue any faſt hold within the earth, and yet they ſtand ſo faſt and grow ſo high, that it maketh men ſcare to ſee men clime vppon them, leaſt they ſhould fall downe. The Canarijns clime as nimbly and as faſt vpon them, as if they were Apes, for they make ſmall ſteppes in the trées like ſtaires, whereon they ſtep, and ſo clime vp▪ which the Portingales dare not vē
                        ter, their planting is in this manner. They firſt plant the Coquos or Nuts whereof the trees doe ſpring, and when they are about the height of a man, in winter time they plant them againe, and dung them with aſhes, and in ſummer time water them. They growe well about houſes, becauſe commonlie there they haue good earth, and beeing well looked vnto and huſbanded, they yeeld fruit in fewe yeares, which is the Canarijns liuinges that dwell here and there among thoſe trees, and haue no other occupation but onely to dreſſe thoſe trees, which they farme of the Landlords, and by the fruite thereof doe get their liuinges. Thoſe trees are more aboundant with them then Oliue trées in Spaine, or willow trées in the Low countries. The profits they reape thereby are theſe. Firſt the wood is very good for many things, although it be ſpungious and 
                           •
                        appy, by reaſon of the length of it, for in the Iſlandes of Maldiua they make whole ſhips thereof, without any iron nayles in them, for they ſow them together with the cordes that are made of the ſaid Cocus or Nut, the ropes and cables beeing likewiſe of the ſame tree, as alſo the ſayles which they make of the leaues, which leaues are called Olas. They ſerue likewiſe to make the Canarijns houſes, and for hattes which they vſe to carrie ouer their heades, for the ſunne or the raine, they make alſo mattes or Tents that lie ouer the Palamkins when it raineth, to couer the women when they are caried abroad, and ſuch like thinges: they likewiſe make thereof very fine Hattes, that are much eſteemed, and coſt three or foure Pardawes the péece, which they weare in Summer for lightnes. They farme or hire thoſe trées for two cauſes, one for the Coquos or fruit to eate it, the other to preſſe wine out of them, thereof to drinke. The nuts are as great as an eſtrige egge, ſome ſmaller, and ſome greater, and are outwardly couered with a Huſke or Shell, which as long as it groweth on the trée, is gréene with out, like an Acorne with his huſke or cup.
                     
                        The Indian nuts are couered ouer with two ſortes of huskes or ſhels,
                        Anno
                              •
                            
                           D. 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           
                         
                        whereof the vttermoſt is hayrie, and of it they make Cairo, that is, all their cables and ropes, and ſtop and make their ſhips cloſe with it in ſtead of Ocam or tow, for that it keepeth the ſhips cloſer in ſaltwater then our Ocam or Tow, becauſe in ſalt water it cloſeth and ſhutteth it ſelfe cloſer together. Of the other they make not onelie drinking cups, in India, but here with vs alſo, for that the common people beleeue there is a certaine vertue in them againſt ſtirring of the body, but it is not ſo.
                     
                     This Huſke beeing drie and pulled off, is haire like hempe, whereof all the cordes and Cables that are vſed throughout al India are made, as well vppon the land as in the ſhips▪ it is of colour verie like the ropes of Sparta in Spaine, they are very good but they muſt be kept in ſalt water, whereby they continue very long, but in freſh or raine water they doe preſently rot, becauſe they are not dreſt with pitch, and tarre as our ſhips are. The ſhip wherein I came out of India into Portingall,
                        
had no other ropes nor cables, nor any ſuch kinde of ſtuffe, but ſuch as were made of the Indian Cocus, called Cayro, which continued very good, ſauing only yt we were forced euery fourtéene dayes to waſh our cables in the Sea, whereby they ſerued vs as well as cables of hemp. The fruit when it is almoſt ripe is called Lanha, and within is full of water, and then it is white of colour, thin and ſoft, and the longer the Cocus is on the tree, the more the water groweth and changeth into white, which is the meat of the nut within, and taſteth much like a haſel nut, but ſomewhat ſweeter. The Lanhos haue within them a good draught of water, which is very cleare, ſweet, and coole to drink. It is at the leaſt halfe a Can full, & when men walke abroad and are thirſtie they go vnto the Canarijns, who preſently with a great knife in their handes come vp the tree, and cut off as many Lanhos as a man deſireth, ſelling them for a Baſaruco or a two peece, which they make very ready and cleare to be drunke, the firſt ſhell that is ouer the inward fruit (which as the nut is come to his full ripenes, becometh almoſt to bee wood, is then but thin and ſoft, and very pleaſant to eate with ſalt, and do taſte almoſt like Artichokes, a man may drinke as much of this water as hee will for it will not hurt him, but is a verie pleaſant drinke, when the fruit is ripe, there is not ſo much water in it, and is white within, and ſomewhat thicker of ſubſtance, and then the water is not ſo good as it was before beeing Lanhos, for then it becommeth ſomewhat ſower. Theſe Cocus being yet in their huſks, may be carried ouer the whole world, and not once hurt or bruſed, and it happeneth oftentimes that by continuance of time, the water within the Cocus doth conuert, and congeale into a certaine kinde of yellow apple, which is verie ſauorie and ſweet. The huſke beeing taken off, the ſhel ſerueth for many vſes, as to make ladles with woodden handles, and alſo certaine little pots, which beeing faſtned to a ſticke, they doe therewith take and lade water out of their great pots, they make thereof alſo ſmall veſſels to beare wine in when they walke into the fieldes, and a thouſand other thinges. Theſe ſhelles are likewiſe burnt, & ſerue for coales for Goldſmithes, which are very good and excellent. Of the white of theſe nuts in India they make porrage, and dreſſe meate withall, ſtrayning and preſſing out the milke, wherin with many other mixtures they ſeeth their rice, & to bee ſhort, they neuer dreſſe any rice, which they cal Carrijl, & is the ſauce to their meate thereunto, but they put ſome of their Cocus milk into it, els the Cocus is but little eaten, for there it is not eſteemed of, but ſerueth for meate for the ſlaues, and poore people. They likewiſe breake the Cocus in péeces, and taking off the ſhell they drie the fruit or white meat that is within it, and it is caried in great quantities out of Malabar to Cambaia and Ormus & to the Northern coaſtes and quarters beyond Goa, as alſo to the countrie of Ballagate, & traffique much therewith. Of this white ſubſtance they make Oyle, which they ſtampe in ceſterns like Oliues, and it maketh verie good oyle, as well to eat as to burne, which is likewiſe very medicinable.
                     
                        There are two ſortes of Oyle made of theſe nuts,
                        Annota. D. Pal, 
                        one out of the freſh or greene nuts, ſtamped and mixed with warme water, which beeing preſſed foorth, the oyle ſwimmeth aboue the water
                              •
                            this oyle is vſed to purge the maw and the guts, for it purgeth very gently, & without hurt ſome mixe therewith the iuyce of Thamarindes, & maketh thereof a verie wholeſome medecine, the other Oyle is preſt out of the dried Cocus, which is called Copra, & is good alſo to purge the maw and againſt the ſhrinking of the ſinews, as alſo for old aches and paines in the ioyntes and lims. This dried Cocus which is ſo caried abroad, is called Copra. When they deſire to haue no Cocus or fruite thereof, they cut the bloſſomes of the Cocus away, and binde a round Potte with a narrow mouth, by them called Callao, faſt vnto the tree, and ſtop the ſame cloſe round about with pot earth, ſo that neyther wine nor aire can eyther enter in, or come forth, & in that ſort the pot in ſhort ſpace is full of water, which they call Sura, & is very pleaſant to drinke like ſweet whay, & ſomewhat better.
                     
                        This water being drunke,
                        Anota D Pal 
                        is very good againſt the heate of the liuer and the kidnies, and cleanſeth the yard from corruption and filthie matter.
                     
                     The ſame water ſtanding but one houre in the ſunne, is very good viniger, and in India they haue none other. This Sura beeing diſtilled, is called Fula, or Nipe, & is as excellent aqua vitae, as any is made in Dor
                              •
                           
                         of their beſt rēniſh wine, but this is of the fineſt kinde of diſtillation. The ſecond diſtillation thereof is called Vraca, which is verie good wine, & is the wine of India, for they haue no other wine. It is very hot & ſtrong, yet ye Indians drinke it as if it were water, & the Portingales vſe it in this ſort. They put it into veſſels▪ and to a pipe of Vraca they put 3. or 4. Hands of reaſons that are brought for marchandiſe into India from Ormus, euerie Hand is 12. poundes, which beeing waſhed they put into the veſſell leauing the bung opē & the pipe not being full, for if it were it wold burſt, by reaſon of the heat, becauſe therewith

it ſéetheth in the Pipe like water on the fire, and boyling ſo, it is ſtirred euery day for the ſpace of fourteene or fifteene dayes, in which time the Vraca getteth as faire a redde colour, as if it were Portingall wine, and differeth not much in taſte, but yet ſweeter, and hotter of it ſelfe, howbeit it is altogether as fayre, and of as good a colour as their Portingall Wyne, ſo that they can hardly bee diſcerned one from the other: this Wine is called Wine of Paſſa, or Reaſons. With this Wine there is great traffique vſed to Bengala, Malacca, China and other places, and euery Pipe thereof coſteth within Goa 30. Pardawen the péece, little more or leſſe. Of the aforeſaide Sura they likewiſe make Sugar, which is called Iagra: they ſeeth the water, and ſet it in the Sun, whereof it becommeth Sugar, but it is little eſtéemed, becauſe it is of a browne colour, and for that they haue ſo great quantitie and abundance of white Sugar throughout all India. The innermoſt parte of the trée or trunke is called Palmito, and is the pith or hart of the ſame trunke, which is much eſtéemed, and ſent for a preſent vnto men of great account. It is as thinne as Paper, and alſo white, and is as if it were plaited or preſt together, as they vſe to plait & preſſe womens huykes in the Low countries: it is alſo long and ſlender, and hath ſometimes 50. or 60. foldes or plaites in it like a paper booke. This the Indians vſe for paper, and bookes, which continueth in the ſame foldes, whereon they write when it is gréene, and ſo let it drie, and then it is impoſſible to get the letters out againe, for it is printed therein with a kind of Iron inſtrument: The Indians cal it Olla, whereof all their bookes, wrytinges, and Euidences are made, which they can ſeale, and ſhutte vp as we doe our letters. Of this Paper with the Indian writing vpon it, you may ſée ſome at D. Paludanus houſe, which I gaue him for a preſent. Theſe trées are for the moſt part in the Iſlands of Maldiua, w
                           •
                        ere there are Cocus Nuttes, that are excellent good againſt poyſon.
                     
                        Garſius and Costa eſteeme this for a fable. Coſta writeth that he hath ſearched into it many times but found it contrarie, as I likewiſe haue done, and can finde no ſuch great effect.
                        
                     
                     Thoſe Iſlandes haue no other dealing or liuing, but with Cayro, whereof they make ropes and Cables, and with the Copra, or the white ſubſtance of the Cocus, whereof Oyle is made, ſo yt they doe oftentimes come into India, whē the ſhip & all the furniture, victuaile and marchandiſe is onely of thoſe Palme trées, whereby it is wel to be conſidered, that it is one of the greateſt & principaleſt traffiques and victua
                           •
                        ls in all India, This ſhall ſuffice for the deſcription of the particular commodities of this trée, the liuely picture whereof is here to be ſéene, together with the Cocus or Nuttes, and the pottes hanging at the ſame, to draw ye water out of them, as alſo the growing and ſprowting of the Fig trées, as well with fruit as with bloſſoms, all liuely ſet downe.
                  
                  
                     The 57. Chapter. Of the Duryoens, a fruit of Malacca.
                     
                     
                        DVryoen is a fruit yt only groweth in Malacca, and is ſo much comē
                           ded by thoſe which haue proued ye ſame, that there is no fruite in the world to bee compared with it: for they affirme, that in taſte and goodnes it excelleth all kind of fruits, and yet when it is firſt opened, it ſmelleth like rotten onions, but in the taſte the ſwéetnes and daintineſſe thereof is tryed. It is as great as a Mellon, outwardly like the Iaacka, wherof I haue ſpoken, but ſomewhat ſharper or pricking, and much like the huſkes of Cheſnuttes. It hath within it certaine partitions like the Iaacka,Annot
                              •
                            
                           D. P. 
                        wherein the fruit groweth, being of the greatneſſe of a little Hennes egge, and therein are the Nuttes as great as Peache ſtones. The fruite is for colour and taſte like an excellent meat, much vſed in Spaine, called Mang
                           •
                        ar Blanco, which is made of Hennes fleſh, diſtilled with Sugar: The trees are like the Iaacka trées, the bloſſoms white, and ſomewhat yellowiſh: the leaues about halfe a ſpanne broad, ſomewhat ſharpe at the end, within light gréene, and without darke gréene.
                     
                     In Malacca there is a fruit ſo pleaſant both for taſte and ſmell, that it excelleth all other fruites both of India, & Malacca, although there are many both excellent and very good. This fruit is called in Malayo (which is the Prouince wherein it groweth) Duriaoen, and the bloſſomes Buaa, and the tree Batan: It is a very great tree, of ſolide and firme wood, with a gray barke, hauing many braunches, and exceſſiue great ſtore of fruit: the bloſſome is white and ſomewhat yellow: the leaues halfe a handfull long, & two or three fingers broad,

                        
                        
                           
                              Arundo Indica femoris pene habiti craſsitudine▪
                              
                           
                           
                              Indiaens riet waſschende inde dick te van cen mans dije ofte been
                           
                           
                              Indicus en truncus brachijs ſepandit opacis Grata etiam ut justis umbra ſit agminibus
                           
                           
                              
                                 Ʋt nova protrudens in apertas exerat auras Grandia germinibus ſustinet ipsa ſuis▪
                              
                           
                           
                              
                              Arbor admiranda quae e ramis novos in terram truncos dimittens tam lata tandem occupat ſpatia▪ ut justum exercitum umbra poſsit contegere. Ficum Indicam vocant▪
                              
                           
                           
                              Een wonderbaerlicken boom welcke wt haere rancken weder neer waerts wortelen beſlaet ten laetſten ſoo veel plaets datter cen vol ſleegen leeger mach onder beruſten▪
                              
                           
                           
                              Duriones fructus jucunda ſaporis ſuavitate prae alijs omni bus habiti eximij, nascuntur tantum in Mallacca
                           
                           
                              Die vruchten diemen Durioens noemt boven alle ander van ſmaeck en lieffelick heyt gepreesen▪ waſſen alleen in Mallacca.
                           
                        
                        
                        
                           
                              Ecce tibi ramum nigra quem nox ſuavibus ornat Exuit ornatum floribus alma dies
                           
                           
                              
                                 Ʋt decus hoc una vigeatque et defluat hora Continuas obeunt illa dieſque vices
                           
                           
                              Traxit et hinc nomen tristi quod ſqualido trunco Auricomum rutilo cum nitet orbe jubar
                           
                           
                              Haud ſecus et noſtro quae ſenſu ſplendida fumos Eſſe. fidem veri h
                                    •
                                 x rediuma facit
                           
                           
                              
                              Arbor ſoli Indiae nota, cui per totum annum occidente ſole flores, gignuntur multi, et odoratu ſuaves, oriente defluunt, unde tristis illi nomen.
                           
                           
                              Een boom welcke in Indien alleen bekent is, int ondergaen vande Son voort▪ brengende veel welrieckende bloemen, welcke alle int opgaen vande ſelve weder af vallen, en dat het gantſche Iaer door.
                           
                        
                        
                        
rounde and ſomewhat hollowe: outwardly darke greene, and inwardly light greene, and ſomewhat after a red colour. It beareth a fruit of the bignes of a Mellon, couered with a harde husk, with many ſmal and thicke ſharpe prickles: outwardly greene, & with ſtrikes downe along the ſides like the Mellon. They haue within them foure holes or partitions according to the length thereof, in each of the which holes are yet three or foure caſes: in each caſe or ſhell a fruite as white as milke, and as great as a Hennes egge, but better of taſte and ſauour, like the white meat, which the Spaniardes make of Ryce, Capons fleſh, and Roſe water, called Mangiar Blanco, yet not ſo ſoft nor ſlymie, for the other that are yellow, and not white within, are either ſpoyled, or rotten, by euill aire or moyſture: they are accounted the beſt which haue but three Nuttes in each hole, next them thoſe that haue foure, but thoſe of fiue are not good, & ſuch as haue any cracks or cliftes in them. There are likewiſe (very ſeldome) more then twenty nuts in one apple, and in euery Nutte is a ſtone like a Peach ſtone, not rounde, but ſomewhat long, not ouer ſweet of taſte, but making the throat harſh, like vnripe Medlers, and for that cauſe are not eaten.
                     This fruit is hot and moiſt, and ſuch as will eat them, muſt firſt treade▪ vpon them ſoftly with his foote, and breake the prickes that are about them: Such as neuer eate of it before, when they ſmell it at the firſt, thinke it ſenteth like a rotten Onyon, but hauing taſted it, they eſteeme it aboue all other fruites, both for taſte and ſauour. This fruite is alſo in ſuch account with the learned Doctors, that they think a man can neuer be ſatisfied therwith, and therefore they giue this fruite an honourable name, and write certaine Epigrammes thereof, & yet there is great abundance of thē in Malacca: & the apples coſt not aboue four Meruedies the peece, ſpecially in the Monthes of Iune, Iuly and Auguſt, at other times the price is higher. Here you muſt note a wonderful contrarietie, that is betweene this fruit Duriaoen, and the hearbe Bettele, which in truth is ſo great, that if there were a whole ſhippe, ſhoppe or houſe full of Duriaoens, wherein there lay certayne leaues of Bettele, all the Duriaoens wold preſently rotte and bee ſpoyled. And likewiſe by eating ouer many of thoſe Duriaoens, they heat the Maw, & make it ſwell, and one leafe of Bettele, to the contrarie, being laide colde vppon the hart, will preſently ceaſe the inflamation, riſing or ſwelling of the Maw. And ſo if after you haue eaten Duriaoens, you chance to eat a leafe or two of Bettele, you can receyue no hurt by the Duriaoens, although you haue eaten neuer ſo many. Hereupon, and becauſe they are of ſo pleaſant a taſte, the common ſaying is, that men can neuer be ſatisfied with them.
                  
                  
                     The 58. Chapter Of the tree Arbore de Rays, that is, root tree, and the Bambus or reede of India.
                     
                     
                        THere is a trée in India called Arbore de Rays, that is to ſay, a Trée of rootes: this trée is very wonderfull to beholde, for that whē it groweth firſt vp like all other trées and ſpreadeth the branches: thē ye branches grow ful of roots, & grow downwards again towards the earth, where they take roote againe, and ſo are faſt againe within the ground, and in length of time, the broader the trée is, and that the branches doe ſpreade themſelues, the more roots doe hang vpon the branches and ſéeme a farre off to bée cordes of Hempe, ſo that in the ende the trée couereth a great peece of ground, and croſſeth one roote within the other like a Maſe. I haue ſéene trees that haue contayned at the leaſt ſome thirtie or fortie paces in compaſſe, and all out of the rootes which came from aboue one of the braunches, and were faſt growne and had taken roote againe within the earth, and in time waxed ſo thicke, that it could not be diſcerned, which was the chief or principal trunke or body of the trée: in ſome places you may creepe betweene the rootes, and the more the tree ſpreadeth, ſo much the more doe the rootes ſpring out of the ſame

branches and ſtill grow downe til they come to earth, and there take roote againe within the ground, and ſtill increaſe with rootes, that it is a wonder. This tree hath no fruit that is worth the eating, but a ſmall kind of fruite like Oliues, & good for nothing but for birdes to eate.
                     
                        Annota. D. Pal.
                        Carolus Cluſius that hath written very diligently of this tree, nameth it by authoritie out of Plinie, the Indian Fig tree, and ſaith, it groweth very high, firſt out of a ſtraight thicke trunke, or body that afterwarde yeeldeth many ſmall and thinne twigges, which being young and tender, are of a gold yellow colour, and growing downewardes towardes the earth, doe waxe againe like young Ruſhes, and ſo make as it were new trees again, which in time become as thicke as the firſt, ſo that they cannot eaſily be diſcerned one from the other, ſauing onely for the compaſſe thereof, which in the ende proceedeth to the thickneſſe of three mens fadomes: out of the which roundneſſe or circuit on euery ſide there groweth other rootes, and 
                                 •
                              o to an innumerable number, ſo that this tree doth couer ſometimes a little Italian mile, and doth not onely ſpread from the loweſt branches down againe into the ground, but alſo from the higheſt, whereby that one tree ſeemeth to be a thicke woode. The Indians that they may go through this tree, do cut away ſome of the branches, and make as it were galleries to walke vnder, and to keepe them from the heate of the Sunne, becauſe the tree is ſo full of branches, that the Sun cannot ſhine through it, and by reaſon of the many crookinges and wayes that are vnder this tree, there are many ſoundes of a great Eccho hearde vnder the ſame, ſo that in many places it will repeate a mans words three or foure times together. He that tolde Cluſius of this tree, ſaide, hee had ſeene 800. or 1000. men (whereof hee himſelfe was one) hide themſelues vnder one of thoſe trees, ſaying further, that there were ſome of thoſe trees which might well couer 3000. men vnder it: the leaues which the new branches bring forth, are like the leaues of the Quince trees: the outſide green, the inſide whitiſh & rough, as if they were couered with Wooll: whoſe leaues are much deſired by Elephants, who therewith are nouriſhed: the fruit is like the firſt ioint of a mans thumbe, and haue the faſhion & forme of little ſmall figges, reddiſh both within and without, and ful of little greines like common figges: ſweet of taſte and good to be eaten, but not ſo pleaſant as our common figs▪ they grow between the leaues & the new branches, as our Figges doe: it groweth in Goa, and in ſome places bordering on the ſame: alſo Cluſius ſaith out of Curtius, Plinius and Strabo, that thoſe trees were alſo knowne of the auncient writers. Hee that deſireth to know more hereof, let him reade Cluſius in his Chapter of Indian Figges.
                        
                     
                     There are in India other wonderfull and thicke trées, whereof ſhippes are made: there are trées by Cochiin, that are called Angelina, whereof certaine ſcutes or Skiffes called Tones are made: there are of thoſe Tones that will lade in them at the leaſt 20. or 30. Pipes of water, and are cut out of one péece of wood, without any péece or ſeame, or any iointes: whereby men may well coniecture the thickneſſe of the trée, and it is ſo ſtrong and hard a woode, that Iron in tract of time would bee conſumed thereby, by reaſon of the hardneſſe of the woode. There are alſo ouer all India many Sugar Canes in all places, and in great numbers, but not much eſtéemed of: & all along the coaſt of Malabare there are many thicke Reeds, ſpecially on the coaſt of Choramandel, which Reedes by the Indians are called Mambu, and by the Portingales Bambu: theſe Mambus haue a certain matter within them, which is (as it were) the pith of it, ſuch as Quilles haue within them, which men take out when they make them pennes to write: the Indians call it Sacar Mambu, which is as much to ſay, as Sugar of Mambu, and is a very medicinable thing much eſteemed, and much ſought for by the Arabians, Perſians, and Moores, that call it Tabaxiir.
                     
                     
                        Tabaxijr is a Perſian word,
                        
                        Annota. D. Pal. 
                        & ſignifieth no other thing but a certaine white or milke moiſture, for any ſap or moiſture cleauing together is called Sacar Mambu, becauſe the reeds or branches, which bring forth the ſame are called Mambu: the trees whereon Tabaxijr groweth, are ſome as great

as a Popler, and ſome ſmaller, commonly hauing ſtraight vpright branches, ſauing that ſome of the fayreſt of them are bowed for their galleries, Arbours, and other walking places: they haue many ioyntes, each of a ſpanne length, hauing leaues ſomewhat longer then the leaues of the Oliue tree: betweene euery ioynt there is a certain ſweete moyſture, white and cleauing together like Starch, ſometimes much, ſometimes little: euery tree or branch doth not bring forth ſuch ſweet moiſture, but ſuch onely as grow in Biſnagar, and in ſome prouinces of Malabar.
                        
                     
                     And therefore commonly in Perſia and Arabia, it is weighed againſt ſiluer, and is a marchandiſe much vſed & eſteemed among ye foreſaide nations: this groweth within the ioynts of the reed, & is white, and ſometimes blackiſh, and ſometimes Aſh colour.
                     
                        It is not therefore reiected or caſt away,
                        
                           
                              •
                           nota. 
                              •
                            Pal. 
                        becauſe it is blackiſh: for this blackiſhneſſe proceedeth either by reaſon of the ſuperfluitie of the moyſture, or that it was too long incloſed within the tree, & not by burning of the tree, as ſome are of opinion. Rhaſes writeth hereof in his third book, and 36. Chap. and Serapio in his booke of phiſicke, in the 342. Chapter, and Auicenna in his 2. booke and 617. Chapter, who are of opinion, that Tabaxijr is made of burnt rootes, but his opinion is hereby proued to be falſe.
                     
                     The Indians vſe it againſt the payne in their priuie members, or ſuch like ſecrete diſeaſes, as alſo againſt hotte or burning feauers, the Colerica paſsio, and the redde Maliſon, and laſkines, with ſuch like diſeaſes. Thoſe réeds grow moſt in the coaſt of Choramandel in Biſnagar, and Malacca in many places, and in great abundance: they growe very high, and are diuided in each ioynt one knot from another, at the leaſt a ſpanne and a halfe, and rather more and are as thicke as a mans leg aboue the knee: they do commonly grow vpright, and moſt of them as high as the higheſt houſe in the Low countries: they bow them many times in growing, that they may bring them into a forme or faſhion to ſerue for their Pallamkins, wherein the Portingalles and Indian Lordes are caried, as I ſaide before: the leaues of thoſe réedes or Bambus growe wide one from another, and haue almoſt the faſhion of an Oliue leafe.
                     
                        Of the tree or reede called Bambus,
                        
                        Annota. D. Pal. 
                        ſome of the Indians make ſcutes or little Skiffes, wherein two men may ſitte, which they doe not altogether make hollow within, but leaue two knots or partitions vncarued. In thoſe ſcutes the Indians ſit naked, at ech end one, croſſe legged, & in each hand an oare, wherewith they rule the boate and driue her ſwiftly againſt the ſtreame, ſpecially in the riuer called Cranganor: and they are of this opinion, that thoſe Scutes are neuer ouerturned by the Crocodiles (although they come about them) as others are, but for theſe it was neuer heard of.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 59. Chapter. Of the tree called Arbore Triſte.
                     
                     
                        THe Tree called Arbore Triſte, that is, the ſorrowfull tree, is ſo called, becauſe it neuer beareth bloſſoms but in the night time, and ſo it doeth and continueth all the yeare long: it is a thing to be wondred at: for that ſo ſoone as the Sunne ſetteth, there is not one bloſſome ſeene vppon the tree, but preſently within halfe an houre after, there are as many bloſſomes vppon it, as the Tree can beare: they are very pleaſant to behold, and ſmell very ſweet, and ſo ſoone as the day commeth on, and the Sunne is riſing, preſently all the bloſſomes fall off, and couer all the ground, ſo that there remayneth not one to be ſeene vpon the tree: the leaues ſhut themſelues cloſe together, ſo that it ſeemeth as though it were dead, vntill euening commeth againe, and then it beginneth to bloſſome as it did before: the tree is as great as a Plum tree, and is commonly planted behinde mens houſes, in their gardens for a pleaſure, and for the ſweet ſmell: it groweth very quickly vp, for that many young plantes do ſpring out of the roote, and as ſoone as thoſe young plantes be aboue halfe a fadome high, they haue preſently as many bloſſoms vppon them as the branches on the trees, and although they cut the tree down to the ground▪ yet within leſſe then halfe a yeare there will branches ſpring out of the roote, and likewiſe if you breake a branch off from the tree & ſet it in the earth, it will preſently take root and grow, & within few dayes after beareth bloſſoms: the bloſſomes

are in a manner like Orange tree bloſſomes, the flowre being white, and in the bottome ſomewhat yellow and reddiſh, which in India they vſe for Saffron, therewith to dreſſe their meats, and to die with all as wee doe with our Saffron, but it is neyther ſo good nor of ſo pleaſant a taſte, yet it ſerueth there for want of the other.
                     
                        Annota. D. Pal.
                        Some ſay, that the water of this tree being diſtilled, is good for the eyes, ſteeping linnen clothes in it, and ſo laying them to the eyes.
                     
                     This tree is found in no place but in Goa, and Malacca, & in ſome other places, where the Portingalles inhabiting, haue planted them, for that they firſt came out of Malacca into India, but within the land there is none, they are called in the Malayan tongue Singady, in Decanun, Pariſatico, in Decan, Pul, of the Arabians Guart, of the Perſians and Turkes G
                              •
                           l. The cauſe of this name, as the Indians ſay, is, that a Gentleman 
                           •
                        alled Pariſatico had a faire daughter, of whom the Sunne became amorous, and in the end obtained his pleaſure of her, but not long after he fell in loue with another, & forſook her, wherupon ſhe falling into diſpaire killed herſelfe, and according to the cuſtome of the countrie her body was burnt, of whoſe aſhes they ſay this tree ſprang vp, and for the ſame cauſe was called Pariſa
                              •
                           ico, and therefore they ſay by reaſon of the hatred it beareth vnto the Sunne, it neuer bringeth foorth bloſſome or flowre, but hy night, and in the day time for griefe they preſently fall off.
                     
                        An
                              •
                           nota. D. Pal.
                        The deſcription of this Tree by Chriſtopherus de Coſta is ſet downe in this manner: that it is of the greatnes and ſimilitude of a plumme tree, with many ſmall branches, ſeperated by diuers knots and partitions, the leaues growing two and two together, and as bigge as plumme tree leaues, ſoft and rough on the out ſide, verie like to leaues of Sage, and inwardlie greene, and ſomewhat ſharp, but not ſo vneuen on the ſides as plumme leaues, neyther yet ſo full of veines. In the middle betweene the two leaues there groweth a little ſtalke, whereon are fiue ſmall heads, & out of them foure little rough leaues, out of the middeſt wherof there doe ſpring fiue ſmall white bloſſomes, of the greatneſſe and forme of Orange bloſſomes, but ſomewhat ſmaller, fairer, and ſweeter. The ſtalke ſeemeth more red than yellow, wherewith the Indians colour their meate, as wee doe with Saffron. The greene fruite is of the greatnes of a Lupyne, and in faſhion like a little hart, ſomwhat long and deuided in the middle, hauing two places wherein the ſeed doth lie, which is alſo like a hart, and as bigge as the ſeeds of Saint Iohns bread, couered with a greene Skin, and ſomewhat bitter. Of all other Trees theſe are the pleaſanteſt of ſmell, ſo that they bee not handled, for if they be, they doe preſently looſe their ſweetnes and ſmell. The Indians are of opinion, that theſe flowers doe quicken and comfort the heart, but they are ſomewhat bitter, the Heathens likewiſe doe account the ſeede among their medicines that ſtrengthen the hart. The flowers may be vſed in meat, the ſeed hath oftentimes bin caried into Portingall, and there ſowed, but neuer would grow, what meanes ſoeuer they vſed, the flowers fall off when the ſunne riſeth as Cluſius ſaith, eyther by reaſon of ſome contrariety, or becauſe of the ſubtill nature of the ſap, which the beames of the Sunne doe drie and conſume: for thoſe wheron the Sunne ſhineth not, ſtay ſomewhat longer on the tree. Theſe flowers are very carefully gathered, whereof a very ſweet and pleaſant water is diſtilled, which is called water de Mogli, ſome of this ſeede was brought me out of India by Iohn Hughen, which I ſowed in the groūd, but it came not forth.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 60. Chapter. Of the Bettele leaues, & the fruit Arecca.
                     
                        THe leaues called Bett
                              •
                           e
                           
                              •
                           e or Bettre, which is very common in India, and dayly eaten by the Indians, doe grow in all places of India, where the Portingals haue diſcouerd, not with in the countrie, but only on the ſea coaſt, vnleſſe it bee ſome ſmall quantitie. It wil not growe in cold places, as China
                        ▪ nor in ouer hot places as Moſambique and Sofala, and

becauſe it is ſo much vſed, I haue particularly ſet it downe in this place, although it is already ſpoken of in many other places. You muſt vnderſtand that this Bettele is a leafe ſomewhat greater and longer out than Orange leaues, and is planted by ſticks, wherevpon it climeth like Iuie or pepper, and ſo like vnto pepper, that a farre off growing each by other, they can hardlie bee deſcerned. It hath no other fruite but the leaues only, it is much dreſſed and looked vnto, for that it is the dayly breade of India. The leaues being gathered doe continue long without withering, alwaies ſhewing freſh and greene, and are ſold by the dozen, and there is not any woman or man in all India, but that euery day eateth a dozen or two of the ſame leaues or more: not that they vſe them for foode, but after their meale tides, in the morning and all the day long, as likewiſe by night, and as they goe abroad in the ſtréetes, whereſoeuer they be you ſhal ſée them with ſome of theſe leaues in their handes, which continually they are chawing. Theſe leaues are not vſed to bee eaten alone, but becauſe of their bitterneſſe they are eaten with a certaine kinde of fruit which the Malabares and Portingales call Arecca, the Guſurates and Decanijns, Supari
                              •
                           , and the Arabians Fauffel. This fruite groweth on trees like the Palme trées that beare the Nut Cocus in India, but they are ſomewhat thinner, with the leaues ſomewhat longer, and ſmaller. The fruit is much like the fruit that groweth on Cipreſſe trees, or like a Nutmeg, though ſome of them are on the one ſide flat, & on the other ſide thicker, ſome being ſomewhat greater and very hard. They cut them in the middle with a knife, and ſo chaw them with Bettele, they are within ful of veines, white, and ſomwhat reddiſh. There is a kinde of Arecca called Cechaniin, which are leſſe, blacker, and very hard, yet are likewiſe vſed with Bettele, and haue no taſte, but onlie of the wood, and yet it moyſteneth the mouth, and coloureth it both red and blacke, whereby it ſéemeth that the lips and the teeth are painted with blacke blood, which happeneth when the Arecca is not well dried. There is another ſort which in the eating or chawing beeing ſwallowed downe, maketh men light in the heade, as if they had drunke wine all the day long, but that is ſoone paſt. They vſe yet another mixture which they eate withall, that is to ſay, a cake or role made of a certaine wood or tree called Kaate, and then they annoint the Bettele leaues with chalke made of burnt oyſter ſhelles, which can doe no hurt in their bodies, by reaſon of the ſmall quantitie of it, all this being chawed togeather, and the Iuice ſwallowed downe into their bodies, for all the reſt they ſpit forth, they ſay it is very good for the maw, and againſt a ſtinking breath, a ſoueraigne medecine for the teeth, and faſtning of gummes, and very good againſt the Schorbucke, and it is moſt true that in India verie few men are found with ſtinking breathes or tooth aches, or troubled with the Scorbuch or any ſuch diſeaſes, and although they be neuer ſo old, they alwaies haue their teeth whole and ſound, but their mouthes and teeth are ſtill as if they were painted with black blood, as I ſaid before, and neuer leaue ſpitting reddiſh ſpittle like blood. The Portingale women haue the like cuſtome of eating theſe Bettele leaues, ſo that if they were but one day without eating their Bettele, they perſwade themſelues they could not liue: Yea, they ſet it in the night times by their Beddes heades, and when they cannot ſleepe, they doe nothing els but chaw Bettele and ſpit it out againe. In the day time whereſoeuer they doe ſit, goe, or ſtand, they are continually chawing thereof, like Oxen or Kine chawing their cud: for the whole exerciſe of many Portingale women, is onely all the day long to waſh themſelues, and then fal to the chawing of their Bettele. There are ſome Portingales that by the common cuſtome of their wiues eating of Bettele, doe likewiſe vſe it. When the Indian women go to viſit one an other, the Bettele goeth with them, and the greateſt pleaſure or entertainement they can ſhew one to the other, is preſently to preſent them with ſome Bettele, Arecca, and chalke in a woodden diſh, which they kéepe onely for that purpoſe. This Bettele is to bee ſold in euery corner, and ſtreete, and ſhoppe of the towne, as alſo in euery high way for trauellers and paſſengers, and is ready prepared, that is to ſay, ſo many Bettele leaues, one Arecca & ſome chalke, and many times ſome Cate for ſuch as deſire to haue it, which they commonly keepe in their houſes, or beare in their hands in a woodden painted diſh, and ſo eate in this ſort, firſt a peece of Arecca, and Cate, which they chaw, after that a leafe of Bettele, and with the naile of their thumbe, which they purpoſely weare ſharpe and long, not round as wee doe, they pull the veines or ſtringes out of the leafe, and ſo ſmeare it with chalke, and rowling it together, they thruſt it in their mouthes and chaw it. The firſt 
                           •
                        ap thereof they ſpit forth, and ſay that thereby they purge the head and the maw of all euill, and flegmaticke humors, and their ſpittle being as fowle as blacke blood, which colour proceedeth from the Arecca, the reſt of the Iuice they ſwallow downe.
                     The Indians goe continually in the

ſtréetes and waies with Bettele and the other mixtures chawing in their handes, ſpecially whē they go to ſpeake with any man, or come before a great Lord, therby to retaine a good ſmell, and to keepe their breathes ſwéet, and if they ſhould not haue it in that ſort with them whenſoeuer they meete or ſpeake with any man of account, it were a great ſhame for them.
                     
                        Annota. D. Pall.
                        The women likewiſe when they accompany ſecretly with their husbands, doe firſt eat a little Bettele, which (they think) maketh them apter to the game. All the Indians eate it after their meales, ſaying that otherwiſe their meate wold vpbraide them, and riſe in their ſtomakes, and that ſuch as haue vſed to eate it, and leaue it, doe preſently get a ſtincking breath. They doe at certaine times forbeare the eating of Bettele, as when any of their neereſt friends die, and alſo on certain faſting daies, as likewiſe ſome Arabians and the followers of Ali, Mahomets brother in lawe, doe vpon their faſting dayes. In Malabar, this leafe is called Bettele, in Decam Guſurate, and Canam, it is called Pam, in Malaion, Siri, by Auicenna, Tambul, but better by others. Tambul, Auicenna ſayeth, that Bettele ſtrengthneth the maw, and faſtneth the fleſh of the Gummes, for which purpoſe the Indians doe vſe it, but where he affirmeth thoſe leaues to be cold in the firſt degree, and drying in the ſecond, it is not ſo, for either his Booke is falſe printed, for hee was deceiued therein, for thoſe leaues are hotte and drie in the end of the ſecond degree, as Garcius ab Horto himſelf hath found out, likewiſe the taſte and ſmell therof doe affirme it to be ſo. This Bettele is like a Citron leafe, but ſomewhat longer, ſharpe at the ende, hauing certaine veines that runne along the leafe. The rypeſt are holden to bee the beſt, and are of colour yellowiſh, although ſome women chuſe the vnripe, becauſe they are pleaſanter in the chawing. The leaues doe wither by much handling. The Bettele in Malacca, beareth a fruit like the tayle of an Efte, which becauſe it taſteth well, is eaten: it is planted like a Vine vpon ſtickes, as Hoppes with vs. Some for their greater benefit Plant it among Pepper, and among Arecca, and there of doe make a pleaſant Gallerie. This Bettele muſt be carefully looked vnto, and often watered. He that deſireth to knowe more hereof, let him reade the worthie commentaries of learned Cluſius, vppon the Chapter of Garcius touching Bettele.
                        
                     
                     The Noblemen and Kings, whereſoeuer they goe, ſtand or ſit, haue alwaies a ſeruant by them, with a Siluer ketle in their hand full of Bettele and their mixtures, and when they will eat, giue them a leafe ready prepared. And when any Ambaſſadour commeth to ſpeake with the King, although the King can vnderſtand them well, yet it is their maner (to maintaine their eſtates) that the Ambaſſadour ſpeaketh vnto them by an interpreter, that ſtandeth there in preſence, which done, be anſwereth againe by the ſame interpreter. In the meane time, the King lyeth on a bed, or elſe ſitteth on the ground, vppon a Carpet, and his ſeruant ſtandeth by, readie with the Bettele, which he continually chaweth, and ſpitteth out the Iuyce, and the remainder thereof, into a Siluer Baſon; ſtanding by him, or elſe holden by ſome one of his ſlaues or his wiues, & this is a great honour to the Ambaſſadour, ſpecially if he profereth him of the ſame Bettele that he himſelfe doth eate. To conclude, it is their common vſe to eate it, which becauſe it is their dayly exerciſe, and that they conſume ſo much, I haue made ye longer diſcourſe, the better to vnderſtand it, although ſomewhat hath béene ſaid thereof in other places. The Kings & Lords of India vſe pilles made of Arecca, Cate and Camphora, with beaten Lignum aloes, and a little Amber, which they eate altogether with Bettele and Chalke, in ſtéede of Arecca.
                     
                     
                        Some mixe Bettele with Licium,
                        
                        Annot
                              •
                            
                           D. P
                              •
                           
                         
                        ſome and thoſe of the richer & mightier ſort with Campher, others with Lignum aloes, Muske and Amber Grijs, and beeing ſo prepared, is pleaſant of taſte and maketh a ſweet breath. There are ſome that chaw Arecca either with Cardamomum, or with Cloues. Within the lande farre from the Sea, thoſe leaues are ſolde verie deare. It is ſaid, that the King of Decan Mizamoxa ſpendeth yearely thereof, to the valew of aboue thirtie thouſand Milreyes. This is their banquetting ſtuffe, and is giuen

them by trauellers, and the Kings giue it to their Subiects. To the rich they giue thereof being mixed with their owne hands, and to others they ſend it by their ſeruants. When they ſend any man of Ambaſſage or otherwiſe; there are certaine Silke Purſes full of prepared Bettele deliuered vnto him, and no man may depart before it be deliuered him, for it is a ſigne or token of his paſſe port.
                     
                     By the pictures hereafter following you may ſée the figures of the fruites of Malacca called Duryoens, & ye trée Arbore de Rays, or roote trée, likewiſe the thicke Réedes, named by the Portingales Bambu, and by the Indians Mambu, with the trée called Arbore Triſte, or the ſorrowfull trée, as it is both by day and by night, and the trée whereon Arecca doth grow, as likewiſe the Bettele. And becauſe Pepper is oftentimes planted at the foote of the Arecca trée, where it groweth and clymeth vp round about the body thereof, I haue ſet it downe, in the ſame order as it groweth: The deſcription whereof ſhall in an other place bee ſhewed, among the Spices and drugges of India, as alſo the Hearbes, ſeruing for Phyſicke, and Apothecarie ware &c.
                  
                  
                     The 61. Chapter. Of the Hearbe Dutroa, and a Plant called Herba Sentida, or the feeling Hearbe.
                     
                        THe Hearbe called Dutroa, is verie common in India, and groweth in euerie fielde: the leafe thereof is ſharpe at the ende, like the pointe of a Speare, and is indented on the edges like the leafe of Beares claw, and about that bigneſſe, hauing in it many long thréedes or veines, it groweth without taſte, or moyſture, and ſomewhat bitter and ſmelling like a Raddiſh. The flower or bloſſome of this Plant is verie like vnto the bloſſome of Roſe-marie in colour: and out of this bloſſome groweth a bud, much like the bud of Popie, wherein are certaine ſmall kernels like the kernels of Melons, which being ſtamped, and put into any meate, wine, water or any other drinke or compoſition, and eaten or drunke therewith, maketh a man, in ſuch caſe as if hee were fooliſh or out of his wittes▪ ſo that he doth nothing elſe but laugh, without any vnderſtanding or ſence once to perceiue any thing that is done in his preſence. And ſome time it maketh him ſléepe as if he were dead, in that ſort he continueth for the ſpace of twentie foure houres: but if his féete bee waſhed with colde water, then hee commeth to himſelfe againe before the twentie fower howers be expired. This Herbe the Indian and Portingall women vſe much to giue vnto their huſbandes, and often times when they are diſpoſed to bee merrie with their ſecrete louers, they giue it him▪ and goe in his preſence and performe their leacherie together, and taking their huſband by the beard, they will call him Cornudo, with other ſuch like ieſtes, the man not knowing any thing thereof, but ſitteth with his eyes open, not doing or ſaying any thing, but laugh and grin, like a foole, or a man out of his wits: and when the time commeth that he reuiueth out of his tranſe, he knoweth nothing what was done, but thinketh that hee had ſlept. This Hearbe the ſlaues vſe likewiſe to giue their maſters and miſtreſſes, therby to robbe them and to breake open their Cheſts, which is oftentimes done, this Dutroa muſt bee vſed in meaſure, becauſe it is a kind of poyſon, for if a man giue too much thereof hee may bring a man to his ende, vnleſſe ſome ſtrong and preſent remedie be taken, by ſome conterpoyſon or Purgation.
                     
                        The remedy thereof conſiſteth in medicines which cauſe vomiting,
                        Annota▪ 
                           D. Pall▪
                         
                        for he muſt caſt al out of his body, meate or what ſoeuer is remaining in his Maw, & then take diuers purgations and ſtrong Gl
                              •
                           ers, as alſo hard rubbing & binding both hands and feete, together with letting bloud in the great toe
                              •
                           .
                     
                     This Hearbe groweth in all places in aboundance, and although it is forbidden to be gathered, or once vſed, neuertheleſſe thoſe that are the principal forbidders of it are ſuch as dayly eate thereof, for their owne wiues ſakes, that thereby they might fulfill their pleaſures with other men, which is the common liuing of them all▪ ſome few excepted. Some men are ſo vſed to eate and drink Dutroa, not knowing of it, that taſting onely of the Iuice of the leaues, they are preſently in a tranſe, and ſo the wife is well aſſured, and without all feare to ſatiſfie her luſt. This and ſuch like Hearbes there are in India, and are much vſed, for that all the care & ſtudie that ye women and wiues of India haue, is day and night to deuiſe meanes to ſatiſfie then pleaſures, and to increaſe luſt, by all the deuiſes they can imagine, and to make their bodies the apter thereunto. Which to effect they know all the diueliſh inuentions and practiſes 
                           〈1 page missing〉
                        
                        
                        
which is like the blacke, ſauing the firſt outmoſt huſke is white and ſmooth, without any wrinckle, but hath the verie ſelf ſame vertue and taſte that black pepper hath. It cometh oftentimes mingled with the Malacca pepper. The pepper that groweth in the countries about Malacca is many times alſo brought into Portingal, but verie little, for that it is 2 yeares betweene euery ſhip that ſayleth out of Portingale thither, which being there, taketh in ſome pepper, but moſt Cloues and Nutmegges with their flowers and other marchandiſes of China: But the moſt part of that pepper is vſed in the ſame countries, as in Pegu, Syon, & ſpecially in China, and other countries bordering on the ſame, which deal continually one with an other. Pepper by the Malabares is called Molanga, and in the countries by Malacca Lada: in Arabia, Fil
                              •
                           il: the Guſarates of Cambaia and Decamins of Ballagate cal it Meriche: and they of Bengala, Moro
                              •
                           s: and the long pepper which groweth onely in Bē
                           g
                              •
                           la and Iaua, is called Pelc
                              •
                           m. Pepper groweth and is planted at the foote of an other trée, and moſt part at the foote of the trée called Arecca, or ſome ſuch like trée, & groweth vpon the tree, like Bettele or Iue. The leaues of pepper are like Orange leaues, but ſomewhat ſmaller, they are green and ſharp at the ends, in the chawing it biteth the tong, and taſteth much like to Bettele, it growes in bunſhes like grapes, but a great deale leſſer and thynner, yet ſomewhat thicker then Gooſeberries: they are alwaies green til they begin to drie and to ripen, which is in Decē
                        ber and Ianuary, for at that time they are gathered. The long pepper groweth in Bengala, and ſome in the Iland of Iaua, and is an other kinde of trée: the long pepper is of the length of a néedle, or the tagge of a point, but ſomewhat thicker, and all of a like thicknes: it is outwardly rugged, and of an aſhie colour, and within ſomewhat white, with ſmall ſeedes, but in taſte and vſe it is like the other black and white pepper. The white pepper (as I ſayd) is like the black, both in taſte and forme, yet it is accounted for better & ſtrōger, and is not in ſo great quantitie as the black. The Pepper called Canariins in the countrie of Goa and Malabar, almoſt of the faſhion of Panike: it is of an aſhe colour, and holow within, with ſome ſmal kernels, which in eating taſteth and heateth like other pepper, yet it is vſed onely by the poore people, and therefore is called Canariin pepper, that is to ſay, Countrie mens pepper, or poore peoples pepper: therefore it is neuer laden away, for it is verie courſe and of little value, neither would it be able to rayſe the fraight, and therfore is it left in the countrie. The other pepper is in India and all other Eaſtern countries, much vſed and ſpent by the Indians themſelues, and that in greater quantitie then yearelie is carried or laden from thence for other places, for they eate not any kinde of meate, but they put therein handfuls of pepper, al vnbeaten, ſo that they waſte the more. In the deſcription of Malabar I haue ſet downe in what places pepper doth grow, and is cōmonlie laden, and the hauens where the Portingall ſhippes doe come and fetch it: therefore it néedeth not here to be rehearſed: pepper is likewiſe much vſed, whē it is green, to be put in pots with vineger and ſalt, and ſo is kept a long time, and in the ſame manner carryed into Portingal: but it is moſt vſed in that ſort to be eaten in India, and is called pepper in Achar, in which manner they vſe to dreſſe all other ſorts of ſpices in India, and eate it commonlie to procure an appetite▪ as we doe Capars, Oliues, and Lemons, being pickled.
                     
                        Pepper is vſed in the kitchen, and in Apothecaries ſhoppe
                              •
                           ,
                        Annota. D. Pall. 
                        although in both places not as a meate or food, but for phyſicke▪ it warmeth the mawe, and conſumeth the cold ſlymenes thereof, to eaſe the payne in the mawe which proceedeth of rawneſſe and wind. It is good to eate fyue pepper cornes euerie morning. He that hath a bad or thick ſight, let him vſe pepper cornes, with annis, 
                              •
                           ennel ſeed, and Cloues, for thereby the myſtineſſe of the eyes, which darken the ſight, is cleered and driuē away. The Apothe
                              •
                           ries make a confection of 3. ſorts o
                              •
                            peppe
                              •
                           , in this ſort, of wh
                              •
                           te, blacke and 
                              •
                           ong Pepper of each 25 drāmes, wilde tyme, ginger, 
                              •
                           
                           nis ſeed, of each an ou
                              •
                           ce, with honnie is much as needeth to make a con
                              •
                           e
                              •
                           , which is good for ſuch as haue a cold 
                              〈◊〉
                            the Nucken, the paine in the liuer, and the Dropſie.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 63. Chapter. Of Cinamom.
                     
                     
                        
                           CInamon in Latin is called Cinamo
                              •
                           
                        : by the Arabians, Quirſa: by the Perſians Da
                              •
                           
                           china, by the men of Seylon, (where it moſt groweth) Curdo: of the people of Malacca, Cayſman: and by the Malabares, Camea: the trees are as great as Oliue trees, and ſome leſſer, with leaues of Colmi like Baye leaues, but of faſhion like Citron leaues, though ſomewhat ſmaller. They haue white bloſſomes, and a

certaine fruite of the greatnes of black Portingall Oliues, whereof alſo Oyle is made, which is vſed for manie thinges. The tree hath two barkes, but the ſecond bark is the Cinamon, it is cut off in foure ſquare péeces, and ſo laid to dry at the firſt it is aſhe colour, after as it beginneth to dry, it roulleth together of it ſelf, and looketh of the colour as it commeth hether, which procéedeth of the heate of the Sunne. The trée from whence the barke is taken they let it ſtand, & within 3 yeres after it hath an other barke, as it had before. Theſe trees are in great abundance, for they grow of themſelues without planting, in the open fields like buſhes: the roote of this tree yeeldeth a water, which ſmelleth like Camphora, it is forbidden to be drawn forth, for ſpoyling the trees. The Cinamon that is not wel dried is of aſhe colour, & that which is ouer much dryed, blackiſh, but the beſt dryed is reddiſh: there is much and excellent water diſtilled out of Cinamō
                         while it is half gréen, which is much vſed in India, & manie times caryed into Portingal, and other places: it is very pleaſant both to drinke and to ſmell, but very hote and ſtrong: it is vſed againſt the Colicke and other diſeaſes procéeding of cold, it is likewiſe good againſt a ſtincking breath, and euill ſauor of the mouth. There is likewiſe a water made of the bloſſomes of this tree, but not ſo good, nor ſo well eſteemed as that of Cinamon it ſelf. The places where Cinamon groweth, is moſt and beſt in the Ilād of Seylon, wherin there is whole woods full of Cinamon trees: in the coaſt of Malabar there groweth likewiſe great ſtore and ſome woods of Cinamon, but not half ſo good and leſſer trees, the barke being grayer and thicker, and of ſmal vertue. The Cinamon of the Iland of Seylon is the beſt and fineſt, and is at the leaſt three times dearer in the price. The Cinamon of Malabar is called Canella de Mato or wilde Cinamon, and is forbidden to be carried into Portingale: yet there is great quantity ſhipped, but all vnder the name of Cinamon of Seylon, whereby it paſſeth, and the King hath his full cuſtome as well for the good as for the bad. When the 
                           
                              •
                           on of Seylon is worth in India 50 or 60 Pardawes the Quintale, the wilde Cinamon is worth but 10 or 12 Pardawes: but it is all regiſtred in India, for Seylons Cinamon, and payeth cuſtome in Lisbon, each Quintale 15 or 16 Milreyes, as well the good as the bad, and all other ſpices after the rate: and there may be nothing ſhipped in India, no not ſo much as the ſlaues, but it muſt all be regiſtred in Cochin: and if there be any thing found, to be brought into Porti
                              •
                           l
                        ▪ and not regiſtred there▪ it is forfait to the King. There groweth Cinamon alſo in the Ilands of Iaua, and by Malacca, but very little, and not ſo good as that of Seylon. The trees which they burne in India, for wood, ſome of them are like Cinamon in burning, and ſmell.
                     
                        Cinamon healeth, it openeth & ſtrēgtheneth all the inward parts, it is ſomewhat attractiue, ſtretcheth the mawe, and digeſteth the meate, it is alſo vſed againſt all kinde of poyſon, that may hurt the hart. Cinamon with Penny
                              •
                           oy all and Biuoet water drunk driueth away the 
                              Ʋolgher, openeth the matrice,
                        Some 
                              〈◊〉
                            this 
                              〈…〉
                            the 
                              〈◊〉
                            ca
                              •
                           led 
                              〈◊〉
                            Mo
                              •
                           . 
                        and maketh women haue their flowers: it is likewiſe good againſt Fuſten, and Catharres, that fall downe from the head into the lower parts, alſo againſt the Dropſie, and breaking or ſtopping of the kidneyes &c. The water and Oyle of Cinamon doe greatlie ſtrengthen all the inward parts, as head, hart, mawe and lyuer. &c.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 64. Chapter. Of Ginger.
                     
                        GInger groweth in manie places of India, yet the beſt, & moſt caryed abroad, is that which groweth in the coaſt of Malabar: it groweth like thin and young Netherland reedes of two or thrée ſpannes high, the roote whereof is the Ginger, being greene, it is much eaten in India, for ſallets, as alſo ſodden in Vineger, which they call Achar, as I ſaid of pepper, and other fruites that are vſed in that māner throughout al India: the time whē they are moſt gathered and begun to be dried, is in December and Ianuarie: they drie it in this ſort, that is, they couer it with pot-earth, which they doe to ſtop and fill vp the holes, and thereby to make it continue the freſher, for the pot-earth preſerueth it from wormes, without the which it is preſentlie conſumed by them▪ it is little eſtéemed in India notwithſtanding there is much ſhipped as well to the red ſea as to Ormus, Arabia and Aſia, but little for Portingal
                        ▪ becauſe it will not ſaue ye fraught and cuſtome: onlie the gunner of the Indian ſhippes may lade and bring certaine Quintals without paying any cuſtome, which by the King of Portingale was of long tyme granted vnto them, and is yet obſerued: and this they may fel to marchants and ſo by this meanes there is ſome brought, otherwiſe but very little, for that the moſt part of Ginger brought into Spain, cometh from Cabo verde, the Ilands of S. Thomas, Braſili
                              •
                           , and

the Ilād of S. Domingo in ye ſpaniſh Indies, which is much trafficked withall in Spaine: wherefore that of the Portingall Indies is little brought out of the coūtry, becauſe of the lōg way & great charges & yet it is better thē other Ginger: as alſo all other ſpices, mettals, and ſtones, that are brought out of the Orientall Indies, that is out of the Portingales Indies, are for goodneſſe and vertue better then any other, which the continuall traffique hath ſufficiently made knowne. There is likewiſe much Ginger conſerued in Suger which commeth out of the countrie of Bengala, but the beſt commeth from China, it is verie good to eate, and much vſed in India, & broght out of Portingal into theſe countries.
                     
                        Ginger by the Arabians, Perſians, and Turkes is called Gengibil, in Guſurate, Decan,
                           Annota. D Pall. and Bengala, when it is freſhe and greene, Adrac, and when it is dryed Sucte, in Malabar both dryed & green Imgi, in Malayo Aliaa. It groweth like water Lillies, or Sword-hearbe, but ſomewhat blacker, with a ſtalke aboute two or three handfuls high, and with a roote like a Lillie, not ſpreading forth as Antonius Muſa writeth, and is not ſo ſharpe, ſpecially that which groweth in Bacaim, becauſe of the ouer great moyſture. This roote is cut ſmall and mixed with other rootes, and ſo eaten for Sallets with oyle, ſalt and Vineger, it is alſo ſodden with fleſh and fiſh. It goweth in all places of India, and is ſowed or Planted, for that which commeth vp of it ſelfe, is not ſo good. The beſt and greateſt ſtore commeth out of Malabar, and by the Arabians and Perſians it is much deſired, next it is the Ginger of Bengala. The third is that of Debut and Bacaim and of all the coaſt along, in the wilde fields and inwardly within the land there is little found. There is alſo ſome found in the Ilands of S. Laurence and Comaro. The vertue and properties of Ginger is, that it maketh a man, to goe eaſily to the ſtoole, and reſtoreth a mans ſtrength that is decayed. But it is found contrary in other Authors, that Ginger ſtoppeth, for that it cauſeth good digeſtion, and ſo laskements, proceeding of raw moyſtneſſe, is ſtopped. It heateth a colde maw, and is good againſt humors, that darken the eyes, and is vſed in many medicines.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 65. Chapter Of Cloues.
                     
                        CLoues are by the Turkes, Perſians Arabians and moſt part of the Indians called Ca
                           
                              •
                           a
                              ••
                           r, and in the Ilands of Maluco, where they are only found and do grow Chamke. Theſe Ilands are fine, lying vnder the Equinoctiall line, as in the deſcriptions therof is declared. They haue nothing elſe but Cloues, which are caried frō thence, through out the world, the trees whereon they grow, are like Bay-trées, the bloſſomes at the firſt white, then greene, and at the laſt red and hard, which are the Cloues, and when the bloſſomes are gréene, they haue the pleaſanteſt ſmell in all the world. The Cloues grow verie thicke together and in great numbers, they are gathered and then dried, their right colour, when they are drie, is a darke yelow, and to giue them a blacke colour, they are commonly ſmoked. The Cloues that ſtay on the trée vngathered are thicke, and ſtay on till the next yeare, which are thoſe that are called the mother of the Cloues. And in the place where the trées ſtand, there groweth not any graſſe or gréene Hearbe at all, but it is wholly drie, for that thoſe trees draw all the moyſture vnto them. That which the Portingals call Baſton
                        ▪ or with vs the ſtocke of the Cloue, and is the ſtalke whereby they hang on the trees is gathered with the Cloues and ſo they are mingled together: for that in Maluco they neuer garble their Cloues, but in India they are many times parted, though verie little: for they are moſt part ſold and vſed with duſt, and ſtalkes and all together, but ſuch as are to bee ſent to Portingall are ſeuered and clenſed The Cloues are ſo hotte of nature, that whenſoeuer them are made cleane, and ſeperated from their Garbiſh, if there chance to ſtand either Tubbe or Payle of water in the Chamber where they clenſe them, or any other veſſell with wine or any kind of moyſture, it will within two dayes at the furtheſt be wholly ſoken out and dryed vp, although it ſtand not néere them, by reaſon of the great heate of the Cloues, that draw all moyſture vnto them, as by experience I haue often ſéene. The ſame nature is in the vnſpunne Silke of China, ſo that whenſoeuer the Silke lyeth any where in a houſe vpon the flowre, that is to ſay, vppon boordes, a foote or two aboue the ground, and that the flowre is ſprinkled and couered with

water, although it toucheth not the Silke, in the Morning all that water will bee in the Silke, for that it draweth it all vnto it. And this tricke the Indians often times vſe to make their Silke weigh heauie, when they ſel it▪ for it can neither be ſéen nor found in the Silke. But returning to our matter, the Cloues grow about the length of a great ſhot from the Sea ſide, and are neither planted nor ſet, and nothing elſe is done vnto them, but only when they plucke and gather them, they make the place vnder the trées verie cleane. The trée will not grow verie cloſe to the Sea ſide, nor farre from it, for theſe Ilands are altogether compaſſed about with the Sea. When it is a fruitfull yeare, then the Cloues are in greater abundance then the leaues. When they gather them, they do not pluck them with their hands, but with ropes which they faſten about the branches, and by force they ſhake them off, and by that meanes the trées are ſo ſpoyled, that the next yeare after they yeelde but little fruite: but the ſecond yeare then after enſuing, there grow vp trées of the Cloues that fell vpon the ground, when they gathered them two yeares before, like Cheſnut trées, and they growe verie ſound, becauſe of the great rayne that falleth in thoſe places: for thoſe Ilandes lye vnder the Equinoctiall line, and yéelde fruite within eight yeares, and ſo continue aboue a hundreth yeares. The time when they are gathered and dried, is from September to Ianuarie. When the Cloues are gréene, they make good conſerues in Sugar, and are likewiſe ſalted in Vineger & ſo kept in pots, and made of Achar, in which manner they are carried into Malacca and India. They likewiſe diſtill water out of the gréen Cloues which is verie cordiall and vſed in many Medecines. The Indian women vſe much to chawe Cloues, thereby to haue a ſwéete breath, which the Portingales wiues that dwell there, doe now begin to vſe, the leaues of the Cloue-trees, are altogether like Bayleaues.
                     
                        Cloues grow on trees like Bay-trees both in forme and quantitie,
                        Annota. D. Pal. 
                        ſaue onely that their leaues are ſomthing leſſer, like Almonds or Willow leaues. They are full of branches, and haue aboundance of bloſſomes, which doe turne theſe fruites, and are called Cloues becauſe in forme and ſhape they doe reſemble a Birdes clawes. They growe like the Mirtle-tree vpon the vttermoſt branches. Cloues are much vſed both in meate and in medicines. The people of Iaua deſire the gray Cloues, that hang a whole yere and more vpon the trees, and are no Males, as Auia doth abſurdly aduiſe, and as we of the common ſort doe, who couet the thinneſt. When they are greene, they vſe to ſalt them, with ſalt and Vineger in Maluco, and ſome they put in Suger, which are verie pleaſant to bee eaten. The water of greene Cloues diſtilled is very pleaſant of ſmel, and ſtrengthneth the hart, likewiſe they procure ſweating in men that haue the Pox, with Cloues, Nutmegges, Mace, long and black Pepper, ſome lay the poulder of Cloues vpon a mans head, that hath a paine in it, that proceedeth of colde. They ſtrengthen the Liuer, the Maw, and the hart, they further digeſtion, they procure euacuation of the Vrine, and ſtop laſcatiuenes, and being put into the eyes, preſerueth the ſight, and foure Drammes being drunke with Milke, doe procure luſt.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 66, Chapter. Of Mace, Folie, or flowers of Nutmegges, and of Nutmegges.
                     
                        THe Nutmegge trée is like a Peare tree or a Peach trée, but that they are leſſe, and it hath round leaues. Theſe trées growe in the Iland of Banda, not farre from Maluco, and alſo in the Ilandes of Iauas & Sunda, from whence they are carried to China, and Malacca, and alſo into India and other places. The fruite is altogether like great round Peaches, the inward part whereof is the Nutmegge. This hath about it a hard ſhell like wood, wherein the Nut lyeth looſe: and this wooden ſhel or huſke is couered ouer with Nutmeg flower, which is called Mace, and ouer it is the fruite, which without is like the fruite of a Peach. When it is ripe it is a verie coſtly meate, and of a moſt pleaſaunt ſauor. This fruite or Apples are many times conſerued in Sugar being whole, and in that ſort caried throughout India, and much eſtéemed: for in truth it is the beſt conſerue in all India, and is many times brought ouer into Portingall, and from thence hether. They are likewiſe ſalted and put in Vineger, which is much vſed in India. When the Nuttes begin

to be ripe, then they ſwell, and the firſt ſhell or huſke burſteth in péeces, and the Nutmegge flowers doe continue redde, as any Scarlet, which is a verie faire ſight to behold, eſpecially if the trées bee full of fruite. Sometimes alſo the Mace breaketh, which is the cauſe that the Nutmegges▪ come all together without the Mace, and when the Nutmegge drieth, then the Mace falleth off, and the red changeth into Orenge colour, as you ſée by the Mace that is brought hether. The Ilands where they grow, ſpecially Banda, are very vnholeſome countries, as alſo the Ilands of Maluco, many that traffique thether die before they depart from thence, or if they eſcape, they are in great perill of their liues, by ſickneſſe, notwith ſtanding great gaine maketh men to trauell thether. The Nutmegge (by the inhabitants of Banda, where they are moſt growing) is called Palla, and the Mace or Nutmegge flower, Buna Palla. The Decanijns and Indians call it Iapatry, and the Mace Iayfol.
                     
                     
                        The trees whereon Nutmegs and Mace do grow,
                        Annota. D. Pall. 
                        are not vnlike to Peare trees, but ſhorter and rounder leaues, they are good for paine in the head, for the mother and the Sinewes.
                     
                     
                        The Nut is compaſſed about with three kinds of Barkes. The firſt & outermoſt is like the greene ſhell of an Acorne, and when they are ripe that ſhel openeth: then you find a thin ſhell or barke like a Nutte, which compaſſeth the fruite, and by vs is called Mace, which both in meate and Medicine is verie ſeruiceable and wholeſome. The third ſhell is harder and more like vnto wood then the firſt, and is like the Acorne, but that it is blacker, which being opened, you find the Nutmegge therein.
                     
                     
                        When the fruit is ripe, and that the firſt ſhell breaketh open, then the Mace is of a moſt faire red colour, and when the fruit is drie, the Mace likewiſe doth change, and becommeth a Golden yellow.
                     
                     
                        There are two ſorts of Nutmegges, one long, which are called Males, the other round, which are better & ſtronger.
                     
                     
                        The Nutmeg comforteth the braine, ſharpneth the memorie, warmeth and ſtrengthneth the Maw, driueth winde out of the body, maketh a ſweet breath, driueth downe Vrine, ſtoppeth the Laske, and to conclude, is good againſt all colde diſeaſes in the heade, in the braine, the Mawe, the Liuer and the Matrice.
                     
                     
                        The Oyle thereof is better then the reſt, for all the aforeſaid named infirmities.
                     
                     
                        Mace is ſpecially good for a colde and a weake maw, it procureth digeſtion of the meate, drieth vp all euill humors and breaketh wind.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 67. Chapter. Of Cardamomum
                     
                     
                        
                           CArdamomum is a kinde of ſpice which they vſe much in India to dreſſe with their meates, and commonly they haue it in their mouthes to chaw vpon. It is very good againſt a ſtincking breath and euill humors in the head, and ſerueth alſo for other things in medecines: it groweth like other graynes and is verie like to Panyke, but of a white colour drawing ſomewhat towards yealow. The huſkes are as great as the huſkes of Panyke graines, but ſomewhat ſmal: within there is about 10 or 12 graines of berryes, which is the Cardamomum. There are two ſorts of Cardamomum, that is to ſay, great and ſmall, and called by the Malabares, Etremilly: the Guſurates, Decaniins & Bengalers cal it Hil, and the Mores inhabiting among them, call it Hilachij. This is much vſed in India, and is a marchandiſe which is caryed into all places of India: moſt of it groweth in Calecut and Cananor, places on the coaſt of Malabar: it is likewiſe in other places of Malabar, and in the Iland of Iaua, and from the countries aforeſaid it is moſt caryed into other places, but little brought into Portingal, becauſe of the great charges, and long way: yet many times the Saylers and other trauellers bring it. They ſieth no fleſh in India, but commonly they put Cardomomum into the pot, it maketh the mea
                              •
                            to haue as good a ſauor and a taſte as any of the other ſpices of India.
                     
                        
                        Auicenna ſayth there are two kinds of it, the one he calleth Saccolaa quebir, that is, great Cardamomum, and the other Saccolaa Regner, that is, ſmal Cardamomum: in Malabar it is called Etremelly, in Seylan Encal, in Bengala Guſaratte, and Decan ſometimes Hil, & ſometimes Elachi, but that is by the Moores, for the Heathens throughout all India call it Dors Cardamomum: to the auncicient Grecians, as Galen, Dioſcorides, and others, it was altogether vnknowne: & although Galen in his ſeuenth booke of Simples ſaith, that Cardamomum is not ſo hot, as Naſturcium or water Creſſes, but pleaſanter of ſauour, and ſmell with ſome ſmall bitterneſſe, yet thoſe ſignes or properties doe not agree with the Cardamomum of India. Dioſcorides in his firſt booke and fift Chapter commending the Cardamomum brought out of Comagens, Armenia, and Boſphoras (although hee ſaith alſo that ſuch doe growe in India and Arabia) ſaith, that wee muſt chooſe that which is full, and tough in breaking, ſharpe & bitter of taſte, and with the ſmell thereof cauſeth a heauineſſe in a mans head: yet is the Indian Cardamomum caryed into thoſe places, from whence Dioſcorides affirmeth that his Cardamomum doeth come, although it bee neyther tough in breaking, nor annoyeth the heade, neyther is bitter of taſte, nor ſo ſharpe as Cloues: the great Cardamomum hath a ſhell that is long and three cornered, wherein are certaine pale red kernels with corners: the ſmall Cardamomum hath likewiſe a three cornered huske, yet ſhorter, and with ſmaller kernels, parted in the middle with a thinne skinne; & this Cardamomum is of three ſorts, as minus, medium, minimum, that is, ſmall, ſmaller, and ſmalleſt of all. It heateth the Mawe, digeſteth the meat, and driueth away the giddines of the head: it is alſo eaten with Bettele, to purge the head & maw of ſlime and filthineſſe.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The 68. Chapter. Of Lacke or hard Waxe.
                     
                        
                           LAcke by the Malabares, Bengalers, and Decaniins, is called A
                              •
                           sii, by the Moors Lac: the men of Pegu (where the beſt is found, and moſt trafiqued withall) doe call it Treck, and deale much therewith by carrying it vnto the Iſland of Sumatra (in time paſt called Taprobana) and there they exchange it for Pepper, and from thence it is carried to the redde ſea, to Perſia and Arabia, wherevpon the Arabians, Perſians and Turkes call it Loc Sumutri, that is, Lac of Sumatra, becauſe it is brought from thence into their countries. The manner how it is made is thus: in Pegu, and thoſe places from whence it commeth, there are certaine very great Piſmyres with winges, which fly vppe into the trées, that are there like Plum trées, and ſuch other Trées, out of the which trées comes a certaine gumme, which the Piſmires ſucke vp, and then they make the Lac rounde about the branches of the trées, as Bées make Hony and Waxe, and when it is ful, the owners of the trees come, and breaking off the braunches lay them to drie, and being drie, the branches ſhrinke out, and the Lac remayneth behinde like a Reede: ſometimes the woode breaketh within them, but the leſſe woode it hath within it, the better it is: the peeces and crummes that fall vpon the ground, they melt them together, but that is not ſo good, for it hath filth and earth within it: it happeneth oftentimes that they finde the Piſmires winges within the raw Lac. When the Lac is raw, as it commeth from the Tree, it is a darke red colour, but being refined and cleanſed, they make it of all colours in India.
                     
                     
                        They beat the Lac to powder,
                        Annota. D. Pa
                              •
                           . 
                        and melt it, and ſo mixe all manner of colours vpon it as they liſt, redde, blacke, greene, yellow, or any other colour, & make peeces, thereof, ſuch a
                              •
                            are ſold here to ſeale letters withall.
                     
                     Them they dreſſe their bedſteds withall, that is to ſay, in turning of the woode, they take a peece of Lac of what colour they will, and as they turne it when it commeth to his faſhion, they ſpread the Lac vpon the whole peece of woode, which preſently with the heat of the turning melteth the Waxe, ſo that it entreth into the creſtes & cleaueth vnto it▪ about

the thickneſſe of a mans naile: then they burniſh it ouer with broad ſtraw or dry Ruſhes ſo cunningly, that all the woode is couered withall, and it ſhineth like Glaſſe, moſt pleaſant to behold, and continueth as long as the wood, being well looked vnto: in this ſort they couer all kinde of houſholde ſtuffe in India, as Bedſteddes, Chaires, ſtooles, &c. and all their turned woodworke, which is wonderful common and much vſed throughout all India: the fayreſt workemanſhippe thereof commeth from China, as it may be ſéene, by all things that come from thence, as deſks▪ Targets, Tables, Cubbordes, Bores, and a thouſand ſuch like thinges, that are all couered and wrought with Lac of all colours and faſhions: ſo that it maketh men to wonder at the beautie and brightnes of the colour, which is altogether Lac: they likewiſe vſe Lac to fill their Golde and Siluer workes, that is to ſay, haft
                           •
                        s of kniues, and other thinges, which they make very fayre outwardly of Siluer, and inwardly full of Lac. The Indians likewiſe are ſo cunning, that they make Ringes of Gold, which to mans ſight ſéeme very fayre and bright, as though they were all of maſſy Gold, inwardly they are hollow and ſtopt with Lac, and cannot bee perceyued, vnleſſe a man bee aduertiſed thereof. There is Lac likewiſe in Ballaga
                              •
                           
                           te and Malabar, but very little: the greateſt quantitie which from thence is carryed throughout India, and all other places, commeth out of the kingdome of Pegu.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 69. Chapter. Of Annil or Indigo.
                     
                     
                        
                           ANnil or Indigo by the Guſurates is called Gali, by others Nil: it is a coſtly colour, and much caryed and trafiqued into Portingall: it groweth in India in the kingdom of Cambaia: the hearbe is very like Roſemary, and is ſowed like other Hearbes, and when time and ſeaſon ſerueth, pulled and dryed, and then it is made wette and beaten, and ſo certayne dayes after dryed againe, and then prepared. At the firſt it is a fine greene, but after it is a fayre blew, as you ſée it when it commeth hether, and the cleaner it is from earth and duſt, the better it is to proue if it be good: they burne it with a candle, and if then it fall out like fine meale, it is good; but if it be groſſe like ſande, it is not good: alſo being throwne into the water if it ſwimmeth it is good, but if it ſinke it is not good: this Annil was more accounted of▪ and commonly more worth then Cloues both in India and in Portingall: the King not long ſince hath farmed it out, ſo that no man may buy it in India, nor bring it into Portingall but onely the Farmers, as they do with Pepper.
                     
                        Annil or Nil, as the learned Doctor Camerarius witneſſeth,
                        
                        
                           
                              〈1 paragraph〉
                           
                         
                        which hath had ſome of the plantes within his garden, hath sky
                              •
                           coloured leaues, being like to the leaues of the Hearbe which in Latine is called Barba Iouis, in Dutch Donder baert, but ſomewhat bro
                              •
                           
                           der.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 70. Chapter. Of Amber, Muske, Algallia or Ciuet.
                     
                     
                        
                           AMber by ſome men is thought to be the fome of a Whale fiſhe: others thinke it to bee the filth and dung of the Whale, and others a certain kind of Betumen, which floweth out of a well that ſtandeth on the ſea ſide, and caſteth ye Amber vp, but it is to bee thought, that it is neyther of the firſt two, for if it were, men ſhoulde continually finde Amber in theſe Countries, ſpocially on the coaſt of Biſcay, where ſo many Whales are taken, yet is the
                           •
                        e no Amber found in that place: it were rather to bee beléeued that it is a Betumen or pitch▪ proceeding out of ſome fountaine or Well▪ or ſome thing that floweth from the bottome of the Sea, & ſo driueth vpon the water becauſe it is found in ſome places, and in ſome places not: where it is moſt found, and from whence it dayly commeth is from the coaſt of So
                              •
                           la, Moſambique, and on the coaſt of Me
                              •
                           de or Abe
                              •
                           
                        : It is likewiſe ſometimes found by the Iſlandes of Ma
                              •
                           diua, and the c
                           •
                        pe de Comorijn, but not much, and not ſo commonly as by So
                              •
                           la and Moſambique. There are others that thinke it to be a ſpungie earth, of ſome vnknowne Iſland, drought or hiddē cliffes, and by force of the ſea in time broken off by peeces, and caſt vpon the ſhore▪
                        
like driftes or ſuch like thinges, for it is often times found floating and driuing in peeces of ten or twelue, and ſome of fifty or ſixtie pannes broad. They ſay that in India there hath bin found whole Iſlandes of Amber, which being well marked by thoſe that found and diſcouered them, whereby to come thether againe and lade thereof, when they came to the ſame place they could not finde them. In Anno 1555.
                        An. 1555 there was a péece found not far from the cape de Como
                              •
                           iin that weighed 30. quintales, and he that found it, thought it to be pitch, whereupon he ſold it for a ſmall price, but afterwardes being knowne, it was greatly eſteemed: likewiſe oftentimes there commeth Amber that is mingled with ſhels, and all ſpotted with the dung of Sea foules, that ſit theron. There is Amber of a gray colour, with whitiſh vaines, that is the beſt: & it is called Amber Griis. There is a kinde of Amber which is perfect blacke, but not ſo much eſteemed as the gray, to prooue if the Amber be good they thruſt pinnes into it and that which yeeldeth moſt oyle is the beſt. It is much vſed among the Indian Noble men, and kinges in their daylie meates, they vſe it likewiſe much to prouoke luſt, and to increaſe nature, thereby to bee the more apt for the ſame, as alſo in many faire workes with muſke, Ciuet, Bemoin, and other ſweete thinges mixed together, whereof they make fine apples and peares wrought about with ſiluer & gold, which they beare in their hands to ſmell vppon, and in haftes of kniues, handles of pomyards, and ſuch like, which they make of ſiluer, and Amber within thē, which in diuers places ſhineth through them. Theſe and ſuch like workes are very common in India among the rich and mightie men of the countrie, as well Indians as Portingales.
                     
                        Annota. D. Pal.
                        Ambarium in Latine, Ambar in Arabia, is a kind of pitch, as the Author very well affirmeth, caſt vp out of ſome fountaine that ſtandeth in the bottome of the ſea, which being ſet in the Sunne doth preſently become hard like other thinges that are alſo taken out of the ſea, as Corall, &c. This Ambar by reaſon of the ſweet & pleaſant ſmell, doth comfort the head and the heart, and by the drynes thereof, it draweth away & conſumeth all watery humors out of the ſtomacke, and good againſt all filthie and fouleneſſe in a mans body. It cureth ſuch as haue the falling ſicknes. It is good againſt the riſing of the Mother, being receiued in and thruſt vp into the body: to conclude it is good for all old men, and for euery cold complection.
                     
                     The Almiſca
                              •
                           , Moſſeliat
                        ▪ or Muſkcat cō
                        meth from China: They are beaſtes like Fores, or little Dogs, which being killed, and beaten and bruſed, they let them lie and rot, blood and fleſh together: which done they cut them in péeces both ſkinne, fleſh and blood, all mixed togeather, and therof make diuers purſes, which they ſowe in a round forme, and are in that ſort caried abroad & ſold to diuers men. Thoſe purſes are cōmonly of an ounce waight the péece, and by the Portingales are called Papos, but the right Papos, and perfect Moſſeliat is the ballockes or ſtones of that beaſt: the others although they paſſe among them for Moſſeliat, are not ſo good as the ſtones: therefore the Chinars, who in all thinges are very ſubtill, and fine workemen, make the purſes cleane round, like the ſtones of the beaſte, therewith to deceiue the people, and ſo the ſooner to procure them to buy it. This beaſt hath a very ſtrange nature, and great vnderſtanding, for when it is chaſed, and perceiueth it ſelfe not able anie longer to continue in breath, it taketh the ſtones betwéene the téeth and biteth them off, and ſo caſteth them away, as if it would ſay, if you come for them there they are, & while the huntſman is buſie to looke for them, ſhee oftentimes eſcapeth away and ſaueth her life. The Chinaes are very deceitfull in ſelling of Moſſeliat or Muſke, for they falſifie it verie much, ſometimes with Oxen and Cowes liuers, dried and beaten to powder, and ſo mixed with the Moſſeliat, as it is dayly found by experience in ſearching of it. When the Moſſeliat beginneth to decay and looſeth the ſmel, they take it out of the purſe and beate it verie ſmall in a morter, and that done being moiſtned with the vrine of a childe, and ſo put into an earthen pot that is leaded and cloaſe ſtopped, it will preſently be good againe, if there were any goodnes or ſtrength left within it.
                     
                        Some are of opinion, that muske groweth at certaine times of the yeare about the nauell of a certaine beaſt, as if it were ſwolne. The pale yellow is the beſt, it ſtrengtheneth the trembling cold hart, & all diſeaſes of the ſame, beeing drunke or ſwallowed. It cleanſeth the white ſpots of the eyes, it dryeth moiſt catharres, it comforteth the head, & healeth the old aches thereof, proceeding of ſleame.
                     
                     
                        Algalia or Ciuet is much found in India, that is to ſay in Bengala, but becauſe they cā
                        not leaue their villanie & falſifying thereof, it is not ſo much eſtéemed, by reaſon they mixeted,

but the beſt Ciuet commeth from Myna in the coaſt of Guynea, which is very faire and good. It is the ſweat that proceedeth frō the Cats called Ciuet Cats, which are many times brought ouer aliue, both into Spaine, and alſo to theſe countries, but becauſe it is ſo ſufficiently knowne vnto vs, I will leaue to ſpeake thereof, and proceede to other ſpices, hearbes, and drugges of India.
                     
                     
                        Ciue
                              •
                            groweth in the outermoſt part of the coddes of a certaine beaſt, which therof hath her name,
                        
                           
                              •
                           ta. 
                              •
                           . Pal. 
                        & is called a Muſcat, and as Hughin very well ſaith, is the ſweat that groweth or ingendreth in the hinder part of the beaſt, and is hotte and moiſt, being laid vpon a womans nauill, it healeth the riſing of the mother, and maketh women apt to leacherie.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 71. Chapter. Of Beniom.
                     
                        
                           BEnioin is a kinde of ſtuffe, like Frankemſence & Mir, but more eſtéemed, for it ſerueth for manie medicines and other thinges.
                     
                        Benioin by reaſon of the ſweet ſmell, comforteth the heart,
                        
                           
                              〈1 paragraph〉
                           
                         
                        the head, and the braine, it clenſeth the head from all ſuperfluous humors, ſharpneth the wit beeing ſmelled vnto, it is good to be vſed when diſeaſes begin to goe away.
                     
                     As when they make balles or péeces of Amber, and Muſke, they muſt alwaies haue Benioin with it to make it perfect, it groweth much in the kingdome of Syan in the Iland of Sumatra, in the Iſlands of Iauas, & the countrie of Malacca, they are high trées full of branches, with leaues like lemmon trée leaues, with a thicke & high ſtemme or ſtock in the middle, from whence procéedeth the Gumme, which is the Benioin. When the tree is young, then it yéeldeth the beſt Benioin, which is blackiſh of colour, and of a very ſweet ſmell, and is called Benioin, de Boninas, that is to ſay, Benioin of the Flowers, becauſe of the perfect ſmell. The ſecond Benioin is called Benioin Amendoado, that is Benioin of Almondes, becauſe it is mixed with peeces of white Benioin among the blacke▪ like to Almondes that are cut in peeces. This Benioin is not ſo good, becauſe the white Benioin is of the old trees, and is not ſo ſtrong nor of ſo good a ſmell as the blacke, but is mixed with the blacke, becauſe it ſhould be ſold the better. Theſe two ſortes of Benioin are the beſt, and much vſed and caried into Arabia, Perſia, the land of Ballagate, China, and other places, as alſo into Portingal. Moſt part of this Benioin groweth in the country of Sion, and by Ma
                              •
                           a
                              •
                           , there is other Benioin which is worſe, and groweth in the Ilandes of Sumatra, and Iauas. The inhabitants of the countries where it groweth call it C
                              •
                           mingion, the Mores, and Arabians call it Louaniany (which is as much to ſay as frankenſence of Iaua.) The Decaniins and Ballagaters call it Vdo, they cut the trée and branches full of ſlits, to make the Benioin the better to come foorth, it is much trafficqued withall throughout India, for it is one of the co
                           ••
                        lieſt drugges in all the Orient, becauſe it excelleth all other in ſweetnes.
                  
                  
                     The 72. Chapter▪ Of Frankenſence and Mirre.
                     
                        FRankinſence groweth in Arabia, and is called Louan, and by Auicenna Conder: it is the gumme that floweth out of the bodies of the trées, like Benioin: the beſt Frankinſence groweth vpon the trées that ſtande on hilles, and ſtony rockes, and ſtony places: for thoſe which growe in the fieldes and in flat grounds yeeld not ſo good Frankinſence: they haue ſo great quantitie of it, that oftentimes they marke their ſhéepe withall, as if it were Pitch, Tarre, or Roſin: from thence it is carried into India, China
                        ▪ and other places in great abundance, and very good cheape.
                     
                        Frankinſence is of two ſorts, one white,
                        Annota. D. Pal
                              •
                           
                           ▪
                         
                        that is round and like vnto drops, which is the beſt, and called the ma
                              •
                           le: the other blacke, which is not much worth but only in ſmell. In India and with vs they vſe Frankinſence againſt the looſenes of the bellie, ſickeneſſes of the head, Cata
                              •
                           rlies, ſurfeits, and pa
                              •
                           br
                              •
                           king, & is good for ſuch as ſpit blood, it filleth vp ho
                              ••
                           ow ſwelling
                              •
                            & healeth fre
                              •
                           h and bloody wounds.
                     
                     Mirre by the Indians is called Bola, it groweth in the ſame that Benioin and frankinſence doth, and commeth alſo out of Arabia F
                              •
                           lix, but moſt out of the countrie of Abexin from the inward parts of the countrie, lying betweene Moſambique, and the red ſea, which is called Preſter Iohns land, and from thence brought into India. and other places.
                     
                        Mirre is vſed in medicines,
                        Annota. D. Pal. 
                        to d
                              •
                            downe the Flowers and the fruite of women, alſo for old coug
                              •
                           es, for laskes, & for bloody Flixes.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     The 73. Chapter. Of Manna and Rubarbe.
                     
                        
                           MAnna commeth out of Arabia, and Perſia, but moſt out of the Prouince of Vsbeke, lying behind Perſia in Tartaria: the Manna yt is brought from thence in glaſſe Vſalies is in péeces as bigge as preſerued Almonds, but of another faſhion, and haue no other ſpeciall forme, but like broken péeces: it is whitiſh, and of taſte almoſt like Sugar, but ſomewhat fulſome, ſweetiſh like Hony: the Perſians cal it Xercaſt, and Xerkeſt, that is to ſay, milke of trees, for it is the dew yt falleth vpon the trées, and remayneth hanging vpon the leaues, like water that is frozen and hangeth in drops at gutters and pentiſes: It is alſo gathered and kept in glaſſe Vials, and ſo brought into India, and other Countries, for in India they vſe it much in all ſorts of purgations. There is another ſorte of Manna called Tiriamiabiin or Trumgibiin, which they gather frō other leaues and hearbes: that commeth in ſmall peeces as big as Hempeſéed, and ſomewhat bigger, which is red & of a reddiſh colour. Some thinke this Manna groweth on the bodies of the trées as Gumme doth: it is much vſed in Ormus and Perſia for purgations, but not in India ſo much as the firſt ſort, there is yet another ſorte, which commeth in great peeces, with the leaues among it: it is like the Manna of Calabria, this is brought out of Perſia vnto Baſſora, and ſo to Ormus, and from thence into India, and is the deareſt of all the reſt. There commeth alſo a Manna that is brought in leather bags, or flaſks, which in Turkey and Perſia they vſe to ride withall, & is melted like Hony, but of a white colour, and in taſte like the other ſortes of Manna, being altogether vſed for purgations, and other medicines.
                     
                        Annota. D. Pal.
                        Manna very gently purgeth the gall: it eaſeth and moyſtneth the harſhnes of the throat, the breaſtes and the ſtomacke: it quencheth the thirſt: but becauſe it purgeth but weakely, it is ſtrengthened with Tyme or Iſop mingled with ſome ſtrong purgations, & maketh them to effect their operations with more perfection and power, by meanes of the ſweetneſſe thereof, which is apter and more plyable vnto nature
                     
                     But becauſe it is no ſpecial marchandiſe, I will ſpeake no more thereof, but for that wee are nowe in hande with medicines to purge, I wil ſay ſome thing of the roote called Rhuba
                              •
                           be, although there is no certaintie how or in what ſort it groweth yet it is moſt certaine, yt it is not to be found in any coūtry but in China, and in the fartheſt parts therof, it is moſt brought by land through the Prouince of Vsbeke, whereof I ſpake before: which Prouince lyeth in Tartaria, and bordereth on the one ſide vpon China, and ſo reacheth behinde India vnto Perſia. Out of this Prouince it cometh vnto Ormus, and from thence into India: yet it is likewiſe brought by water, but becauſe it is not ſo good, and doth ſooner rot and ſpoyle by water then by land, therefore moſt part of it is brought by land. That which is moſt eſteemed & beſt ſold, and greatlieſt deſired, cometh in this manner, that is, firſt from China, through Vsbeke, and ſo through Turkie, from whence it is caryed to Venice, & from thence into all theſe countries, ſo that the Rhubarbe of Venice is better, becauſe it cometh ouer land, then that which is brought into Portingall, becauſe it cometh by water, as alſo all thinges and herbes that belong to Phyſicke, becauſe they are better preſerued by land then by water, they are little brought by ſea, but it is a marchandiſe that is moſt caryed by land vnto Venice, as alſo becauſe the Portingales deale not much therein, and are little giuen to curioſities, contēting themſelues to deale with ſuch wares as are commonlie knowne to all men, without ſeeking further, for they trouble not themſelues with other things.
                  
                  
                     The 74. Chapter. Of the wood called Sanders.
                     
                     
                        THere are 3. ſorts of Sanders, that is, white, yelow and red: the white and the yealow, which is the beſt, come moſt out of the Ilād of Tymor, which lyeth by Iaua. This Iland hath whole woods and wilderneſſes of Sanders, both of white and yealow, and frō thēce it is caryed throughout all India, and other coū
                        tries, and trafficke much therewith: the red Sanders groweth moſt in the coaſt of Choramandel and Tanaſſariin, which is in the countrie of Pegu: the trees of Sanders are like Nut trees and haue a certaine fruite vpon them like Cheries, at the firſt green, and after black, but of no taſte nor any thing worth, for it preſently falleth off, onlie ye wood of ye trée is accounted of, which is the Sāders. It is called by the Inhabitants of the countrie

where it groweth Chandanacon, the Decannus, Guſurates, Canariins, and other Indians cal it Sercandaa: the Arabians and Perſians Sandal, wherevpon the Portingalles likewiſe doe call it Sandalo. The yellow and white Sanders is much vſed and ſpent ouer all India, by all the inhabitantes, both Indians, Moors, Heathens, and Iewes, whatſoeuer: they beate it or ſtampe it in water, till it be as ſoft as pappe, that done they beſmere themſelues therewith, and let it drie vpon their bodies, for it cooleth very much, & alſo becauſe all the Indians doe much delight in ſweet ſmelling ſauours.
                     
                        The white & yellow or bleakiſh Sanders is likewiſe vſed by vs,
                        Annota. 
                              •
                           . Pa
                              •
                           . 
                        with Roſewater, againſt the hotte paines in the head, annointing it therewith: all thoſe woods as well the red as the white and yellow, are good againſt hotte feauers, being beaten and drunken into the body, they help the hot ſtomacke, as alſo laid vpon the ſtomacke with Roſe water, in burning feauers. This Sanders is not onely good for the purpoſes aforeſaid, but alſo for ſtrengthening the hart, and therefore with great vſe it is put into Cordiall medicines, & ſuch as are made againſt the beating of the hart.
                     
                     The red Sanders is little ſpent in India, but they vſe it onely againſt hot agues, annointing their pulſes therewith, as alſo the temples, & their foreheads, but it is much 
                           •
                        
                        ryed into other countries, as being very medicinable for many thinges, and the Indians make their Pagodes and Idoles thereof, becauſe they ſhould be the coſtlier.
                  
                  
                     The 
                           •
                        5. Chapter. Of Palo de Cebra or Snake-wood.
                     
                        SNakewood is moſt in the Iſland of Seylon: it is a lowe Trée: the roote thereof being the Snake-woode is of colour white, ſhewing ſomewhat yellowe, very harde and bitter in taſte, it is much vſed in India: they ſtampe and bruſe it like Sanders, in water or Wine, and ſo drinke it, it is very good & well proued againſt all burning feauers: one ounce thereof bruiſed and mixed with water is good againſt all poiſon and ſicknes, as the collick, worms, and all filthie humors and coldnes in the body▪ and ſpecially againſt the ſtinging of Snakes, whereof it hath the name: it was firſt found by means of a little beaſt called Q
                              •
                           il, or Quirpele, which is of bigneſſe very like a Ferret (wherewith in thoſe Countries they vſe to driue Cunnies out of their holes, and ſo ketch them whereof in India they haue many in their houſes, which they play withall to paſſe the time away, as alſo to kill their Myce and Rattes, and to driue them away. This beaſt by nature is a great enemie to the Snake, ſo that whereſoeuer ſhe findeth any, ſhe fighteth with them: and becauſe it is often bitten by the Snake, it knoweth how to heale it ſelfe with this Snake-woode, (whereof there is much in Seylon, where alſo are many of thoſe beaſtes, and great ſtore of Snakes) ſo that if it be neuer ſo ſore bitten, hauing eaten of this wood, it is preſently healed, as if it had neuer béene hurt. By this means the inhabitants haue found it out & begun to make account of it, & ſince that time it is proued and found to be good for many 
                           •
                        iſeaſes as aforeſaid: wherefore nowe it is much traffiqued withall, and carryed into all countries, as alſo into Portingall, & from thence hether.
                     
                        Garcius ab horto writeth of three ſorts of this wood,
                        
                        Anno
                              •
                           a▪ 
                           D 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           
                         
                        whereof you may there reade two of theſe ſortes of Snake-wood I haue in my houſe to be ſhewen, one is that which Iohn Hughen writeth to bee the root of a tree, white and bitter of taſte, with a rough Aſh colou
                           
                              •
                            barke: the other was ſent me 
                              •
                           u
                              •
                            
                           
                              〈…〉
                           , from the learned Doctor Simon 
                                 〈◊〉
                               Tonar, which is as thicke as a ma
                              •
                            ar
                              •
                           e, with a barke beſprinckled & ſpotted like a Snake, which inwardlie is white, and bitter of taſte
                     
                  
                  
                     The 76 Chapter. Of the wood Caiamba or 
                           
                              •
                           num Aloes.
                     
                     
                        THe 
                           
                              •
                           ignū Aloes which in India is called Calamba and Palo D
                              •
                           guilla, is moſt in Malacca, in the Iſlande of Sumatra Camboia, Sion, and the Countries bordering on the ſame: the trees are like Oliue trees, and ſomewhat greater▪ when it is cut off, it ſmelleth not ſo well, becauſe it is gréene, for the dryer it is, the better it ſmelleth: the beſt and that which ſmelleth moſt, is the innermoſt part of the wood: ſome of it is better then the reſt, which the

Indians doe preſently knowe howe to finde out: the beſt and fineſt is called Calamba, and ye other Palo Daguilla. Now to know which is the beſt, you muſt vnderſtand that the wood that is very heauie with black and brown veynes, and which yéeldeth much Oyle or moyſtneſſe (which is founde by the fire) is the beſt, and the greater and thicker that it is, the better it is and hath the more vertue. Of this wood they make many coſtly thinges, and it hath a ſpeciall and precious ſmell, ſo that it is greatly eſtéemed: ſpecially the Calamba, which if it be good, is ſolde by weight againſt ſiluer and gold. The Palo Daguilla next after the Calamba is much accounted of. There is another kind of Palo Daguilla, which is called Aquilla Braua or wild Aquilla, and is alſo much eſteemed: for the Indians vſe it therewith to burne the bodies of their Bramenes, and other men of account, when they are dead: and becauſe it is coſtly, therefore it is a great honour to thoſe that are burnt therewith, as it is to thoſe that with vs are buried in Tombes of marble ſtones: but it is not comparable to the other Palo Daguilla, nor the Calamba. The wilde Aguilla groweth moſt in the Iſland of Seylon, and on the coaſt of Choramandel, and the beſt Palo Daguilla, and Calamba groweth in Malacca. Theſe coſtly woods are much vſed in India for Beades, and Crucifixes, which are holden in great reuerence, and in truth is very much to be eſteemed, for without all doubt it hath an excellent ſmel, which ſurpaſſeth all other woods, and the like can not bee founde but onely in the ſoreſaide places from whence it commeth.
                     
                        Lignum Aloes, Agallochum, Xylo, alias Paradiſe-woode,
                        Annota. D. Pal 
                        by the Arabians called Agalugen and Haud, by the inhabitantes of Guſurate and Decan, Vd in Malacca, Garro, and the beſt Calamba. Of this wood I haue many ſortes, all very pleaſant of ſmell, ſpeckled with veines and full of moyſture, and withall cloſe and very heauie: this wood being taken inwardly, is good for a ſtinking breath: it is alſo very good againſt a watriſh and moyſt ſtomacke, which can receyue no meate, but caſteth it forth: it is alſo good for one that hath a weake liuer, that is ſick of the red Meliſon, or of the Pluriſie.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 77. Chapter. Of the root China.
                     
                        THe root China came into India, and was there firſt knowne in Anno 1535.
                        1535 for before that time they knewe it not, for that as then they cured the Pore, which in India is a common diſeaſe) with the woode called Guaiacum, that is brought out of the Spaniſh Indies, and was at that time in a manner weyghed againſt Gold: and as the land of China, is much ſubiect to the diſeaſe of the Pore, it ſeemeth that God hath giuen them this roote to cure and help the ſame, and ſince it was knowne and found out in India, they would neuer vſe any other remedy, becauſe there is great ſtore of it, and the beſt in all the world, wherby men in thoſe countries doe not once make any account of the Poxe, or feare the healing therof, for that it is more eaſilier healed then any other diſeaſe: alſo it is no ſhame with them, although they haue had it at ye leaſt 3, or 4. times: this root is now with them in ſo great abundance, and common vſe, that it is very good cheape, for that it is not worth at the moſt aboue halfe a Pardaw the pound, which in Portingall money is a Teſton and a halfe. The ſicke perſons do vſe it in this manner following, they take of the root▪ & cut it in ſmalll peeces or ſlyces, the wayght of an ounce, which they ſeeth in foure pottes or quartes of water, letting it ſéeth till it be halfe conſumed, whereof they ſéeth freſh euery day: this water they muſt drink alone, & eat biſket with nothing els but ſmal roſted Chickens, without any Butter, ſuet, ſalt, or any other ſauce, but onely drie with the Biſket, and this muſt bee their dinner, at night ſome Reaſons, and toſted breade with Hony and nothing els▪ euery day twice they muſt lie on their beddes wel couered to make them ſweat, euery time an hower, or an hower and a halfe which they muſt continue for the ſpace of thirtie dayes, alwaies kéeping themſelues out of the ayre, and from the wind, and lapping their heads and their eares very cloſe, ſtaying continually within the houſe, and aboue all thinges abſtayning from the carnall company of women. Theſe pointes aforeſaid being obſerued, without all doubt they ſhall find great profite: and if the roote doth worke within them, they ſhall know it by this meanes, for that the paine in their lims, and ſpecially in their ioyntes, will grieue them more and more, which is a good ſigne

that it worketh in their bodies, and thoroughly ſearcheth the ſame, and this paine will ſtill increaſe for the ſpace of 15. or 20. dayes, yea and ſometimes vntill 25. dayes, and therefore he that will vſe it muſt not diſpaire, for without faile it wil be ſo as I haue ſaid, within a day two, or thrée more or leſſe. The 25. dayes at the furtheſt being paſſed, then their paine will begin to deminiſh, with ſo great a lightnes and eaſe, that within the other fiue dayes, whereby the 30. dayes will bee accompliſhed, the whole paine will be gone, ſo that the body and all the members will be as freſh and liuely as if they neuer had béene ſicke hauing vſed this rule aforeſaid. And although the roote China being ſodden in the water, cauſeth a great appetite and a hungry ſtomacke, neuertheleſſe they muſt in any ſorte beware that they eate but little, and with meaſure, & that according to the rule preſcribed: for if they break it but one day, nay but one houre, all their labour were loſt, and ſo they muſt be forced to begin their diet again. It muſt likewiſe bee vnderſtood that the older▪ and longer of continuance the pockes are, ſo much the ſooner will the roote heale them, as alſo the older the perſons to be healed are of yeares, becauſe that then the humors are not ſo ripe as in young yeares. When the 3
                              •
                           
                         dayes are expired, they muſt beware of drinking other drinke, and to that end they muſt keepe the peeces and ſlices that were cut and ſodden as before, euery ounce by it ſelfe, and therof take euery day a heape of the ſame roote ſo ſodden, and ſeeth them againe in a pot with as much water as they ſhall need to drinke: but this ſeething need not to be done as the firſt ſeething, with conſumption of the water, but only let it ſeeth vp once and no more. This water muſt they drinke in this ſorte for the ſpace of 2
                              •
                           . or 30. dayes more, and beware of fiſh, or any gooſe or heauie meates, as Oxe, Cow, or Hogges fleſh, and ſuch like, as alſo they muſt keepe themſelues from much aire or winde, whereby their bodies beeing healed may returne to their perfect healthes againe, and after theſe twenty or thirty dayes are full expired, then they muſt begin to vſe all kinde of meates and drinkes, although when the firſt thirtie dayes are out, they may well goe abroad, ſo they bee carefull of themſelues, and they ſhall not neede to ſweate any more after the ſaid firſt thirty dayes: alſo it muſt bee remembred, that ſuch as meane to take this diet, for their healthes, it will bee good before they vſe it, to take a good purgation, & when the firſt fifteene dayes are out, then take a ſecond, and ſo at the end of the thirtie day an
                           •
                         other, whereby it will worke with more effect, and with Gods help they ſhall be as luſtie and ſound as euer they were, as it hath beene prooued by many thouſandes in India. This roote is not onely good for the Pockes and Piles, but alſo for crampes and palſies, and all cold diſeaſes, as for lumites that are ſtiffe and benummed with cold, for the Gout: for the Emperour Charles the fift himſelfe did vſe the ſame, and found that it did him good: But it muſt bee vnderſtood that it is not good to vſe it at all times of the yeare, for in the dogge dayes, and alſo in Summer, by reaſon of the heat it is not good, neyther in winter becauſe of the cold, but it is beſt to be vſed in Lent and Harueſt time: for then it is moſt temperate weather, yet alwaies with the counſell of the learned Phiſition, the better to know the diſpoſition, complection, inclination and age of the perſons, together with the time of the yeare, the ſituation and climate of the countrie. The manner of healing aforeſaid is as it is vſed in India: but in China which is a colder countrey, and almoſt vnder the ſame degrees that theſe Countries are vnder, they vſe to ſeeth the water ſtronger, for there they put 2, ounces or an ounce and a halfe of the wood into ſo much water, and let it ſeeth vntill the water be two partes conſumed, which in India will not bee borne becauſe of the great heate. It is likewiſe to be vnderſtood, that the perſon and the diſeaſe of the perſon muſt be well conſidered: for that if the ſicknes bee not very great, they muſt take leſſe roote, and let leſſe water conſume in the ſeething, the younger perſons alſo muſt haue ſtronger drinke then old 
                           •
                        olkes, becauſe they haue more humors in their bodies: And yee muſt conſider, that hee which will take or vſe this roote, or the water thereof not beeing ſicke, it will waſte and conſume his fleſh and good blood, and doe himſelfe great hurt, wherfore good counſell and aduiſe muſt alwaies be taken before it be vſed, and alſo i
                           •
                         it bee taken too hotte, and too much, it burneth both the liuer and the lunges, and will fill the body full of pyles, ſcurffe, and ma
                           •
                        g
                           •
                        es, with other ſuch like diſeaſes, whereby a man ſhall haue worke enough to driue thoſe new diſeaſes out of his body, and fall out of one ſicknes into another, & rather become worſe then hee was at the firſt. This I thought good in briefe to ſhew you thereby to teach ſuch as knowe it not, the true vſe of his roote if it bee done in time, & when neede requireth: for that many doe ſpende their wealthes, and which is more, are all their liues long out of hope for e
                           •
                        er to recouer their healthes againe, vpon a diſeaſe, which with ſo little coſt, is ſo eaſilie to be cured. The ſumme of the foreſaid water is likewiſe good againſt all ſcabbes and ſwellinges of the ſaid M
                              •
                            Neapo
                              •
                           , 
                              〈◊〉
                           , or ye
                        
French pockes, the beſt rootes are the blackeſt, with few knots and white within: for the reddiſh are not ſo good, the wood or trée wherof it groweth is like a Haw-thorne, ſtraight, and about three or foure ſpannes high, & the roote thereof is called the wood of China, or Pockewood, when they are gréene they eate them raw, and being ſodden they taſte almoſt like ſuger canes but not ſo ſweet. The tree hath but few leaues, but they are almoſt like the leaues of a young Orange tree. Theſe plants or trees in China are called Lampaton, as the Chinos themſelues doe ſay. This ſhall ſuffice for this root of China ſo called becauſe it is found in no place but in China, what is more to be ſaid of it, I leaue vnto the learned Phiſitions, & others that deale withall, and haue better experience thereof.
                     
                        
                           
                              〈1 paragraph〉
                           
                        
                        The roote of China is commonlie vſed among the Egyptians, not onelie for the pockes, but for many other diſeaſes, ſpecially for a conſumption, for the which they ſeeth the roote China in broth of a henne or cocke, whereby they become whole and faire of face.
                     
                     
                        This roote drieth much and cooleth ſweate, it reſiſteth euill humors, and ſtrengthneth the liuer, it healeth watery and filthie Vlcers, and ſcurffes & Leprie. Is is good for a man that hath the pockes, and for thoſe that are dried vp, and medicinable againſt a hard and a great milt.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 78. Chapter. Of Amſion alias Opium.
                     
                        
                           AMſion, ſo called by the Portingales, is by the Arabians, Mores, and Indians called Affion, in latine Opio or opium: It commeth out of Cairo in Egypt, and out of Aden, vpon the coaſt of Arabia, which is the point of the land, entring into the red Sea, ſometimes belonging to the Portingales, but moſt part out of Cambaia, & from Decan, that of Ca
                              •
                           o is whitiſh, and is called Mece
                           
                              •
                           , that of Aden and the places bordering vpon the mouth of the red ſea, is blackiſh & hard. That which commeth from Cambaia and Decan is ſofter and reddiſh. Amfion is made of ſleepe balles or Poppie, and is the gumme which commeth forth of the ſame, to ye which end it is cut vp and opened. The Indians vſe much to eat Amſion, ſpecially the Malabares, and thether it is brought by thoſe of Cambaia and other places, in great aboundance. Hee that vſeth to eate it, muſt eate it daylie, otherwiſe he dieth and conſumeth himſelfe, when they begin to eate it, and are vſed vnto it, they heate at the leaſt twenty or thirty graines in waight euerie day, ſometimes more: but if for foure or fiue dayes hee chanceth to leaue it, he dieth without faile: likewiſe he that hath neuer eaten it, and will venture at the firſt to eate as much as thoſe that dayly vſe it, it will ſurely kill him: for I certainely beleeue it is a kinde of poyſon. Such as vſe it goe alwaies as if they were halfe a ſleepe, they eate much of it becauſe they would not feele any great labour or vnquietnes when they are at worke, but they vſe it moſt for lecherie: for it maketh a man to hold his féede long before he ſheddeth it, which the Indian women much deſire, that they may ſhed their nature likewiſe with the man: although ſuch as eate much thereof, are in time altogether vnable to company with a woman, & whollie dried vp, for it drieth and wholly cooleth mans nature that vſeth it, as the Indians themſelues doe witnes: wherefore it is not much vſed by the Nobilitie, but onely for the cauſe aforeſaid.
                     
                        Opium is the iuice of blacke Poppie,
                        
                        Annota. D. Pal. 
                        and is of two ſortes, one ſweet beeing preſſed out of the leaues and heads together, which the Greekes call Meconium: the other floweth or commeth out of the heads being cut, which is the right Opium. That which is heauy, cloſe, faſt and bitter in taſte, that which with the ſmell of it prouoketh ſleepe, & that which eaſily melteth in the water and is ſoft, white, and without groſſenes or kernels, is the beſt Opium, and is by the Turkes called Maslac. They eate thereof daylie the quantitie of a peaſe, not thereby to prouoke ſleepe, but to giue them courage, ſpecially when they goe to war, thinking that thereby they are made more couragious, and that when they ſleepe they dreame that they ſee many pleaſant places, and are in company of diuers goodly womē: althogh it is commonly ſeene, that ſuch is dayly vſe Opium, are very ſtill and ſleepie, and very ſlow both in wordes and workes, ſo that men know not how to deale with them.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     The 79. Chapter. Of Bangue
                     
                        
                           BAngue is alſo a common meate in India, ſeruing to the ſame effect that Amſion doth. It is a ſéed like Hempſéede, but ſomwhat ſmaller, and not ſo white. Alſo the thing whereon it groweth is like Hempe, but it hath no ſubſtance wherof to make any thing. The Indians eate this ſéede or the leaues thereof being ſtamped, ſaying, that it maketh a good appetite, but vſeth moſt to prouoke luſt, as it is commonly vſed and ſold in the ſhops, it is mingled with ſome poulder of the leaues and the ſéede together: They likewiſe put gréene Arecca vnto it, therewith to make a man drunke, or in a manner out of his wits: Sometimes alſo they mixe it with Nutmegs and Mace, which doth alſo make a man drunke: Others (that is to ſaye, the rich and welthy perſons) mix it with Cloues, Camphora, Ambar, Muske, and Opium, which (as the Moores likewiſe affirme) maketh a man pleaſant, and forgetting himſelfe, performing all kind of labour and toyle without once thinking of any paine: but onely laughing, playing, and ſleeping quietly. The common women or whores vſe it when they meane to haue a mans companie, thereby to be liuely and merrie, and to ſet all care aſide. It was firſt inuented by Captaines and ſouldiers, when they had layne long in the field, continually waking and with great trauell, which they deſiring to remedie, and againe to comfort themſelues, thereby to ſettle their braines doe vſe Bangue, in ſuch manner as is aforeſaid. It cauſeth ſuch as eate it, to réele and looke as if they were drunke, and halfe fooliſh, doing nothing but laugh and bee merrie, as long as it worketh in their bodies. It is verie much vſed by the Indians, and likewiſe by ſome Portingales, but moſt by the ſlaues thereby to forget their labour: to conclude it is a certaine ſmall comfort to a melancholy perſon.
                     
                        A
                              •
                           o
                              •
                           a. D. Pal.
                        Bangue is likewiſe much vſed in Turkie and Aegypt, and is made in three ſorts, hauing alſo three ſeuerall names The firſt by the Aegyptians is called Aſsis, which is the poulder of Hemp, or of Hemp leaues, which water made in paſte or dough, wherof they eate fiue peeces, each as bigge as a Cheſnut and ſome more, ſuch as eate it, for an hower after, are as if they were drunke, without ſence, and as it were beſides themſelues, thinking they ſee many ſtrange ſights, wherein they are much pleaſed. This is vſed by the common people, becauſe it is of a ſmall price, and it is no wonder, that ſuch vertue proceedeth from the Hempe, for that according to Galens opinion, Hempe exceſsiuely filleth the head. The ſecond they name Boſa, which is ſtronger then Aſsis: It is made of the meale of Lolium, by vs called Dronkaydes weede or Hearbe, and of Hempſeede with water as aforeſaid▪ others preſſe out the iuice, and eat that. The thirde is called Bernaui, which is the right Bangue, which they haue readie dreſſed out of India (as Hughen writeth) wherof they take about an ounce, & at the firſt are merie, talking much & ſinging pleſant ſongs, laughing without meaſure, and vſing many fooliſh toyes▪ which continueth with them almoſt an hower. After that they are in a manner furious, giuen to chiding and fighting, which continueth likewiſe a little ſpace, that done they are poſſeſſed with heauineſſe, and a certaine kind of feare, that many times they crie out. In the end whē they haue played al theſe parts they fall in a ſleepe, and being awaked, they are as they were at the firſt. This is much vſed by fooliſh Ieſters or Iuglers at feaſts and banquets, to delight them. The Aegyptians vſe alſo an other ſorte called Bers, that is to ſay, health for an hower. It is made of white Pepper, white Bilzen ſeede, of each fiue ounces, and of Opium two ounces and a halfe, Spica Nardi, Euphorbium, Bertram, of each one Mitchell, Saffran, fifteene Scruples, all beaten in a Marble morter, and mixed with Honnie wherof they make a confection.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     The 80. Chapter. Of Camphora.
                     
                        THere are two ſortes of Camphora, one of Borneo (which is the beſt,) the other of China or Chincheu, which is nothing ſo good: it groweth on trées as great as Nutte trées, and is the gumme which is within the middle of the tree, and by ſweating and dropping commeth out from the ſame. This Camphora of Borneo, is likewiſe in the Iland of Sumatra, and Sunda, as alſo in ſome other places there abouts. It is of bigneſſe like a ſeede called in Portingall M
                              •
                           lho, and with vs Barley, of colour whitiſh. It is of foure ſorts, whereunto the Indians vſe certaine Siues with holes purpoſely made in them: the firſt hauing ſmal holes, and that which paſſeth through them, is the worſt, the next following it is ſomewhat greater, and ſo forth after that rate, as it is ſaid before of Pearles, and ſo it is priſed accordingly. It commeth ſometimes all ſpotted, with ſome filth or fouleneſſe, which the Bamaners of Cambaia know well how to waſh away with water, Sope, and the iuice of Lemons: which done, they ſet it to drie in ſome ſhadow place, wherby it is whiter then it was at the firſt, and keepeth the former waight. It is likewiſe falſified with other Gum or poulder of other rootes, as the Indians can well handle all their wares. This is the right and true Camphora of Borneo, yet I belieue there commeth verie little of it into theſe countries: but the Camphora of Chyna, which commeth from Chincheu, is in great aboundance, and is brought in cakes or balles, and is much carried into al places, and verie good cheape. For one pound of Borneo is worth a hundred pound of Chincheu, although the Champhora of Chincheu is mixed with Champhora of Borneo, and they know how to giue it a colour, in ſuch ſorte that it is both taken and vſed for good, and becauſe it is ſo much vſed in medicines, I haue particularly ſet it downe, in this place, as alſo becauſe it is one of the principalleſt wares in India.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 81. Chapter. Of Tamarinio.
                     
                        TAmarinio groweth in the moſt parts of all India, ſpeciallie in the land of Guſ
                              •
                           ate and the North parts beyond Goa: the Malabares call it Pulu: the Guſurates and the other Indians cal it Anbilii: the Arabians, Tamarindii, becauſe Tamaras in Arabia, are the ſame that with vs we cal Dates, and becauſe they know not what to liken Tamarinio vnto, better then vnto Dates, therefore they call it Tamarindi, yt is▪ 
                        Tamaras or Dates of India, wherevpon the Portingales cal it alſo Tamarinio, and the Dates which are in great abundance brought out of Perſia & Arabia into India: they name them after the Arabians, Tamaras. The trees of Tamarinio are almoſt like vnto Cheſnuts, or other nut trees, the branches being full of leaues, with a cloſe & ſtrong wood: the fruite of the Tamarinio is about a finger long, bowing or crooked, hauing greene ſhelles, or pilles without, and béeing drie are grayiſh, hauing within certaine kernels of the greatnes of a Beane, which are couered about with that which they call Tamarinio: it ſticketh to mens hands (for it is like lime) & therewith they prepare all their compoſitions throughout India, for it hath a ſowriſh and ſharp taſte, and is the beſt ſauce in all India, like vergis with vs, and they neuer ſieth Rice but they put Tamarinio into it, wherewith their compoſition called Cariil is made, as in many places it is alreadie declared: yet thoſe that ſee it dreſt will haue no great deſire to eate it, for they cruſh it through their fingers, whereby it ſheweth like rotten Medlers: yet it giueth the Rice & the meate a fine ſharp taſte. Tamarinio is likewiſe proued to be a very good purgation, for the poore that are of ſmal habilitie, and are not able to be at charges of Rhabarbo, Mann
                              •
                           , and ſuch like coſtlie Apothecaries ware, doe onlie vſe Tamarinio preſſed out into a little water, which water being drunk faſting in a morning, is the beſt purgation in the world, which is to be done when the Tamarinio is ripe or when it is greene: it is vſed likewiſe in dreſſing meate, to put in among their fleſh in ſteed of Vineger, for it is much ſowrer then Vineger, much like gréen gooſeberries or grapes: the Phyſitians vſe it in purgations & medecines cōpoūded with other

herbes and ſpices, and it worketh well: it is likewiſe ſalted to ſend for Portingal, Arabia, Perſia, & other places, yet the Indians kéepe it in their houſes, in the huſkes, as it commeth from the tree, and it hāgeth on the trées like ſheathes of kniues, but that they are ſomewhat bowed, as I ſaid before: there is likewiſe ſugar cōſerues made therof, which is verie good. The nature of this tree is to be wondered at, for that the Tamarini
                           •
                        , that is to ſay, the long crooked huſke wherein it is, in the night time ſhrinketh it ſelf vp vnder the leaues, to couer it from the cold of the night, and in the day time it vncouereth it ſelf again all naked and outright, as I haue often ſéene and beheld it: when it is caryed abroad or ſold, it is out of the ſhelles or huſkes, and béeing put together they make balles thereof, as bigge as a mans fiſt, but it is clammie and ſticketh together. It is not very pleaſant to looke on, nor yet to handle, but verie good cheap throughout all India, by reaſon of the great quanttitie thereof.
                     
                        Tamarinde, is by the Aegyptians called Derelſide. The tree wheron it groweth,
                        
                        Annota. 
                              •
                           . Pal. 
                        is as great as a Plumme tree, with thicke branches, and leaues like a Mirtle: The flowers white like Orange flowers, from the middle whereof do proceede fower white thinne threeds, which growe out of the huske, wherein the ſeede and the pith is, which wee call Tamarindi. The leaues of the tree doe alwaies turne towards the Sunne, and when it goeth downe, they ſhut together and couer the huske in the night time. At Alcayro in their gardens I ſaw ſome of theſe trees, and one by Saint Macarius Cloyſter in the wilderneſſe, where no other Hearbs nor trees doe grow. The Turkes and Egyptians vſe this Tamarinde, much in hotte diſeaſes and Feauers: they put it into faire water, and ſo drinke it. I healed my ſelfe therewith of a peſtilent Feuer, being in Siria. It is a common Medecine among them, which as they trauel through the drie woods and wilderneſſe, they doe vſe, and alſo againſt the Plague and other hot diſeaſes, proceeding of Cholericke burning humors, and againſt the heate of the Liuer and Kidneyes, it is verie good. I can ſhewe the whole huske or ſhell of the Tamarinde with the leaues as they grow, and the Canna Fiſtula, which I my ſelfe gathered in Egypt. The leaues of Tamarinde trees, are vſed againſt Wormes in childrens bellies, and the young huskes, as alſo the Caſsia Fiſtula, are in Egypt vſed to be conſerued in Honnie o
                              •
                            Saint Iohns bread, or Suger, whereof I brought great Pots full ouer.
                     
                     The Canna Fiſtula which is likewiſe much vſed for Purgations, and other ſuch like Medicines is much found in India, as alſo in Cambaia, Sion, Malacca, and the places bordering on the ſame: but becauſe there is the like in the Spaniſh Indies, and many other places, and ſufficiently knowne, I will ſpeake no more of it: but follow on with matters of leſſe knowledge.
                     
                        Of theſe trees I haue ſeene in Egypt at the leaſt thouſands together▪
                        
                        Anota. D. Pal. 
                        ſpecially about Damiata, a famous towne in Egypt, lying on the ryuer Nilus, euen in like ſort as the towne of Campen lyeth vppon Iſſel about a mile from the Sea, The Egyptians call it Caſsia Chaiarx-Ambar. The trees whereon Caſsia groweth, are altogether like our Wallnut trees, both for body, branches, and leaues, only the flowers are Golde-yellow, and of a ſweete ſauor, out of theſe groweth the great huskes wherein the Caſsia lyeth. The huskes being ſmall and without any woode are conſerued likewiſe. The Egyptians vſe the huske of Caſsia with white Suger, & the iuice of Caliſsi-wood, againſt grauell, and all diſeaſes of the bladder and the Kidnies, alſo againſt coughing, and ſtopping of the breſt, with Agaricum, alſo outwardly againſt hotte inflamations laying the Caſsia vpon them. Hee that deſireth to know more hereof, let him reade Mathiolus and other Phyſitions, that haue written moſt diligently vpon the ſame.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 82. Chapter. Of Mirabolanes.
                     
                     
                        THe Myrobalanes are found in many places of India, that is, in Cambaia, in the land of Ba
                              •
                           
                           gate, in Go
                              •
                           , in Malabar, and in Bengalen: whereof there are fiue ſortes▪
                        
The firſt by Phyſitions called Citrinos, and by the Indians Ara
                              •
                           e, thoſe are round, and are vſed to purge choller. The ſecond which are called Emblicos, and in India Amuale, are vſed in India to tanne Leather withall, as Tanners vſe Sumach, and when they are ripe and alſo gréene, they eate them for an appetite. The third ſort in India called Reſonualle, and by the Phyſitions Indius, are eight cornered. The fourth by the Phyſitions called Bellericos, and by the Indians Gu
                              •
                           ij, are alſo round. The fift & laſt are in India called Aretean, & by the Phyſitions Quebulus, thoſe are ſomwhat long, roundiſh with points. The trées are almoſt like Plumme trees, but they haue ſeuerall ſorts of leaues, each tree by himſelfe. They are commonly one with the other in greatneſſe and faſhion like Plummes, but that ſome of them are ſquarer and rounder, as I ſaid before. Thrée ſorts are onely vſed and eſtéemed of by the Phyſitions in India, that is Quebulus, which grow in Cambaia, Biſnagar and Bengala, which are likewiſe preſerued & eaten in that ſort, as alſo carried into diuers places, as well to Portingall as elſe where, likewiſe the Cetrinos and Indius, which alſo are preſerued: and they grow in Malabar, Batecala and Bengala, they are much vſed, eſtéemed and carried into other countries. The Mirabolans when they are ripe are almoſt in taſte like vnripe Plummes, but becauſe this matter concerneth Phyſitions & Apoticaries, I will ſpeake no more thereof, hauing onely ſet it downe for a common thing in India.
                     
                     
                        Annota. D. Pal.
                        All theſe fiue ſorts of Mirabolanes are brought vs hether out of India ready dried, and ſome conſerued in pickle, others in Suger. The firſt wee call Citrinas or Flauas, which are yellow Mirabolans, and the yellower the better, ſhewing ſome thing greene, cloſe, and faſt, and gummie with a thicke ſhell. They purge the ſtomake from choller, and are good againſt Tertians, and other hotte burning Feauers, and verie neceſſarie for a hotte nature. The ſecond wee call Indus: theſe the blacker they are, the better they purge choller, ſpecially black choller, they are good againſt ſhaking of the limmes, they cauſe a faire colour and driue away ſadneſſe. The third is called Cepule or Chebulae, the greater they are the better, blackiſh and ſomewhat reddiſh, heauie, and ſinking in the water, they purge fleame they ſharpen mens wits, and cleare the ſight. They are here preſerued in Suger and Honnie, they doe ſtrengthen and purge the ſtomak, they heale the dropſie, and are good againſt olde Agues, they likewiſe giue a man an appetite, and helpe digeſtion. The fourth wee call Emblicas, and the fift Bellericas, they haue in a manner one kinde of operation like the other called Cebulus. They cleanſe the body from fleagme, ſpecially the braines, the Kidnies, and the ſtomake, they ſtrengthen the hart, giue an appetite, and eaſe belching. The Emblice, are alſo conſerued & eaten to the ſame ende. All theſe fruites purge, but in an other kinde of manner then doth Caſsia or Manna, or ſuch like drugges, but they do it by aſtriction or binding, thruſting that out which is in the members. They that deſire to knowe more hereof, let him reade Mathiolus, and Garcius ab Horto, and others.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 83. Chapter. Of other Spices and Hearbes in India
                     
                        
                           SPiconardus groweth in the countries of Sitor & Mando
                              •
                           , (which are places that border vppon the lands of Decan, Dely, and Bengalen) it is, ſowed and groweth on plants, about 2, or 3. ſp
                           •
                        ns high, (like corne) with great veines, wherein the Spiconardus groweth. They doe commonly come cloſe out of the earth by the roote, and by that ſort are brought into Cambaia, and other places to ſell, and from thence ſent into all places.Annota. D. P
                              •
                           .
                     
                     
                        The Indian Spica comforteth the mawe, being taken inwardly and alſo outwardly applyed, and conſumeth cold humors.
                     
                     
                        Aloe, by the Arabians called Sebar, by the Decaners Area, by the Canarijns Cate Comer, and by the Portingales Azeure, is made of the Iuyce of an Hearbe, when it is dried, the Herbe is called by the Portingales Herba Baboza, that is Quil hearbe. There is much of it in Cambaia, Bengala, and other places, but in the Iland called Sacotora
                        
(which lyeth on the mouth of the redde Sea, or the ſtrength of Mecca) there is great quantitie, and the beſt. It is a marchandiſe that is carried into Turkie, Perſia, Arabia, and alſo into Europe, whereby the Iland is much eſteemed, and the Aloes called after the name of the Iland, Aloes Socotrino, or Aloes of Sacotora.
                     
                     
                        Annota. D. Pall.
                        Aloes purgeth the ſtomacke from choler, and tough fleagme, ſpecially a watrie and weake ſtomake: it taketh away all ſtopping, and conſumeth rawe moyſtures, preſeruing it from fouleneſſe: beſides this, it ſtrengthneth the ſtomake, it is made ſtronger & of more force by adding to it Cinamon, Mace, or Nutmegges. Aloes is good ſpecially againſt Kooren and rawneſſe, and for ſuch perſons as haue their ſtomakes ful of raw moyſture, it is alſo vſed outwardly againſt ſores that breake forth of the body, and for the eyes.
                     
                     The fruite called Anacardi, is in manye places of India, as in Cananor, Calecut, and the countrie of Decan, and in diuers other places. The Arabians call it Balador, the Indians Bibo, and the Portingall Faua de Malacca, that is Beanes of Malacca, becauſe it is like a beane, but ſomwhat greater then the Beanes of theſe countries, they are vſed in India with milke, againſt a ſhort breath, for the Wormes and for many other things. When they are greene, they make Achar thereof, that is to ſay, they ſalt them and lay them in Vineger, as they do with the moſt kind of fruites and Spices, as in diuers places I haue ſhewed.
                     
                        Annota. D. Pall
                        This fruite hath her name from the hart, becauſe in colour and likeneſſe, it reſembleth the heart, ſpecially beeing drie. When the fruites are greene and hanging on the tree (as I haue ſeene thē in Sicilia vpon mount Aethna) they are like great Beanes: and are ſalted like Oliues, being verie good to eate, within them they haue a certaine iuyce, as thicke as Honnie, and as red as bloud, which is good againſt ſtains. The ſame operation that is in prepared Mirabolanes, is alſo in them, they heate & drie, they ſtrengthen the memorie, the braines and ſinewes, ſharpen the wits, and are good againſt cold affections of the head.
                     
                     The Calamo Aromatico called in Guſurate Vaz, in Decan Vache, in Malabar Vaſabu, in Malacca Daringoo, in P
                              •
                           rſia Heger, in Cuncan (which is the countrie of Goa and there abouts Northwards) Vaycan, and in Arabia Caſſab and Aldirira, is ſowed in many places of India, as in Goa, the Countrie of Guſurate and Ballagate, where it is ſowed and ſo groweth, it hath no ſmell at all, vntill it be gathered. The women vſe it much in India, for the mother, alſo for paine in the Sinewes, it is alſo much vſed for horſes, for when it is cold weather, they giue it horſes in the morning to eate, being beaten and mixed with Garlike, Cominſéede, ſalte, Suger, and Butter. This receipt they call Arata, which is alwayes vſed in India for horſes, wherewith (as they ſaye) they doe them great good. The Calamo Aromatico is the ſtalke or Reede of the Hearbe, but the inward and ſpungious part is of yelowiſh colour, the roote of the trée is good for nothing, but onely the ſtalke or Réede therof, with that which is in the middeſt of it.
                     
                        What the right Calamus Aromaticus is,Annota. D. Pa
                                 •
                              
                            my verie good friend Doctor Carolus Cluſius writeth in his learned Annotations vpon Garcius ab Horto in his 127 leafe, whereof certaine peeces were giuen me, which I brought out of Egypt, where it is found in great aboundance, and much vſed. They call it Caſſab Elderira, it is a thinne Reede, being freſhe and vnwithered, of a light Gold yelow colour, with many knots and ſplinters in the breaking, within ſpungie like Cobwebbes, white & tough in chawing, and aſtringent, with a little ſharpe bitterneſſe, as I can ſhew it, and much therof may be had out of Egypt, where they put it in their Treakle, and vſe it many other waies, to driue downe the Vrine, and for the ſtone.
                     
                     
                        Coſtus which the Arabians call Coſt or Caſt, the Guſurates of Cambaia Vlpor, and they of Malac
                              •
                           a Pucho, whether it is much brought, and alſo into China and other places. It commeth from Sitor and M
                              •
                           ndor aboue named, where Spiconardi is found, and from thence it is brought into Cambaia and India, and ſo into all other places. They are trees almoſt like Elder-trées with white bloſſomes, and very ſtrong of ſmell. The wood and the roote is the Coſtus, it is a great marchandiſe in Perſia, Arabia, and Turkie where as it is very much vſed.
                     
                        
                        I haue many kindes of Coſtus, the Indian,
                        
                           
                              〈1 paragraph〉
                           
                         
                        deſcribed by Garcius, with all her tokens. The Arabian and Syrian with her right markes, and alſo an other ſorte, much like Ginger. The Indian Costus is the beſt of them all, it healeth, driueth downe the Vrine and the ſtone, it cleanſeth the Mother, being receiued into the bodie, or thruſt vp into it, and maketh women apt to conceiue. It is good againſt the byting of Snakes, payne in the breſt, and the Wormes &c.
                     
                     
                        Cabebus ſo called by the Arabians, and alſo Quabes, by all the other Indians Cub
                              •
                           c
                              •
                           m, or Cubabelum, becauſe the Chi
                           
                              •
                           ars before the Portingales comming into India, vſed to bring it out of the Ilandes of Iaua from Sunda, where they grow, and in no other place. For as then the Chinars had Nauigation into all places of India, trafficking throughout all the Orientall Countries, with all kinde of wares, as well on the firmeland as in the Ilandes. The Iauers which are the inhabitants of the place, where it growes call it Cum
                              ••
                           . It groweth like Pepper againſt a trée, as Iuie doth, the leaues are verie like Pepper leaues, and it groweth in huſkes like Pepper but euerie graine hath a ſtalke of it ſelfe, whereby it hangeth. The Ia
                              •
                           ers hold it in ſo great eſtimation, that they ſell it not, before it is ſodden, becauſe the ſtrangers that buy it, ſhould not plant it. It is much vſed ſpecially among the Moo
                           •
                        es, who put it into their Wine, therwith to make them apter to accompliſh their luſtes, whereunto they are much giuen: and the Iauers vſe it againſt the coldneſſe of the ſtomacke and other diſeaſes.
                     
                        
                           
                              〈1 paragraph〉
                           
                        
                        Cubebus is a fruit like Pepper, about the ſame bigneſſe, the beſt are ſuch as are cloſe, full, heauie and ſharpe, although they be leſſe then Pepper, but ſ
                                 •
                              mewhat bitter and ſmell well, being i
                                 •
                               a manner ſweete. They warme and comfort the ſtomacke, which is weake by rea
                                 •
                              n of ſuperfluous or windie matter, they cleanſe the breaſt from tough fleagme, they ſtrengthen the Milt, breake winde, and helpe colde diſeaſes of the mother, beeing chawed, with Maſticke, they cleanſe the 
                                 〈◊〉
                               from 
                                 •
                              leagm, & ſtrengthē them.
                        
                     
                     The leaues called Folium Indum which the Indians call Tamalapatr
                              •
                           
                         are like Orange leaues, but ſomewhat ſharper, and of a dark gréen colour. They haue 3 veynes that reach vnto the end of the leafe, one in the middle, and two on the ſides, that is, on each ſide one. They haue a ſweet ſmell, almoſt like Cloues. The trée whereon they grow, is of a reaſonable bigneſſe: they grow alwaies on the ſide of Lakes, waters, or ditches, and are in manie places of India, but moſt in Cambaia: the Indians vſe manie of theſe leaues, and cauſe them to be caryed and ſold by whole balles: they ſay they are good to prouoke vrine, & againſt a ſtincking breath: alſo they lay them betwéene their apparell, cloathes and Linnen, for it keepeth them from wormes, and ſay it ſerueth in all things as Spiconardi doth.
                     
                        The Latiniſts haue deriued the name thereof from the Indian word, Tamalapatra, and call it Malabatrium:
                        
                        An
                              •
                            D. 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                         
                        the Arabians, Cadegi Indi, that is to ſay, the Indian leafe: it is likewiſe much brought hither, ſpeciallie to Venice, and is vſed to prouoke vrine, to ſtrengthē the ſtomack & to helpe a ſtinking breath.
                     
                     
                        Galanga by the Arabians called Galuegian, is of two ſortes, one that is ſmall and ſmelleth well, which is brought out of China into India, and from thence to Portingal and other places: and this ſort is in China called Lauaudon: the other béeing greater is found in the Iland Iaua, and by them called Lanquas, and this ſmelleth not ſo well, as that of China: they grow on ſmall plants, a ſpanne or 2 ſpannes high from the earth, of themſelues without 
                           •
                        ing: that of Iaua is the greateſt plāt, about 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           •
                        pannes high: it hath leaues like the point of a ſpeare, with a white flower, which bringeth forth ſeed: although they ſowe it not, yet in India they haue planted ſome in their Gardens for pleaſure, and vſe it for Sallets and other medicines, ſpecially the midwyues, (which in India are called Da
                              •
                           a: it groweth not of the ſéed, but of the roote which is planted in the earth, like Ginger: they are great & long, and haue knottes like reeds: it is a thing vſed in India for many medicines, & caryed into al places.
                     
                        Galanga is a roote with many 
                                 •
                              nots,
                        
                        Ann
                              •
                            
                           D. P
                              •
                           . 
                        being red both inwardly & outwardly the knottes running about it, ſmelling well, and ſharpe of taſte, for ſauor and faſhion like the Cyperus roote, wherefore by ſome men it is eſteemed for Cyperus of Babylon. It heateth and dryeth in the third degree: therefore it comforteth the ſtomake, and driueth away

the payne thereof proceeding of cold and windyneſſe. It healeth a ſtincking breath: it helpeth the beating of the hart, being drunk with the iuyce of the leafe of Weghe: it healeth the Colicke proceeding from wind: it is good alſo againſt the windines of the Mother, it increaſeih luſt, heateth the kidneyes, and euerie morning eating a little therof, it healeth the head-ache which hath long indured.
                     
                     Of theſe and ſuch like herbes there are manie in India, and in the Orientall parts, the names and properties whereof are to mee vnknowne▪ becauſe they are not ſo common, nor knowne among the meaner ſort of people, but onlie by Phyſitians, Apothecaries, and Herbaliſtes: therefore I haue onlie ſpoken of ſuch as are commonlie knowne, and daylie vſed. And this ſhall ſuffice for Spices, Drugges, and medicinable herbes.
                  
                  
                     The 84. Chapter. Of all ſorts of Pearles, both great and ſmall, and of precious ſtones, as Diamantes, Rubies, Topaces, Saffires, and other ſuch like ſtones, called Oriental ſtones, and of the Bezers ſtone, which is good againſt poyſon, and ſuch like diſeaſes, and in what manner and place they are found.
                     
                        PEarles by the Portingales are called Perolas, that is, ſuch as are great, and the ſmall Alioffar, in Latin, Margaritas: in Arabia, Lulu: in Perſia and India, Motu: and in Malabar, Mutiu. The principall and the beſt that are found in all the Orientall countries, and the right Orientall pearles are ſome betwéene Ormus and Baſtora, in the ſtraights, or Sinus Perſicus, in the places called Bareyn, Catiſſi, Iulfar, Camaron, & other places in the ſaid Sinus Perſicus, from whence they are brought into Ormus. The King of Portingale alſo hath his Factor in Bareyn, that ſtayeth there onlie for the fiſhing of pearles. There is great trafficke vſed with them, as well in Ormus as in Goa. There are alſo other fiſhings for pearle, as betwéene the Iland of Seylon, and the Cape de Comriin, where great numbers are yearelie found, for that the King of Portingale hath a captaine there with certaine ſoldiers that looketh vnto it: they haue yearlie at the leſt aboue 3 or 4 thouſād duckers yt liue onlie by fiſhing for pearles, and ſo maintaine themſelues, whereof euerie yeare many are drowned or deuoured by ye fiſhes called Tubarones or Hayen, whereof I haue alreadie made mētion: theſe pearls are not ſo good, nor ſo much eſteemed as the pearles of Ormus and are of a lower price, which they know likewiſe how to diſcerne at the firſt ſight. There are alſo pearles found by the Iland of Borneo, and the Iland of Aynon, on the coaſt of Cauchinchina, but thoſe of Ormus ſurpaſſe them all. They are fiſhed for by dukers that diue into the water, at the leaſt 10 12 and 20 fadome déepe. They grow in Oyſters, but the great pearls are found in the Oyſters that ſwimme aloft, and the ſmalleſt called Alioffar, are commonly in the bottome of the ſea. The duckers are naked, hauing a baſket bound at their backes, which being at the bottome (to make the more haſt) they rake full of Oyſters and durt together, and then ryſe vp againe, and throwe them into boates, that lie readie for the purpoſe, with men in them, which preſentlie take the Oyſters, and lay them on land to drie, where with the heate of the Sunne they open of themſelues, and ſo they find the pearles of Alioffar in the fiſh: and when they haue made an end of fiſhing for that day, all the Fiſhers, with the Captaine, Soldiers, laborers and Watchmen for the King, goe together, and taking all the pearles that are caught that day, they diuide them into certaine heapes, that is, one part for the King, an other part for the Captaine and Soldiers, the third part for the Ieſuites, becauſe they haue their Cloyſter in that place, and brought the Countrie firſt vnto the Chriſtian Faith, and the laſt part for the Fiſhers, which is done with great Iuſtice and equalitie. This fiſhing is done in Summer tyme, and there paſſeth not any yeare but that diuers Fiſhers are drowned by the Cape de Comoriin (which is called the Kings fiſhing) and manie deuoured by Fiſhes: ſo that when the fiſhing is done, there is a great and pitifull noyſe and cry of women and Children heard vpon the land, for the loſſe of their huſbands and friends: yet the next yeare they muſt to the ſame worke againe, for that they haue no other meanes to liue, as 
                           •
                        lſo for that they are partlie comp
                           •
                        lled thereunto

by the Portingales, but moſt part are content to doe it, becauſe of the gaine they get thereby after all the danger is paſt. They finde ſometimes many, and ſometimes but a few Pearles in one oyſter, ſometimes two hundred graines and more. The oyſters that haue the beſt Pearles in them are thinne and white, which the Indians call Cheripo, wherof they make ſpoones and cups to drink in. The Pearles are ſold by ſiues which are made of mettell driuen into thin plate for that purpoſe, whereof the holes are round. There are many ſorts of theſe ſiues, the firſt hath ſmall holes, and the Pearles that paſſe through them are at one price: the next ſiue hath greater holes, and the Pearles that fall through it are at higher price, and ſo foorth at the leaſt ſeauen or eight ſiues. The ſmall ſtuffe that ſerue for no Pearles, they call Alioffar, and are ſold by the ounce, and vſed by Potticaries and Phiſitions, and to that end many of them are caried into Portingall, & Venice, and are very good cheape. To giue the Pearles a faire colour, in India they vſe rice beaten a little with ſalt, wherewith they rub them, and then they become as faire and cleare as chriſtall, and ſo continue. There is yet an other ſort of oyſters by the Indians called Cha
                              •
                           lia
                        ▪ & by the Portingales Madre Perol
                              •
                           , or in other of Pearle, & are of the ſhell fiſhes that wee call inkehornes, which they know how to prepare and make cleane. They bring many of them into Portingale to ſ
                           •
                        rue for to drinke in, and to keepe for an ornament, & for pleaſure ſpecially thoſe that come out of China and Bengalen, ſome guilt and painted with colours very faire, ſome wrought with branches and other figures, as we dayly ſee them brought thether. In India they make diuers thinges of them, as deſkes, tables, cubbards, tables to play on, bo
                           •
                        es, ſtaues for women to beare in their hands, and a thouſand ſuch fine deuiſes, which are all inlaid and couered with this Chanco or Mother of Pearle, very faire to beholde, & very workmanlike made, and are in India ſo commō, that there is almoſt no place in thoſe countries but they haue of them. It is likewiſe much caried abroad, both into Portingale
                        ▪ and els where, but they are moſt vſed in India, for there the women, ſpeciallie thoſe of Bengala vſe to weare manillias, or bracelets of them about their armes, that is to ſay, thoſe of moſt account, and they muſt not take a maidens maidenhead from her that is of any eſtate or degree, but ſhe muſt haue ſome of theſe mother of Pearle bracelets about her armes, which at this day is yet much vſed, and obſ
                           ••
                        ued, whereby it is verie much worn
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                     
                     
                        Torteanxes there are likewiſe in great numbers throughout all India: of their ſhelles they make many curious deuiſes, as Combes, Cuppes, and Boles to drinke in, with tablemen and diuers ſuch like thinges, knowing howe to giue it a faire and ſhining colour moſt pleaſant to behold, and is more eſtéemed of in India, thē the mother of pearle, by reaſon of the beautifull colour they ſet vppon it.
                  
                  
                     The 85. Chapter. Of Diamonds.
                     
                        DIamonds by the Arabians and Mores called Almas, and by the Indians where they grow Iraa, and by the Malagans where they are likewiſe foūd, Itam. They grow in the Countrie of Decam behinde Ballagate, by the Towne of Biſnagar, wherein are two or three hilles from whence they are digged, whereof the King of B
                              •
                           ſnagar doth reape great profitte: for hee cauſeth thē to be ſtraightly watched, and hath farmed them out with this condition, that all Diamonds that are aboue twenty fiue Mangeleyns in waight are for the king himſelfe: (euery Mangelyn is foure graines in waight) and if anie man bee found that hideth anie ſuch, hee looſeth both life and goods.
                     There is yet another hill in the Countrie of Decam, which is called Vellia, that is the old Rocke: from thence come the beſt Diamonds, and are ſold for the greateſt price, which the Diamand grinders, Iewellers, and Indians can very well diſcerne from the reſt.
                     Theſe Diamonds are much brought to ſell in a Faire that is holden in a Towne called L
                              •
                           ſpor, lying in the ſame countrie of Decam betweene Goa, and Cambaia, whether the Banianes and Guſurates of Cambaia doe goe and buy them vp, bringing them to Goa, and other places. They are very ſkilfull in theſe matters, ſo that no Ieweller can goe beyond them, but oftentimes they deceiue the beſt Iewellers in all Chriſtendome. In this Roca Vellia, there are Diamondes founde that are called Nayfes ready cut, which are naturall, and are more eſtéemed then the reſt, ſpecially by the Indians themſelues.
                     In the ſtraight called Tania pura, a countrie on the one ſide of Malacca there is likewiſe an old rocke, which alſo is called Roca-Vellia,
                        
where many Diamondes are found, that are excellent: they are ſmall, but verie good, and heauie, which is good for the ſeller, but not for the buyer. Diamonds are digged like gold out of Mynes, and where they digge one yeare the length of a man into the ground, within three or foure yeares after, there are Diamondes founde againe in the ſame place which grow there. Sometimes they find Diamonds of one hundred and two hundred Mangelyns, and more but verie few.
                     There is another ſtone called a Topace for colour which is almoſt like the Diamond, but darker & of leſſe eſtimation. There are many of them founde, that are of great valew for that kinde of ſtone, and are likewiſe digged out of the earth like Diamonds in many places of India. There are alſo white Saffires and Rubies, which can hardly bee knowne from Diamonds vnles it be by very good and expert Iewellers, and Diamond grinders. There is likewiſe founde in India a kinde of thing much like to Rock-chriſtall, but indéede it is none: for there is no Chriſtall to be found in India, nor in any of the oriental countries. It is called berylo, and is little different from Chriſtall. It is much found in Cambaia, Pegu, and Seylon, and they make many things thereof, as beades, ſeales, and diuers other thinges, which they ſell vnto the Chriſtians, and vſe among themſelues.
                  
                  
                     The 86. Chapter. Of Rubies, Eſpinelles, Granades, Emeralds and other precious ſtones.
                     
                        RVbies are of manie ſorts, but the beſt are thoſe that are called carbunckles, which are Rubies that waigh aboue 25. quilates, wherof there are verie few and ſeldome to be found. The beſt Rubies that are of the beſt colour, and water are in India called Tockes, which are like Carbunckles, there are others called Ballax, which are of a lower price then the firſt, and they are red. There are others called Eſpinellas, that are of colour like fire, and are leſſe eſteemed then the other two ſortes, becauſe they haue not the right water of Rubies. There are Rubies alſo of manie other ſorts, wherof ſome are white like Diamonds as I ſaid before: other of a Carnation colour or much like white Cherries when they are ripe. There are Rubies found halfe white, halfe red, ſome halfe Rubies, halfe Safires, and a thouſand ſuch other ſortes. The cauſe thereof is becauſe that in the rockes and hils where they grow, their firſt colour is white, and by the force of the Sunne, are in time brought to their perfection and ripeneſſe, and béeing perfect they are of colour red, like the Carbunckle and Tockes aforeſaid, but wanting ſomewhat of their perfection, and being digged out before, that time they are of diuers colours as I ſaid before, and how much paler they are, and leſſe red then the Tockes, ſo much are they leſſe in valew: for as they are in beautie and perfection, ſo are they eſtéemed euery one in their kinde. Thoſe that are halfe Rubies, and halfe Safires, which the Indians call Nilcandi, that is to ſay, halfe Safier, and halfe Rubie, proceed of this, that the Rubies and Safiers grow alwaies in one rocke, whereby they are oftentimes founde, halfe one, halfe other. The Rubies by the Arabians and Perſians are called Iacut, by the Indians Manica. The Safiers are of two ſortes▪ one of a darke blew, the other of a right blew, the Iacinth, Granades, and Robaſſes are likewiſe certaine kinds of Rubies, but little eſteemed, the Indians call them the yellow and carnation Rubies, and ſo foorth, according to their colour. Theſe Iacinthes, Granadoes, and Robaſſes, are in ſo great numbers in Cananor, Calecut, and Cambaia, that they are to ſell in euerie Market, and corner of the ſtreets, by whole corgias, each corgia hauing twentie péeces at the leaſt in it, they ſell the corgia for one ſtiuer or two at the moſt as many as you will deſire, but you muſt vnderſtand, they are of the ſmalleſt ſort. The Safier is not of ſo great eſtimation as the Rubie, and yet is one of the moſt precious ſtones that are next the Diamond, and the Rubie: the Rubies, Safiers, and other ſtones aforeſaid, doe grow and are found in rockes and hilles like Diamonds: they come out of Calecut, Cananor, and from manie places in the land of Biſnaga, but moſt out of the Iſland of Seylon, which are the beſt: but thoſe of the Countrie of Pegu are eſteemed the fineſt, whereof there is great ſtore.
                     The Emerauldes which the Indians call Pache, and the Arabians Samarrut, there are none throughout al India, yet it is reported yt ſome haue bin found there, but verie few & not oftē: but they are much brought thether from

                        
                           〈◊〉
                         in Aegypt, and are likewiſe called Orientall: they are much eſteemed in India, becauſe there are but few of them. There are many alſo brought out of ye Spaniſh Indies, and carryed into the lande of Pegu, where they are much worne, and eſtéemed of, wherby many Venetians (that haue trauelled thether with Emeraldes and bartered them for Rubies) are become very rich, becauſe among them men had rather haue Emeraldes then Rubies: All the ſaid ſtones are likewiſe vſed in medicines, and Apoticarie drugges, Turqueſes are found in great numbers in the Countrey of Perſia, and brought into India from beyond Ormus, by hundreth pounds at once, earth and altogether, which in India are little eſtéemed, for that the Indians and Portingals do not weare many of them, and make ſmall account of them. The Iaſpar is much found in the land of Cambaia, but not much regarded: they make diſhes and cups thereof: it is of colour gréene like the Emeralde. Chriſolites and Amatiſtes are many in the Iſland of Seylon, Cambaia, and Ballagatte, and the ſtone called Alakecca, which is alſo called Bloodſtone, becauſe it quickly ſtancheth blood, and other ſtones called Milke ſtones, which are good for women that giue milke or ſucke. Theſe and ſuch like ſtones are in great numbers found in Cambaia and Ballagatte, and are brought to Goa to bee ſolde, whereof they make Beades, Seales, Ringes, and a thouſand ſuch like curioſities: they are much eſtéemed, for that a ſeale of ſuch a ſtone is worth two or three Pardaws the peece: there is alſo in Cambaia much Alambre, or wherof they make many rings, beades, and ſuch like things, which are much vſed: there are likewiſe ſtones, by the Portingalles called Olhos de Gato, that is to ſay, Cattes eyes, becauſe they are like them (which is the Agat) and are of colour and faſhion like Cattes eyes: they come out of Cambaia, but the beſt out of Seylon and Pegu: they are little brought into Portin
                           
                              •
                           l, for there they are not eſtéemed, and likewiſe becauſe they are worth more in India then in Portingall, for the Indians eſtéeme much of them, ſpecially the Chinos, and thether they are caryed, better eſtéemed, and ſold there then any other ſtones: the Indians ſay that this ſtone hath a certaine propertie and vertue to preſerue and kéepe a man in the riches which he hath, and that they ſhall not leſſen, but ſtil increaſe: the Loadſtone, which the Portingalles call Ped
                              •
                           a de Ceuar is found in great quantity, and in many places of India: the Indians ſay, that if a man vſe dayly to eate a little of that ſtone, it preſerueth him, and maketh him looke yong, and that he ſhall neuer looke olde: wherefore the Kinges and great Lordes of India vſe it in pottes and veſſelles, therein to eate and ſéeth their meate, thereby as they beleeue to preſerue their youthes.
                  
                  
                     The 87. Chapter. Of the Bezar ſtones, and other ſtones good againſt poyſon
                     
                        THe Bezar ſtone commeth out of Perſia, frō the land or Prouince called Caraſ
                              •
                           one, and alſo out of other places in India: they grow within the maw of a ſhéepe or Goat, about a little ſtraw, that lyeth in the middle of the maw, for by experience the ſtraw is often found within them: the ſtone is very ſlicke & ſmooth without, of a darke gréene colour. Theſe Goats or ſhéepe are by the Perſians called Pazan, wherevpon they call the ſtone Pazar, and the Portingalles by corruption of ſpéech call it Bazar or Beſar, and the Indians Pedro do Bazar, which is as much to ſay, as market ſtone: for Bezar in the Indian ſpeech ſignifieth a market or place where all victuailes are kept and ſolde, and for the ſame cauſe they call the ſmalleſt money Bazarucos, as if they woulde ſay market money. This Bezars ſtone is very coſtly, and is much vſed in India againſt all poyſon, and other diſeaſes, and is more eſteemed then Vnicornes horne in Europe, for it is much tryed and ſold very deare: The greater and heauier they are, the better and of more vertue they are: the common ſorte are of thrée foure or fiue octaues weight, ſome more, ſome leſſe: they are much brought into Portingal, and greatly eſtéemed: the place where they are moſt found, is (as I ſaid before) in Perſia and alſo in the Iſland called Inſula das Vacas, or the Iſland of Cowes: It lyeth before the mouth of the riuer, entering into Cambaia, hard by the coaſt where the Portingall nauie often putteth in to refreſh themſelues, and being there, kill diuers of the ſheepe or Goates, wherein they finde many of theſe Bezars ſtones: likewiſe in the lande of Pan by Malacca, there are many found: in the ſame countrey of Pan they find a certaine ſtone within the gall of a Hogge, which they eſteeme more againſt poyſon and other diſeaſes then ye Bezars ſtone: the Portingalles call it Pedra do Porco, that is, Hogges ſtone: it is much vſed in Malacca,
                        
it is of cleare redde colour, and bitter in taſte, and ſauoureth like French ſope: when they will vſe it and giue it any man to drinke, they throw it into a cuppe of water, and ſo let it ſtande a little, which done, they take it out againe, and the water will be bitter, and cleanſe all the venime that a man hath in his body, as by experience hath oftentimes béen found. The Bezars ſtone is as hard as any ſtone, but not very heauie: It is thought that theſe ſtones doe growe in the mawes of ſhéepe, and galles of Hogges by vertue of the graſſe or hearbes whereon they paſture and féed, as we haue declared of the Rhinoceros, becauſe they doe onely bréede in thoſe places aboue named, and in no place els, where theſe kinds of beaſtes are. In the towne of Vltabado in the Countrey behind Goa in Ballagatte, there is a ſtone found by the Arabians called Hagerarmini, and by the Portingals Pedra Armenia, and becauſe there are many of them found in Armenia, they are commonly called ſo: it is blew & ſomewhat light gréene: the Moores vſe it much in purgations and for other diſeaſes: beſides theſe ſtones aforeſaid, there are alſo many ſortes of ſtones, as well precious ſtones, as againſt poyſon and other diſeaſes, and of many properties & vertues: but becauſe they are but little knowne, or trafiqued withall, I haue onely made mention of thoſe that are dayly bought and ſold, and commonly knowne.
                  
                  
                     The 88. Chapter. A briefe inſtruction how to know and find out the right Diamantes, Rubies, Emeralds, Pearls, & other precious ſtones, and how to value them by waight, at their right prices and values, & firſt of the Diamant.
                     
                        FIrſt you muſt vnderſtand that the Diamant is the king of al precious ſtones, becauſe it is ſolde by weight, and hath a very certain thickenes, whereby it is ordinarily wroght, for when it is greater, it is nothing worth, and being leſſe it will ſoone be perceyued: by the which thickneſſe although it ſtandeth in a ring, they can both ſée and geſſe how much it weighth, within a little more or leſſe, and being out of the ring it is weyghed, thereby to value it truely: there are olde and ancient records found in India, wherein are written the prices of the ſtones, that is, one Quilat for ſo much, two Quilates for ſo much, and thrée Quilates for ſo much after the rate &c. and ſo of all prices and weights accordingly: and becauſe they are dayly bought and ſolde, it is therefore néedefull for a man to haue a memoriall about him, that is, of the prices of the perfect and fayre ſtones, without fault or ſpot, for that being vncleane, or hauing any fault or ſpot, they are hardly to be valued. There are ſome Princes and great Lordes that deſire to know the cauſe why ſuch precicious ſtones are holden at ſo great prices, wherevnto no other anſwere is made, but becauſe men buy and ſell them ſo deare, for all thinges are eſtéemed no otherwiſe of, then becauſe they are bought and ſold at ſuch pryces, and ſo is their manner to ſell, for if a Diamant of one Quilat alone, bee worth fiftie Duckets, being perfect, their reaſon is, that after the ſame rate a great ſtone or Diamant may be worth 30. or 40. thouſand Duckets, being in greatneſſe and perfection correſpondent: and the ſtones as well great as little, that vntill this time haue béene bought and ſolde, haue not béene ſo light, that they were ſold aboue or vnder their value and eſtimation. Now to value the great Diamant as it ought to be, it is neceſſarie to know and determine what a Diamant of a Quilat is worth, and a Rubie to match therewith: the like of an Emerald, neyther more nor leſſe, & hauing well conſidered what or how much hinderance the falts and fouleneſſe of the ſaide Diamant will be vnto the ſale thereof, deducting the ſame out of the price of the ſaid Diamant, Rubie or Emerald being Orientall, of what greatneſſe ſoeuer they bee, you may value them, and I will firſt beginne with the Diamant, for that other ſtones are valued after the rate thereof, and wil declare the perfection which it ought to haue. The diamant yt is perfect in all reſpects, muſt be of that proportion, that the two ſquares on the ſides muſt make the breadth of the vpper parte of the ſtone, and that the vnder part of the ſtone be no broader, then that thrée of the breadths thereof will make the breadth of the vpper part, and déepe according to the ſame proportion: and the ſquares on the ſide muſt ſtande cloſe with the edge of the ring or thing wherin it is ſet, being of the whole depth, and ſomewhat longer then ſquare, and yet no more, then that it may be geſſed, which is the length and breadth thereof, alſo it muſt bee without any falts both in corners and ſides, and euery one of the foure corners ſharpe and cleane cut, and of a good water, Chriſtaline & ſhining cleare, ſo that it may not once be perceiued that it draweth neere any colour, and not of a darke water, but cleare and cleane:

the Diamant with all theſe perfections is worth 50. duckets being of one Quilat: but becauſe theſe perfections are not often found, and that few men vnderſtand them, therefore I will ſay that a Diamant of goodneſſe and perfection according to the common eſtimation, being of the waight of one Quilat in worth 40. duckets, and after this rate wee will make our account, and whether it bee a ſmall or great Diamant of what wayght goodnes or fouleneſſe ſoeuer it may bee: you muſt firſt conſider & know what it waigheth, & if they cannot tell you, thē you muſt geſſe by the ſight thereof, and alwayes eſtéeme it at leſſe wayght then you think it weigheth, that you may value it within the price, and hauing eſtéemed the waight, kéepe that in your memorie, and ſay thus, if it were a Diamant of a Quilat waight of this water, and ſo perfect, or had the corners leſſe then theſe, or any fouleneſſe in reſpect of this, and all the qualities, or faultes which a Diamant ought to haue, conſider what ſuch a Diamant may be worth, being of qualitie like that you will eſtéeme, & weighing no more but one Quilat: which hauing wel thought and conſidered vpon, eſtéeme it rather leſſe then more, & hold ye price in your memory as aforeſaid, and thinke vppon the waight that it ſhould weigh, be it much or little, & double the ſame waight adding as much more vnto it, as if it bee two, take other two, and multiply them together, and ſay 2. times 2. is foure: if it weygh 3. multiply it with thrée, and they make 9. and ſo according to the number you find, and ſo you ſhall multiply all Diamonds, in waight, of what wayght ſoeuer they be, and multiply them as I ſaid before with as much againe as they bee eſteemed, and the production of your multiplication you ſhall multiply by the ſumme of money you value the Diamant to bee worth, weyghing one Quilate, and the production of the laſt multiplication is the value of the Diamant: & if in the waight there be any halfes, as if it wayghed 2
                              •
                           . Quilate, then you ſhall redeeme them into halfe Quilates, which is 5. halfe Quilates, and then ſay 5. times 5. is 25. and that ſhall you multiply with the price of the halfe Quilate, as you eſteeme it, and the production thereof is the worth of ſuch a Diamant, and if it chance yt the Diamant were ſo ſmal, that the waight of a graine ſhould be therein eſteemed: then you muſt reduce all the waight into graines, and multiply as aforeſaid, and that which proceedeth thereof is the waight of ſuch a Diamant as you ſeeke to value or eſtéeme. As for example, there is a Diamant that waigheth 2. Quilates, which is of ſuch a qualitie, that being of one Quilate it would be worth 
                           
                              •
                           0. Duckets, and being of halfe a Quilate, 10. Duckets, and being of a graine, 2. Duckets and a halfe. Now to know what this Diamant of 2. Quilates is worth, you ſhall ſay that 2. times 2. is 4. This 4. you ſhal multiply with 40. Duckets, which is the value thereof, being of one Quilate, it maketh 160. Duckets, which is the price of that Diamant of two Quilates: now that you haue a Diamant of two Quilates and a halfe, which is fiue halfes, you ſhall ſay fiue times fiue is 25. this 25. multiplyed by 10. it maketh 250. duckets, becauſe the halfe Quilate coſt 10. duckets, which is after the rate of 40. duckets the Quilate, then the Diamant of 2. Quilates and a halfe amounteth to 250. duckets. Now if a Diamant weighed 7. graines, you ſhall ſay 7. times 7. is 49. which 49. you muſt multiply by the value of a graine, which is two duckets and a halfe: ſo a Diamant of 7. graines is 127. duckets. In this manner you may alwaies know what a Diamant is worth, hauing rated the price of one Quilate: the waight of the Diamant you will eſteeme being thus knowne, as by example is ſhewed, and ſo you may the eaſilier make your account. There are ſome Diamants that are faultie and vnperfect, and are not worth 40. duckets, but of a leſſe price according to the faultes, and may be worth 36.35.34 & 30. duckets, or any lower price, as the faultes are eſtéemed, & in that caſe it is very troubleſome to knowe what half a Quilat or grain ſhould be worth: wherin you muſt do thus: whē you haue eſteemed what a Quilat of ſuch a Diamant may be worth & that in ye weight thereof there falleth out a halfe Quilat or grain, then you muſt firſt knowe what value it woulde bee worth being of one Quilate, and then make your account yt the fourth part of ſuch a price is the value of halfe a Quilate, ſo that when a Quilate is worth 40. duckets, a halfe Quilate is ten duckets, and one grayne two duckets and a halfe: for foure graines is a Quilate, if the Quilate be 36. duckets, the halfe Quilate is 9. duckets, and one graine two duckets and one Teſton, and ſo after that rate may you know ye price of all Diamants, of what qualitie ſoeuer they bee. The like reckening is made with thinne Diamantes, Rubies, and Emeraldes, that is made with thoſe which are of greater price, as I ſhall hereafter ſhew you. You muſt vnderſtand that a Rubie bee of ſuch a quantitie, that it may accompany a Diamant of one Quilate it is worth 70. duckets, or that there be any which in weight doe accompany a Diamant of halfe a Quilate or grayne, then you muſt make your account by halfe Quilates, or graynes, and you muſt alwayes knowe the

price of one Quilate, and muſt vnderſtande that the fourth parte of 70. duckettes is the value of one halfe Quilate, and the fourth part of a halfe Quilate is the price of a grain, and ſo you ſhall make your reckening of Emeraldes, each one according to his waight and price. There are ſome Diamantes that are thinne, and yet ſhew very cleare, which are more worth then they weygh, and leſſe then their clearnes ſheweth: for a Diamant hauing a very thinne table and hollow, yet on ye vpper ſide hauing ye perfection in ſquare, as I ſaid, ſhould be in a thick diamant, which is of ſo good perefection both in ſides & hookes: ſuch a Diamant ſheweth to be of two Quilates and weygheth but one: wherefore whē your Diamant is of what greatnes ſoeuer it may be, being perfect in the vpper parte, and thinne vnderneath, you muſt alwaies make your account, that being thinne vnderneath, it is of leſſe wayght then it ſheweth for, and if it be not altogether thinne vnderneath, then it weygheth more, yet the waight profiteth it nothing at all: and hauing the vpper table ſmaller, and the ſides greater, it will alſo weigh more, but the wayght auayleth it not: but you muſt alwaies eſteeme it to weygh but the halfe of that it ſheweth for: and not being wholly thin vnderneath, it will weygh more, but to no end: and hauing the table ſmal, and the ſides and corners great, it weigheth more, but the weight auayleth not, but you muſt eſtéeme it to weigh but halfe ſo much as it ſheweth for: for that before it bee made ready it will loſe much of the waight. Now if there bee a Diamant that hath a great table outwardes, & the corners ſmall, it ſhall not weigh halfe ſo much as it ſheweth for, yet is it not any thing ye worſe for that, vnleſſe the corners were too ſmall: nowe if there bee a Diamant thinne vnderneath, and ſquare aboue, with the perfections that ſhoulde belong vnto it, it is worth being of one Quilate 70. duckets, and hauing any faultes or ſpots, euery man may wel conſider what hinderance they are vnto it, and after this manner a man may eaſily ſet the pryce & value of them, and make his account after the rate of thicke Diamantes, his account being made of halfe the weight they ſeeme or ſhewe to haue: as if they ſhew to bee two Quilates, make your reckening of one Quilate: and if it ſhew three Quilates, make your account of ſixe grams, which is the half: and if there be any halfe Quilates, then ſee the price what a Quilate is worth, and ſo what a halfe amounteth vnto, and ſo make your account as aforeſaide by thicke Dyamantes, and in graynes the like, for there is no other difference then in the pryce, for that a perfect and cleare thinne Diamant of 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        Quilate is worth 
                           ••
                        . 
                           ••
                        ckets and 
                           〈…〉
                         or leſſe waight accordingly 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                  
                  
                     The 89. Chapter. Of Rubies.
                     
                        WHen you haue a Rubie to value or eſteeme that is ſquared table wiſe, as it ſhould bee, and that ſuch a Rubie is to accompany a Dyamant of the ſame waight of Quilates and ſo man
                           •
                         
                        Quilates in colour, if it hath foure and twentie Quilates in colour and perfection, like Golde of foure and twentie Quilates, then it is certaine, it is both fine and good. The Rubie is not ſolde by the waight▪ becauſe it hath no certaine thickneſſe, for that many of them are made thinne for pleaſure to the ſight, and the better to lay the grounde or leaues vnder them, and it may very well bee thinne, but not very much, for then it ſhould bee a lot and hinderance vnto it: if a Rubie be whole and perfect both in colour, cleanneſſe, thickneſſe, ſquareneſſe, and forme, it is worth an hundred duckets: but there are very fewe that are perfect in all pointes, ſpecially being great, for they haue alwayes ſome faultes or ſpottes that are couered and hidden: but right perfect there are none, or very few, and not many men haue any great knowledge therein: therefore I will ſay, thereby to make our account, that a Rubie which in common ſhew is accounted perfect and good, is worth ſeuentie duckets: ſo that when a Ieweller or ſtone cutter doeth aſke another for a Rubie, which hee hath not▪ 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         ſayth onely, there is a Rubie of greatneſſ
                           •
                         
                        
                           •
                        o accompany a Diamant of ſo many Quilates, and hath ſo many Quilates in colour, the other thereby vnderſtandeth of what colour and greatneſſe it is. Now hauing a Rubie or Rubies with tables or vnground, and are to value them, or knowe what they be worth, you ſhall conſider with your ſelfe and ſay thus: if there were a Rubie that were no greater then this, onely ſeruing to accompany a Dyamant of one Quilate, and were of ſuch colours, cleareneſſe, and qualities, as this in quantitie and greatnes, & had the faultes in all reſpects that this hath, what would it bee worth▪ and hauing well conſidered the qualities, goodnes or badneſſe with the faults, how much they imbaſe the price thereof, and hauing thereafter eſteemed

your price, beeing to accompany a Diamond of one Quilate, kéep that price in your memorie, and looke on the Rubie how bigge it is, and what waight the Diamond hath, wit
                           •
                         the depth which it ſhould be compared vnto▪ and alſo if it bee ſtill raw and vnground, conſider how much it muſt be taken away in the grinding, and how bigge it will be when it is ſquared and faſhioned: which hauing done, and knowing the waight of the Diamond it ſhall accompany, you ſhal then take as much more waight, & multiplie it with the waight you haue alreadie found, that it ſhould bee accompanying a Diamond of one Quilate, and the product
                           •
                        on thereof, is the valew of ſuch a Rubie: to conclude, when you haue determined what the waight of a Diamond is, that it may accompanie, you ſhall make your account as if it were a Diamond, and that which proceedeth of the waight, you ſhall multiplie with the price which you finde it to be worth, to kéep companie with a Diamond of one Quilate: the Rubies that are vngroūd and can be no tables it is to be vnderſtood that they are better in that ſorte then otherwiſe: Of theſe you muſt conſider the price after the manner of the Diamond which hee may accompanie, & the height or depth of the ſtone, after that the colour, goodnes and faults as it falleth out, and make the account or reckoning thereof as of Rubies with tables, and ground, and alſo of the Diamonds. There are alſo Diamonds that are not cut ſquare in tables, but haue a good faſhion for to ſet in anie Iewell, as being pointed with thrée corners, harts▪ and ſuch like ſorts, thereby to hide their faultes, and are made in that ſort to holde the greatnes and waight thereof, and yet one of theſe being perfect in that manner, are not ſo much worth as thoſe with tables: for that many times they haue too much thicknes vnderneath, which maketh the waight not to any profit, but rather hurt: which if it were whole and thin vnderneath▪ hauing outwardly all other perfectiōs, it were as much worth as a Diamond, that hath a table being thicke with his whole depth, which is 46. duckets being of one Quilate: ſo that when you haue any of theſe you ſhall deale with them, as with the other, that is to conſider, what they may be worth, being of one Quilate, and make your reckoning, as with the others aforeſaid.
                  
                  
                     The 90. Chapter. Of the oriental & old Emeralds, for that thoſe that are found in the Iſlandes of the Spaniſh Indies, are not yet tried nor reſolued vpon whether they be fine or not.
                     
                        THe old Iewellers ſay, that if a man can finde an Emerald perfect in al points, as in colour, clearenes, faſhion, and thicknes, that ſuch an Emerald is worth 3. Diamonds, which according to our account ſhold be 120. duckets, and I beléeue verily that it is moſt true, but as yet there was neuer any found, eyther little or great that had all thoſe perfections, there are ſome found that are perfect in colour and faſhion, but of clearenes and cleanenes not one, for they haue alwaies ſome fattines within them like gréene hearbs and ſuch like, wherefore to make our reckoning, wee will ſay, that an Emerauld of cōmon ſort, eſtimation, and perfection, is worth 80. duckets, being of the bignes, as that hee may compare with a Diamond of one Quilate: for althogh it haue certaine gréene hearbes within it, if they bee not too many it is neuertheleſſe eſtéemed perfect, hauing all the other perfections that it ſhould haue: therefore when you haue an Emerald to value whether it be vngroūd or a table, firſt you muſt conſider the greatnes▪ and what waight a Diamond ſhould bee that muſt compare with it, then looke vppon the faults or goodnes that it hath, and conſidering well what ſuch an Emrauld ſhold be worth▪ being no greater than a Diamond of one Quilate, you muſt make your account as with Rubies: which is, take the waight of the Diamond, whereunto you compare it, and multiplie that with as much more, and the production thereof, multiplie by the price that you haue eſtéemed the one Quilate to be worth, and the production is the valew of ſuch an Emerauld, and in the ſame ſort ſhall you doe with all the Emeraulds you haue to valew, whether they be great or ſmall, good or bad, alwaies conſidering the faults or goodneſſe it may haue, and after that eſteeme it, and ſet the price, and if there be half a Quilate or graines in the waight of the Diamōd you compare it vnto▪ then you muſt make your account by halues and graines, as I ſaide before of Diamonds and Rubies. When you will valew any ſtones, you muſt looke well vpon them, and conſider if it be a Diamond, of what water and faſhion it is, if it hath all

the depth and more, if it be foule or haue anie other fault in the corners or in the ſquares, & what hurt or diſaduantage it bringeth to the ſtone, that you deceiue not your ſelfe in valuing the price it may be worth, beeing of one Quilate, thereby to make your reckoning as before: If it be a Rubie, marke well of what bignes it is, and what Diamond in waight it may be cōpared vnto, & rate it alwaies at leſſe greatnes, rather then at more, that you deceiue not your ſelfe, and conſider well what colour it hath: If there be any Caſ
                              •
                           edonia, or vncleaneſſe, if it be thinne or haue any other fault therein, or any want in the ſquarenes, & what hinderance thoſe faultes may bee vnto the ſtone, in the price, perfection, and greatn
                           •
                        s of the Diamond wherunto you compare it, and looke you faile not herein, for if you do, you will cleane ouer ſhoote your ſelfe: likewiſe in ſetting the price what it may bee worth being ſo great, as to compare with a Diamond of one Quilate, thereby to make your reckoning of the waight, that it maie weigh more or leſſe. What I haue ſaide of Rubies, you muſt likewiſe vnderſtand of Emeraulds that are Orientale, all after one ſort and manner of reckoning. There are other red ſtones called Eſpinelles, and of diuers other ſortes, whereof ſome are ſo perfect in their kinds, that they are like to Rubies, and this is to bee vnderſtood of the good and the beſt. There are others called Eſpinelles da Rouca Noua, or new Rocket: ſome of them haue the colour of Rubies, others draw neere the colour of Iacinthes, and it is not knowne whether they be right Eſpinelles or not: for the good Iewellers eſteeme them for no Eſpinelles, but for Rubaſſes, and Iacinthes, and ſo good that they are like to Eſpinelles: wherfore the ſtone grinders & Iewellers ſay, that they are Eſpinelles, becauſe they would bee better paid for the faſhion, and therefore they doe poliſh them with Eſpinell duſt or poliſhing. Theſe Eſpinelles in their poliſh are Eſpinelles, but in colour Rubaſſes, and Iacinthes, and there are manye Rubies, which to polliſh well, and grinde well, you had neede poliſh with the poliſh of Eſpinelles. If there be an Eſpinell of the old rocke, which in kind and qualitie is good, being perfect in all parts with a very good table, and were to bee compared with a Diamond of one Quilate, it would bee worth 40. duckets, but hauing any imperfections, euery mā may well conſider what hurt and abate they may doe in the price, and after the ſame rate make his account as hee doth in Rubies, the Ballayeſes are likewiſe ſold by waight, but not in that ſort as Diamonds and Rubies, but they are eſtéemed according to the waight, that is the beſt 
                           •
                        layes that may be found being of one Quilate, may be worth ten duckets, and hauing any faults▪ eyther in colour or other perfections, is of leſſe valew, but beeing perfect as I ſaid alreadie, it is worth ten duckets, and two Quilates twentie duckets, of three Quilates thirtie duckets, and ſo after the rate as it is, ſmall or great▪ being of the waight it ſhould bee, and beeing imperfect, euery man ofſkill may well conſider what it is worth, being of one Quilate▪ & eſtéeme it thereafter.
                  
                  
                     The 91. Chapter. Of Orientale Pearles.
                     
                        THe Orientale Pearles are better then thoſe of the Spaniſh Indies, and haue great difference in the price: for they are worth more and haue a better glaſſe, being clearer, and fairer. Thoſe of the Spaniſh Indies commonly beeing darker & deader of colour: yet there are ſome found in the Portingall Indies that are nothing inferiour to the Orientale Pearles, but they are very few: Now to valew them as they ſhuld be, I wil only ſet the good Pearles at a price. A Pearle that in all partes is perfect, both of water, glaſſe and beautie without knobs, of forme very roūd or proportioned like a pearle without dents, being of one Quilate is worth a ducket, and after this rate I will make my reckoning, as I doe with Diamonds Rubies and Emeraulds, and if there be any faults in the water, clearenes and faſhion, or that it hath any knobs or other defaults, it may well be conſidered what hurt it may bee vnto the ſale thereof, and according to the goodnes, or badnes valew the price therof: which hauing valewed, we muſt ſée what it weigheth, and then make the reckoning thereof, as with Diamonds, Rubies & Emeraulds, & if there be a whole ſtring or a chaine full of Pearles, you muſt looke well vpon thē for where there are many, they are not all alike: the greateſt beeing the beſt, & the other after the rate, for the goodnes of the great wil beare the badnes of the ſmal: but if it be contrary, then the bargen is not very good. This ſhall ſuffice for inſtruction to ſuch as deſire to deale therewith, to haue alwaies in their memorie, and what herein is wanting for the better vnderſtanding and knowledge hereof, it may be ſupplied by true Iewellers and ſtone cutters that are ſkilfull in this point, and with theſe inſtructions can eaſily help, ſo that a mā ſhall not need wholly to put his truſt in thoſe, that for their owne profit will giue them but bad counſell therein.
                  
                  
                     
                     The 92. Chapter. Of 
                           •
                        rta
                           •
                        ne 
                           •
                        emorable thinges paſſed in India during my reſidence there
                     
                        IN the month of December, Anno, 158
                              •
                           . there ariued in the towne and Iſland of Ormus foure Engliſhmē, which came from Aleppo in the coū
                        trie of Suria, hauing ſayled out of England, and paſſed through the ſtraightes of Gibraltar, to Tripoli a towne and Hauen, lying on the ſea coaſt of Suria, where all the ſhippes diſcharge their wares, and marchandiſes, and frome thence are caryed by land vnto Alleppo, which is nyne dayes iourney. In Aleppo there are reſident diuers marchants and Factors of all Nations, as Italians, Frenchemen, Engliſhmē, Armenians, Turkes & Mores, euerie man hauing his Religion apart, paying tribute vnto the great Turke. In that towne there is great trafficke, for that from thence, euerie yeare twyſe, there trauelleth two Ca
                              •
                           ylen, that is, companies of people and Camelles, which trauell vnto India, Perſia, Arabia, and all the countries bordering on the ſame and deale in all ſorts of marchandiſe, both to and from thoſe Countries, as I in an other place haue alreadie declared. Three of the ſaid Engliſhmen aforeſaide were ſent by the Companie of Engliſhmen, that are reſident in Aleppo, to ſee if in Ormus they might keepe any Factors, and ſo trafficke in that place, like as alſo the Italians doe, that is to ſay, the Venetians, which in Ormus, Goa and Malacca haue their Factors, and trafficke there, as well for ſtones and pearles, as for other wares and ſpices of thoſe countries, which from thence are caryed ouer land into Ve
                           
                              •
                           e. One of theſe Engliſhmen had beene 
                           〈◊〉
                         before in the ſaid towne of Ormus, and there had taken good information of the trade, and vpon his aduiſe and aduertiſement, the other were as then come thether with him, bringing great ſtore of marchandiſes with them, as Clothes, Saffron, all kindes of drinking glaſſes, and Haberdaſhers wares, as looking glaſſes, kniues, and ſuch like ſtuffe, and to conclude, brought with them all kinde of ſmall wares that may be deuiſed. And although thoſe wares amounted vnto great ſummes of money, notwithſtāding it was but onlie a ſhadow or colour, thereby to giue no occaſion to be miſtruſted, or ſeen into: for that their principall intent was to buy great quantities of precious Stones, as Diamantes, Pearles, Rubies, &c. to the which ende they brought with them a great ſumme of money and Gold, and that verie ſecretly, not to be deceyued or robbed thereof, or to runne into anie danger for the ſame. They being thus aryued in Ormus, hyred a Shop, and began to ſell their wares: which the Italians perceyuing, whoſe Factors continue there (as I ſayd before) and fearing that thoſe Engliſhmen, finding good vent for their commodities in that place wold be reſident therein, and ſo daylie increaſe, which would be no ſmall loſſe and hinderance vnto them, did preſently inuent all the ſubtile meanes they could, to hinder them: and to that end they went vnto the Captaine of Ormus, as then called Don Gonſalo de Meneſes, telling him that there were certaine Engliſhmen come into Ormus
                        ▪ that were ſent only to ſpy the Country, and ſaid further, that they were Heretickes: and therefore they ſayd it was conuenient they ſhuld not be ſuffered ſo to depart, without béeing examined, and puniſhed as enimies, to the example of others. The Captaine being a friend vnto the Engliſhmen, by reaſon that one of them which had bene there before, had giuen him certaine preſents, would not be perſwaded to trouble them, but ſhipped them with all their wares in a Shippe that was to ſayle for Goa, and ſent them to the Viceroy, that he might examine and trye them, as hee thought good: where when they were aryued, they were caſt into priſon, and firſt examined whether they were good Chriſtians or no▪ and becauſe they could ſpeake but bad Portugale, onlie two of them ſpake good Dutche, as hauing bene certaine yeares in the lowe Countries, and there traffiqued. There was a Dutch Ieſuite borne in the towne of B
                              •
                           gges in Flaunders, that had bin reſident in the Indies for the ſpace of thirty yeares, ſent vnto them, to vndermine and examine them: wherein they behaued themſelues ſo wel, that they were holden & eſteemd for good and Catholick Romiſh Chriſtians: yet ſtill ſuſpected, becauſe they were ſtrangers, ſpecially Engliſhmen. The Ieſuites ſtil told them that they ſhuld be ſent priſoners into Portingal, wiſhing them to leaue off their trade of marchandiſe & to become Ieſuites, promiſing them thereby to defend them from all trouble: the cauſe why they ſaid ſo, and perſwaded them in that earneſt māner was, for that the Dutch Ieſuite had ſecretlie bene

aduertiſed of great ſummes of money which they had about them, and ſought to get the ſame into their fingers, for that the firſt vowe and promiſe they make at their entrance into their order, is, to procure the welfare of their ſaid order, by what means ſoeuer it be, but although the Engliſhmen denyed them, and refuſed the order, ſaying, that they were vnfit for ſuch places, neuertheleſſe they procéed ſo farre that one of them, being a painter, (that came with the other thrée for company, to ſée the countries, and to ſéeke his fortune, and was not ſent thether by the Engliſh marchants) partly for feare, and partlie for want of meanes to relieue himſelfe, promiſed them to become a Ieſuite: and although they knew and well perceiued he was not any of thoſe that had the treaſure, yet becauſe he was a Painter, whereof they are but few in India, and that they had great néed of him to paint their church, which otherwiſe would coſt them great charges, to bring one from Portingal, they were very glad thereof, hoping in time to get the reſt of them wt all their money into their fellowſhip: ſo yt to conclude, they made this Painter a Ieſuite, where he continued certain daies, giuing him good ſtore of worke to doe, and entertayning him with all the fauour and friendſhip they could deuiſe, and all to win the reſt, to be a pray for them: but the other thrée continued ſtil in priſon, being in great feare, becauſe they vnderſtood no man that came to them, nor anie man almoſt knew what they ſaid: till in the end it was told them that certaine Dutch men dwelt in the Archbiſhops houſe, & counſell giuen them to ſend vnto them, whereat they much reioiced, and ſent to me and an other Dutch man, deſiring vs once to come and ſpeake with them, which we preſentlie did, and they with teares in their eyes made complaint vnto vs of their hard vſage, ſhewing vs frō point to point (as it is ſaid before) why they were come into the countrie, with all deſiring vs for Gods cauſe, if we might by any means, to helpe them, that they might be ſet at liberty vpon Sureties, being readie to indure what Iuſtice ſhould ordaine for them, ſaying, that if it were found contrarie, and that they were other then trauelling marchants, and ſought to find out further benefite by their wares, they would be content to be puniſhed. With that wee departed from them promiſing them to do our beſt: and in the ende we obtained ſo much of the Archbiſhoppe, that he went vnto the Vice-roy to delyuer our petition, and perſwaded him ſo well, that hee was content to ſet them at libertie, and that their goods ſhuld be deliuered vnto them again, vpon condition they ſhould put in ſureties for 2000. Pardawes, not to depart the countrie before other order ſhould bee taken with them. Therupon they preſently found a Citizen of the towne, yt was their ſuretie for 2000. Pardawes, where they paide him in hand 1300. Pardawes, and becauſe they ſay they had no more ready monie, he gaue them credite, ſéeing what ſtore of marchandiſe they had, whereby at all times if néede were, hee might bee ſatiſfied: and by that meanes they were deliuered out of priſon, and hyred them ſelues a houſe, and began to ſet open ſhoppe: So that they vttered much ware, and were preſently well knowne among all the Marchants, becauſe they alwaies reſpected Gentlemen, ſpecially ſuch as brought their wares ſhewing great curteſie and honor vnto them, whereby they wonne much credite, and were beloued of all men, ſo that euerie man fauoured them▪ and was willing to doe them pleaſure. To vs they ſhewed great friendſhip, for whoſe ſake, the Archbiſhop fauoured them much, and ſhewed them verie good countenance, which they knew wel how to increaſe, by offering him many preſents, although hee would not receiue them, neither would euer take gift or preſent at any mans hands. Likewiſe they behaued themſelues verie Catholikely and verie deuoute, euerie day hearing Maſſe with Beades in their hands, ſo that they fel into ſo great fauour, that no man caried an euill eye, no nor an euill thought towards them. Which liked not the Ieſuites, becauſe it hindered them from that they hoped for, ſo that they ceaſed not ſtill by this Dutch Ieſuite to put them in feare, that they ſhould bee ſent into Portingall to the King, counſelling them to yéeld them ſelues Ieſuits into their Cloyſter, which if they did, he ſaid they would defend them from all in troubles, ſaying further, that he counſelled them therein as friend, and one that knew for certaine that it was ſo determined by the Viceroyes priuie Counſell: which to effect he ſaide they ſtayed but for ſhipping that ſhould ſayle for Portingall, with diuers other perſwaſions, to put them in ſome feare, & ſo to effect their purpoſe. The Engliſh men to the contrarie, durſt not ſay any thing to them▪ but anſwered, that as yet they would ſtay a while, and conſider thereof, thereby putting the Ieſuites in good comfort, as one among them,Of this 
                              •
                            Newbery▪ you may read more in M. Hackluy
                              •
                           es boke of Engl
                              •
                           ſhe voyages. being the principal of them (called Io
                              •
                           n Nuberye) complained vnto me often times, ſaying hee knew not what to ſay or thinke therein, or which way he might be rid of thoſe troubles: but in the ende they determined with themſelues, to depart from thence, and ſecretly by

meanes of contrarie friends, they imployed their money in precious ſtones, which the better to effect, one of them was a Ieweller, and for the ſame purpoſe came with them. Which being concluded among them, they durſt not make knowne to any man, neither did they credite vs ſo much, as to ſhewe vs their minds therein, although they tolde vs all whatſoeuer they knew. But on a Whitſunday they went abroad to ſport themſelues about thrée miles from Goa, in the mouth of the ryuer in a countrie called Bardes, hauing with them good ſtore of meate and drinke. And becauſe they ſhould not be ſuſpected, they left their houſe and ſhop, with ſome wares therein vnſolde, in cuſtodie of a Dutch Boy, by vs prouided for them, that looked vnto it. This Boye was in the houſe not knowing their intent, and being in Bardes, they had with them a Patamar, which is one of the Indian poſtes, which in winter times caryeth letters from one place to the other, whom they had hyred to guide them: & becauſe that betwéene Bardes and the Firm land there is but a little ryuer, in manner halfe drie, they paſſed ouer it on foote, and ſo trauelled by land, being neuer heard of againe: but it is thought they arriued in Aleppo, as ſome ſay, but they knew not certainely. Their greateſt hope was, that Iohn Newbery could ſpeake the Arabian tongue, which is vſed in al thoſe countries, or at the leaſt vnderſtoode, for it is very common in all places there abouts, as French with vs. Newes being come to Goa, there was a great ſtirre and murmuring among the people, and we much wondered at it: for many were of opinion, that wée had giuen them counſel ſo to doe, and preſently their ſuertie ſeaſed vpon the goods remaining, which might amount vnto aboue 200. Pardawes, and with that and the money he had receiued of the Engliſh men, he went vnto the Viceroye, and deliuered it vnto him, which the Viceroy hauing receiued, forgaue him the reſt. This flight of the Engliſh men grieued the Ieſuites moſt, becauſe they had loſt ſuch a pray, which they made ſure account of, whereupon the Dutch Ieſuite came to vs to aſke vs if we knew thereof, ſaying, that if he had ſuſpected ſo much, he would haue dealt otherwiſe, for that he ſaid, hee once had in his hands of theirs a bagge wherein was fortie thouſand Veneſeanders (each Veneſeander being two Pardawes) which was when they were in priſon. And that they had alwayes put him in comfort, to accompliſh his deſire, vpon the which promiſe hee gaue them their money againe, which otherwiſe they ſhoulde not ſo lightly haue come by, or peraduenture neuer, as hee openly ſaid: and in the ende he called them hereticks, and ſpies, with a thouſand other rayling ſpéeches, which he vttered againſt them. The Engliſhman that was become a Ieſuite, hearing that his companions were gone, and perceiuing that the Ieſuites ſhewed him not ſo great fauour, neither vſed him ſo well, as they did at the firſt, repented himſelfe, and ſéeing he had not as then made any ſolemne promiſe, & being counſelled to leaue the houſe, & told that he could not want a liuing in the towne, as alſo that the Ieſuites could not kéepe him there without he were willing to ſtay, ſo they could not accuſe him of any thing: he told them flatly, that he had no deſire to ſtay within the Cloyſter. and although they vſed all the meanes they could to kéepe him there, yet hee would not ſtay, but hyred a houſe without the Cloyſter, and opened ſhop, where he had good ſtore of worke, and in the end married a Meſticos daughter of the towne, ſo that hee made his account, to ſtay there while he liued. By this Engliſhman I was inſtructed of al the waies, trades, and viages of the countrie, betwéene Aleppo and Ormus, and of all the ordinances and common cuſtomes, which they vſually hold during their Viage ouer land, as alſo of the places and townes wher they paſſed. And ſince thoſe Engliſhmens departures frō 
                        Goa, there neuer arriued any ſtrangers either Engliſh or others by land in the ſayde countries, but onely Italyans which daylye traffique ouer land, and vſe continuall trade going and comming that way.
                     About the ſame time there came into Goa from the Iland of Iapan, certaine Ieſuites and with them, thrée Princes, being the children of certaine Kings of that country, wholly apparelled like Ieſuites, not one of them aboue the age of ſixtéene yeares, being minded (by perſwaſions of the Ieſuites, to trauel into Portingall, and from thence to Rome, to ſée the Pope, therby to procure great profit, priueledges and liberties for the Ieſuites, which was onely their intent: they continued in Goa, till the yeare 1584.
                        1584 and then ſet ſayle for Portingall, and from thence trauelled into Spaine, whereby the King and all the Spaniſh Nobilitie, they were with great honour receiued, and preſented with many gifts, which the Ieſuits kept for themſelues. Out of Spaine they roade to ſée the Pope, where they obtained great priueledges and liberties, as in the deſcription of the Iland of Iapen, I haue in part declared. That done, they trauelled throughout Italy, as to Venice, Mantua, Florence, and all other places and dominions of Italy, wher they were

preſented with many rich preſents, and much honoured, by meanes of the great report the Ieſuites made of them. To conclude they returned againe vnto Madril, where with great honor they took their leaue of the King, with letters of commendation in their behalfes vnto the Viceroye, and all the Captaines and Gouernours of India, and ſo they went to Lisbone, and there tooke ſhipping in Ano. 1586.
                        1
                              •
                           86. and came in the ſhip called Saint Philip (which in her returne to Portingall was taken by Captaine Drake: and after a long and troubleſome Viage, arriued at Moſambique, where the ſhip receiued in her lading, out of an other ſhippe called the Saint Laurence, that had put in there, hauing loſt her Maſtes, being laden in India, and bound for Portingall, where the ſhippe was ſpoyled: and becauſe the time was farre ſpent, to get into India, the ſaid Saint Phillip, tooke in the lading of Saint Laurence, and was taken in her way returning home, by the Engliſhmen, as I ſaide before, and was the firſt ſhip that had beene taken comming out of the Eaſt Indies: which the Portingales tooke for an euill ſigne, becauſe the ſhip bare the Kings owne name. But returning to our matter, the Princes and Ieſuites of Iapan, the next yeare after arriued at Goa with great reioycing and gladneſſe, for that it was verily thought, they had all béene dead: when they came thether, they were all thrée apparelled in cloth of Golde and Siluer, after the Italian manner, which was the apparell that the Italian Princes and Noblemen had giuen them: they came thether very liuely, and the Ieſuits verie proudly, for that by them, their Viage had beene performed. In Goa they ſtayed till the Monſon, or time of the windes came in to ſayle for China, at which time they went from thence and ſo to China, & thence vnto Iapon, where (with great triumph and wondering of all the people) they were receiued and welcomed home, to the furtherance and credite of the Ieſuites, as the Booke declareth, which they haue written and ſet foorth in the Spaniſh tongue concerning their Viage, as well by water & by land, as alſo of the intertainment that they had in euerie place.
                     In the yeare 1584. in the month of Iune, there arriued in Goa many Ambaſſadours, as of Perſia,
                        
                           
                              •
                           4. 
                        Cambaia, and from the Samori
                              •
                           , which is called the Emperour, of the Malabares, and alſo from the King of Cochin: and among other thinges there was a peace concluded by the Samorijn & the Malabares, with the Portingall, vpon condition that the Portingales ſhould haue a Fort, vpon a certaine Hauen lying in the coaſt of Malabare, called Panane, ten miles 
                           •
                        rom Cal
                              •
                           cut, which was preſently be 
                           〈◊〉
                         built, and there with great coſts and changes they rayſed and erected a Fort, but becauſe the ground is all Sandie, they could make no ſure foundation, for it ſunk continually, wherby they found it beſt to leaue it, after they had ſpent in making and keeping thereof at the leaſt foure tunnes of Gold, and reaped no profit thereof, onely thinking thereby if the Samorijn ſhould breake his word and come foorth (as oftentimes hee had done) that by meanes of that Hauen, they would keep him in where he ſhould haue no place to come abroad, to doe them any more miſchiefe. But ſeeing that the Samorijn had many other hauens and places, from whence they might put foorth to worke them miſchiefe, and as much as euer they did, although the Samorijn proteſteth not to know of it, as alſo that he could not let it, ſaying that they were Sea rouers, and were neither ſubiect vnto him, nor any man elſe. They left their Fort, and put no great truſt in the Malabares, as being one of the moſt rebellious and trayterous nations in all the Indies, and make many a traueling Marchant poore, by reaſon the Sea coaſt is made by them ſo dangerous and perilous to ſayle by: for the which cauſe the Portingales armie by Sea is yearely ſent foorth out of Goa, onely to cleare the coaſt of them, yet are there many Malabares in diuers places, which by rouing and ſtealing doe much miſchiefe in the Countrie, both by water and by land, which kéepe themſelues on the Sea ſide, where they haue their creekes to come forth, and to carie their priſes in to hide them in the countrie. They dwell in ſtraw houſes vpon ſtone hilles, and rocks not inhabited, ſo that (to conclude) they can not be ouercome neither doe they care for Samorijns, nor any man elſe. There is a Hauen belonging to theſe ryuers, diſtant from Goa about twelue miles, and is called Sanguiſ
                              •
                           o, where many of thoſe Rouers dwell, and doe ſo much miſchiefe that no man can paſſe by, but they receiue ſome wrong by them, ſo that there came dayly complaints vnto the Viceroye, who as then was named Don Franciſco Maſcharenhas, Earle of Villa Do
                              •
                           ta, who to remedie the ſame ſent vnto the Samorijn, to will him to puniſh them: who returned the meſſenger againe with anſwere, that he had no power ouer them, neither yet could commaund them, as being ſubiect to no man, and gaue the Viceroy free libertie to puniſh them at his pleaſure, promiſing that he ſhould haue his aide therein. Which the Viceroy vnderſtanding, prepared an armie of fifteen Foiſts, ouer whom he made chiefe Captaine a Gentleman,

his nephew called Don Iulianes Maſcharenhas, giuing him expreſſe commandement firſt to goe vnto the Hauen of Sanguiſen, & vtterly to raze the ſame downe to the ground, which to effect, this fléete being at Sea, and comming to the ſaid Hauen, the Admirall of the fléete aſked counſel what was beſt to be done, becauſe Sanguiſen is an Iland lying within the coaſt, the ryuer runing about it, with many Cliffes & ſhallowes in the entrance, ſo that at a low water men can hardly enter in. At the laſt they appointed that the Admirall with halfe the fléete ſhould put in on the one ſide, and the Vice Admirall called Ioan Barriga, with the other halfe ſhould enter on the other ſide, which being concluded among them, the Admiral entred firſt, commaunding the reſt to follow, and rowed euen to the Firme land, thinking they had come after: but the other Captaines that were all young Gentlemen and vnexperienced, began to quarell among themſelues, who ſhould be firſt or laſt, whereby the fléete was ſeperated, & ſome lay in one place, ſome in an other, vpon the droughts and ſhalowes, and could not ſtirre, ſo that they coulde not come to helpe the Admirall▪ neither yet ſtirre backward nor forwards. And when the Vice Admirall ſhould haue put in, on the other ſide the Captaines that were with him would not obay him, ſaying he was no Gentleman, and that they were his betters, vppon theſe and ſuch like p
                           •
                        ints, moſt of the Portingals enterpriſes doe ſtand, and are taken in hand, whereby moſt commonly they receiue the ouerthrow: and by the ſame meanes this fléete was likewiſe ſpoyled, and could not helpe themſelues: which thoſe of Sangueſe
                              •
                           
                         perceiuing, hauing forſaken their houſes and being on the toppes of the hilles, and ſéeing that the Foiſtes lay without, one ſeperated from the other vpon the Cliffes and ſhallowes not being able to put off, and that the Admirall lay alone vppon the Strand, and coulde not ſtirre, they tooke courage, and in great number ſet vppon the Admirals Foiſte, and put them all to the ſword, except ſuch as ſaued themſelues by ſwimming. And although the Admirall might well haue ſaued himſelfe, for that a ſlaue profered to beare him on his back, yet he would not, ſaying, that he had rather die honourably fighting againſt his enemie, then to ſaue his life with diſhonour, ſo that he defended himſelfe moſt valiantly. But when they came ſo many vpon him, that hee coulde no longer reſiſt them▪ they ſlew him, & being de
                           •
                        d cut off his head, in preſence of all ye other Foiſtes: which done they ſtucke the head vpon a Pike, crying in mocking vnto the other Portingales, come and fetch your Captaine againe, to their no litle ſhame and diſhonour, that in the meane time looked one vpon an other like Owles. In the ende they departed from thence with the fléete, euerie man ſeuerally by themſelues, like ſhéep without a ſhepheard, and ſo returned againe into Goa, with that great victorie. The Captaines were preſently committed to priſon, but each man excuſing himſelfe, were all diſcharged againe, great ſorrowe being made for the Admirall, ſpecially by the Viceroy, becauſe hee was his brothers ſonne, and much lamented by euery man, as being a man verie well beloued, for his courteous and gentle behauiour: the other Captaines to the contrarie being much blamed, as they well deſerued. Preſently therevpon they made ready an other armie with other Captaines, whereof Don Ieronimo Maſcharenhas was Admirall, being couſin to the foreſaid Admirall deceaſed, to reuenge his death. This fléete ſet foote on land, and withall their power entred among the houſes, but the Sangueſeans perceiuing them to come, that purpoſely watched for them, fled into the mountaines, leauing their ſtrawe houſes emptie: whether they could not be followed, by reaſon of the wildneſſe of the place, whereupon the Portingales burnt their houſes, and cut down their trées, raſing al things to the ground, with the which diſtruction they departed thence, no man reſiſting them.
                     At the ſame time the rulers of Cochijn by commandement of the Viceroy, began to ſet vp a cuſtome houſe in the towne, which till that time had neuer beene there: for the which cauſe the inhabitants roſe vp, & would haue ſlaine them, that went about it. Whereupon they left it off, till ſuch time as the new Viceroy came out of Portingall, called Don Duarede Meneſes, and with the old Viceroy aſſembled a counſell in Cochijn, where the gouernment was deliuered vnto him: and there he vſed ſuch meanes, that by faire words and intreatie they erected their cuſtome houſe, and got the townes mens good will, but more by compulſion then other wiſe. Which cuſtome is a great profit to the King, by meanes of the traffique therein vſed, becauſe there the Portingall ſhips doe make themſelues ready, with their full lading to ſayle from thence to Portingall.
                     The ſame yeare in the month of September, there arriued in Goa, a Portingal ſhip, called ye 
                        Dom Ieſus de Cara
                              •
                           a▪
                         that broght newes of foure ſhips more, that were on the way, with a new Viceroy called Don Duarte de Meneſes: which cauſed great ioye throughout the Cittie, and al the Bels being rung as the manner is, when the firſt ſhip of euerie fleete arriueth in Goa out of Portingall.

In that ſhip came certaine Canoniers being Netherlanders, that brought me letters out of Holland, which was no ſmall comfort vnto me. Not long after in the ſame month there arriued an other ſhip called Boa Vragen, wherein were many Gentlemen, and Knights of the Croſſe▪ that came to ſerue the King in India: among which was one of my Lord Archbiſhops brethren, called Roque da Fonſeca, the other Lords were Don Iorgie Tubal de Meneſes, chiefe ſtanderd bearer to the King of Portingal, new choſen Captaine of Soffala, and Moſambique, in regard of certain ſeruice that he had in times paſt done for the king in India▪ Iohn Gomes da Silua newe Captaine of Ormus: Don Franceſco Maſcharenhas brother of Don Iulianes Maſcharenhas, that was ſlaine in Sanguiſe
                              •
                           , as I ſaid before, hee was to haue had the Captaines place of Ormus, but by meanes of his death, it was giuen vnto his brother Don Franceſco, for the tearme of three yeares, after he that is in it had ſerued his full time.
                     In Nouember after, the other thrée ſhips arriued in Cochijn, and had ſayled on the out ſide of Saint Laurence Iland, not putting into Moſambique. The ſhip names were Santa Maria Arreliquias, and the Admiral, As Chagas, or the fiue wounds. In her came the Viceroy Don Duarte de Meneſes that had béene Captaine of Tanger in Africa, or Barbarie: and in this ſhip there were 9
                              •
                           0. Souldiers and Gentlemen, that came to ſafeconduct the Viceroy▪ beſides the ſaylers that were aboue a 100. and had beene aboue ſeuen Monthes vpon the way, without taking land before they arriued at Cochin, wher they receiued the Viceroy with great ſolemnitie: and being landed he ſent preſently vnto the olde Viceroye to certifie him of his arriuall, and that hee ſhould commit the gouernment of the countrie vnto the Archbiſhoppe, to gouerne it in his abſence, ſpecially becauſe the Archbiſhop & hee were verie good friends, and old acquaintance, hauing béene priſoners together in Barbarie when Don Sebaſtian King of Portingall was ſlaine: which the old Viceroy preſently did, and went by Sea vnto Cochijn, that he might returne into Portingall with the ſame ſhips, as the Viceroyes vſe to do, for that after their time of Gouernment is out, they may not ſtay any longer in India.
                     
                     The 10. of Nouember Anno 1584. the ſhip called Carania went from Goa to Cochijn, there to take in Pepper, and other wares: and then doe all the Factors goe into Cochijn, to lade their wares, and when the ſhips are laden and readie to depart, they returne againe to Goa, wher they ſtil remaine. In that ſhippe the olde Viceroye with many Gentlemen ſayled to Cochijn.
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           
                         The fift of Februarie Anno 1585. the Viceroy Don Duarte de Meneſes, arriued in Goa, where with great triumph and feaſting hee was receiued.
                     In the month of Aprill the ſame yeare my fellow (and ſeruant to the Archbiſhop) called Barnard Burcherts, borne in Hamborough trauelled from Goa vnto Ormus. and from thence to Baſſora, and from thence by lande through Babilon, Ieruſalem, Damaſco, and Aleppo: from whence he ſent me two leters, by an Armenian, wherein hee certified me of all his Vſage which he performed with ſmall charges, and leſſe danger, in good fellowſhip, and verie merrie in the companie of the Caffyles. From Aleppo he went to Tripoli in Suria, and there hee found certaine ſhips for England, wherein he ſayled to London, and frō thence to Hamborough, which by letters from him written out of Hamborough I vnderſtoode.
                     In the month of Auguſt, there came letters frō Venice by land, that brought newes of the death and murther of the Prince of Orange, a man of honourable memorie, as alſo of the death of Monſ. the Duke of Alenſon, or Amon, with the mariage of the Duke of Sauoy to the King of Spaines daughter.
                     The 20. of October, there arriued in Goa the ſhip called the S. Francis, that came out of Portingal, & with it came alſo ſome Dutch Canoniers, that brought mee letters out of my countrie, with newes of my father Hugh Iooſten of Harlems death. The firſt of Nouember after▪ arriued at Cochiin, the Saint Alberto that came from Portingal. And the firſt of December that yeare there arriued in Cananor vpon the coaſt of Malabar the ſhip called the Saint Laurence, and from thence came to Goa, moſt of her men being ſicke, & aboue 90. of them dead, hauing indured great miſerie, and not once put into land. At that time ther wanted two of the fléete, that came from Lisborne in companie with her, & they were the S. Saluator, and the Admirall S. Iago, whereof they could heare no newes.
                     At the ſame time there came certaine Italians by land into Goa, and brought newes of the death of Pope Gregorie the 13. and of the election of the new Pope called Sixtus. At that time alſo the ſhips that came from Portingall ſayled to Cochijn to take in their lading: which done in the month of Ianuarie Anno 1586 they ſayled for Portingall.
                     In the month of May Anno 1586. letters were brought into Goa, from the Captaine of Soffala and Moſambique vnto the

Viceroy and the Archbiſhop, to certifie them of the caſting away of the Admiral Saint Iago, that ſet out of Portingall the yeare before being Anno 1585. whereof I ſpake before, ſhe was caſt away in this manner. The ſhip being come with a good ſpeedy winde and wether, from the Cape de Bona Speranza, neere to Moſambique, they had paſſed (as they thought) all dangers▪ ſo that they needed not to feare any thing: yet it is good for the Maſter & others to be careful and keepe good watch, and not to ſtand too much vpon their owne cunning & conceites, as theſe did, which was the principal cauſe of their caſting away and ſo they ſayled betweene the Iland Saint Laurence and the Firme land, that runneth by the coaſt to Moſambique, which lyeth on the left hand, & the Iland of S. Laurence on the right hand, betweene the which Iland and the faſt land▪ there are certain ſhallowes called the India, fiftie Spaniſh miles diſtant from the Iland of S. Laurence, and ſeuentie miles from the Firme land, right againſt the countrie of Soffala, vnder 22. degrees, on the South ſide of the Equinoctiall, and from thence to Moſambique is 90. miles. Thoſe ſhallowes are moſt of cleare Corrale, verie ſharpe both of blacke, white, and gréene colour, which is verie dangerous: therefore it is good reaſon they ſhould ſhunne them, and ſurely the Pilots ought to haue great care, ſpecially ſuch as are in the Indian ſhips, for that the whole ſhip and ſafetie thereof lyeth in their hands, and is onely ruled by them, and that by expreſſe commaundement from the King, ſo that no man may contrary them. They being thus betwéene the lands, and by all ye Saylors iudgements hard by the drowthes of India, the Pilot tooke the height of the Sunne, and made his account that they were paſt the ſhallowes▪ commaunding the Maſter to make all the ſayle hee could, and freely to ſayle to Moſambique, without any let or ſtay. And although there were diuers Saylors in the ſhippe, that likewiſe had their Cardes, ſome to learne, other for their pleaſures, as diuers Officers, the Maſter and the chiefe Boatwayne, that ſaid it was better to keepe alooffe, ſpecially by night, and that it would be good to hold good watch, for yt they found they had not as then paſt the ſhallowes: yet the Pilot ſaide the contrary, and would needes ſhew that he only had ſkill, and power to commaunde: (as commonly the Portingales by pride do caſt themſelues away, becauſe they wil follow no mans counſell and be vnder no mans ſubiection ſpecially when they haue authoritie) as it happened to this Pilot that would heare no man ſpeake, nor tak
                           •
                         my counſell but his owne, & therefore commaunded that they ſhould doe as he appointed them, whereupon they hoyſted all their Sayles, & ſayled in that ſort till it was midnight, both with good wind & faire wether but the Moone not ſhining, they fell full vpon the Shallowes, being of cleare white Corall, and ſo ſharpe, that with the force of wynd and water that draue the ſhippe vpon them, it cut the ſhippe in two peeces, as if it had beene ſawed in ſunder: ſo that the keele and two Oarlops lay ſtill vpon the ground, and the vpper part being driuen ſomewhat further, at the laſt ſtuck faſt, the maſte beeing alſo broken, wherewith you might haue heard ſo great a crie, that all the aire did ſound therewith, for that in the ſhippe, (being Admiral) there was at the leaſt fyue hundreth perſons, among the wich were 30. women, with manie Ieſuites and Fryers, ſo that as then there was nothing elſe to bee done, but euery man to ſhrifte, bidding each other farewel, and aſking al men forgiuenes, with weeping and crying, as it may well be thought. The Admirall called Fernando de Mendoſa, the Maiſter, the Pylot, and ten or twelue more, preſentlie entred into the ſmall boate, keeping it with naked Rapiers, that no more ſhould enter, ſaying they would goe ſee, if there were anie drie place in the ſhallowes, whereon they might worke, to make a Boate of the peeces of the broken ſhippe, therein to ſayle vnto the ſhore, and ſo to ſaue their liues, wherewith they put them that were behind in ſome ſmall comfort, but not much. But when they had rowed about, and finding no drie place, they durſt not returne again vnto the Shippe, leaſt the boate would haue beene ouerladen, and ſo drowned, and in the Shippe they looked for no helpe, wherefore in fyne they concluded to row to land, hauing about 12 boxes of Marmalade, with a pipe of wine, and ſome Biſket, which in haſt they had thrown into the boat, which they dealt among them, as néed required, and ſo commending themſelues to God, they rowed forwardes towards the coaſt, and after they had béene 17 daies vpon the ſea, they fell with great hunger, thirſt and labor on the land, where they ſaued themſelues. The reſt that ſtayed in the ſhip, ſéeing the boate came not againe, it may wel be thought what caſe they were in. At the laſt one ſide of the vpper part of the ſhip, betwéene both the vpper Oarlops, where the great boat lay, burſt out, and the Boate being halfe burſt, began to come forth: but becauſe there was ſmall hope to be had, and fewe of them had little will to proue maſteryes, no man layd hand thereon, but euerie man ſate looking one vpon an other. At the laſt an Italian, called Cyprian

Grimoaldo, roſe vp, and taking courage vnto him, ſayd, why are we thus abaſhed? Let vs ſeeke to helpe our ſelues, and ſee if there be any remedie to ſaue our liues: wherewith preſentlie he leapt into the boat, with an inſtrument in his hand, and began to make it cleane, whereat ſome others began to take courage, and to helpe him, as well as they could, with ſuch things as firſt came to their handes: ſo that in the end there leaped at the leaſt foure ſcore and ten perſons into it, and many hung by the handes vppon the boat ſwimming after it: amōg the which were ſome women: but becauſe they would not ſinke the boate, they were forced to cut off the fingers, handes, and armes of ſuch as held thereon, and let them fall into the ſea, and manie they threw ouer bord, being ſuch as had not wherewith to defend themſelues. Which done they ſet forwards, committing themſelues to God, with the greateſt cry and pitifulleſt noyſe that euer was heard, as though heauen and earth had gone together, when they tooke their leaue of ſuch as ſtayed in the Shippe. In which manner hauing rowed certaine dayes, and hauing but ſmall ſtore of victuals, for that they were ſo manie in the boate, that it was readie to ſinke, it being likewiſe verie leake, and not able to hold out: in the ende they agreed among themſelues to chuſe a Captaine, to whome they would obey, and doe as he commanded: and among the reſt they choſe a gentle man, a Meſtico of India, and ſwore to obey him: hee preſentlie commanded to throwe ſome of them ouer bord, ſuch as at that tyme had leaſt meanes or ſtrength to helpe themſelues: among the which there was a Carpenter, that had not long before, holpen to dreſſe the Boate, whoe ſeeing that the Lot fell vpon him, deſired them to giue him a peece of Marmalade and a Cuppe of wine, which when they had done, he willingly ſuffered himſelfe to bee throwne ouer bord into the Sea, and ſo was drowned. There was an other of thoſe, that in Portingale are called New Chriſtians: he béeing allotted to be caſt ouer bord into the Sea, had a younger Brother in the ſame Boate, that ſodainelie roſe vp and deſired the Captaine that hee would pardon and make free his Brother, and let him ſupplie his place, ſaying, My Brother is older and of better knowledge in the world then I, and therefore more fit to liue in the world, and to helpe my ſiſters and friendes in their need: ſo that I had rather die for him, then to liue without him. At which requeſt they let the elder Brother looſe, and threwe the younger at his owne requeſt into the ſea, that ſwōme at the leaſt ſixe howers after the boate. And although they held vp their hands with naked rapiers willing him that hee ſhuld not once come to touch the Boate, yet laying hold thereon, and hauing his hand half cut in two, he would not let go: ſo that in the end they were conſtrained to take him in againe: both the which brethren I knew, and haue bene in company with them: in this miſerie and paine they were 
                           
                              •
                           0 daies at ſea. & in the end got to land where they found the Admiral and thoſe that were in the other boate. Such as ſtayed in the ſhip, ſome tooke bords, deals, and other péeces of wood, & bound them together (which ye Portingals cal bangadas) euery man what they could catch▪ all hoping to ſaue their liues, but of all thoſe there came but two men ſafe to ſhore. They that before had taken land out of the boates, hauing eſcaped that danger, fell into an other, for they had no ſooner ſet foote on ſhore, but they were by the Mores called Caffares, Inhabitants of that coūtry ſpoiled of al their cloaths, ſo yt they left not ſo much vpon their bodies, as would hide their priuie members: whereby they indured great hunger and miſerie wt manie other miſchieffes, which would be ouer tedious to rehearſe. In the end they came vnto a place, where they found a factor of the Captaines of Soffala & Moſambique, & he holp them as he might, and made means to ſend them vnto Moſambique, and from thence they went into India, where I knew manie of them, and haue often ſpoken with them. Of thoſe that were come ſafe to ſhore, ſome of thē died before they got to Moſambique, ſo that in all, they were about 60 perſons that ſaued themſelues: all the reſt were drowned & ſmothered in the ſhip, & there was neuer other newes of ye ſhip then as you haue heard. Hereby you may conſider the pride of this Pilot, who becauſe he would be coūſelled by no man, caſt away that ſhip with ſo many men: wherefore a Pilot ought not to haue ſo great authority. that in time of need he ſhould reiect and not heare the counſell of ſuch as are moſt ſkilfull. The Pilote, when he came into Portingale, was committed to priſon, but by giftes and preſents he was let looſe, and an other ſhippe, beeing the beſt of the Fleet, that went for India, in Anno 1588. committed vnto him, not without great curſes and euill wordes of the Mothers, Siſters, wiues and Chidren of thoſe that periſhed in the ſhip, which all cryed vengeance on him: and comming with thy ſhip wherein he then was placed, called the S. Thomas, he had almoſt laid her on y• ſame place▪ where the other was caſt away: hut day comming

on, they romde themſelues off, and ſo eſcaped: yet in their voiage homeward to Portingal, the ſame ſhippe was caſt away by the Cape de bona Speranza, with the Pilot and all her men, whereby much ſpeech aroſe, ſaying it was a iuſt iudgement of God againſt him for making ſo many widdowes and fatherles children, whereof I will ſpeake in another place. This I thought good to ſet downe at large, becauſe men might ſee that many a ſhippe is caſt away by the headineſſe of the gouernours, and vnſkilfulneſſe of the pilotes: wherfore it were good to examine the perſons before a ſhippe be committed vnto them, ſpecially a ſhippe of ſuch a charge, and wherein conſiſteth the welfare or vndoing of ſo many men, together with their liues, and impoueriſhing of ſo many a poore wife and child: this loſſe happened in the month of Auguſt, An. 1
                           ••
                        5.
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           
                        In May An. 1586. two ſhips laden with 
                           •
                        are ſet ſaile out of the hauen of Chaul, in Ind
                              •
                           a, that belonged vnto certaine Portingalles inhabitantes of Chaul, the owners being in them: thoſe ſhippes ſhould haue ſayled to the ſtraites of Mecca, or the 
                           •
                        dde ſea, where the ſaid marchantes vſed to traficque: but they were taken on the Sea by two Turkiſh Galleyes, that had beene made in the innermoſt partes of the ſtraites of M
                              •
                           a, by Cairo, on the corner of the redde ſea, in a towne called Sues: the ſayde Galleyes began to doe great miſchiefe, & put all the Indian marchants in great feare.
                     The ſame month there was a great army, prepared in Goa, both of Fuſtes and gallies, ſuch as in many yeares had not béene ſéene, and was appointed to ſaile to the red ſea, to driue the Turkiſh Galleyes away, or els to fight with them if they could: they were alſo commanded by the Viceroy to winter their ſhippes in Ormus, and then to enter into the ſtraights of Perſia, lying behind Ormus, and to offer their ſeruice to Xatamas K. of Per
                           
                              •
                           , againſt the Turke their common enemy, thereby to trouble him on all ſides, if they had brought their purpoſe to effect: but it fel out otherwiſe, as hereafter you ſhall heare: for Chiefe of this army, there was appointed a Gentleman, named Rioy Gonſalues da Can
                              •
                           , who once had béene Captaine of Ormus, being a very fatte and groſſe man, which was one of the chiefe occaſions of their euill fortune, and with him went the principalleſt ſoldiers and gentlemen of all India, thinking to winne great honor thereby: this army being ready, & minding to ſayle to the redde ſea, they found many calmes vpon the way ſo that they indured much miſerie, and begunne to die like dogges, as well for want of drinke as other neceſſaries: for they had not made their account to ſtay ſo long vpon the way, which is alwaies their excuſe if any thing falleth out contrary to their mindes: this was their good beginning, and as it is thought a preparatiue to further miſchiefe: for comming to the redde ſea, at the mouth thereof they met the Turkiſh Gallies, where they had a long fight, but in ye end the Portingals had the ouerthrow, & eſcaped as well as they might, with great diſhonour, and no little loſſe: and the Turkes being victorious, ſayled to the coaſt of Abex or Melinde, where they tooke certaine townes, as Pate and Braua, that as then were in league with the Portingalles, there to ſtrengthen themſelues, and thereby to reape a greater benefit, by indamaging the Portingall, and lying vnder their noſes. The Portingall armie hauing ſpedde in this manner, went vnto Ormus, there to winter themſelues, and in the meane time to repaire their armie, and to heale their ſicke ſoldiers, whereof they had many: and ſo when time ſerued to fulfill the Viceroyes commandement in helping Xatamas, thinking by that meanes to recouer their loſſes: being ariued in Ormus, and hauing repaired their Fuſtes, & the time comming on, the General by reaſon of his fatnes and corpulent bodie ſtayed in Ormus, appointing Lieuetenant in his place, one called Pedro Homen Pereira, (who although he was but a meane gentleman, yet was hee a very good ſoldier, and of great experience) commanding them to obey him in all things, as if he were there in perſon himſelfe: giuing them in charge, as they ſailed along the coaſt, to land vpon the coaſt of Arabia, there to puniſh certain pirates, that held in a place called Nicola, and ſpoiled ſuch as paſſed to and fro vpon the ſeas, and did great hurt to the ſhips and marchants of Baſſora, that traffiqued in Ormus, whereby the trafique to the ſaide towne of Ormus was much hindered, to the great loſſe and vndoing of many a marchant. With this commiſſion they ſet forwarde with their Lieuetenant, and being come to Nicola, where they ran their fuſtes on ſhore, ſo that they lay halfe dry vpon the ſand: euery man in generall leaped on land, without any order of battaile, as in all their actions they vſe to doe: which the Lieuetenant perceiuing, would haue vſed his authoritie, and haue placed them in order, as in warlike affaires is requiſite to be done: but they to the contrarie would not obay him, ſaying hee was but a Bore, & that they were better Gentlemen & ſoldiers then he: and with theſe and ſuch like preſumptuous ſpéeches, they went on their courſe, ſcattering here & there in all diſorders

like ſhéepe without a ſhepheard, thinking all the world not ſufficient to containe them, and euery Portingall to bee a Hercules and ſo ſtrong, that they could beare the whole world vpon their ſholders, which the Arabians (being within the land and moſt on horſebacke) perceyuing and ſéeing their great diſorder, & knowing moſt of their Fuſtes to lie drie vpon the ſtrand, and that without great payne, and much labour they coulde not haſtily ſet them on floate, preſently compaſſed them about, and being ringed in manner of a halfe Moone, they fell vpon them, and in that ſorte draue them away, killing them as they liſt, till they came vnto their Fuſtes: and becauſe they could not preſently get their Fuſtes into the water, through fear and ſhame they were complled to fight, where likewiſe many of them were ſlaine, and not aboue fiftie of them eſcaped that had ſet foote on land: and ſo being gotten into their Fuſtes, they rowed away. In this ouerthrow there were ſlayne aboue 800. Portingalles, of the oldeſt & beſt ſoldiers in all India, and among them was a Trumpetter, being a Netherlander, who being in the thickeſt of the fight, not farre from the Portingalles enſigne, and ſéeing the Enſigne-bearer throw downe his Enſigne, the eaſier to eſcape and ſaue his life, and that one of the Arabians had taken it vp, caſting his Trumpet at his backe, he ranne in great furie, and with his rapier killed the Arabian that held it, and brought it againe among the Portingals, ſaying it was a great ſhame for them to ſuffer it ſo to bee carryed away, and in that manner he held it at the leaſt a whole hower, and ſpoyled many of the Arabians that ſought to take it from him, in ſuch manner, that he ſtood compaſſed about with deade men: and although hee might haue ſaued himſelfe, if hee woulde haue left the Enſigne, yet he would not doe it, till in the ende there came ſo many vpon him, that they killed him, where he yeéelded vp the Ghoſt, with the enſigne in his armes, and ſo ended his dayes with honour: which the Portingalles themſelues did confeſſe, and often acknowledged it, commending his valour, which I thought good to ſet downe in this place for a perpetuall memorie of his valiant mind. The Lieuetenant perceyuing their diſorder, and how it would fall out, wiſely ſaued himſelfe, and got into the Fuſtes, where hee behelde the ouerthrow, and in the ende with the emptie veſſels he turned againe to Ormus, without doing any thing elſe, to the great griefe and ſhame of all the Indian ſoldiers, being the greateſt ouerthrow that euer the Portingals had in thoſe countries, or wherein they loſt ſo many Portingalles together: among the which was the Archbiſhoppes brother
                           •
                        
                        ▪ and many other young and luſtie G
                           •
                        tlemen, of the principalleſt in all Por
                              •
                           ngall.
                     
                     At the ſame time the Queene of O
                              •
                           mus came to Goa, being of Mahomet religion, as all her aunceſters had beene before her, and as then were contributarie to the Portingall. She cauſed her ſelfe to be chriſtened, and was with great ſolemnitie brought into the Towne, where the Viceroy was her Godfather, and named her Donna Phillippa, after the King of Spaines name, being a faire white woman, very tall and comely, and with her likewiſe a brother of hers, being verie young▪ was alſo chriſtened, and then with one Mathias Dalburquer
                              •
                           k that had beene Captain of Ormus, ſhe ſailed to Portingall, to preſent her ſelfe to the king. She had married with a Portingall Gentleman called Anton▪ Dazeuedo Con
                              •
                           nho, to whome the king in regarde of his mariage gaue the Captaine ſhippe of Ormus, which is worth aboue two hundred thouſande duckets, as I ſaid before. This Gentleman after hee had beene maried to the Queene about halfe a yeare, liuing very friendly and louingly with her, hee cauſed a ſhippe to bee made, therewith to ſaile to Ormus, there to take order for the rentes and reuenewes belonging to the Queene his wife: but his departure was ſo grieuous vnto her, that ſhe deſired him to take her with him, ſaying, that without him ſhe could not liue▪ but becauſe he thought it not as then conuenient, hee deſired her to be content, promiſing to returne againe with all the ſpeede he might. Wherevppon hee went to Barde
                              •
                           , which is the vttermoſt parte of the Riuer entering into Goa, about thrée myles off: and while hee continued there, ſtaying for winde and weather. The Quéene (as it is ſaide) tooke ſo great gréefe for his departure, that ſhe dyed, the ſame day that her huſbande ſet ſaile and put to ſea, to the great admiration of all the Countrey, and no leſſe ſorrowe, becauſe ſhee was the firſt Quéene in thoſe countries that had béene chriſtened, forſaking her kingdome and high eſtate, rather to die a Chriſtian, and married with a meane Gentleman, then to liue like a Quéene vnder the lawe of Mahomet, and ſo was buried with great honor according to her eſtate.
                     In the month of Auguſt 1586 there ariued a man of Moſambique in Goa yt came from Portingal in ye ſhip yt ſhold ſaile to Malacca,
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           
                         that brought newes vnto the Viceroy, how the ſhip called the Boa Viagen, that in the

yeare before ſailed from India towards Portingall, was caſt away by the cape de Bona Speranza, where it burſt in peeces beeing ouerladen: for they do cōmonly ouerlade moſt of their ſhips,
                           •
                         & affirmed that the ſhip had at the leaſt 
                           •
                         hādfull high of water within it before it departed frō 
                        Cochiin, & althogh before their ſhips ſet ſayle, they put the Maſter and other Officers to their othes, therby to make them confeſſe if the ſhip be ſtrong and ſufficient to performe the voyage, or to let them know the faults, (which vpō their ſaid oathes is certefied, by a proteſtation made, wherunto the Officers ſet their handes:) yet though the ſhip haue neuer ſo many faultes, they will neuer confeſſe them, becauſe they will not looſe their places, and profit of the Voyage: yea, although they doe aſſuredly knowe the ſhip is not able to continue the Voyage: for that couetouſnes ouerthrowing wiſedome & pollicie, maketh them reiect all feare: but when they fall into the danger, then they can ſpeake faire, and promiſe many thinges. In that ſort moſt of the ſhips depart frō 
                        Cochiin ſo that if any of them come ſafelie into Portingall, it is only by the will of God: for otherwiſe it were impoſſible to eſcape, becauſe they ouer lade them, and are ſo badly prouided otherwiſe, with little order among their men: ſo that not one ſhip commeth ouer, but can ſhew of their great dangers by ouerlading, want of neceſſaries and reparations of the ſhip, together with vnſkilfull Saylers, yet for all theſe dayly & continuall dangers, there is no amendment, but they daily grow worſe and worſe.
                     In this ſhip called the Boa Viagen were many Gentlemen, of the beſt and principalleſt that had ſerued a long time in India, trauelling as then vnto Portingall with their certificates, to get ſome reward for their ſeruice, as the manner is: and becauſe it was one of the beſt and greateſt ſhips of that fléet, the Ambaſſador of Xatamas King of Perſia went therein to procure a League with the King of Spaine, & to ioyne with him againſt the Turke their common enemie: but he being drowned, the Perſian would ſend no more Ambaſſadors, and yet hee is ſtill in League and good friendſhippe with the Portingalles. The worſt ſhip that ſayleth from Cochin to Portingall, is worth at the leaſt a million of gold, & this was one of the beſt ſhips, wherby may be conſidered, what great loſſe commeth by the caſting away of one of their ſhips, beſides the men: for there paſſeth neuer a yere, but one or two of them are caſt away eyther in going or comming.
                     In the month of September the ſame yere 1586. there ariued foure ſhips out of Portingall in Goa, called the Saint Thomas, S. Saluador, the Arrelickias, and Bon-Ieſus de Carania, but of their Admirall S. Phillip they had no newes, ſince their departure from Lisbone.
                     
                     On the laſt of Nouember, the ſame ſhips departed from Goa: ſome along the coaſt of Malabar to take in their lading of Pepper, and from thence to Cochiin, where commonly one or two of them are laden with pepper, but other wares are only laden from Cochiin. At the ſame time there was a ſhip called the Aſcention that lay in Goa, & had made certaine voiages to China and Iapan: which ſhip was brought by the Factors for pepper, becauſe the ſhip Carama by reaſon of her oldnes, was broken in Cochiin, and ſet vpon ye ſtockes to be new made, but not finiſhed by reaſon of certaine controuerſie that fell among the Factors.
                     In this ſhippe called Noſſa Senhora da Sancao, my Lord the Archbiſhop ſayled vnto Portingall, by reaſon of certaine quarels newly begun betweene the Viceroy and other Councellors, and the Archbiſhop. And although by the Viceroy, all the Councell, and Gentlemen, and communaltie of Goa, he was intreated not to leaue them, yet hee would not be diſſwaded from his purpoſe, but went to ride vnto the King, of whom he was well beloued, which the Viceroy and others liked not very well of, fearing hee ſhould giue ſome information to the king, which would be ſmally to their profit, and in that minde he vndertooke his Voyage, diſcharging all his ſeruants, ſauing ſome that he kept about him for his ſeruice, leauing no man in his houſe, but only his Steward, and my ſelfe to receiue his rents and keepe his houſe, and becauſe as then the golden Iubileo or pardon of Roome was newly brought into the Indies, (called La Santa Cruſada) being granted to the end, that with the mony that ſhould bee gathered by vertue therof, the Captiues and Priſoners in Africa or Barbary, that had beene taken Priſoners in the battaile, wherein Don Sebaſtian king of Portingall was ſlaine, ſhuld be redéemed, which was ſent vnto the Archbiſhop, being apointed the Romane Apoſtolicke Commiſſarie, &c. for the ſame: made me the general Clarke throughout al India, to kéepe account of the ſaid receits, & gaue me one of the keyes of the cheſt, wherin the monie lay, with a good ſtipend, and other profits belonging to the ſame, during the time of his abſence: thereby the rather to binde m
                           •
                         that I ſhould remaine in his houſe, and keep the ſame till his returne againe, as I had promiſed

vnto him: And ſo he ſet ſayle from Coch
                              •
                           n in the month of Ianuary, Anno 1587.1587. his Pilot being the ſame man that caſt the Saint Iago away vpon the flats of India, as it is ſaid before.
                     The ſhips at that time being ready to ſet ſayle, one ſome foure or fiue dayes after the other, as they were laden, becauſe they obſerue a certaine order therein, the better to regiſter al their wares and merchandiſes, it ſo fel out, yt all the other ſhips being diſpatched, the Arrelikias only was the laſt that laded: which hauing taken in her whole lading, the Officers and ſome of the Factors being bribed, ſuffered ſome of the ballaſt to be taken out, & in place thereof laded Cinamon, becauſe at that time Cinamon was riſen in Portingall, and at a very high price, and therefore the officers and Factors by giftes aforeſaid ſuffered it to be laden in that maner, as hauing no other place to lade it in. You muſt vnderſtād that when the time commeth to ſet 
                           •
                        aile, the ſhips lying at anker about a mile within the ſea, where they receiued their lading, (the reaſon why they lie ſo farre, is becauſe it is ſummer time, and there the ſea is as calme and ſtill, as if it were within the land.) A trumpet is ſounded throughout all the towne of Cochiin to call them all on bord, wherewith all that will ſaile, doe preſently come downe accompanied with their friendes, which in ſmal boates called Tones and Pallenges bring them abord, with great ſtore of bread and ſuch like victuals: ſo that you ſhall manie times ſée the ſhippes hang round about with boats, at the leaſt three or foure hundred, with ſuch a noiſe and reioycing, as it is wonderfull to heare, and ſomtimes the ſhips are ſo laden, that the Cables touch the water, and beſides that the hatches couered with diuers cheſtes, ſeauen or eight one aboue another, hauing no other place to ſet them in, for ye vnder the hatches they are ſo ſtuffed, that there is not an emptie roome: ſo that when they ſet ſaile▪ they know not where to begin, nor how to rule the ſhip, neyther can they well for a month after tell how to place all things in order, and ſo was it with this ſhip, which being thus prepared, the Viador da Fazenda, or the Kinges officers came abord, aſking them if the ſhippe were readie to ſet ſayle and depart, they ſay it was ready, and he hauing made a proteſtation or certificate thereof, the officers ſet to their hands, as ſome ſay, but others denie it, & preſently he commanded thē to wind vp their cables, and hoyſe anker, as the manner is, and ſo let their ſailes fall, with a great crie of Boa Voyage, or God ſend them good fortune, and a merry Voyage: all the boates being ſtill abord, which commonly doe hang at her at the leaſt a mile, or halfe a mile within the ſea, becauſe it is calme.
                     This ſhip called the Arrelikia beginning in this manner to ſayle, among other roma
                           •
                         that ſtood vpon the hatches, there were certaine hennes cages, from whence certaine hennes flew out, whereupon euery man claimed them for his owne: and vpon a Sunday, (as in ſuch caſes it is commonly ſeene) they ranne all on a heape vpon the one ſide: wherby the ſhip being light of Balaſt, and laden with many cheſtes aboue the hatches (as I ſaid before) it ſwaied ſo much on the one ſide, that by little and little it ſuncke cleane vnder the water: ſo that not aboue a handfull of the maſte could be ſeene aboue the water. The people leaped into the 
                           •
                        oats, that as yet were hanging about the ſhip, which was good Fortune for them, otherwiſe there had not one eſcaped aliue: but by that meanes they were all ſaued, the ſlaues onely excepted that were bound with iron chaines and could not ſtirre and ſo they were drowned. God knoweth what riches was loſt in her for nothing was ſaued but ſome few cheſtes that ſtood aboue the hatches, which the Duckers got vp, and yet the goods in them was in a manner ſpoyled, and the reſt vtterly loſt: by this it may be conſidered what manner the Portingales vſe in lading of their ſhips, and that it is to bee thought, that as many ſhips as are caſt away, whereof there hath bin heard no newes or tydinges, are onely loſt by meanes of euill order and gouernment. This being ſo vnluckily fallen out, the Marchants vſed all the ſpeed and meanes they could▪ by witneſſes to make proteſtation againſt the Officers and the Factors of the pepper, that they might be puniſhed for taking out the Ballaſt, but they kept themſelues out of the way, and by prolonging of time it was forgotte
                           •
                         
                        
                           •
                        nd nothing done therein: ſo that the Marchants that had receiued all the loſſe▪ were glad to put it vp.
                     In the ſame moneth came newes out of Malacca, that it was in great danger & that many died there for hunger, as alſo that the ſhip that went from Portingall thether, was forced to ſtay there, becauſe they had no victuals to diſpatch it away: and likewiſe that the ſtraight of Sumaria was kept by the enemy, ſo that there could no ſhippes paſſe that way to China or Iapan. This was done by the Kinges of Sumaria, that is to ſay, the kinges of Achem and 
                           
                              •
                           or lying by M
                              •
                           lacca vpon the Firme land, which rebelled againſt the Portingales in Malacca vppon a certaine iniurie done vnto them by the Captaine there. Theſe newes put Goa in a great alteration, for that their principall traffique is to China, Malacca, and Iapan, and the

Il
                           •
                        ndes bordering on the ſame, which by me
                           •
                        nes of thoſe warres was wholly hinde
                        
                           •
                         whereupon great numbers of 
                           •
                        uſtes, gallies, and ſhips were prepared in Goa, to relieue Malacca, and all the townes men taſked euery one at a certaine ſumme of mony, beſides the money that was brought from other places, and men taken vp to ſerue in the ſhips: for by means of their late ouerthrowes and loſſe of ſhips, India was at that time very weake of men.
                     In the month of May, Anno 1587. there came a ſhip or galley of Moſambique vnto Goa, bringing newes that the ſhip S. Phillip had bin there, and taken in the lading of pepper that was in the ſhip called S. Lauren
                           
                              •
                           , that had ariued there, in her Voyage towards Portingall, and was all open aboue the hatches and without maſtes, moſt of her goods being throwne into the ſea: whereby miraculouſlie they ſaued their liues▪ and by fortune put into Moſambique. In this ſhip called S. Phil
                              •
                           ip, were the young Princes, the kings children of Iapan, as is before declared. From Moſambique came the ſame Galley that brought the newes to Goa, the ſame Galley likewiſe brought newes of the Army that was ſent out of Goa in December, 1586. being the yeare before, vnto the coaſt of Melinde or Abex, to reuenge the iniurie which they had receiued in the Fléete: whereof Ruy G
                              •
                           nſalues da Camara was Captaine, as I ſaide before, as alſo to puniſh the townes that at the ſame time had vnited themſelues with the Turke, and broken league with the Portingales. Of this armie was Generall, a gentleman called Martin 
                              〈◊〉
                            de Mello: wherewith comming vpon the coaſt of Abex, or Melinde, which lyeth betweene Moſambique and the red ſea, they went on land, & becauſe the Turks whome they ſought for, were gone home through the read ſea, they determined to puniſh and plague the townes that had fauored the Turkes, and broken their aliance with them, and to the ſame end entred into the countrie as farre as the townes of Pate and B
                              •
                           , that little thought of them, and eaſily ouerr
                           •
                        n them, becauſe moſt part of the people fled to ſaue themſelues, & left the townes: whereby the Portingales did what pleaſed them, burning the townes, and razing them to the ground, with others that lay about them and among thoſe that fled to ſaue thē
                        ſelues, they tooke the King of Pate, whoſe head in great furie they cauſed to bee ſtriken off and brought it vnto Goa, where for certaine daies it ſtood vpon a maſte in the middle of the towne for an e
                           •
                        ample to all others, as alſo in ſigne of victorie: wherewith the Portingales began to be ſomewhat incouraged. and ſo they went from thence to Ormus, and from Ormus they were to goe help the King of Perſia, as the Viceroy had commanded them: but being at Ormus, many of their men fell ſick and died, among the which their Generall Martin Alfonſo da Metto was one, whereupon they returned againe vnto Goa, without doing any other thing.
                     The ſame armie ſayling to the coaſt of Abex, and falling on the Iſland of Zamzibar, which lieth vnder ſixe degrees on the ſouth ſide, about 70. miles frō 
                        Pate, towards Moſambique, about 18. miles from the Firme land, there they found the Saint Saluador that came from Cochiin, ſayling towards Portingall being all open, hauing throwne all her goods ouerboard, ſauing only ſome pepper which they could not come at, and were in great danger, holding themſelues by force of pumping aboue the water, & vppon the point to leaue, being all wearie and readie to ſink, which they certainly had done, if by great good fortune they had not met with the armie, which they little thought to finde in thoſe parts. The Armie tooke the ſhippe with them to Ormus, where the reſt of the pepper and goods remaining in her, were vnladen, and the ſhip broken in péeces, and of the bordes they made a leſſer ſhippe, wherein the men that were in the great ſhip with the reſt of the goods that were ſaued in her, ſailed to Portingall, & after a long and weariſome voiage, ariued there in ſafetie.
                     The 17. of September, 1587.158
                              •
                           . a Galliot of Moſambique arriued at Goa, bringing newes of the ariual of foure ſhips in Moſambiqu
                              •
                           
                         that came out of Portingall: Their names were S. Antony, S. Franciſco, our Lady of Nazareth
                        ▪ and S. Alberto: but of the S. Mary, that came in company wc them from Portingall, they had no newes, but afterwards they heard that ſhee put backe againe to Portingal, by reaſō of ſome defaults in her, and alſo of the foule weather. Eight dayes after the ſaid 4. ſhips ariued in Goa, where with great ioy they were receiued.
                     At the ſame time the Fort called Columbo, which the Portingales hold in the Iſland of Seylon, was beſieged by the king of Seylon, called Ram, and in great danger to bee loſt: which to deliuer, there was an armie of fuſtes and gallies ſent from Goa: whereof was Generall Barnaldin de Carualho.
                     
                     And at the ſame time departed another armie of many ſhips, fuſtes, and gallies, with great numbers of ſouldiers, munition, victuals, and other warlike prouiſions, therewith to deliuer Malacca, which as then was beſieged and in great miſery, as I ſaide before:

thereof was generall Don Paulo de Lyma Pereira, a valiant Gentleman, and an olde ſouldier, who not long before had bin Captaine of Chaul, and being very fortunate in all his enterpriſes, was therefore choſen to bée Generall of that fléet. The laſt of Nouember, the foure ſhips afore ſaid departed from Goa to lade at Cochiin, and from thence to ſaile for Portingale.
                     In December after, while the Fort of Columbo in the Iſland of Seylon, was ſtill beſieged, the towne of Goa made out another great fléete of ſhips and gallies, for the which they tooke vp many men within the Citie, and compelled them to goe in the ſhips becauſe they wanted men, with a great contribution of mony rayſed vpō the Marchants and othrr inhabitants to furniſh the ſame: of the which armie was appointed general, one Manuel de Souſa Courinho, a braue gentle man and ſouldier, who in times paſt had bin Captaine of the ſaid Fort of Columbo, and had withſtood another beſieging: whereuppon the king put him in great credit, and aduanced him much, and after the Viceroyes death, he was Viceroy of India, as in time & place we ſhall declare. He with his armie ariued in the Iſle of Seylon, where hee ioyned with the other armie that went before, and placed themſelues in order to giue battaile to Ra
                              •
                           , who perceiuing the great number of his enemies, brake vp his ſiege and forſooke the Fort, to the great reioycing of the Portingales, and hauing ſtrengthned the Forte with men and victuals, they returned againe to Goa, where in the month of March, Anno 1
                           •
                        88.
                           
                              •
                           587. they were receiued with great ioy.
                     In the month of Aprill the ſame yeare, the armie of Don Paulo de Lyma, that went to Malacca, ariued in Goa with victorie, hauing fired Malacca, and opened the paſſage againe to China and other places, the maner whereof was this: In their way as they paſſed the ſtraight of Malacca, they met with a ſhip belonging to the king of Achein in Samatra, who was a deadly enemie to the Portingales, and the principal cauſe of the beſieging of Malacca. In the ſame ſhip was the Daughter of the ſaid king of Achein, which he ſent to be maried to the king of 
                           
                              •
                           oor, therby to make a new aliance with him againſt the Portingales, and for a preſent ſent him a goodly péece of Ordinance, whereof the like was not to be found in all India, and therefore it was afterwards ſent into Portingale as a preſent to the king of Spaine in a ſhip of Malacca, which after was caſt away in the Iſland of 
                           
                              •
                           e
                              •
                           cera, one of the Flemmiſh Ilandes. where the ſame peece with much labor was weighed vp, and laid within the fortreſſe of the ſame Iſle, becauſe it is ſo heauie that it can hardly be caried into Portingale. But to the matter, they tooke the ſhip with the kings daughter, and made it al good prize, and by it they were aduertiſed what had paſſed betweene the kings of Achein, and Ioor: ſo that preſently they ſent certaine ſouldiers on land, and marching in order of battaile, they ſet vppon the towne of Ioor, that was ſconſed and compaſſed about with woodden ſtakes, moſt of the houſes being of ſtraw: which whē the people of the towne perceiued, and ſaw the great number of men and alſo their reſolution, they were in great feare, and as many as could, fledde and ſaued themſelues in the countrie: to conclude the Portingales entred the towne▪ and ſet it on fire, vtterly ſpoyling and deſtroying it, razing it euē with the ground, & ſlaying al they foūd, and taking ſome priſoners, which they led away Captiues, and found within the towne at the leaſt 2500, braſſe péeces great & ſmall, which were al brought into India. You muſt vnderſtand that ſome of them were no greater than Muſkets▪ ſome greater, and ſome very great, being very cunningly wrought with figures and flowers, which the Italians and Portingales that haue denyed their faith, and become Mahometiſtes, haue taught them: whereof there are many in India, and are thoſe indéede that doe moſt hurt, when they haue done any murther or other villanie fearing to be puniſhed for the ſame, to ſaue their liues they runne ouer by the firme land among the Heathens and Mores, and there they haue great ſtipendes and wages of the Indian kinges and Captaines of the land. Seauen or eight yeares before my comming into India, there were in Goa certain Trū
                        peters and Cannonyers being Dutchmen, & Netherlanders, and becauſe they were reiected and ſcorned by the Portingales in India, (as they ſcorn all other nations in the world) as alſo for that they could get no pay, & when they aſked it, they were preſently abuſed and caſt into the gallies, and there compelled to ſerue. In the end they tooke counſell together, and ſeeing they could not get out of the countrie, they ſecretly got into the firme land of Balagate and went vnto Hidalcan, where they were gladly receiued, and very well entertained with great payes liuing like Lords: & there being in diſpaire denide their faithes, although it is thought by ſome that they remaine ſtill in their owne religion, but it is moſt ſure that they are maried in thoſe countries with Heathen women, and were liuing when I came from thence: by this meanes are the Portingales the cauſes of their owne miſchiefes, onely through their pride, & hardines, and make rods to ſcourge thēſelues withall, wc I haue onely ſhewed in reſpect of thoſe

caſt péeces, & other martiall weapons, which the Indians haue learned of the Portingals, and Chriſtians, whereof in times paſt they had no vnderſtanding: and although they had placed all thoſe péeces in very good order, yet it ſhould ſeeme they knew not howe to ſhoote them off, or to vſe them as they ſhould, as it appeared hereby, for that they preſently forſooke them, and left them for the Portingals. With this victory the Portingals were very proude, and with great glorie entred into Malacca, wherein they were receyued with great triumph, as it may well bee thought, being by them deliuered from great miſerie, wherein they had long continued. Which ye king of Achein hearing, and that his daughter was taken priſoner, he ſent his ambaſſadour to Don Panto de Lyma with great preſentes, deſiring to make peace with him, which was preſently granted, and all the waies to Malacca were opened, and al kinds of marchandiſes and victuailes brought thether, which before had béene kept from them, whereat was much reioycing. This done, & order being taken for all things in Malacca, they returned againe to Goa, where they ariued in ſafetie (as I ſaid before) in the month of April, and there were receyued with great triumph, the people ſinging Te Deum laudamus, many of the ſoldiers bringing good priſes with them.
                     In the month of May following, vppon the 1
                              •
                           . of the ſame month the Viceroy Don Duarte de Meneſes died in Goa, hauing beene ſicke but foure daies of a burning feauer, which is the common ſicknes of India, and is very daungerous but it is thought it was for greefe, becauſe hee had receyued letters from the Captaine of Ormus, wherein hee was aduertiſed, that they had receyued news ouer land from Venice, that the Archbiſhop was ſafely ariued at Lisbone, and wel receiued by the king: and becauſe they were not friends at his departure (as I ſaid before) they ſaid he was ſo much grieued therat, that fearing to fall into the diſpleaſure of the king, by information from the Biſhoppe, hee dyed of griefe: but that was contrarie, as hereafter by the ſhippes we vnderſtood, for that the Biſhop dyed in the ſhippe eight dayes before it ariued in Portingal, and ſo they kept companie together: for they liued not long one after the other, whereby their quarrell was ended with their liues.
                     The Viceroyes funerals were with great ſolemnity obſerued in this manner. The place appointed for the Viceroyes buriall, is a Cloiſter called Reys Magos, or the three kings of Cullen, being of the order of Saint Francis, which ſtandeth in ye land of Bardes, at the mouth of the Riuer of Goa, and thether his bodie was conueyed, being ſet in the galley Royall, all hanged ouer with blacke pennons, and couered with blacke cloth, being accompanied with all the nobilitie and gentlemen of the countrey. And approching neere the cloiſter of Reys Magos, being thrée miles from Goa downe the Riuer towards the ſea, the Friers came out to receyue him, and brought his bodie into the church, where they placed it vpon a herſe, and ſo with great ſolemnity ſung Maſſe: which done there were certaine letters brought forth, called Vias, which are alwaies ſealed, and kept by the Ieſuites by the kinges appointment, and are neuer opened but in ye abſence, or at the death of the Viceroy. Theſe Vias are yearely ſent by the King, and are marked with figures, 1.2.3.4.5. and ſo forth, and when there wanteth a Viceroy, then the firſt number or Via is opened, wherein is written that in the abſence or after the death of the Viceroy ſuch a man ſhalbe Viceroy, and if the man that is named in the firſt Via, bee not there, then they open the ſecond Via, & looke whoſe name is therein: being in place, he is preſently receyued and obeyed as Gouernour, and if he be likewiſe abſent, they open the reſt orderly as they are numbred, vntill the Gouernour bee found, which being knowne, they neede open no more. The reſt of the Vias that are remayning are preſently ſhut vp, & kept in the cloyſter by the Ieſuites, but before the Vias are opened there is no man that knoweth who it ſhal be, or whoſe name is written therein. Theſe Vias are with great ſolemnitie opened by the Ieſuites, and read in open audience before all the nobles, Captaines, Gouernors, and others that are preſent: and if the man that is named in the Vias bee in any place of India, or the Eaſt countries, as Soffala, Moſambique, Ormus, Malacca, or any other place of thoſe countries, as ſometimes it happeneth, he is preſently ſent for, and muſt leaue all other offices to receyue that place vntill the king endeth another out of Portingal: but if the mā named in ye 
                        Vias be in Portingal, China or Iapan
                        ▪ or at the cape de bona Speranza, then they open other Vias as I ſaid before. The Maſſe being finiſhed, the Ieſuites came with the kings packets of Vias, which are ſealed with the Kings owne ſignet, and are alwaies opened before the other Viceroyes body is laide in the earth, and there they opened the firſt Via, and with great deuotion ſtaying to know who it ſhould be, at the laſt was named for Viceroy one Mathias Dalbu
                              •
                           kerke, that had beene Captaine of Ormu
                              •
                           , and the yeare before was gone in companie

of the Archbiſhoppe to Portingall, becauſe he had broken one of his legges, thinking to heale it: but if he had knowne ſo much, he would haue ſtayed in India. He being abſent the ſeconde Via was opened with the like ſolemnitie, and therein they found named for Viceroy, Manuel de Souſa Coutinho, (of whom I made mention before, and who was the man that rayſed the ſiege in the Iſland of Seylon) to the great admiration of euery man, becauſe he was but a meane gentleman▪ yet very well eſteemed, as he had wel deſerued by his long ſeruice: & although there were many rich gentlemen in place, whome they rather thought ſhould haue been preferred therto, yet they muſt content themſelues and ſhew no diſlike: and thereupon they preſently ſaluted him, kiſſing his hand, and honoured him as Viceroy, preſently they left the deade bodie of the olde Viceroy, and departed in the Galley with the new Viceroy, taking away all the mourning clothes, and ſtanderds, and couering it with others of diuers colours and ſilkes: and ſo entred into Goa, ſounding both Shalmes and Trumpettes, wherein he was receyued with great triumph, and ledde into the great Church, where they ſung Te Deum laudamus &c. and there gaue him his oath to hold and obſerue all priuiledges and cuſtomes according to the order in that caſe prouided, and from thence ledde him to the Viceroyes pallace, which was preſently by the dead Viceroyes ſeruantes all vnfurniſhed, and by the newe Viceroye furniſhed againe, both with houſholde ſtuffe and ſeruantes, as the manner is in all ſuch chaunges and alterations. The bodie of the deade Viceroy being left in the Church, was buried by his ſeruantes without any more memorie of him, ſauing onely touching his owne particular affaires.
                     In the Monthes of Iune, Iulie and Auguſt, of the ſame yeare, Anno 1588.1588 there happened the greateſt winter that had of long time béene ſeene in thoſe Countries, although it rayneth euerie winter, neuer holding vppe all winter long: but not in ſuch great quantitie and aboundance, as it did in thoſe thrée Monthes, for that it rayned continually and in ſo great aboundance, from the tenth of Iune till the firſt day of September, yt it could not be iudged that it euer held vppe from rayning one halfe hower together, neyther night nor day, whereby many houſes by reaſon of the great moyſture fell downe to the grounde, as alſo becauſe the ſtone wherewith they are built, is verie ſoft, and their morter the more half earth.
                     In the ſame month of Auguſt there happened a foule and wonderfull murther within the towne of Goa, and becauſe it was done vpon a Netherlander, I thought good to ſet it downe at large, that hereby men may the better perceyue the boldneſſe and filthie lecherous mindes of the Indian women, which are commonly all of one nature and diſpoſition. The thing was thus, a young man borne in Antwarpe called Frauncis King, by his trade a ſtone cutter, was deſirous (as many young men are) to ſée ſtrange countries, & for the ſame cauſe trauelled vnto Venice, where he had an vncle dwelling, who being deſirous to preferre his coſin, ſent him in the company of other Marchantes to Aleppo in Suria, where the Venetians haue great trafficke, as I ſaide before, there to learne the trade of marchandiſe, and ſpecially to deale in ſtones, to the which ende he deliuered him a great ſumme of money. This young youth being in Aleppo, fell into company in ſuch ſort, that in ſteede of increaſing his ſtocke, as his vncle meant he ſhould doe, he made it leſſe by the one halfe, ſo that when the other Marchants had diſpatched their buſineſſe, and were readie to depart for Venice, Frauncis King perceyuing that hee had dealt in ſuch ſorte, that halfe his ſtocke was conſumed, and ſpent in good fellowſhippe, knew not what to doe, as ſearing his vncles diſpleaſure, not daring to returne againe to Venice, vnleſſe hee caried as much with him as hee brought from thence: in the end hee tooke counſell of ſome Venetians, with whome hee was acquainted, that willed him to goe with the Caffila or Caruana, that as then was ready to go vnto Baſſora, and from thence to Ormus in India, aſſuring him, ſeeing hee had knowledge in ſtones, that hee might doe great good and winne much profite in thoſe Countries, and thereby eaſily recouer the loſſe that by his folly hee had receyued: which would turne to his great benefite, and likewiſe no hurt vnto his vncle. Which counſell hee followed, determining not to returne backe againe before hee had recouered his loſſe, and to the ſame ende and purpoſe hee ioyned himſelfe with certain Venetians, who at the ſame inſtant trauelled thether, and ſo went with the Caffila till they came vnto Baſſora, the beſt Towne in all thoſe Countries, lying vppon the vtter parte of Sinus Perſicus, that goeth towardes Ormus, and from thence by water till they arriued in Ormus, where euerie man ſet vppe his ſhoppe, and began to ſell his wares: but Francis King being young and without gouernment, ſéeing himſelfe ſo far diſtant from his vncle, made his account, that the money he had in hie hands was then

his owne, and began againe without anie foreſight, to leade his accuſtomed life, taking no other care, but onlie to be merie and make good cheare ſo long, till in the end the whole ſtock was almoſt clean ſpent and conſumed, and beginning to remember himſelf, and to call to mind his follies paſt, hee knewe not what courſe to take: for that to goe home again, he thought it not the beſt way, as wāting the meanes, and again he durſt not ſhew himſelf in the ſight of his Vncle. At the laſt he determined to trauell vnto Goa, where he vnderſtood he might well get his liuing, by ſetting vp his trade, til it pleaſed god, to work otherwiſe for him, and ſo he came to Goa, and being there, preſently ſet vp ſhoppe to vſe his occupation. But becauſe he found there good company, that is to ſay, Netherlanders and other Dutchmen, that ſerued there ordinarily for Trumpetters and Gunners to the Viceroy, who did daylie reſort vnto him: he could not ſo well ply his worke, but that he fell into his wonted courſe: which he perceiuing, in the end determined to make his continuall reſidence in Goa, and for the ſame purpoſe ſet downe his reſt, to ſeeke ſome meanes there to abide as long as he liued, ſeeing all other hope was cleane loſt for euer, returning againe vnto his Vncle, or into his owne countrie. At the ſame time, among other ſtrangers, there was one Iohn de Xena, a French man, borne in Deepe, that in former times was come into India, for drum vnto one of the Viceroyes, and hauing beene long in the countrie, was maryed to a woman of Ballagate, a Chriſtian, but by birth a More. This French man kept a ſhoppe in Goa, where he made Drummes and other Ioyners worke, and withall was the Kings Oare maker for the Galleyes, whereby he liued in reaſonable good ſort. He had by his foreſaid wyfe two ſonnes and a daughter: and as ſtrangers, of what nation ſoeuer they be, vſe to take acquaintance one of the other, being out of their owne countries (ſpeciallie in India, where there are very few) and do hold together as brethren, which to them is a great comfort: ſo this Frauncis King vſed much to this French mans houſe, by whome he was verie much made of, and very welcome, as thinking thereby to bring him to match with his daughter, becauſe of his occupation, which is of great account in India: becauſe of the great number of Diamants & other ſtones that are ſold in thoſe countries: and to conclude, as the manner of India is, that when they haue gotten a man in once, they will neuer leaue him: he ceaſſed not with many promiſes and other wonderful matters to draw Frauncis ſo farre, that he gaue his conſent thereunto, which afterwardes coſt him his lyfe, as in the hiſtorie following you ſhall heare the true diſcourſe. To make ſhort, they were maried according to their manner, the Bryde being but 11 yeares old, very fair and comelie of bodie and limme, but in villanie, the worſt that walked vppon the earth: yet did her huſband account himſelfe a moſt happie man▪ that had found ſuch a wyfe, as he often times ſaid vnto me: although he was ſo ielous of her, that he truſted not any man, were they neuer ſo néere friends vnto him: but he in whome he put his greateſt truſt, & leaſt ſuſpected, was the onelie worker of his woe. When he was betroathed to his wife, the father promiſed him a certain péece of money, and vntill it were payde, he and his wyfe ſhould continue at meat and meale in his father in lawes houſe, and ſhould haue a ſhop adioyning to the ſame, and whatſoeuer he earned ſhould be for himſelf. When all this was done, and the matter had remained thus a long while, by reaſon that the father in law could not performe the promiſed ſumme, becauſe their houſhold increaſed, it came to paſſe that the old man fel into a ſickneſſe and died, and then Frauncis King muſt of force pay his part towards the houſe kéeping, which he liked not of: & thereupon fel out with his mother in law: and on a certaine time made his complaint to me, aſking my counſel therein, I anſwered him and ſaid, I would be loath to make debate betwéene Parents & Children, but if it were my caſe, ſéeing I could not obteyne my dowrie, I would ſtay no longer there, but rather hyre a houſe by my ſelf, and kéep better houſe alone with my wife, then continue among ſo manie, wher I could not be maſter. In the end he reſolued ſo to doe, & with much adoe tooke his wife & Child wt his ſlaues, and parted houſhold, hyred himſelfe a houſe, ſet vp his ſhoppe, and vſed his trade ſo handſomely, that hauing good ſtore of worke, he became reaſonable wealthie. But his mother in law, that could not conceale her Moriſh nature, after ye death of her huſbād: whether it were for ſpight ſhe bare to her ſonne in law, or for a pleaſure ſhe tooke therein, counſelled her daughter to fall in loue with a young Portingal Soldier, whom the daughter did not much miſlike: which ſoldier was verie great in the houſe, and ordinarilie came thether to meat and drinke, and Frauncis truſted him as well as if he had bene his brother, in ſo much that he would doe nothing without his counſell. This Soldier called An honio Fragoſo continued this beaſtlie courſe with Frauncis his wyfe, with the helpe of her mother, all the while that they dwelt with the mother▪ and it is ſayd, that he

vſed her company before ſhee was maried, although ſhee was but young, which is no wonder in India: for it is their common cuſtome in thoſe countries to doe it, when they are but eight yeres old, and haue the ſlight to hide it ſo well, that when they are maried, their huſbands take thē for very good maides. This order of life they continued in that ſorte for the ſpace of foure yeares, and alſo after that they had taken a houſe, and dwelled alone by themſelues (for Antonio Fragoſo kept his old haunt) and although Francis vſed continually to ſhut his chamber dore, yet was this Portingall oftentimes hidden, therin he not knowing thereof, where hee tooke his pleaſure of his wife.
                     At the laſt, one Diricke Gerritſon of Enchuſon in Holland, béeing Godfather vnto Francis Kinges wife, comming newly from China, deſired the ſaid Francis and his wife to come and dine with him at his houſe without the towne, where as then he dwelt, and among the reſt bad mee, minding to bee merrie and made vs good cheare: but becauſe the honeſt Damſell Francis Kinges wife, made her excuſe, that ſhe might not with her credit come where Batchelers were, for that they had no ſuch vſe in India, he deſired mée to hold him excuſed till another time. They being there at this feaſt, with the mother in law, and her ſonne, & their houſhold of ſlaues that waited vpon them, as the maner of India is. After dinner was ended, and they well in drinke, they went to walke in the fieldes, where not far from thence there ſtood a houſe of pleaſure, that had neyther dore nor window, but almoſt fallen downe for want of reparations, hauing on the backe ſide therof a faire garden full of Indian trées and fruites: the houſe and garden Francis Kinges father in law had bought in his life time for a ſmall peece of mony, for as I ſay, it was not much worth: thether they went, and cauſed their pots and their pans with meat and drinke to be brought with them, being minded all that day to make merrie therein, as indéede they did. In the meane time it was my fortune with a friend of mine to walke in the fieldes, and to paſſe by the houſe, wherein they were, not thinking any company had bin there, & going by, Francis King being all drunken, came forth and ſaw me, wherewith he ranne and caught me by the cloke, & perforce would haue me in, & made me leaue my companion, & ſo brought me into the garden, where their wiues and his mother in law, with their ſlaues ſate playing vpon certaine Indian Inſtruments, being verie merrie: but I was no ſooner eſpied by them, but the young woman preſently went away to hide herſelfe for her credits ſake, according to their manner, as their manner is when any ſtranger commeth into the houſe. Not long after ſupper was made ready of ſuch as they had brought with them, although the day was not ſo far ſpent, and the table c
                           •
                        oth was laid vppon a matte lying on the gr
                           •
                        und: for that (as I ſaid before) there was ney
                           •
                        her table, bench, window nor dore within the houſe. The meate being brought in, euery man ſate downe, only Francis Kinges wife excuſed her ſelfe, that I had ſhamed her, and deſired that ſhe might not come in, ſaying for that time ſhee would eate there with the ſlaues, and although her huſband would gladly haue had her come in among vs, thereby to ſhew that he was not iealous of her, yet ſhee would not, ſo that ſéeing her excuſe he let her reſt, ſaying it were beſt to let her ſtay there, becauſe thee is aſhamed. While we ſate at ſupper where the ſlaues ſerued vs, going and comming to and fro, and bringing ſuch thinges as we wanted, out of the place where this honeſt woman was, her huſband thinking ſhee had taken pains to make it ready, it was nothing ſo, for that while we were merry together, not thinking any hurt▪ in came Antonio Fragoſo with a naked Rapier vnder his cloake, it being yet day light, and in preſence of all the ſlaues, both theirs and mine, without anie feare of vs lead her away by the hand into one of the chambers of the houſe hauing neyther doore, flore nor window, and there putting off the cloth that ſhe had about her middle,) which he laid vppon the ground to kéepe her from fowling of her body) not being once aſhamed before the ſlaues, neyther fearing any danger, he tooke his pleaſure of her: but if any miſchance had happened, that any of the ſlaues had marked it and bewraied it, the ſaid Anthonie had tenne or twelue ſouldiers his companions and friendes not farre from thence, which with a whiſtle or any other token would haue come to help him, and ſo would haue ſlaine vs all, and taken the woman with him, which is their dayly proffit in India, but we had better fortune: for that hée diſpatched his affaires ſo well with her, that wée knew it not, and had leyſure to depart as he came, without any trouble, and ſhe well pleaſed therewith: and when the ſlaues aſked her how thee durſt bee ſo bold to doe ſuch a thing, conſidering what danger of life ſhee then was in, ſhee anſwered them that ſhee cared not for her life, ſo ſhée might haue her pleaſure, and ſaying that her huſband was but a drunkard, and not worthie of her, and that ſhe had vſed the company of that fine luſtie youth for the ſpace of foure yeres together, and for his ſake ſhe ſaid, ſhee would not

refuſe to die: yet had ſhe not then beene married to Francis King full foure yeares, neyther was ſhee at that time aboue fifteene or ſixteene yeares of age. Not long after ſhee had done, ſhee came into the garden, and as it ſhould ſeeme, had cleane forgotten her former ſhame, where ſhe began both to ſing and dance, ſhewing herſelfe very merry: wherewith all the companie was very well pleaſed, ſpecially her huſband that commended her for it. When euening was come, euery man tooke his leaue, and departed to his lodging, and when wee were gone wee chanced by our ſlaues to vnderſtand the truth of the fact before rehearſed, and what danger we had eſcaped: whereat we wondred much, and Francis King himſelfe began to be ſomewhat ſuſpicious of the matter, being ſecretlie aduertiſed of his wiues behauiour, but hee knew not with whome ſhe had to doe, nor once miſtruſted this Anthonie Fragoſo, thinking him to be the beſt friend hee had in all the world: yea, and that more is, hee durſt not breake his minde to any but onely vnto him, of whome in great ſecret he aſked counſell, ſaying, that he vnderſtood, and had well found that his wife behaued her ſelfe diſhoneſtlie, aſking him what he were beſt to doe, and told him further, that he meant to diſſemble the matter for a time, to ſee if hee could take them together, thereby to kill thē both, which the other counſelled him to doe, promiſing him his help and furtherance, and to bee ſecret therein, and ſo they departed. Anthonio Fr
                              ••
                           o
                              •
                           o wēt preſently vnto his wife, and ſhewed her what had paſt betweene her huſband and him, where they concluded vppon that which after they brought to paſſe, thinking it the beſt courſe to preuent him. Now ſo it hapned, that in an euening in the month of Auguſt, 15
                           ••
                        . Francis King had prouided a roſted Pig for ſupper in his own houſe: whereunto he inuited this Anthonio Frag
                              •
                           ſo, and his mother in law, who as it ſéemeth, was of counſell with them in this conſpiracie and the principall cauſe of the Tragedy, although very ſtoutly and boldly ſhee denied it afterwards. They being at ſupper and very merrie at the ſame time it was my chance to ſuppe in a certaine place with a Dutch painter, whether Fr
                              ••
                           ci
                              •
                            King ſent vs a quarter of the Pigge, praying vs to eate it for his ſake, and to be merrie he that brought it being one of our owne houſe. They had cauſed him to drinke of a certaine wine that was mingled with the Hearbe De
                              ••
                           oa, thereby to bereaue poore Franci
                              •
                           
                         of his wittes, and ſo to effect their accurſed deuice: for as it appeared, hee that brought the Pigge came halfe drunke, and out of his wittes, whereby we perceaued that all was not well.
                     To conclude, the Hearbe beganne to worke, ſo that of force hee muſt needs ſleep, and the companie beeing departed, ſhee ſhutte his trappe doore, as ordinarily he vſed to doe, and laid the key vnder his pillow, and went to Bedde with his louing wife: where preſently hee fell on ſleepe like a dead man, partly by meanes of the De
                              ••
                           oa, and partly becauſe hee had drunke well. About eleauen of the Clocke in the night, Anthonie Fragoſo all armed, and another good friend of his not knowing (as hee confeſſed what Anthonio meant to doe, and came to the doore of Franci
                              •
                            Kinges houſe, and knocked ſoftly, and willed the ſlaues that ſlept below, to open the dore: but they anſwered him their maſter was a bedde, and that the trappe doore was ſhut on the in ſide. Francis his wife that ſlept not, whē ſhe heard it, ran to the window and willed him to bring a ladder and clime vp, which he preſently did, and ſhe holp him in, where ſhee tooke him about the necke kiſſing him, and bad him welcome, leading him in by the hand, where her huſband ſlept, little thinking on the villanie pretended by his wife, and ſuch as he held to bee his beſt friends, and to be briefe ſhee ſaid vnto him: There lieth the drunkard and the Hereticke, that thought to bring vs to our endes, thereby to ſeperate vs from our loue and pleaſures now reuenge your ſelfe on him if you loue me, and preſently hee thruſt him into the body with his Rapier, cleane through the breaſt, ſo that it came out behind at his backe and being not content therwith, gaue him another thruſt, that went in at the one ſide, and out at the other ſide, and ſo at the leaſt 4. or 5▪ thruſts more after he was dead: whereby the poore innocent man ended his dayes: which done, they took all the ſtones & Diamonds that hee had of diuers men to worke, as alſo to ſell: which amounted at the leaſt to the value of 4
                           •
                        . thouſand Pardawes, and tooke Francis his own Rapier that hung by him & put it into his hand, as if they would make men beleeue that hee would haue killed them, & that in their owne defence they had ſlaine him, but it was well knowne to the cō
                        trarie: for that the ſlaues being below▪ heard all that had paſt. They tooke with them alſo the childe being of two yeares old, and went out of the houſe, but they had not gone farre, but they left the childe lying at a doore in the ſtreet, where in the morning it was found, & althogh the ſlaues made a great noiſe at their miſtriſſes flight, & went to fetch ye officers▪ yet they could not find thē, for that night the murtherers went & knocked at ye Ieſuits cloiſter, deſiring them to take them in, & gaue thē the

moſt part of the ſtones, ſaying they had ſlain the man in their owne defence, but the Ieſuites would not receiue them, although they tooke the ſtones, of purpoſe to giue them againe to the owners. In the morning it was knowne through all the towne not without great admiration, and although they ſought diligently in all places where they thought or ſuſpected them to lodge, yet they could not find them: but not long after they were ſéene in the towne of Chaul, which is about thirty miles Northwarde from Goa, where they walked fréely in the ſtréetes, without any trouble: for there all was couered, and few there are that look after ſuch matters, though they bee as cleare as the Sunne. The dead bodie lay in that ſort till the next morning, & we Dutch men were forced to ſée him buried, for the mother in lawe woulde not giue one peny towards it, making as though ſhe had not any thing to doe with him, but holpe the murtherer both with money and victuailes, therewith to trauell vnto Portingal, and ſo he ſayled in the fléete with vs: for I ſaw him in the Iſland of S. Helena, as bold and luſ
                           •
                        y, as if no ſuch matter had béene committed by him, and ſo ariued in Portingall, not any man ſpeaking againſt him: hauing alſo promiſed both the mother, and wife of Frauncis King, that hee woulde come againe with the Kinges pardon, and marrie her: which I doubt not of, if hee once went about it. And thus Francis King ended his trauell: which I thought good to ſet downe at large, that thereby you may perceyue the boldnes and inclination of the Indian women: for there paſſeth not one yeare ouer their heades, but that in India there are at the leaſt twentie or thirtie men poyſoned, and murthered by their wiues, onely to accompliſh their filthie deſires. Likewiſe there are yearely many women killed by their huſbands being taken in adulterie, but they care not a haire for it, ſaying with great boldnes, that there is no pleaſanter death then to die in that manner: for thereby (they ſay) they do ſhew that they die for pure loue. And to ſhew that this honeſt woman was not of this badde inclination alone, you ſhall vnderſtande that a brother of hers, being but fourtéene or fiftéene yeares of age was openly burnt in Goa for ſodome or buggery, which was done when Francis King and his father in lawe were liuing: yet could not Frauncis thereby bee warned to take héede of his wife and that kindred: for as it ſéemeth it was Gods will he ſhould end his dayes in that manner.
                     The 16. of September 1588. there ariued in Goa a ſhippe of Portingall, called the S. Thomas, bringing newes of 4. ſhippes more, that were in Moſambique, all come from Portingall, which not long after came likewiſe to Goa: their names were, Saint Chriſtopher being Admirall, S. Marie, S. Anthony, and our Lady of Conſeprao. By thoſe ſhippes we receyued newes of the death of my Lord the Archbiſhoppe, called Don Frey Vincente da Fonſeca, who died in his voyage to Portingall, vpon the 4. day of Auguſt, An. 1587.
                        158
                              •
                           . betwéene the Flemmiſh Iſlandes, and Portingall, eight daies before the ſhip came to land. It was thought that he dyed of ſome poyſon, that he brought out of India, or els of ſome impoſtume that ſodainely brake within him, for that an houre before his death he ſéemed to be as well as euer he was in all his life, and ſodainly he was taken ſo ſick yt he had not the leaſure to make his will, but dyed preſently, and voyded at the leaſt a quart of poyſon out of his body. To be ſhort, he was cloathed in his Biſhops apparell, with his Myter on his heade, and rings vpon his fingers, and put into a coffin, and ſo throwne into the ſea. Theſe newes made many ſorrowfull hartes in India, of ſuch as were his welwillers and frindes: and to the contrarie ſuch as hated him, were glad and reioyced, becauſe he had béene earneſt to reprehend and correct them for their faultes: but none loſt more by it then wee that were his ſeruantes, which looked for great preferment by him, as without doubt hee ment to haue obtained it of the King, as being one of the principalleſt occaſions of his going into Portingal, but death altred all. And although at that time my meaning and intent was, to ſtay the comming of my Lord Archbiſhop, & to continue longer there, yea poſſible while I liued: yet vpon thoſe newes I was wholly altered in my purpoſe, and a horrible feare came vpon me, when I called to mind what I had paſſed touching the things I was deſirous to bring to paſſe. And although I had means enough there to get my liuing in good ſort, being as it were one of thoſe countrimē, and ſo in all places well eſtéemed and accounted of, yet thoſe perſwaſions were not of force inough once to diſſwade mee frō the pretence and deſire I had to ſée my natiue countrey: ſo that it ſéemed my God had opened mine eies, and by my Lords death made me more cleare of ſight, & to call my natiue ſoile vnto remē
                        brance, which before was ſo darkened, that I had almoſt forgotten it, and ſtood in hazarde neuer to ſee it more, if my Lord had liued and returned home again. But to auoide all occaſions and inconueniences that might happen, & dayly offred themſelues vnto me, I reſolutely determined to depart, wherevnto I ſought al the meanes & neceſſary occaſions I

could find, to bring it to paſſe: & that which perſwaded me moſt thereunto, was the loſſe of my brother William Tin, that had béene with me in India, who ſailing from Se
                              •
                           ubal in Portingal towards Hamborough, taking their courſe on the back ſide of England, was caſt away, and neuer could be heard of, neyther ſhip nor men. Being in this reſolution, it chaunced that a ſhippe by authoritie of the Viceroy, and at the requeſt of the Farmers of Pepper was appointed to ſaile for Portingall, becauſe there was ſo great quantitie of Pepper to be laden that the Portingall ſhips at that time being there could not take it in: and although the ſhips are purpoſely ſent to lade Pepper, with licence from the King that there may no more but fiue ſhips lade euerie yeare, wherevnto the Factors do bind themſelues, yet if there bee any goods in India, as Pepper & other wares, which the other ſhips can not take in, then the Farmers of Pepper and the kinges officers may buy one or two ſhips, and make them ready for the purpoſe to take it in, ſo that there be ſhips found that bee ſufficient: which if the Factors refuſe, then the Viceroy and the kings officers may 
                           •
                        raight as many ſhips as they thinke good, and as they find fit to take it in, and lade thē with the Farmers pepper, or any other goods that are there to be laden, ſo it bee after the fiue ſhippes are laden by the farmers: and all this for the profit of the King, without let or hinderance of the ſaid farmers. In this ſorte as I ſaid before, there was a ſhippe called the Santa Crus, that was built in Cochijn by the King of the Malabares, and called after the name of the towne of Cochiin, that was likewiſe by ye Portingals called Santa Crus, which the King of Malabares made in honor of the Portingalles, becauſe he hath brotherly allyance with them, and is by the King of Portingall called our brother in armes. The ſame ſhip he had ſold vnto a Portingal, that therwith had made a voiage into China and Iapan, being of 1600. tunnes: and becauſe it was ſtrong and good, & ſo fit to make a voiage into Portingall, and becauſe (as I ſaid before) there was more pepper then the Portingall ſhips could take in, the farmers of pepper were deſirous to buy it, & beſought the Viceroy to let them haue it, according to the contentes of their compoſition, and the Kings ordinance. Wherevpon the Viceroy cauſed the farmers of the ſhips to be called together, & ſignified vnto thē what the requeſt of the farmers of pepper was, that is to ſay, that the ſhippe ſhould be bought according to the Kings ordinance, for as much as neceſſity did ſo require it, & they had refuſed to vſe it, & ſaid that it was not fit for them, & ſo deſired ye in reſpect of the Kings intereſt in the pepper, the ſhippe might be bought accordingly. Alwaies prouided, yt the kings ordinance (who granted thē their Priuiledge) might be kept & obſerued, viz. that their ſhips might firſt haue their lading, and bee firſt diſpatched. And although they that had bought it of the owners for ten thouſand duckets readie money▪ were in doubt that they ſhould not finde wares enough to lade it withall, yet in the end it was in a manner laden as well as the other ſhips were. Nowe it was agréed by the owners that ſold it, that the Maiſter Gunner and chiefe Boteſwaine ſhoulde kéepe their places ſtil within the ſhippe as they had when it ſailed to China and Iapen. The Gunners name was Diricke Gari
                              •
                           ſon of Enchuſen, who after he had beene 20. yeares in India, was minded as then to ſaile in that ſhippe to Portingall, with whome becauſe of olde acquaintance, and for his company, I minded to ſée if I could get any place within the ſhippe. And becauſe the farmers of pepper had their factors in India, that were Dutchmē, which lay there in the behalfe of the Foukers and Velſares of Auſburg, who at that time had a part of the pepper laden in that ſhip, and vſe to ſend in each ſhip a Factor, to whome the King alloweth a Cabine and victuails for the voyage: This place of Factor in the ſaid ſhippe called Santa Crus, I did obtaine of the Farmers, becauſe they were of my acquaintance. Whereupon I prepared my ſelfe to depart, and got a Paſporte of the Viceroy, without which no man may paſſe out of India, as alſo a Certificat out of the Kinges chamber of accountes, and out of the Matricola generall, wherein all ſuch as come into India are regiſtred, with a note of my paye, which by the Kings commandement is appoynted to bee paide vppon certificate from thence, and withall the time of my reſidence in India, and what place I was imployed in there, that when I came into Portingall, I might haue recompence if I would aſke it, or minded to returne againe into India. But although I had no ſuch intent, yet I muſt of force obſerue this order, to make them thinke I would returne againe, and the eaſier to obtaine my Paſport, which was eaſily graunted mée by the Gouernour, as alſo the other Certificates: and hauing obtayned them I tooke my leaue of all my friends and acquaintance, not without great griefe, as hee that was to depart out of his ſecond naturall dwelling place, by reaſon of the great and long continuance that I had made in thoſe countries, ſo that I was in a manner halfe diſſwaded from my pretended voyage. But in the end the remembrance and affection

of m
                           •
                         true natural countrie, got the vpper h
                           •
                        nd, and ouer ruled me, making me wholy to forget my conceipt vnto the contrarie: and ſo committing my ſelfe & my affaires vnto God who onely can direct and helpe vs, and giue good ſucceſſe to all endeuours, I entred into my new pretended courſe.
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           588.In the Month of Nouember 1588. the ſhips ſayled againe from Goa, to the coaſt of M
                              •
                           l
                              •
                           ba
                              •
                           
                         & Cochijn, to take in their lading: And the 2
                           •
                        . of the ſame month, the Santa-Cru
                              •
                           
                         ſet ſayle to begin our Viage. The 28. day we arriued in Honor a Fort belonging to the Portingals, and the firſt they haue vpon the coaſt of Malabar, which lyeth Southward from Goa eighteene miles, in which place we were aſſigned to take in our lading of Pepper. They vſed not before to lade any Pepper in that place, ſo that we were the firſt that euer laded there: but from thence forwards, they minded yearely to lade one ſhip there, becauſe the Queene of Batticola (that lay not farre from thence) and Hono
                              •
                           , being within her Iuriſdiction or kingdom, had boūd her ſelfe, yearely to deliuer ſeauen or eight thouſand Quintales of Pepper, ſo that the Farmers paied her halfe ye mony for the ſame ſixe Months before thee deliuered it, and then ſhee would deliuer it at times. For the which cauſe the Farmers haue their Factor in Honor to receiue it of her by waight, and lay it vp till the time of lading commeth. The like haue they in all the other Fortes vppon the coaſt of Malabar, as at Mangalar, Ba
                              •
                           ſelor, Cananor, Cochijn, Coulan &c. Nowe to know the right manner of farming of the Pepper, you muſt vnderſtand, that the Farmers take the ſame to Farme for fiue yeres, and bind themſelues euery yeare to ſend their ſtocke of readie money, for thirtie thouſand Quintales of Pepper, ſo that the King will ſend ſhips to lade it in. The King on the other ſide bindeth himſelfe to performe, and to ſend euerie yeare fiue ſhips, the Farmers bearing the aduenture of the Sea both of their mony ſending thether and of the Pepper brought from thence, & muſt lade it in India, into the ſhips at their owne coſts and charges: which being brought into Portingall, they deliuer al the Pepper to the King at the price of twelue Ducats the Quintall: & if any bee caſt away or taken vpon the Sea, it is at the Farmers charge, for the King dealeth not but onely with that which is deliuered him in Portingall, being drie and faire laide vp in the Kings ſtore houſe in Lisbone: for the which he payeth not any money vnto the Farmers, vntill the ſaid Pepper be ſold, with the mony wherof he payeth them: ſo that the King without any hazard or diſburſing any thing o
                           •
                         his owne, hath alwaies his money for his Pepper, without the loſſe of any one pennie. And in that reſpect the Farmers haue great and ſtrong priueledges▪ firſt that no man of what eſtate or condition ſo euer he bee, either Portingall, or of any place in Indi
                              •
                           , may deale or trade in Peper but the
                           •
                        , vpon paine of death, which is verie ſharply looked vnto. Likewiſe they may not for any occaſion or neceſſitie, whatſoeuer, diminiſh or leſſen the ordinarie ſtocke of money for the Pepper, neither hinder or let them in any ſorte concerning the lading thereof, which is alſo verie ſtrictly obſerued. For although the Pepper were for the Kings owne perſon, yet muſt the Farmers Pepper be firſt laden, to whome the Viceroy and other Officers and Captaines of India, muſt giue al aſſiſtance helpe and fauour, with watching the ſame and al other things, whatſoeuer ſhall by the ſaid Farmers bee required▪ for the ſafetie and benefite of the ſaide Pepper. For the lading and prouiding wherof, the ſaid Farmers are to ſend their Factors ſeruants and aſſiſtants, of what nation ſo euer they bee, (except Engliſhmen, Frenchmen and Spaniards) vnto euery place, to ſee it laden and diſpatched away, for other ſtrangers may not goe into India without the ſpeciall licence of the King, or his counſell of India. The Pepper commonly coſteth in India 28. Pagodes the Bhar, euerie Bhar is three Quintales and a halfe Portingall waight ſo that euery Quintall ſtandeth them in twelue Pardawes, Xera
                              ••
                           ius and foure 
                           
                              •
                           angoes. Euerie Quintall is 1
                           •
                        8. pounds, and euerie Pardawe thrée Teſtones or thirtie Stiuers heauie money, and euery 
                           •
                        a
                           •
                        ga. 
                           •
                        i
                           ••
                        e Reijs, or ſixe Stiuers, which is twelue Dollers of ſixtie pence Flemiſh the peece, after the rate of Portingall money, and twentie foure Stiuers of the like money, beſides all charges & aduenture of the Seas. But the great quantitie maketh them gaine the more, ſpecially, if it come ſafe home. The ſhips & their frayghting, with condition to builde them, and the prouiſion of all neceſſaries for them, are alſo farmed by themſelues, and all at the aduenture of the Farmers: and if the ſhip come ſafe home, they giue the King a certaine ſumme of money for euery ſhip, and euery yeare furniſh fiue ſhippes, likewiſe at their owne charges: but ſuch Souldiers as are appointed to goe in them, are bound to ſayle for ye King, and haue but onely meate and drinke at the Farmers charge, the Officers and Saylers being placed therein by the Kings Admiraltie, which the Farmers may not once denie or refuſe: ſo that the King aduentureth nothing,

neither in Pepper nor in ſhips, but only if the ſhips be caſt away, he looſeth the money that hee ſhould haue had for the farme of euery ſhip, if it had returned ſafe, & the gaine of the Pepper that ſhould haue beene deliuered him, at a certaine price. Whereupon the Admiraltie of Portingall are now waren verie careleſſe to ſee them well conueied, as they vſed to be during the times of the Kings of Portingal, when all the Pepper came for the Kings own accounts. And although the king hath promiſed continually to ſend his Nauie by Sea▪ as far as the Flemiſh Ilands, there to ſtay for the comming of the Indian ſhips, and from thence to conueye them vnto Liſbone, yet ſince they were Farmed out there are few fleetes ſent forth, ſo that they are but little thought vpon, but howſoeuer it is in the payment of the fée Farme, for Pepper the King will not looſe a pennie of his due, nor once abate them any thing.
                     The ſixth of December wee had taken in our lading of Pepper which was 67
                           •
                        0. Quintales of the beſt that is in all Malabar, and verie ful. The ſame day we ſet ſayle from thence, keeping cloſe vnder the coaſt, becauſe that ordinarily in that countrie, euerie day from twelue of the clocke of the night, till twelue at noone there bloweth an Eaſterly winde, which commeth out of the land: and then commeth a Weſt wind out of the Sea, to the land ward, and with thoſe two windes we performe our Viage: but the Eaſt winde is alwaies mightier and ſtronger then the Weſt, and therefore the ſhippes keepe themſelues cloſe vnder the ſhore, for when they put further into the Sea, they can hardly get the coaſt againe, becauſe the Weſt wind is not of ſo great force: as it chanced vnto vs, for that hauing put ſomewhat from the coaſt, we had much to doe before wee could get the coaſt againe, by the which meanes often times they looſe their Viages into Portingal, as by experience it hath béene found. All the coaſt of Malabar is verie pleaſant to behold: for that they ſayle ſo cloſe vnto it that a man may tell euerie hill, valley and trée that is therein, being verie greene and faire land.
                     The eleauenth of December wee came to Cananor, another fortreſſe of the Portingales, as we haue told you in the deſcription of this coaſt. There we lay a day and a halfe, to take in certaine Maſtes, with other prouiſion yt we were to vſe, which is there in great abundance: & ſo wee ſet ſayle againe, keeping along the coaſt and paſſed by Calecut, Pa
                           
                              •
                           ane, and certaine other places vntill the twentie foure of December, when wee arriued at Cochijn, where we lay till the twentie of Ianuarie after in Anno 158
                              •
                           . In the meane time our ſhippe was prouided of all things neceſſarie, and then we ſtayed till our turne came to ſet ſayle, becauſe the other ſhippes according to the contract were to ſet ſayle before vs, one after the other, which cuſtome I will here partly ſet down in briefe. You ſhall vnderſtand, that as ſoone as the ſhippe hath taken in her lading of Pepper, which is done with great care and diligent watch, as well in the Kings behalfe, as of the Farmers, and is laden in the two nether Oorlopes that is vpon the Balaſt, and in the Oorlop next ouer it▪ laying Deale boords vpon the Balaſt, and making certaine places and deuiſions for the purpoſe, with a hole ouer each place, to ſhutte in the Pepper, leauing roome by the maine Maſt to paſſe by it, ſo that there is at the leaſt thirtie ſeuerall places, which they call Payoos, and all vnder the two lower Oorlopes as I ſaid before. Which beeing all filled with Pepper, they ſhut the holes of thoſe places verie cloſe, with Ocam and Pitch, and ſo are marked with numbers how many there are, and vpon ech place his waight of Peper. Theſe two Oorloppes being thus laden, there is left a place aboute the maine Maſt to beſtow water, wine, woode and other neceſſaries for the ſhippe, which are dayly vſed. In the thirde Oorlop and on both ſides therof, there are diuers places ſeuerally made that belong vnto the Officers of the ſhippe, as the Captaine, Maſter, Pilot, Factor, Purſer &c. and of all the reſt of the Saylors that are allowed places: which they ſell or let out vnto the Marchants, to lade goods therein, whereof they make good profite. Vpon the ſame Oorlop from the Maſt vnto the ſterne, are the places wher they put their Poulder, Biſket▪ Sayles clothes and other prouiſions for the ſhip. The other Oorlopes aboue theſe are laden by the Marchants, with all ſorts of wares, which are in Cheſtes, Fattes, Balles, and Packes, and are placed in this ſort, that is to ſay. As ſoone as the Pepper is laden, there is preſently ſent into the ſhippe two waiters, and one that ſtoweth the goodes (as a Porter) on the Kings behalfe: and he hath ten or twelue Porters vnder him, that muſt onely lade and ſtow the goodes in the ſhippe, the Maſter nor any other not once hauing any thing to doe with it, ſauing onely the chiefe Boteſwaine▪ who is to looke vnto it, and yet commaundeth nothing. No goods may bee laden whatſoeuer, or how ſmall ſo euer they bee, but they muſt bee Regiſtred in the Kinges bookes, and they muſt bring a Billet from the Veador da Fa
                              •
                           enda, that is to ſaye, the

Surueighor of the buſineſſe, being chief Officer for the King, wherein muſt be certified euerie kind of ware by peece meale, which they lade together with ye name of the ſhip, wherein it is to be laden, for without that Certi
                              •
                           i
                           
                              •
                           at
                        ▪ the ſtowers and Porters will not take it in: and although you haue your Billet, yet muſt you bribe the waiters, before you can get it abord the ſhippe, and ſome thing muſt be giuen likewiſe to the porters beſides their duties, if you deſire to ſtow your goods well, otherwiſe they will let it ſtand: and he that giueth moſt hath the beſt place in the ſhippe: yea and they ſtow the ſhip ſo miſerablie full, that there is not a hole or an emptie place to be found, but it is full ſtuffed: and for all their profit, it is often times ſeene, that the chief Porter, that doth onlie command and looke ouer the reſt, getteth for his part in bribes for ſtowage of a ſhip, ſometimes ſeuen or 800 Dukats, and the waiters aſmuch, and all this onlie by gifts. Thoſe offices are giuen by fauor of the Viceroy and the Ve
                              •
                           dor de Falenda
                        ▪ which is the cauſe that the ſhips are often times laden ſo ful that they are in manner ready to ſinke: ſo that a man would think it were impoſſible for them either to row or ſtirre: becauſe ye ſailers & officers of the ſhips haue nothing to doe therewith, vntill the laſt hour that it ſetteth ſayl & thē it is deliuered into their handes, and the waiters and porters goe their waies, leauing the ſhip ful in euery place, euen to the vppermoſt Oarlop, where there ſtandeth commonlie 7 or 8 cheſtes, one aboue the other, both in the ſterne and foreſhippe, vpon the cables, in the forecaſtell, in the ſtirrige, and in euery place, which are all ful of great pots, fattes, cheſts, hennes cages, and ſuch like, ſo that it ſeemeth rather a Labyrinth or a Maze, then a ſhip: and ſo they commit themſelues to the grace of God and ſet ſayle: and often times it falleth out, that of 
                           〈◊〉
                         ſaylers which are aboue the ſhip (as it did in our ſhip) not aboue 
                           〈◊〉
                         of them could tell how to ſtéere or handle the R
                           •
                        ther: & beſides that, moſt of them were neuer at ſea before, but by fauor get their places, as all the reſt doe, ſo that when occaſion ſerueth, being at ſea, they ſtand looking one vpon an other, doing nothing but cry Miſericordia, and our Lady helpe vs.
                     In Cochiin there are a great number of boa
                           •
                        es called Tones, that are cut out of one peece of wood, and yet ſome of them are ſo great, that a man may lade 20 pipes of water in them. Theſe they carrie abord ye ſhips, that lie at the leaſt a mile within the ſea, and there they make price with them for a ſmall ſumme of money, and then they goe and fill the pipes themſelues, with pots which they haue for the purpoſe, and it is a great commoditie vnto them. This water is brought out of ye riuer of Cochin called Manga
                              •
                           e, 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         is verie good. Touching the towne and country of Cochin, I haue already declared in the deſcription of the Coaſt of Malabar
                        ▪ ſo that this ſhall ſuffice to ſhew you what the countrie of India is: and now I will ſhew vnto you the manner that is vſed in the ſhips when they ſayle home againe: which in part I haue alreadie touched, as alſo our departure and voyage from India to Li
                              •
                           bon.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 93. Chapter. Of my voyage and departure from India to Portingale
                     
                     
                        THe firſt of Ian. 1580,
                        1580 the Santa Ma
                              •
                           ia ſet ſayle, and becauſe it was one of the oldeſt ſhippes, it was firſt diſpatched away, by reaſō that the ſooner they depart from Cochin
                        ▪ they come in better time to the Cape de Bona Speranza, and the later they come thether, the more ſtorms & foule wether they haue, becauſe as thē the Sunne goeth further into the North, and leaueth the South parts. Therefore commonly they let the beſt and ſtrōgeſt ſhippes goe laſt, becauſe they are beſt able to hold out: and in the Iland of S. Helena they ſtay one for the other vntill the 25. day of May, & no longer, which is the time appointed by the king, and ſo goe in company together vnto Portingale, for from India vnto the Iland of S. Helena they need not keepe company, becauſe all that way they feare no Rouers, and from thence they haue all their Cannon ſhot pulled in, the better to paſſe the foule wether at the cape de bona Speranza. The 6 of Ianuary, the ſhip called our Ladie de Conſepcao ſet ſayle, the 10 of the ſame, the Admirall called S. Chriſtopher: the 12 the S. Anthony: the 15 the S. Thomas, which was the greateſt and the beſt ſhippe in all the Fleet, and richeſt of lading: and the 
                           
                              •
                           0 of the ſame Moneth, wee ſet ſayle, in our ſhip called the Santa Crus, being the laſt, where in was about 20
                              •
                           
                         men of all ſorts, as 
                           •
                        aylers, ſoldiers and ſlaues: for from India there goe but few ſoldiers without the Viceroyes paſſeport, by vertue whereof they goe to preſent their ſeruices, and to fetch their payes and duties for the ſame. And this they doe after they haue ſerued in India ſome yeares, & alſo when they haue abilitie to paſſe ouer:

for when they are poore, and haue no helpe, they muſt ſtay in I
                              •
                           dia, euen for neceſſities ſake, becauſe they haue no means to procure their paſſage, ſo that manie of them are conſtrayned to tarrie there, and to marrie with 
                           •
                        ores and Indian women, the better to maintain themſelues although it be with miſerie enough. For the charges of a mans voiage out of I
                              •
                           dia into Portin
                              •
                           al, is at the l
                           •
                        aſt 
                           ••
                         or 
                           
                              ••
                           0 Pardawes, and that onlie for meate and drinke, which a poore ſoldier c
                           •
                        n hardly compaſſe, vnleſſe he can procure ſome gentleman, Captaine, or ſome wealthy man in office▪ to be 
                           •
                        auorable vnto him, in helping him to performe his iourney. For in the voyages homewards the king giueth nothing to the ſoldiers and paſſingers, but free paſſ
                           •
                        ge for him ſelf and a cheſt of 
                           •
                        . ſpannes high and broad and 
                           •
                         in length: and that after they haue bene 
                           •
                         yeares in India, & for that Cheſt they pay neither fraught nor cuſtome: they likewiſe haue a Cheſt in the roomage, free of fraight, for which they pay cuſtome: and this they may ſell in India to any Marchant, as they commonlie doe, and is worth vnto them at the leaſt, 40 or 5
                              •
                           
                         Pardawes. Theſe places they call liberties, and hee that buyeth them, regiſtreth them in the name of him that he buyeth them of, to the end that in Portingale they may enioy the ſame libertie and priuiledge: all the ſaylers and Officers alſo of the ſhippes that ſayl in them frō 
                        Portin
                              •
                           al
                        ▪ haue likewiſe beſides their places in the ſhips, the forage of ſuch a cheſt allowed them, full of cuſtome and fraight. All theſe thinges are very ſharply looked vnto: for although the ſhips and goods are farmed, yet when they ariue at Lisbon
                        ▪ all the cheſts are brought into the Indian houſe, and there viſited, to ſee if any goods be in them, that is forbidden to be brought out of India, as pepper▪ Anill, or Indigo, and other ſuch wares as are farmed of the king: & if any be found, it is preſently forfaited, and all the wares that are in ſuch cheſts are likewiſe valued, ſo that if they amount vnto more then the value of 
                           〈◊〉
                         Milreyes, they muſt pay cuſtome for the ouerplus, which in the tyme of the kings of Portingale was not vſed: for then they were accuſtomed to carrie their cheſtes home, and to ſhew them only to the waiters: and although the poore ſaylers and Officers doe much compl
                           •
                        yne for the loſſe & breaking of their liberties, yet can they not be heard: and thus there come but few Soldiers out of 
                           〈◊〉
                        , for the cauſes aforeſayd: for I cert
                           •
                        nlie beleeue that of 15
                              ••
                           
                         Soldiers and more yt yearelie are ſent thether out of Portingal, there returneth not a hundreth again, ſome 
                           •
                        ying there in the countrie, others beeing caſt away, and ſlayne by diuers occaſions, and the reſt by pouertie not able to returne againe: and ſo againſt their willes are forced to ſtay in the Countrie. If anie of them doe chance to come, it is with ſome Viceroy, Captaine, or other Gentleman, or perſon, that hath borne office or authoritie: and when ſuch men come ouer, they alwaies take ſome Soldiers with them, to whome they giue meate and drinke, and yet are ſuch as are of their acquaintāce, and that long before had bene at their commandements: which they doe for the moſt part vpon a certaine pryde and vaine glorie: and in this ſort there may yearelie come 20 or 3
                              •
                           
                         Soldiers ouer in each Shippe, which haue their Slaues and Blacke Mores with them: ſo that they come cleane and ſweet home, both for Linnen and other thinges, becauſe Linnen in India is verie good cheap: and the Shippes when they returne home, are cleaner then when they ſet out of Portingale, becauſe they haue fewer men in them, and ſuch as come out of India, bring all their neceſſaries with them, beſides that the ſhippe is verie ſweete, by reaſon of the ſpice that is laden in it.
                     The partition of the ſhip is in this manner: the Pilot hath his Cabbin aboue in the hinder part of the ſhippe, on the right ſide, where he hath two or thrée roomes, and neuer commeth vnder hatches, nor downe into the foreſhip but ſtandeth only and commaundeth the Maſter of the ſhip to hoiſe or let fall the ſailes, and to looke vnto his courſe, how they ſhall ſteere to take the height of the ſunne & euery day to write and marke what paſſeth and how they ſaile, with what tokens, winde and weather they haue euerie day: the Maſter hath his Cabin in the ſame place, behind the Pilotes Cabins, on the left hand, with as manie places and roomes as the Pylot hath, where he ſtandeth and commandeth, with a ſiluer whiſtle▪ & looketh onlie to the Mayne Maſte and her Sayles, and ſo backwards: yet he hath the care of all the Shippe, and whatſoeuer belongeth to it, and commandeth all thinges, as to make & mend the ſayls, which he cutteth out, & the ſaylers ſow them: he looketh alſo if there be any fault in the ſhippe, and cauſeth it to be mended, & as need requireth, to draw their Cannon in, and againe to put it out. If hee wanteth any thing, as cloth for ſailes, nailes, ropes, or any ſuch like thinges as are needful, ſhe muſt aſke them of the Factor and purſer of the ſhippe, which preſently are deliuered vnto him, with a note of his hand in the booke to be accountable for it. The chiefe Boteſon hath his Cabbin in the forecaſtle,

and hath commandement and gouernement ouer the Fouke maſt, and the fore ſayles: hée hath alſo a ſiluer whiſtle like the maſter, and taketh care for all thinges belonging to the Fouke maſte, and for the faſt binding of the ankers. The Guardian or quartermaſter hath his Cabbin cloſe by the great maſt outward on the left hand, for on the right hand ſtandeth the ſcullerie and kitchin, where they dreſſe their meat, he weareth a ſiluer whiſtle and hath charge to ſée the ſwabers pumpe to make the ſhip cleane, to looke to the ropes & cauſe them to bee mended, and to the boate which he commonly ruleth: the Gunner hath his Cabbin inward from the maſt, hard by the Ruther vnder the firſt Oorlope, and muſt alwaies ſit by the maine maſt looking vppon the maſter both night and day, that as the Maſter whiſtleth to will the Gunners to draw in their péeces, or to thruſt them out, he may bée readie ſo to doe: he likewiſe taketh ca
                           •
                        e for the peeces and the thinges belonging to them: when they haue cauſe to vſe them, the vnder Pilot doth nothing but helpe the chiefe Pilot & watch his quarter: they haue likewiſe two or three of the beſt ſaylers, that doe nothing els but command in the Pilots roome whē he ſléepeth. The ſaylers haue moſt of their Cabins in the forecaſtle, and there abouts, & the Gunners behinde by the maſter Gunner, vnder the vpper decke, & doe nothing els but with their inſtruments put the great peeces forth, or draw them in as they are cō
                        manded, the ſwabers muſt doe all whatſoeuer they are bidden to doe by the officers, but neuer touch the Ruther: for the ſaylers doe only ſtéere and rule the ſhip when néed requireth, but not the pumpe, neyther doe they hoyſe vp the maine ſayle, for the ſouldiers and ſlaues vſe to doe that, the ſwabers pumpe, & the Carpenter doth ſuch worke as is to bee done, the Cooper in like ſort and the Calker, ſo that if the ſhippe were ſincking, not any of them will doe more than belongeth to his charge, and what further is to bee done, they will ſtand ſtill & looke vppon it: the Captaine hath the Gallerie and the Cabbin behind, he commandeth onely ouer the ſouldiers, & ſuch as watch by night, the Pilot, Maſter, and the Boteſon, are ſerued in very good ſorte with their ſiluer lampes, beakers, cups, & bowles, euery man by himſelfe, and are waited on by their ſlaues and ſeruants, and haue enough of euery thing, but the other ſaylers, & ſwabers haue not ſuch ſtore, but indure more hardnes, for euery man muſt prouide for himſelfe, as we told you before. Now you muſt vnderſtand that in their ſhips there is no aueridge: for that when there happeneth any loſſe, or that any goods are throwne ouer board, hée ſtandeth to the loſſe that oweth the goods, without any more accounts, and that commonly falleth out vpon the poore ſwabers, for they vſually haue their cheſtes ſtanding vppon the hatches▪ becauſe they haue nothing to giue vnto the Porters that they might haue a good place for them, as the others of greater abilitie vſe to doe, and when any ſtorme or hurt chanceth, than they throw the thinges ouerboard that firſt comes to hand, without reſpect of perſons 
                           •
                        nye aueridge to bee made.
                     In this ſort ſetting ſaile, we held our courſe ſouth ſouth Eaſt for the ſpace of 150. miles, till we came to the Equinoctiall line, & from thence till we were vnder ſeauen degrées in the ſame courſe, and from thence ſouth Weſt and by Weſt, vnto the cape de Bona Speranza, which way was neuer vſed before that time, for they vſed to ſaile from Cochiin ſouth weſt, and ſouth weſt and by South, betwéene the Iſlands of Maldiua, and a thouſand other Iſlands and ſands, vnto the Iland of Saint Laurence, and ſo to the cape: but after that the Pilot had loſt the Saint Iames vpon the ſhallowes of India, and eſcaped aliue (and was now Pilot in the Saint Thomas, béeing the beſt ſhippe in all our Fléete) hee had the fore Voyage, and kept aloofe two or thrée hundred miles out into the Sea, cleane from all Iſlandes, ſandes, or cliffes: ſaying that the caſting away of ſo many ſhips (whereof no newes or tidinges could euer be heard) was, that they were caſt away vpon the ſands, euen as it chanced vnto him, and to auoide the dangers thereof, as alſo to winne the fauour of the King and the officers of the Admiraltie, he was the firſt that tooke vpon him to diſcouer that way, with the ſhip wherein my Lord the Archbiſhop ſayled, and is almoſt the ſame way that the ſhippes that come from Malacca
                        ▪ do hold when they ſaile to Portingall, where they ſée neither Ilands nor Sandes, nor any other thing but onelie the plaine ſea, & ſo hee came into Portingale, certifying the Admiraltie of that new way, and although hee was caſt in priſon for the ſame cauſe, yet by fauor he was preſently releaſed, and the Admiraltie perceauing it to be ſo great a danger for the ſhips to ſaile amōgſt the Iſlands and Sands, (which they thought to bée the chiefe cauſe of the loſſe of ſo manie ſhips) haue expreſly commanded that the Pilots ſhould vſe that new diſcouered way, according to the ſaide Pilots information, therby to auoide all danger: but that is not the cauſe of their caſting away, although many times they are the means of much miſchiefe: but the chiefe reaſon is the vnreaſonable lading, and charging of the ſhips, the vnſkilfull

ſeamen, and the ſlacke viſiting or ſearching of the ſhips, to ſee if they bee fit to ſayle, and haue all thinges that they want.
                     By theſe and ſuch like meanes the ſhips are dayly loſt, as in other places by examples and true witneſſes I haue already declared, and as the ſame Pilot that firſt founde this new way, did well approue and verifie to bée true, in the Saint Thomas, that the Sands or Iſlands did him no hurt, but onely the ouerlading of her, wherewith the ſhip was by the Cape burſt in péeces, as hereafter I will ſhew. Notwithſtanding this way is not therefore to be diſliked, although it bee ſomewhat further about, but it is a very good way and wholly out of all danger of Sandes and Iſlandes, whereby they doe auoid the Iſland of Maldiua, with other droughtes and ſands about the ſame.
                     The 30. day of Ianuarie in the night, we paſſed the Equinoctiall line, and the next day after we diſcried a ſhippe, which we thought to bée the Saint Thomas, and the ſame day one of our Boyes fell ouerboard, whome to ſaue wee made all the haſte wee could to get out our ſmall boate, but becauſe it ſtood full of thinges, we could not ſo ſoone get it forth, but that in the meane time the boy was caſt at the leaſt two miles behind vs, and ſo was drowned.
                     The third of Februarie the ſhip (we ſaw) came cloſe by vs, and then wée knew it to be the Saint Thomas, wherewith wee made towards it to ſpeake with them: but when they began to know our ſhippe by the ropes, that were all white, made of Indian Cairo, and knowing that we were left behind them at Cochiin, and thinking when they deſcried vs, wee had béene one of the ſhippes that firſt ſet ſaile, as alſo that their ſhip was accounted one of the beſt for ſayle in all the fleete: for very pride and high ſtomacke they would not ſtay to ſpeake with vs, but made from vs againe: which our officers perceiuing, did likewiſe winde from them, euery one doing his beſt to get before the other.
                     By this and ſuch like ſignes of pride, the Portingales do often caſt themſelues away, and as it may bee coniectured▪ it was one of the chiefe cauſes of the loſſe of the ſaint Thomas: for that they vſed all the meanes they could to ſayle well, and that they might paſſe the Cape before vs, wherof they vſe to brag, when they meete at the Iſland of Saint Helena, as if it were done by their wiſedome: for ſo it fell out with the Saint Thomas, that comming to the cape de Bona Speranza, it had a contrarie winde, whereby they ſtrucke all their ſailes, and ſo lay driuing againſt the waues of the ſea, which doe there fall againſt a ſhippe, as if it ſtroke againſt a Hill: ſo that if the Shippes were of hard ſtones, yet in the end they would breake in péeces, much more ſuch Shippes as are made of wood, and this is commonly their manner, thereby the ſooner to paſſe the Cape: which our ſhippe could not beare, ſo that we put backe againe with the winde, yet as little as we might, thereby to auoide the force of the ſea as much as we could: but becauſe the Pilot of the ſaint Thomas truſted ouermuch in her ſtrength, & did purpoſely meane to be before vs all, thereby as hee thought to win the praiſe, the ſhip did (as it well appeared) lie ſtill and driue without any ſailes, which they call Payrar, and ſo by the great force and ſtrength of the ſeas, together with the ouerlading, was ſtriken in péeces, & ſwallowed in the ſea, both men and all that was within her, as wee might well perceiue comming vnto the Cape, by the ſwimming of whole cheſts, fats, balles, péeces of maſts, & dead men tied vnto bords, and ſuch like fearefull tokens: the other ſhips alſo that ariued in the Iland of Saint Helena, told vs likewiſe that they had ſéene the like, moſt pittifull ſights, which was no ſmall loſſe of ſo great treaſure, and ſo many men: ſo that we which beheld it, thought our ſelues not frée from the like danger. It was one of the richeſt ſhips, that in many yeares had ſayled out of India, & only by reaſon of the good report it had to be ſo good of ſayle, being but new, for as thē it was but her ſecond voyage: ſo that euerie man deſired to goe, and to lode their wares in her. In the ſame ſhip went Don Paulo de L
                              •
                           ma Periera, that raiſed the ſiege before Malacca, & had ſerued the king 30. yeares in India, & had obtained many braue victories, thinking as thē to be in the top of his honor, and to be much aduanced by the king. He alſo carried with him a great treaſure in Iewels and other riches, as alſo his wife, children and one of his brethren, with many other gentlemen and ſouldiers that bare him company, thinking to haue good fortune in their Voiage: there were likewiſe 10, or 12. gentlewomen, ſome of thē hauing their huſbands in the ſhip, others whoſe huſbandes were in Portingall, ſo that to conclude, it was full of people, and moſt of the Gentilitie of India, & in all our ſhips there were many that ſéeing vs in daunger would ſay they might haue gone ſafely in the Saint, Thomas thinking it vnpoſſible that it ſhould bee caſt awaie. Therefore it is manifeſtly ſéene, that all the works and nauigations of men are but méer vanities, and that wee muſt onely put our truſt in God, for that if God be not with vs in our actions, all our labour is in vaine,

But returning to our matter, each ſhippe did their beſt to be firſt, vntill the ſeuentéenth of Februarie that we got before the S. Thomas, being in the South vnder ſeuen de, grées, and from that time forwards we ſaw her no more, but onely the tokens of ye caſting of her away about the Cape de bona Speranza, which after being at the Iſland of S. Helena, was tolde vs more at large. The ſame day we had a great ſtorme of wind and raine, ſo that the Ruther of our great maſte by force of the Sea was broken And from the line we had a North and northweſt wind with continuall raynes, ſtormes and fowle weather, neuer ceaſing vntill wee came vnder 20. degrees, which was vpon the 25. of Februarie, and then wee had a Southeaſt wind, with fayrer weather (called by the Portingalles the generall wind) which they commonly finde and looke for vnder 12. degrees: but we had it not before we were vnder 
                           
                              •
                           0. degrees: the cauſe whereof wee thought to be, for that we had put ſo farre into the ſea, out of the common way. This wind commonly holdeth vnto 27. or 28. degrées little more or leſſe, and then they muſt looke for all kindes of windes and weathers, vntill they come to the Cape de bona Speranza, without any certainty of winds.
                     The 5. of March being vnder 25 degrées, we had an Eaſt winde, with a moſt great ſtorme, and exceeding raine, ſo that our Ruther-ſtaffe brake, and two more that we had in the ſhippe, one after the other being put vnto it broke likewiſe, with the pinne and ye ioynt wherein the ende of the Ruther hung: and we were forced to lie and driue without ſteering, hauing ſtricken all our ſayles, and the ſhippe ſo toiſed by the waues on all ſides, that wee had not one drie place in all the ſhip. In this ſort wee lay driuing for the ſpace of two dayes and two nights together, with a continuall ſtorme and fowle weather with rayne. The ſame night we ſaw vppon the maine yarde, and in many other places a certaine ſigne, which the Portingalles call Corpo Santo, or the holy body of brother Peter Gonſalue
                              •
                           , but the Spaniards call it S. Elmo, and the Greekes (as ancient writers rehearſe, and Ouid among the reſt) vſed to call it Helle and Phryxus. Whenſoeuer that ſigne ſheweth vpon the Maſte or maine yarde, or in any other place, it is commonly thought, that it is a ſigne of better weather: when they firſt perceiue it, the maiſter or the chiefe boteſwaine whiſtleth, and commaundeth euery man to ſalute it with a Salue corpo Santo, and a miſ
                              •
                           ricordia, with a very great cry and exclamation. This conſtellation (as Aſtronomers do write) is ingendred of great moyſture and vapors, and ſheweth like a candle that burneth dimly and skippeth from one place to another, neuer lying ſtill. We ſaw fiue of them together, all like the light of a candle, which made mee wonder▪ and I ſhould haue hardly beleeued it, but that I ſaw it, and looked verie earneſtly vpon it: and although it was fowle weather, whereby I had no great leaſure to think vpon ſuch curious thinges, notwithſtanding I came purpoſely from vnder the hatches to note it. Thoſe fiue lights the Portingals cal Coroa de noſſa Se
                              •
                           liora, that is, deere Ladies Crowne, and haue great hope therein when they ſee it. And therewithall our men being all in great feare and heauines, and almoſt out of hope, began againe to reuiue and to be glad, as if thereby they had beene fully aſſured of better comfort.
                     The ſeuenth of March wee had better weather, and then we tooke counſell how to mend our Ruther: ſome were of opinion we ſhoulde ſaile to Moſambique, and rule the Ruther with a rope: others were of contrary opinion, and ſaid we might mend it abord, and ſo performe our voyage: ſo that at the laſt we pulled certaine péeces out of the ſhips ſide, (for we had not brought one with vs, as néede required) but being pulled forth, they were all too little, and woulde not ſerue. In the ende wee ſound it conuenient to take one of the boſſes in our ſhippe, and thereof to make an Anuile, and of two O
                           •
                        e hydes a payre of bellowes, wherewith wee went to worke: and of a péece of an olde hooke or dragge, wee tooke two or three ends, whereof but one woulde ſerue, and that halfe broken, and the ſplinters wee bounde with an Iron hoope: and ſo being fitter to the Ruther, wee ſet forwards in the name of God. This asked vs two dayes worke before wee could diſpatch it▪ & thē we hoyſed ſayle again with great ioy, & gaue diuers almes to our Lady and the Saintes, w
                           •
                        th many promiſes of better life, as being in miſery m
                           •
                        n commonly do. The day after we tooke the height of the Sunne, and found our ſelues to be vnder 28. degrees and two thirdes, being in the height of the land called 
                           
                              •
                           erra D
                              •
                           natal, although wee were at the leaſt 
                           •••
                        . miles to ſeaward from the lande, and there wee had good weather with a Southeaſt winde. In this countrey called 
                           
                              •
                           erra Do
                              •••
                           a
                              •
                           
                         which reacheth to 3
                              •
                           . degrees
                           •
                         and at the Cape de bona Sp
                              ••
                           anza, and is the hardeſt paſſage that is in all the voyage, and oftentimes they feare the land of Natal more th
                           •
                        n 
                           •
                        he 
                           •
                        ape: for there commonly is ſtormy and fowle weather▪ and many ſhippes haue 
                           •
                        eene ſpoyled and caſt away, as the Portingalles recordes

can verie well ſhew. In the ſame countrey alſo wee founde the ſignes of the caſting away of the S. Thomas, ſo that to to conclude, commonly the ſhippes doe there pay tribute by caſting ſome lading ouer bord, or elſe leaue body and all behind: and therefore it is called Terra Donatal, that is to ſay, the lande of Chriſtmaſſe: and for this cauſe they neuer paſſe it without great feare but with good watch, and great foreſight: all their ropes being ſtiffe, and well looked vnto▪ the peeces drawne in, and all cheſtes, pottes, fattes and other roomage that are not ſtowed vnder hatches, being throwne ouer borde into the ſea, and euery thing ſetled and made ready in his place: for that in this coaſt they haue one houre fayre weather, and another houre ſtormie weather, in ſuch manner as if heauen and earth ſhould waſte and be conſumed. In that place likewiſe with a cleare and fayre weather there commeth a certayne cloude, which in ſhew ſéemeth no bigger then a mans fiſt, and therefore by the Portingals it is called O
                              •
                           ho de Boy, or Oxe eye) and although as then it is cleare, and calme weather, and that the ſailes for want of wind do beate againſt the maſtes, yet as ſoone as they perceyue that cloude, they muſt preſently ſtrike all their ſayles: for that commonly it is vpon the ſhips before they perceyue it, and with ſuch a ſtorme and noyſe, that without al doubt it would ſtrike a ſhippe into the water, if there be not great care had to looke vnto it: as it chaunced to the ſecond fléete, after the Portingalles had diſcouered the Indie
                              •
                           , there being ten or twelue ſhippes in company, which in ſuch a calme and fayre weather let all their ſailes hang, and regarded them not, and this cuſtome they obſerued in this our nauigation, for ſodainely the cloud came with a moſt horrible ſtorme, and fell vppon them before they coulde preuent it, whereby ſeuen or eight of them were ſunke into the ſeas, and neuer heard of againe, and the reſt with great hurt and much daunger eſcaped. But from that time forwards they looked better to themſelues, and haue learned to know it, ſo that at this preſent they watch for it, and yet it giueth them worke enough to doe. This ſtorme falling ouer their heads in this ſorte, continueth through the whole Countrey of Terra Donatal, vntil you paſſe the Cape de bona Speranza.
                     
                     The 12. of March being vnder 31. degrees, wée were right in the winde, and had a calme, whereupon we ſtroke all our ſayles, and ſo lay driuing 4. dayes together (which the Portingalles call Payraes) hauing a verie high ſea, which toſſed our ſhippes in ſuch ſort, that the Saylers eſtéemed it to be worſe then a ſtorme: for that there the waues of the Sea mette in ſuch ſorte on all ſides, and claſped the ſhippe in ſuch manner betwixt them, that they made all her ribbes to cracke, and in a manner to open, ſo that it is very dangerous for the ſhippes. We were in very great care for our Fouke-maſte, and therefore we bound our Maſtes and all the ſhippes about with Cables, as harde as poſſible wee might. This continued till the 17. of March, and then we had a little wind, ſo that we hoiſed ſaile againe: but it continued no longer then to the next day, and then we fell againe into the wind, and had a ſtorme: wherewith our maine yard brake, and then againe wee ſtroke al our ſails, and ſo lay driuing or Payraering, as the Portingalles call it. In the meane time we mended our maine yard, and ſo wee continued driuing without our ſailes till the 20. of March, with great riſings of the waues of the ſea, which much tormented vs, as in that place they commonly doe: all the which time we were vnder 31. degrées, and could not paſſe forward. In that time we ſaw many birdes, which the Portingals call Antenalen, and are as bigge as Duckes.
                     The 2
                              •
                           . of March wee had a little winde, but very ſharpe, yet we hoyſed our ſailes, and ſayled by the wind. The next night after, we had a calme, which continued to the 22. day, and then we fell againe into the winde, with ſo great a ſtorme, that wee were compelled to ſtrike all our ſayles, which wee coulde hardly pull in, and could not ſtay the ſhippe in any ſort, it draue ſo faſt: whereby wee were in great daunger, ſo that wee were compelled to binde the bonnet about the Fore-caſtle, which was our ſayle, (for other ſayle we might not beare) and ſo ſayled backwarde, whether the winde would driue vs, thereby to haue ſome eaſe, and yet we had enough to doe, for wee were compelled to throwe our great Boate ouer bord, with all the cheſts, pots, and veſſelles, that ſtoode vpon the Hatches, with other wares, ſuch as came firſt to hand. This ſtorme continued for the ſpace of two dayes & three nights without ceaſing.
                     The 25. of March (being the day before Palme ſunday) we had a better wind and weather, after we had giuen great almes to our bleſſed Ladie of the Annuntiation, whoſe Feaſt was vppon that day, and again hoyſed vp our ſayles, keeping our courſe towards the Cape. At the ſame time we had a diſeaſe in our ſhip, that tooke vs in ye mouth, lippes, throate, and tongue, which tooke off the ſkin and made them ſwell, whereby they could not eate, but with great paine, and not one in the ſhip but had it.
                     
                        The eight of Aprill in the Morning, after we had ſayled fifteene daies before the winde, towards the Cape, we perceiued ſome ſignes of the land, which is greene water: but wee found no ground, yet was it not aboue fortie miles from the land, according to the Pilots iudgement. We ſaw there alſo diuers of the Birds called Mangas de Velludo, that is to ſay, Veluet ſleues, for they haue vpon the ends of their wings, blacke points like Veluet, all the reſt beeing white and ſomewhat gray, which they hold for a certaine ſigne of land that lyeth within the Cape de Bona Speranza called Baya de la Goa, or the Bay of the Lake, and lyeth vnder thirtie thrée degrées & a halfe, from the coaſt that reacheth towards Moſambique.
                     
                     The ninth of Aprill at night, we were againe right in the winde, being vnder thirtie fiue degrees and a halfe, with a great ſtorme, and foule wether, that continued till the 14. of the ſame Month, ſo that we were compelled, (not being able to endure the force of the Sea, with the continuall ſtorme and foule wether) to ſayle back againe before the wind, with the halfe of our Fouke ſayle vp, for that wee found our ſelues not ſtrong enough to driue without ſayles, as the ſhippes commonly vſe to doe, which oftentimes is the cauſe of their caſting away, as it may well be iudged, by reaſon of the great force and ſtrength of the waues that runne there: ſo that it ſeemeth almoſt impoſſible for a ſhip to beare out ſo great a force, though it were of Iron. And although we ſayled before the winde, yet wée had danger inough: for that the Sea came behinde and ouer our ſhippe, and filled all the Hatches, whereby wee were compelled to binde our Maſtes, Cables, and all the ſhippe round about with Ropes, that with ye great force of the Sea it might not ſtirre, and flye in péeces. And forced wee were to Pumpe night and day, hauing at each ende of the Fouke-yarde, a rope that reached to the Pilot, and at each rope there ſtoode fifteene or ſixteene men, the Pilot ſitting in his ſeate, and the vnder Pilot behinde vpon the ſterne of the ſhippe, to marke the courſe of the Sea, and ſo to aduertiſe the other Pilot. At the ruther there ſtoode ten or twelue men, and the other Saylers vpon the Hatches to rule the ſayles, & as the waues came and couered the ſhippe, the vnder Pilot called, and then the chiefe Pilot ſpake to them at the Ruther to hold ſtiffe, and commaunded the ropes that were at the Fouke yarde to bee pulled ſtiffe: the Saylers likewiſe and the chiefe Boteſwaine ſtanding on the Hatches, to keepe the ſhip right in the waues, for if the waues had once gotten vs about, that they had entred on the ſides of the ſhippe, it had certainly beene ſaid of vs, Requieſcant in pace. And it was there almoſt as cold as it is here with vs in winter, when it freeſeth not: whereby wee were all ſore toyled, and in a manner out of hart, ſo that wee eſteemed our ſelues cleane caſt away: for we were forced by turnes to go to the ruther & from thence to the pumpe, (not one excepted) ſo that we had no time to ſleepe, reſt, eate, nor cloath our ſelues: and to help vs the better the ſtaffe of our Ruther brake in péeces, and had almoſt ſlaine two or three of our men. But God had pittie on vs, ſo that there happened no other hurt but that ſome of them were a litle amazed. This continued to the fourteenth of April, without any change, whereupon all the Officers of the ſhippe aſſembled together with others of the companie, taking counſell what was beſt to be done, and perceiuing the ſhippe not to bee ſtrong enough to paſſe the Cape, they concluded by proteſtation (whereunto they ſubſcribed their hands) to ſayle with the ſhip to Moſambique, and there to winter and to repaire the ſhippe, and prouide all neceſſaries for it, which greatly greeued the common ſort becauſe they did find as great danger in turning backe againe to Moſambique, as to paſſe the Cape, for that they were to ſayle againe by the land Donatal, which they feared, as much as the Cape: and alſo though they did arriue at Moſambique, yet they accounted it as much as a loſt Viage. For that they muſt ſtay there till the next yeare, and there ſpend all they haue, for that all things that come thether are brought out of India: ſo that euerie thing is there as 
                           •
                        eare as gold, which would bee hard for the poore Saylers and Swabbers, as hauing but little meanes to relieue themſelues, and therby they ſhould be conſtrained to ſel that litle they had broght with them, for halfe the value: and beſides that they were as then about 
                           •
                        00. miles frō 
                        Moſambique. Wherefore there grew great noyſe and murmuring in the ſhip, among the Saylers, that curſed the Captaine and the Officers, becauſe the ſhip was badly prouided, for it had not one rope more then hung about the ſhip nor any thing wherof to make them, if thoſe that we had, ſhould haue chanced to breake. The Captaine laide the faulte on the Maſter, becauſe hee aſked them not when hee was at land: and the Ma
                           •
                        ter ſaide that he had ſpoken for them, and that the Cairo, or Hemp (whereof in India the ropes are made) was deliuered vnto the Captaine, and that he had ſold ye beſt part thereof, to put the money in his purſe: & that was the cauſe why we wanted: with this diſorder they bring their matters to paſſe, not once remembring what

may after fall out: but when they are in danger, thē ther is nothing els, but crying Miſericordia, and calling to our lady for helpe: the Captaine could not tell what to anſwere ſéeing vs in that trouble, but ſaid, that he maruelled at nothing ſo much, as why our Lord God ſuffered them (beeing ſo good Chriſtians and Catholiques, as they were) to paſſe the Cape, with ſo great torments and dangerous weather, hauing ſo great and ſtrong ſhippes, and that the Engliſhmen, béeing (as he ſaid) Heretickes, and blaſphemers of God, with ſo ſmal & weake veſſels, & paſſed ye Cape ſo eaſilie: for they had receaued newes in India, that an Engliſh Shippe had paſſed the Cape with verie great eaſe. And ſo wee made backe againe towards Moſambique, being in great diſpaire, for that no man cared for laying his hand to worke, and hardlie would any man obay the Officers of the Shippe. In this manner ſayling, wee perceiued diuers veſſelles, and bordes with dead men bound vpon them, driuing in the Sea: which comforted vs a little, thinking that ſome other of the ſhippes were in the ſame taking, and had throwne ſome of their goods ouer bord, and ſo made towardes Moſambique before vs: whereby we thought to haue company, and that we alone were not vnfortunate, for that is commonlie ſaid, that companions in miſerie are a comfort one to an other, and ſo it was to vs: but I would to God it had bene ſo as we imagined, but it was farre worſe then turning backe againe, for thoſe were the ſignes of the caſting away of the S. Thomas, as being in the Iland of S. Helena, as we were afterwards aduertiſed.
                     The 15. of April we had an other great calme, which continued till the 17 day, and taking the hight of the Sunne, we found our ſelues to be vnder 37 degrees, to the great admiration of al the company, for that being (as I ſaid) vnder 35 degrees, and hauing ſayled for the ſpace of 5 dayes with ſo great a wind and ſtormy weather towards Moſambique, we ſhould rather by al mens reaſon, haue leſſened our degrees, & by eſtimation wee made account to haue bene vnder 30 or 32 degrees at the higheſt: but the cauſe why our ſhippe went backward in that ſort againſt wind and weather towards the Cape, thinking wee made towards Moſambique, was by the water, which in thoſe countries carieth with a verie ſtrong ſtreame towards the cape, as the Pylot tould vs he had proued at other times: yet he thought not that the water had runne with ſo great a ſtreame, as now by experience he found it did: ſo as it ſéemed that God miraculouſlie againſt all mans reaſon and iudgement, and all the force of wind and ſtormes would haue vs paſſe the Cape, whē we were leaſt in hope thereof: whereby we may plainelie perceiue that all mens actions without the hand of God, are of no moment. The ſame day againe we ſaw gréene water, and the birdes called Mangas de Velludo, or veluet ſléeues, which are certain ſignes of the cape de bona Speranza, which put vs once againe in hope to paſſe it: and about euening a ſwallow flew into our ſhippe, wherat they much reioiced, ſaying that it was a ſign and foreſhowing, that our Lady had ſent the Swallow on bord to comfort vs, and that we ſhould paſſe the Cape: wherewith they agreed once againe to proue if we could paſſe it, ſéeing we had ſuch ſignes and tokens to put vs in good comfort, that God would help vs. This being concluded, we ſung the Letany, with Ora pro nobis, and gaue many almes, with promiſes of pilgrimages and viſitations, and ſuch like things, which was our dayly worke. With that the ſaylers & others began to take courage, and to be luſtie, euery man willinglie doing his office, offering rather to loſe life and welfare in aduenturing to paſſe the Cape, then with full aſſurance of their ſafetie to returne vnto Moſambique: we had as then great waues, and very bigge water in the ſea, which left vs not till wee came to the other ſide of the Cape.
                     The 18 of Aprill we fell againe into the wind, with as great ſtormes and foule weather as euer we had before, ſo that we thought verily we ſhould haue bene caſt away: for that at euerie minute the ſea couered our ſhip with water, & to lighten her, we caſt diuers cheſtes, and much Cinamon, with other thinges, that came firſt to hand, ouer bord, wherewith euerie man made account to die, and began to confeſſe themſelues, and to aſke each other forgiuenes, thinking without more hope, that our laſt day was come. This ſtorme continued in this ſort, at the leaſt, for the ſpace of 24 houres: in the mean time great almes were giuen in our ſhippe to many Virgin Maries, and other Saints, with great deuotion & promiſe of other wonderfull things when they came to land: at the laſt God comforted vs, and ſent vs better weather for that the 19 of A
                              ••
                           ill the wether began to cleéere vp, and therewith we were in better comfort▪
                     
                     The 20. of Aprill we tooke the hight of the Sunne, and found it to be 
                           
                              •
                           6 degrées: and againe we ſaw greene water, and ſome birds which they call Alcatraces, and many Seawolues, which they hold for certain ſignes of the cape de Bona Sperāza, & as we thought were hard by the land▪ but yet ſaw none: the ſame day we had the wind ſomewhat fuller,

and were in great hope to paſſe the Cape, ſo that the men began to be in better comfort, by reaſon of the ſignes we haue ſeene. All that day we ſaw greene water, till the 22 of Apr. vpon which day twice, and in the night following, we caſt out the Lead, and found no ground, which is a good ſigne that wee had paſſed the Cape called das Agulhas, or the cape of needles, which lieth vnder 35 degrees, and is about 20 miles from the Cape de bona Speranza, which lieth vnder 34 degrées & a half. And becauſe that about this cape Das Agulhas, there is ground found, at the leaſt 30 or 40 miles from the land, we knew wee were paſt it: as alſo by the colour of the water, and the birds, which are alwaies found in thoſe countries: and the better to aſſure vs thereof, the great & high ſea left vs, that had ſo long tormented vs, and then we found a ſmoother water, much differing from the former: ſo that as thē we ſeemed to be come out of hell into Paradice, with ſo great ioy, that we thought we were within the ſight of ſome hauen, and withall had a good winde, though ſomewhat cold.
                     The 23 of Aprill we paſſed the Cape de Bona Speranza, with a great and generall gladnes, it being as then 3 months and three dayes after we ſet ſayle from Cochiin, not once ſeeing any land or ſand at all, but onelie theſe aſſured tokens of the ſaid Cape, which happened very ſeldome: for that the pilots doe alwaies vſe what meanes they can to ſee the cape, and to know the land, thereby to know certainlie that they are paſt it: for then their degrees muſt leſſen, and there they may as ſoone make towards Moſambique, as to the Iland of S. Helena: for although they can well perceiue it by ye water, yet is it neceſſary for them to ſee the land, the better to ſet their courſe vnto S. Helena, wherein they muſt alwaies kéepe on the left hand: otherwiſe it were impoſſible for them to come at it, if they leaue that courſe: for if they once paſſe it, they can not come to it again, becauſe there bloweth continually but one kind of wind, which is South eaſt: and thus hauing paſſed the Cape, we got before the wind.
                     The 24 of Aprill the Pilot willed vs to giue the Bona viagen vnto the Cape de Bona Speranza, according to the cuſtome, with great ioy and gladnes of all that were in the ſhippe: for that as thē they aſſure themſelues that they ſayl to Portingal, and not to turne againe into India (for ſo long as they are not paſt the Cape they are alwaies in doubt) and as then we were about 50. miles beyond the Cape. The ſignes and tokens whereby they know themſelues certainly to haue paſſed the Cape, are great heapes and péeces of thicke réedes, that alwaies thereabouts driue vppon the water, at leaſt 15 or 
                           ••
                         miles from the land: as alſo certaine birds by the Portingals called Fey
                              •
                           oins, ſomewhat greater then ſea m
                           •
                        w
                           •
                        s, being white & full of blacke ſpots ouer al their bodies, & very eaſie to be known from al other birds. Theſe are certain ſignes whereby the Pilotes doe certainly perſwade themſelues that they are paſt the Cape, and hauing paſſed it, they ſet their courſe for S. Helena Northweſt, & Northweſt & by weſt. The 27 of Apr. we were right in the wind, and ſo continued till the next day, and thē we had a calm, being vnder 3
                           •
                         degrees on Portingal ſide. The 
                           
                              •
                           9 of Apr. w
                           •
                         g
                           •
                        t before the wind, which is the generall wind yt alwaies bloweth in thoſe countries al the whole yere, vntill y• come to the Equinoctial line, and is a Southeaſt wind: ſo yt they may wel let their ſayles ſtand, & lay them down to ſl
                           •
                        ep, for in ye greateſt wind yt bloweth there, they need not ſtrike their maine yard aboue half the maſt.
                     The 12 of May, in the morning betimes▪ we diſcouered the Ilād of S. Helena, whereat there was ſo great ioy in the ſhip, as if we had bene in heauen: & as then we were about 2 miles from ye land, the Iland lying from vs Weſt, ſouth weſt: whereunto we ſayled ſo cloſe, that with a caliuer ſhot we might reach vnto the ſhore: being hard by it, we ſayled about a corner of the land, that from vs lay Northweſt, which hauing compaſſed wee ſayled cloſe by the land. Weſt, North weſt: the land on that ſide beeing ſo high and ſtill, that it ſéemed to be a wall that reached vnto the ſkyes. And in that ſort we ſayled about a mile and a half, and compaſſed about ye other corner that lay weſtward from vs, which corner béeing compaſſed, we preſentlie perceiued the ſhippes that lay in the road, which were thoſe ſhips that ſet ſayle before vs out of India, lying about a ſmall half mile from the foreſaid corner, cloſe vnder the land, ſo that the land as then lieth South eaſt from them: and by reaſon of the high land the ſhippes lie there as ſafe, as if they were in a hauen: for they may well heare the wind whiſtle on the top of their maine yards, but lower it can not come: and they lie ſo cloſe vnder the land, that they may almoſt caſt a ſtone vpon the ſhore. There is good ground there, at 25 and 30 fadomes deep, but if they chance to put further out, or to paſſe beyond it, they muſt goe forward, for they can get no more vnto ye land: and for this cauſe we kept ſo cloſe to the ſhore, that the height of the lād took the wind frō vs, & the ſhip wold not ſteer without wind, ſo that it draue vpon the land, wherby our horeſprit touched ye ſhore, & therwith we thought that ſhippe & goods had all

beene caſt away: but by reaſon of the great depth, being 1
                              •
                           . fadomes water, and with the help of the Boats, and men off the other ſhips that came vnto vs, we put off from the land, without any hurt, and by thoſe Boates wee were brought to a place wher the other ſhips lay at Anker, which is right againſt a valley, that lyeth betwéene two high hilles, wherein there ſtandeth a little Church called Saint Helena. There we found fiue ſhippes, which were, the ſhip that came from Malacca, and the S. Mary that had béene there about 15. daies, which came both together to the Cape de Bona Speranza, the S. Anthonie, and the S. Chriſtopher being Admiral, that had arriued there 
                           
                              •
                           0. daies before, and the Conception, which came thether but the day before vs, ſo that ther wanted none of the Fléet but the S. Thomas, and by the ſignes and tokens, that we and the other ſhips had ſéene at Sea, we preſumed it to be loſt, as after we vnderſtoode (for it was neuer ſeene after) for the other ſhippes had ſeene Maſtes, Deales, Fattes, Cheſtes, & many dead men that had bound themſelues vpon boards, with a thouſand other ſuch like ſigns. Our Admiral likewiſe had béene in great danger of caſting away: for although it was a new ſhip, & this the firſt Viage it had made, yet it was ſo eaten with Wormes, that it had at the leaſt 20 handfuls déepe of water within it, and at the Cape was forced to throw halfe the goods ouer bord, into the Sea, and were conſtrained continually to Pumpe with two Pumpes, both night and day, and neuer holde ſtill: and being before the Iland of S. Helena, had ther alſo ſunke to the ground, if the other ſhips had no
                           •
                         holpen her. The reſt of the ſhippes coulde likewiſe tell what dangers and miſeries they had indured. About thrée Monthes before our arriuall at S. Helena, there had béene a ſhip which the yere before ſet out of Ormus, with the goods & men that remained in the S. Saluador, that had béene ſaued by the Portingal armie, vpon the coaſt of Abex, and brought vnto Ormus, as in an other place I haue declared. That ſhip had wintered in Moſambique, and had paſſed verie ſoone by the Cape, & ſo ſayled without any companie vnto Portingall, hauing left ſome of her ſicke men in the Iland, (as the maner is) which the next ſhips that came thether muſt take into them. Theſe gaue vs intelligence, that about foure monthes before our arriuall, there had béene an Engliſh ſhip at the Iland of Saint Helena, which had ſayled through the Straights of Magel
                              •
                           anaes, and through the ſouth ſeas, & from thence to the Ilands of Phillippinas, and had paſſed through the Straights of Sunda, that lyeth beyond Malacca, betwéene the Ilands of Sumatra and Iaua: in the which way ſhe had taken a ſhippe of China (ſuch as they call Iunckos) laden with Siluer and Golde, and all kind of Silkes, and that ſhee ſent a letter with a ſmall preſent to the Biſhop of Malacca, telling him, that ſhee ſent him that of friendſhip, meaning to come her ſelfe and viſite him. Out of that ſhip of China, they tooke a Portingall Pilot, & ſo paſſed the Cape de Bona Speranza, and came to the Iland of Saint Helena, where they tooke in freſh water and other neceſſaries, and beate downe the Alter and the Croſſe that ſtoode in the Church, and left behind them a Ketle and a Sword, which the Portingales at our arriual found there, yet could they not conceiue or thinke what that might meane. Some thought it was left there for a ſigne to ſome other ſhips of his companie, but euerie man may thinke what he will thereof. In the ſhip of Malacca came for Factor of the Pepper, one Gerrit van Afhuyſen, borne in Antwarpe, and dwelling in Lisbone, who had ſayled in the ſame ſhip from Lisbone about two yeares before, for that they ſtaied in Malacca at the leaſt fourtéene Monthes, by reaſon of the warres and troubles that were in that countrie, vntill Malacca was relieued, as I ſaide before: whereby they had paſſed great miſerie, and béene at great charges. And becauſe it is a very vnwholeſome countrie▪ together with ye conſtraint of lying there ſo long, of 200. men, that at the firſt ſayled from Lisbone in the ſhip, there were but 18. or 20. left aliue, and all the reſt dyed, ſo that they were enforced to take in other vnſkilfull men in Malacca, to bring the ſhippe home. This Gerrard van Afhuyſen, being of mine acquaintance and my good friend, before my departure out of Portingall for India, maruelled and ioyed much to find me there, little thinking that we ſhould méete in ſo ſtrange a place, and there we diſcourſed of our trauels paſt. And of him among diuers other things, I learned many true inſtructions as well of Malacca, as of the countries and Ilands lying about it, both for their manner of dealing in trade of Marchandiſe, as in other memorable things. By the pictures following, you may ſée the true deſcription of the Iland of Saint Helena, and of the thrée ſides therof, as we paſſed by it, and as we ſayled about it to the road, as alſo of the Iland of Aſcention. The deſcription of which two Ilands you may here perceiue and learne, as I my ſelfe could marke the ſame.
                  
                  
                     
                     The 94. Chapter. A briefe deſcription of the Iland Saint Helena.
                     
                        
                           SANCTA HELENA
                        
                     
                     
                        THe Iland of Saint Helena is ſo named, becauſe the Portingales diſcouered it vppon Saint Helens day, which is the twentie one of May. It is in compaſſe ſixe miles, little more or leſſe, and lyeth vnder ſixtéene degrées and a quarter, on the South ſide of the Equinoctall 550. Spaniſh miles from the Cape de Bona Speranza, and from the coaſt called Angola or Ethiopia 350. miles, & from Braſilia 510. miles. Theſe are the two néereſt lands adioyning to it. It is a verie high and hillie countrie, ſo that it commonly reacheth vnto the cloudes: the countrie of it ſelfe is verie aſhie and drie: alſo all the trees that are therein, whereof there are great ſtore, & grow of themſelues in the woodes, are little worth but only to burne: for it hath no ſpecial ſubſtance, but ſheweth as if it were halfe conſumed, ſo that it ſhould ſeeme that ſome mines of Brimſtone, hath in times paſt béene in that Iland, as commonly all the Ilands are all much ſubiect to the ſame: for that in ſome places thereof they find Sulphur and Brimſtone. When the Portingales firſt diſcouered it, there was not any beaſts, nor fruite, at all within the Iland, but onely great ſtore of freſh water, which is excellent good, and falleth downe from the mountaines, and ſo runneth in great abundance into the Valley, where the Church ſtandeth, and from thence by ſmall chanels into the Sea, where the Portingales fill their veſſels full of freſh water, and waſh their clothes: ſo that it is a great benefit for them, and a pleaſant ſight to behold, how cleare & in how many ſtreames the water runneth downe into the valley, which may bee thought a myracle, conſidering the drineſſe of the country, together with the ſtonie Rockes and hilles therein. The Portingales haue by little and little brought many beaſtes into it, and in the valleyes planted al ſorts of fruites: which haue growne there in ſo great abundance, that it is almoſt incredible. For it is ſo full of Goates, Buckes, wild Hogges, Hennes, Partridges, and Doues, by thouſands, ſo that any man that will, may hunt and take them: & ther is alwaies plentie and ſufficient, although there came as many ſhippes more into the Iland as there doe: and they may kill them with ſtones and ſtaues by reaſon of the gret numbers of them. Now for fruites, as Portingall Figges, Pomgranets, Oranges, Lemons, Citrons, and ſuch like fruites, there are ſo many, that growe without planting or ſetting, that all the valleyes are full of them, which is a great pleaſure to beholde, ſo that it ſéemeth to bee an earthly Paradiſe. It hath fruite all the yeare long, becauſe it raineth there by ſhowers at the leaſt fiue or ſix times euerie day, and then againe the Sunne ſhineth ſo, that whatſoeuer is planted, there it groweth verie well: but becauſe the Portingales are not ouer curious of new things, there groweth not of al ſorts of fruites of Portingall and India in that Iland: for aſſuredly without any doubt

they would growe well in that land, becauſe of the good temperature of the ayre, beſides this, they haue ſo great abundance of Fiſh, round about the Iland, that it ſéemeth a wonder wrought of God: for with crooked nayles, they may take as much Fiſh as they will, ſo that all the ſhippes doe prouide themſelues of Fiſh, of all ſorts in that place, which is hanged vp and dried, and is of as good a taſte and ſauor, as any Fiſh that euer I eate: and this euery man that hath beene there, affirmeth to be true. And the better to ſerue their turnes, vpon the Rockes they find ſalt, which ſerueth them for their neceſſarie prouiſions, ſo that to conclude, it is an earthly Paradiſe for ye Portingall ſhippes, and ſeemeth to haue been miraculouſly diſcouered for the refreſhing and ſeruice of the ſame, conſidering the ſmalneſſe and highneſſe of the land, lying in the middle of the Ocean ſeas, and ſo far from the firme land or any other Ilands, that it ſéemeth to be a Boye, placed in the midle of the Spaniſh Seas: for if this Iland were not, it were impoſſible for the ſhippes to make any good or proſperous Viage: for it hath often fallen out, that ſome ſhippes which haue miſſed thereof, haue endured the greateſt miſerie in ye world, and were forced to put into the coaſt of Guinea, there to ſtay the falling of the raine, and ſo to get freſh water, and afterwardes came halfe dead and ſpoyled into Portingall. It is the faſhion, that all the ſicke perſons, that are in the ſhippes, and can not wel ſayle in them, are left there in the Iland, with ſome prouiſion of Rice, Biſket, Oyle, and ſome Spices, for Fiſh and fleſh they may haue enough, for when the ſhips are gone, then all the beaſtes (which by reaſon of the great number of people fly into the mountaines) come downe againe into the valleyes, where they may take them with their handes and kill them as they liſt, thoſe ſicke men ſtay there till the next yeare, till other ſhips come thether, which take them with them, they are commonly ſoone healed in that Iland, as being a verie ſound and pleaſant countrie: and it is verie ſeldome ſeene that any of them dyeth there, becauſe they haue alwaies a temperate ayre, and coole winde, and alwayes fruite throughout the who
                           ••
                         yeare. The king will not ſuffer any man to dwell in it, becauſe they ſhould not deſtroye & ſpoyle the countrie, and holde it as their owne, but will haue it common for euerie man to take what he hath neede of. In time paſt there dwelt an Hermet in the Ile, who continued there for certaine yeares, vnder pretence of doing penance, and to vphold the Church, hee killed many of the Goates and Buckes, ſo that euerie yeare hee ſold at the leaſt fiue or ſixe hundred ſkinnes, and made great profit therof: which the King hearing, cauſed him preſently to bee brought from thence into Portingall. Likewiſe vpon a certaine time two Ca
                              ••
                           ares or blacke people of Moſambique, and one Iauer, with two women ſlaues ſtoale out of the ſhippes, and hid themſelues in the Rockes of this Iland, which are verie high and wilde, whereby men can hardly paſſe them. They liued there together, and begot children, ſo that in the ende they were at the leaſt twentie perſons, who when the ſhips were gone, ran throughout the Iland and did much hurt, making their houſes & dweling places betweene ſome of the hilles, where not any of the Portingales had beene, nor yet could eaſily come at them: and therein they hid themſelues vntill the ſhippes were gone, but in the end they were perceiued, and the Portingales vſed all the meanes they could to take them▪ but they knew ſo well how to hide and defend themſelues, that in many yeares they could not be taken: in the end, fearing that they might in time be hurtfull vnto them, and hinder them much, by expreſſe commaundement of the King, after long and great labour, they tooke them all and brought them priſoners into Portingall: ſo that at this preſent no man dwelleth therein, but onely the ſicke men, as I told you before. When the ſhips come thether, euerie man maketh his lodging vnder a trée ſetting a Tent about it: for that the trees are there ſo thicke, that it preſently ſéemeth a little towne or an armie lying in the fielde. Euerie man prouideth for himſelfe, both fleſh fiſh, fruite and woode, for there is enough for them all: and euerie one waſheth Linnen. There they hold a generall faſting and prayer, with Maſſe euerie daye, which is done with great deuotion, with proceſſion, and thankeſgiuing and other Himnes, thanking God that hee hath preſerued them from the danger of the Cape de Bona Speranza, and brought them to that Iland in ſafetie. There they vſe oftentimes to Carus their names, and markes in trees & plants for a perpetuall memorie: whereof many hundredth are there to be found, which letters with the growing of the trées, doe alſo grow bigger and bigger, we found names that had been there ſince the yeare of the Lord 1510. & 1515. and euerie yeare orderly following, which names ſtoode vpon Figge trées, euery letter being of the bigneſſe of a ſpanne, by reaſon of the age and growing of the trées. This ſhal ſuffice for the deſcription of the Iland of Saint Helena.
                     
                     The 21. of May, being Saint Helenas day, and Whitſunday, after we had taken in all our freſh water, and other neceſſaries, we ſet ſayle altogether in companie, and directed

                        
                        
                           
                              Th
                                    •
                                  
                                 
                                    〈…〉
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                              P
                                    ••
                                 nt
                                    •
                                 d 
                                    〈◊〉
                                  London by 
                                    •
                                 ohn Wolfe 
                                    〈◊〉
                                  by William Rogers
                           
                        
                        
                        
                           THE TRVE Description of the ISLAND of 
                                    〈◊〉
                                  lyei
                                    •
                                 g 
                                    〈◊〉
                                  by 
                                    •
                                  degrees on ye S
                                    •
                                 uth syde of ye Equinoctiall lyne.
                           
                           
                              
                              Printed at London by Iohn Wolfe G
                                    ••
                                 uen by William Rogers
                           
                        
                        
                        
our courſe towardes Portingall, leauing about fiftéene ſicke men in the Ilande, & ſome ſlaues that ranne out of the ſhips. The 26. of May in the Euening, wee ſpake with the Saint Mary, and the next day with the Gallion of Malacca: the ſame Morning and in the after noone with the Admirall, who willed vs to follow him vnto the Iland of the Aſcention. The ſame day one of our ſlaues fell ouer bord, & although we vſed all the meanes we could to ſaue him, yet we could not doe it, by reaſon wee ſayled before the winde. The ſame day at night wee ſaw the Iland of Aſcention, and lauered all that night, becauſe we would not paſſe the Iland. In the Morning the 28. of May, we ſayled about the Iland, to ſée if there were any ground to Anker on, becauſe the Admirall was ſo leake, that ſhee could no longer holde out: and the men deſired the Officers of the ſhippe, that they would lay the goods on land, in the Iland of Aſcention, and there leaue it with good watch and neceſſaries for them that keepe it, and ſo ſayle with the emptie ſhip to Portingall: and there procure ſome other ſhippe to fetch the goods, thinking it was ſufficient to haue it well watched and kept there, for that there commeth not a ſhip in twentie yeares into that Iland, becauſe there is nothing in it to be had. We went cloſe vnto it, by a verie white and faire Sand, where the Admirall and all the ſhippes caſt out the Lead, and found from eightie to fiftie, and 4
                              •
                           . Fadomes water: and although they might haue gone cloſer to the land, yet the Officers excuſed themſelues, ſaying, that they coulde not goe neerer, and that it was too deepe and verie dangerous for them to Anker there. Which they ſaid to pacifie the men, deſiring that they might borow two Pumpes nore of the other ſhippes, and ſo without doubt they woulde bring the ſhippe ſafe vnto Portingall, and although it would bee great paine and labour for them to doe it, yet they muſt of force content themſelues: for that the Admirall and all the Gentlemen that were in the ſhippe▪ pumped both day and night, as their turnes came about, as well as the meaneſt in the ſhippe, onely to encourage the people. They borowed one Pumpe of the Saint Mary, and ſent to deſire vs to lend them another, and although our ſhip was none of the beſt among the Fleet▪ we were of opinion not to lend him any, as not knowing what neede wee ſhould haue our ſelues, hauing ſo long a way to ſayle yet in the end ſeeing the great neceſſitie they were in, we lent them one, the rather becauſe they ſayd, that the Admirals meaning was, if it were calme wether, to diſcharge ſome of their wares into other ſhippes, thereby to lighten themſelues, but it fell not out as they thought, ſo that with great miſerie and labor they ouercame their iournie.
                  
                  
                     The 95. Chapter. Of the Iland called the Aſcention.
                     
                        THis Iland was diſcouered vpon Aſcention daye, and in ſhew ſéemeth as great as the Iland of Saint Hellena, but not ſo high. It is ful of hilles and dales, lying vnder eight degrées and a halfe, on the Southſide of the Equinoctiall line▪ and lyeth Northweſt diſtant from Saint Helena, 19
                              •
                           
                         Spaniſh miles, and from the Equi
                           •
                        octiall line 140. miles. There is not any freſh water in the Iland, nor one greene leafe or branch. It hath many hilles of a reddiſh colour, which ſhew like a certaine Earth in Spaine called Almagro, and is full of ſtonie hilles, and dryed land, it is like Saint Helena. There hath beene ſome ſhippes there, that miſſed Saint Helena, and ſought for freſh water in that Iland, but could find none. It hath certaine faire and white Sandes about it, and great ſtore of Fiſh, wherein it ſurpaſſeth S. Helena, but in it there are no beaſtes at all, onely by reaſon of the great quantitie of Fiſhes. Ther are ſo many Birds in it yt it is ſtrange, and they are of the bigneſſe of young Geeſe, & came by thouſands flying about our ſhips, crying and making great noyſe, and ranne vp and downe in the ſhippe, ſome leaping and ſitting on our ſhoulders and armes, not once fearing vs, ſo that wee tooke many of them, and wrung of their neckes, but they are not good to eate, becauſe they taſte moriſh. I thinke the cauſe they are ſo tame is, becauſe they ſee but few men, and ſome deſire to goe to them. About that Iland and the Iland of Saint Helena, vnto the Equinoctiall line, there are flying Fiſhes, as great as Herings which flie by great flockes together, two or thrée Fadome aboue the water, and flie in that manner at the leaſt a quarter of a mile, vntill their wings or finnes be drie, and then they can flie no longer, but fall into the water, and there wet themſelues, and then flie againe aboue the water. The cauſe why they flie in that ſort is, becauſe they are chaſed by the great fiſhes, that eate them, and to eſcape from them, they flie aboue the water, and ſome times into the ſhippes: for many of them fell into our ſhip, which flew too high, for whē their wings are drie they muſt needes fall.
                     
                        From that Iſland of Aſcention the ſhippes held their courſe Northweſt and by Weſt, til they be a degree paſt the Equinoctiall line on the North ſide, where there lyeth a cliffe called Penedo de Sam Pedro, which many times they ſée, and to it from the Iſlande of Aſcention are 300. miles. The 5. of Iune we paſſed againe the Equinoctiall line, and then again began we to ſee the North ſtarre, which we had loſt vnder ten degrées, on this ſide Cochijn, and now began to loſe the ſight of the South ſtarre, and there we had the ſun in the South at twelue of the clocke at noone, in which on the other ſide of the line at the ſame time is in the North. The 8. of Iune being 4. degrées in the North, we loſt our generall South eaſt winde, that had ſerued vs from the Cape de bona Speranza thether, & then began the raines and calmes: for as then we began to come neare the coaſt of Guinea, which continueth to 9. degrees. Theſe calmes and raines helde vs till 11. degrées, being the 20, of Iune, whereby the ſhips ſeperated themſelues, by reaſon of the calmes which made them not able to ſtéerre: and in the 11. degrees they met againe, and there we had a North eaſt wind, which is called the generall winde, becauſe it floweth continually in thoſe Countries, and holdeth to 30. and 
                           
                              •
                           2. degrées, beginning many times at 6. and 7. degrees: but wee had it not till wee were vnder 1
                              •
                           . degrées. This wind is ſomewhat ſcant, for wee muſt of force ſaile in the wind, becauſe our chiefe courſe is Northweſt and by North.
                     The 23. of Iune we paſſed the point of Capo Verde, which is vnder 15. degrées, and the 26. of the ſame month we paſſed the Iſlands of Capo Verde, which are ten in number. They beginne vnder 15. degrées, and end in 19. degrées, and are diſtant from the firme land of Capo Verde, from 70. to 1
                              •
                           0. miles inwards to the ſea. Then wee entred into the ſea, called Sergaſſo, which is all couered with hearbes, ſo that it ſéemeth to be like a gréene fielde, & ſo thicke that a man can not ſee the water, neyther can the ſhips paſſe through them, but with great labour, vnleſſe they haue a ſtrong wind. The hearbe is like Samper, but yellow of colour, & hath berries like Gooſe berries, but nothing in them. The Portingalles call it Sargaſſo, becauſe it is like the herbes that groweth in their welles in Portingall, called Sargaſſo: wherevpon that ſea is called Sargaſſo. It is not knowne from whence it commeth: for there is no land nor Iſland that is knowne to bee neare that ſea, but the coaſt of Africa, which is at the leaſt more then 400. miles from thence. It is thought it commeth from from the ground, and yet there is no ground in that place to bee founde: and in ſayling to India, the ſhippes come not into that ſea (for then they kéepe cloſer to the ſhore, ſo that it is not once ſéene) and it is not found in any place but there, beginning at 20. degrées, & continuing to 34. degrées, ſo thicke, and ſo full as if they were whole Iſlandes, moſt ſtrange to beholde. In that countrey it is as cold in winter, as it is here with vs when it fréezeth not, which the Portingalles eſtéeme a great cold, and cloath themſelues againſt it as we doe in a mightie great froſt. The laſt of Iune wee were vnder 23. degrees, being right vnder the Sunne: for yt the Sun was then in the ſame height, and we alſo vnder ye Tropike of Cancer, which is the furtheſt part that the Sunne goeth Northwarde, and then it turneth againe vnto the Equinoctial line, and from thence into the South. Wee paſſed ye line of Tropicus Capricorni twice, once on the South ſide, by the ende of the Iſland of S. Laurence, and then againe vnder 23. degrées, after we had paſſed the Cape de bona Speranza. The 2. of Iuly wee were vnder the height of the Iſlands of Canarie, which lie vnder 28. and 29. degrées, and are diſtant from the coaſt of Barbarie and Africa from 30. to 80. miles, which Iſlandes lay on our right hande: and becauſe in thoſe Iſlandes there are many things that are worthie the noting, therefore I thought it conuenient to make a briefe deſcription of them.
                  
                  
                     The 96. Chapter. A briefe deſcription of the Iſlands of Canaria.
                     
                        THe Iſlandes of Canaria are ſeuen, which in times paſt were called the Fortunadas, and at this day by the Spaniards are called the Canaries, by reaſon of the great numbers of dogges which they founde in them, when they were firſt diſcouered. The names of the Iſlands are, great Canarie, Teneriffe, La Palma, La Gomera, El'Hierro, Lanſarotte, and Fuerte Ventura. In the Iſland of Teneriffe there is a hil called Pico de Terraira, which is thought to bee the higheſt hill that euer was found, for it may eaſily bee ſéene at the leaſt threeſcore miles into the ſea, before they come at it. It cannot be climed but in the monthes of Iuly and Auguſt: for all the other

monthes it lyeth full of ſnowe, although below in the Iſland, and in other Iſlands thereabouts, they ſée no ſnow. It is thrée dayes iourney to clime vp into it, and on the toppe therof it is flat, and when it is clear and faire weather, a man may from thence ſée all the Iſlandes round about it, although ſome of them are at the leaſt 50. miles diſtant, and as much in compaſſe. The two monthes in which they vſe to clime vp vpon the hill, they bring downe certaine peeces of brimſtone, from whence it is much caried into Spaine: and at my being in the Iſland of Tercera, a ſhipper one of my acquaintance that came from Teneriffe, gaue me a péece thereof, for a remembrance of him. In one of thoſe Iſlandes called Hierro, or of Iron, there is a wonderfull and ſtrange thing to be ſéene, and I verely thinke it is one of ye ſtrangeſt things in the world. This Iſland is on of the greateſt of all the ſeuen: but it is an vnfruitful and barren land, and ſo drie, that in all the Iſland there is not one droppe of freſh water to bee found, but onely in ſome places vppon the ſea ſide, which is farre from hand, ſo that it profiteth the inhabitants but very little. But God of his mercie hath prouided for the want of water both for men and beaſtes, in this maner: for there is a great trée, which no man knoweth, (for the like is not found in any other place) the leaues whereof are ſmall and long, and alwaies gréene without chaunging colour: this trée is couered and compaſſed about with a ſmall cloud, which alwaies continueth in one forme, and neuer altereth nor diminiſheth: and this cloud caſteth dew vpon the leaues of the trée, which hang down, and drop continually (without ceaſing) a moſt cleare, thinne and fine water, which falleth into certaine Ceſternes, that by the inhabitants of the Iſland are made round about & vnder the trée, therein to kéepe and preſerue the water.
                     
                        The Iſland of Aſcention, ſo called, becauſe it was diſcouered vppon the day of Chriſts aſcention into heauen, is not inhabited becauſe of the vnfruitfulnes therof, & becauſe it wanteth freſh water: which is alſo the cauſe that it is not viſited by the ſhips, for that they hope for no refreſhing in the ſame. The hilles of this Iland are redde like Bolus. About this Iland are many birds, becauſe of the great numbers of fiſhes that are about it, ſpecially ſmall flying fiſhes, which in Portingall are called Piſce Bolodor. Reade more hereof in the booke, in Folio 175.
                     
                     And this water is in ſo great abundance, that it ſerueth all the Iſland for their neceſſarie vſes, not onely for the people, but alſo for their cattle throughout all the Iſle, and no man can remember when that wonder firſt began.
                     On the right ſide of this Iſland about an hundred miles diſtant: there is yet an other wonder to be noted, which is, that oftentimes there is an Iſlande ſéene thereaboutes, called San Borondon, where diuers men haue been on lande, being onely ſuch as fell vppon it on the ſodaine, and not looking for it▪ who affirme it to bee a very fayre, pleaſant, and gréene Countrey full of trées, and all kinds of victuaile, and that it is inhabited by people that are Chriſtians: but no man knowes of what nation they are, neyther what language they ſpeake. The Spaniards of the Iſlandes of Canaria haue many times ſayled towardes it to view it, but they could neuer find it: whereupon there goeth diuers opinions of it: for ſome think it to be inchanted, and that it may not bee ſeene but vppon certaine dayes: ſome thinke it to bee very ſmall, and alwaies couered with cloudes, and that therefore it can not bee ſéene nor founde out: and alſo the great ſtormes and ſtrength of the water driueth the ſhippes from it: but to conclude, it is holden for a truth, that the Ilande lyeth thereaboutes, as all thoſe that come from thence doe certainly affirme. The Ilandes of Canaria are very fruitfull, and plentifull of all thinges, both victuailes and other neceſſaries. They haue of all kinds of corne, ſpecially excellent good Wine, which from thence is caried into all places. There is likewiſe great ſtore of Sugar, which is much eſteemed, and alſo caryed into all countries of Chriſtendome, which cauſeth great trafficke vnto thoſe Ilands, as well by Spaniardes and Portingalles, as other nations, and is the common ſtaple for the ſhippes that ſayle out of Spayne into the Weſt Indies, and refreſhe themſelues there, and alſo take in ſuch Wyne as they commonly vſe to carry with them to the Weſt Indies. They haue alſo great abundance of Cattle and Cammelles, and are now inhabited by Spanyardes, hauing yet therein many of the naturall borne inhabitantes, which they doe call Guanchas, who by reaſon of their long conuerſation with the Spaniardes, doe wholly vſe their cuſtomes, and manner of apparell. The chiefe of theſe Iſlands is great Canaria, where there is a Biſhop, and the inquiſition with the tribunal Royall, and it hath the gouernment ouer all the other Iſlandes, that are called the Canaries.
                     
                     The 6. of Iulie wee were vnder 32. degrees, where wee loſt the generall North-Eaſt wind, and had a calme, and ſaw much of

                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
the hearbe called Sargaſſo, which couered all the ſea. The 
                           〈◊〉
                         of the ſame month, we got againe before the wind, being vnder 34. degrees, and then we ſaw no more of the hearbe Sargaſſo, but a faire cleare ſea.
                     The eighteenth of Iulie wee were vnder 39. degrees, vnder which height lieth the Iland called de Coruo, and the Iſland of Tercera, and alſo the riuer of Lisbone, all theſe dayes we had many calmes. The next day wee had a Weſt winde being a right forewind, and ſaw many flying fiſhes, almoſt as great as Haddockes, that flew thrée or foure fadomes high aboue the water.
                     The 22. of Iuly, the winde continuing, about noone we ſaw the Ilands called Flores, and de Coruo, which lie one cloſe to the other: from thence to the Iſland of Tercera Eaſtward are 70. miles. At that time wee began to haue many ſick men, that is to ſay, ſome ſicke in their eyes, and ſome in their breaſte and bellies, by reaſon of the long voiage and becauſe their victuals began to looſe the taſte, & ſauour, and many wanted meat, whereby diuers of them through want were compelled to ſeeth rice with ſalt water, ſo that ſome of them died, which many times were found vnder the fore deck that had laine 
                           •
                        ead two or three dayes no man knowing it, which was a pittifull ſight to behold, conſidering the miſerie they indured aboard thoſe ſhips. There died in our ſhip from India vnto that place, of ſlaues and others, to the number of 24. perſons.
                     The ſame day about Euening, being hy the Iſlandes of Flores and Coruo, wee perceiued thrée ſhippes that made towards vs, which came from vnder the land, which put vs in great feare: for they came cloſe by our Admiral, & ſhot diuers times at him, & at another ſhip of our companie, whereby wee perceiued them to be Engliſh men, for they bare an Engliſh flagge vpon their maine tops, but none of them ſhewed to be aboue 60. tunnes in greatnes. About Euening they followed after vs▪ and all night bore lanternes with Candles bu
                           •
                        ning in them at their ſternes, although the Moone ſhined. The ſame night paſſing hard by the Iſland of Fayarl, the next day being betwéene the Iſland of S. George that lay on our right hand, and the ſmall Iſland called C
                              •
                           o
                              •
                           o on our left hand, we eſſpied the thrée Engliſh ſhips ſtill following vs that tooke counſell together, whereof one ſayled backwards, thinking that ſome other ſhip had come after vs without company, & for a ſmall time was out of ſight, but it was not long before it came againe to the other two, wherewith they tooke counſell, & came all thrée together againſt our ſhippe, becauſe we lay in the lée of all our ſhips, and had the Iſland of S. George on the one ſide in ſteede of a ſconce▪ thinking to deale ſo with vs, that in the end we ſhould be conſtrained to runne vppon the ſhore, whereof wee wanted not much, and in that manner with their flagges openly diſplayed, came luſtily towardes vs, ſounding their Trumpets, and ſayled at the leaſt three times about vs, beating vs with Muſket and Caliuer, and ſome great péeces, and did vs hurt in the body of our ſhippe, but ſpoyled all our ſayles and ropes, and to conclude, we were ſo plagued by them, that no man durſt put forth his head, and when wee ſhot off a peece, we had at the leaſt an houres worke to lade it againe, whereby wee had ſo great a noiſe and crie in the ſhip, as if we had all bin caſt away, whereat the Engliſh men themſelues beganne to mocke vs, and with a thouſand ieſting words called vnto vs. In the meane time the other ſhippes hoiſed all their ſailes, & did the beſt they could to ſaile to the Iſland of Tercera, not looking once behinde them to help vs, doubting they ſhould come too late thether, not caring for vs, but thinking themſelues to haue done ſufficiently: ſo they ſaued their own ſtakes, whereby it may eaſily be ſéene what company they kéepe one with the other, & what order is among them. In the end the Engliſh men perceiuing ſmall aduantage againſt vs, (little knowing in what caſe and feare we were, as alſo becauſe we were not far frō 
                        Tercera) left vs, which made vs not a litle to reioyce, as thinking our ſelues to be riſen from death to life, although we were not well aſſured, neither yet voide of feare till we lay in the road before Tercera
                        ▪ & vnder the ſafetie of the Portingales fort, & that we might get thether in good time we made all the ſailes we could: on the other ſide we were in great doubt, becauſe wee knew not what they did in the Iſland, nor whether they were our friendes or enemies, and wee doubted ſo much the more, becauſe wee found no men of war nor any Caruels of aduiſe frō 
                        Portingal, as we made our accounts to doe, that might conuay vs from thence, or giue vs aduiſe, as in that countrie ordinarilie they vſe to do, & becauſe the Engliſh men had bin ſo victorious in thoſe parts, it made vs ſuſpect that it went not well with Spaine: they of the Iland of Tercera, were in no leſſe feare then we, for that ſéeing our deer, they thought vs to be Engliſhmen & that we came to ouer run the Iland, becauſe the 3. Engliſh mē had boūd vp their flags & came in company with vs: for the which cauſe the Iland ſent out 2. Caruels that lay there with aduiſe from the King, for the Indian ſhips that ſhould come thither. Thoſe Caruels came to view vs, and perceiuing what wee were, made after vs, wherevppon the Engliſh

ſhips left vs, & made towardes them, becauſe the Caruels thought them to be friends, and ſhunned them not, as ſuppoſing them to be of our company, but we ſhot foure or fiue times and made ſignes vnto them that they ſhould make towards the Iſland, which they preſently did. The Engliſh men perceiuing that did put forwards into the ſea, and ſo the Caruels borded vs telling vs that the men of the Iſland were all in armes, as hauing receiued aduiſe from Portingall, that Sir Francis Drake was in a readines, and would come vnto thoſe Iſlands. They likewiſe brought vs newes of the ouerthrow of the Spaniſh Fléet before England, and that the Engliſh men had béene before the gates of Lisbone: wherupon the king gaue vs commandement that we ſhould put into the Iſland of Tercera, and there lie vnder the ſafetie of the Caſtle vntill we receiued further aduiſe what wee ſhould doe, or whether we ſhould ſaile: for that they thought it too dangerous for vs to goe to Li
                              •
                           bone. Thoſe newes put our fleet in great feare, and made vs looke vppon each other not knowing what to ſay, as being dā
                        gerous for them to put into the road, becauſe it lieth open to the ſea: ſo that the Indian ſhips, although they had expreſſe commandement from the king, yet they durſt not anker there, but only vſed to come thether, and to lauere to and fro, ſending their boates on land to fetch ſuch neceſſaries as they wanted, without ankering: but being by neceſſity cō
                        pelled thereunto, as alſo by the kinges commandement, and for that wee vnderſtood the Earle of Cumberland not to bee farre from thoſe Iſlands with certaine ſhips of war, we made neceſſitie a vertue, and entring the rode, ankered cloſe vnder the Caſtle, ſtaying for aduiſe, and order from the king to performe our voyage, it being then the 24. of July, & S. Iames day. We were in al 6 ſhips, that is 5. from Eaſt Indies, & one from Malacca, & lay in the rode before the Towne of Angra, from whence we preſently ſent three or foure Caruels into Portingal, with aduiſe vnto the king of our ariuall. There we lay in great daunger, and much feare, for that when the month of Auguſt, commeth it is very dangerous lying before that Iland, for as then it beginneth to ſtorme. The ſhippes are there ſafe from all windes, ſauing onely from the South and Southeaſt windes: for when they blow, they lie in a thouſand dangers, ſpecially the eaſt Indiā ſhips, which are very heauily laden, and ſo full, that they are almoſt readie to ſinke, ſo that they can hardly be ſtéered.
                     The fourth of Auguſt in the night we had a South winde out of the ſea, wherewith it began ſo to ſtorme, that all the ſhips were in great danger to be caſt away, and to run vpon the ſhore: ſo that they were in great feare and ſhot off their péeces, to call for help. The officers and moſt of the ſailers were on land, none but pugs and ſlaues being in the ſhips: for it is a common cuſtome with the Portingales, that whereſoeuer they anker, preſently they goe all on land, and let the ſhippe lie with a boy or two in it. All the bels in the Towne were hereupon rung, and there was ſuch a noyſe and crie in euerie place, that one could not heare the other ſpeak: for thoſe that were on land by reaſon of the foule weather, could not get aboard, and they in the Shippe could not come to land. Our Shippe the Santa Crus was in great danger, thinking verily that it ſhuld haue run vpon the ſands, but God holy them. The ſhip that came from Malacca brake her Cables, and had not men enough aboard the ſhippe, nor any that could tell how to caſt forth another anker: ſo that in the end they cut their maſtes, & droue vpon the Cliffes, where it ſtayed, and brake in péeces, and preſently ſunke vnder the water to the vpper Dorlope, and with that the winde came North Weſt, wherewith the ſtorme ceaſed, and the water became calme. If that had not béene, al the ſhips had followed the ſame courſe: for that ſome of them were at the point to cut their Maſts, and Cables to ſaue their liues, but God would not haue it ſo. In that ſhip of Malacca were loſt many rich and coſtly Marchandiſes: for theſe ſhips are ordinarily as rich as anie ſhips that come from India, as being full of all the rich wares of China, M
                              •
                           luco, Laua, and all thoſe countries, ſo that it was great pittie to ſée what coſtly thinges, as Silkes, Damaſkes, clothes of gold and ſiluer, & ſuch like wares) fleeted vpon the ſea, and were torne in péeces. There was much goods ſaued that lay in the vpper part of the ſhip, and alſo by duckers, as pepper, Nutmegs, and Cloues, but moſt of it was loſt, and that which was ſaued, was in a manner ſpoyled, and little worth: which preſently by the kinges officers in the Iſland was ſeaſed vpon, and to the Farmers vſes, ſhut vp in the Alſandega, or Cuſtome houſe, for the Kinges cuſtome, not once regarding the poore men, nor their long and dangerous Voiage that had continued the ſpace of three yeares, with ſo great miſerie and trouble by them indured in Malacca, (as in another place I haue alreadie ſhewed:) ſo that they could not obtaine ſo much fauour of the king nor of his officers, that of the goods that were ſaued and brought to land, they might haue ſome part, although they o
                           •
                        fered to put in ſuerties for ſo much as the cuſtome might amount vnto, or els to leaue as much goods in

the officers hands as would ſatiſfie them, and although they made daily, and pittifull complaintes, that they had not where with to liue, and that they deſired vppon their owne aduentures to fraight certaine ſhippes or Caruels at their owne charge, and to put in good ſuerties to deliuer the goods in the Cuſtome houſe of Lisbone, yet could they not obtaine their requeſts: but were anſwered that the king for the aſſurance of his cuſtome, and of all the goods, would ſend an Armado by ſea to fetch the goods: which fetching continued for the ſpace of two yeares and a halfe, and yet nothing was done, for there came no Armado.
                     In the meane time the poore ſaylers conſumed all that they had, and deſperately curſed both themſelues, the king, and all his officers: yet in the end by great and importunate ſute of the Farmers of the pepper, euery mā had licence to lade his goods in what ſhip hee would, after it had laine there for the ſpace of two yeares and a halfe, putting in ſuerties to deliuer the goods in the cuſtome houſe of Liſbone, where they muſt pay the halfe & more of the ſame goods for cuſtome to the King, without any reſpect of their hard fortune and great miſerie, during their long and dangerous Voyage, and he that will be diſpatched in the Cuſtome houſe there, muſt ſée the officers, otherwiſe it is moſt commonly three or foure monthes before the goods are deliuered vnto the owners, and the beſt thinges, or any fine deuiſe that the Marchants for their own vſes bring out of India, if the officers like thē they muſt haue them, yet they will promiſe to pay for them, but they ſet no day when: ſo that the poore Marchants are forced to giue them reſt, and wel contented that the officers are ſo pleaſed, and vſe no more delaies.
                     The eight of Auguſt, the officers of the ſhips tooke counſell together, with the Gouernour of the Iſland what they were beſt to doe, thinking it not good to follow the kinges aduiſe, conſidering their long ſtaying, and fearing ſome other hard fortune if they ſhould ſtay, and becauſe a great Gallion being a mā of warre, and very ſtrong, lay as then before the Iſland, wherein was the Gouernour of Braſil
                              •
                           a, who by foule weather had put in there: they concluded that this Gallion being well appointed ſhould ſayle with them to Liſbone, and although they did it without the aduiſe and commandement of the king, yet bad they rather ſo to aduenture their liues vpon the ſeas, then againe to ſtay the danger of the Hauen, for that the winter did daylie more and more increaſe, ſo that they were not to looke for any better weather, and in that ſort appointing themſelues as well as they could, and taking in all neceſſarie prouiſions, the ſame day they all ſet ſaile with no ſmall feare to fall into ſome miſfortune by the way: but becauſe many that were of the ſhip of Malacca, ſtayed at Tercera to ſaue ſuch goods as by any meanes might be ſaued, and by that meanes to help themſelues, (among the which was the Factor of the pepper, béeing one of my acquaintance, at whoſe requeſt, as alſo becauſe the Pepper of that ſhip, and of all the other ſhips belonged all to one Farmer, by whom I was appointed Factor, and ſéeing the neceſſitie he bad, and that he alone could hardly diſpatch ſo great a matter,) I tooke order for mine owne affaires, and hauing diſpatched it by other ſhippes, I ſtayed there to help him, till wee had further aduiſe, and order from the Farmers of the Pepper and other ſpices and wares, of the which goods we ſaued a great quantitie by meanes of Duckers and other Inſtruments that we vſed, hauing aduiſe from the Farmers & the King that it ſhuld not be long before they ſent for vs, willing vs to ſtay there, and to looke vnto the goods. This ſtaying and fetching vs away continued (as I ſaid before) for the ſpace of two yeares and a halfe, whereby you may conſider the good order, and pollicie of the Admiraltie of Portingall, and with what diligence and care they ſéeke for the common profit of the land, and the poore Marchantes of the Countrie, whome they ought to fauor and help, as much as poſſiblie they may, but they do cleane contrarie, as thoſe which deale in Portingall doe well finde.
                     The 13. of Auguſt the ſhips came back againe vnto the Iſland of Tercera, becauſe they had a contrarie wind as alſo for want of freſh water, but they ankered not. The day before the Earle of Cumberland with 
                           •
                        . or 7. ſhips of warre, ſayled by the Iland of Tercera, & to their great good fortune paſſed out of ſight, ſo that they diſpatched themſelues in all haſte, & for the more ſecuritie, tooke with them 4. hundred Spaniards, of thoſe that lay in Garriſon in the Iſland, & with thē they ſayled towards Lisbon, hauing a good wind: ſo that within a 11. dayes after they arriued in the riuer of L
                              •
                           sbone with great gladnes, & triumph: for if they had ſtayed but one day longer before they had entred the riuer, they had all béene taken by Captaine Drake, who with 40. ſhips came before Caſcalis, at the ſame time that the Indian ſhips caſt anker in the riuer of Lisbone, being garded thither by diuers Gallies. Now by the diſcourſe of this long and perilous voiage▪ you may ſufficiently perceiue, how that onely by the grace and ſpeciall fauour of God, the Indian ſhips doe performe their voiages, yet with great miſerie, paine, labour, loſſe, and hinderance: wherby men may likewiſe conſider the manner

of their Nauigatiō, ordinances, cuſtomes and gouernments of their ſhips, ſo that in cō
                        pariſon of many other Voyages, this preſent Voyage may be eſtéemed a happy & proſperous voyage: for oftentimes it chanceth, that but one or two ſhips (of the fiue that yearely ſaile to India come ſafe home, as of late it hath bin ſéene, ſome being taken, and ſome loſt, altogether by their owne follies, & bad order, as herin at large you may perceiue, &c.
                  
                  
                     The 97. Chapter. Of the deſcription of the Iſlands of Acores of the Flemmiſh Iſlands.
                     
                        THe Iſles of Acores, or the Flemmiſh Iſlands are 
                           •
                        . that is, Terce
                              •
                           a, Saint Michael, S. Mary, S. George, Gratioſa, Pico, & Fay
                           
                              •
                           el. There are yet two Iſlands called Flores and Cora
                              •
                           , which are not contained vnder the name of Acores, but yet at this day are vnder the gouernment of the ſame Iſlands, ſo that they are in all accounted 
                           •
                        . Iſlands. They are called Acores, that is to ſay, Sparhaukes or Haukes, becauſe that in their firſt diſcouerte, they found many Sparhaukes in them, whereof they hold the name, although at this day there is not any there to be found. They are alſo called the Flemmiſh Iſlands, that is, of the Neatherlanders, becauſe the firſt that inhabited the ſame, were Neatherlanders, whereof till this time there is a great number and ofſpring remaining, that in manner and behauiour are altogether like Neatherlanders, and there is yet in the ſame Iſland a running water, that iſſueth out of a hill, & ſo runneth into the ſea, where as yet thoſe iſſues or ofſpringes of Neatherlāders inhabite, & is called Ariber
                              •
                           dos 
                              •
                           ramengos, that is the Flemmiſh riuer. The principall Iland of them al, is that of Tercera, called Iuſu
                              •
                            de Ieſus C
                              •
                           ſtus of Tercera. It is betwéene 1
                              •
                           . or 
                           
                              •
                           6. miles in compaſſe, and is altogether a great Cliffe of land, whereby in it there is little roome: for it is as it were walled round about with Cliffes: but where any ſtrand or land is, there ſtandeth a ſort. It hath no Hauens nor entrance of waters, for the ſecuritie and ſafetie of the ſhips, but only before the chiefe towne called Angra, where it hath an open Hauen, which in forme is like a halfe Moone, by the Portingales called Angra, whereof the towne hath her name. It hath on the one ſide in manner of an elbow ſticking forth, two high hilles, called Breſyl, which ſtretch into the ſea, ſo yt a far off they ſéeme to bee deuided from the Iland. Thoſe hils are very high ſo that being vpon them, a man may ſee at the leaſt 10, 12 and ſometimes 15. miles into the ſea, being cleare weather. Vpon theſe hils there ſtand two ſmall ſtone pillers, where there is a Cē
                        tinell placed, that continually watcheth to 
                           〈◊〉
                         what ſhips are at ſea and ſo to aduertiſe thoſe of the Iſland: for that as many ſhips as hee ſéeth cōming out of the weſt, that is from the Spaniſh Indies, or Braſ
                              •
                           , C
                              •
                           bo v
                              •
                            Guinea, and the Portingal
                        ▪ Indies, and all other waies lying ſouth or weſt, for euerie ſhip he ſetteth a flagge vppon the piller in the weſt, and when the ſhips which he deſerieth, are more then 5. then hee ſetteth vp a great auncient, betokening a whole fleet of ſhips▪ the like he doth vpon the other piller, which ſtandeth in the Eaſt, for ſuch Shippes as come from Portingall, or other places out of the Eaſt or North partes, theſe pillers may bee eaſily ſéene in all places of the towne, by reaſon of the highnes of the hils, ſo that there is not one ſhip or ſayle that is at ſea, or maketh towards the Iſland, but it is preſently knowne throughout all the towne, and ouer all the whole Iland: for the watch is not holden onely vppon thoſe two hils iutting into the ſea, but alſo vpon all corners, hilles and cliffes throughout the Iland, and as ſoone as they perceiue any ſhips, the Gouerner and Rulers are preſently aduertiſed therof, that they may take ſuch order therein as need requireth. Vpon the furtheſt corner into the ſea ſtandeth a ſort, right againſt another fort that anſwereth it: ſo that thoſe two forts doe ſhut and defend the mouth or open hauen of the towne, where the ſhips lie in the road, and ſo no ſhip can either goe in or came forth, without the licence or permiſſion of thoſe two forts. This towne of 
                           〈◊〉
                         is not only the chiefe towne of 
                           〈◊〉
                        , but alſo of al other townes within ye Ilands thereabouts. Therein is reſident▪ the Biſhop, the Gouernour for the King, and the chiefe place of iudgement, or tribunall ſeate of all the Iſlands of Acores.
                     
                     Three miles from this towne lieth another towne towards the North, called V
                              •
                            de Prava for P
                              •
                           
                         is as much to ſay, as ſtrand becauſe it lieth hard by a great ſtrand, and for that cauſe there is little traffique thether, as not hauing any conuenient place for ſhips to come at it: yet ſome times there cō
                        meth ſome one, that by reaſon of contrarie wind cannot get before the towne of Angr
                              •
                           , and ſo by conſtraint diſcharge their goods in that Towne, which from thence are carried by land to Angra, and yet ſome part thereof is ſpent and vſed there. It is walled and well houſed, but not many people 
                           〈◊〉
                        , and ſuch as are in it, doe get their liuings moſt by huſbandrie: for there are 
                           〈…〉
                         corne lands. The Iſland is likewiſe very fruitful and pleaſant, it hath much corne and wine, but the Wine is not verie good to carrie into other Countries there abouts, becauſe it is

ſmall, and will not long continue, ſo that it is vſed in the Countrey by the common people: but ſuch as are of wealth, for the moſt part drinke wines of Madera and Canaria. It aboundeth in fleſh fiſh, & all other neceſſaries and meats for mans body, where with in time of neede they might helpe themſelues. Oyle there is none, but it commeth out of Portugall. Alſo Salt, pottes, pannes, and all kinde of earthen veſſelles, Chalke, and ſuch like are brought thether out of other places, for there they are not to bee founde: for fruites they haue (beſides Peaches of diuers kindes▪ and in ſo great abundance that it is ſtrange Cherries, Plummes, Walnuttes, Haſle nuttes, Cheſnuttes but thoſe not very good: of Apples, Peares, Oranges and Lemons with all ſuch like fruites there are ſufficient. Of all ſorts of Hearbs and plants, as Cole worts, Radiſhes and ſuch like they haue at their certayne tunes of the yeare. They haue likewiſe in that Iſland a certaine fruite that groweth vnder the earth, like Radiſhes or other roots, but the leaues or plants are trees like Vines, but different in leaues, and groweth long wiſe vpon the grounde: it beareth a fruite called Ba
                              •
                           a
                              •
                           as, that is very good and is ſo great that it weigheth a pound, ſome more, ſome leſſe, but little eſteemed: and yet it is a great ſuſtenance and foode for the common ſort of people. It is of good account in Port
                              •
                           gall
                        ▪ for thether they vſe to bring it for a preſent, and thoſe of the Ilande by reaſon of the great abundance doe little eſteeme it. There is alſo another kinde of ſtuffe that is ſowed like corne and is a fruite: it groweth vppon the roote of the graſſe or leaues and is round and as bigge as a great Peaſe, but not ſo rounde: in eating it taſteth like Cardnuttes, but harder to bite: it is like wiſe a good meate and much eſteemed in other places, but by reaſon of the great quantitie thereof, it is moſt vſed to fatten their Hogges▪ and is called 
                           
                              •
                           un
                              •
                           . There is alſo in the Iland a certaine plant, which is found in all places therof in the open fields: it groweth as high as a man▪ and beareth no fruite, onely the roote thereof is a ſubſtance, of the th
                           ••
                        kneſſe of a mans two fi
                           •
                        tes, and in ſhew as if it were natural golden hair, and in handling like ſoft ſilke, which is vſed there to ſtuffe and fill their beddes in ſteede of wooll and feathers▪ and I do certainly beleeue, if any man of vnderſtanding woulde take it in hand, it would well be wouen. The principalleſt traf
                        
                           •••
                        ue of this Iland is their woad, ſuch as wee vſe for 
                           ••
                        ing where of much is made in that Iland, and is fetched from thence by Engliſhmen, Scottes, and French men, in barter for cloathes and other wares, who continually traffique into that Iland: and although by reaſon of the warres, the Engliſhmen are forbidden to traffique thether, yet vnder the names of Scots and French men, they haue continuall trade there. The Iland hath not any wilde beaſtes or fowles, but very fewe, ſauing onely Canarie birdes, which are there by thouſands, wher many birders take them▪ and thereof make a dayly liuing, by carying them into diuers places. It hath alſo wonderfull many Quailes, which they call Cod
                              ••
                           
                           niſen: of tame fowles, as Hennes, & Gynny hens are there likewiſe great ſtore. Hunting is there little vſed, but only for Cunnies, which are very great: Hares, Harts, Partridges, Veniſon, and ſuch like are not there to be found, becauſe of the little reſpect or care the inhabitantes haue to breede any ſuch thinges. Fiſh is very plentifull, and of diuers kindes, and very good: in Summer there is great ſtore taken, for in Winter they can hardly brooke the ſeas. The chiefe monthes of winter weather for raine and ſtormes are, Ianuarie, Februarie, March and Aprill, and alſo the month of September is commonly very ſtormie: all the other monthes it is commonly good weather. The Countrey is verie hillie, and in ſome places wooddy, full of buſhes and trees: it is hard to trauel, becauſe their waies for the moſt parte are ſtony, ſo that for a mile, or a mile and a halfe together, men can ſée no ground, but only ſtones, which for ſharpeneſſe and faſhion ſhew like pointed Diamantes, whereby one can hardly tread vpon it leaſt it ſhould cut through both ſhooes and feet: and yet it is all planted with Vines, ſo full and thick that in ſummer time you can hardly ſee through it, for that the rootes thereof doe grow betweene the ſtones: ſo that a man would think it impoſſible that any thing ſhould grow therein: and which is more, in ſome places it ſeemeth impoſſible for a man to tread vpon it, being ſo wilde and deſert as it ſheweth and nothing but harde ſtones and rockes. In good ground their Vines will not grow but onely in the wild & ſtony places: & for that cauſe they are much eſteemed. The good groundes and plaine fieldes, which in ſome places are verie many ſpecially by villa da Prava are ſowed with corne and woad, & they haue ſo much corne that they neede not bring any from other places: although that beſides their inhabitants & natural borne Iſlanders. They haue continually with them 14. companies of Spaniards, which are all fed and nouriſhed by the corne that groweth in the countrey vnleſſe there chance to come a hard & vnfruitfull yeare, as oftentimes it doth, for then they are forced to helpe themſelues with forraine corne▪ and that ſpecially

becauſe of the ſoldiers that lie in the Iland: & yet it is ſtrange, that the corne and all other things in the Iland continue not aboue one yeare, and that which is kept aboue a yeare is nought and nothing worth. And therefore to keepe their corne longer then a yeare, they are forced to bury it in the earth, for the ſpace of foure or fiue monthes together, to the which end euery townſeman hath his pit at one ende of the towne in the common high way, which is appointed for the purpoſe, and euery man ſetteth his marke vpon his pitte ſtone: the Corne is but lightly buried in the earth: the holes within are rounde, and the toppes thereof ſo wide that a man may créep in, wherunto there is a ſtone purpoſely made to couer it, which ſhutteth it vppe very cloſe. Some of the pittes are ſo great, as that they may holde two or thrée laſtes of corne, ſome greater, & ſome ſmaller as euery mā hath his prouiſion: and as ſoone as the corne is reaped and fanned (which is in Iuly,) euery man putteth his corne into thoſe pittes, laying ſtraw vnder and round about it, & then they fill it ful or but half ful according as their quā
                        titie is, and ſo ſtoppe it vppe with the ſtone, which they couer with earth, & ſo let it ſtande vntill Chriſtmas, when euery man that will fetch home his corne: ſome let it ly longer, and fetch it by little and little, as they vſe it: but the corne is as good when they take it out, as it was at th
                           •
                         firſt houre that they put it in: and although that Cartes, horſes, and men do commonly paſſe ouer it, and alſo that the raine rayneth vppon it, yet there entreth not any droppe of rayne or moyſture into it: and if the corne were not buried in that manner, it woulde not continue good aboue foure monthes together, but would bee ſpoyled: and when it hath béene thus for a long time buried in the earth, it will continue the whole yeare through, and then they keep it in cheſtes, or make a thing of mattes, like a coope to preſerue it in, not once ſtirring or mouing it, and ſo it continueth very good.
                     The greateſt commoditie they haue in the land, and that ſerueth their turnes beſt, is their oxen: & I belieue they are the greateſt & fayreſt yt are to be found in al Chriſtendom, w
                           •
                         vnmeaſurable great and long horns. Euerie Oxe hath his ſeuerall name like men, and although there bee a thouſande of them in a hearde, and that one of them be called by his name, hee preſently commeth forth vnto his mayſter that calleth him. The land is verie high, and as it ſéemeth hollow: for that as they paſſe ouer a hill of ſtone, the grounde ſoundeth vnder them as if it were a Seller, ſo that it ſéemeth in diuers places to haue holes vnder the earth, whereby it is much ſubiect to earthquakes, as alſo all the other Ilandes are: for there it is a common thing, and all thoſe Ilandes for the moſt part haue had mynes of brimſtone, for that in many places of Tercera, and Saint Michael, the ſmoke and ſauour of Brimſtone doeth ſtill iſſue forth of the ground, and the Countrey rounde about is all ſindged and burnt. Alſo there are places wherein there are fountaines and welles, the water whereof is ſo hotte that it will boyle an egge, as well as if it hung ouer a fire. In the Iland of Tercera, about three miles from Angra, there is a fountayne in a place called Gualua, which hath a propertie, that all the woode which falleth into it, by length of time conuerteth into ſtone, as I my ſelfe by experience haue tryed. In the ſame fountayne by the roote of a tree, whereof the one halfe runneth vnder that water, and is turned into as harde ſtone as if it were ſteele: and the other parte of the roote (which the water toucheth not) is ſtill woode and roote, as it ſhould bee. The Iland hath great ſtore and excellent kindes of woode, ſpecially Cedar trees, which grow there in ſo great numbers, that they make ſcutes, Cartes, and other groſſe workes thereof, and is the commoneſt woode that they vſe to burne in thoſe Countries, whereby it is the wood that with them is leaſt eſteemed, by reaſon of the great quantitie thereof. There is another kinde of wood called Sangu
                              •
                           nl
                              •
                           o, and is very fayre of a redde colour, and another ſorte that they call white woode, being of it ſelfe as whyte as Chalke: other that is p
                           •
                        r
                           ••
                        ite yellow, and all naturall without any dying▪ and therefore there are diuers good workemen in Tercera, that are skilfull in Ioyners ocupation, & make many fine peeces of worke, as Deſkes, Cubbordes, Cheſtes, and other ſuch like thinges, whereof many are caried into Portingall, and much eſteemed there, as well for the beautie of the woode, as for the workemanſhippe, and ſpecially the Spaniſh Fleete, which ordinarily refreſh themſelues in that Iland, do carry much of it from thence, for it is the beſt and fineſt that is made in all Spayne and Portingall, although it be not comparable to the Seſkes, and fine workemanſhippe of Nurenbergh, and thoſe countries: but for wood it excelleth all other countries, for that they haue in the Spaniſh Fleete, beſides their owne kindes of woodes, at the leaſt a thouſande ſortes of Woode of all colours that man can imagine or deuiſe, and ſo fayre that more fayrer can not be paynted. There

is a certaine kinde of Woode in the Iſlande Pico, ſituate and lying twelue miles from Tercera, called Te
                              •
                           xo, a moſt excellent and princely wood, and therfore it is forbidden to be cut, but only for the Kings owne vſe, or for his Officers. The wood is as hard as Iron, and hath a colour within, as if it were wrought, like red Chamlet, with the ſame water, and the older it is and the more vſed, the fairer it is of colour▪ ſo that it is worthie to be eſtéemed as in trueth it is.
                     All thoſe Ilands are inhabited by Portingals, but ſince the troubles in Portingall, there haue bene diuers Spaniſh ſoldiers ſent thether, and a Spaniſh Gouernor, that kéep all the Forts and Caſtles in their poſſeſſions, although the Portingales are put to no charges, nor yet hardly vſed by them, but are rather kept ſhort, ſo that not one ſoldier dareth goe out of the towne, without licence: and therefore men may quyetlie trauell throughout the Iland, both day and night, without any trouble. Likewiſe they will not ſuffer any ſtranger to trauel to ſée the Country and this order was not brought vp by the Spaniards, but by the Portingals themſelues, before their troubles, for they would neuer permit it▪ and which is more, all ſtrangers that came thether were vſually appointed a certain ſtreet, wherin they ſhould ſel their wares and might not goe out of that ſtréet. Now it is not ſo ſtraightlie looked vnto, but they may goe in all places of the towne, & within the Iland but not about it, to view the coaſt: which notwithſtanding was graunted vnto vs, by the Gouernor himſelf, who lent vs his horſes, to ryde about, and gaue vs leaue to ſée all the fortes, which at this time is not permitted to the naturall borne Ilanders, neyther are they ſo much credited. We road twice about the Iland, which he granted vs leaue to doe, by meanes of certaine particular friendſhip we had with him: neyther could the Portingales hinder vs therein, becauſe wee were in the Kinges ſeruice, as Factors for the Kinges Pepper, and for that, they held and accounted vs as naturall borne Portingalles: for the Gouernor would willinglie haue had mee, to haue drawne a plot of the whole Iland, that hee might haue ſent it to the King: wherein I excuſed my ſelf: yet I made him the town with the Hauen, coming in, and Fortes of Angra, which he ſent vnto the King, the like whereof you may in this Booke behold: for the which the Gouernor was greatlie affected vnto mee, and ſhewed mee much friendſhippe. Wee had in our Lodging a French Marchant and a Scot, that willinglie would haue gone with vs, to ſée the Iland, but could not be ſuffered: for the Portingalles thinke that they would take the proportion thereof, and ſo ſeeke to defeate them of their right.
                     But returning to our matter, the Ilandes are verie good, and holeſome ayre, and the diſeaſes that are moſt common in thoſe Countries, though not verie plentiful, but only here & there one are one ſicknes called O Ax, that is a kind of bad ayre yt taketh them, & maketh them altogether lame, or half lame of their limmes, or of ſome one limme: and an other ſicknes, that is called O Sange, that is, a certaine blood, that haſtelie cometh vppon a man, as a ſwelling in the eyes, or other places of the face, or of the bodie, & is as red as blood, for (as they ſay) it is nothing els but méere blood: theſe are two diſeaſes like the plague, and are commoneſt ſickneſſes in thoſe Countries, which grow by reaſon of the great windines of the Ilandes, that are ſubiect to all ſtormes and foule weathers, and are vnreaſonable moyſt, which is one of the principall cauſes of theſe diſeaſes: for the windes are there ſo ſtrong and dangerous, that they conſume both the Iron and the Steele of their houſes, and bring them into powder: for I haue ſeene Iron grates in the Kings Cuſtome houſe, as thicke as a mans arme, and the windowes of hard free ſtone, which were ſo conſumed by the wind, that the Iron in ſome places was become as thynne as a ſtraw, and the ſtone in like ſort: and therefore in thoſe Countries they vſe to make their Rooffes and painthouſes of ſtones, which they digge in the water, out of ſandes vppon the Sea coaſt of thoſe Illandes, whereon the wind hath not ſo great a power to conſume it: and yet that Cuſtome houſe had not bene made aboue 6 or 7 yeares before, at the moſt.
                     In this Iland beſides the two townes, there are diuers great villages, as S. Sebaſtians, S. Barboran, Altares, Gualua, Villa noua, with manie other pariſhes and hamlets: ſo that for the moſt part it is built and inhabited, ſauing onely the places that are wild and full of woods, which can hardlie bee trauelled, much leſſe inhabited. Their moſt traffique is (as I ſaid before) the wood that groweth in thoſe countries, I meane for ſuch as deale in marchandiſe, and the workemen that make it: but the reſt waight for the fleets that come and goe to and from the Spaniſh and Portingall Indies from Braſilia, Cabo, Verde and Guinea: all which countries doe commonly come vnto Tercera to refreſh

themſelues, as lying very fitly for that purpoſe: ſo that all the inhabitants doe thereby richlie maintaine themſelues, and ſell at their wares, as well handie works as victuals vnto thoſe ſhippes: and all the Ilandes round about doe as then come vnto Tercera with their wares, to ſell it there. For the which cauſe the Engliſh men and other ſtrangers keepe continually about thoſe Ilandes, béeing aſſured that all ſhippes for want of refreſhing muſt of force put into thoſe Ilandes, although at this time manie ſhippes doe auoid thoſe Ilandes, to the great diſcommoditie of the Ilands and the ſhippes.
                     From Tercera Southeaſt, about 27. or 28. miles, lyeth the Iland of S. Michael, which is about 20 myles long, and is likewiſe full of Townes and Villages inhabited by Portingalles, for ayre and all other thinges like vnto Tercera. The chief Towne is called Punta del Gada, where there is great traffique of Engliſh, Scots, and French men, onlie (as in Tercera) becauſe of the woad, which is more abundant in that Ilande, then in all the reſt of them: for that euerie yeare there is made aboue two hundreth thouſand Quintalles of Woad. It hath likewiſe great abundance of Corne, ſo that they helpe to victuall all the Ilandes that are round about them. It hath neither Hauens nor Riuers, but onlie the broad ſea, and haue leſſe ſafegard and defence then thoſe which are of Tercera: but there they ly not vnder the commandement of any Fort: ſo that many ſet ſayle with all the windes, and put to ſea, which in the road of Tercera they may not doe: and therefore the ſtrangers ſhippes had rather ſayle to S. Michaels, for there they can not be conſtrayned to doe anie thing, but what they will themſelues to doe. There is alſo a company of Spaniards in a Caſtle that ſtandeth by the Towne of Punta del Gada, which is made by the Spaniards for the defence and maintenance of the ſame towne.
                     From the Iland of S. Michaels Southwardes twelue myles, lyeth the Iſland Santa Maria, which is about ten or twelue myles compaſſe, and hath no traffique but onlie of pot earth, which the other Ilands fetch from thence. It hath no Woad, but is full of all victualles like Tercera, and inhabited by the Portingales. There are no Spaniardes in it: becauſe it is a ſtonie Countrie, like Tercera, and hard to bord: whereby the inhabitantes themſelues are ſufficient and able enough to defend it. While I remained in Tercera, the Earle of Comberland came thether, to take in freſh water▪ and ſome other victuals: but the inhabitants would not ſuffer him to haue it, but wounded both himſelf and diuers of his men, whereby they were forced to depart without hauing any thing there.
                     From Tercera North northweſt about ſeuen or eight myles, lyeth the little Iland called Gratioſa, & is but 5. or 6. mile in compaſſe, a very pleaſaunt, and fyne Iſland, full of all fruites and all other victualles, ſo that it not onley feedeth it ſelf, but alſo Tercera and the other Iſlandes about it, and hath no other kinde of merchandiſe: it is well built and inhabited by Portingales, and hath no ſoldiers in it, becauſe it is not able to heare the charge. The Earle of Comberland while I lay in Tercera▪
                         came vnto that Iland, where himſelf in perſon, with ſeuen or eight in his company went on land, aſking certaine beaſtes, Hennes, and other Victuals, with wyne and freſh water, which they willinglie gaue him, and therewith hee departed from thence, without doing them anie hurt: for the which the inhabitantes thanked him, and commended him for his curteſie, and keeping of his promiſe.
                     From Tercera Weſt North Weſt, eight or nyne miles, lyeth the Iland of S. George. It is about twelue myles long, but not aboue 2. or 3. myles at the furtheſt in breadth: it is wooddie and full of hilles: it hath no ſpeciall traffique, but onelie ſome Woad, and yet verie little of it. The inhabitants liue moſt by Cattell and tilling of the land, and bring much victuals to ſell in Tercera: it hath likewiſe many Cedar trees, and other kindes of wood, that from thence are brought vnto Tercera, and ſold vnto the Ioyners, which for that occaſion dwell onlie in Tercera.
                     
                     From S. George Weſt Southweſt 
                           •
                        . miles, lyeth the Iland called Fayael, which is 17. or 18. miles in compaſſe: it is one of the beſt Ilands next vnto Tercera, and S. Michaels: it aboundeth in all ſorts of victuailes, both fleſh and fiſh, ſo that from this Iland the moſt part of victuailes and neceſſaries commeth by whole Caruels vnto Tercera: it hath likewiſe much Woad, ſo that many Engliſh ſhippes doe traffique thether. The principall road and place is the towne called Vitta dotta: there the ſhips likewiſe doe lie in the open ſea vnder the land, as they do before al ye other Ilāds: by this town there lieth a fortreſſe, but of ſmal importance: & becauſe the inhabitants of themſelues do offer to defend the Iland againſt all enemies, the ſoldiers were diſcharged from thence, which

which before that time lay in the fort, complayning that they were not able to maintaine nor lodge them. The ſame time that the Earle of Cumberland was in the Iland of Gratioſa, he came likewiſe to Fayael, where at the firſt time that he came, they beganne to reſiſt him, but by reaſon of ſome controuerſie among them, they let him land where he raſed the Caſtle to the ground, and ſunke all their Ordinance in the Sea, taking with him certaine Caruels and ſhips that lay in the road, with prouiſion of all things that he wanted: and therewith departed againe to Sea. Whereupon the King cauſed the principall actors therein to bee puniſhed, and ſent a companie of Souldiers thether againe, which went out of Tercera, with all kind of warlike munition, and great ſhotte, making the fortreſſe vp againe, the better to defend the Iland, truſting no more in the Portingales. In that Iland are the moſt part of the Netherlanders ofſpring, yet they vſe the Portingales language, by reaſon they haue béene ſo long conuerſant among them, and thoſe that vſed the Dutch tongue are all dead: they are greatly affected to the Netherlanders and ſtrangers.
                     From Fayael Southeaſt thrée miles, and from Saint George Southweſt foure miles, and from Tercera Southweſt and by Weſt twelue miles, lyeth the Iland called Pico, which is more then fiftéene miles in length. It is ſo named of a high mountain that ſtandeth therein called Pico, which is ſo high, 
                           •
                        t ſome thinke it is higher then the Pico of 
                           〈◊〉
                         When it is cleare weather, it may as perfectly beſeene in Tercera, as if it were not halfe a mile from thence, and yet it lyeth aboue twentie fiue miles from it: for it is at the furtheſt end of the Iland towards Fayael The toppe of it is ſeene cleare and bright, but the nether part is couered with cloudes, and with the Horizon, whereby the Iland is much ſpoken of. It is verie fruitfull of all kinds of victuals, like Fayael, and hath great ſtore of woode, as Cedars & all other kinds, and alſo the coſtly wood Te
                              •
                           xo. There they build many Caruels and ſmall ſhips: & from thence by reaſon of the abundance of woode, they ſerue the other Ilands with woode. It is alſo inhabited as the reſt are, their chiefe traffique being Cattle and huſbandrie. It hath much wine, and the beſt in all thoſe Ilands, and it hath the ſauoreſt and pleaſanteſt Oranges that are throughout all Portingal: ſo that they are brought into Tercera for a preſent, as being ther verie much eſteemed, and in my iudgement they are the beſt that euer I taſted in any place. And becauſe the towne of
Angra, in the Iland of Tercera is the chiefe towne and ruler ouer al the Flemiſh Ilands, I thought good to ſet it downe in this place, in the full proportion, with all the ſtréetes, Forts, and Road or open Hauen, together with the hilles called Breſil, where the ſentinell is holden, for all ſhippes that come into thoſe Ilands: al liuely deſcribed as in my ſimple ſkill I could comprehend and deuiſe it.
                  
                  
                     The 98. Chapter. Of the Ilands of Coruo and Flores.
                     
                        FRom Tercera weſtwarde to the Iland named Flores are ſeuentie miles: it is aboute ſeauen miles compaſſe, it is alſo inhabited by Portingales, and hath no ſpeciall marchandiſe, but onely ſome wood, it is full of Cattle, and other neceſſarie prouiſions, and lyeth open to all the world, and to whoſoeuer will come thether, as well Engliſhmen as others: for that the inhabitants haue not the power to reſiſt them. A myle from thence Northward, lyeth a little Iland of two or three miles in compaſſe called De Coruo. The inhabitants are of the ſame people that dwel in Flores. Betwéene thoſe two Ilands and round about them, the Engliſhmen doe commonly ſtay, to watch the ſhips that come out of the Weſt: for thoſe are the firſt Ilands, that the ſhippes looke out for and deſcrie, when they ſayle vnto Tercera, wherby the inhabitants doe but little proſper, becauſe they are at the pleaſure and commaundement of all that will come vnto them, and take their goods from them, as oftentimes it happeneth. Yet for all their pouertie, not to looſe both landes and goods, they muſt content themſelues, and Sayle with euerie winde.
                     The Ile of Tercera lyeth vnder thirtie nine degrees, in the ſame height that Lisbone lyeth: and is diſtant from Lisbone lying right Eaſt and Weſt two hundred and fiftie Spaniſh miles. This ſhall ſuffice for the deſcription of the Flemmiſh Ilands, called the Azores, which by dayly traueling vnto them are ſufficiently knowne: for that at this time many of our nation doe ſayle thether, ſo that euerie Marchant knoweth them. This briefe deſcription therfore is by me ſet town for the inſtruction of ſuch as deale not in the trade of Marchandiſe, and know them not▪ whereby they may ſée what manner of Countries they are▪ &c.
                  
                  
                     
                     The 99. Chapter. Of cer
                           •
                        aine notable and memorable accidents that happened during my continuance in Tercera.
                     
                        THe ſecond of October An. 15
                              •
                           9. at the towne of Villa dan Praya, in the Iland of Tercera, two men being in a field hard without the towne were killed with lightning.
                     The ninth of the ſame month there arriued in Tercera fourteene ſhippes, that came from the Spaniſh Indies, laden with Cochenile, Hides, Golde. Siluer, Pearles, and other riche wares. They were fiftie in companie, when they departed out of the Iland of Hanana, whereof, in their comming out of the Channell, eleauen ſunke in the ſame Channell by ſoule weather, the reſt by a ſtorme were ſcattered and ſeperated one from the other. The next day there came an other ſhip of the ſame companie, that ſayled cloſe vnder the Iland, ſo to get into the Roade: where ſhe met with an Engliſh ſhippe, that had not aboue three caſt peeces, and the Spaniyard twelue. They fought a long time together, which we being in the Iland might ſtand and behold: whereupon the Gouernour of Tercera ſent two Boates of Muſketiers to help the ſhippe: but before they could come at her, the Engliſh ſhippe had ſhot her vnder water, and wee ſaw her ſinke into the Sea, with all her ſayles vp, and not any thing ſeen of her aboue the water. The Engliſhmen with their Boate ſaued the Captaine and about thirtie others with him, but not one penie worth of the goods, and yet in the ſhippe there was at the leaſt to the value of two hundred thouſand Ducats in Golde, Siluer, and Pearles, the reſt of the men were drowned, which might bee about fiftie perſons, among the which were ſome Fryers and women, which the Engliſhmen would not ſaue. Thoſe that they had ſaued they ſet on land: and then they ſayled away. The twentie ſeauenth of the ſame month, the ſaide fourteene ſhips hauing refreſhed themſelues in the Iland, departed from Tercera towards Saul, 
                        
                           •
                        nd comming vpon the coaſt of Spaine▪ they were taken by the Engliſh ſhips, that laye there to watch for them, two onely excepted which eſcaped away, & the reſt were wholly carried into England.
                     About the ſame time the Earle of Cumberland, with one of the Queenes ſhippes, and fiue or ſixe more, kept about thoſe Ilands and came often times ſo cloſe vnder the Iland, and to the Road of Angra, that the people on land might eaſily tell all his men that hee had a bord, and knew ſuch as walked on the Hatches: they of the Ilande not once ſhooting at them, although they might eaſily haue done it, for they were within Muſket ſhotte both of the towne and Fort. In theſe places he continued for the ſpace of two Moneths, and ſayled round about the Ilands, and landed in Gratioſa, and Fayael, as in the deſcription of thoſe Ilands I haue alreadie declared. Here he tooke diuers ſhippes and Caruels, which he ſent into England: ſo that thoſe of the Iland, durſt not once put foorth their heads, at the ſame time about three or foure daies after the Earle of Cumberland had beene in the Iland of Fayael, and was departed from thence, there arriued in the ſaide Iland of Fayael 
                        
                           •
                        i
                           •
                        e Indian ſhips, whole Generall was one Iuan Doryne
                              •
                           
                        
                        ▪ & there they diſcharged in the Iland 40. myllions of Gold and Siluer. And hauing with all ſpeed refreſhed their ſhippes, fearing the comming of the Engliſhmen, they ſet ſayle, and arriued ſafely in Saint Lucas, not meeting with the enemie, to the great good lucke of the Spaniards and hard fortune of the Engliſhmen: for that within leſſe then two daies, after the Golde and Siluer was laden againe into the Spaniſh ſhippes, the Earle of Cumberland, ſayled againe by that Iland: ſo that it appeared that God would not let them haue it, for it they had once had ſight thereof, without doubt it had beene theirs, as the Spaniardes themſelues confeſſed.
                     In the Moneth of Nouember▪ there arriued in Tercera two great ſhips, which were the Admirall and Viceadmirall of the Fleete laden with Siluer, who with ſtormie weather were ſeperated from the Fleete▪ and had beene in great torment and diſtreſſe, and readie to ſinke: for they were forced to vſe all their Pumps: ſo that they wiſhed a thouſand times to haue met with the Engliſhmen to whom they would willingly haue giuen their Siluer, and all that euer they brought with them, onely to ſaue their liues. And although the Earle of Cumberland, lay ſtill aboute thoſe Ilands, yet they met not with him ſo that after much paine and labour they got into the Road before Angra, where with all ſpeed they vnladed, and diſcharged aboue fiue myllions of Siluer▪ all in peeces of 8. and 1
                              •
                           
                         pound great: ſo that the whole Raye lay couered with plates and Cheſts of Siluer, full of Ryales of eight, moſt wonderful to behold: each myllion being 10. hundred thouſand Ducats, beſides Pearles, Gold, and other ſtones,

which were not regiſtred. The Admiral and chiefe commaunder of thoſe ſhippes & Fléete called Aluaro Flores de Quiniones was ſicke of the Neapolitan diſeaſe, & was broght to land, whereof not long after he dyed in Syuilia. He brought with him the Kings broad Seale and full authoritie to be Generall and chiefe commaunder vppon the Seas, and of all Fléetes or ſhips, and of all places and Ilands, or lands whereſoeuer he came▪ wherevpon the gouernor of Tercera, did him great honour, and betwéen them it was concluded, perceiuing the weakneſſe of their ſhips, and the daunger of the Engliſhmen, that they would ſend the ſhips emptie with Souldiers to conueye them, either to Syuil or Lisbone, where they could firſt arriue, with aduiſe vnto his Maieſtie of all that had paſt, and that he would giue order to fetch the Siluer, with good and ſafe conuoy. Whereupon the ſaide Aluaro Flores ſtayed there, vnder colour of keeping the Siluer, but ſpecially becauſe of his diſeaſe, and for that they were affraide of the Engliſhmen. This Aluaro Flores had alone for his owne part aboue 50. thouſand Ducats in Pearles, which hee ſhewed vnto vs, and ſought to ſell them, or barter them with vs for Spices, or bils of exchange. The ſaid two ſhippes ſet ſayle with thrée or foure hundred men, as well Souldiers as others, that came with them out of India, and being at Sea had a ſtorme, wherewith the Admirall burſt and ſunke in the Sea, and not one man ſaued. The Vice Admirall cut downe her Maſt, and ranne the ſhip on ground hard by Sentuual, where it burſt in péeces, ſome of the men ſauing themſelues by ſwimming, that brought the newes, but the reſt were drowned.
                     In the ſame month, there came two great ſhips out of the Spaniſh Indies, and being within halfe a mile of the Road of Tercera, they met with an Engliſh ſhippe, that after they had fought long together, tooke them both. About 7. or 8. Monthes before, there had béene an Engliſh ſhippe in Tercera, that vnder the name of a Frenchman came to traffique in the Iland, there to lade woode, & being diſcouered was both ſhippe and goods confiſcated to the Kings vſe, and all the men kept priſoners: yet went they vp and downe the ſtreetes to get their liuings, by labouring like ſlaues, being in déede as ſafe in that Iland, as if they had beene in priſon. But in the end vpon a Sunday, all the Saylers went downe behind the hils called Breſil: wher they found a Fiſher boate, whereinto they got, & rowed into the Sea to the Earle of Cumberlands ſhip, which to their great fortune chanced at that time to come by the Iland, and Ankered with his ſhippes about halfe a mile from the Road of Angra, hard by two ſmall Ilandes, which lye about a Baſes ſhot from the Iland and are full of Goates, Buckes, and ſhéepe, belonging to the inhabitants of the Iland of Tercera. Thoſe Saylers knew it well; and thereupon they rowed vnto them with their Boates, and lying at Anker that day, they fetched as many Goates and ſhéepe as they had neede of: which thoſe of the towne and of the Iland well ſaw and beheld, yet durſt not once goe forth, ſo there remained no more on land but the Maſter, & the Marchant, of the ſaid Engliſh ſhip. This Maſter had a brother in lawe dwelling in England, who hauing newes of his brothers impriſonment in Tercera, got licence of the Quéene of England, to ſet forth a ſhip▪ therewith to ſée if hee could recouer his loſſes of the Spaniards, by taking ſome of them, and ſo to redéeme his brother, that laye priſoner in Tercera, and he it was, that tooke the two Spaniſh ſhips before the towne. The Maſter of the ſhip aforeſaid, ſtanding on the ſhore by me, and looking vpon them, for he was my great acquaintance, the ſhips being taken, that were worth 300. thouſand Ducats, he ſent all the men on land ſauing only two of the principal Gentlemen, which he kept a borde, therby to ranſome his brother: and ſent the Pilot of one of the Indian ſhips that were taken, with a letter to the Gouernour of Tercera: wherein hee wrote that he ſhould deliuer him his brother, and hée would ſend the two Gentlemen on land: if not, he would ſayle with them into England, as indeed he did becauſe the Gouernor would not doe it, ſaying that the Gentlemen might make that ſuite to the King of Spaine himſelfe. This Spaniſh Pilot we bid to ſupper with vs, and the Engliſhmen likewiſe, wher hee ſhewed vs all the manner of their fight, much 
                           ••
                        mmending the order and manner of the Engliſhmens fighting, as alſo for their curteous vſing of him: but in the end the Engliſh Pilote likewiſe ſtole away in a French ſhip, without paying any ranſome as yet.
                     In the month of Ianuarie 159
                              •
                           . there arriued one ſhippe alone in Tercera, that came from the Spaniſh Indies, & brought newes, that there was a Fleete of a hundreth ſhippes which put out from ye Firm land of the Spaniſh Indies and by a ſtorme were driuen vpon the coaſt called Florida, where they were all caſt away, ſhe hauing only eſcaped, wherin there were great riches, & many men loſt, as it may well be thought: ſo that they made their account that of 22
                              •
                           . ſhips, that for certaine were knowne to haue put out of Noua Spa
                              •
                           g
                              •
                           a, Santo Domingo, Hauana, Capoverde, Braſilia, Guinea &c. In the yeare

                        1589. to ſayle for Spaine and Portingall, there were not aboue fourteene or fiftéene of them arriued there in ſafetie, all the reſt being either drowned, burſt or taken.
                     In the ſame Moneth of Ianuarie, there arriued in Tercera 15 or 16 ſhippes that came from Siuilia, which were moſt Flieboates of the lowe countries, and ſome Britons that were arreſted in Spain: theſe came full of ſoldiers, and well appointed with munition, to lade the ſiluer that lay in Tercera, and to fetch Aluares de Flores by the kings commandement into Spain. And becauſe that tyme of the yeare there is alwaies ſtormes about thoſe Ilandes, therefore they durſt not enter into the road of Tercera, for that as then it blew ſo great a ſtorme, that ſome of their ſhippes that had ankered, were forced to cut downe their maſtes, and were in danger to be loſt: and among the reſt a ſhippe of B
                              •
                           lcay ranne againſt the land, and was ſtriken in péeces, but al the men ſaued thēſelues. The other ſhippes were forced to keepe the ſea, and ſeparate themſelues one from the other, where wind and weather would driue them, vntill the 15 of March: for that in all that time they could not haue one day of faire weather to anker in, whereby they indured much miſerie, curſing both the ſiluer and the Iland. This ſtorme being paſt, they chanced to meet with a ſmall Engliſh ſhip of about 40 tunnes in bignes, which by reaſon of the great wind could not beare all her ſayles: ſo they ſet vpon her, and tooke her, and with the Engliſh flagge in their Admiralles ſtern they came as proudly into the hauen, as if they had conquered all the Realme of England: but as the Admirall that bare the Engliſh flagge vpon her ſterne, was entering into the road, there came by chance two Engliſh ſhippes by the Iland, that payd her ſo well for her paynes, that they were forced to cry Miſericordia
                        ▪ and without all doubt had taken her, if ſhe had bene but a myle further in the ſea: but becauſe ſhe got vnder the Fortreſſe, which alſo began to ſhoot at the Engliſhmen, they were forced to leaue her, and to put further into the ſea, hauing ſlayne 5. or 6. of the Spaniardes. The Engliſh men that were taken in the ſmall ſhippe were put vnder hatches, and coupled in boltes, and after they had beene priſoners three or foure dayes, there was a Spaniſh Enſigne-bearer in the ſhippe, that had a brother ſlayne in the fleet that came for England, who as then, mynding to reuenge his death, and withal to ſhew his manhood to the Engliſh captiues, that were in the Engliſh ſhippe, which they had taken, as is aforeſayd, tooke a poinyard in his hand, and went downe vnder the hatches, where finding the poore Engliſhmen ſitting in boltes, with the ſame poinyard hee ſtabbed ſixe of them to the heart: which two others of them perceyuing, claſped each other about the middle, becauſe they would not bee murthered by him, threw themſelues into the ſea, and there were drowned. This act was of all the Spaniardes much diſliked and verie ill taken, ſo that they caryed the Spaniard priſoner vnto Lisbon, where béeing ariued, the King of Spaine willed he ſhould bee ſent into England, that the Queene of England might vſe him as ſhee thought good: which ſentence his friends by intreaty got to be reuerſed, notwithſtanding he commanded he ſhould without all fauor be beheaded: but vpon a good Fryday, the Cardinall going to Maſſe, all the Captaines and Commanders made ſo great intreaty for him that in the end they got his pardon. This I thought good to note, that men might vnderſtand the bloodie and honeſt mindes of the Spaniardes, when they haue men vnder their ſubiection.
                     The ſame two Engliſh ſhippes, which followed the Spaniſh Admirall, till he had got vnder the Fort of Tercera, as I ſaid before, put into the ſea, where they met with an other Spaniſh ſhip, béeing of the ſame Fléet, that had likewiſe bene ſcatered by the ſtorme and was onlie miſſing, for the reſt lay in the road: this ſmall ſhippe the Engliſhmen tooke, and ſent all the men on ſhore, not hurting any of them: but if they had knowne, what had beene done vnto the foreſaid Engliſh captiues, I beleeue they would ſoone haue reuenged themſelues, as afterwards manie an innocent ſoule payed for it. This ſhip thus taken by the Engliſh men, was the ſame that was kept and cōfiſcated in the Iland of Tercera, by the Engliſh men that got out of the Iland in a fiſher boate (as I ſayd before) and was ſold vnto the Spaniardes, that as then came from the Indies, wherewith they ſayled to S. Lucas, where it was alſo arreſted by the Duke, and appointed to goe in company to fetch the ſiluer in Tercera, becauſe it was a ſhippe that ſayled well: but among the ſpaniardes fleet it was the meaneſt of the company. By this meanes it was taken from the Spaniards, and caryed into England, and the owners had it againe, when they leaſt thought of it.
                     The 19 of Marche, the aforeſaid ſhippes, being 19 in nūber, ſet ſayle, hauing laden the Kings ſiluer, and receiued in Aluaro Flores de Quiniones, with his company, and good prouiſion of neceſſaries, munition and ſoldiers, that were fullie reſolued (as they made ſhewe) to fight valiantly to the laſt man, before they would yeeld or loſe their riches: and

although they ſet their courſe for S. Lucas, the wind draue them vnto Lisbon, which as it ſeemed) was willing by his force to helpe them, and to bring them thether in ſafetie: although Aluaro de Flores, hoth againſt the wind and weather would perforce haue ſayled to Saint Lucas, but being conſtrained by the wind, and importunitie of the Saylers, that proteſted they would require their loſſes and damages of him▪ he was content to ſayle to Lisbone: from whence the Siluer was by land carried into Siuilia. At Cape Saint Vincent, there lay a Fleete of twentie Engliſh ſhippes, to watch for the Armada, ſo that if they had put into Saint Lucas, they had fallen right into their handes, which if the wind had ſerued they had done. And therefore they may ſay that the wind had lent them a happie Viage: for if the Engliſhmen had met with them▪ they had ſurely beene in great danger, and poſſibly but few of them had eſ
                        
                           ••
                        ped, by reaſon of the feare wherewith they were poſſeſſed, becauſe fortune or rather God 
                           •
                        as wholly againſt them. Which is a ſufficient cauſe to make ye Spaniards out of hart, to the contrarie to giue the Engliſhmen more courage, and to make them bolder for that they are victorious, ſtout and valiant: and ſeeing al their enterpriſes doe take ſo good effect, that thereby they are become Lordes and maſters of the Sea, and neede care for no man, as it well appeareth, by this briefe diſcourſe.
                     
                        15
                              ••
                           .In the month of March 15
                              ••
                           . There was a blaſing Starre with a tayle ſeene in 
                           〈◊〉
                        , that continued foure nights together, ſtretching the taile towards the South.
                     In the Month of May, a Caruel of Fay
                           
                              •
                           
                         arriued at Tercera, in the Hauen or Roade of Angra, laden with Oxen, ſheepe, Hennes, and all other kinds of victuals, and full of people, which by a ſtorme had broken her Ruther whereby the Sea caſt her about and therewith ſhee ſunke, and in her were drowned three children, and a Frier Franciſcan, the reſt of the men ſaued themſelues by ſwimming, and by helpe from the ſhore, but all the Cattle and Hennes came drowned to land: the Frier was buried with a great proceſſion and ſolemnitie, eſteeming him for a Saint, becauſe hee was taken vp dead with his Booke between his armes: for the which cauſe euery man came to looke on him as a myracle, giuing gret offerings to ſay Maſſes for his ſoule.
                     The firſt of Auguſt, the Gouernour of Tercera, reeceiued aduiſe out of Portingall and Spaine, that two yeares before the date of 
                           〈…〉
                        , there were ſayled out of England 
                           〈◊〉
                         great ſhippes wel apointed, with full reſolution to take their fourme, ſeuen of them into the Portingall Indies, and the other fiue to Ma
                              •
                           : of the which fiue, two were caſt away in paſſing the Straightes of Magellane
                              •
                           , and three ſayled to Malac
                              ••
                           
                         but what they had done there▪ was as then not knowne. The other ſeuen paſſed the Cape de Bona Speranza, and arriued in India, where they put into the coaſt of Malabar, and there tooke ſixe Foiſtes of the Malabares, but let them goe againe: and two Turkiſh Gallies, that came out of the Straightes of Mecca or the redde Sea, to whome likewiſe they did no hurt. And there they laded their ſhippes with Spices, and returned backe againe on their way: but where or in what place they had laden, it was not certainely knowne, ſauing onely that thus much was written by the Gouernour of India, and ſent ouer land to Venice, and from thence to Mad
                              •
                           .
                     
                     The ſeuenth of Auguſt a Nauie of Engliſh ſhippes was ſeene before Tercera, being 20. in number, and fiue of them the Quéenes ſhippes: their Generall was one Martin Furbu
                              •
                           her, as wee after had intelligence. They came purpoſely to watch for the Fleet of the Spaniſh Indies, and for the Indian ſhippes, and the ſhips of the countries in the Weſt: which put the Ilanders in great feare, ſpecially thoſe of Fay
                              •
                           el, for that the Engliſhmen ſent a Trumpet to the Gouernour to aſke certaine wine, fleſh, and other victuals for their mony, and good friendſhip. They of Fayael did not onely refuſe to giue eare vnto them, but with a ſhot killed their meſſenger or Trumpeter: which the Engliſhmen tooke in euill part, ſending them word that they were beſt to looke to themſelues, & ſtand vppon their gard, for they ment to come and viſite them whether they would or no. The Gouernor made them anſwere, that he was there in the behalfe of his Maieſtie of Spaine and that he would doe his beſt, to keepe them out, as he was bound: but nothing was done, althogh they of Fayael were in no litle feare, ſending to Tercera for aide, from whence they had certaine Barkes with poulder and munition for warre with ſome Biſket and other neceſſarie prouiſion.
                     The 3. of Auguſt we receiued very certaine newes out of Portingal, that ther were 80. ſhips put out of ye 
                        C
                              •••
                           nl
                              •
                           o, laden with victuals, Munition, money, and Souldiers, to goe for Britaine to aide the Catholicks, and Leaguers of Fraunce, againſt the King of Nauarre. At the ſame time two Netherland Hulkes, comming out of Portingall to Tercera, being halfe the Seas ouer, met with foure of the Queenes ſhips their General being

                        S. Iohn Hawkins, that ſtayed them, but let them goe again, without doing them any harme. The Netherlanders reported, that each of the Queenes ſhips had 80 peeces of Ordinance, and that Captaine Drake lay with 40 ſhippes in the Engliſh Channell, watching for the Army of the Carunho: and likewiſe that there lay at the Cape S. Vincent tenne other Engliſh ſhippes, that if any ſhippes eſcaped from the Ilandes, they might take them. Thoſe tidings put the Ilanders in great feare, leaſt if they fayled of the Spaniſh Fleet, and got nothing by them, that thē they would fall vpon the Ilands, becauſe they would not returne emptie home, whereupon they held ſtraight watch, ſending aduiſe vnto the king what newes they heard.
                     The firſt of September, there came to the Iland of S. Michael a Portingall ſhippe, out of the Hauen of Pernanbuco, in Braſilia, which brought newes that the Admirall of the Portingall fleet, that came from India, hauing miſſed the Iāld of S. Helena, was of neceſſitie conſtrayned to put in Parnanbuco, although the King had expreſſie vnder a great penaltie forbidden him ſo to doe, becauſe of the wormes that there doe ſpoile the ſhips. The ſame ſhip wherin Bernaldin Rybero
                        ▪ was Admirall, the yeare before 1589,
                        
                           
                              •
                           89. ſayled out of Lisbone into the Indies with 5. ſhips in her company, whereof but 4. got into India, the 5 was neuer heard of, ſo yt it was thought to be caſt away: The other foure returned ſafe againe into Portingale though the Admirall was much ſpoiled, becauſe he met with two Engliſh ſhips, that fought long with him, and ſlew many of his men, but yet he eſcaped from them.
                     The 5. of the ſame moneth, there arriued in Tercera a caruell of the Iſland of Cor
                              •
                           o and brought with her 50. men that had been ſpoiled by the engliſh men, who had ſet them on ſhore in the Iland of Cor
                              •
                           o, being taken out of a ſhippe that came from the Spaniſh Indies, they brought tydinges that the engliſh men had taken foure more of the Indian ſhips, and a caruell with the king of Spaines letters of aduiſe for the ſhips comming out of ye Portingal Indies, & that with thoſe which they had taken, they were at the leaſt fourty Engliſh ſhippes together, ſo that not one Barke eſcaped them but fel into their hands, and that therefore the Portingall ſhips comming out of India, durſt not put into the Ilands, but tooke their courſe vnder 40. and 42. degrees▪ and from thence ſayled to Liſbon, ſhunning likewiſe ye cape S. Vincent, otherwiſe they could not haue had a proſperous iourney of it, for that as then the ſea was ful of Engliſh ſhips. Whereupon the king aduiſed the fleet, lying in Hauana, in the Spaniſh Indies ready to come for Spain that they ſhould ſtay there all that yeare, till the next yeare, becauſe of the great danger they might fal into by the Engliſhmē, which was no ſmall charge, and hinderance to the Fléet, for that the ſhips that lie there doe conſume themſelues & in a manner eat vp one an other, by reaſon of the great number of people, together with the ſcarſetie of al things ſo that many ſhips choſe rather, one by one to aduenture thēſelues alone, to get home, then to ſtay there: all which fell into the Engliſh mens hands, whereof diuers of the men were brought into Tercera, for that a whole day we could ſée nothing els, but ſpoyled men ſet on ſhore, ſome out of one ſhip, ſome out of an other, that pittie it was to ſee, al of them curſing the Engliſhmē, and their owne fortunes, with thoſe that had bin the cauſes to prouoke the Engliſhmen to fight, and complayning of the ſmall remedie and order taken therein by the king of Spaines Officers.
                     The 19 of the ſame month, there came to Tercera a Caruel of Lisbon, with one of the kings officers, to cauſe the goods that were ſaued out of the ſhip, which came from Malacca, (for the which we ſtayed there) to be laden, and ſent to Lisbon. And at the ſame tyme there put out of the Carunha one Don Alonſo de Baſſan, with 4 great ſhippes of warre to come vnto the Ilāds, ther to watch for the fleet of the Spaniſh & Portingall Indies, and the goods of the Malacca ſhip being laden, they were to conuoy them all together into the riuer of Lisbon: but being certaine daies at ſea, alwaies hauing a contrary wind they could not get vnto the Ilands: only two of them that were ſcattered from the fleet, arriued at Tercera, & not finding the fleet, they preſently returned backe to ſeek them: in the meane time the King changed his mind, and cauſed the fleet to ſtay in India, as I ſaid before: & therfore he ſent word vnto Don Alō
                           ſo de Baſſan, that he ſhuld return again to ye 
                        Carunho, which he preſently did (without doing any thing, nor once approching neere the Ilāds▪ ſauing only the 2 foreſaid ſhips, for he wel knew yt the Engliſhmē lay by the Iland of Co
                              •
                           uo, but he would not viſit them: and ſo he returned to the hauē of Carunha, wherby our goods that came from Malacca, were yet to ſhip, and truſſed vp again, and forced to ſtay a more fortunat time, wt patiēce p
                           •
                        rforce
                     The 23 of Octob. there arriued in Tercera a Caruel, with aduiſe out of Porting
                              •
                           le,
                        159
                              •
                           
                         yt of 5 ſhips, which in the yere 159
                              •
                           
                         wer ladē in Lisbon for ye 
                        Indes, 4 of them wer turned again to portin after they had bin 4 mōths abrod, & that the Admiral, wherin the Viceroy called Mathias d' Alburkerke ſayled▪ had

only gottē to India, as afterward news therof was brought ouer lande, hauing beene at ye leaſt 11. monthes at ſea and neuer ſaw land, & came in great miſerie to Malacca. In this ſhippe there dyed by the way 280. men, according to a note by himſelfe made, and ſent to the Cardinal at Lisbone, wt the names & ſurnames of euery man, together wt a deſcription of his voyage, & the miſerie they had indured: which was only done, becauſe he wold not loſe ye gouernment of India: & for that cauſe he had ſworne eyther to loſe his life, or to arriue in India, as in déede he did afterwardes, but to the great daunger, loſſe and hinderance of his companie, that were forced to buy it with their liues, and onely for want of prouiſion, as it may well be thought: for hee knew full wel that if he had returned backe againe into Portingal, as the other ſhippes did, he ſhould haue béene caſſiered from his Indian regiment, becauſe the people beganne alreadie to murmure at him, for his proude and loftie mind. And among other things that ſhewed his pride the more, behind aboue the gallery of his ſhip, he cauſed Fortune to be painted, & his owne picture with a ſtaffe ſtanding by her, as it were threatening Fortune, with this poſie. Queroque veneas
                        ▪ that is, I will haue thée to ouercome: which being read by the Cardinall and other Gentlemen (that to honour him brought him abord his ſhippe) it was thought to be a point of exceeding folly: but it is no ſtrange matter among the Portingalles, for they aboue all others muſt of force let the foole peepe out of their ſleeues, ſpecially when they are in authoritie: for that I knew the ſaid Mathi
                              •
                           s d' Alburke
                              •
                           k in India, being a ſoldier and a Captaine, where he was eſteemed and accounted for one of the beſt of them, and much honoured, and beloued of all men, as behauing himſelfe courteouſly to euery man: whereby they all deſired that he might be Viceroy. But when he once had receyued his Patent with full power and authority from the king to be Viceroy, he changed ſo much frō his former behauior, that by reaſon of his pride they al began to feare & curſe him▪ & that before he departed out of L
                              •
                           sb
                              •
                           ne, as it is often ſeene in many men that are aduanced vnto ſtate & dignity.
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           591The 20. of Ianuarie Anno 1591. there was newes brought out of Portingall into Tercera▪
                         that the Engliſhmen had taken a ſhippe, that the king had ſent into the P
                              •
                           rtingall-Indie, with aduiſe to the Viceroy, for the returning again of the foure ſhips that ſhould haue gone to India, & becauſe the ſhips were come backe againe, that ſhip was ſtuffed and laded as full of goods as poſſible it might bee, hauing likewiſe in ready money 500. thouſand duckets in Rials of 8. beſides other wares. It departed from Lisbone in the month of Nouember 1590. & met with ye Engliſhmē, with whom for a time it fought: but in ye end it was takē & caried into England with men & all, yet whē they came there, the men were ſet at libertie, & returned into Lisbone, where the Captaine was committed priſoner: but he excuſed himſelfe, & was releaſed, wt whom I ſpake my ſelfe, & he made this report vnto mee. At the ſame time alſo they tooke a ſhip that came from the Mine laden wt gold, & 2. ſhips laden with Pepper, and ſpices that were to ſaile into Italie, the pepper onely that was in them, being worth 170. thouſand duckets: all theſe ſhips were caried into England, and made good priſe.
                     In the month of Iuly an. 1591. there happened an earthquake in the Iland of S. Michael, which continued from the 26. of Iuly, to the 12. of Auguſt: in which time no man durſt ſtay within his houſe, but fled into the fields faſting & praying, wt great ſorrow for ye many of their houſes fel down, & a towne called Villa Franca, was almoſt cleane razed to ye ground, all the cloiſters and houſes ſhaken to the earth, & therein ſome people ſlain. The land in ſome places roſe vp, and the cliffes remoued from on place to another, & ſome hils were defaced and made euē with the ground. The earthquake was ſo ſtrong that the ſhips which lay in the road, & on the ſea, ſhaked as if the world would haue turned round: there ſprang alſo a fountaine out of the earth, from whence for the ſpace of 4. daies, there flowed a moſt cleare water, & after that it ceaſed. At the ſame time they heard ſuch thunder▪ & noiſe vnder the earth, as if all the Deuils in hel had been aſſembled together in that place, wherewith many dyed for fear. The Iland of Tercera ſhooke 4. times together, ſo that it ſeemed to turne about, but there happened no miſfortune vnto it. Earthquakes are common in thoſe Ilandes for about 20. yeares paſt there happened another earthquake, wherein a high hill that lyeth by ye ſame towne of Villa Franca, fell halfe downe, and couered all the towne with earth, and killed many men.
                     The 25. of Auguſt, ye kings Armada cōming out of Far
                              ••
                           
                         ariued in Tercera, being in all 30. ſhips, Biſka
                           •
                        es Portingals & Spaniards: & 10. Dutch 
                           •
                        lieboats, yt were areſted in Lisbone to ſerue ye king, beſides other ſmal ſhips Pataros, yt came to ſerue as meſſengers frō place to place & to diſcouer the ſeas. This nauie came to ſtay for▪ & conuoy the ſhips that ſhold come frō the Spaniſh Indies, & the 
                           •
                        lieboates were apointed in their returne home▪ to take in the goodes yt were ſaued in ye loſt ſhip yt came frō 
                        Malacca, & to c
                           •
                        
                        ̄uoy it to Lisbon.
                     
                     
                        The 13. of September the ſaide Armado ariued at the Iland of Coruo, where the Engliſhmen with about ſixtéene ſhippes as then lay, ſtaying for the Spaniſh Fleete: whereof ſome or the moſt parte were come, and there the Engliſh were in good hope to haue taken them. But when they perceyued the kings Army to be ſtrong, the Admirall being the Lorde Thomas Howard, commaunded his Fléete not to fall vpon them, nor any of them once to ſeperate their ſhippes from him, vnleſſe he gaue commiſſion ſo to doe: notwithſtanding the Vice Admirall Sir Rychard Greenfield, being in the ſhip called the Reuenge went into the Spaniſh fléete, and ſhot among them, doing them great hurte, and thinking the reſt of the company would haue followed: which they did not, but left him there, and ſayled away: the cauſe why could not be knowne: which the Spaniardes perceiuing, with ſeuen or eight ſhippes they borded her, but ſhe withſtood them all, fighting with them at the leaſt 12. houres together, and ſunke two of them, one being a newe double Flie boat. of 1200. tunnes, and Admirall of the Flie boates, the other a Biſcaine: But in the ende by reaſon of the number that came vppon her ſhe was taken, but to their great loſſe: for they had loſt in fighting, and by drowning aboue 4
                              ••
                           . men, and of the Engliſh were ſlaine about a hundred, Sir Rychard Greenfield himſelfe being wounded in his braine, whereof afterwardes hee dyed. He was borne into the ſhip called the Saint Paule, wherein was the Admirall of the fléet Don Alonſo de Barſan: there his woundes were dreſt by the Spaniſh Surgeons, but Don Alonſo himſelfe would neither ſee him, nor ſpeake with him: all the reſt of the Captaines and Gentlemen went to viſite him, and to comfort him in his hard fortune, wondring at his courage, and ſtout heart, for that he ſhewed not any ſigne of faintnes nor changing of colour. But feeling the hower of death to approch, hee ſpake theſe wordes in Spaniſh, & ſaid: Here die I Richard Gr
                              •
                           enfield, with a ioyfull and quiet mind, for that I haue ended my life as a true ſoldier ought to do, yt hath fought for his countrey▪ Queene, religion, and honor, whereby my ſoule moſt ioyfull departeth out of this bodie, and ſhall alwaies leaue behinde it an euerlaſting fame of a valiant and true ſoldier, that hath done his dutie, as he was bound to doe. When he had finiſhed theſe or ſuch other like words, hee gaue vp the Ghoſt, with great and ſtout courage, and no man could perceiue any true ſigne of heauineſſe in him.
                     This Sir Richard Greenfield was a great and a rich Gentleman in England, and had great yearely reuenewes of his owne inheritance: but he was a man very vnquiet in his minde, and greatly affected to warre: in ſo much as of his owne priuate motion hee offered his ſeruice to the Queene, he had performed many valiant actes, and was greatlie feared in theſe Iſlands, and knowne of euery man, but of nature very ſeuere, ſo that his owne people hated him for his fiercenes, and ſpake verie hardly of him: for when they firſt entred into the Fleete or Armado, they had their great ſayle in a readineſſe, and might poſſiblie enough haue ſayled away: for it was one of the beſt ſhips for ſayle in England, and the Maſter perceiuing that the other ſhippes had left them, and followed not after, commā
                        ded the great ſayle to be cut, that they might make away: but Sir Richard Greenefield threatned both him, and all the reſt that were in the ſhip, that if any man laid hand vppon it, he would cauſe him to be hanged, and ſo by that occaſion they were compelled to fight, and in the end were taken. He was of ſo hard a complection, that as he continued among the Spaniſh Captaines while they were at dinner or ſupper with him, he would carouſe three or foure glaſſes of wine, and in a brauerie take the glaſſes betweene his teeth and craſh them in peeces and ſwallow them downe, ſo that often times the blood ran out of his mouth without any harme at all vnto him, and this was told me by diuers credible perſons that many times ſtoode and behelde him. The Engliſh men that were left in the ſhip, as the captaine of the ſouldiers, the Maſter and others were diſperſed into diuers of the Spaniſh ſhips that had taken the, where there had almoſt a new fight ariſen betweene the Biſcaines and the Portingales: while ech of them would haue the honour to haue firſt borded her, ſo that there grew a great noiſe and quarrell among them, one taking the chiefe ancient & the other the flagge, and the Captaine and euerie one held his owne. The ſhips that had borded her were altogether out of order, and broken, and many of their men hurt, whereby they were compelled to come into the Iſland of Tercera, there to repaire themſelues▪ where being ariued, I & my chā
                        ber fellow, to heare ſome newes went abord on of the ſhips being a great at Biſcaine, and one of the twelue Apoſtles, whoſe Captaine was called Bertandono, that had bin Generall of the Biſcaynes in the fleete that went for England. Hee ſéeing vs called vs vp into the gallerie, where with great curteſie hee receiued vs, beeing as then ſet at dinner with the Engliſh Captaine that ſate by him, and had on a ſute of blacke veluet, but he could not tell vs any thing, for that he could ſpeake

no other language, but Engliſh and Latine, which Ba
                              •
                           tandano alſo could a little ſpeake. The Engliſh Captaine got licence of the gouernour that hee might come on land with his weapon by his ſide, and was in our lodging with the Engliſhman that was kept priſoner in the Iland, being of that ſhip wherof the ſaylers got away, as I ſaid before. The Gouernour of Tercera bad him to dinner▪ & ſhewed him great curteſ
                           •
                        e. The Maſter likewiſe with licence of Bartandano came on land, and was in our lodging, and had at the leaſt ten or twelue woundes, as well in his head, as on his body, whereof after that being at ſea, betwéene Lisbone & the Ilands he died. The Captaine wrote a letter, wherein he declared all the manner of the fight, and left it with the Engliſh Marchant that lay in our lodging, to ſend it to the Lord Admiral of England. This Engliſh Captaine comming vnto Lisbone, was there well receiued, and not any hurt done vnto him, but with good conuoy ſent to Sentinial, & from thence ſayled into England, with all the reſt of the Engliſhmen that were taken priſoners.
                     The Spaniſh armie ſtated at the Iſland of 
                           〈◊〉
                         til the laſt of September to aſſemble the reſt of the fleet together: which in the end were to the number of 14
                              •
                           . ſaile of ſhips partly comming from India, and partly of the Army & being altogether ready vnto ſaile to 
                           〈◊〉
                         in good company, there ſodainely roſe ſo hard and cruell a ſtorme, that thoſe of the Iſland did affirme, that in mans memorie there was neuer any ſuch ſeen or heard of before▪ for it ſeemed the ſea would haue ſwallowed vp the Iſlands, the water mounting higher than the Cliffes, which are ſo high that it amaſeth a man to beholde them: but the ſea reached aboue them, and liuing fiſhes were throwne vppon the land. This ſtorme continued not only a day or two with one wind but ſeauen or eight dayes continually the wind turning round about, in all places of the compaſſe, at the leaſt twice or thrice during that time, and all alike, with a continuall ſtorme and tempeſt moſt terrible to behold, euen to vs that were on ſhore, much more then to ſuch as were at ſea: ſo that only on the coaſtes and Cliffes of the Iland of Tercera, there were aboue twelue ſhips caſt away, and not only vppon the one ſide, but round about it in euery corner: wherby nothing els was heard but complayning, crying, lamenting and telling here is a ſhippe broken in peeces againſt the Cliffes, & there another▪ and all the men drowned: ſo that for the ſpace of 20. dayes after the ſtorme, they did nothing els but fiſh for dead men, that continually came driuing on the ſhore. Among the reſt was the Engliſh ſhip called the Reuenge, that was caſt away vpon a Cliffe nere to the Iland of Tercera, where it brake in a hundred péeces and ſunke to the ground, hauing in her 
                           ••
                        . men Gallegos, Biſcaines, and others, with ſome of the captiue Engliſhmen, whereof but one was ſaued that got vp vpon the Cliffes aliue, and had his body and head all wounded, and hee being on ſhore brought vs the newes, deſiring to be ſhriuen, & thervpon preſently died. The Reuenge had in her diuers faire braſſe péeces, that were all ſunke in the ſea, which they of the Iſland were in good hope to waigh vp againe. The next ſummer after among theſe ſhippes that were caſt away about Tercera, was likewiſe a Flie boat, one of thoſe that had bin areſted in Portugall to ſerue the king, called the white Doue. The Maſter of her, was one Cornelius Martenſon of Schiedam in Holland, and there were in her one hundred ſouldiers, as in euerie one of the reſt there was. He being ouer ruled by the Captaine, that he could not be Maſter of his owne, ſayling here and there at the mercie of God, as the ſtorme droue him, in the end came within the ſight of the Iſland of Tercera: which the Spaniards perceiuing, thought al their ſafety only to conſiſt in putting into the road, compelling the Maſter and the Pilot to make towards the Iſland, although the Maſter refuſed to doe it, ſaying, that they were moſt ſure there to be caſt away, and vtterly ſpoyled: but the Captaine called him drunkard, and Heriticke, and ſtriking him with a ſtaffe, commanded him to do as he would haue him. The Maſter ſéeing this, and being compelled to doe it ſaid: well then my Maſters, ſeeing it is the deſire of you all to bee caſt away, I can but looſe one life, and therwith deſperately he ſayled towards the ſhore, and was on that ſide of the Iſland, where there was nothing els but hard ſtones and rockes, as high as Mountaines, moſt terrible to behold, where ſome of the Inhabitantes ſtood with long ropes and corke bound at the end thereof, to throw them downe vnto the men, that they might lay hold vpon them and ſaue their liues: but few of them got ſo neere, moſt of them being caſt away, and ſmitten in péeces before they could get to the wall. The ſhip ſayling in this manner (as I ſaid before) towards the Iſland, & approching to the ſhore, the maſter being an old man, and ful of yeres, called his ſonne that was in the ſhippe with him, and hauing imbraced one another, and taken their laſt farewell, the good old Father willed his ſonne not to take care for him, but ſeeke to ſaue himſelfe: for (ſaid he) ſonne thou art yong, and may haue ſome hope to ſaue

thy life, but as for me it is no great matter (I am old) what become of me, and therewith each of theſe ſhedding many teares, as euerie louing father and kinde childe may well conſider, the ſhip ſell vpon the Cliffes & brake in peeces the father on the one ſide, the ſonne on the other ſide falling into the ſea, each laying hold vpon that which came next to hand, but to no purpoſe: for the ſea was ſo high and furious, that they were all drowned, and onelie fourteene or fifteene ſaued thēſelues by ſwimming, with their legges and armes halfe broken and out of ioint, among the which was the Maſters ſon, and ſoure other dutch bo
                           •
                        es: the reſt of the Spaniards and Saylers, with the Captaine and Maſter were drowned: whoſe heart would not melt with teares to behold ſo grieuous a ſight, ſpecially conſidering with himſelfe that the greateſt cauſe thereof was ye beaſtlines and inſolencie of the Spaniards, as in this only example may wel bee ſeene: whereby may be conſidered how the other ſhips ſped, as wee our ſelues did in part behold, and by men that were ſaued did heare more a
                           •
                         la
                           ••
                        e, as alſo ſome others of our Countrimen that as then were in the like danger 
                           •
                        an well witnes.
                     On the other Iſlandes the loſſe was no leſſ
                           •
                         then in Ter
                              •
                           e
                              ••
                           : for on the Iſland of Saint Georg
                              •
                           
                         there were two ſhips caſt away: on the Iſland of 
                           〈◊〉
                         two ſhippes: on the Iſland Gra
                              •
                           o: three ſhips, and beſides thoſe there came euerie where round about diuers peeces of brok
                           •
                         ſhips, and other things fleeting towards the Iſlands, wherewith the ſea was all couered moſt pittifull to behold. On the Iſland of S. Michaell, there were foure 
                           •
                        hips caſt away, and betweene Tercera and S. Michael
                              •
                           , three more were ſunke, which were ſeene and heard to crie out, wherof not one man was ſaued. The reſt put into the ſea without Maſts, all torne and rent: ſo that of the whole Fleete and Armado, being 140. ſhips in al, there were but 3
                              •
                           . or 33. ariued in Spaine and Portingall, yea and thoſe few with ſo great miſerie paine & labor, that not two of them ariued there together, but this day o
                           •
                        e, and to morrow another, next day the third, and ſo one after the other to ye number aforeſaid. All the reſt were caſt away vpon the Iſlands, and ouerwhelmed in the ſea: whereby may bee conſidered what great loſ
                           •
                        e and hinderance they receaued at that time: for by many mens iudgementes it was eſ
                           ••
                        med to be much more then was left by their armie that came for England, and it may well bee thought, and preſumed, that it was no other but a iuſt plague purpoſely ſent by God vpon the Spaniards, & that it might truely bee ſaid, the taking of the Reuenge was iuſtlie reuenged vppon them, and not by the might or force of man but by the power of God, as ſome of them openly ſa
                           •
                         in the Iſle of Tercera, that they beleeue
                           •
                         verily God would conſume them, and that hee tooke part with Lutheranes and Heretickes: ſaying further yt ſo ſoone as they had throwne the dead bodie of the Viceadmirall Sir Richard Greenfield ouer borde, they verily thought that as he had a deuiliſh faith and religion, and therefore ye deuils loued him ſo hee preſently ſunke into the bottome of the ſea, & downe into Hell, where he rayſed vp all the deuilles to the reuenge of his death: and that they brought ſo great ſtormes and tormentes vpon the Spaniardes, becauſe they onely maintained the Catholike and Romiſh religion: ſuch and the like blaſphemies againſt God, they ceaſed not openly to vtter without that any man reproued them therein 
                           •
                        or for their falſe opinions, but the moſt part of them rather ſaid and affirmed, that of truth it muſt needes be ſo.
                     As one of thoſe Indian Fleetes put out of Noua Spaigna, there were 
                           ••
                        . of them by ſtorme and tempeſt caſt away and drowned in the ſea, being 5
                              •
                           . in all▪ ſo that but 
                           〈◊〉
                         eſcaped. Of the fléete that came from Santo Domingo, there were 14. caſt away, comming out of the channell of Hauana, whereof the Admirall and Viceadmirall were two of them: and from Terra Fi
                              •
                           ma in India, there came two ſhippes laden with gold and ſiluer, that were taken by the Engliſhmen▪ and before the Spaniſh Armie came to 
                           
                              •
                           oru
                              •
                           , the Engliſhmen at time, had taken at the leaſt 20. ſhippes, that came from S. Domingo, India, Braſilia, &c. and al ſent into 
                           〈◊〉
                         Whereby it plainly appareth, that m
                           •
                        y end God wil aſſuredly plague the Spaniards hauing already blinded them, ſo that they haue not the ſence to perceiue it▪ but ſtill to remain in their obſtinate opinions: but it is loſt labour to ſtr
                           •
                        ue againſt God, and to truſt in man, as being foundations created vppon the ſands, which with the wind are blome down, and ouerthrowen as we dayly ſee before out eyes, and now not long ſince in many places haue euidently obſerued: and therefore let euery man but 
                           •
                        ooke into his owne actions, & take our Low countries for an example▪ wherein we can but blame our owne ſinnes and wickedneſſe, which doth ſo blind vs, that wee wholly forget and reiect the benefites of God, continuing the ſeruantes & yoke ſlaues of Sathan. God of his mercie euen our eyes and hearts, that wee may know our onely health and ſauiour Ieſus Chriſt▪ who 
                           〈◊〉
                         can helpe, gouerne, and p
                           •
                        ue vs▪ and 
                           •
                        e vs a happie ende in all our aſſures. By this

deſtruction of the Spaniardes and their euill ſucceſſe, the lading and ſhipping of the goods that were ſaued out of the ſhippe that came from Ma
                              •
                           a
                              •
                           
                         to 
                           
                              •
                           ercera, was againe put off: and therefore we muſt haue patience till it pleaſe God to ſend a fitter time, & that wee receiue further aduiſe and order from his Maieſtie of Spaine.
                     
                     All this being thus paſt, the Farmers of pepper and other Marchants that had their goods in Tercera, which were taken out of the loſt ſhip that came from Malacca, ſeeing that the hope of any Armada, or any ſhips in the kinges behalfe to be ſent to fetch it, was all in daine: they made requeſt vnto his Maieſtie, that he would grant them licence euery m
                           •
                        n particularly to ſhip his goods in what ſhip he would at his owne aduenture, which in the end after long ſute was granted, vpon condition that euery man ſhould put in ſuerties, to deliuer the goods in the cuſtome houſe at Li
                              •
                           bone, to the end the king might be pa
                           •
                        
                        ed his cuſtome, as alſo that the goods that ſhould bee deliuered vnto them in Tercera, ſhould all bee regiſtred: wherevpon the Farmers of pepper with other Marchants agreed with a Fluſhinger, to fetch al the Cloues, Nutmegs, Mace, and other ſpices and goods that belonged vnto them, the Pepper onely excepted, which as then the King would not graunt to lade. The ſame ſhippe arriued in Tercera about the laſt of Nouember, and becauſe it was ſome what dangerous, being the latter end of the yeare, wee laded her with all the ſpeed we could, for as then the coaſt was cleare of Engliſhmen. To bee ſhort, this Fluſhinger being laden with moſt part of the goods, ſauing the Pepper that was left behind, we ſet ſaile for Li
                              •
                           bone, paſſing ſome ſmall ſtormes, not once meeting with any ſhip, but onely vppon the coaſt where wee ſaw ten Hollanders, that fayled with corne towards 
                           〈◊〉
                         and other places in Italie, and ſo by Gods helpe vpon the ſecond of Ianuarie,1
                              ••
                           2 
                        Anno 
                              •
                           5
                              ••
                           . we arriued in the riuer of Li
                              •
                           bone, being nine yeares after my departure from thence, and there I ſtayed till the mouth of Iulie▪ to diſpatch ſuch things as I had to doe, and vpon the ſeuenteenth of the ſame month, I went to Sentinial, where certaine Hollanders lay, with whom I went for 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                     The 2
                              •
                           . of Julie wee ſet ſaile being in all twelue ſhips, and becauſe we had a contrarie winde, we put out higher into the ſea. The 2
                              •
                           . of the ſame month wee had a laſting ſtorme, whereby wee ranne againſt another ſhip, being both in a hundred dangers to bee ſunke for we were within a ſpanne of touching one another: but God holp vs, and wee parted from each other, which almoſt ſéemed impoſſible: for that the bore ſprite of the ſhip, that came againſt vs, ſtrake vpon our Fankyard, and there with brake in peeces, and preſently thereupon his Fouke-maſte fell ouer borde, whereby hee was forced to leaue the fléete. Another alſo of our companie had a leake, ſo that he made towardes the coaſt againe, where to ſaue the men hee ran the ſhip on ſhore, as afterwards we vnderſtood, and ſo we remained but ten in companie.
                     The 1. of Auguſt, being 90. miles in the ſea, becauſe the wind held contrarie, ſo that we could not keepe our right courſe, we eſpyed three ſtrange ſhippes: but were not long before we loſt the ſight of them againe. The 4. of Auguſt there came three other ſhippes among our fléete, which we perceiued to bee Biſcaines, whereupon wee made towardes them, and ſhot certaine peeces at them and ſo they left vs.
                     The 16. of Auguſt the winde being yet contrarie, and becauſe wee were about 15. paſſengers aborde our ſhippe, our victuailes (ſpecially our drinke) beganne to faile, ſo that wee were conſtrained to keepe an order, and to ſtint euery man to his portion, being as then 120. miles from He
                              •
                           ſſant inwardes in the ſea, vnder 46. degrees, which is called the half ſea. The 18. we had a ſtorme, whereby three of our fleet were left behind, becauſe they could not follow vs. The 24. of Auguſt we caſt out the lead, and found ground, wherewith wee were all glad, for it was the entrance into the channel betweene England and Fraunce. The 
                           ••
                        . of Auguſt being in the channel, there came two ſmall Engliſh ſhippes to view our floete, but preſently put in againe to the coaſt of England. The 
                           ••
                        . we deſcried land, being loofeward from vs, which was Goutſte
                              •
                           
                         and D
                              •
                           rtmouth. The next day we paſſed by the Iſle of Wight, ſayling alonge the coaſt. The 30 of Auguſt we put into the head betwene Douer and Calleys, where there laye one of the Queenes ſhips, but ſhe hoiſed anker and ſailed to the coaſt of England, without lookinge after vs, ſo wee ſet fower men on ſhore: and then we had a ſcant winde, wherwith wee entred into the North ſea, not ſeeing any bodie. The 1 of September being clowdie, we had a ſtorme out of the northweſt, wherby we could not deſcerne land: but in the euening we met with two ſhippes that came out of the Eaſt countries, which told vs they had ſeene land, ſaying it was the Terel, willing vs to follow them, and ſo we diſcouered lande, being the Vlie: but wee thinking it to bee the Te
                           •
                        ell, would no longer follow the other ſhips, but put ſo neare vnto it that wee were in great

danger: and then we perceiued that we had deceiued our ſelues, and ſaw the other ſhips to take another courſe towards the Terell: but we had the wind ſo ſcant and were fallen ſo low that wee could hardly gette from the ſhore, and withall we had a ſodaine ſtorme, wherewith our Fouke maſte brake, our maine maſte being alreadie crackt: wherevppon wee were fully determined to anker there, and ſtand vpon good comfort and hope in God: and ſodainely the wind came better, ſo that with great paine and labour about Sunne ſetting wee entred the mouth of the Terel, without any Pylot: for that by reaſon of the great winde they durſt not come out: ſo that to conclude we got in, and there with thankes giuen vnto God, we ankered. In the morning being the ſeconde of September, our Gunner thinking to charge the Peeces, and for ioy to ſhoote them off before the towne, by fortune a ladle full of powder tooke fire, and with the force thereof ſtrake off all his right hande, and burnt him in many places of his bodie, wherewith our ioy was wholly quailed, and abated. The third of September wee ariued in Enchuiſen, where I founde my mother, brother and ſiſter, all liuing and in good health, it being twelue yeares, nine monethes and a halfe after my departure from thence. For the which God Almighty with his ſonne Chriſt Jeſus our Sauior, be praiſed and bleſſed, to whom belongeth al power, honor and glorie now and for euermore, Amen.
                  
                  The end of the firſt booke
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE SECOND BOOKE. The true and perfect deſcription of the whole coaſt of Guinea, Manicongo, Angola, Monomotapa, and right ouer againſt them the Cape of S. Auguſtin in Braſilia, with the compaſſe of the whole Ocean Seas, together with the Ilands, as S. Thomas, S. Helena, & the Aſcention, with all their hauens, channels, depths, ſhallows, ſands & grounds. Together alſo with diuers ſtrange voyages made by the Hollanders: alſo the deſcription of the inward partes of the ſame landes.
                  Likewiſe a further Deſcription of the Carde of Madagaſcar; otherwiſe called the Iland of S. Laurence, with a diſcouery of all the ſhallows, cliffes, and numbers of Ilands in the Indian ſeas, and the ſituation of the Countrey of the Cape de Bona Speranza, paſsing along to Monomotapa, Soffala, and Moſambique, and from thence to Quiloa, Gorga, Melinde, Amara, Bar
                        •
                     , Magadoxo, Doara, &c. to the red ſea: and what further wanteth for the deſcription thereof, you ſhal find at large in Iohn Hughen of Linſchotens book: alſo the vo
                        •
                     ages that the Portingall Pilots have made into 
                        •
                     ll p
                        •
                      of the Indies.
                  Extracted out of their ſea Cardes, bookes, and notes of great experience. And tranſlated into Dutch by I. Hughen van Linſchoten.
                  And now tranſlated out of Dutch into Engliſh by W. 
                        •
                     
                  
                  
                     THE KINGDOM OF CONGO
                     map of the Congo
                  
                  LONDON Imprinted by John Wolfe. 1598.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE SECOND BOOKE ¶
                  
                     The true and perfect deſcription of the whole coaſt of Guinea, Man
                              •
                           congo, Angola, Monomotapa, and right ouer againſt them the Kape of Saint Auguſtine in Bri
                           •
                        n with the compas of the whole Ocean Seas, together with the Iſlands, 
                           〈…〉
                         S. Helena and the A
                              •
                           en
                              •
                           i
                              •
                           n, with all their Hauens, 
                           〈…〉
                         partes 
                           〈…〉
                        .
                     Likewiſe a further deſcription of the Card of Mada
                              •
                           ar 
                        
                           •
                        herwiſe called the Iſland of S. Laurence, with the diſcouery of all the 
                           〈…〉
                         Chri
                           ••
                        , and numbers of Iſlands in the Indian Seas, and the ſituation of the Countrie of the Cape de Bona Speranza paſsing along to Mon
                              •
                           motapa, Ae
                              •
                           ala, & Moſamb
                              •••
                           e, and from thence to Quiolo
                              •
                           , Gorga, Melin
                              •
                           e, Amara, 
                              •
                           aru, Magado
                              •
                           o, Doara, &c. to the red Sea: and what further wanteth for the deſcription thereof, you ſhall finde at large in Iohn Hughen of Linſ
                              •
                           hotens booke. Alſo the voyages that the Portingall pilots haue made into all places of the Indies, extracted out of their Sea Cardes and bookes, and tranſlated into our mother tongue.
                  
                  
                     BEcauſe ſuch as ſaile into India, doo compaſſe the moſt part of Affrica, therefore there are certaine Cardes placed in this booke, which ſhewe thoſe partes of that coaſt, whereby the ſhips do ſaile, and not ſpeaking of the rich Iſlands of Canar
                           •
                        a and Cabo verde, to al men well knewne, and right ouer againſt them, in Affrica, the kingdomes of Gualata, Tombuto, and Meili, whereof Gualata is very ſmall and poore, both of victuals and fruit, hauing little elſe, but Milie: Tombuto great and populous, abounding in corne, beaſtes, milke, and butter, but wanting ſalt. Melli rich of corne, fleſh, and cotten. We will come lower towards Guine
                           •
                        , a greater & richer kingdome then the reſt, lying in Ethiopia, or the Moores countrey: which the better to vnderſtand, you muſt firſt knowe, that the ancient Coſmographers haue diuided Affrica into foure partes, as Barbaria, Numidia, Libia, and Aethiopia▪
                      or the Moores countrey, not comprehending Egypt nor Abexin, now called the land of P
                           •
                        eſter Iohn, which are likewiſe Moores, and the righteſt, as the ſcriptures wel declare, and ought to be counted and numbred amongſt the chiefe prouinces of Affrica, which al Coſmographers, and deſcribers of the world may reade. Touching the kingdome of Guinea, wherein the Portingales and Frenchmen haue traffiked many yeares, and whither our Countrymen in theſe dayes doe likewiſe trauel, it bordureth on the kingdome of Meil
                           •
                        , and vpon the riuer Niger, in length fiue hundred Italian miles, which are about one hundred Dutch miles: in this country the Portingales hold a fort, being the caſtle of the Mine vpon the golden coaſt. There is alſo the coaſt of Melegete, our countrey men that ſailed thither this yeare, did firſt

put in to the land between the Cape de las P
                           •
                        nas, and the Cape de tres Puntas, and found anker ground at twenty fadomes water, and with their boat rowing on land, they came to a place, wherein ſtoode man
                        •
                      houſes, and a little fort placed vpon a rocke and many Moores about it, and t
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      ſo played vpon with ſhor, 
                        〈…〉
                      vnite off. This village 
                        〈…〉
                      and the lande 
                        〈…〉
                      This ſort is holden 
                        〈…〉
                      b
                        ••
                      is not ſtrong: before 
                        〈…〉
                      about the l
                        •
                     ngth of twoo 
                        •
                     es 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     nto the ſea there lie
                        •
                     h 
                        •
                     1. cliffes, ſo that you muſt paſſe right between them 
                        〈…〉
                      vnto the 
                        •
                     ort, lying in a boothe 
                        〈…〉
                     . This caſtle lieth about three or foure miles from the Cape de tres 
                        〈…〉
                      not 
                        •
                     arre from it being a hilly and 
                        〈◊〉
                      countrey with many trees, ſome of 
                        〈…〉
                      fadomes in compas: 
                        〈…〉
                      vilage called 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      and 
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      with the 
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      cloth or mo
                     
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      and tempe
                     
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      by ſouth, towards 
                        〈…〉
                      in two dayes could make 
                        •
                     t two degrees, ſo that they ſailed ech day one degree, although it was indifferent cold, by reaſon of the ſtormes that ſel, eaſt northeaſt, and eaſe and by north towardes the coaſt. Alſo ſuch as wil ſatie from the Colde hauens to the cape de Lop
                           •
                         G
                           •
                        
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to 
                        〈◊〉
                      Iſland, muſt keepe 
                        〈…〉
                      ſouthward as poſſibly they may, 
                        〈…〉
                      any wind, but hold as neere a
                        •
                      they can, and yet al litle enough, or elſe fal beneath the cape de Rio 
                           •
                         Gabain, that is, the riuer of Gabain or elſewhere, vnles then the winde be ful we
                        •
                     ſt, or that they haue any 
                        〈◊〉
                      out of the north, and ſo compaſſed into the ſouth, otherwiſe it is not we
                        •
                      to be done, for that there are ſome that haue bin 5. or 6. weekes ſayling thither. Here ye muſt note, that the neerer ye 
                        〈◊〉
                      to the Equinoctial line, there you find 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſoutherne windes: and when you 
                        〈◊〉
                      the li
                        ••
                      
                     
                        •
                     ou finde the winde ſouth & 
                        〈…〉
                     , and ſomewhat higher: 
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     wiſe vnderſtand, that when 
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     ng fiſhes, that then yee 
                        〈…〉
                      of S. Thomas. 
                     
                        〈…〉
                      with the people of 
                        〈…〉
                      with ſuch as are not ouer 
                        〈…〉
                      the Portingales, which 
                        〈…〉
                      them ſlaues, for 
                        〈…〉
                     : the countrey is 
                        〈…〉
                      either knowing God 
                        〈…〉
                     , heathens, and idolaters, without gouernement or any order, abundant in golde, elephants teeth, corne, Ethiopian pepper, rice, barly, cotten wool, and many kindes of fruits, whereof aboue a hundred ſortes, both vnknowne & neuer written of were brought from thence vnto me: beſides this, there groweth all ſorts of great beanes, ſome on trees, in coddes as big as a mans elbow, & a handful broad, others red and blacke like to the Turki
                        •
                     h beanes, but greater, ſome white & round, euery one in a place by it ſelf, like 
                        〈◊〉
                      others round and ſmall, as red as currall. with blacke ſtrikes, like thoſe that growe in Egypt, where I haue 
                        ••
                     ne of them, and were called 
                        〈◊〉
                      they are deſcr
                        •
                     bed by the learned doctor P
                           •
                        er A in 
                        〈◊〉
                      booke of Egyptian herbes. There at 
                        ••
                     
                     wiſe others that are hard, 
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     
                     ted like marble 
                        〈…〉
                     , and birds are there abound
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      peacockes, wilde hennes, gr
                        •
                     y 
                        〈◊◊〉
                     , or 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſmal 
                        〈…〉
                      very cunningly hang their neſts vpon the braunches of the trees, whereof ſome were brought me thereby to preſerue their egs from wormes and ſnakes. They haue 
                        •
                     o ſelfe abundance of fiſh, ſo that to conclude, there wanteth nothing in thoſe countries, but onely the knowledge of the Goſpell, thereby to bring them to the vnderſtanding of the word of God, and the pathway to ſaluation. The country is very hot, and intemperate for our countrey people, ſpecially the
                        •
                     r ſigne, which is very hurtful, and breedeth much filth and wormes, becauſe it is warme and moyſt, and mother of 
                        •
                     ll corruption whereby ſpringeth many diſeaſes, as burning feuers, l
                        •
                     ſkes, the bloody th
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     nd 
                        〈◊〉
                      like.
                  Sailing along the coaſt, they paſſed by the Iſland of 
                        〈◊〉
                     , and then vnder S. Thoma
                           •
                        
                      line, ſo called, becauſe it was firſt diſcouered vppon S. Thomas day, the Iſland is in breadth about threeſcore Italian miles, which is twelue of our miles, and is in compaſſe one hundred and foure ſcore miles, which are threeſcore Dut
                        •
                     h miles, in forme almoſt round, abounding 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſugar, and ginger, and all kind of 
                        〈◊〉
                      alles, by rea
                        •
                      of the came and mo
                        ••
                     nes of the dewes, which euery morning 
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     r the earth, as a moſt ſoueraigne thing 
                        •
                     o make ſuch fruit increaſe and growe 
                        ••
                     .
                  From 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſoutheaſt and by 
                        ••
                     ſt they came before 
                        〈◊〉
                      or th
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      before the which riuer 
                        〈…〉
                      three or foure 
                        〈…〉
                      daungerous 
                        〈…〉
                      commeth out 
                        〈…〉
                     
                     
with it, which make an extreame rough water: the riuer is aboue two miles broade, with many trees on both the ſides, but there they found no man to traffike withall: wherevpon they ſailed further, as the wind ſerued them, ſometimes cloſe by the 
                        •
                     hoare, and ſometime further into the ſea, there the coaſt lieth north and ſouth, and very ſhalow, ſo that at the leaſt a mile or a mile and a halfe into the ſea, there is not aboue twelue or thirteene fadomes water, and neerer within halfe a mile of the ſhore, foure, fiue, ſixe, or ſeuen fadoms, but a man may go neere vnto the ſhore, bicauſe it is cleere and faire ground to anker in, and commonly in the night time they haue the land winde from off the ſhore, which is called Vento
                           〈…〉
                         Terra, ſpecially being neere, a litle further the coaſt reacheth ſomewhat more to the weſt, vntill you come to the cape of Lopes Gonſales, where th
                        •
                     y ſtayed certaine days, to traffike with th
                        •
                      country people, but not much, becauſe the French men had beene there not long before, and ſpoiled the country, and during the time of their ſtaying there, they obſerued many ſtrange cuſtomes and maners of that people.
                  Firſt, concerning their religion, they know neither God nor his laws, for ſome of them pray to the ſunne & to the moone, ſome is certaine trees, or to the earth, becauſe th
                        •
                     y 
                        •••
                     ad vpon it, thinking it a gret offence to 
                        •
                     ort 
                        •
                     hereon: they go moſt commonly in the ſtreetes with a great broade naked knife in their handes: they are all, both men and women pincked and raced on their bodies in diuers maners, and very ſtrong to behold, which they doe with a knife, racing their ſkinnes, then they take a certaine oyntment mixed with ſome colour which they put into the races, they neuer drinke, but firſt they poure ſome of the drinke out of the pot: they drinke not likewiſe betweene meales, but when they haue eaten their meate, they drinke a harty draught of water, or of their palme tree wine, or elſe of water ſodden with honny. In the morning, and at any other time of the day, when they meete any man, or reuerence their ruler or gouernour in token of obedience, they fall vppon their knees, and beate their handes together, where they kneele vntill hee clappeth his handes, and ſometimes they clap handes together one with the other, vttering theſe words, Fino, Fino Fino, wherewith they giue eache other leaue to departe, and by the ſame they ſignifie and ſhewe themſelues to be friendes. The countrey people are much addicted to ſteale from ſtraungers but not from their owne nation, and the women much giuen to luſt and vncleaneneſſe, ſpecially with ſtraungers, which among them is no ſhame. There are ſome men that weare round bores about their neckes made of barkes, ſome great, ſome ſmall, not much vnlike the bores, which with vs are vſed to bee hanged in Innes and Tauernes, to putte money in for the poore: but they will by no meanes let anie man ſee what is in them. For the moſt part both men and women goe bare headed, with their haire frizeled and folded, yet very ſhorte, ſome weare hartes that commonly are made of barkes of trees, or of Indian nuttes, ſome weare plumes or feathers, which are made faſt to theyr haire with certaine wyars, whereof diuerſe ſorts were brought me from thence▪ ſome haue hoales in theyr vpper lippes, and alſo through the middle parte of their noſe, and in the holes in theyr lippes they thruſt peeces of bone, as broad as a 
                        〈◊〉
                      with a ſtalke that paſſeth through the hole, which being thruſt in, hangeth both before his noſe and his mouth, ſome thruſt ſmall hornes or teeth through the holes and ſo weare them, all as they think▪ to beautifie themſelues, ſome bore a hole in theyr neather lippes, and vſually thruſt theyr tongues through it, manye of them both men and women weare Rings in their eares, whereof ſome are at the leaſt ſeuen or eight ounces in weight, and ſome haue ſtickes thruſt through their rings that are fiue or ſixe fingers long.
                  As touching their apparell, they haue nothing but a matte made of the barke o
                        •
                      a tree dyed redde, which they weare before their priuy members ouer ſome of theyr mattes: they weare Apes or ſea catt
                        •
                     s ſkinnes, or the ſkinnes of ſome wilde beaſts, in the middle whereof there hangeth a bell, ſuch as wee hang about the neckes of cowes or ſheepe: they paint theyr bodies redde, with a colour made of redde wood, whereof (had ſome brought me from thence, it maketh a fayre colour, and is ſomewhat lighter than b
                        •
                     aſtil, many times they make one 
                        〈◊〉
                      red, the other white or yellow, with a ſtrike or two of the ſame colour in their faces.
                  Moſt of them weare a gerole or ſtring about theyr middles of buffles ſkinne with they hayre vpon it, which meeteth not together vpon theyr bellies, by the breadth of a hand, but hath twoo endes ſticking or turning vppe, and wyth a ver
                        •
                      ſmall ſtring are made faſt about them: and

before vppon their bellies they weare a ſhort broad Iron knife, with a ſheathe of the ſame mettal: thoſe girdles ſome of them are a handful broad, ſome two, ſome three, and ſome broader: beſides theſe kniues, they vſe throwing kniues, with three or foure poyntes, being verie dangerous, whereof I can ſhew you.) The women weare great Iron, copper, or tinne rings about their legges, ſome one, others two, and ſome more: many of them weying at the leaſt three or foure poundes waight the peece, being almoſt cloſe about their legges, whereby a man can hardlie iudge how they gette them on: ſome men likewiſe vſe them, but not manie. There are alſo ſome women that weare aprons before them made of Breſen, whereof I can ſhew you. This ſhal ſuffice for the deſcription of their apparrell, and beautifying of their bodyes, which is verie ſtrange and vnſeemely: no leſſe diſorder is there in their houſes, for they liue like beaſtes, and ſleep on mattes laid vpon the ground. Their meat is made of great white rootes, taken out of the earth, called Iniamos, very pleaſant of taſte, like the ſpaniſh Ba
                        
                           •
                        at
                           〈…〉
                        
                      or cheſnuts. They are both roſted and ſodden, with other rootes, and ſugar canes, and Bananas, which are a fruite of a tree, like the Indian figges, mentioned in this booke, long like cucumbers, with a tart ſweetiſh, but a pleaſant taſte: ſometimes likewiſe they eate both fiſh & fleſh, which they lay al in one veſſell togither, and ſo ſit round about it like a company of beaſtes, and neuer drinke, but after they haue done eating. The gouernours eate alone out of a tin veſſel, the reſt out of a filthie earthen veſſel, and ſit vpon a mat ſpread vpon the ground. The moſt worke that the women do, is to fetch water and fruite, and to dreſſe the meate: they will by no meanes eaſe themſelues vppon the ground, eſteeming that a great offence, but haue great veſſels made for the ſame purpoſe, which are ſette in the earth. They vſe no other weapons againſt their enemies, but onely fiſtes and traues: they that dwell by the mine, are better appointed with bowes, arrowes, pikes, and targets as long as a man, made of barkes of trees, and ſuch like things. Their Drums are broade aboue, and narrow below: they haue likewiſe Cornets of Elophants teeth: of all theſe kindes of inſtruments and weapons, I had ſome brought from thence. Our men being in the Riuer of Gaban came vnto an Iland, where they were carried on ſhore by a Moore, that had a great tooth ſticking in his vpper lip, with a broade knife in his hand, and all his body raſed and pinked as I ſaide before, where he brought them into a houſe among the Moores, wherein were certaine couerlets, made of the rinds or barkes of trees laide vppon the earth, where they ſate downe, not making anie choyſe, and being ſette, he clapt them on the ſhoulders, pointing vpwards with his fingers, ſaying in his language, Ma
                           ••
                        
                        bam, they not knowing what hee meant, looked vp, where they perceiued a blacke man ſate vppon the top of a certaine paire of Staires, like an image, with many chaines of bones and rings hanging about him, fearefull to beholde: at his feete lay certaine blacke women, with Elephants tailes in their handes, to beare away the flies, and to make winde, whereby they vnderſtood him to be the Lorde of the Iſland. Wherupon they kneeled vpon one of their knees, honouring him according to the cuſtome of the lande, clapping their hands vntill the Ma
                           ••
                        
                      or Lord made ſignes vnto them, clapping his handes: which done, they roſe vp, the Ma
                           ••
                        
                      giuing them ſome of thoſe mars made of barks as a princely preſent, of the which with their linnen I can ſhew you: others of the ſame ſhip taking their pinnace entred into another creeke in the ſame Riuer, about two miles higher, and there founde a great village lying on the ſame riuer, ſo neere, that they might throw a ſtone ouer the houſes: and being within two ſhips length or the ſhore, they caſt anker on the ſhore there ſtood at leaſt 1000. Moores, men, women, and children, whereof ſome had pikes, kniues, and other wepons in th
                        •
                     ir hands, crying with loude voyces, 
                        〈◊〉
                      and other wordes, clapping their handes together, which to them was ſtrange, both to heare and ſee. Not long after, a Moore that by them about foure or fiue miles frō thence, had beene taken into their pinnace, ſtepped into the water, and went on ſhore, where being on land, the Moores, ſpecially the women, hong about him, in ſuch numbers, that he could hardly paſſe, ſinging and throwing graſſe vppon him, that our men could neither heare nor ſee the man, neuer ceaſing to ſing and make a noyſe, but ſtill continuing, dancing, leaping, and with their kniues cutting off al the graſſe: meane time there came one out of the village, hauing a long ſtaffe in his hand, as 
                        •
                     f he were ſome officer, willing them to leaue off theyr noyſe, driuing th
                        •
                     m from the ſhore, but to no end 
                        〈◊〉
                      reaſon of the great number of people that were there aſſembled,

at the laſt the Moore that went out of the pinace from our men, with one of their Canuyten, (for ſo they called their boates) came aboord, bringing two men and an old woman, that was one of the gouernors wiues, hauing her breaſt painted greene, and in each hande a branch of a tree, ſhaking both her handes, and the two men clapping with their hands, giuing to vnderſtand (as our men conceiued) according to their manner, that they were welcome: with them two of our men went on land, whereat the Moores made great ioy, with ſinging, dancing, leaping, and ſuch like paſtimes, and going vnto the gouernor, diuers of them followed, ſpecially the women, running both before and behinde them, leaping and dancing like mad men, moſt of them hauing of the great broade kniues in their handes, ſtriking them together in moſt feareful maner: but it was no wonder to ſee them make ſo great ioy, and ſhew ſo much paſtime, for that it was ſtrange for them to ſee white men, which they neuer had ſeene, for that neuer any had beene or traffiked among them: true it is that the Portingales had beene in the ſame Riuer, but not ſo high, for our men were at the leaſt tenne or twelue miles from their ſhippe within the Riuer, and the Riuer before that village called Crementun, was about a mile broade, hauing another village on the other ſide, and 
                        〈◊〉
                      with their pinnace before that village, they ſhot off a peece, whereat all the people 
                        •
                     ne backe, being afraid, but came preſently againe: and as our men went vnto the 
                        •
                     ouernour, they led them by the armes, ſinging, and ſhewing great ſignes of ioy, for the comming of theſe white men into their countrie: and being at the Gouernours houſe, which was made of reeds, they ſtayed about halfe an howre before he came out, meane time the people that followed thē, neuer left ſinging & making anoyſe
                        •
                      and when hee came, there were three mattes, and two ſtools, a great and a little brought with him, by certain Moores that followed him. All his body and his face was painted white, either with chalk or ſome other painting, a ſacke of whiting bring likewiſe brought after him. On his head he wore a cappe made of a ſkin, ſtuck ful of feathers, with chains made of bones aboue 100. times about his necke, armes, and legs, & being ſet vpon his ſtoole, there came an old woman, that gaue him ſome of the whiting, wherewith hee made as if he had waſht his hands, the reſt he threw vpon his face, & with that he held vp both his hands: meane time his wiſe had whiting giuen her, which done, ſhee began to come forth of the houſe, ſinging and dauncing, al the other women following her, & doing the like: with that the gouernour called the Moore that brought our mē with him from the place aforeſaid, ſaying vnto him that our men were welcome, clapping his handes together, and ſaying Fuio, Fuio, according to their manner, and after many other wordes, hee willed them to bring ſome Iron, ſaying they ſhould haue teeth for it, which hauing done, he brought forth his teeth.
                  This riuer as I ſaide is verie broad and full of Crocodiles, and ſea horſes, it hath many creekes: and as they ſailed from Crementun▪
                      it lyeth Southeaſt, where in the night they lauered 2. or 3. houres, and came twice on ground, and 
                        ••
                      ſayling forwardes they paſſed by an Iſland, called Carace
                           ••
                        bo, lying in the mouth of the riuer, as there are many, being verie low and flat land, and ful of trees: From that Iſland there came a Ca
                           •
                        utien aboord their ſhip, and in it eighteene perſons, and with them they had a ſmal drum, of a hollow ſtocke, whereon they played, and being by the ſhip, foure or fiue of them ſtept in, whereof one of them vppon his face, breaſt, and armes, was al white, he bore a greene branch of a tree, with a little bel, and ſome whiting in his hand, which hee ſtrowed about the ſhip, ringing the bel, & when they or any of our men ſpake, hee made ſhewe as it were to conſecrate and bleſſe the ſhip, which done, ſirting downe, and ſtammering in his words, like a man poſſeſſed with ſome ſprite, or one that had a ſhaking feuer. There was a great pot of Palme wine brought forth, whereof they dranke one vnto the other, which continued for the ſpace of halfe an houre, which done, they went into their ſc
                        •
                     te, & rowed to land, making ſignes to our men to come on ſhore, and to barter with them for their wares, which they did, carrying them ſome Iron and other marchandiſe, and went into the gouernors houſe being in a village, where among other things they ſaw a little cottage about three foote high, couered with ſtraw, and opē on the ſide, vnder the which ſtood a little gibet, wheron hung a little horne, with certaine ſtuffe therein, which they would not lette them ſee by no meanes, and vnder the gibet ſtood a ſtaffe, with a dead childes ſcul fixed vpon it, hauing in the one eye a bone, much like the bone that is founde in the head of a 
                        •
                     addocke (whereof with vs they make horſes,

bridles, and collars for degs, at the foote of the ſtaff lay al ſorts of bones, both of fiſhes and beaſts: and among the reſt, the 
                        •
                     awes of a Priſ
                           ••
                        
                      (which in our countrey is called a ſword fiſh) without teeth, which the maſter tooke away, & brought it vnto me: our men aſking what yt might ſignifie, they ſaid, there lay a dead carcas: and being in another village as they paſſed forwarde, they ſawe at the leaſt twentie men ſitting at the doore of one of their houſes, whereof ſome ſeemed to bee of the principal commanders, and within that houſe there was a noyſe of ſinging, both by great and ſmal, that it made them muſe, whereupon they aſked what it meant, they ſaide there was one dead. The women being in trauel, are not any thing aſhamed, but euery one, both yong and old, men and women, run vnto her, the doore ſtanding wide open: but one thing is to be wondered at, that the children are al circumciſed, and yet they haue neither law, order, nor knowledge of God. The countrey is fruitful, and ful of al ſtrange fruites, and abounding in al kinds of beaſts, and birds of diners formes, both great and ſmal. There are ſome trees, where vpon one branch there hang at the leaſt 100. birdes neſts, altogether moſt pleaſant to behold. They hang by certaine ſtrawes made faſt vnto the boughes, becauſe ſnakes ſhould not creepe in and ſuck their egges: many of thoſe neſts were brought vnto me. This ſhall ſuffice for the diſcription of the coaſt of Guinea, after the which followeth the mightie kingdome of Congo.
                  
                  The ancient writers helde opinion that this lande was not inhabited, calling it Torri
                           ••
                        am Zonam, that is, a place in the earth, that through the heate of the ſunne is burnt vp, but they were altogether deceiued, for as Odoardus Lopez, a Portingale witneſſeth, hauing with many other Portingales long time inhabited therein. There is good dwelling, and the aire, cōtrarie to al mens iudgements, very temperate, and that in winter there is no extreame cold, but onely ſuch weather as it is in harueſt time at Rome. They vſe no linings nor ſhirte bandes, nor change of clothes neither care they for the fire, it is likewiſe no colder on the tops of the hilles, then in the vallies, but generally it is warmer with them in the winter then in the ſummer, onely becauſe of the continual raines, ſpecially about the middle of the day, two houres before, and as much after dinner, which heat is very euill for our mē to endure. The people of the countrie are black, but part of the women fear what 
                        ••
                     llow: their haire for the moſt part is blacke and curled, and ſome haue red haire: they are of a mean ſtature, therin not much vnlike the Portingales, the balles of theyr eyes being of diuers colours, blacke, and ſea colour: their lips not ſo thicke as thoſe of N
                           •
                        b
                           •
                        a, & other Moores: their faces of al proportions, fat leane, and indifferent betweene both, like the Portingales, and not like other Moores of Guinea, that are foule and deformed. The length of the day and night is in a ma
                        •
                     er al one, for that it differeth not one quarter of an houre to anie mans iudgement) throughout the whole yeare: their winter beginneth in our lent. about the middle of March, and their ſummer in the middle of September 
                        •
                      in winter it raigneth there continually, for the ſpace of fiue moneths, that is, Aprill, May, Iune, Iuly, & Auguſt, in which time there are but few faire daies, and there the raine falleth in ſuch great drops, that it is wonderful, which water is al dronke vp into the earth with the drieneſſe of the land in ſummer time, wherein it raineth ſcarce once in ſixe moneths: with the raine likewiſe the riuer is filled with thick muddie water, ſo that it floweth ouer the banks and moyſtneth the ground. The windes that in ſummer doo continually blow in thoſe countries, are (as Hippocrates, and after him Iulius the firſt emperor of Rome, naming them with a greek name E
                           •
                        eſ
                           •
                        o
                           •
                        , Northweſt, by the Portingales called Ven
                           •
                        o Maeſtro or general wi
                        •
                     d, as being ordinarie at that time of the yeare in all thoſe countries, which are likewiſe cauſes of the raines, by driuing vp of m
                        •
                     ſtes and vapors, vppon the tops of the hils, which being there, and reſoluing into water, doo fil the earth with raine, and thoſe continual raines, are likewiſe cauſes of the growing and increaſing of the great riuers that are in Egypt and Ethiopia as Niger and Nylus, and al the riuers there abouts, ſome running into the Mediterranean, others into ye great Ocean ſeas, by reaſon of their ſlime & fattines: and becauſe in our ſumer, (which is their winter for the moſt part it raineth throughout the countryes of Congo and Ethiopia, it is not to be wondered at if the riuers be greater, and do ouerflow more then they are, in the furder and very drie countries, for in Egypt (not accounting Alexandria with the places bordering on the ſame) where it neuer raineth, it is holden for a verie ſtrange & wonderful thing, how the riuer Ni
                           •
                        
                      ſhould gr
                        •
                     w ſo high, & ful of thicke muddie water, and

alwaies at one time of the yeare, not fayling therein, thereby refreſhing the earth, and giuing foode both to man and beaſt, whereby the ancient inhabitants of thoſe countries, did vſe to offer ſacrifices vnto that Riuer, calling it as Ptolomeus in his fourth booke rehearſeth a good Spirit, and yet at this day many Chriſtians eſteeme it for a miracle, for that without the increaſe thereof, they would die for hunger: their liues 
                        •
                     as Iohn Chriſoſtome ſayth) conſiſteth of the increaſing of the waters, ſo then the Northweſt winds, that in our ſummer time, which is their winter, blow in our countries, are the meanes in thoſe countries, to gather cloudes and moyſtures vpon the high hilles, from whence their raine proceedeth, which raine is the cauſe that their countrey is not ſo colde as ours, ingendering in thoſe hot countries a certaine kinde of warme water. Thoſe raines then are likewiſe the cauſe of the growing & ouerflowing of the riuer Ni
                           •
                        us, and other riuers in thoſe countries, wherof the inhabitants haue deuiſed and written to many fables. But in their ſummer, which is our winter, there bloweth contrary windes, as ſouth, and ſoutheaſt, which without al doubt are cold, as blowing from the contrarie part of the Pole Antarctike, and coole thoſe countries, as our winds do here in theſe countries, & like as with thē they cauſe a faire & cleare aire, ſo with vs they cauſe great ſtore of raines, by a certain natural diſpoſition of the heauens & the climates, ruled and gouerned by the high wiſedom of God, that hath diuided the heauens, & ordained the courſe of the ſun and other planets, in ſuch maner, that al parts of the earth by their light & brightnes are filled with warmth and coldnes, & therein do continue, with great proportion and equalitie: ſo that for certain, if the freſhneſſe and coldnes of thoſe winds did not refreſh the countreyes of Ethiopia, Congo, and other places bordering on the ſame, it were impoſſible for the inhabitants to indure the heate. The ſame windes likewiſe doo refreſh and comfort the inhabitants of Grecia the Iſlands of Candia and Cipies, the countries of Aſia Mynor, and thoſe of Suria and Egypt, which liue by the refreſhing of thoſe generall Northweſt & weſt winds, which rightly by the Grecians are called Zoephero, that is, bringing life, & thoſe alſo are the cauſe that in Ethiopia, Congo, and other countries bordering thereon it neuer Snoweth, no, not vpon the higheſt hilles, vnleſſe it bee further off, towardes the Cape de Bona Speranza, or in ſome certaine places, by the Portingales called Snow hilles, as in Congo they finde neither Ice nor ſnow, which with them would bee more eſteemed then gold, therewith to coole their drink, ſo that the Riuers do not increaſe by the melting of ſnow, but only by means of the cōtinual raine of fiue moneths, as I ſaid before.
                  But returning to our former matter, you may trauel to Congo by two waies, one by the main ſea, to S. Helena, and ſo further ouer, or along by the coaſt of Affrica, to the Iſland of Saint Thomas, and ſo to the Cape of Lopes Gonzales, lying vnder one degree vppon the South ſide of the Equinoctiall line, about 21. Duch miles from Saint Thomas Iſland, and from thence they ſaile with the wind (that commeth off the land,) along the coaſt, euerie euening caſting anker in ſome creeke or hauen vntill they arriue at the place where they deſire to be. The kingdome of Congo beginneth at the Cape de S. Catharina, which lyeth on the South ſide of the Equinoctial line, vnder two degrees and a halfe and paſſing along the coaſt, you ſaile by certain hils and ſtrands, not woorth the noting, till you come to two creekes, in forme ſomewhat like a paire of ſpectacles, where there is a good hauen called Baro D Aluaro Gonzales, that is, the creeke or hauen of Aluaro Gonzale
                           •
                        
                     : not farre from it runneth a little riuer into the ſea, by reaſon of the redneſſe thereof, by the Portingales called Rio de 
                           •
                        as, Boreras, R
                           •
                        ſlas, becauſe the water runneth ouer a certaine redde ſande, that coloureth the water: at that place beginneth a high hill, called by the Portingales la Sierra Complida, that is, a long hill: paſſing further, there is another riuer called 
                        
                           •
                        a 
                           •
                        e 
                           •
                        as Almadias, which is as much to ſay, as the creeke or hauen for ſhippes, becauſe in that place many bankes are made: in the mouth of this riuer there lyeth three Iſlands, wherof the greateſt is the middle being inhabited, wherein there is a hauen for little ſhips, the other two are not inhabited. Parting from thence you come to the great riuer of Congo, called Za
                           •
                        e, taking his beginning or ſpring, partly frō the ſame lake frō whence the riuer Nylus doth flow. This riuer caſteth forth ſo great aboundance of water, that it is incredible, for that before it runneth into the ſea it is at the leaſt 5. miles & broad, & on ye vpper part it is freſh water, for 8 10. & 16 Duch miles vnto the red ſea, whereby the pilots ſailing ouer it, know what place they are in. Vpwards into this riuer you may ſaile

with great barks ſhe length of fine miles, but not higher, by reaſon of the diſcending and fall thereof from a ſteep high ground, as the riuers of Nilus, Donow, and Rhein do in ſome places, which are called Catara
                           •
                        tas, that is, ſhedings or fallings of waters, making ſo great a noyſe, that it may bee heard a great way from it. In this riuer at the entry into the ſea are many Iſlands, al inhabited, and very populous, that haue diuers gouernours, al ſubiectes to the king of Congo. In tunes paſt thoſe Iſlands made warres one againſt the other in certaine ſcutes cut out of the bodie of a great tree, in their language called, Licondo, whereof ſome are ſo great, that ſixe men cannot fadome them, with height and length correſpondent, ſo that one of the greateſt being cutte in proportion of a ſcute, woulde holde two hundred men: Thoſe ſcutes they rowe with ores, wherwith they make great ſpeede, euery man hauing an ore and a bowe: and when they fight, they lay downe the ore, and vſe their bowe: and to ſteere and winde thoſe ſcutes, they vſe no other ruther, than one of thoſe ores. In this riuer there are many ſtrange beaſtes, ſpecially Crocadiles, that are very great, in their language called Carman, the ſea horſe, and another that ſeemeth to haue handes, and a taile, like vnto a Flaſke, which they call Ambize Angulo, that is, a ſea hogge, becauſe it is as fatte as a hogge, it hath a good and ſauoury fleſh, not like fiſh, although it bée a fiſh which feedeth not of that which is in the riuer, but eateth the graſſe that groweth on the riuers ſide, and hath an head like an ore, whereof there are ſome that weigh fiue hundred poundes, the Fiſher men that take them, are bound vpon pain of death to bring them to the King.
                  There you finde an other hooke of land called Cabo di Padran, and alittle from thence the riuer Lelunda, which commeth out of a ſmall lake lying within the land, from whence more Riuers haue their offſpring, ſpecially one called Coanza, wherof hereafter I will ſpeake. This riuer Lelunda when it rayneth not, is very drie, ſo that it may be paſſed ouer by foote, it runneth vnder the hill (whereon Congo the chiefe cittie doth ſtand) and from thence to the riuer of Ambrizi, which is a great riuer, with a hauen, and runneth not farre from the riuer of Congo into the ſea: a litle further you come to an other riuer called 
                        
                           ••
                        ze, which hath no hauen, and from thence to Onzo another riuer with a good hauen, hauing her ſpring out of the ſame lake, from whence the riuer Nylus doth iſſue: and ſomwhat more to the ſouth lieth the riuer Lemba, but it hath no hauen, nor yet ſaileable. From thence you come to Damde, a very great riuer, wherin ſhips of two hundred tuns may ſaile: out of this riuer there runneth an arme or braunche lying ſouthward called Bengo, which with Coanza (another great riuer) make the Iſland of Loanda: both their ſtreames meeting together, driue foorth much filth and ſand, which make the Iſland greater. Bengo is a great ſtreame or riuer, which may be ſailed vppe at the leaſt fiue and twenty Italian miles, which are about fiue Dutch miles: and betweene theſe two Iſlands (as I ſaide before) lieth the rich Iſland of Loanda, with the hauen called by the name of, the Iſland Loanda, which is as much to lay, euen or flat land, without hilles. This Iſland is about four miles long, and ſomewhat leſſe than a quarter of a mile broad, and in ſome places, not aboue a bowe ſhoote broad, where there is a thing much to be wondered at, that when it is ful ſea, if one dig but twoo or three handfuls deep into the groūd, they ſhal find freſh water, and digging in the ſame ground when it ebbeth, the water is ſalt and brackiſh.
                  In this Iſland of Loanda are fiſhed the Schulpekens, which in the kingdome of Congo, and other places borduring thereabouts are vſed for mony, which fiſhing is done in this maner: There are certayne women, that being on the ſea ſide, goe alittle way into the water, lading certayne baſkets with ſand, which being filled, they carry them on land, & waſh the ſand from the Schulpkens, that are very ſmall and in great numbers, by them eſteemed of twoo ſortes, ſome males, other females, which in ſhew and colour are the faireſt, and although many of them are found vpon the ſtrand or ſhore of the riuer of Congo, yet thoſe of Loanda are the beſt, faireſt, & moſt eſteemed of, they are very ſhining, and of an aſh colour, other colours are of no account: for thoſe Schulplikens you may buy any kinde of thing, whether it be gold, ſiluer, or any kinde of victualles, whereby you may perceiue, that not onely in the kingdome of Congo, and the countries about it, but alſo in other places of Affrica, and in the kingdome of Chyna, and ſome part of India, they haue vſed other kindes of things in ſteed of mony, as we vſe gold, ſiluer, copper, and ſuch like mixtures: for in Ethiopia they vſe pepper corns for mony. In the kingdome of 
                        
                           •
                        bu
                           •
                        o about

the riuer Niger, Shu
                           •
                        penes, and Porcelleten
                     ▪ as alſo in China, and Ben 
                           •
                        alen, ſo that mettall is not ſo much eſteemed of in moſt partes of the worlde, as it is in Europa, and other places circumtacent. In this Iſland there are ſeauen or eight villages by them called Libat
                           •
                        , whereof the principall is called the Holighoſt, wherein the gouernour is reſident, being ſent from Congo, where he adminiſtreth Iuſtice, and looketh ſharpelye to the fiſhing of Schalpekens: There are many beaſts, goates, and wilde ſwine, for that the tame become wilde, and runne into the woods: alſo therein groweth a great and ſtrange tree called Enlanda, being alwaies gréene, of a ſtrange form, ſpecially in the branches that grow very high, and caſt downe certaine ſmall threedes, which touching the earth do bring forth roots, from whence other plants or trees do ſpring forth moſt aboundantly in great numbers: vnder the firſt rhinde or barke of this tree groweth a certaine linnen, which being beaten and made cleane, and then ſtretched foorth in breadth and length, it ſerueth to apparell the common people. In this Iſland alſo they vſe ſhipps made of palme or Indian nut trees, the boordes being peeced together, after the manner of the Portingale barkes, wherein they vſe both ſailes and o
                        •
                     es, and with them they fiſh in all the riuers thereabout which are very full of fiſh, and with them likewiſe they row vnto the firme land. On that ſide which reacheth towardes the firme land: there are trees that growe in certaine deepe places, on the ſhore, vpon the rootes whereof the ſea continually beateth, where groweth oyſters as broade as a mans hand, verie good to be eaten, and wel knowne to that countrey people, which they call Ambiziamatare, which is to ſay, ſtone fiſh. The Iſland at one ende is very neere vnto the firme land, and the chanell is oftentimes ſwoome ouer by the countrey people, and in the ſame chanel there are certaine ſmal Iſlandes, which when it floweth are not ſeene, but when it ebbeth, they appeare aboue the water, and being vncouered, they finde the oyſters lying at the rootes of the trees, hare by the Iſland, on the outwarde part, ſwim many whales, that are blacke, and fight togither, killing ech other, wherof being fiſhed, & taken vp by the Moores, they make treane oile, with the which and with pitch togither, they dreſſe their ſhips: the mouth of the 
                        •
                     auen lieth in the north, in breadth aboue halfe an Italian mile, being very deep, and right ouer againſt it on the firme land lieth the village of S. Paul, not very ſtrongly fortified, and inhabited by Portingales, that are brought the thither with wife and children out of Portingale, all the channell is very full of fiſh, ſpecially of Sardins and Ench
                           •
                        ones, which in winter time are there in ſo great abundaunce, that they leape vpon the ſhore: alſo diuers other good fiſhes, as ſoales, ſturgeons, barbles, and great creui
                        •
                     hes, which are very wholeſome, and are there found in great numbers, whereby the common people doe liue. Satling further from Loanda, you come to the Riuer called Coanza, which Riuer with Bengo, and other Riuers aforeſaide doe make the Iſland of Loanda, ſo that Coanza alſo hath her offſpring from a little lake, which maketh a Riuer that floweth out of the ſame greate lake, from whence Nylus and other Riuers haue their iſſue, which Lake in this Carde is called Zane or Zembre, of the ancient fathers Tritoms Lanis, becauſe therein (as it is ſaide) Sea-gods, and Mermaids haue beene found.
                  The entrance of the riuer of Coanza is about halfe a mile broad, & may be ſailed vp with a ſcute at the leſt xx. miles againſt the ſtreame, but it hath no ſpeciall hauen. Thereabout beginneth the kingdome of Angola, which in time paſt was vnder the obedience of the kinges of Congo, but not long ſince, by meanes of a certaine gouernor, it was taken from it, and made a gouernement of it ſelfe, which holdeth himſelfe as a friend, and not as a vaſſaile to the king of Congo, yet many times hee ſendeth him certaine preſents in maner of a tribute.
                  Frō 
                     Coanza paſſing forward you come to a hook of land called Capo Ledo, which hauing compaſſed about, you finde other Riuers, the firſt is Songa, which may bee ſailed vp xxv. Italian or fiue Duch miles, the next Bengleli, where now one of the king of Angolas ſubiects is gouernor: then you come to a very good hauen, fit and capable for all ſhippes, called the Creeke of Kine, of ſome, the banke of Kine, becauſe thereabout great numbers of kine doe vſe to paſture, being a plaine country, fruitful of graſſe, and al kinds of vutualles: & there many times is openly to be ſolde certayne kinds of mettall, ſpecially ſiluer, as Lopez and Pigafetta his interpreters do witnes, from whence moſt part of this deſcription is drawne and taken forth: and ſo far was the coaſt of the mighty kingdome of Congo vſually accounted to bee, where the Portingales, in the firſt diſcouery of the

country did ordinarily traffike, and beginneth vnder 4 degrées and ½ on the ſouth ſide of the Equinoctiall line, reaching til you come vnder 13. degrees, which are 630. Italian miles▪ that is, 126. Duch miles, accounting fiue Italian miles to euerie Duch mile: and although this countrie, as alſo al other, hath other ſides, that lie both Eaſt, Weſt, North, and South, yet this diſcriptiō of the Weſt ſide (as far as it reacheth on the ſea coaſts) ſhal ſuffice for the neceſſary knowlege of thoſe ye ſaile along the Affrican or Indian ſeas. But to make it ſome what better knowne, I will, in parte, deſcribe the fruitfulnes thereof: which to vnderſtand you muſt know, that the whole kingdome of Congo is diuided into ſire principall prouinces, which are called Bamba, Sogno, Sundi, Pango, Batta, and Pemba.
                  
                  
                     Bamba is the greateſt and the richeſt, it reacheth along the Sea coaſt from the riuer of Ambrizi, to the riuer of Coanza, hauing in it many Lordes, whoſe names are needeleſſe to rehearſe, for they are all called Mani, that is, Lord, as Mani Bamba, lord of Bamba, Mani Loanda, lord of Loanda, Mani Coanza, lord of Coanza. This prouince of Bamba is the key, ſhield and defence of the whole kingdom of Congo, from whence the king hath all his power & means to reſiſt the enemy, for they withſtand al rebellions of the places borduring about them: they haue diuers expert ſouldiers that are alwayes in armes, helping and aſſiſting the king in all his wars, and in the ſame prouince, if need require, he may haue 400000. fighting mē, and according to the manner of the countrey at his commaundement. The principall towne of this prouince lieth in an euen field, betweene the riuers of Loze and Ambrizi, and is called Panza, which is a common name to all theyr towns, where the gouernor lieth: it is diſtant from the ſea about 100. Italian miles, which are 20. Dutch miles: in this prouince beginneth the hill, wherein are mines of ſiluer, and of al other mettalls (reaching toward the kingdome of Angola) being very rich, and there on the ſtrande they finde the Schulphkens which they vſe for money, where likwiſe is the greateſt trade for ſale of ſlaues in al that country, being brought from Angola, which the Portingales euery yeare do buy of them by thouſands, carrying them to ſell againe into diuers far & different countries. The people of the country are very expert in armes. They beare long and broad rapiers, or two handed ſwordos like the Slauonians, or Switzers, which are brought vnto them by the Portingales, & ſom of them are ſo ſtrong, that with one blow they will ſtrike a ſlaue cleane thorow the middle of the body into peeces: and further, there hath bin ſo of thē found that haue borne the fourth part of a butte of wine (weying about 325. li. vpon theyr ſhoulders: beſides thoſe weapons, they haue bowes, wherein they bee very expert, with long ſhieldes made of barks ſolded togither, whereof I can ſhew you. In this prouince of Bamba there be diuers ſtrange beaſts as elephants, wherof there be many, by reaſon of the great aboundaunce of wooddes, meddowes, and ſtreames, and be very great for that they grow halfe the time of theyr liues, which is 150. yeares. Thoſe that haue bin found in Portingale, and here with vs, are 
                        〈◊〉
                     , becauſe they are yong, & not come to the
                        ••
                      full growths: and to prooue them to 
                        〈◊◊〉
                      great, it may be tried by the greatnes and weight of ſome of the teeth that be brought from thence, for that there hath been 
                        〈◊〉
                      found to be two hundred pounds 
                        〈…〉
                     , euery pound foure and twenty 
                        〈◊〉
                     .  In Congo ſpeech an elephants tooth is called Mene Manzo, and the yong elephantes are by them called Moana Manzo, theyr eares are as big as the greateſt target that the Turkes do beare, which are ſixe ſpans long, in forme like a Gys, and ſomewhat ſharpe towardes the ſhoulder, and with the beating of theyr eares and tayles, they driue away the flies, and likewiſe with the wrinckling and ſhrinking together of theyr ſkinnes they kill them. The hayres on theyr tailes are very thicke, blacke, and ſhining, the olde hauing them much fayrer than the yoong, and be more woorth: theyr hayres are 
                        •
                     ſ
                        •
                     d by theſe country people, for necke laces, ſpeciallie by the men and gentlewomen in the countrey of Angola, and the places borduring on the ſame, which are much eſteemed and accounted of bicauſe they come from theſe kindes of beaſts, as alſo for the fay reneſſe and ſtrength of the hayre, for that ſome of them are ſo ſtrong that a man can not breake them with his handes. Some of the countrey people venture theyr liues, to get them, which is in this maner: when the elephant paſſeth through ſo narrowe away that he cannot turne himſelfe, they leape out, or follow him, and with ſharpe kniues cut off his haires, which they ſell, and are wreathed and folded in the manner and forme of Ringes and Laces, and ſo worne about th
                        •
                     yr neckes, armes,

and fingers, thereof by whole tayles, with th
                        •
                      th
                        ••
                     es they weare in thoſe countries: and many rings of the ſame hayre made by the 
                        •
                     es, you may ſee at D Paluda
                        
                           ••
                        
                      houſe: the ancient fathers had not the great knowlege of elephants, bicauſe they 
                        〈◊〉
                     , yt they cannot bow their legs, & that 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſtep, ſtanding vpright againſt trees, by which means they write them to be ta
                     
                        •
                      but the experience of our country mē, as alſo of the Portingales, haue foūd it to be oth
                        •
                     rwiſe, and th
                        •
                     t they haue ioynts in their legs, and can bow them, lifting vppe their two 
                        •
                     egges againſt trees, to eate the 
                        •
                     arizes, as alſo ſtooping or kneeling down to the water, 
                        •
                     o drinke therof, of the which wants in their legs 
                        •
                     can ſhew you: what more 
                        〈◊〉
                      the diſcription of Elephants, ſeing many autho
                        •
                     s haue made mention of them, I eſteeme it needeleſſe to ſpeake more thereof in this place. There are likewiſ
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      of the ſame form and 
                        •
                     n, as 
                        〈…〉
                      haue beene ſeene in 
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     heweth a won
                     
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      beaſt, which is, 
                        〈…〉
                      vpon a white man, 
                        〈…〉
                      that if a blacke and a 
                        〈…〉
                      both together, they 
                        〈…〉
                      blacke man, and not 
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     ng hungrie, they come a
                        ••
                      
                     
                        ••
                     oure the catrel, although the hou
                     
                        ••
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      be neuer ſo neare which they do
                        ••
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      and no other kind of beaſtes 
                        〈…〉
                      they ſpare not any kinde 
                        〈…〉
                      Co
                        ••
                      they are called Engo
                           •
                        , and are 
                        ••
                     uel beaſts like Lions, but of an
                     
                        •
                      colour and ſpeckled: they are taken 
                        〈…〉
                      being putte into fleſh and other 
                        〈…〉
                      being hot with arrowes 
                        〈…〉
                      of the Tiger, is 
                        〈…〉
                      extreame poyſon, which 
                        〈…〉
                      procureth preſit death. 
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        ••
                     ke them are puniſhed 
                        〈…〉
                      their ſkins without the 
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     une prouince hath another kind of 
                        〈◊〉
                      called 
                        〈◊〉
                     , altogeth
                        ••
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      only differing herein, that 
                        〈…〉
                      which the m
                        •
                     le doth not: this 
                        〈◊〉
                      of a verie ſtrange hatre, for that 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     he backe downe to the bell
                        •
                     e it is all 
                        〈◊〉
                      with thee co
                        •
                     ours, white, blacke, and 
                        •
                     arke red, ea
                        ••
                      
                     
                        •
                     ripe orderly follow
                     
                        •
                      the oth
                        •
                     r, and th
                        ••
                      
                     
                        •
                     ingers broade, as 
                        〈…〉
                      the book printed at 
                        〈…〉
                     . Of theſe beaſts 
                        〈…〉
                      breede 
                        〈◊〉
                      yeare there are 
                        〈…〉
                     , and 
                        •
                     de, and there
                     
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                     , whereby the Portin
                     
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      ſ
                        ••
                     th, to ſay a man or other t
                        •••
                     g is as ſw
                        •
                     ft as a Zebra, meaning thereby, as ſwift as poſſible may be, being tamed, they would ſerue in place of horſes, both to ride vpon, & to draw, as alſo in wars and other neceſſary affaires, ſo that herein a man may wel ſee the great prouidence of God, that hath enriched all countries with neceſſary prouiſions, both of beaſtes and other thinges, as alſo with victuals: but becauſe in al the kingdome of Congo there are no horſes, and that they know not how to vſe them, many of them know how to make their oren taine, wherof they haue great numbers, and ſetting ſaddles on their backes, with bridles in their mouthes, they ride vpon them alſo: in ſteede of beaſts they vſe men, which are brought vp to the ſame vſe, and ſtande in the ſtreetes readie to beare men, either in field beds, like the Indians in Palamkins or ſitting vpon ſtooles or chaires, as you may ſee in the ſame booke that was printed in Rome. Therfore ſuch as deſire to make great haſte as wee doo in riding poſt) take diuers ſlaues to beare them, and when one is wearie, there changeth and taketh another, as wee do horſes, and by that meanes make ſpeedy tourmes. There are likewiſe many other beaſts, ſ
                        •
                     me as great as an ore, ſome leſſe, by them called Empalanga, many wilde buffles and wolues, that are good of ſmel. and loue oyle, which they ſucke out of the Palme trees, fores, harts, hindes, goates, comes, and hares in great aboundance, for that they are neither hunted nor killed. There likewiſe are many muſke Cats by them made tame, whereby to gette the muſke, which they delight in. Snakes and adders in thoſe countries are of a ſtrange forme, in reſpect of ours, and verie great, for there are ſome that are at the leaſt 25. palmes long, and fiue in breadth, with their bellies & mouthes ſo great, that they will deuoure a hart or any other beaſt of the ſame bigneſſe: they feede vpon the land, and in the water, vſing both the elements, & hauing filled theyr bellies, they do oftentimes lie in ſome darke place to ſleepe, and ſo are killed, and by the countrey people eaten, eſteeming them as daintie a meate as we doo hens and capons. There are many venomous adders, which if they bite a man, he dyeth within foure and twentie houres after at the furtheſt. There are other beaſts as big as a Rans Owle, like Dragons, hauing wings and a taile, with a long mouth and many teeth, they eate raw fleſh, they are of colour blew and greene, and with a painted ſkinne, and two feete: ſome of the Moores pray vnto them. There are likewiſe

many Camelions, as great as a horſleach, with a high backe, and foure féete, changing into al colours. Birds there are of diuers ſorts, as Indian hennes, Peacocks, geeſe, ducks, wilde and tame partriges, fezants, pigins, and turtle doues, in great aboundance, alſo Eagles, Falcons, Hawkes, Pellicans, and ſuch like birdes: beſides al theſe, there are diuers parrats, both greene, and gray, and verie red, by them called Framenghi, with an innumerable number of ſmall birdes, ſinging as pleaſantly as Canare birdes. The ſecond prouince of Congo called Songo, lyeth about the Riuer of Zaire and Loango, and reacheth to the Riuer Ambrizi towardes the North, vnder ſeauen degrees and a halfe, and endeth at the red ſtone Rocks, which lie vppon the borders of the kingdome of Loango, in the middle of that prouince. There is a towne called Songo, wherein the gouernor dwelleth, and of the ſame town the prouince taketh the name: In this prouince are many Eelphants, where they vſe to exchange theyr teeth for Iron, likewiſe apes and munkies, both great and little, of diuers kindes, whereof many are verie pleaſant and louing, good to paſſe the tune withall, doing whatſoeuer they ſee any man do: in this prouince they make much linnen of the Indian Palme trees, wherewith they haue great traffike, whereof I haue many ſorts: they are rich of kine, and of other beaſts aforeſayde: for Religion they are heathens, and pray to what thing ſoeuer they will, they eſteeme the ſunne as huſband, and for the greateſt God, and the Moone as wife, for the ſeconde God. Their apparrell is like thoſe of Congo, and haue war with theyr neighbors, the people of Anzicana.
                  
                  
                     Sundi the third prouince is the firſt, & as it were a parte of the kings owne inheritance, and therfore it is ruled by the kings eldeſt ſonne, or a Prince of the bloud royall, that is next heyre vnto the crowne: it lyeth about the Citie of Congo, by the portingals called S. Saluato
                           •
                        , and reacheth from thence about fortie Italian miles, or eight Duch miles, to the Riuer of Zaire. The people of that countrey as alſo of Pango, deale much with ſalte and coloured linnen, by the Portingales brought out of India, vſing ſchelpkēs for their money, for the which wares they barter linnen made of Palme trees, Elephants teeth, ſables, Martires, and ſome girdles made of the leaues of Palme trees, much eſteemed of in thoſe countries, whereof I can ſhew you: in this prouince there groweth much Criſtall, and many kindes of mettals, yet they eſteeme of iron more then of al others mettals, ſaying that other mettals are vnprofitable & of iron they ma
                        •
                     e kniues, ſwords, and other weapons, with ſuch like inſtruments, neceſſarie for the vſe of man.
                  
                     Pango the fourth prouince, was in time paſt a free kingdome, ruled and gouerned of it ſelfe, on the North ſide reaching towardes Sundy on the South ſide to Batta, on the Weſt, to the country of Congo, and on the Eaſt to the Sunne hilles. The cheefeſt towne is called Pango, and lyeth on the Weſt ſide of the Riuer Barbela, which iſſueth out of the great lake from whence Nilus floweth, their traffike is like thoſe of Sundi.
                  
                  
                     Batta the fift prouince, on the North ſide ioyneth to Pango, and on the Eaſt to the Riuer Barbela, and ſo to the ſunne hilles, and to the foote of the Saltpeeter hils, and of the South ſide of the ſame hils. it reacheth to Barbela til you come to the burnt hil. The cheefe towne is called Batta, where the gouernor is reſident, which gouernor is allowed to haue muſket and caliuer ſhot, becauſe that Eaſtward, beyond the ſun & Saltpeeter hils, on the Eaſt and Weſt ſide of the riuer Nilus, there dwelleth certaine people▪ of the Congoers, called G
                           •
                        aquas, and in their owne countrie Agag, verie fierce and cruel, and much giuen to fight, & to ſteale, whoſe ordinary incurſions into the countries about thē, and alſo into Batta, maketh them neceſſarily to ſtand vpon theyr guard, & ſo to defend thē
                     ſelues. This prouince can raiſe 70. or 80. thouſande men well armed: from thence are brought many Sables and Flumen, the reſt of their traffike is like theſe at Pango and Sundi.
                  
                  In Peniba being the ſixt prouince, 
                        ••
                     th the cheefe Citie 
                        〈◊〉
                     , in times paſt called Banza, that is the head, and now by the Portingales S. Sa
                           •
                        tor it lyeth on a hill within the land, diſtant from the ſea 1
                           ••
                        . Italian miles, or thirty Duch m
                        •
                     les 
                        〈◊〉
                      hil verie great and high, and moſt 
                        〈◊〉
                     , yet it yeeldeth iron, being about two Duch miles in compaſſe, al built with man 
                        •
                     
                     lages and houſes, where there are about 100. thouſand men. This hil is very fruitful, by reaſon of the freſh ayre, which is very cleare and ſounde: it yeeldeth much good water, which neuer hurteth in
                        •
                      is rich of graſſe and al kindes of beaſtes, and fruitfull trees, which are alwaies greene, aboundant in al ſorts of graine that are vſed in thoſe countries, ſpecially of one ſort,

called Luco. which is holden and eſteemed for the beſt and principall kinde of graine, as our wheat, but ſmaller like muſtardſeed, and ſomewhat greater, which they grinde in handmilles, whereof they make a verie white flower, making bread that is both wholeſome and of a good ſauour, and not much vnlike our bread made of wheate: of this grain they haue great ſtore in Congo, which not long ſince was firſt brought thither from the riuer Nylus, ſpecially from that place where Nilus fills the ſecond lake. There is alſo much barly, called Mazza di Congo, that is, graine of Congo, and alſo great quantitie of Maiz, that is, Turkiſhe wheate, which is there but little eſtéemed, and by their country people called Mazza Manprito, that is, graine of Portingale, wherewith they fatten their hogges: of rice they haue great plenty, but nothing worth. This country is likewiſe ful of diuers ſorts of fruitful trées, ſo that the common ſort of people for the moſt part doe nouriſh themſelues therewith, as citrons, lemons, and ſpecially very pleaſaunt oranges, neither ſwéet nor ſowre, but indifferent, betwéene both: there are likewiſe many Bananes, which ſome thinke to be the fruit that in Siria and Egypt are called Maſe, and in this Booke Indian Figs, they are very pleaſant and ſauery fruit, of a ſwéete and ſoweriſh taſte, being a good ſuſtenance for the countrey: in the fatte land there groweth many ſortes of palme trees, as the Indian Nutts, and ſuch as bring forth Dates, & ſome greater, and other ſortes of Palme trees, whereof they make oyle, wine, vineger, fruit, and bread: they preſſe the oyle out of the fruite as the Spaniardes do oliues, which for colour and ſubſtaunce is like our butter, but gréene and ſomwhat yelow, which they vſe in ſtéede of oyle and butter, and burne it in lampes: they likewiſe annoynt their bodies therewith: to conclude, it is good to eate in tune of néede, as it hapned to our men, that without this oyle had died for hunger.
                  Of the ſame oyle brought from thence, together with the wine and vineger of the ſame palme trees, I can ſhew you: the wine they draw out of the top of the tree, which being bored, there iſſueth a certaine iuyce like milke, being colde and freſh to drincke: the firſt that commeth foorth is ſweete and very pleaſant, next iſſueth ſowre, and the laſt is vineger, which may be vſed in ſallets, but beeing drinke when it is freſh and newe, it maketh the water to auoyde, whereby in thoſe countries men are little troubled with the ſtone, and drincking much, it maketh them drunke, and faſſeneth well. The bread they make of the ſtones of this fruit, which in forme are like almonds, but much harder: within thoſe ſtones are certaine kernels very pleaſaunt to eate, increaſing ſound and good fleſh: this fruit both inwardly and outwardly is gréene, and is eaten both rawe and ſodden. There are other trées that bring foorth a certaine fruit called Cola, as great as a pine apple, within it hauing an other kinde of fruit like cheſnuts, wherein are foure redde or carnation hoales, which they holde in theyr mouths, ſucking and chawing them, thereby to quench their thirſt. This fruit put into water, maketh it ſowre, and of a good taſte, they ſtrengthen the ſtomacke, and are paſſing good for an euil lyuer, other ſortes of wilde Palme trees are likewiſe found there, which yéelde much frui
                        •
                     , to bée eaten, the leaues ſeruing to make mais, to couer houſes, and to make baſkets or other neceſſary houſholde ſtuffe, whereof I haue many ſortes.
                  There are likewiſe other trées caled Ogbeghe, which bring forth fruit, in forme like yellow plumbes, pleaſant both in ſmel and taſte, from theſe trees they cut certaine braunches, which they plant or ſette cloſe together, making them faſt each to other, as wée doe Bore or Thornes, therewith making ſences for their houſes, which branches growing vp they make likewiſe galleries and arbors, therein to kéepe them from the heate of the Sunne.
                  Beſides al the fruits aforeſaide, there are many other ſorts, verie good for phiſicke, as alſo to eate, ſpecially Tamarinde of a verie tart and pleaſant taſte, and verie good againſt burning feauers. The Moores and Turkes trauelling by land, take the rind of Tamarinde with them, and mixing it with water, drinke it, to coole the inward heate, ſpecially the lyuer & kidnies, thereby alſo to make them laxatiue, as alſo Caſsia Fiſtula, which is there verie plentiful, alſo Citrons, Melons, Pompions, Cucumbers, and al other ſorts of fruites that grow out of the earth. Such as deſire a larger diſcourſe touching the ſame, let them reade Odoardus▪
                     
                     Congo tranſlated by maſter Abraham Hartwel, and Printed in London. 
                     Lopez, tranſlated by Piga
                           •
                        etta, and printed in Rome, from whence I haue gathered the moſt parte heereof: and although the houſes in Congo are ſmall and low, yet there wanteth no ſubſtance to builde withall, ſpecially Stones, for there are great ſtore, whereof may bee made whoſe Pillers, and foure ſquare peeces of fine redde Marble ſtone, and there are ſuch great peeces, that a whole Church might bee

hewed out of one of them. Beſides this marble, there are hilles of iaſper, porphier, or red marble, nured with white and other colours, which in Rome is called marble of Numidia, Affrica, and Ethiopia, whereof many pillers are to be ſeene in Rome.
                  
                  There is likewiſe found many grained ſtones, among the which there are that are mixed with iacinths, which maye bee taken foorth and ſeparated from the other ſtones wherein they growe: of thoſe maye likewiſe pillars and other workes be made, wherein might bee ſeene diuers ſortes of ſtones. There are alſo other ſtrange ſtones mixed with mettall, of diuerſe colours, as copper, in ſhew greene and ſhining, whereof they maye make Images, and other princely workes, ſo that want of ſubſtance to builde withall is not the cauſe of theyr ſmall houſes, for neyther ſtone, chalke, wood, nor beaſtes to drawe or carry them is wanting, onelie, they haue no maſons, carpenters, nor brickelayers, that ſhoulde make th
                        •
                     ir houſes, ſo that they dwel in little cotages. Heere might be declared, how this kingdome in the diſcouerie of the Eaſt Indies being in the yeare 1490. and 1491. was by the Portingales brought vnto the Chriſtian faith: alſo howe ſhamefully the countrey was left when golde beganne to faile, I meane not by the decaying or diminiſhing of the golde, but becauſe the King of Congo was perſuaded by a Portingale, not to diſcouer the mine, as alſo not mentioning the euill gouernement of the Biſhoppes, Prieſtes, Moonkes, and Friers, that were ſent thither, as beeing ſufficiently declared by Odoardus Lopez in his deſcription thereof, ſhewing that they deſired not the health and ſaluations of mens ſoules, but rather glory and rule, and to ſatiſfie their inſatiable luſtes and gréedineſſe after golde.) Yet not long ſince the King of Congo now liuing, hath twice ſent his embaſſadors to the King of Spaine & the Pope of Rome, friendly & hartily deſiring them, to ſend certaine preachers and teachers of the word of God, to inſtruct his ſubiects, withall, offering to diſcouer the rich mines of gold that are within his countrey, thereby to winne them to bring preachers to inſtruct his country: but chriſtendome hath other matters in hand, as to hang, ſuppres, purſue, and deſtroy their chriſten brethren, which being beyond my profeſſion, is not for me to deale in.
                  But returning to the further deſcription of the coaſt of Angola, to the great cape de Bona Speranza: firſt as touching Angola, it is by report) very populous, and abundant in ſiluer, copper, and other mettall, rich of al kinds of beaſts and victualles, ſpecially kine, yet the people rather eate dogs fleſh, which they buy and pay dearer for it, than for any other fleſh: their mony is ſchulpens like theirs in Congo, and are like in ſpeech, yet different in ſome words, as Spaniſh and Portingale: their king is an idolater or a Heathen. They haue as many wiues as they will, whereby they haue ſuch aboundaunce of people, that Angola alone can make a million of armed men, all ready to ſerue theyr gouernours in the warrs. They vſe many glaſſe beades brought out of Venice, beeing of diuerſe colours, which they weare for an ornament about their neckes and armes, in their ſpeech they doe call them Anzoles, and being hanged on ſtrings, Mizanga.
                  
                  Hauing paſſed the kingdome of Angola, and the ſhoare of Kine called Seno delle Vache, ſouthward to the black cape, or Out hooke, the coaſt ſtretcheth about 220. Italian miles. This coaſt is all one land, like Angola, and is vnder the gouernement of many lordes: and from this blacke cape reacheth a line Eaſtward, parting the hills called the colde hilles, which alſo in ſome high places néerer to the Equinoctiall line, are by the Portingales called the Snowe hilles, which end at the foote of the Criſtall hill, taking her name from the great abundance of criſtall found therein: out of thoſe Snow hilles the waters that make the lake haue their beginning, by the Portingales called Dumbea, Zocche, and this criſtall hil ſtretcheth further into the north toward the ſiluer hilles, as farre as Malomba, where the kingdome of C
                           •
                        ngo endeth, beeing diuided by the riuer of Coari. Coaſting along the ſhoare from the kingdome of Angola, to the cape de Bona Speranza, you muſt paſſe by the kingdome of Climbeb
                           •
                        , wherein raineth king Matama: this country reacheth to the riuer of Bauaghul ſpringing out of the hill called Luna or the Moone, and both together running into the riuer Magnice, which floweth out of the lake aforeſaide: behind this lieth Tropicus Cancri, and betweene this Tropicus Cancri and the cape de Bona Speranza, there raigneth no king, but diuerſe ſeuerall Lords. This land is compaſſed by high, ſharpe, and colde unhabited hilles: the people that are there liue in the fields, like labourers in cotages, apparelled in beaſts ſkins, wild rough people, and not to be credited, not induring or permitting anie traffike with ſtraungers. Their weapons are dartes and arrowes: their meate fruites of the earth, and fleſh of

beaſts. The ancient Writers thought the riuer Ni
                           •
                        u
                           •
                        
                      to haue her off ſpring in the hils of the Moone, ſo that many to this day are likewiſe of the ſame opinion. In this hil towardes the weaſt lieth a ſmall lake called Gale, out of the which lake floweth the Riuer Camilla, by the Portingales called the freſh riuer, which about the end of the falce cape de Bona Speranza runnes into the ſea. This Hooke is called the falſe or vnright Cape, becauſe the ſhips that ſaile from India to Portingale, doe firſt diſcouer a great corner or hook of land called De
                           •
                        li Agu
                           ••
                        ie, and after that this ſmaller hooke, and therefore call it the Faiſe Cape, beeing ſeperated from the right and great Cape. The ſpace betweene theſe two Hookes or Capes is 20 Dutch miles, which bearing out like twoo hornes, make an intercourſe or gulfe where the Portingales at times take in water out of the freſh riuer aforeſaide: and the people dwelling about this riuer are blacke (although the pole antartike is there at 35 degrees as alſo thoſe that dwell in the colde hilles of the Moone, ſo that it is not the heat of the Sunne, but the nature of the Countrey that maketh them blacke. And bicauſe this is the greateſt hooke or cape, and that reacheth furtheſt into the ſea of any Cape whatſoeuer in al the world, and very daungerous to paſſe (as al other Capes are) as alſo becauſe that in this place the ſea makes a moſt fearful noyſe, & that the land windes comming downe, make the ſea thereabouts moſt rough and troubleſome, whereby ſo many Portingale ſhips haue there bin caſt away: and becauſe by ancient Hiſtoriographers ſo litle hath bin ſaid therof, before and ſince the Portingales diſcouered the ſame, & thinke it good in this place to ſet downe, the meaſure and certaine knowledge of the greatneſſe of the Portingales voyage towards the Indies
                     ▪ for that there are about 6000. Italian miles to ſaile before you com to compas this great cape, for that from the riuer of Fernando Poo where the head firſt beginneth to iut into the ſea, to the furtheſt point, which (as I ſaid) is called Delli Aguglie, that is, the néedles, the coaſt from north to ſouth is accounted 2200. Italian miles, and on the other ſide of the ſame hooke or corner, to the point or cape Guarda fu
                           •
                        , lying ouer againſt the Iland Socotora, the coaſt from ſouth to north is accounted 3300. Italian miles, whereof 1000. Italian miles make 200. Dutch miles, and is 660. Dutch miles, ſo that from Lisbon ſailing about the coaſt of Affrica, & the cape de Bona Speranza to the kingdome of Goa, are about 15000. Italian miles, and thence to Malacca, & China, is as much againe: ſo that not any people in the world did euer make ſo dangerous a voyage, as the Portingales haue done, except within theſe few yeares, certain Engliſh gentlemen, that not onelie haue performed this voyage, but haue ſayled round about the worlde. This head is called the cape de Bona Speranza, that is, head of good Hope, for that al the ſhips that ſaile to India. or from India to Portingale, do feare the paſſing of this cape, thinking if they paſſe it, to haue paſſed al danger.
                  Now to returne to our matter touching the coaſt of Affrica, hauing paſſed the cape delli Aguglie, there are diuers good hauens for ſhips to harbor in, firſt Seno Formoſo, & il Seno del Lago, becauſe in that place the ſea makes a gulfe or entrance, wherein are certaine Ilands and hauens: alitle further the riuer called S. Chriſtofer runs into the ſea, in the mouth whereof lieth iii. Ilands: and ſomewhat further there comes a riuer out of the land (which the Portinga
                           •
                        e
                           •
                        
                      call 
                        
                           •
                        eria della Natiuita, that is, the land of Chriſts birth, bicauſe it was diſcouered on the ſame day) downe to the cape de la Peſcheria, between this cape & the riuer M
                           •
                        gnice, lieth the kingdome of Burtua, which reacheth to the hils of the Moone, and ſo to this riuer towardes the north, where the country of Monomo
                           •
                        ap
                           •
                        
                      lieth, and on the weſt ſide to the riuer Bauagul. In this country are many gold veines, the people being altogether like the men of Monometapa: & paſſing in this maner by the coaſt, you ſée ye riuer of Magnice, by the which begins the kingdome of Sofala, & the country of Menomotapa. This riuer ſpringeth out of the ſame lake where Nilus iſſueth forth, & runneth into ye ſea, in the middle of the entrance betwéene two corners of land, one called Della Peſcheria, the other Delli Correnti, liyng vnder 23. degrees ½ on the ſouth ſide of the pole, vnder Tropicus Caneri. Into this riuer not far from the ſea, run three other riuers, whereof one is called S. Chriſtopher, and by the inhabitants of the country called Nagoa: the ſecond hath her name of a particular man called Lorenzo Marcho
                           •
                        , (becauſe he found it firſt) and in that country Toroa: theſe two iſſue out of the hils of the Moone: the third is called A
                           •
                        r
                           •
                        e ſpringing out of the other ſide of the hills, by the golde mines of Mone motapa: in ſome places of this riuer they finde golde as ſmall as ſand. Theſe three riuers, together with the riuer of Magnice running into the ſea, caſt foorth great abundance of water, and from the mouth of theſe three Riuers ſtretcheth the kingdome of Soſala, to the riuer of

                     Cuania, which hath receiued hir name from a Caſtle of the ſame name, inhabited by Mahometanes. This riuer of Cuama diuideth it ſelfe into ſeuen partes, beſides the channel that floweth vpwardes, al inhabited and very populous, and floweth out of the ſame riuer from whence Nylus doeth iſſue: ſo the kingdome of Sofala lieth betwéen theſe two riuers Magnice and Cuama on the ſea ſide, yet very ſmall, hauing but fewe townes or villages, whereof the principall cittie is Sofala, lying in an Iſland of the ſame riuer, giuing the name to the whole country inhabited by Mahometanes, their King being of that ſect, but ſubiect to the King of Portingale, onely becauſe they wil not be vnder the obedience of Monomotapa.
                  
                  In the mouth of this riuer Cuama, the Portingales haue a fort, where there is much traffike for golde, iuorie and amber, which is found by the ſlaues vpon the coaſt, bartering the ſame for linnen made of cotten, and for ſilke, brought from Cambaia. The people as nowe inhabiting therein, were not borne in that country, but before the Portingales diſcouered the land, they came out of Arabia Felix, with ſmall barkes to traffike there: and being once brought in ſubiection by the Portingales, doe nowe inhabite and dwell there, being neither Turkes nor heathens.
                  In the inward parte of the countrey between thoſe two riuers beginneth the kingdome of Monomotapa, wherein are manie golde mines, which is carried into all the places round about, as well to Sofala, as throughout Affrica, ſome being of opinion, that out of this country Solomon cauſed golde and iuorie to be brought into Ieruſalem, which ſeemeth not vnlikely, for that in this Kingdome of Monomotapa, were found many olde and princely buildings, very coſtly, both for timber, ſtone, chalke, and wood, which in the countries about it are not found. The gouernement of Monomotapa is very great, and reacheth ouer many warrelike people, all Heathens and Pagans, blacke, of a middle ſtature, and very ſwift: in the which gouernment are many kings that are ſubiect to the ſame, and doe often rebell: their weapons are dartes and light targets. This Emperour holdeth many armies in ſeuerall prouinces, diuided into legions, after the maner of the Romanes, thereby to defend hys great countrey, and to maintaine his eſtate: amongſt his men of warre the legion of women is the beſt, which are greatly eſteemed of by the King, wherein conſiſteth his greateſt power. Theſe women do burne theyr breaſtes, becauſe they ſhoulde not hinder them in ſhooting, like the Amazons, whereof the auncient Hiſtoriographers make mention: theſe women are very ſwift, expert, and cunning in ſhooting out of their bowes. In theyr fight they vſe a certayne ſubtiltie, which is, that ſeeming to runne away and flee from their ennemies, as being ſcattered, vpon the ſodayne returne agayne, and do their ennemy great miſchiefe, eſpecially when they thinke to haue gotten the victory, and by that ſubtiltie are ouerthrowne. Theſe women haue places appointed them to dwell in by themſelues, and at certayne times haue the company of men, that they may haue children, which if they be boyes, they ſend vnto their fathers, if daughters, they keepe them.
                  The countrey of Monomotapa is in maner of an Iſland, formed in that order by the ſea, the riuer of Magnice, and a parte of the lake from whence the riuer ſpringeth, together with the riuer Cuam
                           •
                        , borduring on the ſouth vppon the Lordes of the cape de Buona Spera
                           •
                        za, and on the north vpon the kingdome of Monemugi.
                  
                  Sayling along the coaſt by the riuer of Cuama, you come to a ſmall kingdome liing vppon the ſea ſide called Angoſcia, taking the name from certaine Iſlandes that beare the ſame name, lying right againſt it, inhabited by Mahometanes and Heathens, which in ſmall ſhippes doe traffike, and deale in ſuch wares as thoſe of Sofala vſe. And ſayling further, you diſcouer the kingdome of Moſambique, lying vnder fouretéene degrees and a halfe, whereof I haue ſufficient ſpoken heretofore, as alſo of the Iſland lying behinde it called Quiloa, and the great Iſland of S. Laurence, making the chanell, which in the entrance towards the weſt is three hundred and forty Italian miles broad, and in the middle towardes Moſambique, where it is narroweſt a hundred and ſeauentie miles, kéeping that breadth all along the coaſts towards India, containing many Iſlandes. The ſhippes that ſaile from Spaine into India, and from India into Spaine, do commonly keepe their courſe through this channell, vnleſſe they be otherwiſe compelled by the winde: and ſurely this Iſland deſerueth to haue better people than it hath inhabiting therein, becauſe of the ſituation, hauing many good and ſafe hauens, togither with fayre riuers, & ſweet freſh waters, which cauſe the land to bring forth diuers kinds of fruits and ſpices, as beans, peaſe, rice and corn, oranges,

lemons and citrons, and all ſortes of fleſh, tame and wilde hennes, ſwine and harts of very good and ſweete fleſh, by reaſon of the fertilitie, and excellent good fiſh. The inhabitants are heathens, and ſome of Mahomets ſect, of a fayre colour, much giuen to war, and to their weapons, ſpecially bowes and woodden holberts. This Iſland is diuided into foure gouernments, ech fighting againſt other. Therein are many mines of gold, ſiluer, copper, yron, and other metals: but the wilde people vſe not to traffike out of their owne countrey, but onely ſayle in ſmall ſcutes (cut out of trées) from one place of the Iſland to the other, for the moſt parte not ſuffering any traffike in their Iſland with ſtrangers: yet the Portingales at this time traffike in ſome of their hauens, but go not on land, and from thence bring ambergreece, ware, ſiluer, copper, rice, and diuers other wares. In this chanel betwéen the firme land of Affrica and this Iſland, there lieth many both great and ſmall Iſlands, al inhabited by Mahometanes, among the which the chiefe is S. Chriſtofer, then the Holyghoſt, another called Magliaglie, as alſo Comoro, Anzoame, Maiotto and ſuch like. Returning againe vnto the coaſt, and hauing paſſed Quiloa, you ſée the kingdome of Mombaza, lying vnder thrée degrées and a halfe on the ſouth ſide, taking the name from a certaine Iſland, ſo called, wherein lieth a faire towne, with many goodly buildings, beautiffied with diuers Images and figures, the king being a Mahometane, who withſtanding the Portingales, ſpéede like thoſe of Quiloa, taking it by force, where they found much golde, ſiluer, pearles, cotten, linnen, ſilkes and cloth of golde, with other ſortes of merchandiſes. This Iſland bordureth on Quiloa, and Melinde, inhabited by heathens and Mahometanes, and ſubiect to the king of Monemugi.
                  
                  Sayling further, you come to the kingdome of Melinde, which is likewiſe verie ſmall, ſtretching along the ſea coaſt till you come to the riuer Chimamchi lying vnder two degrees and a halfe, and vpwardes by the riuer it runneth to a lake called Calice, about a hundred Italian miles, or twentie Dutch miles: In this countrey about the ſea ſide there is a very great towne, moſt inhabited by white people, al heathens and Mahometanes: their houſes are built almoſt like the houſes in Portingale: theyr ſheepe are almoſt as bigge againe as thoſe in Portingale, with tailes, which are accounted for a quarter of mutton, weighing at the leſt fiue and twenty or thirtie pound. The women are white, and dreſſe themſelues after the manner of Arabia, very prowdly, and in great pompe, al in ſilkes, wearing about their neckes, armes, and legges, iewels, rings, and bracelets of gold, going with their faces couered, like the Egyptian women, not being ſeene or known, but when it pleaſeth them: in this towne there is a good hauen for ſhips to lie in, and for the moſt parte, the people are friendly, vpright in worde and déede, holding good friendſhippe with ſtrangers, ſpecially with the Portingales, giuing them much credit, and neuer hurting them. Betweene the ii. heads of Mombaza, and Melinde there lieth three Iſlands, the firſt called Momſie, the ſecond Zanzibar, and the third P
                           •
                        mba, all inhabited by Mahometanes, white of colour, very rich and abundant in wealth, but not vſed to the warres, only to til thearth. In thoſe Iſlands is much ſugar, which is by them brought in boates vnto the firme land, with other fruites of thoſe Iſlandes within the firme land.
                  Beyond thoſe three kingdomes of Quiloa, Melinde, and Mumbaza, lieth the great and large kingdome of Monemugi, which on the ſouth lieth vppon the kingdome of Molambique, by the riuer of Co
                           •
                        uo, and on the weſt vpon the riuer Nylus, between the two lakes, on the north vppon the Land of P
                           •
                        eſ
                           •
                        e
                           •
                         lolin it liueth peaceably with the 3. kingdomes aforeſaid, traffiking with them for cotten, linnen, which is brought thither out of Cambaia, wt ſuch like wares, brought out of India, which they barter for gold, ſiluer, copper, and iuory, but on the other ſide towards Monomotapa, it hath continuall warres, and that ſo cruel and bloody, that it can hardly be knowne who hath the victory, becauſe in that place there méeteth two mighty people, and thoſe that are moſt expert in armes throughout all Affrica, for thoſe of Monomotapa, the women called Amazon, whereof I ſpake before: and for Monemugi, the people (by thoſe of Mencongi) called Giachi, but in their owne ſpéech Agagi, which in time paſt vſed much to inuade the kingdome of Congo, nothing incomparable for ſtrength, and agillitie to the Amazons.
                  
                  This people haue a cuſtome, with hote yrons to burne their faces, eſpecially their vpper lippes., and ſo make ſtrikes and lines in them: alſo they turne their eye lids vpwards and round about. They are blacke with ſhining ſkinnes. The white of their eies being of ſo ſwart a colour, that by their faces they ſeeme to be ſtange and cruel mōſters: they are il fauored, & great bodies,

liuing in the fields like beaſts, & eate mans fleſh. In war they are moſt couragious, ſetting moſt fiercely vpon their enemie: their arms are darts, wherin they are moſt cunning. Comming again vnto the Coaſt, & hauing paſt the kingdome of Melinde, to the Cape de Guarda fuy, there are many other places inhabited by white Mahometanes, where there are ſome good hauens, whither diuers ſtrange ſhippes and Marchants with their wares doe ordinarily reſort, wherof the chéefe is Pate, the ſecond Braua, the third Magadoxo, the fourth Amffion, and behinde that reacheth the broade and wide head or Cape of Guarda Fuy, which becauſe of the greatnes, iſſueth farre into the ſea, is knowne by many ſhips comming out of India, Arabia, Ormus, & other places. And about this Cape the Portingales do yearely watch for the Turkiſh ſhips, which ſaile with many coſtly wares, not hauing licence of them, & they are boorded and ſpoyled of their wares by the Portingales, preſuming themſelues to be lords of al the traffike in thoſe coūtries, not permitting any other to traffike therin but onely themſelues, or by theyr licence.
                  Hauing ſailed about this Cape de Guarda Fuy, and ſetting your courſe towardes the redde Sea, there are other townes and hauens, inhabited by the Mahometanes, the firſt called Meth, the other being ſomewhat further Barbora, and there are the laſt white people: from thence you finde al blacke people, and beyond that you come to Ceila, Dalaca, Malaca, & Carachin, which coaſt in their ſpéech is called Baragiam being al Moores, and expert in armes, their apparrell from the middle vpwarde being of cotten linnen. The chéefe gouernours or nobles weare Cappoten, which they cal Bermiſſi, this countrey is rich of gold, Iuory, mettal, and al kind of victuals. From thence you come to the mouth of the red ſea, wherein lyeth an Iſland called Babelmandel, on both ſides wherof there runneth a channel into the red ſea, whereof the Weſt ſide is almoſt fiftéene Italian, that is, three Duch miles broade, through the which al the ſhippes doe paſſe both in and out: the channel lying on the other ſide, is ſhallow, and ful of ſandes and cliffes, ſo that in al it is about ſixe Duch miles broade, whereof the one poynt lying in the Affrican ſhore, is called Raibel, and the other lying in the countrey of Arabia Felix, is called Ara, whereabouts alſo is the hauen of the rich towne of Aden in Arabia, alreadie ſpoken of in this booke. This water runneth inward vnto Swes, being about 1200. Italian miles in lēgth, on both ſides altogether dry and verie ſhallow, ful of Iſlandes, déep only in the middle, where the ſhippes do ordinarily ſaile, which is onely by the great & ſwift courſe of the water, which ſcouring the channel, kéepeth it cleane and déepe, caſting vp the ſande on both ſides.
                  Now to ſay ſomething of Preſter Iohn, being the greateſt and the mightieſt prince in all Affrica, his countrey beginneth from the enterance into the red ſea, and reacheth to the Iſland of Siene, lying vnder Tropicus Cancri, excepting the coaſt of the ſame ſea, which the Turke within theſe fiftie yeares hath taken from him, ſo that his gouernment towards the Northweſt and Eaſt, lieth moſt part by the red ſea, and Northeaſt, vpon Egypt, and the deſarts of Nubia, and on the South ſide vpon Monomugi, ſo that to ſet downe the greatneſſe of all the countries which this Chriſtian king hath vnder his commandement, they are in compaſſe 4000. Italian miles. The cheefe Cittie whereof, and wherein he is moſt reſident is called Belmalechi, his gouernment is ouer many countries and kingdomes that are rich and aboundant, in gold, ſiluer, and precious ſtones, and al ſorts of mettals, his people are of diuers colours, white, blacke, and betwéene both, of a good ſtature and proportion. The noblemen and gentlemen of the countrey, apparrel themſelues in ſilke, Imbrodered with gold and other ſuch like. In this countrey they obſerue lawes for wearing of apparrel by degrées, as they do in Portingale, for that ſome are not permitted to weare any other apparrel but Leather: the people are Chriſtians, but hold certaine ceremonies of the Iewiſh lawe, and vpon the day of the conception of the virgin Mary, al the kings and Princes vnder his obedience, do come vnto the ſaide towne of Belmalechi, there to celebrate the feaſt, euerie man bringing with him ſuch treaſor or yearely tribute as he is bound to pay, and at the ſame feaſt the people come thither in pilgrimage to honour it, wherevppon that day there is a great proceſſion, and out of the church from whence they come, they bring an Image of the virgin Mary, in form like a man, of Maſſie gold, and where the eyes ſhould be, it hath two great rubies, the reſt of the whole Image beeing wrought with excellent workmanſhip, and ſet with many precious ſtones, laying it on a beere of gold very cunningly wrought. At this proceſſion Preſter Iohn himſelfe is perſonally preſent, either ſitting in a Chariot of golde, or riding on an Elephant, moſt richly trapped, himſelfe apparrelled in moſt

ſtrange and coſtly cloth of golde, al embrodered and ſet with pearles and ſtones moſt ſumptuous to beholde: to ſee this feaſt and Image the people runne in ſo great troupes, that by reaſon of the preaſe, many are thruſt to death.
                  This Emperour Preſtor Iohn is not rightly named, for that his name is Belgian, Bel ſignifying the higheſt, perfecteſt, and excellenteſt of all things, and Gian Lorde, or Prince, which is proper to all that commaund or gouerne ouer others: ſo then Belgian ſignifieth the chiefe or higheſt Prince, which name being ſo ioyned, is proper to none but to the king, hauing alſo a ſurname of Dauid, as our Emperours the name of Caeſar or Auguſtus.
                  
                  Here I muſt alittle diſcourſe of the riuer Nylus, which hath not her iſſue in Belgians land, neither from the hilles of the Moone, nor as Ptolomeus ſaith, from the two lakes which he placeth in the midle between eaſt and weaſt, with the diſtance of almoſt foure hundred and fiftie Italian miles one from the other, for that vnder the ſame pole wher in Ptolomeus placeth the ſaide two lakes, lieth the two kingdoms of Congo and Angola, towardes the weaſt, and on the other ſide towards the eaſt the kingdome of Monomotapa and Sofala, with diſtance from the one ſea to the other of about twelue hundred Italian miles: and Odoardus ſaieth, that in theſe countries there is but one lake, which lieth on the bordures of Angola, and Monomotapa, which is in bigneſſe about a hundred ninety fiue Italian miles: of the which lake wee are well aſſured, and truely certified by thoſe of Angola, but on the eaſt ſide of Sofala and Monomotapa, there is no mention made of any other lake, whereby it may be ſaide, that vnder the ſame degrees there is no other lake. True it is that there are yet two other lakes, but they lie clean contrary to thoſe whereof Ptolomeus writeth, for hee (as I ſaide before) placeth his lakes right in the middle betweene eaſt and weaſt, and thoſe whereof I ſpeake, lie right by direct line betweene north and ſouth, diſtant about foure hundred miles. Some men in thoſe countries are of opinion, that Nilus ſpringeth out of the firſt lake, and then againe hideth it ſelfe vnder the earth, and iſſue out againe in another place, which ſome men deny, and Odoardus ſaith that right the opinion therein is, that Nylus paſſeth not vnder the earth, but that it runneth through certayne fearefull and deſart valleis, where no man commeth or inhabiteth, (without anye certaine channell) and ſo it is ſayd that it runneth vnder the earth.
                  Therefore it is moſt certaine that Nyl
                           •
                        
                      floweth out of the firſt ſake, which lieth vnder twelue degrees, by the pole antartike, which lake is almoſt compaſſed about with hils, whereof thoſe that lie eaſtward, are called Ca
                           •
                        ates, with rockes of Saltpeeter, and of ſiluer on the one ſide, and on the other ſide hilles, through the which Nylus deſcendeth about foure hundred miles right north, and then runneth into an other lake that is greater, which the inhabitantes doe call a Sea or Meere, becauſe it is greater than the other, being in breadth about twoo hundred and twentie miles, lying right vnder the equinoctiall line. Of this ſecond lake we are truely aduertiſed by the people of Arzich
                           •
                        
                      the which bordure vppon Congo, who traffiking in that country reporte, that in that lake there are people that do ſaile in great ſhippes, that can write, vſing weights and meaſures, which they haue not in the bordures of Congo, which alſo build their houſes of ſtone and chalke as it groweth in the earth, much like the people of Portingale, whereby it may be ſaide, that Preſtor Iohns land is not farre from thence. Out of this ſecond lake aforeſaide, the riuer Nylus runneth to the Iſland of Meroe, being diſtant from the lake 240. Dutch miles (whereunto other Riuers haue their courſe, as the riuer of Colues, &c. lying on the bordures of Melinde,) and comming to the ſaide Iſland of Meroe, it diuideth it ſelfe in two partes, compaſſing about a high land called Meroe: on the right ſide of Meroe towardes the eaſt runneth an other riuer called Abagni, ſpringing out of the lake Bracina, which riuer runneth through Preſtor Iohns land to the ſaide Iſland: and on the other ſide towardes the weſt runneth other riuers, among the which is Saraboe. This riuer entring into Nilus, and running about the Iſland of Meroe, runne together in a broder ſtreame through Ethiopia, which is called Ethiopia, lying aboue Egypt, and reacheth to the deſcending thereof, where the riuer Nylus, meeteth againe with both the ſtreames, together, in a high valley, and ſo with a great fall runs to the Iſland of Siene, with ſo horrible a noyſe, that the people thereabouts by that means are moſt part deafe, and thence running through Egypt, it watereth al the countrey, and maketh it fruitfull, and from thence runneth into the Mediterranean ſea, right ouer againſt Cipres, and that with two notable ſtreames, beſides others, whereof one at

                     Roſſetto a dayes iourny from Alexandria runneth into the ſea, the other at Peluſio, now called Damiata: ſo that hereby I conclude, that the riuer Nylus in Egypt, the riuer Zaire in Congo, and the riuer Nigri in E
                           ••
                        iopia▪
                      are the cauſes of the fruitfulneſſe of thoſe countries: al at one time increaſing and ouerflowing, by meanes of the exceeding great raines, that for the ſpace of fiue moneths do continually fall in the countrie of Congo, and the places borduring on the ſame. Touching the coaſt of Aden, the coaſt of Arabia Felix, and the country running along by the gulfe of Perſia, vntil you come to Goa, it is ſufficiently already declared in this booke, whereunto I refer you.
                  
                     The deſcription of America, and the ſeuerall partes thereof,
                     
                        as, Noua Francia, Florida, the Iſlandes called Antillas, Iucaya, Cuba, Iamaica, &c. with the ſituations, degrees, and length, how farre they are diſtant one from the other: likewiſe the fruitfulnes and ab
                              •
                           undance of beaſts, birdes, fiſhes, and fruits of the ſame countreyes, with the manners faſhions, apparrels, and religions, together with the principall actions of the people inhabiting therein.
                     
                     
                        When the authour of this booke, as alſo the Printer, had beſtowed and vſed great labor and charges herein, to ſet forth ſome perfect Cardes of America, becauſe that often times the Indian ſhippes in their ſailing out, or returning home, do fall vpon thoſe coaſts, ſpecially Braſilia, which herein is moſt diſcouered, they thought it expedient therewith to place a briefe diſcription of the ſame countries, thereby to ſhew the readers the principall places therein, whereunto at this day moſt ſhips do traffike, hoping they wil take it in good part.
                     
                     
                        THe fourth parte of the world, which at this day we cal America, or weſt India, was becauſe of the great diſtance vnknowne to the ancient Coſmographers til the yeare of our Lord 1492. that Chriſtopherus Columbus a Geneuois diſcouered the ſame, and fiue yeeres after that one Americus Veſpacio, by the King of Caſtilliaes commandement, ſailed thither, and called al the countrey America after his owne name, and for the greatnes therof, is alſo called, the new world, reaching as Poſtillus is of opinion, from the one pole to the other, beeing diuided by the ſtraigths of Magellana, where it endeth vnder 52. degrees on the ſouth ſide of the Equinoctial line. This countrie by diuers men is diuerſly parted, ſome making it a parte of the whole worlde, and cal it the fourth part by the name of America: others make out of that countrey in generall, two other parts of the world, diuiding the world in ſixe parts, as Aſia, Affrica, Europe, Mexicana, or the new Spaine, Peruana, and Magellanica, as the ſixt part which as yet is but litle diſcouered: others diuide it into three parts, in Peru, newe Spain, others Mexico, & new France. They that firſt found it, accounted it but for one part, after that, the Spaniardes diſcouering more land, diuided it into two parts, into Mexico, (or new Spaine) and Peru: after that the Frenchmen diſcouering more countreyes, called that which they diſcouered Noua Frauncia, which in time beeing by the Spanniardes, woonne from the Frenchmen, was accounted for a péece of newe Spaine: at the laſt the ſtraights of Magellana being founde out, was by Petrus Plantius, a miniſter of the worde of God, added as a ſixt parte, but becauſe our Card extendeth no further then to certaine limits of Noua Frauncia, namely to the prouince or countrey of Florida, we wil not ſpeake much of the reſt, and proceede with the other partes, with certaine Ilandes in our Carde, called Antillas or foure landes, becauſe they lie before the firme lande, defending and couering the ſame, as a henne with her wings couereth her chickens.
                     The land then which ſtretcheth towards

                        
                        
the pole Arcticum, or northward is called new Fraunce, for that in Anno 1524.
                        
                           
                              •
                           524. 
                        Iohannes Verrazanus of Florence, being ſent by the King and Queene mother of France into the new world, did almoſt diſcouer al that coaſt, beginning from Propicus Cancri, about 24. degrees, til he came to 50. degrees, and ſomewhat further into the north, where he erected the French ſtandard, ſo that from thenceforth that countrey was called by the name of Noua Frauncia, and Villagagno Frauncia Antarctica. The breadth of this countrey is from 24. degrees to 54. degrees towardes the North. The length from 280. to 330. miles, whereof the Eaſt part by the writers in theſe dayes, is called Norumbega, reaching to the gulfe Gamus, where it is ſeperated from Canada. About this land, which is not leſſe in compaſſe then Europa, or whole Chriſtendome, lie diuers Iſlands, & among the reſt Terra di Laborador, ſtretching towards Groenland, whether diuers ſhips, both Spaniards, French, and Engliſh, do often times reſort, ſeeking ſome paſſage through the ſame to enter into the Eaſt Indies, but al in vaine, for the moſt part conſuming and deſtroying themſelues therein, & found much ice and ſnow. The people of this Iſland are wel proportioned of bodie and limbes, wel made, and fitte to labour: they paint their bodyes, thereby to ſeeme faire, and weare ſiluer and Copper rings in their eares, their apparrel is ſpeckled furres and marternes, and ſuch like, in winter they weare the furs inward, and in ſummer outward, like the Lapelanders and Vinnen: they gird themſelues with cottē girdles or with fiſh ſkins, and ſuch like things: their cheefe foode is fiſh, ſpecially Salmon, although they haue both birdes and fruit inough: their houſes are made of w
                           •
                        od, whereof they haue great quantities, and couered with the ſkinnes of beaſtes or fiſhes. In this land are griffons, white beares, and birdes. There is a countrey vnder 44. degrees and a halfe, called Baccalao, taking the name of ſome kind of fiſhes, which thereabouts are ſo aboundant, that they let the ſhippes from ſailing. This countrey of Baccalaos reacheth nine hundred miles, that is, from the Cape de Baccala
                              ••
                           
                         to F
                              •
                           orida, which is accounted in this ſort, from the point of Baccalao to the bay of the riuer, are 70. miles, frō the bay of the Riuer, to the bay de los Iſlos, 70. miles, from thence to Rio Fundo 70. miles, from thence to Cabo Baxo 160. miles, and again to the riuer of Saint Anthony. 100. miles, from thence to the furtheſt Cape 180. miles, and againe to the Cape of ſaint Elena, 110. miles, and from Saint Elena to the poynt of Canauerall, or the Reedlyooke 100. miles, then to Florida 40. miles, which is in all nine hundred miles, which is the greatnes of this land, whereof the leaſt latitude from the Equinoctial line is 48. degrees and a halfe: this country both on the ſea coaſt and otherwiſe, is verie populous, and like the low countries, becauſe it lyeth in a corner. This Land hath many Iſlandes lying about it, as Curia, Regia, Baya Bica Stella, the Cape of Hope, and the Brittons Cape. Before you come to Florida, the prouince Cichora, lyeth by the Riuer Iordan, and another hard by it, called Guada Lupa. The weſt ſide of Noua Frauncia hath diuers prouinces now diſcouered, as Quiui a, 
                              •
                           euola, Aſtaclan, Tethchichimichi. The ſouth ſide of Florida is called by the Spaniards Floridum Paſcha, becauſe Iohannes Pontio Legionenſi founde it out on Eaſter day, in Anno 1512. and not becauſe of the greenneſſe and budding of the trees in the ſame land, as Theue
                              •
                           
                         writeth. The north ſide of noua Frauncia is as yet not diſcouered, and becauſe our Carde diſcouereth no further then to Florida, we wil begin therwith, and deſcribe ſome part of the ſituation thereof, becauſe it is worthie memorie, as beeing a place wherein many Spaniards & Frenchmen haue loſt their liues, as alſo becauſe it is the firſt, & beſt knowne of al new France, whereunto the Frenchmen haue vſed to ſaile, and therein in the time of Charles the ninth, had a certaine fort, which was called by his name, Charles burg
                              •
                           , but was after taken by the Spaniards, and al the Frenchmen ſlaine, contrary to their fayth and promiſe, ſpecially ſuch as yeelded themſelues into their hands. But becauſe my meaning is not to recite hiſtories, I remit the reader to the bookes which make mention thereof. Florida hath a Cape lying far into the ſea ſtretching Southward, in maner of a tong reaching an hundred miles, the meaſure being taken from the loweſt northerne corner, to the ſouth poynt. This Cape or hooke as I ſayde, is long and narrow, like Italy: in length an hundred miles, and in breadth twentie or fiftie miles, where it is broadeſt. On the Eaſt ſide it hath the Iſlands of C
                              •
                           
                           ehora Banama, and Lucaya, on the weſt ſide towardes Spaine and the gulfe of Mexico, it is diuided from new Spaine, by the land of Anauaca. On the north ſide it bordureth on the firme land, it lieth right againſt the point towards the ſouth: 25. miles into the ſea, lieth the famous Iſland Cuba, otherwiſe called Iſabell
                              •
                           : the ſea that runneth between this poynt of Florida and Iuc
                              •
                           tan,
                        
is called Mare Catayum, by other, the gulfe of Ferdinando Cortoſi, or the gulfe of Florida, or of Mexico. It is a flat lande, wherein are many riuers, which moyſture the land, and make it fertile, the ſea ſide being ſandie, whereon there groweth diuers pine trees, without nuts or ſhels, alſo many acornes, wild cherries, mulberies, cheſnuts, but ranker of taſte then oures in theſe countreyes, many Maſtike, Cedars, Cipres, Bayes, & Palme trees, Nuls, and wild vines, which grow vppon the trees that are next them, bringing forth grapes that are good to be eaten, alſo a certain fruit of Medlars, greater and better then ours, there are alſo plums verie faire to behold, but not good of taſte: there are alſo Framboiſen or Hinnebeſien, and ſome verie ſmall round berries, of a pleaſant taſte, not much vnlike our Clappe beries: there groweth rootes which in their ſpeech they cal Hatle, whereof in time of dearth they make bread. Fourefooted beaſts are there likewiſe in great aboundance, as Harts, Hinds, rain Deare, Goats, Beares, Leopards, Fores, & many kind of Wolues, wild Dogs, Hares, Conies &c. Their birds are Peacocks, Partriges, Parrats, Pigeons, ring Doues, Turtledoues, Meerelens, Crowes, Hauks, Falcōs, Marlens, hearns, Cranes, Storkes, wild Geeſe, Ducks, water Rauens, white, red, & blacke, and aſh coloured, Reighures and many other water foules, & Crocadiles in ſo great aboundance, that it is incredible, which oftē times do eat and deuoure men ſwimming in the water: there are likewiſe many kindes of ſnakes, and a certain kind of beaſt not much vnlike the lion in Affrica.
                     
                     Golde and ſiluer wherewith they traffike, they haue it (as they ſay) out of the ſhips which fal on ground vpon the Cape, which is not vnlikely, becauſe moſt of the ſhips are caſt away vpon that Cape ſo that there is more money thereabout, then in the north parts. They ſaid likewiſe that in the hils Apalatcyaeris, there is gold to bee found: in this countrie alſo groweth the roote China, which by meanes of the Emperour Charles, hath gotten a great report, and is much vſed by phiſitions, which ſome alſo vſe to heale the French pocks. Beſides al theſe things aforeſaid, there are diuers ſortes of ſeedes and hearbes, whereof many kindes of collours are made, very profitable for painters: the inhabitants knowe well how to vſe them, therewith to die al kindes of leather. The people are in a manner a black yellow, and euil fauoured, yet ſtrong, of good proportion of bodie. They couer their members with verie faire dreſt hart ſkins: moſt part of them paint their bodies, and alſo their armes and thighes, with many figures, which colour wil not off, vnleſſe it bee waſhed, it is ſo printed and ſunke into the fleſh: they haue black haire downe to theyr hippes, being long, which they verie cunningly bind vp: in their dealings they are wholly light, and not to bee credited, but verie bolde and valiant in armes, and in the warres, wherein they vſe bowes and arrowes, whereof the ſhafts are made of hartes, goates, or ſkinnes finely painted, and ſo cunningly wrought, that in theſe countries they cannot be mended, and in ſteede of heades, they take fiſhes teeth, or ſharp peeces of wood: they exerciſe their boyes in leaping, ſhooting in bowes, and playing with balles: they haue great delight in hunting and fiſhing: their kings holde continuall warres, not ſparing any of theyr enemies, if they ouercome them, but preſently cutte off theyr heades to bee no more troubled with them: which comming home, they ſet vp in certaine places for a triumph and victory. Women and children they will not hurt, but keepe and nouriſh them among them: and returning from theyr warres, they call all theyr ſubiects together, where for the ſpace of three dayes, they doo nothing but banket and make good cheere, with ſinging and dauncing.
                     To the olde women that are among them, they giue the ſkinne and the haire of the heades of their enemies that are cutte off, compelling them to daunce, and ſing ſongs in prayſe and thankſgiuing to the Sunne, as hauing by his meanes obtained victorie. They haue no Religion, nor any knowledge of the true and liuing God, but in ſteede of him, (as other Americans) they honour the Sunne and the Moone. They feare theyr Prieſtes, and put great credite in them, becauſe they are great coniurers, ſouthſayers, and inuocaters of Diuelles, which by moſt feareful meanes they cauſe to appeare.
                     Their prieſtes are likewiſe theyr phiſitions and ſurgeons, for the which cauſe they vſe continually to beare a ſacke full of hearbes and ſalues to heale theyr ſicke people with, for the moſt parte haue the pocks, as beeing verie hot of nature, and much addicted to lecherie, whereby often times they vſe women, maydes, children and Boyes. Euerie man hath but one wife, onely the king, to whome it is permitted to haue twoo or three, but with this condition, that the firſt hee marrieth ſhall bee honoured before

the reſt, and onely holden for Quéene, and her children to inherite his goods, and to be heires of the crowne. The women doo al the worke about their houſes, and when they are once with child, their huſbands neuer deale with them vntill they be deliuered, and eate no meate of their dreſſing, at ſuch time as they haue their flowers. Beſides this, al the countrey is ful of Flermophroditers, which of nature are both man and woman, thoſe are kept to labour, and to carrie their munition and weapons when they go to warres: they paint their faces, and put certaine birds feathers into their haires, thereby to ſeeme the fairer and more fearful. Their prouiſion of virtuals is bread and Meele of wheate and hony: they roſt their Meele of Maiz, becauſe it may continue the longer, & cauſe ſome broiled fiſh dried to be carried with thē. In time of dearth they eate many bad things, putting ſande and coales among their meale. When they go to warres the king goeth firſt, hauing in one hand a ſtaffe, in the other a bow, with arrowes in a caſe hanging on his ſhoulder: the reſt follow him with bowes and arrowes, either in caſes or elſe ſtucke in their haire: at their meeting with the enemie, and alſo in fight, they vſe great and fearefull cries, like other Barbarians, Turkes, and Tartarians. They neuer beginne war before they haue taken counſell together, meeting about it in the morning: in which their aſſemblies they vſe a very ſtrange cuſtome, which is to be noted, for that being aſſembled, they lette themſelues downe on both ſides of the king, in maner of a half Moone, the king ſitting alone in the middle of them vppon a ſtoore made of nine peeces of round wood, higher then the reſt, that hee may bee knowne, which done, they come and do him honour, ſaluting him, the oldeſt beginning firſt, and lifting their handes aboue theyr heades, ſpeake and ſay, Ha, He. Ya, Ha, Ha: the reſt anſwering Ha. Ha which done, each man ſitteth downe. And if there be any matter of great importance to bee handled, the king cauſeth the prieſts (by them called lauas and the auncients to be ſent for, aſking their aduice, meane time he cauſeth certain women to ſeethe Cacinam, which is a certain drink preſt out of leaues, which being ſodden and clarified, the king being ſet with his Lords & others, each man in his place, there commeth one in preſence of them all, and lifting vp his hands, and bleſſing, and wiſhing them al good lucke, filleth a cuppe of mother of pearle, ful of that hot drinke, which he firſt preſenteth to the king, which hauing drunke, he willeth him giue it to the reſt. This drinke they make great a
                           •
                        c
                           •
                        at of, and giue it not to any man that ſitteth in councell, before he hath ſhewed ſome valiant act in the fielde againſt the enemie: which drinke is of ſuch force, that preſently after they haue drunke it, 
                           〈◊〉
                         maketh them ſweate, and ſuch as drinke it 
                           〈◊〉
                         it vp againe, are not imployed in an great affaires, nor may not ſerue as Captaine or other officer in the fielde, as being vnfit for ſuch a place, for that when they are in the field they muſt of force often times faſt two or three dayes together, to the which ende this drinke is verie good, for that whoſoeuer drinketh it, may wel faſt foure and twentie houres after, and neither eate nor drinke: wherefore when they go to warre, they cauſe the Hern o
                              •
                            hrediter to carry diuers bottles of that drinke with them, which ſuſtaineth, feedeth, and ſtrengthneth the body, not once making their heades
                           •
                        le nor light. They ſow their wheate twice euerie yeare, that is, in the moneths of March and Iune, & all vpon our land, in three moneths being ripe and readie to reape. The other ſixe moneths they let the earth he vntitled: they haue very great Pumptans, melons, & very good beanes: they neuer dung their ground, but burne off the Stubble, which in the ſixe monethes conſumeth, and with thoſe aſhes fatten the ground, as they do us ſome places of Italy, they plow and dig vp their ground with a woodden ſpit or ſhouel, and throw two or three graines of wheate into one hole, as wee vſe to ſet beanes or peaſe: when their corne is to be ſowed, the king ſendeth one of his ſeruants to aſſemble the people, that they may plow and dig the earth, and then cauſeth much of the aforeſaide drinke to be made, to giue it to the labourers. The wheate being reaped, they carrie it into a common barne, or place made for the purpoſe, whereof euerie man according to his deſert hath a parte. They ſow no more then neceſſarily wil ſerue, keeping the reſt to ſerue thē for the ſix months wherein they ſow not, and for longer time they prouide not: alſo euerie yeare in winter time they withdraw themſelues into the woods for three or foure moneths together, continuing there in certaine places made of Palme tree branches, meane time feeding vpon Acornes, fleſh of Darts, fiſh, and oyſters, peacocks, and other foules. All their meate is broyled vpon coales, making it ſomewhat hard, by reaſon of the ſmoke and extreame heate: among other meate, they are verie deſirous of Crocodiles fleſh, which ſheweth very white and faire like veale, but taſteth like rotten Moſchus:
                        
if any man be ſicke, in ſtéed of letting bloud, their prieſts do ſuck the place where their paine lyeth, vntil the bloud doth iſſue forth.
                     The women in Florida are great and verie wiſe, and coloured like men, and pinked on their bodies, legges, and armes, putting ſuch colour into the places, that will not eaſily come forth: but the women kind when they come firſt into the world, are not ſo blacke, but verie white: the blacke yellowiſh colour is made vpon them by a certaine oyntment, as the Tartarians and other heathens vſe to do, which oyntment they vſe to make of a certaine ceremoniall oyle by them vſed. Their colour likewiſe changeth becauſe they go naked, and with the burning heate of the ſunne. The women likewiſe are verie quicke and ſubtile, like the women of Egypt, and can ſwim ouer great riuers, holding their children faſt vnder one of their armes, and will likewiſe climbe vppe the higheſt trees that are in all thoſe countries.
                     The chiefe prouinces in Florida, which the Spaniards, both in the beginning, and ſince at other times haue founde out, are theſe: firſt Panuca, lying on the borders of Noua Spaigna, diſcouered by Franco de Gray, in An. 1518.
                        1518. who left many ſpaniards bohind him, being ſlaine, eaten and deuoured by the wild people, whoſe ſkinnes being dryed, they hung for a memorie and euerlaſting triumph in their Iools Temples. Thoſe people are verie vnchaſte, and helde open ſtewes, where by night they meete and lie together. They bore holes in their noſes, and alſo in their eares, to hang rings at thē: they ſcrape their teeth to make them cleane, and marrie not before they be fortie yeares of age, although their daughters are deflowred at the age of ten or twelue yeeres. There are in Florida other prouinces, as Anauares, Albardaoſia, Iaguaſia, Apalachia, Autia, Samouia, and diuers others, al obſeruing one kinde of religion & cuſtomes, wholly without any feare of God, pollicie, manlineſſe, or reaſon. The beſt and fruitfulleſt part of Florida bordereth on Noua Spaigna, to the riuer and prouince of Panuca, which riuer runneth with ſo great a ſtreame into the ſea, that it is a verie good hauen for ſhips.
                     
                        Here followeth the deſcription of the coaſt of Florida, foraſmuch as is contained in the Carde hereunto annexed.
                        THe length of the furtheſt poynt of Terra di Laborador, vnto the Cape of Saint Elena, lying in Florida, is before declared, nowe ſhall follow that which is furder ſette downe in the Carde, beginning from Saint Elena, which lyeth vnder 32. degrees: This is a verie faire and broade riuer, ſurpaſſing al others whatſoeuer in the north coaſtes: wherefore by the Frenchmen it is called Porto Real or kingly hauen, hauing found it to be tenne ſeadom water: about this riuer there are many woods of Dakes and Ceder trées, wherein are many Harts and other wilde beaſtes, and Peacocks. The mouth of the riuer is three miles broade, and hath two Capes or hookes of land, one ſtretching Weſt, the other North: vppon this riuer the Frenchmen haue built a fort, called Charles fort: ſome ſay this riuer runneth vnto the riuer Iordan, and ſo into the other ſea. Betwéene both theſe hookes of lande, in the mouth of the Riuer, there lieth a fayre Iſland full of trees: from Saint Elena to Rio Secco, is fortie Spaniſh miles, whereof ſeuentéene and a halfe make a degree, and this Riuer lieth vnder 31. degrees: from Rio Secco to Santa Cioce, and from thence to the point of Cannaueral, which lyeth vnder 20. degrées, are forty miles. Here I muſt pauſe a while, & follow the Frenchmens rule, becauſe this countrey was likewiſe diſcouered and alſo deſcribed by them. So then the Frenchmen recon from Saint Elena, ſayling ſouthward along the coaſt foure French miles, where you come to the Riuer Magnus, or Grandis that is the great Riuer: then Guade or as it is in our Carde Guate, and further Bellum or Bellus, from thence to Gironda, then to Garumna, and ſo to Charenta, from Charenta, to Ligetim, or the Loire, ſixe miles, from Loire to Axona in the mouth whereof lyeth an Iſland, in our Carde called Rio di S. Pero, from Axona to Sequana or Seine, becauſe it was like the riuer that runneth throgh Paris vnto Roan, lieth ſixe miles, and all theſe nine riuers lie within the ſpace of ſixtie French miles, leauing the Seine, and ſailing ſouthward by the ſhore, you paſſe certaine ſmall Riuers, as Ay & Serrauahi, then you come to the great Riuer Maius (ſo called by the Frenchmen) that is the Riuer of May, becauſe it was found by one Landometo vpon the firſt day of May, and is diſtant from Sequana or Seine 14. miles: thereabout grew certaine redde and white mulberie trées, vppon the higheſt branches whereof, hung great numbers of ſilke wormes: from this riuer you come to a gulfe that reacheth ſomewhat inward into the land, beeing the place where Landonerius firſt arriued, when hee ſayled out of France into thoſe countreyes, and there hee ſaw in the mouth

of a certaine riuer, many ſea Swine or Dolphins, wherevpon he called the ſame Riuer by the name of thoſe Dolphins: on the South ſide of the gulfe lyeth the French Cape, about thirtie degrees from the line, ſo called becauſe the Frenchmen did firſt land there. This Cape is not high, but a flatte ſtrand, al ful of high trees and thick woods. From the French Cape you come to Cannaueral, another Cape, fiue & thirtie miles diſtant, taking the name form the reeds that grow thereon. The Spaniards and alſo our Carde doo not ſet downe many of theſe Riuers, and the greateſt parte of them that are deſcribed, are altered in their names, for the Riuer of May by them is called Maranca, the Seine Saint Auguſtin, the Ga
                                 ••
                              mna S. Matheo, & the great riuer S. Pero. From Cannauer
                                 •
                              l to the cape of Florida are fortie miles, and betweene theſe two Capes lie many flats. The cape of Florida lyeth vnder fiue and twentie degrees, and before it lie many cliffes, which they name Martires or Ma
                                 •
                              ti
                                 •
                              s, and on the other ſides litle Iſlands, called Teſtudines, that is Torteaux, becauſe they are in forme like thoſe kindes of beaſts. The Cape of Florida is in breadth twentie miles, and from thence to Ancon B
                                 •
                              xo are 100. miles, and lieth fifty miles eaſt and weſt from Rio Secco, which is the breadth of Florida.
                        
                     
                     
                        The deſcription of ſome Iſlands that lie ouer againſt the coaſt of Florida.
                        
                        FIrſt you moſt note that the whole coaſt of Florida is ful of Iſlands, cliffes, banks, flattes, and ſuch like dangerous places, and as touching the Iſlandes, they are at the leaſt foure hundreth in number, beſides the great Iſland called Luca
                                 •
                              ae, that giueth the name to al the reſt, and Bahama, which lie al north from C
                                 •
                              ba, and ſaint Do
                                 •
                              inic
                                 •
                              . The common opinion is, that theſe Iſlandes were all one land, and ioyned to the great Iſland, and by the force of the ſea ſeperated one from the other, as it is thought of I
                                 •
                              aly and Cici
                                 •
                              ia. They lie vnder ſeuenteene and eighteene degrees: the people of thoſe Iſlands are whiter, and better proportioned then thoſe of Cuba, and Spaignuola ſpecially the women that are verie faire, for the which cauſe many of the firme land went thither to dwel, as from Florida, Cachora, and Iucatan, becauſe there they founde more pleaſure among the people, then in other Iſlands, and great difference in their ſpeech, whereupon hath riſen the common opinion, that in thoſe Iſlands the Amazons did dwell (beeing women that burnt their right breaſts, the better to ſhoote in bowes, when they went to fight againſt their enemies) and that there was a fountaine that made olde women yong. The men go naked, onely when they go to wars, and when they keepe any feaſtes, or vſe to dance, then they put on a certaine cotten garment, and other garments of diuers coloured feathers, finely wrought, with a great plume of feathers on their heades. Touching the women, they haue verie ſtrange cuſtomes, for the married women, or ſuch as haue had the company of a man: they couer their priuie members from the Nauel downe to the knees, with certaine mantils of cotten, made in manner of nets, wherein they ſticke certaine leaues, otherwiſe they go naked, vntil ſuch time as they firſt perceiue their flowers, and then they inuite al their friendes, and make a great feaſt or banket, as if they were married, with great ſignes of ioy, and then they beginne to hang that kinde of mantle before them, wearing the ſame as long as they are vnmarried. They are in great ſubiection to their maiſters, in ſuch maner, as that if they ſhould command them to throw themſelues headlong from off a hil, or to do any other thing whatſoeuer, they wil not refuſe to do it, what danger ſoeuer conſiſteth therin, not once aſking wherefore they ſhould doo it, but only, becauſe the maſter commandeth it. Here alſo you muſt note wherein their kings gouernment conſiſteth, which reacheth no further then only concerning ſowing or planting the ground, hunting, & fiſhing, for that whatſoeuer is ſowed or planted, hunted, or fiſhed in any reſpect, is onelie in the kings power, and done by his commandement, which diuideth thoſe kindes of labours among the people, directing euerie man what he ſhould do. The fruit that is reaped and gathered, is brought all into a place appointed, and from thence it is yearely deliuered vnto euerie man according as his houſhold and neceſſarie vſe requireth, ſo that their Lords are nothing elſe but kings of Bees, ſtuards, & diſtributers of the common goods of the countrey: thinke then (I beſeech you,) what a golden time thoſe people had, where neither this is mine, or this is thine, was euer heard among them. The only wel ſpring of ſtrife & contentiō. Thoſe in the eaſt parts vſing nothing els but playing at the ball, fiſhing, and hunting, where neither law nor proceſſe was vſed nor decided, where onely the kings will was a lawe, and in all things were content to obey it. They found certaine red ſtones in

ſhels of fiſhes much eſteemed and accounted of among thē, which they weare at their cares, and others more eſteemed, of which they took out of ſnakes Herſenen or ſnailes, (whereof the fleſh is very good to eate) of a fire red colour, cleare, and ſo like rubies, that they could hardly be diſcerned from them, whereof the Snakes in their ſpeech are called Coho
                                 •
                              o, and the ſtones Cohibici. They gather likewiſe in the ſande vppon the ſea ſide, certaine cleare ſhining ſtones, yellow, blacke, and other colours, whereof they make necklaces and ſuch like Iewels, to weare about their necks, armes, and legs: in many places of thoſe Iſlands they haue no fleſh, nor eate it not, their meate is fiſh, breda of wheate, rootes, and ſome fruites. The people of theſe Iſlands being carried to ſaint Dominico or Cuba, died there with eating fleſh, it beeing giuen them by the Spaniards. In ſome of thoſe Iſlands there are ſo many pigeons & other birues, which build their neſtes in the Trees, that many out of the firme land, and alſo from the other Iſlands, come thither and load whole ſcutes ful, and take them with them: the trees wherein they breed are like Youngarnet trees, the barke hauing a certaine taſte like Cinamon, and ſomwhat better, and hot like ginger, ſmelling like cloues, yet are they not accounted for ſpices: among other fruites they haue a certaine kind by them called Ia
                                 ••
                              ma, both ſauorie and holſome, about a ſpan and a halfe long, like a fig when it is greene: the leafe likewiſe not much differing from the fig leafe, and of the bigneſſe of a willow tree: not cloſe like other trees, nor hollow like reedes, but faſt like Elders, the leaues beeing excellent good to heale wounds, as the Spaniards haue wel tryed. To ſpeake more hereof is needeleſſe: thoſe Iſlandes of Lucaya are more deſolate and not inhabited, for becauſe they haue no gold. The Spaniards carried many thouſandes of them into other places, and in ſeeking for Golde ſpoyled and deſtroyed them.
                     
                     
                        Hereafter followeth other Iſlands lying about that coaſt, and firſt Cuba, being one of the principal Iſlands vnder the Antillas.
                        
                        
                           CVba another verie great Iſlande, accounted among the Antillas, was by Columbus firſt foundout, and diſcouered in An. 1492.
                           1492. which he called Fernandinam and I
                                 •
                              hannam, as alſo Alpha and Omega, as Peter Martin ſaith, and by others the Iſland is called ſaint Iacob, after the name of the cheefeſt towne therein, which by reaſon of the great hauen as alſo the ſituation therof, hath a verie great traffike, as hauing on the Eaſt ſide the Iſlande of Saint Domingo, on the Weſt Iucatan, on the North the great Cape of Florida, and on the South the Iſland Iamaica, all ſet downe in this Carde. It is in forme like vnto a willow leafe, becauſe it is longer thē broad, being in length from eaſt to weſt three hundred miles, and from north to ſouth ſeuenty miles, in breadth in ſome places but fifteene and in ſome nineteene miles. The middle of the Iſland lieth in longitude 19. degrees, and in latitude or height twentie degrees. It was long time accounted for firme land, becauſe of the greatneſſe, which is no maruaile, for the inhabitants themſelues knew no other, but that it had no ende (and alſo long after the Spaniards comming thither) becauſe the people are poore and naked, contented with a little, and with their own, not ſeeking any further, neither caring what their neighbours did, and therefore knew not if there were any other lande vnder the heauens, then that wherein they dwelt. The ground is high, rough, and ſharpe of hils, the ſea in many places being white, and the riuers ſmall, and good water, rich of golde and good copper, the aire temperate, yet ſomewhat colde: therein is found much Mather, ſeruing to die wooll, cloath, and leather: it is alſo ful of thicke woods, fiſhponds, and faire Riuers of freſh water, alſo of ponds that naturally are ſalt water: In the woods are many hogges and oxen, the riuers do oftentimes caſt foorth gold: in this Iſland are ſixe townes inhabited by Spaniards, whereof the firſt & principal is Saint Iacobs, the reſidence and ſea of the Biſhop, but Hauana is the cheefe towne of marchandize, and where all their Shippes are made. Twoo principal and notable things are by Gonſalo Onetano written of this Iſland, the firſt, that therein is a valley ſituate betweene two hils, in length about two or three Spaniſh miles, wherein nature of it ſelfe bringeth foorth certaine round balles, ſuch as by art cannot poſſibly bee made rounder, and in ſo great aboundance, that they may balliſt or loade whole Shippes therewith, and are vſed in the ſhippes in ſteede of Iron or Leaden bulltes. The other is a certaine hil not farre from the ſea, from whence there floweth pitch in great aboundance, and runneth unto the ſea, where it driueth vppon the ſhore from place to place, as the winde and weather ſerueth. This pitch

is vſed by the inhabitants and Spaniards, to pitch their ſhippes. The people of the Iſland are like thoſe of Hiſpaniola, onely differing in ſpeech: both men and women go naked, and kéepe their bridalles in verie ſtrange manner: for that he which is married lieth not the firſt night with his wife, be if it be a Lord, he biddeth all the Lordes, and one of them doth it for him, and if it be a Marchant, then Marchants take the paines to helpe him, but if it be a countreyman, either one of the Lordes or the prieſt doth eaſe him of a labour. They leaue their wiues for verie ſmal occaſions, but the women may not forſake their huſbands for any cauſe whatſoeuer. The men are very vnchaſte, and wicked liuers: there are great wormes and ſnakes in the Iſland, and not venimous, but eaſie to be taken, the fleſh whereof they eate, and are neuer hurt therwith, which ſnakes do liue by eating certaine beaſtes, called Guabiniquinazes, whereof many times there are ſeauen or eight found within their mawes: they are in greatneſſe like Hares, in form like fores, onely that their feete are like Conies feete: the head like a Weſell, a Fores taile, long haire like a Badger, of colour ſomwhat red, the fleſh ſauorie and holſome. This Iſlande was verie populous, but nowe hath verie few, onely certain Spaniards, the reſt beeing almoſt cleane rooted out, and dead for want of meate.
                     
                     
                        Iamaica.
                        RIght againſt Cuba lyeth another Iſland, which ſtil holdeth the name, it alwaies had, and is called Iamaica and of the Spaniards ſaint Iacob, it lieth betwéene ſeuentéene and eightéene degrées, on this ſide the Equinoctiall line, on the Eaſt ſide it hath Saint Dominico, about fiue and twentie miles diſtant, on the Weſt ſide the Cape or corner of Iucatana, on the north Cubam, alſo fiue and twentie miles diſtant and ſomewhat more, and on the South another ſmal Iſland, called Lacerana, of fiue and twentie miles diſtant as the reſt. This Iſlande was diſcouered by Chriſtopherus Columbus, in his ſeconde nauigation into thoſe countreyes, and was taken by his ſon Don Diego, gouerning the Iſland Saint Dominico, by one Iohan de Squibel, a captaine.
                        The breadth of the Iſlande ſurpaſſeth the length, for it is from Eaſt to Weſt about fiftie miles, and from north to ſouth twentie miles, it is moſt inhabited by Spaniards, the inhabitants alſo being burnt and deſtroyed by them, like thoſe of Lucaya. The middle of the Iſland hath the longitude of 191. degrees, and latitude or height eighteene degrees, and is diſtant from the line ſeuenteene degrees, on the north ſide. It hath a hill that raiſeth it on al ſides, inward to the middle of the land, and ſo proportionably and euen, that it can hardly bee deſcerned: it is verie fruitfull both on the ſea ſide, and within the land, and in times paſt verie populous, ſuch as were very wittie and ſubtile, more then other of the Iſlanders thereabouts, both in wars and other labours. There is likewiſe gold, and verie fine cotten wooll, and at this preſent it is ful of beaſts brought thither by the Spaniards, and there haue increaſed. The ſwines fleſh is better in that Iſland, then in any other place. The cheefe towne in this Iſland is called Hiſpalis of Siuilia, becauſe of the abby which therein is erected, the firſt abbot being Peter Marti
                                 •
                              
                            borne in Milan, an excellent learned man, and hee that wrote moſt concerning this Hyſtorie.
                     
                     
                        Hiſpaniola or Haiti.
                        THe ſeconde great Iſlande accounted among the Antillas, was by the firſt inhabitants called Quiſqueia, or Quiſqueſia, and after that Haiti, and then Cipanga: Haiti is as much to ſay, as roughneſſe or ſharpneſſe, and Quiſqueia great land, Chriſtopherus Columbus called it Hiſpaniola, and now it is called Saint Dominico, after the cheefe Towne in the ſame Iſland: it was diſcouered in Anno 1493.
                           1493. on the eaſt ſide thereof lyeth the Iſland of Saint Iohn, and many others, on the Weſt Cuba and Iamaica▪
                            on the north the Iſland of the Canibals, and on the ſouth the firme land, which is the Cape of Vela by Venezuela, or little Venice. The cōpaſſe of this Iſland is 350. miles, Benzo ſaith 400. French miles, which is in a manner al one, and it is broader then long, for in length it is from Eaſt to weſt 150. miles, and from north to ſouth 40. miles, the middle of the Iſland lyeth in the longitude of 300. degrees, in latitude 19: in it there are verie many and great hauens, as Hatibanico, Iuua, Ozoma, Neyua Nizao, Nigua, Hayna, and Iaques, which do, al runne into the ſea. There are others that are ſmaller, as Macorix, Ciba
                                 •
                              , & Cotui, wherof Macorix is verie ful of fiſh, the other two abounding in gold. In this Iſland are two very ſtrange lakes, the one becauſe of the goodnes and profitablenes therof, the

other, by reaſon of the ſtrangeneſſe, the one comming out of the hilles, from whence the Riuer Puizao hath her iſſue: it profiteth no man, onely it giueth a feare, and a little ſinder ſulkes.
                        The other of Xaragua is ſalt, although many ſweete riuers runne into it, and hath many fiſhes, among the which are verie great Tortuxes and Tiburones or Hayen: it is hard by the ſea, and is eleuen miles in compaſſe: the riuer ſides and ſhores were much inhabted, except the Saline a verie faire hauen, and the Riuer Iaques, where there is a great ſalt hil: There groweth in this Iſland great ſtore of very fine blew colour, and much braſill wood, cotten wooll, (but they know not how to make any thing of it) amber, rich mines of gold, and is alſo fiſhed out of lakes and riuers, and likewiſe ſiluer and other mettals, great abundance of ſugar: it is verie fruitful ground, Reddiſh, Lettice, and Coleworts beeing ſowed therein, are within ſixteene dayes after ripe, and to bee eaten: Melons, Cucumbers, and Gourdes, within ſixe and thirtie dayes are alſo ripe and verie ſauory, aboue al others whatſoeuer. The forme of the Iſland is like a cheſnut tree leafe, in the middle of the Iſland there paſſeth a ſtony or rough hil, in forme of a mans backe, which is called Cibam or Cipangi, where in times paſt much gold was founde: out of this hil runneth foure great riuers, diuiding the Iſland into foure partes, wherof the one is in the Eaſt, and is called Iunna: the ſecond in the weſt, called Attibunicus, the third in the north, called Iachem, and the fourth in the South, called Naxban, whereabouts there is much braſile wood, and woods of diuers ſpices, but not like our ſpices, which they barter for other wares, ſpecially for ſtooles and diſhes of blacke ebanny. Vppon the hil of Cibano, lyeth the Caſtle of Saint Thomas. There are likewiſe many townes within this Iſlande, the principall called Saint Dominico, made by Bartholomeo, Columbo▪
                            and by him ſo named, becauſe they arriued in that Iſland vpon ſaint Dominicks day: it lyeth on a plaine ground, vpon the ſea ſide, and hath aboue fiue hundred houſes, built after the ſpaniſh maner, on the Weſt ſide therof runneth the riuer Ozama, or Ozonca, into the ſea, where there is a good hauen, in the which manie ſhippes may anker: about this Riuer lyeth verie great and thicke woodes: the greateſt traffike next their golde is ſugar, and hides, for that al ſorts of foure footed beaſts being brought thither out of Spaine, haue ſo much increaſed therein, that there are ſome ſpaniards in the Iſle, that haue ſixe thouſand or eight thouſand beaſtes.
                        
                           Iſabella and another towne lying on the other ſide of the ſame Iſlande in a valley, concerning the ſituation, the people, their Religion and cuſtomes, you may ſufficiently reade in the ſpaniſh Hiſtories thereof ſet forth, yet will I note ſome that are verie ſtrange: in this Iſland are certain wormes verie common among them, and by the inhabitants called Cuuero, in greatneſſe as bigge as a ioynt of a mans finger, with foure wings, two verie little, the other two ſomewhat greater, and harder, and are as couers to the ſmaller, theſe wormes ſhine by night as the ſloe wormes here with vs, which light doth not onely appeare like a ſtarre, caſting forth ſtreames and ſhining out of their eies, but alſo in the whole body, ſo that when they flie and ſpreade their wings, they giue much more light out of their bodyes, then when they ſitte ſtill: in which wormes men may well beholde the great workes and bleſſings of God, by his ſtrange gifts beſtowed vpon his creatures: for by the light of this little worme, the darkeſt chamber that is in the night time, may be made cleare and bright, whereby a man may reade, write, or do any thing, not néeding any other light: and likewiſe if a man beare that worme in his hand, he ſhall haue as great a light as if he bore a torch or lanterne, and many light others therewith, and the more wormes there are, the greater will be the light.
                        Not farre from Hyſpaniola lyeth another ſmall Iſlande, called Mona, betweene Hiſpaniola and Boriquena, or Saint Iohns vnder ſeuenteene degrées on the North ſide of the line. This Iſlande is ſmall and flatte, and euen lande, in bigneſſe about three miles, and inhabited by a fewe Indians, and Chriſtians, it hath verie good water, and is ful of fiſh, ſpecially of verie good creuiſhes.
                     
                     
                        Boriquen.
                        FRom this Iſland you come vnto Boriquen, now named S. Iohn a rich hauen: on the Eaſt ſide it hath the Iſland of Sancta Croce, on the Weſt other ſmall Iſlandes, Northwarde the Iſlande of Saint Dominico, which is fiue and twentie miles diſtant, and on the South, the Cape of Paria, diſtant aboue three hundreth thirtie and ſixe miles. The length of this Iſlande is more then the breadth, for from Eaſt to Weſt it is fiftie miles, from north to South eighteene miles, and

is diuided into twoo partes, that is, the North and the South quarter: the middle of the Iſland lyeth vnder 303. degrees longitude, and 18. degrees latitude: in forme almoſt ſquare, populous and wel houſed, hauing many good hauens and woods. The inhabitants haue continual warres againſt the Canibals, or ſuch as eate mens fleſh. This Iſland was rich of gold on the north ſide, and towardes the ſouth, fruitfull of bread, fruit, graſſe, and fiſh: it is ſaid theſe people vſed not to eate any fleſh, which is to be vnderſtood of wilde fleſh, but they eate many birdes, as Pigeons, and ſuch like: in other things they are like thoſe of Hiſpaniola, onely that they are better ſouldiers, and vſe bowes and arrowes: in this Iſlande there is a certaine gumme, by them called Ta
                                 •
                              unuo, vnholſome and fatty like tallow, wherewith and with oyle they dreſſe their ſhippes, and becauſe it is bitter, it preſerueth the ſhips from wormes. There is likewiſe much por wood, which is vſed to heale the pore and other diſeaſes. This Iſland was diſcouered by Chroſtopherus Co
                                 •
                              umbu
                                 •
                              , in his ſecond voyage into India: There is a verie ſtrange and notable Hiſtorie written of the inhabitants hereof, which is, that at the firſt arriual of the Spaniards in that Iſland, they thought the Spaniards to be immortal and neuer died, whereof to be aſſured, vppon a time, one of their Cariquen or Lords, called Vraioa de Yaguara, cauſed one of the Spaniards to be taken, and to prooue if he were immortal, cauſed him to be put into a Riuer vnder the water, and there holden, to ſee if hee would come foorth aliue, but being dead, and brought before the king, he was thereby aſſured of their mortalitie, whereupon he roſe againſt them, and ſlew 150. of them, that were buſie in ſeeking of gold.
                     
                     
                        Saint Crus, Hay, Hay
                        FRom Borequien you come to the Iſland S. C
                                 •
                              us, in time paſt by the inhabitants called Hay, Hay, being inhabited by Canibals, or eaters of men, as alſo the next vnto it, called Guadalupea, by them called Qui
                                 •
                              
                              ra, or Quera, which Caribes or Canibales had in ſhort time deuoured at the leaſt 5000. men, which they ſtole and tooke out of the Iſlandes rounde about them: from thence you come to diuers other Iſlandes, which lie like an Archipelago, hauing the ſame name, but many of them are likewiſe called after the forme or faſhion that they beare, as Anguilla, which is an eele, as being long and ſmal▪ 
                           Redonda Maria becauſe it is like a ſpheare, & verie round Mon
                                 •
                              
                              ratu
                                 •
                              , that is, a cloſed hil, becauſe the Iſland hath high hils round about it, ful of people and victuals, ſome of ſaints, as S. Mi
                                 〈…〉
                              , S. Bartholmew, S. Barbara, Beata 
                                 •
                              i
                                 •
                              g
                                 •
                               Antigua, till you come to the olde Virgin Maryes, which lie together in a rowe, verie pleaſant to beholde, ſome greene, others red▪ blew, yellow, and violet, moſt wonderful to ſuch as ſaile by them, wherof many colours are made.
                     
                     
                        Guadalupea.
                        BY Antigua lieth Guadal
                                 •
                              pe
                                 •
                              
                              ▪
                            the cheefe and greateſt Iſlande of Canibals foure degrees diſtant from the Equinoctiall line▪ it is round aboue 130. miles, and diuided by two ſtreames, like Engl
                                 •
                              n
                                 •
                              
                            and 
                              〈…〉
                            ſo that it ſeemeth almoſt to be two Iſlands it hath many goodly hauens the na
                              ••
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           ; giuen it of our Lady of Guadalupe it is 
                              •
                           ul of villages, each of twentie or thirtie houſes, all wood, and rounde, made of certaine great okes which they thruſt into the earth, and thoſe ſerue for the doores of their houſes, then they place ſmaller, which hold the reſt from falling. Their branches on the toppe being bound together like tents, which they couer with Palme tree leaues, to keep them from the raine, within they faſten ropes made of cotten wool, or of B
                                 •
                              eſen▪
                            wherupon they lay cotten mattreſſes, and hanging beddes therein to ſleepe. This Iſland hath ſeuen faire riuers, the inhabitants were called Ca
                                 •
                              uc
                                 •
                              erum, it hath verie great Parrots, much differing from others, being red both before and behind, with long feathers the wings ſpeckled with red, ſome yellow, ſome blew, al mixed together whereof there are as great abundance, as of Spree
                                 〈…〉
                              er in our countryes: there groweth in this Iſland a certaine gumme called A
                                 〈…〉
                              m: not much vnlike Amber: the ſmoke or aire of this gumme being let vp into the head, driueth out the colde: the tree bringeth foorth a fruit like dates, but of a ſpanne and a halfe long, which beeing opened, hath a certaine white and ſweete meale. This fruit they keepe for winter, as we do cheſnuts, the trees are like figge trees: they haue likewiſe in this Iſland al kind of orchard fruit, and ſome are of opinion that al kindes of ſweete fruites were firſt brought out of this Iſlande into the other Iſlandes round about it, for they are hunters of men, which hauing taken, they eate them, and for the ſame cauſe they trauaile abroade many hundreth miles, both farre and neare, and in their trauell whatſoeuer they finde, they bring it home and plant it. They are not friendly, but

fierce and cruell. They indure no ſtrangers among them, both the men and the women are verie ſubtile, and expert in ſhooting with their bowes, and their arrowes being poyſoned: when the men are gone abroad, the women keepe their places and countreyes, moſt ſtoutly defending them from al inuaſion: to conclude, al parts of that Iſlande both hils and dales, are verie fruitfull, and in the hollow trees and clifts of hilles, and rocks, they find home.
                     
                     
                        Deſiada, or Deſiderata
                              •
                           
                        
                        ABout eighteene miles from Guadalupa towards the Eaſt, lieth Deſiada, another Iſland, being twentie miles great. Deſiada▪
                            or Deſiderata, that is deſire, ſo called by reaſon of the faireneſſe of the Iſland: ten miles from Guadalupa towards the ſouth, lyeth Galanta, being in compaſſe aboue thirtie miles, it is an euen and faire country, wherof the Iſland hath taken the name, for Galanta in Spaniſh betokeneth faire. Therein are diuers ſweete ſmelling trees, both in barks, rootes, & leaues. There are likewiſe many great Horſleaches. Nine miles from Guadalupa towards the Eaſt, there lieth ſix ſmal Ilands, called Todos los Sanctos▪
                            or al Saints, and Barbara ſpokē of before. Thoſe Iſlandes are verie full of cliffes, ſtonie, and vnfruitful, which the Pilots are to looke vnto to auoyde the danger that may enſue. A little further, lyeth Dominica, taking the name from the day, becauſe it was diſcouered vpon a ſunday, and alſo an Iſlande of Caniballes, ſo ful and thicke of Trees, that there is ſcant an elle of free land. Thereabouts alſo is another Iſland called Madannina, or the womens Iſlande, where it is thought that women onely inhabited in maner of Amazons, whither the Canibales often times reſorted to lie with them, and if they had daughters, they kept them, but boyes, they ſent vnto their fathers: it lyeth fortie miles from Mons Serratu
                           ▪ After that lyeth yet thrée Iſlands, (beſides other little Iſlands and diuers cliffes) called S. Vincent, Granada, and S. Lucia. Comming further towards the coaſt of Florida, where we left▪ right againſt it there lyeth certaine ſmal cliffes, called Martires, and the little Ilands called Tortugas, becauſe they are like a Torteauxes. From this poynt of Florida to Ancon Baxo are 100. miles, and lyeth fiftie miles diſtant Eaſt and Weſt from Rio Secco, which is the breadth of Florida, from Ancon Baxo 100. miles to Rio di Nieues, from thence to the riuer Flores 20. miles and ſomewhat more, from the riuer of Flores to the bay called Bahya del Spirito Sancto, which is likewiſe called La Culata, being in the entrance thereof thirtie miles broade: from this Bahya which lyeth vnder 29. degrées, are 70. miles to the riuer called Rio del Peſcadores, from Rio del Peſcadores (which lyeth vnder 28. degrees and halfe, there is 100. miles to the Riuer called Rio de las Palmas, from whence Tropicus Cancri beginnneth: from Rio de las Palmas to the Riuer Panuco are 30. miles, and from thence to Villa Rica, or Vera Crus, are ſeuentie miles, in which ſpace lyeth Almeria: from Vera Crus, that lyeth vnder 19. degrees▪ to the riuer of Aluarado, (by the Iſland called Papa Doapan, are thirtie miles: from the riuer Aluarado to the riuer Co
                                 •
                              z
                                 •
                              coalco are fiftie miles: from thence to the riuer Grital
                                 •
                              a are fortie miles. The ſaid two riuers lying about eighteene degrées: from the riuer Gritalua, to Cabo Redondo, are eightie miles, as the coaſt ſtretcheth along wherein are contained Champoton and Lazaro: from Cabo Redondo to Cabo di Catoche, or Iucatan are 90. miles, and lyeth about 21. degrées, ſo that there are in al nine hundred miles in the length of the coaſt of Florida to Iucatan, which is another Cape or hooke, which ſtretcheth from off the land northward, and the further it reacheth into the ſea, the more it crooketh or windeth about, and is ſixtie miles from Cuba. The Iſland whereof we haue alreadie ſpoken, which doth almoſt incloſe the ſea that runneth betwéene Florida and Iucatan, which ſea by ſome men is called Golfo de Mexico, of others Golfo de Florida, and of ſome others Cortes: the ſea that runneth into this gulfe, entreth betwéene Iucatan and Cuba with a mightie ſtreame, and runneth out againe betweene Florida and Cuba, and hath no other courſe.
                     
                     
                        A breefe deſcription of Noua Hiſpania, or new Spaine.
                        
                        THe ſecond part of America is called Noua Spaigna▪
                            or new Spaine, it beginneth towards the North, about the Riuer of Panuco, vppon the borders of Florida, on the South ſide it reacheth to the prouince Darien
                                 •
                              , where it is diuided from Peru on the Eaſt it hath the maine Sea, and on the weſt the South ſea called Mare Auſtrale: this whole Prouince was in times paſt by the Inhabitants called Cichemecan Cathuacan, or Co
                                 •
                              acan, which peple came out of the land of Culhua, which lieth aboue Xaliſco, & made their habitation about the Moores

of Tenuchtitlan, where at this preſent lyeth the towne of Mexico, which people hauing neither countrey nor dwelling place, choſe that for the beſt and moſt profitable, therein building diuers houſes and habitations, and in that manner placed both their new and old villages vnder the commaundement of Culhuacan, giuing the ſame name to all that countrey.
                        This land is great and hath many people and countries vnder it, but the principall and chiefe prouince which the Spanyardes holde therein is Mexicana, alſo 
                              
                                 •
                              enuſtiran or Culhuacan, as I ſaide before, the other prouinces are Guatimala, Xaliſcus, Hondura, Cha'cos, Taic
                                 •
                              , Chamo
                                 •
                              la, Claortomaca, Hu
                                 •
                              cacholla, and the kingdomes of Michuacan, Teſcuco, Utazcalia, Tenuacan, Maxcalcinco, and Mix
                                 •
                              e
                                 •
                              apan. Mexico or Culhuacan was brought vnder the ſubiection of the kings of Spaine, by Fernando Cortes Merches deila Valo in the yeere of our Lorde, one thouſand fiue hundred and eighteene,1513 which countrey is very rich of golde and ſiluer, for that many riuers haue golde in the ſand. The Sea ſhore in thoſe Countries yeeldeth manye pearles, muſtles, or oyſters, wherein they finde the pearles, whereof there is a great fiſhing, and much traffike for them. There are likewiſe in this countrey many lakes or meeres that are ſtil and haue no iſſue, which by the heate of the Sunne tourne into ſalt. There is likewiſe no leſſe aboundance of Caſsia Fiſtul
                                 •
                              
                            then in Egypt, growing on trees, with leaues like walnuts, and yellow bloſſoms, from whence the pipes or caſes of Caſsia do iſſue forth, which are vſed to purge in hote feuers, to coole and cleanſe the gall and heart blood, as alſo very good againſt the ſtone in the bladder and kidneys, and other diſeaſes. There is likewiſe in that countrie a kinde of fruit that groweth in great abundance called Cacao, altogether like an almond, which is taken out of the huſke, and couered with a thinne ſkinne, whereof the kernel is diuided into three or foure partes, of a darke yellow with blacke veines, being harſh in the mouth, and of an euill taſte, but with them is much eſteemed, whereof, being beaten with ſome of their countrey pepper, they make a certaine drinke, which they eſteeme of great price, giuing it vnto great Lordes, and ſuch as are their eſpeciall friends, as we eſteeme of muſcadel or malueſie. The ſea bordering vpon this countrey, as alſo the riuers running through it are ful of fiſh, wherein alſo they finde diuers Crocodiles, as in Egypt, the fleſh whereof is ſo much eſteemed before al other meates, that they account it for a princely diſh, whereof ſome are aboue 20. foote long. The country is full of hilles, and ſtony rockes, and great difference in their ſpeeche, ſo that they hardly vnderſtand each other without Interpreters. The places wherein the Spaniardes firſt placed their men were Compoſtella, where the Biſhop and the Kings counſell are reſident, and Colima, which they call the Purification: in new Galicia is the chiefe Guadalahara. and the head or principall part of the kingdome. Mecheocan alſo a Biſhops ſea, Cacatula the towne of Angels, a chiefe towne and biſhopricke, M
                                 •
                              x
                                 •
                              
                            a kingly citie, and Queene of al cities in the new world, lyeth vpon the border or ſide of a lake: the market place of the Towne lying ful vpon the lake, whereby they can not come at it but they muſt paſſe ouer bridges. This lake is l
                              ••
                           t, and is in length ſixe lucas, or twelue miles, and is in breadth tenne miles, without fiſh, onely a ſmal kind that may rather be called wormes than fiſhes, from the which lake in ſummer time there ariſeth ſuch a ſti
                              •
                           ke, and infecteth the ayre in ſuch manner, that it is vnwholeſome to dwel there, notwithſtanding it is inhabited by as many marchants, as any towne in Europe, the cittie is great, at the leaſt three miles in compaſſe, wherein are ſo many temples that it is incredible: the particularitte whereof, before it be long ſhalbe tranſlated out of Spaniſh into our mother tongue, by the author therof, whereunto I referre you.
                        Not farre from this cittie lieth an other freſh lake very ful of fiſh, whereon, as alſo vpon the ſhore, lie many townes. When this towne was firſt taken by the Spaniards, there raigned a king called M
                                 •
                              ntez
                                 •
                              m
                                 •
                              , being the ninth in degree, and as then the towne was but 140. yeares old, which is to bee wondered at, howe it is poſſible that ſo great a citie in ſo few yeers ſhould be ſo famous. The marchandiſes that are moſt carried out of this countrey, are golde, ſiluer, pearle balſam, cochenilia, the white roote Macheocan, which is good to purge, Salla Pariglia, and an other roote which maketh men ſweate, brimſtone, beaſts ſkinnes, and fiſh. And thus much for new Spaine in generall, and of Mexico in particular.
                        Not minding at this preſent time to make any longer diſcourſe, becauſe that our Carde ſheweth little thereof, and now returning to our owne Carde, you muſt vnderſtand that the lower ende of Cuba hath an out Hooke, called P. de Santa Anthonio, which is very fitte for to

take in freſh water, and to calke and mend the ſhippes.
                        Sailing from this hooke ſixtie fiue miles, to the firme land, you come to the hooke of Iucatan, which runneth into the ſea like a halfe Iſland. Iectetan is in Indian ſpeech, I vnderſtand you not, for that vpon a time when certaine Spaniards put out of the hauen of Saint Anthony, to diſcouer newe countries, and arriued in that Iſland, they made ſignes vnto the people to knowe the name of the country, whereuppon the Indians anſwered them and ſaide, O Tectetan, Tectetan, that is, We vnderſtand ye not: and ſo the Spaniards corrupting the name Tectetan call that land Iucatan, yet the furtheſt point therof in their ſpéech was called 
                              
                                 •
                              ecampi. This point of Iucatan lyeth vnder 21. degrees, vnder the which name a great countrey is comprehended, by ſome called Peinſula, that is, a place almoſt compaſſed about with water, for that the further this point reacheth into the ſea, the broader it is, being in the narroweſt part 80. or 90. Spaniſh miles broad, for ſo farre it is from Xicalanco.
                        
                        Therefore the ſea Cardes that place this land nearer or ſmaller, do erre much, for that it is in length from Eaſt to Weſt twoo hundred miles, being diſcouered by Franciſco Hernandez of Cordua, in the yeare of our Lord 1517.
                           151
                                 •
                              
                            but not al of it, for that ſailing from out of Cuba from Saint Iacobs, to diſcouer new countries, or (as ſome ſay) to fetch labourers to trauell in his mines, he came about the Iſland Guanaxos, (herein called Caguan x
                              •
                            to the cape di Honduras, where good, honeſt, ciuill, and ſimple people dwelt, being fiſhermen, hauing no weapons, nor vſed to the warres: and proceeding further, ſayled to an vnknowne point of land, where hee found certaine ſalt pannes, whereunto he gaue the name of Donne, that is, women, for that there were certaine ſtone towers with ſtaires & chappels couered with wood and ſtraw, wherein were placed diuerſe Idols that ſhewed like women, whereat the Spaniardes maruelled, to finde ſtone houſes, which till then they had not ſeene, and that the inhabitants were rich and well apparelled, with ſhirtes and mantles of cotten white, and coloured, with plumes of feathers, and iewels of precious ſtones ſette in golde and ſiluer: their women likewiſe appareled from the middle downewardes, as alſo on the head and breaſt, which hauing ſeene, hee ſtayed not there, but went vnto an other poynt, which hee named Cotehe, where hee met with certayne Fiſhermen, who with feare fled from him into the countrey aunſwering or calling vnto him, Cotehe, Cotehe, that is to ſay, home, home, thinking hee aſked them the way into the land, whereby this poynt hath holden the name of Cotehe. There vpon the ſea ſide they found a great towne, which for the greatneſſe thereof, they called Alkair, after a Towne of the ſame name, lying in Egypt (yet I thinke it not to be halfe ſo great as they affirme it to be) where by the Inhabitantes they were friendly receiued, and being entered into the town, they meruelled to ſee houſes with high towers, goodly churches, paued ſtreets, and great trade of marchandiſe. The houſes were of hewen and carued ſtones wo
                              •
                           kmanlike made and built with chalke, but couered with ſtrawe and leaues, the chambers within them of tenne or twelue ſteps high: they were likewiſe apparelled, but not with wollen cloth, becauſe they had no ſheepe, but with cotten wouen in diuerſe ſortes, very finely coloured: the women likewiſe apparelled from the middle downe to the foot, couering their heads and breaſts in diuers ſorts, very carefully ſeeking to couer their feete that they might not be ſeene: going diligētly to church, to which end ſuch as were rich & of authoritie had their owne paued ſtréet from their dores to the church, but were Idolaters, & although they offred men vnto their Idolles, yet they did not eate mans fleſh. They were likewiſe circumciſed, but it is not knowne why they vſed it, vnleſſe it were the diuell that ruled ouer them willed them ſo to do: in their dealings they were vpright, and kept their promiſes: they traffiked without mony, by bartering, ſpecially for cotten and apparell, or gownes made therof, all without ſleeues, which is the greateſt riches they bring vnto their Lordes, and which they carry to Mexico, Capo di Hondura
                                 •
                              
                            and Cuba they haue likewiſe many Bees, hony and ware, but they knew not how to vſe ware before the Spaniardes came thither: golde and ſiluer mines they had none, although the Countrey was a rough, ſharpe, and ſtonie land, yet it is fruitleſſe, ful of Ma
                                 •
                              z or Turkiſh wheate, and aboundant in fiſh: there was in thoſe Countries before the Spaniardes arriuall, at the leaſt foure hundred thouſand Inhabiters, whereof there are ſcarce eight thouſand left, they haue beene ſo rooted out by the Spaniards, ſome ſlaine, ſome ſolde for ſlaues, and carried into wild vnhabited places, to ſee for golde, and others by hiding themſelues from the cruell Spaniardes.
                     
                     
                        
                        Guatimala.
                        BY Iucatan inward to the land, lieth the prouince of Guatimala, wherein there was a towne, hauing the name of the Prouince, which vppon the eight day of September An. 1541.
                           
                              
                                 •
                              541. by meanes of continuall ſtormes and raine was wholy ouerthrown and deſtroyed, wherein were killed about a hundred and twenty Spaniardes. The day before it hapned, ſome of the Indians went vnto the Biſhop of Guatimala, whoſe name was Franciſcus Maſoquin, teling him that at the foote of the hill whereon the towne ſtoode, they had heard a moſt horrible and fearefull noyſe: whereunto the Biſhop anſwering them ſaide, haue I not often times willed and inſtructed you not to thinke vppon ſuch thinges, and preſently after about two houres after midnight, there fell an vnmeſurable water downe out of the hill, that ranne with ſo great a force, that it carried ſtones and all thinges with it, diuers fearefull ſightes and horrible cries beeing heard and ſéene in the aire: after the which the Towne was new built, & placed in a plaine field about 3. miles diſtant from the place, wherein it ſtood, hauing about 80. or 90. houſes in it all of free ſtone, & couered with tiles. In this Prouince are many Earthquakes, as Benzo writeth, who continued long in thoſe countries, otherwiſe the countrie is of a good and temperate aire, fruitful of corne, and of trées that were brought out of Spaine thether, yet fewe of them proſper, onlie Figge trées and Apricockes, but the fruit is not very ſauorie. There are likewiſe many Cacauaren: as touching the Religion and manner of thoſe people, they are much like thoſe of Mexico, and of Nicaragua, whereof I wil ſpeake, they likewiſe deale together, but becauſe this Prouince ſtandeth not in our Carde, I haue ſpoken ſufficiently thereof.
                     
                     
                        Fonduras.
                        NExt to Guatimala, is the great countrie of Fonduras, wherein before it was inhabited by Spaniards, there were at the leaſt, 410000. Indians, whereof there are not at this preſent (nor many yeares ſince) aboue 8000. left aliue, part of them ſlaine by the Spaniards, part led Captiues and conſumed in their golden mines, and part ranne away to hide themſelues in deſert places and holes vnder the earth, ſo to auoide the Spaniſh tirranie. In this Prouince the ſpaniards haue erected 5. townes, which are not in all aboue 120. or 130. houſes, moſt part built of reedes and ſt
                              •
                           aw, and at this preſent not much inhabited, becauſe the gold which is their onlie deſire beginneth to faile. The chiefe of theſe townes in our Card is named Truxillo, of others, Trugillum, or Turtis Iulia, wherein there is a Biſhop, this Towne is ſituate vpon a litle hil, on the ſea ſide in the north part the reſt of the townes ſhall likewiſe bee ſpoken of in the deſcription of the coaſt. And returning againe to the Cape of Iucatan, right againſt it there lieth a moſt ſweete and pleaſant Iland, by a king named Cozumela
                                 •
                              , whoſe anceſtors dwelt therein, called Coſumell, which from the further corner of Cuba Porto di Sa
                                 •
                              nt Anthoni
                                 •
                              , is ſeuenty miles, and from Iucatan fiue miles, it is round 45. miles, being a flat and euen coū
                           trie, very fruitfull they haue gold, but it is brought from other places, and great abundance of honie and war, and all kind of fruits, hearbs, birds, and foure footed beaſts, for other thinges, as Churches, Houſes, ſtreets, traffique, apparrell, and cuſtomes, altogether like Iucatan, ſome of the houſes are couered with ſtraw, becauſe they want ſtones, yet there are many ſtonie places, & in ſome places pillers of Marble as they haue in Spaine.
                        
                        At the firſt entrie of the Spaniards into that Iland they were not receaued, but after the ruler thereof entertained them very curteouſlie, and brought them vp into a tower, where they erected a Croſſe, becauſe that they arriued there vpon the 5. of May, being as then holie roode day, and called the Iland S. C
                                 ••
                              s, but in our Carde it keept
                              •
                           h the old name. In this Tower they found certaine chambers, wherin they ſaw many Idols, lying among other Images, which they with great noyſe called vpon & prated vnto, offering certaine ſweet ſauours and incenſe vnto them, as other Idolaters and Heathens vſe to doe, therein fulfilling their Heatheniſh Ceremonies, they are likewiſe circumciſed.
                        From this cape to Rio Grando are 100. miles, wherein are contained La Punta de las Mugeres, and the Baliya de la Aſcention. Rio Grando lieth vnder 16. degrees, and from thence are 150. miles to C
                                 •
                              uo di Camaron, which are accounted in this manner: firſt, from the great riuer to the hauen of Higueras are 30. miles, from Puerto Higueras to the hauen et Puerto di Cauallo
                                 •
                              , other thirtie miles. This is the ſecond place by the Spaniards diuided into a colonie: a dayes iournie from thence lieth Saint Pedro in a plaine field cloſe to certaine hilles,

being the third Colonie of the Spaniardes, not farre from thence runneth the riuer Vilua, and the lake in the middle: from whence he certaine hard groundes like Ilandes couered ouer with weedes, which as the wind bloweth, fleet from place to place.
                        From Puerto de Cauallas to Puerto del triumpho de la Crus are thirtie miles betweene, the which lieth next to Guamareta, Saint Iacob, and Truxillo. From Puerto del triumpho de la Crus to Capo de Honduras are 30. miles, and from thence to Cabo del Camaron 20. miles, from thence to Cabo de Gatias a dios lying vnder 14. degrées, are accounted 70. miles: this is likewiſe a Spaniſh colonie or towne builded by them, and betweene them on the ſame coaſt lieth Carthago, alſo a Spaniſh towne from Gracias a dios are 70. miles to del Aguadera, which ſpringeth out of the lake or ſea of Nicaragua, and is heere called Aguadaco: now againe for a time we will leaue ſpeaking of the coaſt, to declare the Prouince and Countrie of Nicaragua.
                        
                     
                     
                        Nicaragua.
                        DEparting from Fondura, and paſſing the borders of Chiulutecca, you come to the Prouince Nicaragua, ſtretching towardes the ſouth ſea, which is not verie great, but rich, fruitfull and pleaſant, but of ſo vnreaſonable a heate, that in Sommer time the heate cannot be indured in the day time, but only in the night, it raineth there for the ſpace of 6. whole monthes together beginning in Maie. The other ſixe moneths are exceeding drie: the day and night being all of a length, honny, waxe, cotton, wool, and balſam growe there in great aboundaunce, and many kindes of fruites, which are not found in other prouinces, neither yet in Hiſpaniola, nor any other place: and among the reſt a kind of apple, in forme much like a peare, within it there is a round nut, almoſt twice as bigge againe as one of our common nuttes, very ſwéete and pleaſant of taſte, the tree is great, with ſmall leaues. There are few kine, but many hogges, which were brought out of Spaine to bréede therein. The country is ful of Indian villages, all with ſmal houſes made of reedes, and couered with ſtrawe: they haue no mettall: yet at the firſt entraunce of the Spaniards, the inhabitants had certaine common and baſe gold among them, which was brought out of other places thither: there are many parrats, which doe great hurt vnto the ſeedes, and would doe more, were it not that they are driuen away by ſlings and other meanes. The Spaniards at their arriuall in thoſe countries, by reaſon of the great abundance of al things, called them the Paradiſe of Mahomet. There are many Ginny hennes, and a certaine fruit called Cacauate, which they vſe inſteed of mony, it groweth on an indifferent great tree, and onely in warme and ſhadowe places, as ſoone as the Sunne commeth vpon it it withereth, and therefore it is ſowed in woodes vnder trées, and in moyſt places, and al little enough, but the trées whereby it is planted muſt be higher than it, and bound cloſe together, that they may defend and couer them from the heate of the ſunne: the fruit is like almonds, and being taken out of their ſhels, are couered with a thinne blacke ſkinne, and the piths being taken out it may be diuided into two or thrée partes, hauing browne and gray veines, but of a hard taſte. When they make drinke thereof, they drie it in a pot by the fire, and then bruiſe it with ſtones, which done, they put it in a cullender, or potte made with holes, mixing it with water, and putting thereto a litle of their pepper, and ſo drinke it. This drinke is ſomewhat bitter, it cooleth the body, not making them drunke, and by them throughout all the country, it is eſtéemed for a moſt pretious thing, which they preſent to men of great account, as we do malueſey or hypocraſe. The maners of this people are not different from thoſe of Mexico, they eate mans fleſh, their clokes and garments are without ſléeues: they kindle their fire by rubbing two péeces of wood one againſt an other, which is their common cuſtome throughout al India: and although they haue great ſtore of waxe, yet they knew not how to vſe it, for that in ſteede of candles they vſed lights made of pine trée boughes: their ſpeech is diuerſe, but the Mexican ſpéech is the beſt, and that is furtheſt knowen, for that therewith men may trauell through the country aboue fiftéene hundred miles, and is very eaſie to learne: when they daunce, they vſe a very ſtrange manner, for they are at leaſt three or foure thouſand together, ſometimes more, according to the number of inhabitants, in the fielde where they wil daunce, being all together, they make the place very cleane, then one of them goeth before leading the daunce, commonly going backeward, turning in and out, all the reſt following by three and foure together, vſing the like apiſh toyes, their minſtrels and drummes, ſinging and playing certaine ſongs, whereunto hee that leadeth the daunce aunſwereth, and after him all the reſt, ſome bearing Wayerkens
                           
in their hands, & ſome rattles ful of ſtones, wherewith they rattle, others haue theyr heades al ſlucke with feathers, ſome their legs and armes bound about with ſtringes full of ſhels, ſome ouerthwart, and ſome crooked, turning their bodies, ſome opening their legs, ſome their armes, ſome counterfeiting the deafe man, and others the blind man, ſome laughing, others grinning, with many ſtrange deuiſes, they keep their feaſts al that day till night drinking nothing but Cocauate.
                        
                        The ſhips that ſaile ouer the ſouth ſea to Nicaragua, paſſe thorow the narow ſtream about fiue and twenty miles inwards, towards the land, til they come to a dorp called Re
                                 •
                              l
                                 •
                              gio, where there are certaine reed houſes, inhabited by Spaniardes, where the ſhips anker by reaſon of the good hauen, and becauſe of the wood. A dayes iourney from this place eaſtward lieth Legio or Leo
                                 •
                              
                            the Biſhops ſea of Nicaragaa, ſtanding vpon the border of the lake of Franciſco Fernandez, as alſo Granaten and other Spaniſh townes lying vpon the ſame lake, fifty miles from each other almoſt, at the other ende where the lake iſſueth into the northerne ſea. Thoſe two townes are both ſcarce foureſcore houſes, part made of lime and ſtone, and parte of reedes and ſtrawe. Fiue and thirtie miles from Leon lieth a hill, that caſteth out fire, in ſuch abundance, that by night they may beholde at the leaſt 100000. ſparks of fire flying into the aire: many Spaniards are of this opinion, that therin muſt be gold, which giueth the fire a continual eſſence, wherby they haue ſought many meanes to trie it, but al in vaine, and therefore needeleſſe to rehearſe.
                        Returning againe to the lake of Nicaragua. therein are great fiſhes, and amongeſt the reſt a certaine kinde of fiſh, in Spaniſh called Man
                                 •
                              , hauing finnes hard by their heades, like two hands, this fiſh is almoſt like an otter of 35. foote long, and twelue foote thicke, the head and tayle like an oxe, ſmall eies, hard and hairie ſkinne, of colour light blew, with two feete like elophantes feete: the ſinnes ſtanding out like Kopen, feeding their yong ones with their dugges. This fiſh feedeth both on land and in the water, they are very familiar with men, whereof the Indians tell a moſt wonderful thing, which is, that there was a king called Ca
                                 •
                              a
                                 •
                              amavuis, that had taken a yoong M
                                 •
                              nate which for the ſpace of ſix and twenty yeres he kept and broght vp with bread, in a lake called Guamabo, that bordered vpon his houſe, which fiſh in time became ſo tame, that he ſurpaſſed the dolphin, wherof we reade ſo many hiſtories, for that at what time ſoeuer the kings ſeruants called him Matto, Matto, which in Indian ſpéech is Maniſecale or curteous, hee would preſently come out of the lake, and eate meate out of their handes, and woulde likewiſe come out of the water, and goe into the houſe, to fetch his meate, and there woulde play with the children: and when any man was deſirous to go ouer the lake, he would oftentimes take eight or tenne of them together, and ſwimming beare them lightly on his backe ouer the water, in which manner playing with him, the Indians kept this fiſh long time, til by ſome iniury done vnto him he became angry, for that vppon a time as a Spaniard would prooue if his ſkinne were as hard as they reported it to be, threw an arrow or dart at him, and although it hurt him not, yet he felt the ſharp point of the arrow, and from that time perceiuing that men with beards and in apparel were there, they might wel call him, but al in vaine, for he would neuer come vp againe, but in the end, when the riuer A
                                 •
                              
                              bunicus chaunced to flowe ſo high, that it ranne ouer the bankes, and ſo into the lake Guaniabo, the fiſh folowed the ſtreame, and ſwamme into the ſea, theſe kindes of fiſhes are much ſeene and taken in that countrey, for that their fleſh is of a very good taſte, like hogs fleſh, which being ſalted is carried to Nombre de Dios, and other places. The lake of Nicaragua lyeth not farre from the ſouth ſea, and about a hundred miles from the north ſea, running through a riuer that is ful of ſhips, which the Spaniardes called Deſaguadera that is, falling of water therein. Thereabouts, & in that riuer there are many crocadiles, that lay their egges vpon the ſands on the riuers ſides, as bigge as geeſe egs, which being throwne againſt a ſtone wil bruiſed, but not breake, and in time of hunger, are eaten by the ſpaniards, their taſte is like a Moſchu
                                 •
                              
                            halfe rotten, and by the Indians is accounted for an excellent kinde of meate: by Nicaragua the country is rough and ſharpe, becauſe of the thicke woodes, and vneuen hilles, where not onely horſes, but men can hardly paſſe ouer, vnleſſe it be with great paine and labour: about this countrey for the ſpace of foure months, there are certaine Torte
                                 •
                              ux that doe continue in the ſea, as alſo vppon the ſhoare, which lay their egges as the crocadiles doe, in the ſand vppon the ſhoare, whereof preſently by reaſon of the great heate of the ſunne, there commeth yoong Torteaux the fleſh of this beaſt being freſh, is wholeſome and pleaſant to eate.
                        
                           From Cabo de Gratias a dios, to the Rio Grande, or Deſaguadera (as I ſaid before) are ſeuenty miles, from Deſaguadera to Corobaro are fortie miles, from Corobaro to Nombre de Dios fiftie miles, betwéene Corobaro and Nombre de dios lieth Veragua, and the riuer Swerus: theſe 90. miles lie vnder nine degrees and ½, ſo that from the poynt of Iucatan to Nombre de Dios are 500. miles.
                        As touching the maners of the Indians of Sweren that are about the riuer Swerus, & dwelling by Veragua they are not much different from the reſt, onely that they eate no mans fleſh: in their countrey are many beares, tigers, and lions, that are very fearfull, and flee when they ſee a man: there are likewiſe very great ſnakes, but not venomous, and many ſea cats: there is likewiſe an other kinde of beaſt called Caſcui, in a manner like a blacke pigge, hairie, with a hard ſkinne, ſmal eies, open eares like an elephant, but not ful ſo open, nor hanging down, clouen feet, and a litle ſnowt, armed like an elephant, and of ſo ſhril a voyce, that it maketh men deafe, and is of a good and ſauory fleſh. There is likewiſe an other wonderful and ſtraunge beaſt, of Geſnerus called a Foxe ap
                              •
                           , on the belly whereof Nature hath formed an other belly, wherein when it goeth into any place, it hideth her young ones, and ſo beareth them about her. This beaſt hath a body and member like a foxe, feete like mens hands, or like ſea cattes feete, eares like a batte, it is neuer ſeene that this beaſt letteth her yong ones come foorth but when they ſucke, or eaſe themſelues, but are alwayes therein, vntil they can gette their own meate: alſo there is another kind of beaſt called Iguanna or Iuanna, not much vnlike our eftes, hauing a thing hanging at his chinne like vnto a beard, and on her head a combe like a cockes combe, vpon his backe certaine ſharpe quilles, ſticking vpright like thornes, and amongeſt the reſt, ſome hauing teeth like a ſawe, with a ſharp taile, and ſtretching out, ſometimes winding like the adder. This beaſt is accounted among the vnhurtfull ſnakes, euery time it layeth it hath fortie or fiftie egs, round, and as big as a nut, whereof the yellow is ſeperated from the white, like hennes egs: they are good to eate, and very ſauory fleſh, but not roaſted either in oyle or butter, onely in water: this beaſt feedeth both on land, and in the water, it climeth trees, and is fearful to behold, ſpecially to thoſe that knowe not the nature thereof, yet it is ſo gentle & quiet that it maketh not any noyſe, and being taken and bound, it liueth at the leaſt tenne or twelue dayes without meate, it is of a good and ſauoury fleſh, and is kept for likoriſhneſſe, ſpecially the women, onely ſuch as haue had the pox, if they eate it, their paine reneweth.
                     
                     
                        Nombre de Dios.
                        
                           NOmbre de Dios, is a towne of traffike lying on the north ſea, ſo named by Diego de Niqueſa. a Spaniard, that had indured ſome hard fortune, and landing in that hauen with the reſt of his men ſaide, 
                              
                                 •
                              n Nombre de Dios, that is, in the name of God, and ſo began his worke againe which before he did pretend, and there erected certaine houſes, giuing the place the name aforeſaid: this towne lieth eaſt and weſt vpon the ſea ſide, in the middle of a very great wood, in a very vnwholeſome place, ſpecially in winter time, by reaſon of the greate heate and moyſtneſſe of the earth, as alſo, becauſe of the mooriſh ground that lieth on the weſt ſide of the towne, whereby many of the Indians die: the houſes are built after the Spaniſh maner, as alſo thoſe of Panama, wherein many Merchants dwel that ſell their wares by the great: the reſt of the houſes are for ſtrangers, like Innes, as alſo for Grocers, handicraftſmen, and ſuch like, moſt part of the merchants of Nombre de Dios, haue houſes likewiſe in Panama, for that the traffique out of Peru commeth to Panama, and out of Spaine to Nombre de Dios, and there they are continually reſident, vntill they become rich, and then they goe to other places, or elſe returne into Spaine. On the north ſide of this towne lieth the hauen wherein many ſhips may a
                              •
                           
                           ker: touching ſuch fruits as they bring 
                              〈◊〉
                            of Spaine into thoſe countries, there g
                              •••
                           
                           eth ſome in that vntemperate and vn
                              •
                           
                           ſome ayre, as lemons, oranges, re
                              〈…〉
                           hes, coleworts, and lettuce, but very ſmall, few, & not very good, other victuals are brought thither out of Hiſpaniola, Cuba, and the prouince of Nicaragua, as India wheat or maiz, bread called Cazab
                                 •
                              , ſalt fiſh, hogges, batatas, and from Panama kine, and fleſh vnſalted, all other kind of wares are broght out of Spaine thither, for that euery yeere there commeth ſhippes out of Spaine laden with wine, meale, bread, biſket, oliues, oile, figs, reaſins, ſilks, woollen and linnen cloth, and ſuch wares neceſſary for the ſuſtenance of man: which wares being arriued in that country, are carried in little ſcutes through the riuer Chiara, to a place called Ciu
                                 •
                              ce, fifteene miles diſtant from Panama, where it is deliuered to a Spaniſh Factor, which

regiſtreth all the wares, and kéepeth them, vntill they be carried by beaſts vnto Panama, a Towne lying on the other ſide of the Lake, from whence by ſhips they are conueyed into other places, thorow the whole country of Pe
                                 ••
                              , C
                                 •
                              a
                                 •
                              c
                                 •
                              s, and Chila. as alſo northward in the out places of the Spaniards. The breadth of the country betweene N
                                 •
                              mbre de Dio
                                 •
                              , and Panama, from the one ſide to the other, is not aboue ſeuenteene miles, whereby Peru is no Iſland. The Spaniards compare this towne to Venice, but I think they nere ſaw it, for if they had, doubtles they would be of another opinion.
                        But letting Panam
                                 •
                              
                            reſt til another time I will proceede with the deſcription of the coaſt, from Nombre de Dios to Farallones del Darien, lying vnder eight degrées, are ſeuentie miles: touching the towne of Dariene. til you come to the old virgine Mary, it heth in an vnwholeſome place, therefore all the inhabitants are of a pale yellow collour like thoſe that haue the yellow iandiſe, yet it proceedeth not from the nature of the land, for that in places of the ſame height there is wholſome dwelling, that is, where they haue freſh water, and cleere fountains and where vnder the ſame height they dwel vpon hilles, and not as Dariene which lieth in a valley: the ſides of the riuer being compaſſed with high hilles, and by that means they haue the ſunne but at noone time, only right ouer them, and on both ſides, both before and behinde they are no leſſe troubled with the reflexion of the ſunne beams, cauſing a moſt vnſupportable heat, in ſuch ſort that the dwelling in Dariene is not hurtful, by reaſon of the nature of the land, but becauſe of the ſituation thereof: it is likewiſe deadly, by reaſon of the mooriſhneſſe of the ground, beeing wholly compaſſed about with mooriſh ſtincking water, the Towne it ſelfe being a very pitte or mooriſh plotte of ground: and when they throwe water vpon the floores of their houſes, it doth preſently ingender toades, and when they do digge but a ſpanne and a halfe deepe in the earth, preſently there appeareth Adders out of the poyſoned water, that are within the filthy earth of the riuer, which floweth with filth, and full of durt. Out of this deepe valley, euen vnto the ſea, in Dariene are Tygars, Lions, and Crocadiles, Oxen, Hogges and Horſes, in great abundaunce, and greater than thoſe that are brought thither out of Spaine, many great trees and fruit, and all kindes of fruits and hearbs that are to be eaten: the people are of colour betweene darke and red yellow, of good proportion, with little haire, or beardes, onely vpon the head and the eiebrowes, ſpecially the women, which with a certaine hearb make it fall off, they goe all naked, ſpecially vpon their heades, they haue their members hidden, eyther in a ſhell, or in a caſe, or elſe they couer it with a cotten linnen, the women are couered from the middle to the knees, all the reſt is naked and bare: in that countrey there is no winter, for that the mouth of the riuer Dariene lieth leſſe than eight degrees from the equinoctiall, ſo that day and night is there of a length: from the furtheſt point that reacheth into the ſea, lieth a village in the Prouince of Caribana, nine miles from Dariene called Futeraca and from thence about three miles lieth Vraba, wherof the whole ſtream hath her name, and in time paſt was the chiefe Towne of the kingdome: ſixe miles off lieth Fe
                                 •
                              , from thence to Zereme are 9. miles, from Zereme to Sorache, are twelue miles. Theſe places were all full of Camballes, and when they had no ennemies to fight withall, they fought one againſt the other, that they might deuoure the men.
                        The gulfe of Vraba is 14. miles long, and in the entrie ſixe miles broade, and the nearer it runneth to the firme land, the narrower it is, into this riuer runne many waters, and one that is muche more proſperous then the Riuer Nilus, whatſoeuer is ſowed or planted in Vraba, it ſpringeth very ſpeedily, for that within 28. daies they haue ripe Cucumbers, Goardes, Melons, &c. In Dariene and Vraba there groweth much fruit that is verie pleaſant and ſweete of taſte, & much aboue our fruits, whereof whoſoeuer is deſirous to know more, let him reade the hiſtories thereof, as Peter Martir in his ninth book of the deſcriptiō of the firme land.
                        In the mouth of the gulfe of Vraba lyeth a ſmall Iſland called Tortuga, that is, the Iſland of Torteaux, becauſe it is formed like a Torteaux, or becauſe there are many Torteauxes therein, and further on the ſame coaſt lyeth the Iſland l. Fuerte, which is in the middle betweene Vraba and Carthago, wherein alſo are Canibals, moſt cruell villaines, and from thence you come to Puerto de Caribana, the hauen of Caribana, or of Cambals, whereof the Caribes haue receiued their name. From thence you come to the riuer de Guerra, and then to the riuer of Zenu, which is a great hauen, the town being about ſeuen or eight ſpaniſh miles and a half from the ſea, wherin is great traffike of fiſh, fine gold & ſiluer works. They gather gold out of the riuers in great floods & rains placing great nettes in the water, wherein they ſtay the gold, which is in great grains:

it was diſcouered by Roderigo de Baſtidas, in the yeere of our Lord 1502.
                           1502 And within two yeares after by Giouanni de la Coſa: And then againe in the yeare of our Lorde 1509.
                           1509 by Don Anciſus: and after him followed Alonſo de Hoieda, who deſiring to diſcouer their ſands, or barter with the inhabitants, as alſo to learne their ſpeech, and to know the riches of the country, ſought to come acquainted with them, but the Indians withſtoode them, and determined to fight: wherewith the Spaniardes ſhewed ſignes of peace, cauſing an interpreter (that Franciſcus Pizairo had brought from Vraua) to ſpeake vnto them, ſaying that hée and his companions the Spaniards were chriſtians, peaceable and quiet people, and ſuch as hauing by long voyages paſſed the great Ocean ſeas, had as then need of all neceſſary prouiſions, and of golde, deſiring them to barter the ſame with them, for other coſtly wares, which they had neuer ſeene. Wherevnto the Cariben of Zenu anſwered them, that it might well be they were ſuch quiet people, but yet they ſhewed not the ſigns of peace, and therefore they willed them preſently to departe out of their countrey, for they ſaide they were not minded to be mocked by them, neither meant they to indure an enemies or ſtraungers weapon within their country. Wherevpon D. Anciſus replying anſwered them and ſaide, that he could not with honour depart from thence, before he hadde deliuered his meſſage vnto them for the which he was ſent thither, making a long oration, thereby to perſwade them to the chriſtian faith, grounded onely vpon one God maker of heauen and earth, and of all creatures therein: in the end telling them that the holy Father the Pope of Rome Chriſts lieutenant throughout al the world, hauing abſolute power ouer mens ſoules, & religion, had giuen their countrey to the mighty king of Spaine his maſter, & that he was purpoſely ſent thither, to take poſſeſſion thereof, wiſhing them therefore not to oppoſe themſelues agenſt him, if they meant to become chriſtians and ſubiects to ſo great a Prince, onelie paying a ſmall yeerely tribute of golde. Whereunto they in ieſting manner, and ſmiling, aunſwered much after the ſame manner, as it is written of Attabalipa, that they liked well of his propoſition touching one only God, but as then they were not minded to argue therof, neyther yet to leaue their religion, & that the Pope might well bee liberall of other mens goods, that belonged not to him, or at leaſt that he ſhould giue that which was in his power to deliuer, as alſo that the king of Spaine was either very poore, to deſire that which was none of his, or very bold to ſeeke that which he knew not, and that if he came to inuade their countrey, they would ſet his head vpon a ſtake, as they had done manie other enemies his like: but the Spaniardes not eſteeming their words, entred vpon the land and ouercame them.
                        From the gulfe Vraba to Carthagena are 70. miles, betweene the which two places the hauens and riuers aforeſaide do lie, the partition being paſſed ouer, as alſo Puerto de Naos, that is, the hauen of Ships, it is from Carthagena to S. Martha fiftie miles.
                     
                     
                        Carthagena.
                        
                           CArthagena was ſo named, becauſe that in the mouth of the hauen there lieth an Iſland in Indian ſpeech called Codego, as alſo new Carthago, in Spaine Scombria, or els bicauſe al the Spaniards dwelling therin, came out of the Cittie of Carthago in Spaine: the Iſland is about two miles long and a mile broad. When the Spanyardes came firſt into that countrey, they found it ful of Fiſhermen, whereof at this time they can hardly find any remnant, which is not to be wondered at, for that not onely in this prouince, but in al the other Iſlands, wherin the Spaniards haue béene, there is hardly any Indians left, becauſe, the Indians as long as poſſibl they might wold neuer haue any dealings with the Spaniardes, becauſe of their tyranny. This Countrey is rich of fiſh, fruites, and all kinde of victualles neceſſary for men: they couer their priuy members with clothes of cotten wooll: both men and women go to the wars, for in the yeere of our Lorde 1509. as a Spaniard called Martinus Amiſus made warre vppon thoſe of Zenu, bordering vpon Carthegena, hee tooke an Indian woman of the age of twenty yeeres, that with her owne hands hadde ſlaine 28. Chriſtians: their arrowes are poyſoned, and they eate their 
                              •
                           nue
                              ••
                           tes fleſh, and ſpoiled many Spanyards: at their feaſts which in times paſt they vſed to hold they beautifie their bodies in the beſt maner they can deuiſe, with iewells, and golden bracelets, mingled with pearles, and ſtones called ſmaragdes, wearing them about their faces, armes, legges, and other parts of their bodies: their chiefe merchandiſes are ſalt, fiſh, and pepper, which groweth in great abundance all along the coaſt, it is of forme long, and ſharper than the 
                              •
                           ſt Indian pepper, and much ſweeter and pleaſanter of ſmell than the common Bra
                                 •
                              ilia pepper, which wares they carrie into ſuch

places as want it, where they barter for other things, before they were vnder the ſubiection of the Spaniards: they had many kindes of fruites and trees, cotten wooll, feathers, golde bracelets, gold, many pearles, ſmaragdes, ſlaues, and diuers rootes, wherwith they traffiked, bartering them without any reſpect, deſire or couetouſnes, vſing theſe wordes, Take this, and giue me ſome other ware for it, but no ware was more eſteemed with them than victualles, but now they likewiſe beginne to couet after golde and other thinges, whiche they haue learned of the Spaniards. Benzo in his ſecond booke of the Indian hiſtorie and fift chapter ſheweth a notable example, ſaying, that vpon a time he being very hungry, went into an Indians houſe, praying him to ſel him a chickin, and the Indian aſkt him what hee would giue him, he pulling foorth a ſpaniſh riall of ſiluer, gaue it him, which the Indian taking, helde betweene his teeth, and ſaide, Then I perceue you would haue my victualles, and giue mee that which no man can eate, neither is it of any account, therefore take you your peece of ſiluer, and I wil keep my victualls.
                        Betweene Carthagena and ſaint Martha, there runneth a great ſwift riuer called Rio Grande, which ſtandeth in our Carde, which iſſueth with ſuch force into the Sea, ſpecially in winter, that it beats the ſtream of the ſea backe againe, whereby the ſhipps that paſſe by it, may eaſily take in water. Sayling vpwardes into this riuer to the kingdome of Bogota, by the Spaniards called Granada, there are certaine mines of emeraldes found in the valley of Tunia, in this Carde called Tomana, whereabouts the ſpaniards haue builded new Carthage. The inhabitantes of the valley of Tunia, and the people bordering on the ſame doe worſhip the ſunne for their chife god, with ſuch reuerence, that they dare not ſtare or once looke ſtedfaſtly vpon it: they likewiſe worſhip the Moone, but not ſo much as the ſun: in their wars, inſteed of Ancients they tie the bones of certaine men (who in their liues were valiaunt in armes) vppon long ſtaues, and ſo carry them before them to incorage others to be the like, and make them the readier to fight. Their weapons are arrowes, pikes made of palme tree wood, and ſtone ſwordes. They bury their kings with golden neckelaces, ſette with emerauldes, and with bread and wine, wherof the Spaniards haue foūd many ſuch graues, which they haue opened. The people that dwell vpon the aforeſaid great riuer, are all Caniballs or Caribes, as alſo thoſe that dwell about ſaint Martha, and in time paſt were Caribes. The inhabitants of the Iſlandes of Boriquen, Dominico, Matitini, Cibuchine (now called ſaint Croce) and Guadalupe, as it is already declared, which rowe on the water with ſcutes made of a certayn wood called Canois, and that fought againſt thoſe of Hiſpaniola, and the people of the firme land, whome they ſpoyled and eate.
                        The common opinion is, that they came firſt out of the firme land of Caribana, by Vraba, and from Nombre de Dios, in Indian ſpeech called Caribes, and all ſtrong and valiaunt menne, are nowe by them called Caribes, which are very expert in bowes and arrowes. The Braſilians name them Prophets, or Soothſayers, and Caribes Prieſts.
                        The people inhabiting in the valley of Tunia, poiſon their arrowes, and before the Spaniards ouercame them they hadde continuall warres againſt the people of Bagota, or Bogota, they are good ſouldiers, cruel, and very reuengeatiue: when they goe to warres, they carry their Idoll Chiappen with them, as a iudge of the victorie, vnto whome before they enter into the field, they offer many ſacrifices and offerings of certaine liuing men, béeing the children of ſlaues, or of their ennemies, painting all the Image with bloud, which doone, they doe eate the fleſh: when they retourned victorious, they helde great feaſts with dauncings, leapings, and ſingings, ſome drinking themſelues druncke, and agayne beſmeering their Image with blood, and being ouercome, they were ſorrowfull, and heauy, ſeeking by new ſacrifices to intreats theyr Chiappen, that hée woulde helpe and aſſiſt them, and ſend them victory againſt theyr enemies.
                     
                     
                        S. Martha.
                        SAint Martha is alſo a Towne and Hauen of the Spaniardes lying on the firme land vnder eleuen degrees, on the north ſide of the Equinoctial line about fiftie Spaniſh miles, from Carthagena, it lieth at the foote of certayne hills, ſo monſtrous high, that it is, incredible, howe in ſo great extreame heate, ſo great quantitie of ſnowe ſhould lie vpon the toppes of thoſe hills which is ſeene a great way off, and whereby the hauen is knowne.
                        This country was diſcouered and taken by Roderigo de Baſtidas in 1524.
                           1524. where it coſt him his life, not by the enemy, but by

his owne men, that when he was aſleepe, killed him, and gaue him fiue woundes in his body. The people of this country are ſo cruell and fierce, that they haue oftentimes driuen the Spaniards from their countrey, not caring for the ſhippes, but running into the ſea, till the water mounted as high as their breaſts, ſhooting with thouſandes of poyſoned arrowes, and neuer would giue ouer, were it not by meanes of the great ſhot, together with the cries of ſuch as were afraid, and ran away, thinking them to be thunder claps, which oft times happen in thoſe countries, by reaſon of the euenneſſe of the countrey, with the height of the hills. The compaſſe of this hauen is three Spanniſh miles, and ſo cleere that they may ſee ſtones lying on the ground within the water, although it is at the leaſt twentie elles deepe: into this hauen there floweth twoo running waters, but not fit for great ſhips, but onely for little boates, cut out of peeces of wood: it is a great pleaſure to heare what they report of the great numbers, and goodnes of the fiſhes that are taken thereabouts both in freſh and ſalt water, for the which cauſe they found many Fiſhermen thereabouts, with many nettes made of packethreede, hanging on cotten ropes, which was their greateſt liuing, for that for fiſh they had whatſoeuer they deſired of their neighbours. In this country they found ſaphires, emerauldes, calcedonies, iaſpers, amber, braſil wood, golde and pearles, that is, in the two prouinces Caramaira and Sacurma, wherein the two hauens Carthagena and S. Martha do lie. Caramaira is a very fruitfull and pleaſant countrey, wherein there falleth neither hard winter, nor ouer hote ſummer, day and night being there almoſt of a length. The Spaniardes hauing taken in this country, found gardeins ready planted, moyſtned with ſtrange waters like the gardeins in Italie: their common meate is Ages, luca, Maiz, Batatas, and ſome fruites of trees, ſuch as other Indians therabouts do vſe, they eate fiſh alſo, and mans fleſh, but not often. Ages are rootes, of the greatneſſe of long turnopes in Italie, pleaſant of taſte, not much vnlike cheſnuttes, which they vſe in banquets inſteede of fruit. Iuca is alſo a kinde of roote whereof they do make bread: the Iuca that groweth in Cuba. Hayti, & other Ilands, is very hurtful being eaten raw: and to the contrary that of S. Martha is very wholſome, being otherwiſe eaten, it is very good of taſte: theſe roots are planted & not ſowne, which being ripe, are as great as a mans arme, or the ſmal of his leg, & ripeneth in halfe a yere, but if it ſtand two yéeres in the ground, it maketh better bread, being ripe, they are preſt betweene 2 ſtones, wherby the ſap runneth forth, which is very hurtful in the Iſlands, vnleſſe it be ſodden, as we doe milke: otherwiſe being drunke of men or beaſts, it kills them as being a ſtrong poiſon, but ſod till it conſumeth to the half, & ſo let ſtand til it be cold, it may be vſed inſteede of vineger, & being ſod til it be thick, it becoms ſweet like hony, & ſo they vſe it in the firm land, being raw, for drink, and ſodden, for vineger & hony. I ſaid in the firme land, for that in the Iſlands it is very dangerous & venomous: of the material ſubſtance of the roote being preſt, which is like almonds that are ſtampt, they make round cakes as big as dollars, which they bake, & is their Cacaui or bread, wherewith they ſo long haue noriſhed themſelues: this bread is ſomwhat harſh in the throat, if it be not tempered with water, or mixed with other meate. Yet I had rather eate bread made of Maiz, that is, Braſilia wheate, for that it giueth no leſſe ſuſtenance than our wheate, & is very wholſome, agreeing with ye ſtomak, wherof they make bread, as we do of wheat Batatas are alſo common, & in great aboundance in this country, which are roots of the thickneſſe of a mans arme, & ſome ſmaller, pleaſant of taſte, and procuring good noriſhment, yet they cauſe wind, vnleſſe you roſt thē, then they looſe that effect, ſpecialy when they are eaten with any good wine: of theſe rootes they alſo make conſerues, not much vnlike that which is made of Quinces, and cakes, with other ſuch kinds of deuiſes. At this time there are many of them in Spaine, whence they are likewiſe brought into our countries: Thoſe that are deſirous to reade more hereof, let them peruſe the Writers of the new World, or the bookes of the learned doctor Carolus Cluſius, which writeth therof at large, from whence this is taken.
                        In S. Martha is great traffike for fiſh, cotten, & feathers, their houſes are of earth, hanged with mattes made of 
                              
                                 •
                              eſen, and of diuers colours, they haue many couerlets of cotten, wherin are wouen the figures of Tigers, Lions, Eagles, and ſuch like. From Saint Martha to the Cape de la Vela, that is, the cape of the ſaile, are 50. miles: this cape lieth vnder 12. degrees, & is 100. miles from S. Dominico: betweene S. Martha and the cape de la Vela, lie theſe places, Cape de la Guia, the point of the needle or of the compaſſe, Ancon de Gacha, an open hauen of Gacha, Rio de Palominas, the riuer of Palominas: Rio de la Hacha, the riuer of the Tocrtſe: Rio de P
                                 •
                              edras, the riuer of Stones: Laguna de S. Iuan, the lake of S.

Iohn. From the Cape de la Vela to Coqui
                                 •
                              ocoa are fortie miles, in our Carde it is placed with twoo words diuided, which ſhould be but one. Th
                              •
                           s is another point lying on the ſame corner, behinde the which beginneth the gulte of Ven
                                 •
                              z
                                 •
                              el
                                 •
                              , which in compaſſe and breadth is from the cape of S. Roman eightie miles.
                     
                     
                        Porete Venezuela, little Venice.
                        THe whole coaſt from the Cape de la Vela, to the gulfe of 
                              
                                 •
                              ar
                                 ••
                              
                            was diſcouered by Chriſtophero Co
                                 •
                              an
                                 •
                              o, in An. 149
                                 •
                              .
                           1498. and the firſt gouernour of Venezuela, was a h
                              •
                           gh Duchman, called And
                                 ••
                               ſius A
                                 •
                              mg
                                 •
                              
                            who in the name of Wel
                                 •
                              ren traua
                              ••
                           ed into thoſe countries, the Emperour hauing beſieged their towne, in the yeare of our Lorde 1518. and died of a wound giuen him by a poyſoned arrow,
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                              
                            and moſt of his men dyed for hunger, after they had eaten dogs and ſome Indians fleſh: it is a B
                              •
                           
                           ſhopr
                              •
                           cite the towne being called Venezuela becauſe it is binlded in the water vpon an euen rocke, which water and lake is called M
                                 ••
                              aca
                                 ••
                              o, and by the Spaniards Lag
                                 •
                               di Noſtra D
                                 •
                              nna: the women of this place are preuder & better mannered then others of the prou
                              •
                           ces thereabouts, they painte their breſts and armes, al the reſt of their bodies are naked only their priuities which they couer with certain deaths, which to leaue off were great ſhame vnto thē, & likewiſe if any man ſhould lift it vp, he ſhuld do them great 
                              〈◊〉
                            & diſhouor. The maides are knowne by their colour, & the greatnes of their girdles that they weare, which is a certaine ſigne o
                              •
                            their maidenhead. The men carrte theyr members in a ſhell, they pr
                              ••
                            to Idols, and to the diuel, whom they paint in ſuch a 
                              •
                           riue as he inſtructeth them: or as hee the 
                              ••
                           d himſelfe vnto them. In warres they vſe poyſoned arrowes, & pikes of fiue and 
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              ••••
                           ful long, kniues of reedes, great t
                              ••••
                           s made of barks of trees, and alſo of 
                              〈◊〉
                           . Their prieſts which alſo are Ph
                              •••
                           tions, aſke the ſicke perſon (by whom they are ſent for if they certainly beleeue that they 
                              〈◊〉
                            help them, and then lay their hands vpon the place where they ſay theyr paines, 
                              ••
                           poſtumes, or ſwellings are, crying or calling out, and if it fortune that they heale not, they put the fault either in the ſicke perſon, or in their gods, and in th
                              •
                           s ſort their Ph
                              ••
                           tions deale with them, In the 
                              •••
                           ht time they mourne for theyr Lords, which is ſinging certaine ſongs in their commendations, that done they roaſt them, and beate them to ſmal pouder, which them, drink in wine, which among them is a great honour. From Venezuela to C
                                 ••
                               S. Roman is eighty miles, and from S. Ro
                                 ••
                              n to Golfo Triſte, are fiftie miles, wherein lyeth Curiana.
                        
                     
                     
                        Curiana.
                        
                           CVriana hath a hauen like that of Callice in Spaine, where on the ſhore there are about eight houſes, but not farre from thence within the land there was a v
                              •
                           llage, full of people, that went naked, but very friendly, for ple, innocent, and familar, and receiued the Spaniards w
                              •
                           th great ioy, and for pinnes, néedles, Lels glaſſes, and beads, they gaue them many ſtrings of pearles: receiuing them into their houſes, ſeruing them with al kinds of meates, and for foure pinnes gaue them a peacocke, for two pins a pheſant, for one pinne a turtle doue, or houſe pigeon, for a ſtone, g
                              ••
                           ſſe, or a pin or two, a goo
                              ••
                           : & they aſking them what they would do with the pinnes, ſeeing they were naked, they ſaid they were good to pick their teeth, and for the belles they tooke great delight to heare them ring: the country is very ful of the birdes before rehearſed: alſo of hartes, wilde ſwine, and cennies, of colour and greatneſſe like our hares, which birdes and deeres fleſh is their meate, as alſo the pearle oyſters, whereof thereabouts are great aboundance, and much eaten: they are al very ſ
                              ••
                           ful in ſhooting at wild beaſts and birds, their beates are hewed out of a peece of hard wood, but not ſo well proportioned as thoſe of the Canniballes, and in H
                                 •
                              ſpani
                                 •
                              l
                                 •
                              , which they call Gall
                                 ••
                              s, their houſes are made of wood, and couered with palme 
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              ••
                           ues, wherein, when they are at reſ
                              •
                           , th
                              ••
                            may eaſily heare the fearefull cries of wilde beaſts, which hurt not any man, for 
                              〈◊〉
                            inhabitants go al naked, and without campany into the wooddes, onely with their be
                              ••
                           s and arrowes, and not it was neuer heard that any of them was euer ſlaine or deuoured by wild beaſts. They likewiſe brought the Spaniardes as many hartes and wilde ſwine as they deſired, all killed with theyr arrowes, their breade is of rootes or Maiz like other Indians: the people haue blacke and halfe curled hayre, and ſomewhat long: they make their teeth white with an hearb which all the day they chawe in their mouthes, which hauing chawed, they ſp
                              •
                           tte out againe, waſhing their mouthes. The women are better for keeping of a houſe, than to labour in the fieldes, and the men vſe to worke in the groundes, and to hunt: alſo to goe to warres, to dance and to play. In their houſes they haue many earthen veſſels, as cups, pots, & ſuch like, which are brought them from other places.
                        
                           They keepe certayne yéerely fayres, euery one carrying to ech other, ſuch things as they want. They weare ſtrings of pearles about their necks, as common as the countrey women in Italie weare criſtall beades, whereon hangeth many beaſtes and birdes made of baſe gold, like Rheins gold, which is brought vnto them from Carichieta, ſixe dayes iourney from thence, towardes the ſouth: and when the Spaniardes aſked of them where they had the golde, they made ſignes which way, ſhewing them it was in an other countrey beyond them, but counſelled them not to go thither, ſaying they were Canniballes, and ſuch as eate mans fleſh. The men bore a goard which they weare for a codpeece, and tie about their middles with a ſtring, hiding their members therein, or in a Snakes ſhel, the reſt of theyr bodies are al naked. Thus much for the cuſtomes and manners of Curiana. Betweene the Cape of Saint Roman, and Golfo Triſte lieth Core Taratara, and P. Secco. From Golfo Triſte to Cariari are a hundred miles, the coaſt lying vnder tenne degrees: betweene them lieth manie hauens and riuers, ſpecialy Puerto di Canna Fiſtola, P. Fle
                                 •
                              chado, that is, the point where they were ſhotte at with arrowes. Punto Muerte, the dead hauen. Cabo de Ioan Blanco, the cape of Iohn White, Cabo la Colhera, Rio Dunari, Illa de Pirico, Maracapana, Chelheribiche, St. Fee, that is, holy Faith, Rio de Cumana, Punta D'ara
                                 •
                              a C
                                 •
                              m
                                 ••
                              
                            and Maracapana: along by the coaſts aforeſaid lie many Iſlands, as Moines, that is, the Iſle of Moonks, Quiracao, Buenaire, Good Ayre, Rocques, or Roca, Stone Rockes, de Aues, the Birds, Tortuga, Torteaux, and then Cubagna, or Margaritha, the Iſle of Pearles.
                     
                     
                        A certaine deſcription of Maracapana, and Cumana.
                        
                           CVmana ſignifieth a Prouince and a Riuer, wherin there is a towne and a cloiſter of grey Friers, becauſe of the great numbers of pearles that are found thereabouts. The people of this countrey went naked, onely that they couered their members, eyther in a gorde, or Snakes ſhels, or elſe with bandes of reedes or cotton wooll: in wars they weare mantles, and decke themſelues with feathers: at feaſts and bankets they paint themſelues, or elſe ſtroke themſelues ouer with certaine gum, and ſalues that be clammy, wherein they ſticke feathers of all colours, which is no ill ſight: they cut their haire aboue their eares, and if any haire grow vpon their knees, or on their faces, they pul them out, and will haue no haire vpon any place of their body, although they are by nature moſt of them without beards or haire, and ſuch as let their haire grow after the Spaniſh manner, they call them beaſts: theſe people make great meanes to make their teeth blacke, and ſuch as haue them white, they eſteeme them to be women, becauſe they take no paines to make them blacke, which they do with the powder or ſap of a certaine hearbe, by them called Hay, or Gay, which leaues are very ſoft like turpentine leaues, and in faſhion like Mortella, being of the age of 15. yeers, and that their courages began to riſe: they begin to beare thoſe leaues in their mouths, and to chaw them, vntil their teeth become as blacke as coles, which blackneſſe continueth vntill they die, which likewiſe preſerueth the teeth from rotting, ſpoyling, or any paine, they mire the powder of that leafe with another ſort of powder of a kinde of wood, and with chalk of white ſhells burned, in which ſort thoſe of the Eaſt Indies vſe their betele and Arrecca, with chalke of oyſters, which is already declared in the deſcription of the Eaſt Indies: the powder of theſe leaues, woodde and chalke they beare continually in their mouthes, ſtill chawing it, which they keepe in baſketts and boxes made of reedes, to ſel and barter the ſame in the markets round about them, for gold, ſlaues, and cotten, and for other wares: al the maides goe naked, only they weare certaine bandes about their knees, which they binde very hard, that their hips and thighes may ſeeme thicke, which they eſtéeme for a beauty: the married women weare ſhooes, and liue very honeſtly: and if they commit adultery, they are forſaken by their huſbands, & puniſhed. The lords and rich men of the country haue as many wiues as they liſt: and if any man come to their houſes to lodge, they giue them one of the faireſt to lie by them: the reſt haue but one, and ſome none: the women till the land, and looke to the houſe, and the men not being in the warres, doe fiſh and hunt: they are highminded, reuengeatiue, and haſtie: their chiefe weapons are poyſoned arrowes, which they prepare in diuers maners, as with the blood of ſnakes, the iuice of hearbes, and mixtures of many other things, whereby there is no means to heale ſuch as are once wounded therewith. The children, women, and men from their youth vpwards learne to ſhoote in bowes: their meate is horſleaches, battes, graſhoppers, creuiſhes, ſpiders, bees, and rawe, ſodden,

and roſted lice, they ſpare no liuing creature whatſoeuer, but they eat it, which is to be wondered at conſidering their country is ſo wel repleniſhed with good bread, wine, fruite, fiſh, and all kinde of fleſh in great aboundance whereby it commeth that theſe people haue alwaies ſpots in their eyes, or elſe are dimme of ſight, which ſome notwithſtanding impute to the propertie of the water in the riuer of Cumana: they cloſe their gardens or lands with cottē yarne, by them called Bexuco, placing it about the height of a man, and among them it is accoūted for a great offence, if any man ſhould venter either to climbe ouer, or creep vnder that cotten, holding for certaine that whoſoeuer doth teare it, ſhal die preſently after it. The men of Cumana, as I ſaid before, are much giuen to hunting, wherein they are verie ſkilful. They hunt and kil Lions, Tigers, Goates, Ileren, Hogs, and al other kinde of foure footed beaſts, which they kil with bowes, or take with nettes. There are likewiſe in theſe prouinces many verie ſtrange beaſts, part whereof are alreadie deſcribed, and part not: he therefore that deſireth further inſtruction heerein, let him reade the Spaniſh hiſtoriografers, that write larger. The women as I ſaid, til the ground, ſow Maiz, and all kinde of corne, plant Batates, and other trees, watering them, ſpecially the Hay, wherewith they make their teeth blacke: they plant trées, which being cutte, there iſſueth a white liquour like milke, which changeth into a ſweete gumme, verie good to ſmell vnto. They plant likewiſe other trees called Guare
                                 •
                              ma, whereof the fruit is like a Mulberie, but ſomewhat harder, whereof they make a certaine kinde of ſodden Muſt, which healeth colde, and out of the wood of the ſame tree they make fire. They haue another kind of high and ſweete ſmelling trée, which ſeemeth to be Cedar, whereof the wood is verie good to make cheſts & caſes, & by reaſon of the ſweetneſſe of the wood, good to keep things in: but putting bread into them, it becommeth ſo bitter, that it is not to be eaten: the wood is likewiſe good to make ſhips, for that it neuer conſumeth in the water, by wormes, or any other meanes. There are other trees from whence they haue lime, wherewith they gette birdes, and annoint their bodyes therewith, wherein they ſtick feathers. The land of it ſelfe bringeth forth Caſsia, but they eate it not, neither knowe how to vſe it. There are ſo many Roſes and ſweete flowers in that countrey, that the ſmel thereof maketh mens heades to ake, in ſmel exceeding muſke: wormes, as graſhoppers, Caterpillers, and ſuch like, there are verie manie, which deſtroy the ſeed. There are likewiſe vains of ſea coles burning like pitch, whereof they make great profite. Thus much concerning the fruitfulneſſe of the countrey, their manners and cuſtomes in planting, hunting, &c. Beſides this, theſe people take great pleaſure in twoo things, that is, dancing and drinking, often times ſpending eight dayes together in banquetting, dancing, and drinking themſelues drunke: beſides their ordinarie dancings and meeting together, at the feaſts and coronations of their Kings and Lordes, or in common aſſemblies and publike bankets: many of them meete together, euerie one dreſt in a ſeueral maner, ſome with crowns of feathers, others with ſhelles or fruits about their legges, like Iuglers heere in our countrey, vſing al kinds of toyes and deuices, ſome ſtraight, others crooked, ſome backwards, ſome forwards, grinning, laughing, counterfetting the deafe, blind, and lame man: fiſhing, weauing, and doing al kinde of workes, and that for the ſpace of fiue or ſixe howres together, for that hee which continueth longeſt in that manner is the beſt man, and he that drinketh wel is a luſtie fellow: hauing danced, they ſitte down croſſe legged like a Taylor, and make good cheare, drinking themſelues drunke at the kings charges, of which their dancing I haue ſpoken in another place, ſo that to ſpeake any more thereof it were needleſſe. They are great Idolaters, praying to the Sunne and the Moone, thinking them to bee man and wife, and to be great Gods: They feare the Sunne verie much when it thundereth or lightneth, ſaying that it is angry with them: they faſt when there is any eclipſe of the Moone, ſpecially the women, for the married women plucke theyr haires, and ſcratch their faces with theyr nailes, th
                              •
                            maides thruſt thornes of fiſhes into their armes, and therwith draw bloud, thinking that when the Moone is in the full, they thinke it is to be ſhot or hurt by the ſunne, by reaſon of ſome anger or greefe he hath conceiued againſt it: when any blazing ſtar appeereth, they make a great noiſe with Drummes, and hallowing, thinking by that meanes it will bee gone, for they thinke a blazing ſtarre ſignifieth ſome great hurt or euill fortune. Among many Idols and figures which they honour and inuoke for Gods, they haue a certaine thing like a Burguinion Croſſe, which they hang vpon their new borne children, thinking thereby they are preſerued in the night from all euill things. Their prieſts are called P
                                 •
                              aces,
                           
who in thoſe countries haue the maidenheades of their Daughters when they marrie. Their office likewiſe is to heale the ſicke, and to ſay truth, to call vppon the the diuel, and to conclude, they are ſkilful in the blacke art and coniurers. They heale with hearbes and rootes, both ſodden and raw, beaten, and mi
                              ••
                           ed with fat of birdes, fiſh, or beaſts, with wood and other things vnknowne to the ſimple men, vſing certain darke wordes and ſentences, which they themſelues do not vnderſtand. They ſucke and ſicke the place where the paine
                              •
                           s, therby to draw out the euil humours, and if the paine or feuer increaſeth, the prieſts ſay that their patients are poſſeſſed with euil ſpirits, wherewith they rubbe their bodyes all ouer with their handes, vſing certaine wordes of coniuracion and charmes, ſucking after that very hard, often making them beleeue that by that meanes they cal the ſpirit, which done, they take a certaine wood, wherof no man knoweth the vertue but onely themſelues, wherewith they rub their mouthes and throats, ſo long vntil they caſt al whatſo
                              •
                           u
                              •
                           r they haue within their ſtomackes, and with ſo great force, that oftē times they caſt forth bloud, mean time ſtamping, ſtammering, calling▪ and knocking with theyr feete againſt the earth, with a thouſande other toyes needleſſe to rehearſe.
                     
                     
                        Cub
                              •
                           gua, or Margaritha.
                        
                           CVbagua or Margaritha is the Iſland of pearles, and is in compaſſe three miles, lying vnder twelue degrees and a halfe, vpon the north ſide of the Equinoctiall line, foure miles from the point 
                              〈◊〉
                           , a count
                              ••
                            wherein there is much ſalt, & although the grounde is both flat and euen, yet it is vnfruitfull and drie, both without water and trees, and wherein there is little els found, then onely Comes, and ſome Sea foules. The inhabitants paint theyr bodies, they eate the oyſters wherein the Pearles are founde, and fetch all their freſh water from the firme land, giuing pearles for it: there is not any Iſland in the world ſo ſmal as it is, that hath raiſed ſo much profit, and made both the inhabitants and ſtrangers rich, as this hath doone, for that the pearles which in few yeares hath bin brought from thence, doe amount vnto aboue two millions of gold, although thereby many Spaniards and ſlaues haue loſt their liues.
                        From the point 
                              •
                            
                           Arya to the Cape de Salines, that is, to the poynte of the Salt pans, are ſeuentie miles, & between them lyeth Ca
                                 •
                              be, and the Cape de tres Puntas, which is the Cape of three poynts: from the Cape de Salines to Punto Auegado, that is, the drowned hauen, are more then ſeuentie miles, and the ceaſt running along by the gulfe of Pa
                                 •
                              a, the lande maketh with the Iſland Trinidad.
                        
                     
                     
                        Paria.
                        IN the mouth of the gulfe of Paria, lyeth the Iſland la Trinidad, taking the name from a certaine promiſe made by Columbus in his ſecond voyage, in An. 1497. being in danger, or becauſe he firſt perceiued three hilles, ſeeking for freſh water, his people in a maner dying with thirſt. The mouth of this gulf was called os Draconis, yt is, the Dragons mouth, becauſe of the great ſtreame that runneth therein. The whole countrey and ſhore of Paria ſtretching towardes the South, is the goodlieſt country in all India, and the fruitfulleſt, as Benzo and Columbus both doe witneſſe, ſo that by ſome it is called the earthly Paradice: it is a great, flatte, and euen land, ouerflowing and aboundant of all things, alwaies bring forth flowers of ſweete and vnſweete ſauour. The trees continually greene, as it were in May or lent, but not many fruitfull or wholſome trees, and in ſome places thereof is great aboundance of Caſsia Fiſtula, the whole countrey is generally hot and moiſt, whereby there are diuers wormes, among the which are many Mytes, which by night fall verie heauily vpon the people, and many graſhoppers, that doo much hurt, the inhabitants beare there members in a goord or reede, as it were in a ſheath, letting their ſtones hang out, before the Spaniards came into the countrey, they wore ſuch kind of codpeeces bordered with gold & pearles, and ſuch like things, which cuſtome the Spaniards made them to leaue: the marrted women couer their ſecret parts with an apron, by them called Pampanillas, and the maides tie a peece of cotten before their bellies, their kings haue as many wiues as they will▪ yet one of them is accounted for the right Queene, and hath commandement ouer all the reſt: the common people haue three or foure, as they think good, and when they are olde they put them away, and take yong for them. They likewiſe let theyr Piacchos or prieſts he with their gentlewomen and their maids the firſt night of the marriage. This people, as alſo moſt part of the Indians, maintaine themſelues with fiſh, and wine made of Ma
                                 •
                              z which is with them in 
                              •
                           eede of corne, and alſo with other fruits and rootes, as all the reſt of the Caribes do, and ſome eate Lice, Apes, Meerecats,

Frogs, Wormes, and ſuch vnprofitable things as thoſe of Cumana, they vſe a kinde of ſalue, to make their teeth black like thoſe of Cumana, which is made in this maner: they take ſhels wherein the pearles are ſound, with the leaues of the trée called Axis, (the fruit of the which tree they eate continually al the yeare like ſauce or pepper) which they burne together, and beeing burnt, they put a little water vnto it, wherwith the white looketh like chalke, with the which ſalue they make their teeth as black as coles, and therewith preſerue them from ach, their bodyes are painted red and blacke, with colours made of the iuice of Hearbes, and the filthier it ſheweth, the fairer they eſtéeme it to bee. Their beddes are like nettes made of cotten, which they make faſt to twoo bordes, and therein they ſleepe. Sleeping in the fields they haue on the one ſide of their beddes a fire, to warme them in the night: their weapons are arcowes, made either of reeds or palme wood, whereon they putte ſharpe ſtones or bones in place of iron, which they ſmeere with pitch, which is a moſt cruel poyſon, made of rootes, hearbs, Antes, fruites, and certaine ſtinking iuice, which the olde women do verie diligently ſeethe with ſnakes bloud, with the venimous aire whereof many of them die while they ſeethe it, if any man be ſtrucken with an arrow that is new dipt therein, theyr bodye preſently ſwelleth, and they die with al ſpeede, in a manner rauing, and when the poyſon is olde, it looſeth the greateſt parte of the ſtrength: the remedie againſt ſuch poyſon, is to thruſt a hot burning iron into the wound: all the ſlaues that the Spaniards take out of this country, they carrie them into the countrey of Cubag
                                 •
                              a, burning them in the foreheades with a letter C. whom they keepe for fiſhers or pearles, by which meanes many of them are carried out of the Iſland, whereby at this preſent it is almoſt deſolate, for that the fiſhing for pearle is there almoſt clean done, and the gold conſumed, which maketh the Spaniards not to eſteeme of that place.
                     
                     
                        Hereafter followeth the deſcription of the coaſt of Paria, to the ſtraights of Magellanes.
                        
                        FRom Punto Anegado which lyeth vnder eight degrees, are fiftie miles, to Rio Dulce, which lieth vnder ſixe degrees: from Rio Dulce, that is, the ſweet riuer, to R
                                 •
                              ode O
                                 •
                              ellana, which is called Rio de la Amazones is 110. miles, ſo that there is accounted eight hundred Spaniſh miles, or 3200. Italian: from Nombre de Dios along to the coaſt of the Riuer Orellana, which cunneth into the ſea, (as it is ſaide) hauing fiftéene miles in the breadth of the entrie, and moſt vnder the Equinoctial line. From this Riuer I will ſhew the coaſt as it lieth, yet firſt I muſt tel you the riuers, & their names that lie betweene it and Pun
                                 •
                              o Anegado, firſt Rio Grando, the great Riuer, then Rio Dulce, the ſweete riuer, Rio de Canoas, the Riuer of Canos. Canoas are ſcutes, by the Indians made out of peeces of wood, which they make hollow, and therewith they fiſh in the riuers, Capo de Corrientes, the point of the ſtreame, Aldea the village, Capo de los Farillon
                                 •
                              z, the point of the cliffes, Rio de Ancones, the riuer of the open hauens, Rio de Laga
                                 •
                              tos, the riuer of ye Crocadiles, Rio de vincente P
                                 ••
                              zon, Rio de Cacique, the K. riuer: for Cacici in Indian ſpeech is Kings. Coſta Braua the wild poynt, Capo de Corrientes, Rio de Caribes, the riuer of Caribes, or eaters of men. Rio de Canoas, Rio de Arboledas, the riuer of bowes, Rio de Montanna, the riuer of the hill, Rio Apercellado, the riuer of the Bankes, Bayha de Canoas, the bay of Canaos, or Scutes, Atalaya ſentinel or watch, Rio dos Fumos, ye riuer of Smoke, Rio de Pracellet, ye riuer of banks, Capo de North, the North point. And there being paſt that point, the great riuer Oregliana (in Spaniſh Orellana▪
                           ) runneth forth which 
                              〈◊〉
                            the greateſt riuer in India or in all the world, ſome called this riuer the ſweete ſea, it is at the mouth or entrie fifteene Spaniſh miles broade, there are ſome that ſaid this riuer and the Riuer of Maragnon, which hereafter ſhall follow, haue all one head or ſpring from Quito by Mullubamba, & then this riuer runneth vnder the Equinoctial line at the leaſt 1500. ſpaniſh miles, as Orellian & his companions recite, that came out of Peru from the ſouth ſea, cleane ouerwhart the countrey through this riuer, with great hunger & much trouble, and ſo entred into the north ſea, not that it runneth ſtraight outright, but crooking and compaſſing in and out, which maketh it ſo long a iourney, for that from the head of this riuer to the ſea it is but ſeuen hundred Spaniſh miles, to trauaile right forth ouer the country. This Riuer within the land is in ſome places foure and ſome fiue miles broade, making many Iſlands. The common opinion is, that vpon this riuer there dwelleth women that burne off their right breaſts, that they be not hundred therby to ſhoote in bowes, which they vſe in the warres: by the ancient writers they were called Amazons, and had a great parte of Aſia vnder theyr

ſubiection: from the riuer Orellana, to the Riuer Marannon, or Maragnon, are 100. miles, which in the mouth or entry is 15. miles broad, & lyeth vnder 3, degrees, on the ſouthſide of the Equinoctial line, in it alſo are many Iſland: thereabouts likewiſe there groweth good Frankenſence, which is eſteemed better then that of Arabia, & there alſo were founde certain Emeralds, and tokens of gold, with other riches. They make wine of diuers kinds of fruit, ſpecially of great dates, in quantity as big as ſpaniſh Quinces, which is verie good & may be kept, the men weare iewels at their eares, and thrée or foure rings through their lips, which they likewiſe ſ
                              •
                           t, as a beautifying vnto them, they ſleep in beds ſtretched abroad and made faſt to trees, a good height from the ground, without any couerlets, as all the Indians from Nombre de Dios, & ſo to the ſtraights of Magellana vſe to do. There are in this riuer filthy flies which make men lame, being bitten or ſtinged by them, vnleſſe they doo preſently pul out the ſtings: there are many of opinion that this Riuer M
                                 •
                              ragnon, and the aforeſaide Riuer of Orellana, doo both ſpring out of the countrey of Peru, but no man knoweth the certaintie thereof. From Maranhon to tetra de Humos, or Fumous, that is, the country of Smoke, where the line parteth is 100. miles, & from thence to Angla di S. Lucar, are 100. miles, and from thence to Cabo de S. Auguſtin, lying vnder 8. degrées and a halfe, on the South ſide of the Equinoctial line are 70. miles, the length of the coaſt from the riuer of Maragnon to Cabo de S. Auguſtin, is as followeth, firſt an Iſland called Iſla de S. Sebaſtian. Acenc
                                 •
                              o Aſcenſion: P. de Pracell, the hauen of Bankes: P. de Corrientes, the hauen of the Streame, Rio de Il
                                 •
                              ieo, the riuer of ye Iſlands, Coſta Branca, the white coaſt, Rio de Coroa the riuer of the Crowne, Cabo del eſte, the Eaſter coaſt, Rio des Lixos, the riuer of filth, Rio dos Reciffes, the riuer of cliffes, Rio S. Miguel, the riuer of ſaint Michael, Bahya dos 
                                 •
                              ortugos, the Riuer of Torteeux, Grand Bahya, the great Bay, Cabo de S. Roque, the point of S. Roche, Cabo de S. Raphael, the poynt of S. Raphael, Baya de Traicam, the Bay of Treaſon, Paraiba os Petiguares, Pernambuco, the Cape of S. Auguſtin was diſcouered in An. 1500.
                           1500. by Vincentio, Ianes Pinzon, in the firſt month of the yeare.
                     
                     
                        Braſilia.
                        NOw followeth the Eaſt prouince of America, or of Peruana commonly called Braſil the which was moſt diſcouered by the Portingales, and by them ſubdued and brought vnder ſubiection, they had therein from North to ſouth, 40. miles, and from Eaſt to Weſt 160. miles, which ſtretching along by the coaſt, is more then 700. miles. This country hath the name of Braſilia, by reaſon of the great aboundance of red braſil wood which from thence is brought into theſe countryes: in this countrey are manie prouinces and ſundrie people, ſome ſubiect to the Portingales, & ſome to the Frenchmen, as Marga
                                 •
                              atan, Taba
                                 •
                              arren, Oueta
                                 •
                              aten, Tououpi
                                 •
                              ambaultiem, and Morpions, all cruel Indians, and moſt of them Canibals, whereof in the deſcription of the coaſt we make mention: not far from the Cape S. Auguſtin, lyeth Pernambuco, a place where the Portingales haue great traffike for ſugar and Braſil wood. This cape lyeth vnder eight degrees and a halfe, on the ſouth ſide of the Equinoctiall line, and was diſcouered by Vincente Ianes Pinzon, in the yeare of our Lord, 1500. in the moneth of Ianuary, and is the neereſt place to Affrica or Spain, of al the country of America, for yt it is accounted but 500. miles from this pointe to Cabo Verde in Affrica, the common reckoning of the ſea Cards, yet ſome eſteeme it to be leſſe. From this cape to Baia de todos Sanctos, lying vnder 13. degrees, are 100. miles: between the which two places, I let paſſe S. Alexio, S. Miguel, Rio de Aguada, that is, the riuer of watering, Rio di Franciſco, Rio de cana Fiſtola, becauſe in that place there groweth much Caſsia, ſuch as is in Egypt, Rio Real the kings riuer, Rio de Tapuan A. Pouoacam, the village or commom aſſemblie, &c. after the which followeth the Baya de todos Sanctos, From this bay to the Cape dos Abrollios, or dos Baixos, that is, the Cape of the droughts, which lieth vnder 18. degrees, are 100. miles, and between them lieth theſe places, Rio de S. Giano, that is the riuer of S. Iulian, os Ilhos, the Iſlands, Rio de S. Antonio, Rio de S. Crus, P. Seguro, the ſure hauen, Rio de Braſil, Rio de Caruelas, &c.
                        
                     
                     
                        Margaiates.
                        
                           MArgaiates are certaine people mingled with the Portingales, & are Canibals, the country wherin they dwel is gran both in winter and ſummer, as it is with vs in May and Iune, both men and women go naked, as they come out of their mothers wombes, painting themſelues with blacke ſtrikes, like the Tartarians. The men ſhaue themſelues like Friers, they make

holes in their nether lippes, wherein they weare certaine greene poliſhed Iaſper ſtones, wherewith they ſhutte and open the holes: which ſtones they weare for a great ornament, which notwithſtanding being taken out of the holes, maketh them ſhew moſt vgly, as it they had two mouthes one ouer the other: the women lette their haires grow long like our women, and bore not their lippes, but make holes in theyr eares, wherein they hang certaine white bones, which hang as low as their ſhoulders. This countrey yeeldeth much Braſill wood, from the Cape dos Baixos, to Cape Frio, which lyeth like an Iſland, are an hundred miles: betweene theſe two places lye many riuers and hauens, ſpecially theſe, P. del Agnado, Rio Dulce, Re
                                 •
                              os Magos Spirito Sancto, where the Portingales haue a Caſtle, which the Margarites or Barbarians call Moab: from Moab you come to Tapenury, where there lieth certaine Iſlands friends vnto the Frenchmen, from thence you come to Paraiba people that dwell in cottages made like ouens. From thence paſſing along the coaſt, you come to certaine running ſandes, whereabouts alſo are certaine cliffes, that iutte into the ſea, whereunto the ſailors are to take great regard. Right againſt thoſe ſhalowes or flattes, there lyeth an euen or flat land, about twentie miles great, inhabited by the Ouetacaters moſt cruel Barbarians.
                     
                     
                        Ouetacates.
                        THis people make warres, not onely againſt their neighbours, but alſo one againſt the other, as likewiſe aga
                              •
                           nſt al ſtrangers. They ſuffer no man to deale or traffike with them, and being hardly beſette by the enemies (although neuer ouercome) they can runne ſo faſt away, that they ſeeme in a manner to ſurpaſſe the wild Hart, as it is ſeene by their hunting of wild beaſts. They go naked like other Braſilians, and let their haire grow long, downe to the middle of their bodies, cōtrary to al other Braſilians: yet they cut it away on the fore part of their heades, and behinde in their neckes, as the reſt doo. Theſe cruel Canibals dwel in a ſmal, but an inuincible countrey: they eate raw fleſh like dogs and wolues, they haue a ſeueral ſpeech different from their neighbours, and becauſe of their cruelty they haue but little of our wares brought vnto them, and that they haue, they get it in exchange, for certaine gréene feathers. This exchange is done one ſtanding diſtant from the other at the leaſt an hundred paces, ſhewing each other their wares without ſpeaking one word, and each of them laying their wares in a certaine place appointed: they take it away, giuing no longer credite one to the other, then for the time that they haue exchanged their wares: after that beeing returned to their places, they to then beſt to rob each other of his marchandiſe, wherein the Ouetacaters, running faſter then the other, and faſter then hounds, do oftentimes win the priſe. Being paſt this countrey of the Ouetacaters, you come to another prouince called Maq-He, which is likewiſe inhabited by cruel Barbarians, which neuertheleſſe cannot ſleepe nor reſt in peace, for their bad neighbours the Ouetacater
                                 •
                              . Vpon this coaſt lyeth a great high ſienie rocke made like a tower, whereon when the ſun ſhineth, it gliſters like Sinarag
                                 •
                              u
                                 •
                              
                            whereby many haue thought it to be a recke of Sinaragdus ſtones, and therefore by the Frenchmen and Spaniards it is called M
                                 •
                              nſis, that is, Sinaragdu
                                 •
                              . It is not poſſible neither by ſhip nor on foote, to get vnto that reck, becauſe of the cliffes wherewith it is compaſſed, and being by it, there is no wayes or meanes to get vpon it. About this country lyeth three ſmall vnhabited Iſlandes, called Maghenſis full of birdes, which are ſo tame, that mē take them with their hands, and kil them with ſtaues. From thence you go to Cape Frio, a verie good hauen, & well knowne by meanes of the French traffike, whereabouts the 
                              
                                 •
                              ou
                                 •
                              up
                                 •
                              nambau
                                 ••
                              , friendes to the Frenchmen doo inhabite: about this Cape are many great whales, in Latine called Preſtis, and in Duch Swordfiſhes, yet they are no ſword fiſhes, for that their Iawes are full of teeth like Sawes. There are likewiſe on this Cape manie Parrats, in as great aboundance as crowes with vs: about this Cape lyeth the creeke by the Barbarians called Ganabara, and by the Portingales Rio de Gane
                                 •
                              r
                                 •
                              
                            becauſe it was diſcouered in the firſt moneth of the yeare, and the Bayaſe
                                 •
                              moza: this creeke is wel knowne to the Frenchmen, becauſe they traffike thither, and therin had made a fort, it lyeth vnder three & twentie degrees, on the South ſide of the Equinoctial line. right vnder Tropicus Capricor
                                 •
                              
                            it is in the entrie ſixe Spaniſh miles broad, and further in but three or foure miles broad, and there lyeth ſmaller hils then at the entrie. The mouth of this creeke is verie dangerous, for that if you leaue the ſea, you muſt ſaile by three vnhabited Iſlandes, where it is great fortune but the ſhips doo ſtrike in peeces vppon the rocks and cliffes: you muſt likewiſe paſſe before a pointe, not

aboue three hundred paces broade, which hangeth from a high hil, hauing the form of a Piramides, which not onely ſeemeth verie great, but far off ſhewing as if it were made by mans art, which by reaſon of the roundneſſe, as alſo becauſe it is like a tower, is by the Frenchmen called le pot de Buere, that is, the Butter potte: a little further in the creeke is an euen rock, about a hundred and twenty paces great, by the Frenchmen called R
                                 •
                              tier or Mouſe fall, to which Villagagno at his firſt arriuall brought all his neceſſaries and prouiſion, thinking thereon to build a fort, but the waues droue him backe againe: about halfe a mile further lieth the Iſlande wherein the Frenchmen did dwell, which before their arriuall was not inhabited, and is in compaſſe about a thouſand paces, yet the breadth is ſix times more then the length, all compaſſed about with cliffes, as alſo with water, in ſuch ſort, that the ſhippes cannot come at it but with great danger, onely in one place, and that with ſmall boates, whereby it appeareth that this Iſland by reaſon of the ſituation, is very ſtrong: on both ſides of this Iſland there ſtandeth a little hill, whereupon the Gouernour had made his houſe, and on a Rocke about fiftie or ſixtie foote high in the middle of the Iſlande, hee had placed his Court or Caſtle called Coligni, in honour of the Admirall of France, that had ſent him thither. In other plaine fieldes about the ſame, were the reſt of the Frenchmens houſes made rounde, and couered with leaues or boughes, being in all about eighty men. 10000. paces, or two Spaniſh miles and ½ further from this Iſland, lyeth another verie fruitfull Iſland, in compaſſe about thrée French miles, called the great Iſland, inhabited by Tououpinamba
                                 ••
                              i
                                 •
                              s, great friends to the Frenchmen, to whome they oftentimes went to fetch meale and other neceſſaries: there are likewiſe in this creeke many other ſmall and vnhabited Iſlandes, where there are many good oyſters, the Barbarians diue vnder the water, & with theyr hands bring vp certaine great ſtones, whereat there hangeth great numbers of Oyſters, and ſo faſt cleued to the ſtone, that they can hardly gette them off, verie good to eate, ſome of them hauing ſmall Pearles within them: they are by the Barbarians called Leripes. This water is ful of ſtrange fiſhes, ſpecially Barbels and Sea Swine: there are likewiſe whales with verie fatte and thicke ſkinnes: there runneth likewiſe into this creeke out of the middle part of the land, two freſh riuers, vppon both the ſides whereof lyeth many villages of the Barbarians: tenne or fiftéene miles further along the coaſt, towards the riuer de Plata, or the ſtraights of Magellana, there is another great creeke, by the Frenchmen called Vaſarum, whereunto they vſe to ſaile, as they do to the other which they firſt took in.
                     
                     
                        Hereafter followeth the manner and cuſtomes of the people.
                        THe Toupinambaultii are not much vnlike our people, well proportioned of bodie and limbe, but ſtronger and healthſomer then wee, and leſſe ſubiect vnto ſicknes: among them are found fewe lame cripples, blinde, or miſhapen men, although there are of them that liue to the age of an hundred and twenty yeares, accounting their yeares by the Moones, fewe of them likewiſe hauing gray haires, which is a certaine ſigne of the temperatenes of that land, as hauing no extream cold, nor exceſſiue heate, hauing greene trées, hearbes, and fields al the yeare through, and becauſe they liue without care they ſhew alwaies of one age, for they haue no hurtful poyſon nor foule water to drink, whereby all diſeaſes do grow: they haue likewiſe no paſſions or afflictions of minde in their countreyes, which mooue, vexe, and conſume both the ſpirits and bodyes, as not knowing of any fauours, couetous deſires, chidings, hate, or enuie, which (but to our ſhame) conſumeth the Chriſtians. As touching the colour of their bodyes, they are not altogether blacke, but browne like the Spaniards, becauſe of the heate of the ſim: they go al naked as they came out of theyr mothers wombes, not once ſhaming therat, vnleſſe it be at bankets, or when they goe to warres: there are ſome of them that bind two great leaues together, therewith to couer theyr priuie members, not ſo much for their credite, but becauſe they haue either ſome deformity, or elſe diſeaſe therin, which oftentimes happeneth among them, they are not rough nor hairie, as ſome men deſcribe them, for they ſuffer no haire to hang vpon theyr bodyes, for that as ſoone as they perceiue it, they plucke it foorth either with theyr nayles, or ſheeres, which they haue either of the Frenchmen, or the Portingales, which they pull not onely from their chins, but alſo from their eye browes, eye liddes, which maketh them for the moſt part ſeeme feareful and vgly. The hinder part of theyr heades is couered with haire: the young boyes vntil they come to mans ſtate, we are theyr haire from the crowne of the head, downe to theyr neckes, but al theyr foreheades ſhauen, as if it were a Friers

crowne, on the hinder part of their heades they let the haire grow, after the manner of our aunceſtors, which were all ſhorne only in their necks, and that was rounded. They haue likewiſe for a cuſtome, that they bore holdes in their boyes vnderlippes, wherein they ſtick ſharp bones, as white as Iuorie, which they take out and put in as often as they wil, and being older, they take away the bones, and in ſteed thereof weare greene Iaſpis ſtones, being a kinde of baſtard Emerauld, inwardly flat, with a thick ende, becauſe they ſhall not fall out: ſome weare ſuch ſtones that are ſharpe, and of a finger long, when they take out the ſtones, they play with their tongues in the hole, which is moſt vgly to beholde, for that it ſeemeth they haue twoo mouthes: ſome of them weare not onely this ſtone through theyr lips, but alſo through both their cheekes: touching their noſes they are flat, which they cauſe to grow ſo by force when they are yong, cōtrary to vs, which deſire ſtraite noſes, but they eſteeme their flat noſes for a beauty, they paint their bodies with manie colours, ſpecially aboue al others, their legs with a blacke colour, with the ſap of a certaine hearbe by them called Genipat, ſo that a farre off they ſeeme to haue blacke bootes, or ſtraight hoſe, like the prieſts in our countries, the blackneſſe of this ſap cleaueth ſo faſt on, that if they waſh themſelues for the ſpace of ten or fifteene daies together, yet it will hardly come off. They haue likewiſe necklaces of eight fingers long, made of bones, as white as Alablaſter, which they call Iaci, according to theyr forme, which they putte vppon cotten ſtrings, and weare them about theyr armes, as alſo other flatte and rounde bones, like ſtiuers, certaine peeces of money in Holland, which beeing bored through the middle, and hanged one by one vpon ſtrings, they weare them in ſuch ſort as wee weare chaines of gold, which they call Bouze. Beſides this, they make certaine rounde beades of blacke ſhining wood, which they tie together vpon ſtrings, and weare them likewiſe about theyr neckes, which ſhine as blacke and gliſtering as if they were Iet. They haue likewiſe many Hennes of our countreyes, which the Portingales brought thither, from the which they pull the ſmall white fethers, which with irons they hacke and make ſoft, and then colour them redde: which done, they annoint their bodies with gum, and ſtrow the feathers therein, wherby they looke like new hatched birds, wherof this opinion hath riſen by ſome men that haue firſt gone into thoſe Countries, and ſéeing them dreſt in that manner) that they wereſo by nature. They dreſſe theyr foreheades with feathers of diuers colours, verie cunningly placed together, like the French gentlewomen, that ware periwigs of ſtrange haire: theſe apparrels and ornaments of feathers and ſtones, as alſo the rattles wherewith they make a noyſe, with their woodden halberdes, and many other things to them belonging, you may ſee at Doctor Paludanus houſe: thoſe crownes on theyr heades they call Iempenambi, in theyr eares likewiſe they weare certaine white bones, not much vnlike thoſe which the children weare in theyr lips.
                        In Braſilia there are certaine blacke Birdes like Crowes, by them called Toucan, which haue certaine rings about theyr neckes, of yellow and red feathers, which they flea, and drie the ſkinnes, and beeing drie, are likewiſe called Toucan, which they weare vppon each Cheeke, ſticking them on with ware, and when they goe to warres, or to a banket, when they meane to kill a man and to eate him, according to their manner, becauſe they will bee after the fineſt ſort, they putte on that kinde of apparrell made of feathers, with hoodes vppon their heades, and thinges made of greene, redde, blewe, and other colours of feathers, about their armes verie cunningly ſette together, which by vs coulde not bee mended, ſhewing as if they were of wrought Veluet, as Paludanus can ſhewe you. Such feathers likewiſe they binde vppon theyr Halberdes, which are likewiſe almoſt like a blacke Spitte, Lappe of harde woodde, made redde or blacke.
                        They wearelikewiſe on their ſhoulders certain mantles of Eaſtrige feathers (which is a ſigne that they haue Eaſtriges) that are verie cunningly ſet together, and hang long about them, by them called A
                                 •
                              aroy: ſuch as wil among them be accounted manly and ſtout, & haue the report to haue killed & eaten many men, they cut great ſlaſhes in their breaſts, hips, and thighs, wherby they make the fleſh to riſe, which they couer with a certain pouder, and make them looke blacke, which colour neuer goeth off during theyr liues, wherby a farre off they ſeeme to haue cutte leather Ierkins on their bodies, ſuch as the Switſers vſe to weare. When they will holde any drunken feaſt, or dauncing, wherunto they are much giuen, to increaſe their mirth, beſides the great noyſe and crie which they ordinarily make, they haue a certaine kind of hollow fruit, which Theretus calleth Ahonay, the pith whereof

being taken out, ſome of them are filled with ſtones, and ſome without, and ſo are put vpon ſtrings of cotten wooll, which they tie about their legs, dauncing therewith, as our iuglers and morice dauncers in theſe countreyes dance with belles: likewiſe they carrie in their hands certaine dryed goords, which they fil with ſtones, & hauing a ſticke in the ende, make a noyſe therewith, as our children doo with a blather full of ſtones: which inſtrument with them is called Maraca: the women go naked like the men, and pul away their haire from the eyebrowes, and eyelids, but weare it on theyr heades like our women, which they waſh and comb derie often, and tie it vp with redde cotten hairelaces, as our country women vſe to do, but moſt parte of them vſe to lette it hang downe about theyr ſhoulders, wherin they take great pleaſure: the women neyther bore lips nor cheekes, but onely their eares, with ſo wide holes, that a man may thruſt his finger through, in thē they hang certain long things, which reach vnto their breaſts or ſhoulders, like bloudhoundes or water ſpanels eares. They paint their faces with all kinds of colours, which their neighbors and other women do for them: in the middle of the cheeke they make a rounde circle, drawing lines from it of diuers colours, vntill theyr face is ful, not leauing ſo much vndone as the eye liddes: they weare bracelets of white bones, cut thin like plates, very cunningly ioyned together with wax and gum, & alſo white necklaces, which they cal Bonze, & weare them not about their necks like the men, but onely their armes, for the which cauſe they are verie deſirous of the glaſſe beades of all colours ſuch as we haue here in theſe countries, by them caled Maurobi, it is to be wondered at, that if any apparrel be giuen vnto thē, they wil not weare it, excuſing themſelues & ſaying that it is not their cuſtome, but had rather weare ſtones & other things vppon their bodies, then ſuch cloathes: they haue a cuſtome that in euery riuer where they come, they ſteepe vnto the water and waſh their hands, & many times they duck into the water at yt leaſt ten times a day, to waſh themſelues like birds, and if they were apparrelled & ſhould put it off as often as they do ſo, it would be ouer troubleſome vnto them: likewiſe the women ſlaues being compelled to weare cloathes, many euenings to pleaſure themſelues, doo put off theyr cloathes, ſmock, and all, and ſo runne naked about the countrey: I muſt ſpeake ſomewhat of their little children, of the age of foure or fiue yeares old, which being fat of body, with white bones in theyr lips, their haire ſhorne, and their bodyes painted, runne playing in great numbers about the countrey leaping and dauncing, moſt wonderfull and verie pleaſant to behold: & laſtly it is to be noted, that many are of opinion, that the nakedneſſe of their women ſhould be an occaſion to prouoke them vnto luſt, which notwithſtanding is found contrary, for that by reaſon of their vnſeemly nakedneſſe, the men rather haue a loathing then a luſt, and to the contrarie, the great and coſtly apparrell, as gownes and peticoates, counterfeit haire, the ſumptuous dreſſing of the head, the chaines and bracelets of gold, which our women vſe, do more prouoke and intice men vnto luſt, then ſimple nakednes, although it is againſt the ordinance of God, and therfore not to be commended, as not beeing conuenient, but as therein they goe beyonde the limits of Gods worde, our women alſo doo paſſe the boundes of godly matrones, and ſinne no leſſe then they in ſuch he atheniſh cuſtomes.
                     
                     
                        Of the meate and drinke of the Braſilians.
                        THe Braſilians haue twoo ſorts of rootes, called Aypi and Maniot, which béeing planted, in three or foure Moneths become a foote and a halfe long, and as bigge as a mans thigh, which beeing taken out of the earth, are by the women dryed by the fire vppon a Boucano, and then grated vppon ſharpe ſtones, as wee doo Nutmegs, whereof proceedeth a certaine white meale, and being moyſt, is of taſte like our newe ſtarch, which to prepare, they haue great earthen Pots, wherein they ſeethe it, ſtirring it continually, vntill it bee as thicke as pappe, yet they make twoo kindes of meale, one ſodden till it bee harde, which they call Ouyentan, that is, hard meale, which becauſe it will continue long, is carried with them into the warres, the other is leſſe ſodden, and ſomewhat ſofter, called Ouypou, that is, ſoft meale, which taſteth like white bread bran, ſpecially when it is eaten freſh, and although both theſe kindes of meale beeing freſh, are of a verie good taſte, and ſtrong meate, yet are they not fit to make bread, they may well knead it as wée doo wheats or rie, and it will bee verie white, but being baked, it wil on the out ſide burne and become drie, and inwardly continue meals as it was at the firſt: with the broth of fat

fleſh. They make good pappe thereof, verie pleaſant of taſte, ſeeming like ſodden ryce, by them called Mingant, with their hands they preſſe certaine iuice out of this roote, which is as white as milke, which being putte in earthen pots and ſet in the ſunne, it runneth together like curds, which they put into earthen diſhes, & frie them as we do egs. The roote Aypi is much vſed to be roſted and eaten, as being ſoft, and taſteth like cheſnuts, the other muſt be made into meale and ſodden, otherwiſe it is dangerous to be eaten: both the ſteeles of the rootes are not much vnlike each other, being as great as a ſmall iuniper tree, and leaues like Poenie, the ſtrangeneſſe of theſe rootes conſiſteth in the great numbers, for that the branches (that are as brickle as the ſtalkes of hemp) beeing broke into diuers peeces, and ſo thruſt déepe into the earth, without any other vſage, within three or foure months after do bring forth great quantities of thoſe rootes: they haue likewiſe much Indian wheate, by thē called Anati, and by others Maiz, whereof they make meale, which they bake and eat. Touching their drinke, which they make of thoſe two rootes, and alſo of Maiz, it is made in this ſort by their women, being of opinion, that if it ſhould wee done by men, that it would haue no taſte. They cut the rootes in ſmal peeces, as we do turnops, which they ſeeth in yellow pots vntil they be ſoft, which done they ſet them from the fire, and then ſet themſelues round about the pots, chawing the ſodden rootes, which they throw into another pot made ready for the purpoſe, and ſet vpon the fire, wherein they are ſodden once againe, and continually ſtirred, vntil they thinke them to be inough, which done, they are poured into other fattes made of reedes, not being clarifyed, and a third time ſodden and ſkimmed, they couer the reedes, and keepe it to drinke, as their maner is, and as hereafter I will ſhew you: in the ſame manner the women make a drinke of Maiz or Indian wheate, which they call C
                                 •
                              ou-in thicke and troubled, in a manner taſteth like milke, and becauſe this Maiz and rootes are there in great aboundance they make as much drinke as they wil, which is by them likewiſe done, kéeping it til they come altogether to drink, and whē they come to the drunken feaſts, and that they meane to kil a man and eate him, thē the women make fiers about the veſſeles, wherby the drink becommeth warme, and then it is firſt drawne, and the women filling a goord halfe ful, giue it to the men as they are dauncing, which they drink at one draught, and that ſo often and ſo long, that they emptie al theyr veſſels, as Letio himſelfe hath ſeene (from whom I gathered this diſcourſe) that for the ſpace of three dayes they haue done nothing but drinke, and neuer ceaſed, and being ſo ful that they coulde beare no more, yet would they not leaue off, but ſtill kéepe companie: at thoſe drinkings they are merrie, ſinging, leaping, dancing, and exhorting each other to be valiant in armes, and to kill many of their enemies. That done, they runne one after the other like cranes in their flight, leaping vntill al theyr veſſelles are emptie, at the which feaſts, eſpecially when they meane to kill and eate a man, they are dreſſed in fine feathers and wt necklaces, and bracelets: in theyr daunces there are no women coupled with them, but euery one daunceth by himſelfe, and theſe drinkings are obſerued whē thoſe of one village meete together, and neighbours drinke one with the other, ſitting in theyr hanging beds, but with more good fellowſhip, wherewith there are twoo things to be conſidered, firſt, that the Braſilians do neuer drinke when they eate, as we do, nor when they drinke, they neuer eate: ſecondly, that they eat without word ſpeaking, and if they haue any thing to ſay each vnto other, they do it after their meat, they vſe likewiſe no certaine houre to eate in, but when they are hungrie they fall to their meate, as well by night as by day, yet they are verie ſober in eating, waſhing hands and mouthes both before and after meate, which I thinke they doo to take the clamines of the meat off from their fingers.
                     
                     
                        Of certain great beaſts and Crocadiles in Braſilia.
                        FIrſt you muſt vnderſtand that in al Braſilia there is not any foure footed beaſts like theſe in our countries, they haue great numbers of one kind which they cal Tapirouſlou, of a midle ſtature, between a cow & an aſſe, this beaſt hath reddiſh & long haire, like a cow, but hath no hornes, and a ſhorter neck, long & hanging eares, ſmaller and longer legs, a whole foot like an aſſe, ſo that it is not wrong named to be called a cow aſſe, yet different from both, firſt becauſe it hath a ſhort taile (as many beaſts in America haue no tailes at al) & ſharpe téeth; yet without any corage, for it runs from a man: the Braſilians ſhoot at this beaſt with their arrowes, or elſe take them in pits, which they dig for the purpoſe, & eſteeme much of it, becauſe of the ſkin: they hauing fleyed it off, they cutte the hide in rounde péeces, which they drie in the Sunne, whereof they make buklers, wherwith they defend them

ſelues from the enemies arrowes, for that by reaſon of the heate of the ſunne they become ſo harde, that no arrow will pierce them, be they neuer ſo fiercely drawne. The fleſh of the beaſt taſteth much like our bores fleſh, and by the Braſilians it is roſted vpon the coales, and ſo kept, for that becauſe they haue no ſalt, they al broyle theyr meat vpon woodden gardirons, and ſo kéepe it: in euery village you finde ſuch girdirons, which oftentimes he ful of mens fleſh. Secondly, they haue a certaine kinde of Hart, by them called Seouaſlous, yet leſſe then ours, and with ſhorter hornes, with long haire like goates: and wilde American Swine, by them called 
                              
                                 •
                              aroſlou, which is as bigge of bodye, eares, head, and feete, as ours are, as alſo the like teeth, which are verie dangerous, but becauſe it is leaner and ranker, and grinneth fearefully, therefore it is miſſhapen. This beaſt by nature hath a hole in the backe, as the ſea Swine haue in theyr heades, whereat they receiue and caſt foorth theyr breath. There is likewiſe a fine coloured beaſt, called Agouti, which is a kind of hart, with clouen feete, a ſhorte taile, with a noſe and cares much like a hare, very pleaſant and ſauorie of taſte: there are alſo two or thrée kindes of beaſts called Tapitis, not much vnlike our hares, red of haire: in the woods are great rats, of body and haire like Ekehornes, in taſt not much vnlike our conies, Pag. or Pague, a beaſt of the height and greater thē an indifferent Grayhound, with an euil fauored head, a faire ſkin, ſpeckled white and blacke, of taſte much like veale. There is likewiſe another beaſt called Sarigoy, which becauſe it ſtinketh, ye Barbarians wil not eate, yet it is good & ſauory fleſh, ſpecially when the fat of the kidnies (wherin the ſtinke lieth) is taken away. There are alſo Tatous or Armadillen, wherof in other places I haue ſpoken, which are of very white, good, and ſauorie fleſh: alſo there are certaine Crocadiles, which they cal Iacare, as big as a mans leg, and indifferent long, not hurtfull, they come into their houſes, where the children play with them without any danger. The Crocadiles in thoſe countries haue a wider mouth, high feet, ye taile neither round nor ſharp, but very thin at the end: ther are likewiſe diuers kinds of Eaſts ſpeckled like our little ones, & of foure or fiue foot long, in thicknes correſpondent, feareful to behold, but keepe in riuers & moores like frogs, doing no hurt, they cal them Touous: being ſleyed & ſoddē, they ſurpaſſe al meates for taſte & goodnes, their fleſh being as white as a capons fleſh, ſweet, ſhort, & excellēt good. They haue great toades, which the Toupinambauiltu eate whole being roſted, ſo that they are not poyſon like our toades, they eat likewiſe ſnakes of the bigneſſe of a mans arme, & fiue foote long, but of no great taſte, ther are alſo many other ſnakes, ſpecially in the riuers, that are as gréen as graſſe, long & thin, whoſe ſting is very dangerous: there are alſo in ſome meeres of woods, diuers great and dangerous Eaſts. Iohanes Lerus writeth, that paſſing through a wood, he met an Eaſt, as bigge as a mans bodye, & of fiue or ſix foot long, al couered with white ſcales like oyſter ſhels, which lifted vp one of her forefeete, and caſting vp her head, looked vpon him with ſtaring eyes, breathing at the mouth moſt feareful to beholde, and after he and his companie had ſtayed a quarter of an houre to behold it, it clome vp ye hil with ſuch a noiſe ouer and through the trées, that not any Hart running through the wood, could make a greater noyſe. There is yet in this countrey another kind of ſtrange beaſt caled Ian-ouare, feeding only vpon the pray: this beaſt for length of legs and ſwiftnes, is like the Grayhound, but vnder the chinne it hath a beard or certain long haire, & a ſpeckled ſkin, like a Linx, and in other parts not vnlike the Linx: this beaſt is much feared by the Braſilians, for that whatſoeuer it taketh, it teareth it in peeces, and ſpoyleth it like a Lion, feeding therof: the Indians take this beaſt in pits, & to reuenge themſelues, they cauſe her therin to pine to death, wherby they double her paine. Méerecats are there in great aboundance, that are ſmall & blacke, by them called Cay, and among the reſt, one kind of Méerecat called Sagouin. of a verie fayre coloured haire, as big, and of haire as an Ekehorne, but as touching the forme of the chaps, breaſt, and necke & other parts, altogither like a lion, being one of the aireſt little beaſtes in al that country, but for the tendernes therof it cannot be brought ouer ſea. There is yet another very ſtrange beaſt, by the Indians caled Hay. as big as a dog, with a face like a Méerecat, & a hanging belly like a ſow that hath new farrowed▪ of haire dark white, al black, with a long taile, with rough feet like a beare, long clawes, when it lieth in ye woods, it is very wild, but if they take it, it will be tamed, the naked Tououpinambaultiers play not willingly with it, becauſe it hath verie ſharpe clawes: no man (as the Indians ſay) did euer ſée this beaſt wild or tame, to eate any thing, but as they think, it liueth by ye aire, wherof I haue ſpokē in other places. Laſtly there is yet another ſtrange beaſt called Coaty, as high as a Hare, with ſhort & ſpeckled haire, ſmal ſharpe eies, a head very ſmal, & downe

from the eies a ſnout that riſeth vp, of a foote long & more, round like a ſtick, & ſomewhat ſmal at the end, in ſuch maner, that it is al of one bigneſſe, with ſo narrow a mouth, that a man can hardly thruſt his little finger therein, very ſtrange to behold: and being taken, it pulleth all his foure feete together and falleth either vppon the one ſide or the other, and wil not riſe, vnleſſe they giue it mice, whereof it liueth in the wood: this countrey aboundeth with al kinde of foule, whereof ſome are to be eaten, and ſome not, as Indian Hens, by them called Arignow Ouſſou, and common hennes of theſe countryes, firſt brought thither by the Portingales, and among them the white hens are much eſteemed, to pull out their feathers, and to die them red, therwith to dreſſe themſelues, yet they eat them not, thinking likewiſe that their egs are poyſon, which they feare, becauſe they ſee the Frenchmen eate them: whereby it commeth that in the villages where no ſtrangers traffike, there are ſo great numbers of hens, that you may buy one for a penie: beſides the hens, they bring vp many duckes, which they cal Vpec but becauſe they are of this minde, that if they ſhould eate ſuch ſlow birdes, they ſhuld likewiſe become ſlow, and ſo might be taken by theyr enemies, therefore they eate none of them, nor any other beaſt that goeth ſoftly, nor fiſhes that ſwim ſlowly. There are likewiſe many ſpeckled hens, of three ſorts, all blacke, with white ſpots, verie pleaſant of taſt, like pheaſants: there are alſo two kinds of faire cocks called Moutor, as great as pecockes, ſpeckled with white ſpots, and black feathers. Macocaua & Yamboun-Ouaſlou. are two kindes of partriges, as big as ducks, and of taſte like pheaſants, wood Doues, Turtledoues, and yet another kind of partriges, al of one taſt: of foules that are not eaten, there are many, as diuers kindes of parrats, wherof ſome are ſo faire, that fairer cannot be found, ſpecially 2. ſorts, called Aras & Canide, the feathers wherof they vſe for their apparell, hats, & arme bands. They haue verie faire redde, blewe, and gold yellow ſhining feathers, whereof diuers of them ſing. Beſides thoſe, they haue foure other kindes of Parrots, whereof one kinde is very little brought hither, by them called Aa
                                 •
                              ourous, which haue theyr heades parted in thrée colours, as redde, yellow, and violet, the wings all redde, the taile long and yellow, and the body greene, which learne ſo perfectly to ſpeake, as if it were men: wee reade of one that when it was bidden, would daunce, ſkippe, ſing, and play all the parts of the wilde Barbarians: being carried with them into the wars & commanded to be ſtil, it would be as quiet as if it had beene dumbe, neither ſtirring ſoot nor tongue: ſuch Parrats as are brought hither, they call Marganas, and eſtéeme them not, for they are as common there, as pigeons with vs, which although they haue a certaine harde fleſh like heathcocks, yet there are many of them eaten in thoſe countryes: there are likewiſe little Parrots, which are brought hither, but among the cheefe foules of that countrey, there is a very ſmal bird called Toucan, as big as a pigeon, blacke like a Rauen, onely the breaſt, which is yellow, with a round red ring about her necke, as I ſaide in another place, which they weare vppon theyr cheekes, ſpecially when they go to any feaſtes or dauncings, whereupon it hath the name of Toucan-Tabourace, that is, the feathers to daunce with: the bil of this bird is greater then all the body, and is one of the ſtrangeſt things that euer was ſeene: there is another of the greatneſſe and colour like a Merlin, onelie vpon the breaſt, which is as redde as an ore bloud, it is alſo by the Indians fleyed, and the ſkinne dried like the Toucan. which bird they call Panon: there is another like a Liſter, as red as ſcarlet, which they cal Quempian.
                        
                        I muſt not forget a wonderfull ſtrange little bird, no bigger then a Scalebiter, or a horſe flie, with white ſhining feathers, which hath ſo great and pleaſant a voyce in ſinging, yt it reſembleth our nightingale, in ſuch ſort, ye it may be ſaid it wer impoſſible that out of ſo ſmal a body, there could iſſue ſo great a voyce, which bird by the Indians is called Gonambuch. There are yet many other kinds of birds, of colour red, white, violet, & purple, &c. al much differing from ours, & needleſſe to rehearſe. There is one among the reſt which the Indians do much regard, not ſuffering it to be hurt, or to be taken, as thinking it a bird of ſome ſecret diuination, it is as great as a pigeon, of a gray colour, crying verie heauily, which is heard more by night thē by day: the Touepinambaultii are of opinion, that thoſe birdes are ſent vnto them by theyr friendes that are dead, to bring them good newes, and prouoke and ſtirre them to bee of good courage againſt theyr enemies in the fielde, they thinke alſo, ſo they take good regard vnto this Birds ſong, and fortune to bee ſlaine in the warres, that after they are dead, they ſhal goe vnto theyr forefathers, beyond the hilles there for euer to be merry, and continually to dance: They certainely perſwade themſelues that thoſe birdes bring newes

from their friendes, and that thereby they ſhould be merrie, and of better courage, ſo that they take great regard vnto their cries. There are likewiſe in this countrey many battes as big as crowes, which by night enter into the houſes, and finding any man lying naked, they ſucke the bloud out of their toes in great aboundance, whereof in another place I wil ſay more. Their Bees are leſſe then ours, like blacke flies, and make theyr honey in hollow Trées: the Indians haue good knowledge howe to gette theyr ware and theyr honey: they vſe not the wax to burne, but onely to ſtoppe their reedes, wherein they keepe their feathers from the wormes. Touching ſmal wormes like flies or Mytes, as alſo ſcorpions and earth creuiſhes, which are hurtful vnto men, it is needeleſſe to write: they haue diuers fiſhes, wherof many are common here with vs, as twoo ſorts of Barbels, the one called Rurema. the other Parati, both beeing ſodden or roſted, are of a verie good taſte, which becauſe they ſwimme in companicars, e by them killed with dartes, ſometimes two or thrée together. The meate or ſubſtance of thoſe fiſhes is verie tender and ſhort, wherefore the Indians drie them, and make flower & meale thereof. There are three other kinds of verie great fiſhes, wherof one is called Camoroupouy Ouaſſou, the other Ouara, the third Acara Ouaſſou, al veeie good of taſte, & good to be eaten: there is a certaine kinde of flat fiſh, called Acarapep, which being ſodden yeeldeth a certaine yellow fatte, which they keepe for ſauce. This fiſh likewiſe is verie good meat, Acarabouten is a ſlymie fiſh of a redde colour, it is better then the other, but not ſo ſauorie in the mouth, Pira-Ipochi is a long fiſh like an eele, but not to be eaten: the Rochets which are taken in the Créeke of Ganabara, and thereabouts in the ſea, are much greater then ours, with twoo long hornes ſticking out before, and fiue or ſixe clawes in the belly, which men would think not to be natural, but rather artificiall, with a long thinne venomous taile. In their Riuers are many ſtrangs fiſhes, ſpecially one called Tamouata, which is a handfull long, with a moſt great and monſtrous head, others called Pana, Pana, which likewiſe hath a great and monſtrous head, yet both good to eate and verie ſauorie.
                     
                     
                        A deſcription of certain trees and fruits in thoſe countries.
                        FIrſt there are many Braſil trées, wherby the country hath taken the name, this tree by them is called Araboutan, becauſe of tha great and thick branches, not much vnlike our oakes, ſome of them are at the leaſt three fadomes thicke, their leaues are like boxe or palmetrées, but yeelde no fruite, the wood would with great labour and paine be conuayed aboord the ſhippes, if the wild people did not helpe them, for the marchants ſhuld hardly lade a ſhip in a whole yeare, becauſe of the hardneſſe and troubleſomeneſſe in the cleauing, as alſo that there are no beaſts to draw or carrie it to the ſhippes, but muſt be brought downe by men, which for cloathes, ſhirts, hattes, kniues, and ſuch like things, are hired to cleaue and rounde it, and to bring it out of the woods farre within the lande, vpon their ſhoulders, to the ſhippes: it is much burnt in that countrie, and is of nature dry, whereby when it it is burnt, it maketh little ſmoke, the aſhes wherof yeeld a certaine red color: the Tououpinambaultii wondered much what our men doe with all that wood, aſking if there were no wood in our countreies for to burne, and anſwere was made vnto them, that we vſed it to die withall, as they died their ropes or ſtrings: this is ſhewed in another place.
                        Beſide this Braſill tree, there are fiue kindes of Palme trees, whereof the principall is called Gerau, the other Iri, of theſe trées I haue ſufficiently declared in the Hiſtories of the Eaſt Indies, as alſo in the deſcription of the Affrican coaſt: there is a tree called Ayri, a kinde of Eban wood, with leaues, not much vnlike the palme trées, the body couered with thicke thornes, the fruite thereof indiffeeent great, wherein there is a pith as white as ſnow, but not good to eate: the wood is blacke and verie hard, whereof the Barbarians make theyr halbeards, coluen & arrowes, it is likewiſe ſo heauy, that it ſinketh vnder the water: there is alſo much wood in this countrey, whereof ſome is yellow like Box, ſome violet, ſome white like paper, ſome pale red, ſome varniſh red, and ſome darke red, whereof likewiſe they make Halberds: another wood is founde therein called Copau, whereof the trees are like our wallnut trées, but beare no nuttes, the wood being plained, hath graines like Walnut tree: there are many other kindes of trees, whereof ſome haue leaues rounde like pence, others great, of a foote and a halfe long, as alſo a tree which is very pleaſant to beholde, and ſo ſweete of ſmell, that it excelleth the roſe, ſpecially when it is cut: to the contrarie there groweth another tree called Aou-at, which wood beeing cutte or burnt, ſtinketh ſo vnreaſonably, that no man can abide it: it hath leaues like our apple

trée leaues, and a fruit not vnlike the Egiel, the nut whereof is ſo venemous, that being eaten, it worketh preſently, but becauſe the Indians make their rattles of this fruit, they eſteeme it much: Beſides this, there groweth in Braſilia many kindes of fruits, and apples, pleaſant to looke on, ſpecially on the ſea ſide, but not to be eaten, and very daungerous, ſome are like miſpelles, whereof the Indians warned our men, that they ſhould not eate them.
                        
                           Hiuourae is a barley about halfe a finger thicke, good of taſte, ſpecially being freſh, it is a kinde of pox wood, and by the Indians vſed for a certaine diſeaſe called Pians, which is as daungerous with them, as the pox with vs, there is likewiſe a trée by them called Choyne, of a reaſonable height, for leaues, forme, and greeneneſſe like the Bay trees, the fruit as great as a childes head, as bigge as an Eſtridge egge, but not to be eaten: the Tonoupinambaultians thereof make certaine rattles, by them caled Muaracas, & of it alſo they make veſſels to drinke, with ſuch like things, cleaueing them in the middle. The tree by them called Sabaneay, beareth fruit bigger than a mans two fiſts, whereof they make drinking cuppes, and is much like a cup: in this nut there are certaine piths, not vnlike for forme and taſte to the almon. There is an other tree in bigneſſe like a Sorben, the fruit wherof is by them called Aca iou, of forme and greatneſſe like a hennes egge, which being ripe, is of a golde yellow colour like a quince, very good and ſauory to eate, hauing a certayne ſharpe taſte, and in it a iuice that cooleth heate, but becauſe this fruit is not eaſie to be gathered, as being high trees, the meere-cattes eate them, and ſuch as fall to the ground, are the Indians parte. Pacoaire is a ſprig about tenne or twelue foote high: the body as thicke as a mans thigh, but yet ſo ſoft that it may be cutte in twoo with one blow: the fruit thereof is by them called Paco, which are of a handfull long, in forme like cucumbers, and being ripe, are of the ſame colour: this fruit groweth 20. or 25. vpon a braunch, which the Indians plucke off and carry into their houſes, they are very pleaſant of taſte, whereof you may reade at large in the Eaſt Indian Hiſtories: the ſprigs that bring foorth cotten, are there in great aboundance, being of an indifferent greatneſſe, and haue leaues like the yellow bels of the aſh trees, frō whence there groweth an apple as bigge as Bulken, which beeing ripe, openeth in foure partes, and yeeldeth forth cotten, the Barbarians call it Ameni iou, in the middle of which wool are certain blacke kernels, p
                              •
                           eſt together like mens kidneyes, and as bigge as beanes, this cotten is gathered by the Braſilian women, which they ſpinne, and therof make many things, Citrons and Lemonds by the Portingales brought into thoſe countries, grow there in great aboundance, very pleaſant and good: alſo many ſugar canes, whereby much ſugar is brought from thence into Portingale: it is much to be wondered at, that ſeeing there is ſo ſwéet a ſubſtance in thoſe reedes while they are freſh and newe gatherd, that being but a little withered or put into the water, they doo preſently conuert into ſo ſower a ſubſtance, that it is as good Vinegere as any can bee founde. Beſides theſe ſugar reedes, there groweth other reedes as thicke as a mans legge, which beeing greene, are with one blow eaſily cutte in two peeces, but when they are drie, they become verie tough and hard, whereof they make arrowes, & ſticks to carry in theyr handes: in that countrie likewiſe is much Maſticke, & excellent good Gumme (which was ordinarily brought out of Chio) alſo diuers and innumerable ſorts of ſweete ſmelling flowers & hearbes. And although that about this Cabo de Frio there is much thunder, raine, and great winds, as lying vnder Tropicus Capricorn, yet becauſe there falleth no froſt, ſnowe, nor haile, therefore the trees are there alwayes gréene, as they are with vs in May: and in December when the dayes are ſhorteſt and coldeſt here with vs, they are there at the longeſt and hotteſt, but it is to be vnderſtood, that they neuer fal out to be ſo long or ſhort as they are with vs, for they haue the day and night of an euener length then we, and a more temperate aire. The fruits of this countrey are many, whereof Ananas is the beſt, the leaues whereof are like the leaues of Iris or aloes, a little bowing, and in manner rounde, the fruit is long like Cucumbers or diſtaues, when they are greene they preſſe a certaine iuice out of them, which taſteth as pleaſantly as Malueſie, of this fruite I haue alreadie ſpoken in the deſcription of the eaſt Indians, ſo that at this time it is needleſſe to write any more thereof, as being ther to be read: there is an hearb in Braſilia, by ye 
                           Tououpinambaulti
                                 •
                              
                            called Petum, which we call Tabacum or Nicouana, and now it groweth in our gardens, but not ſo good, nor ſo ſtrong as theirs: this hearb is ſufficiently deſcribed by Cluſius and other writers, & very well knowne, it hath leaues like our dock leaues, or Conſolida Maior by the Braſilians it is much eſteemed, which they gather and make into balles, and being

dried, take foure or fiue of the leaues, and rubbing them togither, they make thē burne, the ſmoake whereof they receiue in to their bodies, which doth ſo fill & nouriſh them, that hauing receiued in the ſmoake, they will goe two or three dayes when they are in the warres, and neither eate nor drinke, which Le
                                 •
                              ius likewiſe hath tried, as alſo, that the ſame ſmoake maketh men auoyde ſleugine, out of their heads, & therefore the Indians weare bundles thereof about their neckes, to ſmel vnto it: the rootes Maniot and Aypi I haue alredy deſcribed. There is likewiſe another kind of roote called Hecich, whereof there are three kindes, ſome being ſodden are blew, others yellow like quinces, and the reſt white like parſeneps, they are all good of taſte, ſpecially the yellow, which being roſted, are as good as peares, & are there in as great aboundance as turnops in Sauoy, about two handfulles thicke, and a foote and a halfe long: the hearb runneth along vpon the ground, and hath leaues like cucumers or great ſpinage, but differing in colour, neerer to the broome or white wilde vine leaues: becauſe theſe roots neuer yeeld ſeed, they are cut in péeces and planted n the earth: he that deſireth to knowe more hereof, let him reade Cluſius his workes, and they wil ſatiſfie his deſire. There is alſo a kinde of nut (by them called Manobi) which groweth vnder the ground and hang by little thréedes one faſt to an other, hauing a ſubſtaunce within them like to our hazel nuttes, of a browne whitiſh colour, with huſkes like the ſhelles of peaſe. Touching Braſilia pepper, which alſo at this preſent day groweth in our gardeins, and very hot it is, by Mathiolus called S
                                 •
                              iquaſtium, and Braſilia beanes and peaſe, whereof néedeth no great deſcription, as being commonly knowne. To conclude you muſt vnderſtand, that ſéeing Braſilia hath no wilde beaſts, foules, fiſhes, nor liuing creatures, ſuch as are in Europa, neyther yet trees, nor hearbs, onely pulcelen, baſill, and vaarne or felix, which growe in ſome places thereof, we may ſay with the Prophet Dauid in his 104. pſalme:

                              O Lord, thy works moſt ſtrange and wonderfull,
                              both far & neere are ſeene & known right well
                              How wiſely thou al things doſt bring to paſſe,
                              whereby al creatures thy great goodnes feele,
                              And who can either number, write, or ſhow,
                              the kindes of beasts that are in land and ſea.
                           
And ſurely theſe people might well be accounted happy, if they had the knowlege of the true and euerliuing God.
                     
                     
                        A briefe diſcourſe of their warres and armes.
                        TOuching their warres, they vſe them not, thereby to get riches by force, or to inlarge their dominions, but only of meere affectiō and deſire they haue to reuenge the deaths of their forefathers, which by theyr enemies haue from time to time beene taken and deuoured, wherein they are ſo zealous, that as many of their enemies as they take are ſure to die the like death, and to be eaten by them, and hauing once begunne warres with their neighbours, they wil neuer be friends againe, but where or howſoeuer they can intrap or catch each other, they are ſure to die: The manner of the Tououpinambaul
                                 •
                              ers warres are in this
                        Although they haue no Kings nor Princes among them, not one of them beeing of greater account than the reſt, yet they haue this cuſtome, that they honour their auncients, by them called Peore ru Picheb, and in euery village they are ready to do as they commaund them, which their auncients many times, walking among them, or elſe ſitting in their hanging beddes of cotten, take occaſion to vſe this maner of ſpéech vnto the people ſaying, Are not our forefathers that haue fought with, ouercom, ſlain and eaten ſo many of our enimies, an example vnto vs, not to ſtay cōtinually at home? ſhall we ſuffer our nation, which in times paſt was ſo fearful to our enemies that they durſt not looke them in the face, be thus brought into ſo open ſhame and reproach? that it ſhall be ſaide our ennemies came to aſſaile vs within our owne houſes? ſhal we by our negligence and ſlowneſſe ſtay and watch till the Marga
                                 •
                              aters and the Peros Engaipa, which are cruell Portingales, doe firſt ſhew their powers and execute theyr tirannies vpon vs? & hauing ſpoken in that manner, he clappeth his handes vppon his buttockes, and crying out ſaith, Erima, Erima, Tououpinambaults, conomi, ouaſſou, Tan, Tan, &c. that is, Beholde my friends, you ſtrong yong men, is this conuenient to be done, let vs rather arme our ſelues, and by force be ouerthrowne, or els reuenge our iniuries receiued. Theſe and ſuch like Orations, which indure for the ſpace of ſixe howers at the leaſt do the Elders vſe vnto the people, which they with great patience and quietnes hearken vnto, and therewith are ſo incouraged, that preſently, with all ſpéed they aſſemble themſelues togither in a certaine place, and in great numbers with ſwordes and holberdes (by them called Tacapes) of red or blacke wood, very heauy like

bore trees, about fiue or ſixe foot long, round at the end like a ſpit, a foote broad, and the thickeneſſe of a thumbe in the middle, al the other part ſharpe. Beſides thoſe weapons, they haue orapats, which are bowes, there are likewiſe of blacke or red wood, wherewith they can ſhoote ſo ſure and certainly, that no man excelleth them, of the which bowes and arrowes, becauſe there are ſo many of them brought into theſe countries, there needeth no great deſcription: withall they haue bucklers of the ſkinnes of Tapirouſſou, broad, flat, and round like the couer of a drumme, wherewith they couer not themſelues, but vſe them onely to receiue their enemies arrowes: theſe are al the wepons they do commonly vſe, only that they do put on certayne kindes of apparell made of feathers, wherewith they ſet foorth theyr bodies, otherwiſe they will not haue any thing vpon their bodies (were it but a bare ſhirt) that might be any let or hinderaunce vnto them. And being armed in this manner, they ſet forward ſometimes eight or tenne thouſand men (with certaine women not to fight, but to carry their neceſſaries & prouiſions and being in the field, the ancienteſt among them ſuch as haue ſlaine and eaten many of their enemies) are appoynted for captaines and commaunders, after whome the reſt folowe, and ſet forward towards the enemy, and although they meete all together without order, yet when they march they place themſelues in rankes, the ſtrongeſt going before, and the reſt after them, wherein it is ſtrange, that ſo manye men being together without a generall, can ſo well place themſelues, and know when they ſhould ſet forward. There are ſome of them that blowe in great hornes, like our trumpets, which they call Inabia, wherewith they incourage the people, and giue them ſignes of battell, others haue pipes or flutes made of their enemies bones, which at other times they haue ſlaine and eaten: whereon all the time of their march they ceaſe not to pipe, thereby to ſtirre their fellowes harts to do the like with their ennemies bones that by them ſhould bee taken. And if they aſſaile their enemies by water, they keepe cloſe to the ſhore, not daring enter farre into the ſea, becauſe their ſcutes which are made of the barkes of trees, are not able to indure againſt a tempeſt, but ſerue onely in calme weather, eache ſcute holding fiftie men, which may eaſily ſitte therein and rowe, with ſo great ſwiftneſſe, that it is wonderfull.
                        In the maner before rehearſed they trauel ſometimes tenne or twelue miles within their enemies countrey, vſing to march with their ſtrongeſt men firſt, leauing the weakeſt with the womē a day or two daies iourney behind them, marching very quietly entring into certaine woods, where they ſtay & hide themſelues for the ſpace of half a day, meane time if they meete with any of their enemies, either men, women, or children, they kéep them not priſoners, neither take them with them, but preſently kil and roſt them vpon their boncans or girdirons, and ſo eate them, which they do, not to bee troubled with them when they ſhould enter into the vilages of their enemies, which are all without walles, their houſes being of 80. or 100. paſes long, without doores, placing in ſteede thereof certayne Palme trees or branches of the hearb called Pindo: yet there are ſome villages among them, ſuch as border vpon their enemies, that are paled about with boordes of ſixe foote high, againſt the which when they meane to doe any exploit, they watch the way that goeth vnto the village, where ſuch as iſſue foorth or enter in, fighting with them, are taken priſoners, and are killed and eaten. But when they meet in open field, army againſt army, it is done with ſuch fury and horrible bloudſhed, that it is incredible, as Ioannes Lerius a Burgonian hath perſonally beheld them, can witnes, from whome this is gathered, for that they run with ſo great fierceneſſe and boldneſſe together, as neuer was heard of: for (as Lerius writeth) when the Tououpinambaultiers firſt perceiued their enemies, they made ſo horrible a crie, as greater is neuer heard among vs when we hunt the wolfe, and that ſo lowde, as if at that time it had thundred, it could ſcarcely haue béene heard: and approching nearer vnto them, they beganne a ſecond time to crie, with blowing of hornes, and piping on their flutes, calling to their ennemies, and ſhewing thē the dead bones of their frends, and their teeth, which they do weare about their neckes vpon ſtrings, at the leaſt twoo elles long: that done, entring into battell, and beginning to ſhoote, you may ſee theyr arows flee into the ayre as thick as ſwarms of flies, with all kinde of coloured feathers, which maketh a moſt pleaſant ſhew, if it might be ſéen without danger: in the which ſhooting, whoſoeuer is hurt, preſently pulleth ſorth the arrow, and like a madde dog biteth it in peeces, yet hee leaueth not off, but ſtill fighteth, as being ſo cruel and fierce that they neuer ceaſe fighting as long as any ſtrength is in their bodies, neuer flying: and ſuch as they ſtrike with their woodden holberts, fal preſently dead vnto the groūd,

like oxen that are kild by the butcher. This manner of fight was ſéene by Lerius, to bee done by the Tououpinam baultiers, who after thrée houres fight had the victory, and after many on both ſides were ſlaine and wounded, they brought about thirty men and women priſoners, which they placed in the middle of their battell, the ſtrongeſt of them being tied with ropes: which done, they returned to the Créeke or entry or Ganabara, of the which priſoners ten of them were bought and ſent to Henry the ſecond king of Fraunce. Lerius himſelfe bought a woman and her child, and being with him, he thinking to comfort her, telling her hée would ſend her into France, ſhe aunſwered him, that ſhe had rather be eaten by her enemies, or to be let looſe, that ſhe might once againe helpe to be reuenged on the ennemies that haue taken her, wherein you may ſee how ſtiffely they are bent vnto reuenge, neuer forgetting or forgiuing anie iniury whatſoeuer.
                     
                     
                        The manner how they vſe their priſoners, and what ceremonies they vſe in the killing and eating them.
                        THe priſoners being brought home by ſuch as haue taken them, are not onelie well fed, but they giue the men, women to beare them company (but not the women men to lie with them) and which is more ſtrange, diuers of them that haue priſoners wil not refuſe to giue him daughter or ſiſter to wife, which muſt liue truely and honeſtly with her huſband, and becauſe they obſerue no certaine time of the offerings, or butcheries of their priſoners, but ſomtimes ſooner, ſomtimes later, as they thinke good, therfore the men priſners are kept to hunt, fiſh, and catch birds, and the women to garden, plant, and fiſh for oyſters: and when like ſwine they are fat and wel fed, they are ſlaine and eaten, in manner as followeth. Firſt they certifie all the neighbours round about, when, and in what place their feaſt ſhall be kept, where there reforteth a great number, both men, women, and children, conſuming all the forenoone with drinking, among the which are the priſoners (which know ful wel that it wilbe vnto their coſts) all beſet with feathers, who not onely feareth not death, but in dancing, leaping, and drinking excelleth all the reſt, in which maner, hauing conſumed at the leaſt ſix or ſeauen houres, two or thrée of the ſtrongeſt among them lay hold vpon the priſoner, and therewith bind him about the middle with cotten ropes, or with the barks of a certain trée, by them called Iuire, which is like a Linden trée, meane while hee ſtandeth ſtill and neuer reſiſteth them, although both his armes & hands are at libertie: which done, they leade him in that manner round about the village for euery man to ſee him, he not once hāging down his head (as thoſe which in our countries are ready to be executed vſe to do) but to the contrary with an incredible boldneſſe boaſting of his déedes, and telling them that leade him, what hee hath done, ſpeaketh vnto them in this manner: When I was at libertie, I haue manye times in this ſorte bound your friendes and kinſmen, and with much more boldneſſe commending himſelfe, and ſetting forth his actions, tourning his face on all ſides, and looking about him hee ſpeaketh to ſome one of them and ſaith, Heareſt thou friend, It is I that ate thy father, and to an other, ſirra, it was I that killd thy brother and broyled him vpon the coles, and haue taken and eaten ſo many of your people, that I am not able to number them, and be you well aſſured that my friendes the Margaiaters will not leaue my death vnreuenged, and will once catch ſome of you, and ſerue you in the like ſort.
                        And in this maner being ſhewed round about the village, in the end, the two men that holde him, ſtepping backe about thrée elles diſtant from him, pulling the rope wherewith hee is bounde on both ſides ſo ſtrait, that therewith he ſtandeth faſt, and is not able to ſtirre eyther backward or forward: which done, they bring vnto him certain ſtones or peeces of broken pots, and they that hold him bound in that manner, being couered with bucklers of tap
                                 •
                              rouſſou ſpeake vnto him, and aſke him if before he die he will reuenge his death, wherewith preſently in great fury, he throweth ſtones at them, as alſo at al others ſtanding round about him, which many times are aboue foure thouſand people, not once caring how many of them are hurt or wounded, not although he ſhould breake any of their legges with a blowe, and hauing caſt ſtones, potſhardes, earth, and all whatſoeuer he can reach: then he that muſt kill him (hauing al that day kept himſelfe cloſe, and not once come forth) goeth vnto him and ſaieth, Art not thou one of the Margaiaters our ennemies? haſt not thou thy ſelfe taken priſoners and eaten ſome of our kinſmen and friends? whereunto the priſoner anſwereth him, and ſaith, Pa, che, tan, tan, aiouca, a
                                 •
                              oupaue, that is, I am he that hath ſlaine and eaten many of your people, and to grieue them the more, hée layeth both his hands vppon

his head, and ſaith, O howe luſtily haue I therein behaued my ſelfe? howe earneſtly haue I purſued you in the battell, and haue eaten an innumerable companie of you? Wherewith he that ſhal kil him anſwereth him and ſaith: Therefore now ſéeing you are here, and our priſoner, I will kill you, and your body being roſted, ſhall likewiſe be eaten. Whereunto hee anſwereth and ſaith, Well, what remedy? aſſure your ſelfe my friendes will reuenge my death: and while he ſpeaketh he is ſtricken down with the wooden holbert: and if he had a wife (as during their impriſonment they commonly haue) ſhe falleth firſt vpon the dead bodie, and with a few (although crocadiles) teares ſhe weepeth ouer him, for that it is ſaide the Crocadile weepeth before he deuoureth the dead body he hath ſlaine, in the ſame maner do they, for that the falſe teares once ſhed, ſhe woulde be the firſt that ſhoulde eate his fleſh: which done, the other women, ſpecially old womē, as being moſt deſirous to feed on mens fleſh, tell thoſe women that keepe the priſoners, that they muſt make haſte to bring the dead body, and hot water with them, wherewith they rubbe, ſcrape, and waſh the body ſo cleane, that the ſkinne goeth off, the fleſh ſéeming as white as a roaſted pigge: which done, commeth the maiſter of the priſoner, with as many companions as he thinketh good, and diuideth the dead body, as quickely as a Butcher with vs ſhould cut vp a ſhéepe, or other beaſt: and as with vs when the hunters haue killed a Bucke, throw the entrailes and bloud vnto the houndes, ſo thoſe Barbarians annoynt their children with the bloud of theyr dead ennemy, thereby to prouoke them to cruelty and reuenge: before the Chriſtians vſed to thoſe countries, they cut the body in peeces with certayne ſtones, but now they haue kniues. The man in that ſort diuided, and the intrailes being waſhed and made cleane, the girdirons are looked vnto by the other women, that are very deſirous of mās fleſh, where they fit and licke vp the fat that droppeth off the quarters, therewithal moſt erneſtly exhorting and prouoking the yong men and childrē to take ſome more of their enemies, and to bring them ſuch meate. In this ſort one, two, or thrée priſners, or more, as it falleth out, being ſlaine and roſted, all the company that are preſent, aſſemble about their boucans or girdirons of wood, for that the Indians roſt no meate vppon ſpittes, as ſome men paynt them to do, for that they thincke it impoſſible that euer it ſhould be roſted enough being turnd round about, where they make great ioy, leaping, ſkipping, and with moſt fierce countenances beholding the roſted quarters, euerie man taking a peece, not for hunger, or deſire of eating, (as ſome would think) or becauſe without all doubt mans fleſh is verie ſauorie, but rather in reſpect of reuenge, ſpecially the olde women, that are moſt rauenous of mans fleſh, for their intent is onely to gnaw the fleſh of their enemies to the bare bones, thereby to putte the reſt of the priſoners (as then not ſlaine) in greater feare, for that to ſatiſfie their monſtrous and greedie deſires, there is not one peece of the whole body, not ſo much as their fingers endes, noſe, and eares, but by them is eaten, (onely the vaines and the ſcull, which they keep, as wee doo dead mens bones in our Churchyards) and ſhew them as ſignes of their dictories and triumphs. The great bones of their legges and armes are kept to make pipes, and their teeth they put vpon ſtrings, which they weare about their necks. Thoſe that haue killed them, eſtéeme it for an honourable action, and departing from the reſt of their companie, cutte certaine ſlaſhes in their breaſts, armes, legs, and other fleſhie places, wherein they put a certaine ſalue, thereby to make ſcarres and ſignes thereof in their bodyes, vpon the which they throw certaine blacke pouder which neuer goeth off, being of opinion that the more ſtrikes he hath in his bodye, the more men he hath murthered, and for the ſame is accounted a luſtie fellow, and of great courage. And to finiſh their bloudy tragedie, if it fortune the woman (that was giuen vnto the priſoners during his impriſonment for his wife) bée with childe, they take the childe when it is borne (a thing moſt fearefull and horrible to heare, for they neuer ſuffer it to growe to yeares) and eate it, alleadging that ſuch children are of their enimies ſéed. And thoſe Barbarians doe not onely ſéeke vtterly to extinguiſh their enemies, but woulde likewiſe haue other ſtrangers and countrymen that come among them to vſe the ſame cruelty, and to eate mens fleſh, which by ſome reiecting all humanitie, hath beene done.
                     
                     
                        ¶Of the religion of the Braſilians, and the miſery or feare where into the poore men are brought by their Caraiben, not acknowledging any God.
                        IN the hiſtorie of Peru, a prouince lying on the ſouth ſide of Braſilia, and bordering vpon this Countrey whereof I ſpeake, is declared that they worſhip the ſunne and the moone, but theſe Toupins haue no god,

neither heauenly nor earthly, and therefore haue no churches nor temples, wherin they ſhould aſſemble to worſhip their idols, clean contrary to the cuſtome and manner of all Heathens and Idolatours throughout the whole worlde. They vnderſtand not what the creation of the world meaneth, neyther do they giue any names to the dayes, or eſtéeme one more than the reſt, nor account not their times by wéeks, months or yéers, but onely by the moones: and as touching godly or worldly literature, they are wholy ignorant, not vſing ſo much as any kind of characters or letters, woondering much at the Frenchmen that wrote vpon paper, and could reade it: wherein we are greatly to praiſe god that hath giuen vs the grace that we can certifie each other by letters of our actions being in far countries, and thereby alſo attaine vnto the knowledge of the true and liuely God, maker of heauen & earth, wherof when any man ſpeaketh vnto thoſe ſimple people, being in great admiration, they ſtand ſtill as it were abaſhed, and crie I c
                                 ••
                              , and becauſe they ſéemed to be very fearefull of the thunder clappes, by them called Toupan, and that thereuppon the Frenchmen (taking occaſion to marke their ſimplicitie and little knowledge) tolde them that God, to ſhew his great power and maieſty, did thereby cauſe both heauen and earth to ſhake, they aunſwered that ſuch a God muſt néedes be wicked that putte men in ſo great feare: Such is the miſerable eſtate of thoſe poore men. Now if any man aſke whether they liue like beaſts, without and God, it may be aunſwered them, that there is not much difference, for that thoſe people are wholy more thā other men without any knowledge of God, and yet being in this gréeuous blindeneſſe, they beléeue the immortalitie of the ſoule, and doe moſt aſſuredly perſwade themſelues, that the ſoules of ſuch as here in this life haue valiantly and well behaued themſelues (which their valiancie and well liuing is meant by killing and eating of their enemies) doe fly behinde certaine high hilles, where being in pleaſant gardeins (with the ſoules of theyr forefathers) they continue in euerlaſting ioy, pleaſure, and dauncing: and to the contrary that ſuch as are ſlacke, (which liue without honour, and will not defend theyr natiue country) are borne away by the Aygnan, for ſo they caled the diuel, with whom they liued in euerlaſting paine. They are likewiſe in this life many times tormented by the diuell, which alſo they call Kaagerre, for Lerius writeth, that he perſonally ſawe them, and heard them ſpeake to the French men, and raging like madde dogges, began to crie out and ſay vnto them, Alas, alas, helpe vs, for the Aygnan beateth vs, and would tell them, that they did oftentimes ſee the diuell, ſometimes in forme of a beaſt, ſometimes in likeneſſe of a bird, at other times in diuers ſhapes: and becauſe they maruelled that they were not troubled nor moleſted by him, they made them anſwer, that god who is of greater power than their Aygnan or diuell, did preſerue them from him: wherupon they being tormented promiſed to become chriſtians, and to beleeue in the onely God: yet their paines were no ſooner ended, but they preſently forgot their promiſe. And it is moſt certaine, that they are ſo tormented, for Lyrius ſaith, that hee hath often ſéene them, when onely with the remembraunce of their torments, they were in ſo great feare, and ſighed ſo deepely that very griefe made them to ſweat, and ſitting with their hands vpon their heades, mourning and lamenting ſaid, Mair atouraſſap, acequere, aignan atoupaue, that is, O my good friend, and my companion, I feare wicked ſathan aboue al other things, whereunto he anſwered them, that he feared him not, wherewith lamenting their eſtate, they would ſay, O how happy ſhould wee be if wee were fréeed from him: if you will be frée ſaide Lerius, then you muſt beléeue in him that is mightie. Then the Aignan or the diuel which they being in paine promiſed him to doe: but their torments paſt, they had cleane forgotten what they ſaide.
                        Herein you muſt vnderſtand that thoſe of Peru and Cuſco, did not only beleeue the immortallitie of the ſoule, but alſo the reſurrection of the body, as in the Hiſtorie of Peru is already declared, by the example of the Indians, who ſéeing the Spaniards to open graues of the dead Indians, and to take away their Iewelles, deſired them that they wold not ſcatter nor throw away the bones, to the end that the dead might not want them when they ſhoulde riſe againe.
                        This is written to the ende that all vngodly men, that are conuerſaunt with the ſimple Tououpinambaultes, perſwading themſelues that there is no God, ſhoulde learne of the wild miſerable wretches, that there are certaine wicked ſpirites, which torment the vngodly (not beléeuing in the power of God) here in this life. And it they affirme (as many of them doe) that ſuch wicked ſpirites are nothing elſe, but the euill affections and conceites of the minde, and that therefore the Barbarians doe fooliſhly

perſwade themſelues of that which is not true, it may be anſwered them (as they may reade in our deſcription) that the Americans were openly and certainely tormented by wicked ſpirits, whereby it may ſufficiently appeare, that ſuch torments are no fleſhly effects, which torment the ſtrongeſt of them in that maner. Secondly, although ſuch vngodly men are altogether vnworthy to heare that which the holy ſcripture ſpeaketh concerning the reſurrection of the body, yet this ſecond poynt of the Barbarians may well be propounded againſt thoſe which beléeue the immortalitie of the ſoule, as alſo the Peruuians that beléeue the immortalitie both of ſoule and body, whereby they may bee aſhamed, and learne of ſuch wilde men: and although thoſe people knew how to bee quit of all their torments and gréefes aforeſaide, yet are they in great feare of thunder, as fearing a certain power, which they cannot reſiſt or withſtand, yet will they not knowe it, wherefore the Goſpel in the Acts of the Apoſtles, fourtéenth Chapter and ſeuentéenth verſe, moſt truely ſaith, that God in time paſt ſuffered the heathens to walke in their own wayes, although hee ceaſed not continually to make his power knowne, by doing vs good, ſending vs raine from heauen, and giuing vs fruitfull times and ſeaſons, filling our hearts with ioy, and our bodyes with meate, ſo that it is the onely wickedneſſe of man that will not acknowledge the eternall God and maker of all things. And in another place, in the firſt to the Romanes and twentieth verſe, Saint Paul ſayth (for that which is inuiſible vnto man, which is his eternitie and Godhead) is manifeſted vnto vs by the creation of the world. Therefore although thoſe men wil not confeſſe God with their mouthes, yet are they by their own actions ouerthrowne, and made to knowe there is a God, and that ſo they are not ignorant, or may once pretend the ſame, conſidering their beléefe of the immortalitie of the ſoule, the feare they haue of the thunder clappes, and the wicked ſpirits that torment them. They haue likewiſe Prophets or Prieſtes, which they call Caraibes, that goe from village to village, making the poore people beleeue that they are conuerſant with ſpirites, and that they can make ſtrong whom it pleaſeth them, and giue them power to vanquiſh the enemie, alſo that by theyr helpe the fruites and great trées do grow and increaſe vpon the earth.
                        Beſides this, euerie thrée or foure yeare they come togither, both men, women and children, obſeruing a certaine feaſt, but in ſeuerall houſes, ſo cloſe or neare togither, that they may heare each other: where they firſt beginne with fearefull ſongs and ſome daunces, their Caribens being with them, the women foming at the mouthes, as if they had the falling ſickneſſe, beating their breaſtes, and making a moſt fearefull noyſe, as if they were poſſeſſed with euill ſpirits, and in like ſort the children: which noyſe being ended, they are ſtill for a time, and then beginne againe to ſing ſo ſweetly, and in meaſure, that it woulde delight a man to heare them, withall dauncing a rounde, each following and not leading the other, bending their bodyes forwards, and their right legge ſomewhat outwarde and crooked, with their right hande vppon theyr buttocks, letting the left hand hang down, and in this manner they daunce and compaſſe thrice about, in each daunce hauing thrée or foure Caribes, with hattes, apparrell, and arme bandes of feathers, each Caribe hauing in his hand a Ma
                                 •
                              aca or rattle, thereby making the people beleeue that the ſpirit ſpeaketh vnto thē out of th
                              ••
                           e rattles, ſtepping forwarde and backewarde, and (not as the people doo) ſtanding ſtill in one place.
                        They likewiſe often times take long Reedes, wherein they putte a certaine hearbe by them called Petum, which they ſette on fire, and turning themſelues about, incenſe the people with the ſmoke thereof, with theſe wordes, Receiue the ſpirite of ſtrength, whereby you may ouercome your enemies: which kinde of ceremonies continue for the ſpace of ſixe or ſeauen houres togither, and with ſo pleaſant melodie, that men that are ſéene in muſicke (as thoſe people are not) would maruaile thereat, and thinke it impoſſible: and at the ende of euerie ſong▪ ſtamping on the grounde with their right foote, euerie man ſpitting, and with a hoarſe voyce often vttering theſe wordes, He, He, Hua, He, Hua, Hua, Hua: In theſe ceremonies they firſt remember their valiant Predeceſſors, being in good hope that they ſhall goe behinde the hilles, and there with them be merrie and daunce: that doone, they doo moſt earneſtly threaten the Ouetacaten (a moſt cruell people bordering vppon them,) that in ſhort tune they hope to ouerrunne them, and at the laſt ſinging ſomewhat of Noes floud, that it deſtroyed the world and drowned all the people, onely their forefathers, that ſaued themſelues vpon the tops of high trees, whereby it ſhould appeare that they haue hadde a certaine knowledge of Noes
                           
floud, although now cleane forgotten, becauſe they haue no bookes, neither yet can reade. Theſe ceremonies ended, they entertaine their Caribes moſt ſumptuouſly with daintie meate and drinke, and make good cheere: the ſaide Caribes walke likewiſe through the villages with their rattles or Maracan, & couering them with feathers, they make them faſt to a ſtaffe, which they fixe into the earth, and there offer meate and drinke before it, as if it were an Idole, making the poore men beleeue that the rattles eate and conſume the meate and drink, whereby euery houſholder thinketh himſelfe bound to ſet, not onely fleſh and fiſh before them, but alſo of their Coauin, which is their drinke: the manner of it is thus: their Maracans or rattles being tyed to a ſticke, and fixed in the earth, as afore ſaid, for the ſpace of fifteene dayes, are by the people ſerued with great deuotion, and therwith they do ſo bewitch the poore people, that they make them beleeue the rattles are holy, and that the ſpirits ſpeake out of them. The Frenchmen ſéeking to bring them from that fonde opi
                              ••
                           on, were hardly thought of by them, and thereby incurred the Caribes ſore diſpleaſure: in like manner Balaams prieſts hated Elias, for diſcouering their deceits. And thus much concerning the ceremonies and Religion of theſe poore ſimple people, which at this preſēt ſhal ſuffice, and ſuch as are deſirous to know more, let them reade the hiſtories therof, ſpecially Iohnes Lerius, from whence for the moſt part this is taken forth, who hath deſcribed at large what happened vnto him in his voyage into thoſe countries.
                     
                     
                        The manner of their marriage, number of wiues, and the degrees of marriage obſerued among them, alſo the education of their children.
                        IN marriage they obſerue theſe degrées of kindered, no man marrieth with his mother, ſiſter, or daughter, other degrées they reſpect not, for the vncles marrie with their coſins, and ſo of other degrées: when they match together, they vſe no ceremonies, but hee that is deſirous to marrie with a widow or a maide, ſpeaketh vnto theyr friendes (if they haue any) or to their neighbours, for want of friendes, aſking them if it be their wils that ſuch a one ſhuld marrie with them, if they ſay I, then preſentlie he taketh her home without any more ceremony, & keepeth her for his wife, but if ſhe be denied him, he neuer ſeeketh further vnto hir: but here you muſt conſider, that they are permitted to take many wiues, for that euerie man hath as many as hee thinks good, and the more he hath, the ſtronger and worthier they eſtéeme him: there are ſome of thē that haue eight, yet the liue in ſuch vnitie, that although ſome one of them is better beloued then the reſt, yet they neuer conceiue any ielouſie therein, neither yet once murmur thereat, but liue quietly togither, weauing and making their cotten beds, doing their houſhould worke, looking to their gardens, and planting of their rootes, &c. Such women as commit adulterie, are by nature ſo abhominable to the Americans, that it is in the mans power to kill them, or els with ſhame to put them from him: it is true that they take no regarde vnto their maids, but let them do as they wil, but being once married, they muſt obſerue their promiſe, vpon the paines before rehearſed, but they are not ſo much addicted to vncleanneſſe as the people of Eaſt India: the women that are with child abſtaine from great labours, and do nothing but ordinarie worke about the houſes, and commonly the women do more work then the men, for the men only in the morning, ſet certaine trées about their gardens, but not al ye day after, but cōſume moſt of their time in the wars, hunting, & fiſhing, & to make Braſilia halberds, and weapons of wood, as alſo bowes and arrowes: as touching the bringing forth of the child into the world, the men receiue them from the womans body, and with their téeth bite off the childes nauill ſtring, and then preſſe downe the noſe, eſteeming it a great beautifying vnto them the child being borne, is preſently waſhed by the father, and painted with red and blacke colour▪ it is neuer ſwadled nor lapped in cloathes, but onely laide in a little cotten bed, and being a boy, the father preſently giueth him a woddē knife, a bow, and a little arrow, which are laide by him in his bed, and therewith he kiſſeth the childe, ſaying vnto him, My ſonne, when thou art great thou muſt be ſtrong, and reuenge thy ſelfe vpon thine enemies: as touching their names, they giue them the names of ſuch things as they know, as Orapacen, that is, bow and arrow, Sarigoy, foure footed beaſt, Arignan, henne, Arabouten, a Braſill tree, Pindo, a great hearbe, &c. The childrens meate beſids their mothers milke, is chawed meale, & ſome ſowſt meat, the womā that is deliuered, lieth 2. or 3. daies at the moſt vpon her cotten bed, after that ſhée putteth a cotten cappe vppon the childes head, and either goeth into the garden or els about the houſe to doo ſome worke, which our women cannot do, as being of weaker complections,

and liuing in an vntemperate aire: beſides this, we would thinke if our children ſhould not be wond or ſwadled, they would grow crooked, whereof not any ſuch are founde to be among them, but rather goe vprighter then any other people in the world, which is alſo by meanes of the temperateneſſe of the aire. The children growing great and to mans ſtate, are taught no other thing, then onely to be reuenged of their enemies, and to eate them: alſo they are bounde (as right followers of Lamech, Nimrod, and Eſau, to hunting, and to go to the warres, to kill and eate both men and beaſts.
                     
                     
                        What lawes and pollicies are vſed among the Braſilians, alſo howe friendly they entertaine ſtrangers, together with their weepings, and words vſed by the women vnto ſtrangers at their firſt comming into their houſes.
                        THe policie of the Braſilians is hardly to be beleeued: howe reaſonably and naturally they behaue themſelues therein, I mean among themſelues for commō quarrels, for that as touching their warlike affaires againſt their enemies, it is ſufficiently declared, but if there riſeth any ſtrife or quarrel among themſelues, ſuch as are preſent will not ſeeke to pacifie the matter, but rather lette them fight or deale together as they thinke good, yea, although they ſhould plucke each others eyes out of their heads: but if one of them chaunceth to hurte the other, and being taken, he is likewiſe wounded in the ſame place where he wounded the other, and if it fortune that by the wounde the partie dieth, he that killed him ſhall by the kindred of the dead man bee likewiſe flame, ſo that with them they pay life for life, eye for eye, and tooth for tooth. Theyr goods are houſes and lande, which they haue farre greater then their neceſſities requireth: as touching their houſes, you muſt vnderſtande that euerie village hath at the leaſt 
                              
                                 •
                              00. houſes, wherby many of thē muſt of force dwell in a houſe, yet euerie family hath a ſeuerall place, although without any diſtance, as beeing nothing betweene the houſes, to let them from ſeeing from the one ende of all their houſes to the other, although many times they are at the leaſt 60. paces long, yet euerie man hath his wiues & children ſeuerall to himſelf, and it is to be wondered at, that they neuer dwell aboue fiue or ſixe moneths in one houſe, but taking the trees and the hearbe P
                                 •••
                              o, wherof their houſes are made, they carrie them oftentimes at the léaſt 1000. paces off, yet the villages keepe their ancient names, whereby it may eaſily bee gathered what great houſes they build, ſéeing it oftentimes happeneth that one man in his life time doth remoue his houſe twentie times at the leaſt: and if any man aſketh them why they ſo often remoue their houſes, they make anſwer, that changing of place is holſome, alſo that their predeceſſors did the like, which if they ſhould leaue, they ſhould not liue long: touching their grounds, euerie Mouſſacat, that is, houſholder, hath certaine gardens and orchardes to himſelfe, which hee vſeth as he tihnketh good: but as touching the tilling and dreſſing of their groundes, as wee do ours it is not vſed among them: as concerning their houſhold worke, the women ſpin and work cotten wooll therof to make ropes and hanging beds, which beddes they cal I
                                 ••
                              s, they are about ſix or ſeuen foot long, made like a net, but ſomewhat thicker, like our thin cloath, with ſtrong ropes at the head and foote to tie them at, but becauſe ſuch beds are brough
                              •
                            hither and ſo well knowne, it is not neceſſarie to ſpeake anie more of them, neither of the manner howe they vſe to ſpinne the wooll, but touching theſe things you may reade Lerius, my deſire being onely to ſet down their cheefe and principall cuſtomes. When the men go to warre, hunting, or fiſhing, they take ſuch beds with them, and making them faſt to two trees, they ſleepe therein, which beddes being foule, either with duſt, ſmoke, or otherwiſe, are by the women made cleane, which is done in this manner: they goe into the wooddes to ſeeke a certaine fruite not much vnlike our pumpcons, but greater, for that moſt parte of them are ſo great, that a man can hardly beare them in his hand: this fruite they ſlampe verie ſmall, and put it in an earthen potte, ſteeping it in water, which doone, they ſtirre it with a ſticke, in ſuch ſort, that it yeeldeth forth a thicke ſcumme, which ſcumme they vſe in ſteede of Sope, wherewith they make their beddes as white and cleane, as anie Fuller doth his cloath, and in ſummer time or in the wars, it is better ſleeping on thoſe beddes then vppon ours: as touching their houſholde ſtuffe, the women make great earthen Pottes, therein to put theyr drinke Coa
                                 •
                              in. They make pottes likewiſe of many faſhions, ſmal and indifferent great cups, broad diſhes, and ſuch like veſſels, the outward parte not much poliſhed, but inwardly ſo cleane & white, with a certaine colour layde vpon them, that they far ſurpaſſe our pot makers, they likewiſe make

certaine mixture of blacke and white colour together, wherewith they paint and ſtripe their earthen veſſels, ſpecially thoſe wherein they keepe their meate: their manner of earthen worke is much pleaſanter and better then our wodden diſhes, onely the women which paint their pots, haue this fault, they cannot paint one thing twice, becauſe they do it not by art, but onely according to their fantaſies. Theſe Barbarians alſo haue certaine pumpeons and other fruits, which they diuide into two partes, and cutting the meate out of them, they vſe them for drinking cuppes, which they call Cobi, they haue alſo great and ſmall baſkets, made of whole Ruſhes, not much vnlike wheate ſtraw, cunningly wrought and folded togither, which they cal Panacon, wherin they keepe their meale and other things: theyr weapons are wodden Halberds, bowes and arrowes, feathered coates and caps, with arme bands and rattles by them called Mar
                                 •
                              , whereof I haue ſufficiently ſpoken, ſo that at this preſent it is needleſſe to ſay more. Nowe then the Barbarians houſe, with his houſhold ſtuffe, and furniture, weapons, bedde, and apparrell, being ſufficiently deſcribed, I will ſhewe you the manner of their entertainment of ſtrangers: and although the Tououpinambaul
                              
                                 •
                              ers doo receiue their gueſtes in friendly ſort, yet their ſtrange manner to ſuch as know it not, is verie fearefull, as Lerius telleth it happened vnto him at his firſt going to viſite them, ſaying that when he came firſt into one of theyr villages, all the Barbarians ranne about him, and ſaid vnto him, Marape derere, Marape derere, that is, what is your name, & howe are you called? one of them taking off his hat, and ſetting it on his head, the other hanging his girdle and ſword about his naked body, the third putting on his Caſſocke, making a great hollowing: ſhowting, and in that maner one going one way, the reſt another, with his cloathes and furniture on theyr backs, he verily thought to haue beene quit of them, and in danger of his life, which after he found to be needleſſe, as not knowing their cuſtomes, doing the like at the firſt to al ſuch as come among them, not beeing of their company: & whē they haue taken their pleaſure in wearing their apparrell, they giue it them again, the interpreter alſo told him that they were deſirous to knowe his name, but ſaid vnto him when he told them, he muſt not giue thē any name in our ſpeech, becauſe they cannot pronounce it, as in ſteed of Ioh
                                 •
                              
                            they ſay N
                                 ••
                              n, and becauſe they cannot remember ſuch words, he ſaid hee muſt name himſelfe by ſome thing that is well knowne to them: and becauſe Lerius ſignifieth an oyſter, he called himſelfe Lery ouſſou, which they wondered at, and ſaid Te
                                 •
                               Mair, hey Frenchman, this is an honorable name. And ſuch as we neuer heard of any Frenchman, and ſurely Circes with all her charmes and hearbes did neuer conuert a man ſo lightly into an oyſter as then it was done, after which time Lerius ſpake often with them, and herein you muſt note that they are ſo good of memorie, that when they haue once heard a name, they will not lightly forget it. Then Lerius proceedeth further to ſhew how he ſpedde among them in that his firſt iourney, which is, that going furder with his interpreter, he came into a village of Barbarians called Eurami
                                 •
                              , by the Frenchmen Goſet, wherin his interpreter had dwelt, where they found the Barbarians dancing & drinking of their Coauin, as hauing that day killed one of their enemies, for the which cauſe they helde the feaſt, the peeces of his bodie as then lying vppon the Boucan, howe this fearefull ſpectacle pleaſed him you may wel iudge, which notwithſtanding was nothing at all, conſidering what followed, for beeing come into the houſe, and according to their manner ſette vppon a hanging bedde, the women as their cuſtome is, weeping, and the good man of the houſe friendly entertaining him, his interpreter being vſed therunto, & whollie accuſt
                              •
                           med to their drinke, without ſpeaking vnto Lerius, or once bidding him welcome, left him, and went to dance and drink among the Indians, and hee being wearie, and hauing eaten certaine bread and other meate that had beene ſet before him, laide himſelfe downe to reſt, yet by reaſon of the noyſe which the Barbarians with dauncing and drinking made about him, he was well kept from ſleeping, ſpecially when one of the wilde men came running vnto him, with a broyled ſhinne bone of a man in his hand, aſking him if he would eate with him, iudge then I pray you if feare made not ſleep to auoyd out of his eies, ſpecially (as he writeth) for that he thought (as then not vnderſtanding their ſpeech) the wild man ſhewed him that peece of the broyled fleſh, telling him that they would do the like with him, ſo that with feare he beganne to be ſuſpitious, that hee was betraied by his fellow, who in that ſort had deliuered him into the Barbarians hands, wherupon he determined if he could to get away, but being compaſſed on all ſides w
                              •
                           h Barbarians (that meant him no hurt) hee fouude it impoſſible, ſo that with the feare hee hadde receiued,

which ſtill increaſed more and more, thinking he ſhould likewiſe be ſlaine and eaten, hee paſſed ouer the whole night onely in prayers, in the morning verie early the interpreter came vnto him, that had paſſed al the night in drinking with the Barbarians, and ſéeing him looke ſo pale, and hauing a fitte of an ague then vppon him, aſked him if hee were ſicke, and whether he had 
                              •
                           ot ſlept well, wherewith hee blamed the interpreter for leauing him alone among the Barbarians, hée not vndeeſtanding what they ſaid, and becauſe he could not ſhake off his feare, he deſired his interpreter that hee might preſently depart from thence, but hee to the contrary putting him in good comfort willed him to take courage, ſaying that the Barbarians meant him no hurt, and withal diſcouered his feare vnto them, who for his ſake had watched and made that ſport all the night long, becauſe they eſtéemed him welcome, which the Barbarians hearing, ſayde that they had ſomewhat perceiued it, and that it greeued them that he had paſſed the night in ſo great ſorrow and diſeaſe, and with that they all beganne to laugh, which made him caſt off all feare: after that, hee and his interpreter went into another village, where as the manner is, entering into a Mauſſacats houſe (which in euery village they muſt do, and go to no place elſe, if they wil haue their loue and fauor) he ſate down vpon a hanging cotten bed, and for a little time ſitting ſtill, preſently the women went vnto him, and ſitting downe vppon their héeles cloſe to the grounde, couering their faces with their hands, bad him welcome, weeping and vttering many words in his commendation▪ as ſaying, you haue taken a great and dangerous voyage in hand, onely to come and viſite vs, you are good, you are ſtrong, and if it be a Frenchman, they adde further, you haue brought vs many fine things that we neuer ſaw: and to conclude, with ſuch counterfeit teares and pleaſing words they receiue and ſalute their gueſts, & thē ſtranger ſitting vppon the cotten bedde, muſt do the like, holding his hande before his face, which (ſome good fooles) prouoked by their teares, haue not let to doo, and hee muſt likewiſe aunſwere them, and ſigh as though hee were gréeued.
                        This fooliſh entertainement of the women beeing ended, the Mauſſacat or good man of the houſe, who all that time is buſie making of his arrowes, and neuer regardeth his gueſt, as though hee hadde nothing to doo with him, (which is a verie ſtrange manner in reſpect of ours) at the laſt ſteppeth vnto the gueſt, and ſpeaketh vnto him ſaying, Ere Ioube? that is, are you come? how looke you? what is your deſire? and what ſeeke you? as Lerius hath perticularly deſcribed: then he aſketh if he hath a ſtomake to eate, if hee ſay or make ſignes that hée is hungrie, then preſently hee cauſeth all kinde of victualles to bee ſette before him, as meale, which is their bread, roſted fleſh of certaine beaſtes, birds, and fiſhes, and ſuch like meat, which is brought in earthen diſhes, and becauſe they haue neither Tables nor Stooles, they ſette it on the grounde, and drinke, and if they haue any Caouin in the houſe, they giue it him. In the end when the women haue wept ſufficiently, bidding the gueſt welcome, they come vnto him, bringing certaine fruites, aſ
                              •
                           ing, or couertly deſiring of him in reſpect thereof, either looking glaſſes, Combes, or glaſſe beades▪ which they weare about their armes, and if hee meaneth to ſtay all night, the Mauſlacat commaundeth the women to hang him vp a cleane bedde, about the which he cauſeth ſmall fires to be made, which oftentimes by night hee cauſeth to be blowed with a certaine paire of bellowes, (by them called Tatapecoua) which are made of two rounde beddes, not much vnlike the fannes wherwith the Gentlewomen in our countrie do kéepe themſelues from the heate of the fire, which fiers are not made becauſe of the coldneſſe of the countrey, but to driue away the moyſtneſſe of the night, as alſo becauſe it is a cuſtome with them ſo to doo: and ſeeing wee are nowe in hand with fire, I thinke it not vnconuenient to ſay ſome thing thereof, they call the fire Tata, and the Smoke Tatatin, and when they trauaile either to the wars, to hunting or to fiſhing, they alwayes haue fire with them, becauſe of the Aygnan or Diuell, who continually tormenteth them, therewith to driue him away, which they kindle not with Flint ſtone and a peece of Stéele as wee vſe to doo, but rubbe twoo péeces of woodde one againſt the other, one peece béeing ſoft, the other, harde, which is done in this maner: they take a péece of harde wood of a foote long, which they make ſharpe at one ende almoſt like a pricke, which poynte they thruſt it into the ſoft wood, and turne it ſo often with theyr handes, as if they would bore the peece of wood therewith, and by that meanes it not onely ſmoketh, but taketh fire, which done, they take cotten or dried leaues, and therewith kindle their fire.
                        The gueſt being in this ſort entertained,

and layd in a cleane cotten bedde, if he bée liberall he giueth the men kniues or ſheeres to clip and pull out their haires, to the women combes or looking glaſſes, and to the children fiſh hookes, and if he chance to haue neede of victuals by the way, agreeing with them for their meat, hee may take it al with him, and becauſe in thoſe countries there are no kindes of beaſtes to carrie men or their wares, they are forced to trauell on foote, if they be wearie, and that the Indians let them haue ſome of their maids, they preſently as being verie willing and ready to ſerue take vp the burthen, & often times carrie the man himſelfe, and if he ſpeaketh vnto them to reſt themſelues, they anſwere him ſaying, thinke you vs to be as weake and faint as married women, that we ſhuld faint vnder our burthen? rather you then ſhuld think ſo, we would carrie you a whole day long: they are likewiſe touching natural loue, better giuen & affected then wee, for that daily they giue each other fleſh, fiſh, and fruits, & it greeueth them that their neighbour ſhoulde not haue as much as they, which liberalitie alſo they vſe to ſtrangers, which in this one example by Lerius himſelfe t
                              ••
                           d and ſet downe, may ſufficiently be proued, which is, that as Lerius with twoo other Frenchmen, trauailed through the woods, and was in danger of his life by a fearefull Eaſt, as alſo that vnaduiſedly hee and his companions had paſſed hard by the borders of the Margaraters, enemies to their friends the Tououpinambaultiers
                           ▪ (by whom if they had beene taken, they had bin eaten, and which is more, ſticking their bodies vpon thornes, would haue made them p
                              ••
                           e in that manner, for the ſpace of twoo dayes without meate or drinke) at the laſt they came into a village called Pauo, where by the Barbarians they were moſt friendly welcommed, who vnderſtanding the great danger they had eſcaped, not only from the beaſt▪ but alſo of the Marga
                                 •
                              aters, that vſe to ſtick their bodies vpon thornes, as I ſaide before, did with ſuch pittie and compaſſion bewaile theyr haſſard, that it might aſſuredly be ſayde, that thoſe ſimple Barbarians did not counterfeit, but rather wiſhed them all good: and firſt with faire water (according to their maner) they waſhed their féet, each of them ſitting by himſelfe in a cleane bedd: that done, the good man of the houſe that had made ready their meate, ſet freſh meale
                              •
                            eating like our white bread crums) broyled fleſh, fiſh, and foules, with all ſorts of their beſt fruits, making them good cheere, and when night came, he cauſed all the children to be conuayed out of the roume where they ſlept, that they might not be diſeaſed, and in the morning betimes hee came vnto them, ſaying in theyr ſpeech, Agite autouraſſap, that is, my good friendes haue you reſted wel this night, and they anſwered, I very well: he ſtill as yet (ſayth hee) for I know that yeſterday you had a weary iourney. To conclude, it cannot be expreſſed with what friendlineſſe they were entertained by the Barbarians, wherein you may perceiue that although the wilde men are cruell and reuengatiue againſt their enemies, yet they are no leſſe louing to their friendes and fau
                              •
                           urers.
                     
                     
                        Of the healing of the Barbarians diſeaſes, of theyr burialles, with the ſorrow and mourning they make ouer them that are dead.
                        IF any of them bee ſicke, hee ſheweth in what place hee is pained, cauſing it to be ſearched by ſome one that ſtandeth by, or elſe by the trauellers about the countrey, which are their cuſening Pages, that is, Phiſitions, and are another ſort of people then the Caribes, who doo likewiſe affirme that they can eaſe men of their pains, and lengthen their liues: Thoſe people are much ſubiect to feuers and other kindes of diſeaſes, but not ſo common as with vs: beſides this, there raigneth among them a certaine incurable diſeaſe, called P
                                 •
                              au
                                 •
                              , proceeding from their lecherie, although many of their children are troubled therewith, as yong children with vs are ſicke of the ſmall por, it maketh bliſters greater thē the ioynt of a mans thumbe, which runne ouer al the bodie and face, and is no leſſe ſhame vnto them, then the French poxe vnto vs, they giue the ſicke perſon no meate vnleſſe he deſire it, although he ſhuld die for hunger, and although the ſickneſſe bee daungerous, yet thoſe that are in health ſpare not to dance, leape, and drinke, thereby troubling the ſicke man, whereof hee neuer complaineth or once diſliketh, although it be much greefe vnto him: but if hee dieth, ſpecially being a houſkeeper, they preſently change thou ſinging into weeping and mourning, with ſuch a noyſe, that all the whole night they neuer ceaſe, ſpecially the women that crie out, not like men, but like wolues and dogs, & with ſtammering voyces, vtter theſe or ſuch like complaints, ſaying, Alax the ſtrong ma
                              •
                            is dead, that vſed to bring vs ſo many men to eate, others crying, O what a luſtie hunter, and how cunning a fiſher man was hee, O

what a ſtrong and valiant man was hée in deſtroying our ennemies the Marga
                                 •
                              aters and Portingales and in that ſort lamenting and crying, they imbrace each other, neuer ceaſing till the body be carried to the graue, adding many times, he is now gone whom we bewaile, the man Eheu is dead, whome we ſhall ſee no more before we goe behinde the hilles, there to daunce with him, as our prophets the Caribes teach vs, with many other wordes, which continue for the ſpace of ſixe ho
                              •••
                           es, for they kéepe not their dead bodies any longer vnburied, and then they ſet the dead body in a round pit or graue, in forme like a winde pipe, wherein he ſtandeth vpright: but if the dead man be a houſe keeper, he is lapped in his cotten bed, and ſo buried in the middle of his houſe, with fethers & ſuch like things put into his graue, as if he were liuing in the ſame maner, that the Perunians bury their kings with their iewelles about them, as it ſhall be ſhewed. The next night after the dead body is buried, they ſet certaine diſhes of meale, fleſh, fiſh, and other victualles by the graue, becauſe they are of opinion, that the A
                                 •
                              gnan, or the Diuell would come and digge the body out of the graue, if hee founde not other meate to eate, and withall they ſet ſome of their Coa
                                 •
                              in, which they do as long as they thinke the body is not corrupted, from the which opinion they can by no meanes bee perſwaded, although in the mornings they finde the meate whole, and in the ſame ſort it was when they ſet it there. This toy, or fooliſh deuiſe ſeemes to ſpring out of the falſe gloſes of certaine Rabines, but he that deſireth to ſee more hereof, let him reade Lerius: and becauſe the Americans do often change their dwelling places, by whole villages together, therefore when they remooue they couer their graues with a great herb called Pindo, whereby ſuch as trauell may eaſily know where men are buried, by the which places, whenſoeuer they paſſe, they make a moſt fearefull noyſe.
                        Thus much touching the generall cuſtome of all the Braſilians, and now we wil procéede with the deſcription of the reſt of the coaſt from Cabo Frio, to the ſtraites of Magellanes.
                        
                     
                     
                        Heere followeth the deſcription of the ſea coaſts.
                        FROM Cabo Frio to Punta de Buen Abrigo (in our Carde called Abitrioga) are a hundred miles: Beyond this point reacheth Tropicus Capricornus, and the line of repartition, which beareth the name aforeſaide, from Buen Abrigo, to the Bay of S. Michael are 50. miles, and fro thence to the riuer of S. Francis, which lieth vnder ſixe and twenty degrees are ſeuentie miles: from S. Francis to the riuer of Tibiq
                                 •••
                              e are a hundred miles, wherein lieth Puerto de Patos, which is vnder eight and twenty degrées: and right againſt it an Iſland called S. Catherina, Puerto de Fara
                                 •
                              o
                                 •
                              
                            and others: and from Tibiquire, to Rio de la Plata are more than fiftie miles, ſo that from Cabo de S. Auguſtin, to Rio de la Plata, that is, the ſiluer riuer are ſixe hundred and threeſcore miles, which lieth vnder thirty fiue degrees on the South ſide of the Equinoctiall line. This riuer by the Barbarians is called the riuer of Parana, or Paranagna
                                 ••
                              , that is to ſay, great riuer, or a riuer like the ſea, hauing certayne entries that are very broade, & many Iſlands, it is rich of ſiluer, pearles, precious ſtones, and fiſh: it is in breadth xx. miles, and many Iſlands between both the hookes of S. M
                                 ••
                              ia
                                 •
                              
                            and Cabo B
                                 •
                              anco. This riuer increaſeth and floweſh ouer like the riuer Nilus, making the country fruitful at certaine times of the yeere, and as ſome are of opinion, it ſpringeth out of the hilles in the kingdome of Peru, into this riuer there runneth many other great riuers, as Auanca, Vicas, Purina, and X
                                 ••
                              xa, which ſpring out of the high land called Bombon, many of the Spaniardes that dwell vppon this riuer, haue come vp as high as to Peru, and the mines of Potoſi. The whole coaſt from Cabo Frio, to the Rio de Plata, or rio Solis, is inhabited by goodly men and well proportioned, but all eaters of mens fleſh. The country is ful of braſil wood, and of white Anime. From Rio de Plata to Puerto de S. Elena, are thréeſcore miles, from S. Elena to Arenas Gordas are thirtie miles, from thence to Baros Anagedos forty miles, from thence to Terra Baixa fiftie miles, from terra Baixa to Bahya S
                                 •
                              n F
                                 •
                              ndo thréeſcore and fiue miles: and from this Bay which is vnder one and fortie degrees, to the Arrecifes de Lobos are fortie miles. Vpon this bordereth the country of ye 
                           Patagones, where the inhabitaunts paint theyr faces with certaine herbs: frō 
                           Lobos which is vnder fortie foure degrees, to Cabo d
                                 •
                               S. Dominico, are fiue and fortie miles: from this cape to another called cabo Blanco are twenty miles to the riuer of Iohn Serrano, which lieth vnder nine and fortie degrées, and by others called Rio de Traba
                                 •
                              os are threeſcore miles, betwéene them lieth Ba
                                 •
                              a de S. Iulian, wherein is a good hauen. The people being wilde, and without weapons, couered with ſkins, and without any lawe,

but of a great ſtature: from thence to the Promontorium or cape de las 11000. Virgins are foureſcore miles: from Cabo de las 11000. Virgins which lieth vnder one and fiftie degrees and a halfe, to the entry of the ſtraits of Magellanas, which vnder the ſame degrees from eaſt to weſt are accounted 110 miles, ſome ſay 130. miles, and the ſouth and north part from Venezula twelue hundred miles, it is two miles broad, in ſome places more, and very deepe, and rather increaſeth than diminiſheth, and runneth ſouthward. In this ſtrait are many Iſlands and hauens. The coaſt on both ſides verye high, and full of great rockes: the countrie vnfruitful, it hath no greene land, but is very colde, as hauing ſnowe the moſt part of the yeare: about it groweth many trees, whereof are diuers cedars, and other trées, bearing fruit like Biſnole or Creken. There they find Eſtriges, and other greater birds, with many ſtrange beaſts: alſo in that ſtrait are many ſardines, & flying fiſhes, they eate of all kindes of meates: there are likewiſe many ſeawolues, wherewith they line or furre their clothes, and whale fiſhes, the bones whereof they vſe to make ſhippes, as alſo of the barkes of trees. This ſtrait was diſcouered by Fernando Magellanus a Portingale,1521 in the yéere of our Lorde, one thouſand fiue hundred twenty and one, and as ſome ſaye, one thouſand fiue hundred and ninetéene,1519 entring vpon the one and twentie day of October, and iſſuing againe in the moneth of December after, when as then the dayes were there at the longeſt, and the nights ſhorteſt. Touching this ſtrait you may reade at large in the hiſtories of India, and the nauigations of the Engliſhmē that alſo haue paſſed the ſame. The K. of Spaine in the yeare of our Lorde one thouſand fiue hundred eightie and two, commaunded a Caſtle to be made vppon the point, or firſt entry into thoſe ſtraits on the ſouth ſide towards Peru, from whence moſt part of his treaſure commeth, thereby to impeach other Nations to enter or paſſe the ſame: about this ſtrait dwelleth certayne great giantes of tenne or eleuen foote high, and higher (as ſome men write.)
                     
                     
                        
                           Magellanica, the ſixt part of the worlde.
                        
                           MAgellanica is the ſixt part of the world which as yet is leaſt knowne, but with out al doubt very great, and ſtretcheth farre and wide: the prouince in that countrey lying right againſt the ſtrait of Magellana is called Terra de Fuego. Beach another prouince lying in that part of the worlde, is eſteemed to be rich of golde: the furtheſt Iſlands thereof are Iaua minor, or little Iaua, diuided into eight Kingdomes, bringing foorth many kindes of ſpices, as yet vnknowen to vs. Iaua maior, Timor, from whence is brought white and redde ſanders wood. Banda, from whence nutmegges and mace are brought: the Iſlands of Moluco, wherin groweth cloues: Los Romeros, and the Iſlands Salomonis. But hereof I wil leaue to ſpeake vntil a more conuenient time, and wil proceede with our deſcription to Peru, beginning from Panama, right againſt Nombre de Dios, and ſo containing our deſcription in the briefeſt maner to Cabo Deleado, or the deſired Cape, lying in the ſtraites of Magellana: but before I beginne, I wil firſt make a briefe deſcription of Peru in generall.
                        
                           Peru is a common word, and ſignifieth thrée things: firſt, a poore ſmall countrey and hauen of the Spaniards, diſcouered by Pizzarro, and Almagio, lying about Panama vnder two degrées, on the north ſide of the line: ſecondly, by this worde is vnderſtoode the whole countrey beginning at that hauen, and following along the coaſt within the ſouth ſeas, til you come to Chile, containing eight prouinces, as Quito, Cagnareſia, Porto veio de S. Iacomo, Caſſamalca, Cuſcoa, Cagnaſia, Calloa, and Charcaſsia. Thirdly, this word Peru or Peruuia ſignifieth the ſixt parte of the worlde, namely, that which is diuided ſouthwarde from America, which is alſo ſeperated from New Spaine, by a ſtraight or narrow péece of ground, not aboue ſeuentéene miles in breadth, making that Peru (which otherwiſe is wholy cōpaſſed about with the ſea) is not an Iſland, for that on the ſouth ſide it hath the ſea called the South Sea, whereby men paſſe through the ſtraits of Magelana: on the weſt part lieth the ſtrait it ſelf, which diuideth Peru from the land that lieth ouer againſt it, as yet not fully diſcouered, and by ſome called Terra di Fuegos, that is, the land of Fire. This ſtrait or narrowe paſſage, was found out by Magellanus, in the yeere of our lord one thouſand fiue hundred and nineteene, and as ſome ſay, in the yeere of our Lord one thouſand fiue hundred and twenty one, and reacheth right eaſt & weaſt 110. miles, and lieth vnder 52. degrees and thirty minutes, being in the greateſt part but two miles broad: the ſhore on both ſides being full of high ſtone rockes. In this part of the worlde are fiue principall great prouinces, as Caſtilia del Or
                                 •
                              , or the Golden Caſtle, Popaiana, Braſilia, Chile, and

                           Peru, and is diuided from new Spaine, by the prouince of Dariene. Beginning from thence, and reaching to the ſtraites of Magellana, you muſt then vnderſtand Peru to be a whole ſixt part of the world, which reacheth wide and broade to aboue ſixty foure degrees and thirtie minutes, namely on the ſouth ſide of the line to fiftie two degrées, and one halfe, and on the north ſide twelue degrees to Saint Martha. which is the furtheſt part of the country northward: in the furtheſt length this part hath fiftie three degrees, accounting from the meridian. Paſſing the Cape Saint Auguſtine which lyeth vnder 8. degrees, and thirtie minutes, ſouthward to the Meridian, and the head of ſaint Francis lieth vpon the poynt of two parts ſouthward. The whole ſixt parte of the world is in forme almoſt like a Hart, or a Triangle, ſtanding three equall diſtances or lines, being drawne from the three corners or points of the land. The firſt from the Cape Saint Auguſtine, to the ſtraites of Magellana. The ſecond from Magellana to ſaint Martha: and the third, from ſaint Ma
                                 •
                              tha again vnto ſaint Auguſtine, which in this ſort may be deſcribed, for that placing the one corner of the triangle, being Cape ſaint Auguſtine, vnder eight degrees and thirtie minutes ſouthward, and the length thrée hundred forty and one degrées, the other corner of the triangle being the ſtrait of Magellana vnder fifty two degrees and thirtie minutes ſouthward, and the length 303. degrées. The line that is betweene theſe two heades muſt haue ſixtie degrees, as the Meridian three hundred ſixtie hath, ſo much then, or ſomewhat more hath the line that runneth from Magellana to Saint Marcha, which lieth vnder twelue degrees, and in length two hundred ninetie foure degrees: therefore this land hath almoſt the forme of a triangle: others ſay, it is formed like an egge, which on both ſides runneth ſharpe downewards, and is broad in the middle, whereof (the better to know it) I will firſt beginne with Peru, and the courſe the Portingales helde from Panama to Peru. In tune paſt by the name of Peru men vnderſtoode all the prouinces that lie thereabouts, from Paſtoa vnto Chile, and from the riuer Maul
                                 •
                              
                            north and ſouth, vnto the riuer Anchaſmay. Nowe the Spaniards by the word Peru mean the land that lieth between the riuer Argiropilis, or Villa de la P
                                 •
                              atta, & the prouince Quito, which is a fruitful, ſound, populous, and wel inhabited countrey, being in length from north to ſouth ſeuen hundred miles, and in bredth from eaſt to weaſt about a hundred miles, ſo that the borders eaſt and ſouth are Argiropolis, towards the weſt ſea and towards the north the prouince Paſtoa.
                        
                        This land is diuided into three partes, that is, Planitiem, Sierras, and Andes, that is, an euen flat land lying on the Sea ſide, with hilles, or hilly countrey, which paſſe through the middle of Peru lying eaſtward ouer the hilles. This land is rich with gold and ſiluer, more than any country in al the world, which well appeareth by the yeerely quantitie of golde and ſiluer brought from thence, reſpecting not the boaſtings & brags vſed by the Perunians themſelues, that ſay, The ſummes yéerely brought out of that countrey is nothing in reſpect of the quantitie therein, for that it may be eſteemed as much as if a man hauing a ſack ful of corne, ſhould take a few graines out of it: it may likewiſe be iudged by the hiſtory of Franciſco Xereſio, who writeth, that in Cuſco there were houſes, hauing the gates, walls, and roofe couered with plates of golde. Beſides this, Giraua writeth that the inhabitantes of Anzerma hadde their weapons, breaſtplates, necke peeces, and peeces for their ſhinnes, all of maſſy gold: he likewiſe writeth, that about Quito there were gold hilles, that yeeld more gold then earth, the like do all Hiſtoriographers witneſſe, that write of king Atabalidas ranſome, which was ſo great, that the like was neuer heard of, for that he cauſed the chamber (wherein he was kept priſoner) beeing of twoo and twentie foot long, and ſeuenteene foot broad, to be filled ſo full of gold, that hee ſtanding vpright therein, and ſtretching his armes and fingers aboue his head as high as hee could reach, the gold couered them, offering that if they would haue ſiluer and leaue the gold, he would fill the Chamber twice full, but the Spaniards tooke the gold, whereof the kings duty being a fift part, amounted to ſixe hundred and ſeuenteene thouſand, ſix hundred fortie ſeuen Carolus gyldernes, & 30000. marks of ſiluer, euery horſeman had 12000. caſtilians, euerie Caſtillian of fourteene rialles beſides ſiluer, and euerie footeman 1450. caſtillians, beſides ſiluer, being 180. markes, ſo that to conclude, the golde onely ammounted vnto (in Flemiſh money) the ſumme of three millions, eighty eight thouſand; two hundred & fiue carolus gylderns, beſides the ſiluer, wherby may be knowne the great aboundance of gold and ſiluer that is in thoſe countries: and although Atabalida payed ſo great a treaſour for his ranſome, yet was it not comparable vnto ye which his elder brother promiſed to pay, ſo that he might ſaue his life, for that he

                           
                              〈1 page duplicate〉
                           
                           
                           
                              〈1 page duplicate〉
                           
                           
had all the treaſor of his predeceſſors, and alſo his fathers, which were not knowne to Atabalida, when he firſt entered into the kingdome, from whence by force he hadde driuen his brother, and placed him ſelfe therein. We reade likewiſe, that when the Spaniards firſt entred that country, they ſhooed their horſes with ſhooes of golde, and what it yeeldeth yeerly at this preſent doth ſufficiently appeare by the Armada that came from thence into Spaine the laſt yeere, whiche needeth not heerein to bee declared.
                        But now proceeding to the deſcription of the coaſt of Panama to Peru, you muſt firſt vnderſtand that Panama and Nombre de Dios are two townes, lying one right ouer againſt the other, the one on the north ſea, or north ſide of Peru, the other on the ſouth ſea ſeuenteene miles diſtant one from the other, Panama lying in a little valley, ſo neere vnto the ſea, that when the moone is in the full, the ſea entereth into the houſes lying neereſt to the ſhore: the houſes thereof are part of reeds, and partly made of other ſubſtances mixed together, moſt couered with tiles, but there are not many houſes in the towne. There is in this towne a very fitte and ſafe hauen, but very ſmall, where with the ſtreame or floud, the ſhippes doe enter, and with an ebbe, they go out, but not heauy laden, for that ſuch as are deepe laden, would be in danger to fall vpon the flattes: in this hauen there runneth both a great floud and ebbe, ſo that where the water is very deepe, within an houre after it will bee drie ſand, whereby the ſhippes muſt keepe ſomewhat from the land, diſcharging and lading their ſhippes by little ſcutes, as well ſuch as come out of Spaine thither, as that goe from thence into Spaine. This Towne hath from Peru, maiz, meale, hennes, and hony: it hath of it ſelfe, kine, and hogges, oranges, lemons, coleworts, onions, lettuce, melons, and ſuch like things in great abundance.
                        This prouince of Panama, in time paſt was much inhabited, and haunted by the Indians, and al the riuers yeelded gold, but now by the Spaniards are moſt fiſhed drie. When men will trauel by land from Panama to Nombre de Dios, the firſt dayes iorney is faire and good way, the next day you enter into woods, which continue till you come to Nombre de Dios. In the middle of this way you come vnto a water, which in three houres can hardly be paſſed ouer, becauſe of the many crookings & windings thereof, and many are caſt away therein, the ſtreame (ſpecially in winter when there falleth much raine) running moſt ſwiftly. Such as compare this towne to Venice, are much deceiued, for that both of them put together, with many other townes erected by the Spaniardes in thoſe countries, wil not make the compaſſe or greatneſſe of the Cittie of Venice, although euery man may iudge as pleaſeth him. As touching the maner of ſayling from Panama to Peru, as alſo at what times of the yeare, you muſt vnderſtand, that the beſt and fitteſt times of the yeere are in the three firſt moneths, that is, Ianuary, February, and March, vntill the moneth of Aprill, for as then the Sea is open, ſummer comming on, and many of the Briſen (which are eaſt and northweaſt windes doe blowe, no weaſt or ſoutherly windes as then ſtirring, whereby the ſhips do eaſily performe their voyages, and commonly ariue at their deſired hauens, before any other winde, ſpecially ſouth winde, which for the moſt part of the yeare vpon the coaſt of Peru) doe blowe. They may likewiſe put out in the moneths of Auguſt, and September, but make not ſo good ariuage, as in the moneths aforeſaide, and if any ſhips do put out of Panama, at other times than in the moneths aforeſaide, they are ſure to haue a long and tedious voyage, and commonly ſom one of them is forced to turne backe againe, not being able to gette the coaſt, and are (by reaſon of the ſouthern winds, which for the moſt part of the whole yeere blow vpon the coaſt (as I ſaid before) as likewiſe becauſe of the great contrarie ſtreame) many of them are brought into great danger. It is very good with the wind blowing from Peru, to ſayle to Panama. Nicaragua, and other quarters thereabouts: but to ſayle to Peru from Panama it is very dangerous, and vncertayne. The ſhips that are laden with Spaniſh wares, and depart from Panama
                           ▪ firſt come to 
                              
                                 •
                              aboga, and the Ilands bordering on the ſame (which haue receiued their names from the Pearles) where they take in freſh water, in thoſe Iſlands that are at the leaſt fiue and twentie or thirtie together.
                        The Spaniardes in times paſt founde many Pearles, whereof they helde the name of Iſlas de Pa
                                 •
                              las.) They lie hardly vnder eight degrées northward. The greateſt of them in times paſt, was woont to be inhabited: but not now, becauſe the fiſhing for pearles beginneth to decay, and ſuch as are owners of thoſe Iſlandes there: in keepe ſlaues of Nicaragua, and Cubag
                                 •
                              a, that looke to their beaſtes, and ſowe the ground, as being very fruitfull: from thence they put into the ſea weſtward, & then ſee ye
                           
poynt called Carrachine, which lieth northweſt and ſoutheſt from the great Iſland of pearles called Taboga, diſtant about thirty Italian miles, which are ſeuen Spaniſh miles and a halfe: as they come néere vnto this cape, they ſhall perceiue it to be a high hilly land, lying vnder ſeuen degrees and a halfe, from this poynt to the Rio de Pinas, or Pine trée hauen) the coaſt runneth ſouth weſt, and ſouthweſt and by ſouth, and is diſtaunt from the poynt aforeſaide foure and twenty miles, which are ſix Spaniſh miles or ſixe degrees and a halfe: it is a high land with great hilles and dales: on the ſea ſide there groweth very great pine trees, and therefore it is called the Hauen of Pine trees: from thence the coaſt lieth ſouthward and ſouth and byweſt, to Cape de las Correntas, that is, the cape of Streames, which is very ſmall, and reacheth into the ſea, and becauſe of the great and ſtiffe ſtreame that runneth like a ſtrong fall of waters, running eaſtward like riuers, many times the Portingale ſhips which ſaile that way, are forced to anker in the night, and in the morning ſetting ſaile, it happeneth oftentimes, that when they thinke to winde, that they are ſtayed, and driuen backe agayne, & ſo hang ſomtimes 15. or 20. dayes about that Cape before they can paſſe it: but paſſing forward beyond that Cape, you come to the Iſland lying before the Rio de Palmas, ſo called becauſe of the aboundaunce of palme or Indian nut trées that do growe thereon. This riuer is in compas ſomwhat more than fiue miles, which is one Dutch mile, and a mile and 
                              •
                            Spaniſh, which was once inhabited: it is diſtant from Cabo de Correntes, ſeuentie fiue miles, or foure degrees 
                              •
                           .
                        Thereabouts are many riuers, all very good water, and not farre from thence lyeth the land and riuer of Peru, where Piza
                              
                                 •
                              us arriued, and after his name almoſt all the country is called Peru: from the Iland de las P
                                 •
                              linas folowing along the coaſt and the ſame courſe, you come to the ſtrand of Bonauentura, which is diſtant from the Iſland aforeſaide ſomewhat more than nine miles, which are two Spanniſh miles ¼. Hard by this ſtrand (which is very great) lieth a high cliffe or rocke of ſtone, and the entry of the Bay is vnder three degrées 1/
                              •
                           . All this ſide is full of very great hilles, and there runneth into the ſea many and verie great riuers that haue their ſprings out of the hilles, by one of thoſe the ſhippes enter into the land or ha
                              ••
                           n of Bonauentura, but the 
                              •
                           ilots that pu
                              ••
                           h there, ought to haue good knowledge of the riuer, for that if they be not wel acquainted with it, they are like to indu
                              •
                           e much danger, as it happeneth vnto many ſhippes, that had Pilots to whom the riuer is not knowne: from this Bay the coaſt runneth eaſt, and eaſt and by ſouth to the Iſland Gorgona, which is diſtant from the ſtrande ſeauenty fiue miles, which are ninetéene Spaniſh miles: the coaſt al along this courſe, is very lowe, full of trees, and other wilde places and hilles, from whence there runneth many great riuers, whereof the chiefe and greateſt is the riuer of Saint Iohn, which is inhabited by Barbarians, hauing builded their houſes vppon great poſtes and ſtoopes, in manner of houelles, where many dwell in one houſe, (and ſome alone by themſelues) becauſe the houſes are very long and broade. Theſe Indians are rich of gold, and their country is very fruitfull, the riuers by force of the ſtreames abounding with much gold, but it is ſo ſleeke and mooriſh that it can hardely bee gotten, but with the loſſe of many people, and with great labour.
                        This Iſland of Gorgona is vnmeaſurable high, wherein for the ſpace of eight moneths yéerely it neuer ceaſeth raining, and thundering, whereby it ſeemeth the Elements fight and ſtriue one againſt the other, it is in circuite about two miles, or ſixe Italian miles, all high hilles, vpon the the trees whereof are ſeene many peacocks, pheſants, ſpeckled cats, great ſerpents, many ſea crabbes, and night foules, ſeeming as if it were not inhabited, it hath likewiſe much freſh water. Summer there beginneth at the end of Maie, cleane contrary to Panama, whereas then winter beginneth. In this Iland Franciſcus Pizarius with 13 others that had diſcouered the countrey of Peru, ſtayed certayne days, induring great paine and hunger, before they coulde ouercome the countrey. This country of Gorgona lieth vnder three degrees: and as touching the miles that in this diſcourſe, as alſo in the deſcription of Braſilia, and other places I haue obſerued, they are all Spaniſh miles, whereof ſeuenteene 1/
                              •
                            make a degrée: from this Iland the coaſt runneth weſt ſouthweſt, to the Iland del Gal
                                 •
                              o, or of the Cocke, all this coaſt being lowe and full of vallies, from whence there runneth many riuers: this Iland is ſmall, and in compas ſcarſe a mile, or about three Italian miles, it hath certayne redde Downes. The ſame coaſt from the firme land thither lyeth twoo degrees from the Equinoctiall: from thence the coaſt tourneth ſouthweſtward till you paſſe the point called Mangla
                                 •
                              es, which are trees ſo called, and in our Card Manglalos
                           ▪
                           
which lieth ſcarce vnder two degrées: and from the Iſland to the poynt which is ſixe Spaniſh miles, little more or leſſe, or foure and twenty Italian miles: the coaſt is low and ful of vallies, and thereabouts runneth certaine riuers into the ſea, which inwards to the land are inhabited: from thence the coaſt runneth ſouthweſt to the ſtrand called S. Iacob, or S. Iago, and maketh a greate Creeke, where there is an open hauen or roade named by the Sardinians: and from thence runneth the great riuer of S. Iacob, where the gouernement of Pizarro began: and this ſtrand is 9. miles ¼ from the point of Manglares, and it happeneth many times that the ſhips haue there at the beake head foureſcore fadomes water, and at the ſterne they touch the ground: and alſo it is often found, that ſometimes they ſayle in two fadomes water, and preſently they find ninetie fadomes, which the ſtrong courſe and fury of the riuer cauſeth: and although there are ſuch banks, yet are they not dangerous, neither do the ſhippes refuſe to paſſe in and out when they will. The ſtrand of S. Mathew, in our Carde Mathias, lyeth full in one degree: from thence the coaſt runneth weſt to the Cape ſaint Francis, which lieth from the ſtrand thirtie Italian miles, that is, ſeuen Spaniſh miles and one halfe: this poynt lieth on high ground, and hard by it are certayne red and white Downes, that are of the ſame height. This poynt of ſaint Francis lyeth vnder one degrée, on the north ſide of the Equinoctiall line. From thence the coaſt runneth ſouthweaſt, to the poynt Paſſao, which is the firſt hauen of Peru, ouer the which paſſeth the Equinoctiall line. Betweene theſe two poynts there runneth foure great riuers into the Sea, which are called Liquixinus, in Latine Quiſinuae, and there about there is an indifferent good Hauen, where the ſhips finde good water and wood to burne. From the poynt Paſſao, to the firme land are diuers high hilles, that are called De Quaque: the poynt is a land which is not ouer lowe, where you ſée certayne Downes as aforeſaide.
                     
                     
                        ¶Here followeth the Nauigation from the Line to the Towne of the Kings called Lyma.
                        
                        FRom hence forwarde wee haue declared the coaſt of Panama, in the South ſea, til you come to the hauen of Quixinus, which lieth in the Countrey of Peru, now I will goe forward with the courſe that lieth betweene Quixinus and the towne of Kings, ſo then departing from the poynt de Paſſos the coaſt ſtretcheth ſouth, and ſouth and by weaſt, to the hauen called Porto veio, or the Old Hauen: and before you come thither, there lieth the ſtrand called Charaqui, wher the ſhips may put in without any daunger, and it is ſo ſafe a ſtrand that they may there lay their ſhips on ſhoare, and mend them if they neede, be they neuer ſo great, for it is a good hauen of entraunce, onely that in the midle of the entry there lieth certain ſtones or rugged Iſlands, but the ſhippes may enter at which ſide they wil and paſſe by them without any danger, for there is nothing to be ſhunned, but onely that which you ſée before your eyes, the Olde Hauen lieth vnder one degrée on the ſouth ſide of the Equinoctiall line, and is one of the fiue Townes which the chriſtians or Spaniardes haue built in the flat land of Peru, ſo that Porto Veio ſignifieth the towne and countrey lying thereabouts, which is much ouerrunne & waſted, becauſe it is a poore vnwholeſome country, yet it hath certain mines of Sinaragdes, which they held long time hidden, and by no meanes would diſcouer them, as to this day they yet do. They had likewiſe in times paſt many golde and ſiluer veſſels which are by the Spaniardes all taken and carried away, but now by the kings letters patents being made frée, they pay to theyr ſuperiour lords, but onely the tenth parte of all their fruits, whereby many Spaniards withdrawe themſelues from thence, ſéeing their profite to decay. The Countrey about Porto Veio was rich of golde, where the people made their houſes in the trées, like birdes neſts, and becauſe the coaſt is mooriſh, there is no being for horſes, whereby it was not ſo ſoone ſubdued by the Spaniardes, as alſo becauſe that out of theyr neſts, they threw ſtones, iauelines, pottes with hot water, and whatſoeuer came next to hand, whereby they killed many Spaniards, wherewith they were forced to couer themſelues with boordes, and ſo cut downe the trees, before they could ouercome them, as alſo becauſe the Countrey is ſo rough, ſharpe, and wilde, that they could hardely finde prouiſion for their army: there is yet much country thereabouts vnhabited. By the Old Hauen two miles within the land is the towne of ſaint Iacob, or Iago, which for houſes and inhabitants is not inferiour to Porto Ve
                                 •
                              o: and thereabouts is the paſſage of Gainacaua, by the Spaniards ſo called for this occaſion, that Ga
                                 ••
                              acaua the father of Attabalida vpon a certain time ſent one of his Captain
                              ••
                           , 
                              ••
                           th a great army to ſubdue that countrey, who minding to paſſe

his people ouer the riuer, commanded them to make a bridge of péeces of wood, that ſo they might paſſe. Which being made, when his people with their armor and weapons were vppon it, the ennemy cutte the ropes, wherewith the péeces of wood were faſtned together, whereby many of them that were vpon it, by force of the ſtreame were drowned in the riuer, and the reſt ſpoyled by the enemy. Which Gainacapa vnderſtanding, aſſembled a great number of ſouldiers, and with them departed from Quito, and being in the plaine field, in open battell he ouercame thoſe people: after the which victorie, minding to make a paſſage ouer the riuer, that men might paſſe ouer on foote, to the ſame end he cauſ
                              •
                            great numbers of ſtones and earth to be brought thither, and threw them into the riuer, being twentie foote broad, but whatſoeuer he threw in, al wold not preuaile, by reaſon of the great deapth, and ſwiftneſſe of the riuer, that carried it away by force of the ſtreame, which hee perceiuing, left off his worke and ſo departed, and therfore the Spaniards haue giuen this place the name of the paſſage of Gainacaua: about the which paſſage lieth the towne of ſaint Iacob builded by them. About a Spaniſh mile and a half diſtant from this town of ſaint Iacob, towardes the ſouth lyeth a round hil, by them called Chriſts Hil. From Porto ve
                                 •
                              o further forward the ſame courſe almoſt foure miles diſtant in the ſouth, lieth the poynt of ſaint Laurence, and two miles, and a quarter from thence ſouthweſt lieth an Iſland of the ſame name, which is full a mile in compaſſe, wherein the Indians or Peruuians of the firme land, in times paſt vſed to make their ſacrifices and offerings, killing many lambes, ſhéepe, and ſome children, offering their blood vnto their idolles, or diuelles, whoſe figures were made and carued in ſtone, to whome they doe vſually pray.
                        When Franciſcus Pizarius with his thirteene companions trauelled to diſcouer Peru, they entred likewiſe into this Iſland, where they found certaine iewells of ſiluer and golde, many cloakes and ſhertes of very faire and fine wooll, ſo that from that time forwards, and for the ſame cauſe this Iſland was called Siluer. The poynt of ſaint Laurence lieth vnder one degrée, on the ſouth ſide of the line. And (as I ſayde before) Peru beginneth at the line, and ſtretcheth ſouthwarde vnto Chile. The people that dwell vnder the line and thereabouts, haue the cuſtomes and manners of the Iewes. Whereby many men are of opinion, that they are iſſued from the Iews, or of the race of Cham: they ſpeake hoarſely, and in the mouth, like the Moores, and are much giuen to vncleanneſſe, eſpecially that which is wholy againſt nature, whereby they do not well agree with their wiues, but rather deſpiſe them. The women weare neither hayre nor apparell, but onely a certaine aprone before their priuities. They plant, ſowe, reape, and thraſh the corne, and wheate meale, whereof they make breade, which wheate in Peru is called Zara: the men weare ſhort ſhertes without ſleeues, downe to their nauelles, their members being vncouered, and ſome goe naked & paint their bodies with a black colour, their haire being ſhauen, and cut almoſt like Friars, but they leaue no haire neyther before nor behinde their heades, but onely vppon the ſides: it is likewiſe a common cuſtome with them to weare many Iewels of golde, both in their eares, and noſes, ſpecially emerauldes, ſuch as are found in thoſe Countries.
                        And although the inhabitants will not diſcouer the mines, yet hath it beene perceiued by certaine rough ſtones: on their arms and legs they weare many beades of gold, ſiluer, and ſmall tourqueſes: alſo of white and red Teekens and Huyzkens, but will not haue their wiues to weare anye ſuch: touching the ſituation of the Countrey, it is very hote, and vnwholeſome, and there they haue certayne ſore biles, that iſſue out vpon their faces and other partes of theyr bodies as bigge as akornes, hauing deepe rootes, worſe and more deformed than por, and muſt be wroong off by binding a threed about them when they are ripe: they paynt their mouthes, and boare holes in theyr eares, noſe, lippes, and cheekes vpon their feſtiuall dayes wearing iewels and pearles therein: the ſcutes by them vſed in thoſe countries, to fiſh, as alſo to ſaile in, are like drifts made of thrée, fiue, ſeuen, nine, and eleuen light quarters, or rafters of wood laid or bound together, as men binde maſtes, and let them driue vppon the water, and their manner is to binde the longeſt in the middle, and the reſt on both ſides ſhorter than other, and as their driftes are long or ſhort, ſo are their ſailes proportioned, and when they haue brought their drift a good way forwar
                              •
                            they throwe bread, fruit, and ſuch like things into the ſea, praying for a good winde, as being weary, and wholly without ſtrength to rowe any more. The doores of the Churches in that Countrey ſtand Eaſtward, hanged with certaine cotton linnen, and in euery church there ſtandeth two grauen Images, of forme like

blacke Buckes, and before them there is a fire made of ſwéete wood, (which groweth in that countrey) which fire burneth continually, out of the which wood, the barke being taken away, there iſſueth a certaine ſweet gumme, I thinke it to be Cedar, from whence the gumme Elemi is taken, which is accounted for the life of the dead, and the death of the liuing, becauſe it preſerueth the dead body from putrifaction. There are alſo in thoſe temples certain Images of great ſerpents, which they pray vnto: and beſides theſe common idolles, euery man hath his ſeuerall Idoll, each man according to the trade he vſeth, as the Fiſhermen a greate fiſh, and the Hunters a hart or the Image of ſome wilde beaſt, by the Cape Paſſao, in ſome churches vpon euery piller thereof, were placed the bodies of men women and children crucified, that were ſo well kept and dried, that by no meanes they could rot or caſt foorth any vnſwéete ſauour: there were likewiſe the heads of Indians ſet vpon nailes, which with ſome certaine ſubſtaunce they had ſo cloſed and knitte together, that they were no bigger in compaſſe than a mans fiſt: their houſes are made of great thicke réedes, which growe in that countrey: but for fruite they haue very little.
                        Procéeding further to the deſcription of the coaſt, and folowing on ſouth and ſouthweaſt to Cape ſaint Elena, before you come to that poynt, there are two hauens, one called Colao, the other Calemgo, where the ſhippes anker, to take in freſh water, and woodde to burne: and from the poynt ſaint Laurence, to Cape ſaint Elena, are full nine miles, and lieth vnder twoo degrees, and from the point towardes the north it maketh a hooke of land, which is a very good Hauen: about a bowe ſhoote from thence, there ſtandeth a fountayne, which by certaine veines runneth into the ſea, from whence there iſſueth a certayne Bitumen, altogether like pitch, and by the Spaniardes is vſed about their ſhippes inſteede of tarre, and the Peruuians ſay, that about that point in times paſt, there dwelt great men like Giants, but they knew not from whence they came, and fedde vppon ſuch meate as their neighbours vſed, ſpecially fiſh.
                        Thoſe Giauntes fiſhed likewiſe vppon drifts, and manye times came on foote to land through the water where they had at the leaſt two fadome déepe and ſomewhat more. They went naked, and were moſt cruell, killing many of the people thereabouts.
                        When the Spaniardes arriued at Porto Vero, they found therein two Images of thoſe Giantes, a man and a woman, and the Peruuians ſay likewiſe that the deſtruction of thoſe Giauntes was done by a boy that came downe from heauen, ſhining like the Sunne, that fought againſt them with fiery flames, in ſuch manner, that where the flames touched, they tare and rent the ſtones, the rents and holes whereof are at this day to be ſeene, and by that meanes the Giauntes ranne into certayne holes to hide themſelues, where they were all deſtroyed.
                        This tale was not greatly beléeued by the Spaniardes, vntill one Iohn de Helmos borne in Truxillio, Gouernour of Porto Vero, in the yeare of our Lorde God euerlaſting,1543 one thouſand fiue hundred fourtie and thrée cauſed certayne places to bee digged vppe, where they found ſo great bones and ribbes, that it was incredible to bee mens bones, but that they found the heads lying by them, the teeth thereof being three fingers broad, and foure fingers long, and fiue quarters ſquare, which were ſent into diuers places of Peru, and from that time the Peruuians tale thereof was beleeued to be true. The Spaniards opinions are, that becauſe the Giantes were giuen to ſinne againſt the lawes of nature, that the moſt righteous God had deſtroyed them by his Angel with fire from heauen, as he did the Citties of Sodome and Gomorrha: Yet is this not certainely to be credited, becauſe the Americans haue no hiſtories, bookes, nor other writings to record the ſame, onely the memories and rehearſalles of menne from time to time, and by ſome tokens and memorialles there made of all ſortes of painted cotten ropes, which they call Quippos, ſignifying by the number of knottes, made of diuers faſhions, that which they would remember, beginning from the bottome, and ſo telling vpwardes, from one to tenne, and ſo forth, painting the ropes of the ſame colour that the things were of, which they woulde thereby ſignifie or haue in memorie, whereof the Spaniardes by their Barbarian crueltie and negligence haue ſpoyled great numbers, in euery prouince: there were menne appoynted for the purpoſe, in that manner to regiſter ſuch things as had happened, as you may reade more at large in the Hiſtorie of Mexico, thoſe that did it were caled Quippo camayos, of which cordes there were whole houſes full, which by ſuch as were acquainted with them, could eaſily be tolde, although the things had béene done many yeeres before▪
                           
but returning againe to the deſcription of the coaſt, from the point of ſaint Elena you ſaile to the riuer of Tumbez, which lieth almoſt nineteene miles off, and from thence about foure miles lieth the Iſlande P
                                 •
                              na otherwiſe called the Iſland of Saint Iacob, which is more than ſeuen miles and one half in compaſſe, very rich, and inhabited with ſo many people, that they warred continually with the men of Tumbez, and the people of the firme land: betweene them hauing had many battells in open field, but by continuaunce of tune, and power of the Spaniardes, they were in the ende wholely ſubdued. This Iſland is very fruitful and ful of al ſorts of trees, abounding both with wilde beaſtes and fiſh: alſo of freſh water: for their apparel they vſed ſhirts and other clothes: they fiſh with drifts of light wood, bound vpon two other peeces of woodde, as their neighbors do, of the which drifts ſome of them are ſo great, that at the leaſt fiftie men and three horſes might ſit vpon them, which they vſed both with ſailes and oares, wherein they are very expert. It chaunced on a time, that the Peruuians bare certaine Spaniardes vpon one of thoſe driftes, and that they vntied the cordes that bound the wood thereof together, whereby the Spaniardes were all drowned, and the Indians ſaued themſelues vpon the peeces of wood, and many without them ſwamme to land, as being very expert therein. Their weapons are ſlings, bowes, clubbes, and billes of ſiluer and copper, alſo launces and pikes with heades of baſe golde: both the menne and womē weare many iewels, their drinking cuppes and veſſelles being of gold and ſiluer: the Lorde of the Iſland was much honoured by his ſubiects, and was ſo ielous that he cut off both the noſes and priuy mē
                           bers of his ſeruaunts that attended on his wiues. In this Iſland Pizarius and the Spaniards were very friendly entertained. But the Gouernour perceiuing their great auarice and couetous deſire in ſeeking for gold, as alſo their lechery with the women, fell vpon them, with great numbers of Indians: but in the end, not being able to reſiſt the Spaniardes, he was forced to flie and keepe himſelfe in the wooddes: which victory was after by Pizarius moſt cruelly vſed, and therewith paſſed ouer vnto the prouince of 
                              
                                 •
                              umbez, which is about 12. miles diſtant: but the inhabitants hauing heard of their cruelty vſed among thoſe of Puna, fled into a Caſtle lying ſomewhat inward from the ſea: but Pizarius to the contrary ſent vnto the Gouernour, making as thogh he would be friends with him, whervpon the Gouernour came not alone, but prepared himſelfe very ſtrong to go & meete him, thinking thereby to ouerthrowe him: but the ſpaniards ſetting forward towards him, in the night time paſſing ouer the riuer with their men, being guided by ſuch as were well acquainted with the way, and going through ſharp and rough waies, they ſurpriſed the Peruuians by night, as they lay ſleeping, and ſo ouercame them, and after the ouerthrow entred the town of Tumbez, which they robbed, and ſpoiled the rich church, taking away the ſame: and in that towne hee was informed of the great riches in Per
                                 •
                              . Touching the Iſland Puna, it is a common opinion, both of the Indians & Spaniards, that in time paſt, there was much golde and ſiluer hidden within theyr Temple. Alſo the inhabitants at this preſent liuing do affirme, that their forefathers were very religious, and much addicted to ſoothſayings, and other abuſes, very couetous, and aboue all other things, they vſed the accurſed ſin of S
                                 •
                              dome lying with their own ſiſters, & committing many other greeuous ſinnes. Into this Iſland fled brother Vincentius de Vaile viridi (a Friar that was the chiefe cauſe of the warres againſt the Peruuians, and after that firſt Biſhop of Peru) with two and fortie Spaniardes, ſeeking to ſhunne the wrath of Didaci Almag
                                 ••
                              , and hauing hidden himſelfe in the night time, the Ilanders with clubbes ſlew both him and his companye, where hee receiued a very iuſt rewarde for his good workes.
                        In Puna, and in the countries of Guaiaquil, and Porto Ve
                                 •
                              o groweth the roote with vs called Zarzape
                                 •••
                              a
                           ▪ which is vſed againſt the por and other diſeaſes. In that Iſland they bruiſe it betweene two peeces of wood, & ſo preſſe out the iuyce, which done, they mixe it with warme water, and giue it to the patient, whereupon they ſweate as much as poſſible they may, which drincke they vſe for certaine dayes, eating onely a little biſket, with a roſted henne, in our country we vſe to cut the roote in ſmall peeces, and ſeethe it, cauſing the ſicke perſon to drinke it certain dayes: by this Iſland there lieth another (but ſomwhat further into the ſea) called S Clara, not that it is at this preſent, neither was in time paſt inhabited, as hauing neither woodde nor freſh water, but onely becauſe the predeceſſors of the Iſlanders of Puna vſed therein to bury their forefathers, & there offered their ſacrifices: ye place wherin they buried their dead, was very high, with whome they buried greate treaſures of golde, ſiluer, & other iewels, as

offered and layde vp for the vſe and behoofe of their Gods, which at the enterance of the Spaniards they cauſed to bee hidden, no man knowing where it is become. This riuer of Tumbez is greatly inhabited, and in time paſt was much more populous: by it there ſtoode a verie ſtrong and beautifull Caſtle, built by the Iugas or kings of Caſco, who ruled ouer all the countrey of Peru, and therein kept a great treaſor, where there was a temple of the ſunne, and a couent of Ma
                                 •
                              aconas, which is as much to ſay as cheefe or principall women and maides, that were conſecrated and appoynted for the ſeruice of the Temple, which liued almoſt after the manner and cuſtome of the Vaſtale virgins in Rome
                           ▪ and were therein maintained: but becauſe theſe women with their ſeruices and works are ſpoken of hereafter, I will for this preſent leaue them. Touching the building of this caſtle, it was long ſince deſtroyed, yet not ſo wholly, but that men may yet perceiue the greatnes and magnificence thereof. The mouth of the Riuer Tumbez lyeth vnder foure degrees on the ſouth ſide in the firme land. Right ouer againſt Pana there are people that haue fiue or ſixe of their foreteeth in the vpper gumme pulled forth, ſome ſay they do it of pride, and think it a beautie, others ſay that they had their teeth pulled out as a puniſhment for certaine iniurie they hadde in times paſt doone and committed againſt the kings or Iugan of P
                                 •
                              ru, and others ſay they offer thē vnto their Idols. From the riuer Tumbez the coaſt runneth ſouthweſt, to Cabo Blanco, or the white Cape, being diſtant full 11. miles, and lyeth vnder three degrees and from whence it runneth weſt, to the Iſland de Lobos or of 
                              •
                           olues: betweene Cabo Blanco and the Iſle de Lobos, lyeth a poynt called Depa
                                 •
                              na, and in our Carde Pariana, which reacheth almoſt as farre into the ſea, as Cabo Blanco: from this pointe the coaſt reacheth againe ſouthweſt, til you come to Parta, betweene Cabo Blanco and Parta, lyeth the towne of S. Michael, which was the firſt town that the Spaniards built within Peru, called Noua Caſtillia, and was begun by P
                                 •
                              z
                                 •
                              rius, in the yeare of our Lord 1531.
                           1
                                 •
                              31 wherein alſo was the firſt Chriſtian Church, although at this time of ſmall importance, and ſo I wil leaue to ſpeake thereof.
                        The whole coaſt from Tumbez is without hils or daies, and where there are any dales they are bare, only full of ſand and ſtones, and but fewe riuers iſſue from the coaſt: the hauen of P
                                 •
                              
                            lyeth beyond the Cape ſomwhat more then ſixe miles, and is a good hauen, wherein they rig their ſhips, & newe tarre them, being the principall ſtaple of all Peru, and of al the ſhips that ſayle for thoſe parts. This hauen of Parta lyeth vnder fiue degrees, from the Iſland of Wolues aforeſaid, thither you run eaſt and by weſt, which are diſtant three Spaniſh miles, or twelue Italian miles, and from thence the coaſt runneth ſouth, wherewith you fall vppon the poynt de la Cora: in the middle between the Iſland of Wolues and this point, there is a great intercourſe or creeke of water, hauing very good harber for ſhippes to anker in, it lyeth vnder ſix degrees on the ſouth ſide of the line, from thence you perceiue 2. Iſlands, both called Iſlas de Lobos, that is, Iſlandes of Sea Wolues, becauſe of the great quantity that are thereabouts: the firſt of theſe Iſlands lyeth north and ſouth, with the firſt poynt, and is diſtant from the firme land three Spaniſh miles, or 12. Italian miles: the other Iſland lyeth 9. miles further forward, and is not ful vnder ſeuen degrees, ſouthweſt from the coaſt, till you come to the hauen called C
                                 •
                              ſma, and from this firſt Iſland you ſaile northeaſt & ſouthweſt to Malabrigo, (which is the ſlender or bad defence) where there is a hauen wherin their ſhippes may not enter, but with faire weather, and ſuch ſpecially as haue great occaſion, thereby to further their voyage. Seuen miles and a halfe further you come to Tarr
                                 •
                              e
                                 •
                              ſſe, (that is the cliffe) of Truxilio, which is a verie bad hauen, and hath no other harber or defence, then onely good ankers, and a mile and a halfe within the land lyeth the towne of Truxilio, which is alſo one of the Spaniſh townes, ſituate in the plaine countrie of Peru, it is builded vppon the corner of a Riuer in the vallie of Chimo. The countrey thereabouts is verie fruitfull, abounding in wheat, M
                              •
                           l
                              •
                           , cattell and water, and the towne built in good proportion, hauing about three hundred Spaniſh houſes, with broade ſtreetes, and a great market place: rounde about the towne are many fayre gardens, and euerie houſe is ſerued with water by channels, comming out of the Riuer, and runneth into all their gardens, which are continually greene and full of bloſſomes, wherfore it is ſaide this towne lyeth in a verie good place, compaſſed about with faire and pleaſant meddowes, corne fieldes, and Paſtour groundes, where the inhabitants feede their Cattell, and likewiſe plant and ſowe theyr Corne. There the Spaniards haue plāted many kinds of ſpaniſh fruites, as por
                              •
                           ga
                              •
                           nats, oranges, lemones, citrons, figs, & much of the countrie

fruit in great aboundance, and verie good: beſides this, they haue many foules, hens, and capons, whereby they are prouided of all things, of fleſh in great aboundance, and fiſh out of the ſea, which is hard by them, & alſo in the riuer. The Indians inhabiting about the towne, are in ſubiection to the Spaniards, and furniſh the towne with all things that are neceſſarie: at this Towne there are whole ſhippes laden with cotten linnen, made by the Indians to ſell in other places. This towne was made and erected by Marquis Franciſco Pizarto, the firſt gouernour of Peru,
                           1533 in the yeare 1533 From Tru
                                 •
                              
                            by land vnto ſaint Michae
                                 •
                              
                            another ſpaniſh towne, and the firſt place where they inhabited in thoſe countryes, are about fiue and fortie ſpaniſh miles, or an hundred and eightie Italian miles, litle more or leſſe, for that comming from Saint Michae
                                 •
                              s to the vallie Motup
                                 •
                              , are fifteene miles and a halfe, all ſandie and bad way, ſpecially where men much cheefely trauell: and being paſt thoſe fifteene miles, you enter into certaine vallies, and though therabouts falleth certaine ſmall riuers out of the hilles, yet they reach not to the vallies, but runne into the ſands, whereby they doo no good: and to trauaile this way, you muſt depart out of Saint Micaels in the enening, and ſo go all night, and earlie in the morning you come to certain places where you find water to drinke, for by night the heate of the ſunne doth not hurt, ſome carrie bottles with water or wine, and when you come vnto the vally Motupe you enter into the kings hieway, very broad & euen, which I haue occaſion to ſpeake of the kings of Peru
                           ▪ I will declare more at large. This vallie is broade and fruitfull, but the riuer that falleth from the mountaine, ſtoppeth before it commeth vnto the ſea but becauſe the earth is verie mooriſh, there groweth many trees: the people draw their waterout of certaine pits, which they dig within the earth, their traffike is cotten wool, and cloth made thereof: three miles from Motupe lyeth the faire freſh vallie of Xa
                                 •
                              anca, which is alſo three miles great, through the which there 
                              •
                           unneth a goodly riuer from whence they fetch water to moyſten their grounds: this vallie in time paſt was very populous, and likewiſe the other: in this vallie were many houſes of great Lords, that therein kept their ſtewards to commaund ouer the reſt, who were greatly honoured and feared by the common people: from this vallie you goe to another called 
                              
                                 •
                              uqueme
                           ▪ which likewiſe is great and full of buſhes, the ruines of the great houſes that ſtood therin, yet to bée ſéene, do euidently ſhew that many people haue inhabited in that vallie: a dayes iourney further there is yet another faire vallie called 
                              
                                 ••
                              nto, and between theſe two vallies there is nothing but ſandy wayes, and drie ſtony hils, where you find
                              •
                            neither liuing creatures, trees, nor leaues, but onely certaine birdes that flie ouer it, and ſuch as will paſſe that way, muſt haue good guides, leſt they looſe themſelues in the ſandie downes, and by reaſon of the great heate of the ſun, and want of water, ſhould faint for thirſt. From Cinto you come to an other vallie called Coliche, through the which there runneth a great riuer called by that name: this vally likewiſe in times paſt was full of people, but nowe for the moſt part by meanes of the warres, they are almoſt conſumed: from whence you goe to Zana, much like the 
                              •
                           ormer, and ſomewhat further to Palcamayo, of all the reſt thereabouts the moſt fruitful and populous: the people of this vallie before they were ouercome and ſubdued by the 
                              •
                           ings of Peru were verie mightie and much eſteemed of by their neighbours, they had great churches, wherein they ſacrificed, but now al deſtroyed and ouerthrowne: there were likewiſe many Indians graues. Through this vallie there runneth a great riuer, that watereth al their groundes, and through it alſo paſſeth the kings high way, and therein were many houſes belonging to the king.
                        In this vallie they make much cotten work, & haue al kind of cattel, as kine, hogs, goates, and ſuch like beaſts, and is verie temperate. From this vallie you go to another called Cancama, not inferiour for fruitfulneſſe and pleaſure to the other. They haue likewiſe many ſugar canes and very good fruit, wherein there is a cloyſter of Dominican Friers, made by Dom di S. Themafe, and three miles from thence in the vallie of C
                                 •••
                              o, lieth T
                                 •
                              ux
                                 •
                              l
                                 •
                              
                           
                           ▪ as I ſaid before, which val
                              ••
                           e keepeth the name of a Lorde called C
                                 ••
                              o, who was a valiant Souldiour, and liued long time 
                              〈◊〉
                            warres.
                        The kings of Peru greatly eſteemed that vallie, wherein they builded many houſes and gardens of pleaſure, and through it alſo paſſeth the kings high way, with the wales: but returning again vnto the coaſt, the hauen of 
                              
                                 •
                              xillo lyeth vnder ſeauen degrees 
                              •
                            and from thence you ſaile to the hauen of Goanape
                           ▪ which lyeth full fiue miles from the towne of 
                              
                                 •
                              x
                                 •
                              lo, vnder eight degrees and 
                              •
                            and ſomewhat further ſouthward lyeth the hauen 
                              〈◊〉
                            or holie,

where the ſhippes put in, by it there is a great riuer and a very good water: all this coaſt is without hilles, and (as I ſaide before ſandy and chalkie vallies. This hauen of Porto Santa lyeth vnder nine degrees: and further ſouthward about foure miles diſtant lieth another hauen called Ferrol
                           ▪ a very good and ſure hauen, but hath neyther freſh water, nor wood to burne: and about foure miles and a halfe further there lyeth a hauen called Caſina where there is a Riuer of freſh water, and much woodde to burne, where the ſhippes doe ordinarilye refreſh themſelues, it lyeth vnder tenne degrees: From Caſma the coaſt runneth ſouth to the cliffes called Los Farollones di Guaura: A little further lieth Guarmey, wherein runneth a riuer: and from thence you ſayle the ſame courſe to the Barranca, or Downes, which is fifteene miles towardes the ſouth: and foure miles and one halfe further lieth the hauen of Guaura, where the ſhippes may take in as much ſalt as they will, for there is ſo much that all Spaine and Italie might be furniſhed with ſalt from thence, and yet they woulde haue ſufficient for the country: three miles further lie the Cliffes or Farrollones: From this poynt which 
                              •
                           utteth out of the land with the ſame northeaſt and ſouthweaſt courſe, you ſaile ſixe miles further, to the furtheſt cliffe that lyeth into the ſea. Theſe Cliffes lie vnder eight degrées and one halfe: from thence the coaſt turneth againe ſoutheaſt, till you come to the Iſland of Lyma, in the middle way, and ſomewhat more towards Lyma lieth a rocke which is called Salmarina, and is vnder ſeuen or ſeuen degrées and a halfe. This land maketh a barre of defence before Callao, which is the hauen of the Towne of Kings, or of Lyma, and by this defence from the Iſland the hauen is very ſafe, for the ſhippes to harbour in: Callao lieth vnder twelue degrees and a halfe.
                     
                     
                        The way by land from Truxillo to Lima.
                        THe towne of Truxillo lyeth diſtant from Lima ſixtie ſpaniſh miles, which is 48. duch miles, or 240. Italian miles, all the which way is ſandie, vnleſſe it be when you paſſe certaine vallies. Now when you ſet out of Truxillo, you come firſt to the valie of Gu
                                 •
                              nape, which is full fiue Spaniſh miles from thence, that is, 21. Italian miles, which in times paſt was wel known becauſe of the good drinke called Cica, that was made ther, no leſſe then in Italy, Mente, Fraſcon, and in Spaine, S. Martin, are eſteemed for the good wines that are there to be ſolde, and this vallie is inhabited and watered as the reſt are, it hath a verie good hauen, where the ſhippes take in all theyr prouiſion: from thence you come to a little valley, where no riuer runneth through, but it hath a ſmall water, where thoſe of Peru and other trauailers vſe to drinke: and going further, you come to the vallie of Santa, which in time paſt was verie populous, and had in it many braue ſouldiours, and captaines for commanders, which held ſtoutly againſt the Kings of Peru, ſo that they were forced to ouercome them more by pollicie then force: they were likewiſe much eſteemed of by their kings, that cauſed many houſes & pallaces to be built therin, as being one of the greateſt and biggeſt vallies in thoſe countries, and through it there runneth a verie ſtrong and great riuer, which is verie full and high when it is winter in the hilles, wherein alſo were manie Spaniards drownde. Nowe they haue a drift to ſet ouer their paſſengers, therein in time paſt there dwelt many thouſand people, nowe there are not aboue 400. left. They go apparrelled both men and women with certain mātles and ſhirts, with bands or rolles about their heades: all kindes of fruites both of that countrey, and ſuch as are brought out of Spaine, do grow therein in great aboundance. There likewiſe they take much fiſh: the ſhippes that ſaile along the coaſt, do there take in freſh water and other prouiſions: two daies iourney from thence, lieth another vallie called Guambac
                                 •
                              o, for fruitfulnes & other things like vnto the reſt, & about a daies iourney and a halfe further lyeth the valley of Guarmey, wherin are many beaſts, cowes, hogs, and horſes, from thence you go to Parmongo, no leſſe pleaſant then the former: in it are yet ſeene certaine faire caſtles, built after theyr manner, wherein vpon the walles are painted the Images of certaine beaſtes and birdes: and it is to be wondered at howe they make the water runne out of the riuer ſo farre into the land, whereby it moyſtneth all the countrey: a mile and a halfe from the vallie, lieth the riuer Guaman, which in our ſpeech ſignifieth the riuer of the fields, and is by them called Barranca, which vallie is like all the reſt, and when it raineth much in the hilles, this riuer is verie dangerous. A dayes iourney from thence lyeth the vallie of Guaura, from the which you go to Lima, the vallie wherin it lyeth is the greateſt and broadeſt of all that are betweene it

and Tumbez, and as it is greateſt, ſo was it verie populous, wherof at this time there are few left: for when the towne began to be inhabited, the inhabitants of the towne tooke the countrey and land from thoſe that dwelt in the vallie, who after that were likewiſe deſtroyed and cleane rooted out▪ This towne next vnto Cuſco, is the greateſt in all the countrey of Peru and the principall, for that at this preſent the Viceroyes of Peru, the Archbiſhop, the Councell, and the Chancerie, wherein all proceſſes are ſued, and the lawes of the whole countrie adminiſtred, are reſident therein, whereby there is great traffike and concourſe vnto Lyma, becauſe many people come thither out of the townes lying about it. In this towne are faire houſes, ſome built with Towers and coſtly galleries: the Market place is great, and the ſtreetes broade, and entring into the market place, from whence alſo you may goe into euerie place of the towne, and to the fieldes, and into moſt of the houſes there runneth certain channels, that conuay water, a great commoditie and pleaſure vnto the towneſmen, wherewith they may water all their gardens and orchards, which are there verie faire and pleaſant: vpon the riuer likewiſe are many water milles, made after the manner of our countrey, wherewith they grinde theyr corne, to conclude, therein dwelleth manie rich inhabitants, ſome worth 150000. duckets: and from this towne oftentimes there ſaileth ſhippes that are worth in value at the leaſt 800000. duckets, and ſome a Million: on the eaſt ſide a little aboue the town, lyeth a high hill, whereon there ſtandeth a Cru
                                 ••
                              fix: on another ſide of the towne, the townſmen haue certaine places where they keepe their cattell, their douehouſes, vineyards, (but no good grapes becauſe of the grounde) gardens of pleaſure, not onely full of all thoſe countrie fruits, but alſo of Spaniſh fruites, as figges, poundgarnats, lemons, oranges, melons, beanes, peaſe, and ſugar canes, all verie good and ſauorie, and better then in Spaine, and to ſay the truth, to paſſe a mans life in quietneſſe (were it not for the reporte that runneth of the Spaniards, that they make warre againſt thoſe people without a cauſe) I thinke it the beſt and moſt pleaſant place in all the world, the aire being ſo temperate, that all the yeare long there is no extremitie either of heate or cold, and it was neuer heard that euer they had famine, plague, or any raine, thunder, or lightning, but to the contrarie, alwayes a cleare and faire ſkie: it was builded by the Admirall Don Franciſco Pizarro, in the yeare of our Lord 1535.
                           1535. and was called 
                              〈◊〉
                            Kings towne, becauſe they arriued therein vpon twelfe day, by vs ſo called. Touching victualles, beſides fiſh, which they haue both out of the ſea and the Riuer▪ in great aboundance, as alſo fleſh and fruits of trees, and of the earth, as I ſaide before: they haue no leſſe quantitie of wheate: and the foure moneths of ſummer in Spaine, are winter with them, onely ſomewhat colder then the ſummer: in thoſe ſoure moneths of winter, there falleth euerie day in the forenoone, a ſmall dew or miſt, but not vnholſome, as with vs, for that thoſe that haue any paine in their heades, waſhing their heades therewith, it healeth the ach: it is verie likelie that this towne of Lima will daily increaſe in people and houſes, for many yeares together there were not aboue 500. houſes therein, yet the place is great inough to containe 2000. houſes, for the ſtreetes are verie broade, and the market as bigge as a great fielde, euerie houſe is eightie foote broade, and a hundred and ſixtie foote long, and becauſe there is no conuenient woodde whereof to make chambers, for that al their wood within two or three yeares, is cleane conſumed by wormes, therefore the houſes be but of one ſtorie high, yet verie coſtly and ſumptuous, with many chambers, halles, and parlers, both fitte to dwell in, and alſo to receiue ſtrangers, the walles of the houſes are made of a certaine ſtuffe baked hard together, and filled with earth. They couer their houſes with painted mattes, or elſe with painted linnen, and round about and aboue vppon the walles they make arbours of greene boughes, wherein they ſit to keepe themſelues from the ſunne, for raine they neede not care, for there it neuer raineth: this Citie hath vnder it al theſe townes hereafter named, where there are Biſhops, as Quito, Cuſco, Guamanga, Arequipa▪ Pax, P
                                 •
                              ata, Trugillo, Guanuco, Chachapo
                                 •
                              a, Portus, Vetus, Guaiaquil, Popatan, Carchi▪ Saint Michael, and S. Francis. Before it was ſaide that Peru is diuided into three prouinces, in flat or plaine land, on the ſea coaſt in hillie lande, that runneth through the middle of Peru, & in other lands, lying beyonde the hilles: touching the flat lande on the ſea ſhore, I haue hitherto ſpoken, beginning from the line, and the Cape Paſ
                                 •
                              ao hitherto, ſo you muſt vnderſtand that from Tumbez, not onelie to Lima but alſo further ſouthward, the ſea coaſt is full of many great droughts, and wilde ſandie places, where for the ſpace often miles it neuer thundereth, lightneth, nor raineth, but beyonde that, or all the ſpace that is betweene

thoſe tenne miles and the hilles, it thundereth, lightneth, and raigneth. In this flatte land there are no fountaines nor welles, but foure or fiue ſtanding waters that are brackiſh, becauſe they are neare the ſea, the inhabitants vſe the riuer waters, that run out of the hilles, which ſpring of the ſnow and raine that falleth on the hilles, and not out of fountaines that ſtande among the hils. The diſtance of theſe riuers are alreadie partly deſcribed, lying ſeuen, eight, ten, twelue, fifteene, and twentie miles one from the other, yet moſt part ſeuē or eight, wherby ſuch as trauaile direct their courſe, becauſe they haue no other waters: on both ſides of theſe riuers about a mile broade or further, and ſometimes more or leſſe, according to the ſcituation of the countrey, are diuers fruitfull trees, and corne landes, which are planted and ſowed by the people of the countrey, which they may do all the yeare long, alſo there groweth about thoſe riuers many wilde trees, cotten, reeds, thiſtles, and L
                                 •
                              s, and ſince the Spaniards ſubdued the countrey, they ſowe wheate, moyſtning the lande by certaine channels, made out of the Riuers, and becauſe they runne with ſo great force out of the high hilles, that without helpe men can hardly paſſe them, and many are drowned: ſuch as trauaile in that flat countrey go ſo neare to the ſea coaſt, that they haue them alwayes in their ſight: when it is winter in the hilles, and that it raineth much, it is dangerous trauailing in thoſe countries, ſpecially to paſſe the riuers, which they muſt either do vpon drifts which they haue for the purpoſe, or with a net, which they fil with canworden or goords, whereupon the trauailer muſt lie, and one of the Indians ſwimmeth before him, drawing the net or drift, and an other behinde that ſteereth it. The people in the flat land dwell in houſes made of boughes, the men weare ſhirts and cloathes vppon their knees, and ouer it they caſt an vpper garment or mantle, the women weare a kinde of cotten pettiecoate, from the head to the foot, and although their manner of apparrel is in euerie place almoſt alike, yet they vſe certain differences in the attiring of their heades, ſome wearing nothing but plaine hairelaces, ſome double and wreathed, others of one colour, and ſome of diuers colours, and there is no man but he weareth ſome thing vppon his head, and all different, according to the manner of the country. Thoſe Peruuians of the plaine countrie are diuided into three manner of people-ech hauing a different name, wherof the firſt are called Iungas, thoſe are ſuch as dwell in the hot country, the ſecond Tallanes, and the third Mochicas, ech hauing a ſeuerall ſpeech, only that the Lordes could ſpeake the Cuſcan ſpeech, as our Courtiers ſpeake French, the cauſe thereof is, that their Kinges helde it for a diſhonour vnto them, to ſpeake to their ſubiects by an interpreter, for the which cauſe Guaynacapa father to Atabaleba, commanded that all the ble men of the countrey ſhoulde ſend theyr children to his Court, vnder pretence as he ſaide, to ſerue him, to learne that ſpeech, although his intent was none ſuch, but onely thereby to aſſure himſelfe of his kingdome, againſt ſuch as might riſe vp againſt him, which they would not do, he hauing theyr children in his power, and by this ſame meanes al the noble men learned the ſpeech commonly vſed in the Court, wherewith a man may trauaile cleane through the countrie.
                     
                     
                        Of the windes that blow in the plain countrie of Peru, alſo the occaſion of the droughts, and of the other townes and places which lie in the further deſcription of the ſea coaſt.
                        BEfore I returne to procéeding with the deſcription of the reſt of the ſea coaſts, from Lyma to Arequipa, I thinke it not vnconuenient to declare why it raineth not in the plaine countrey of Peru, lying on the ſea ſide, where neuertheles there is ſo great occaſion giuen of raine, becauſe the Sea, (which commonly yeeldeth moyſture) lyeth vpon the one ſide, and the hils, (whereon there is alwaies ſo great quantitie of water and ſnow) vppon the other ſide: you muſt vnderſtand that vppon the hils ſummer beginneth in Aprill, and continueth May, Iune, Iuly, Auguſt, and September, and in October winter beginneth, and continueth the other moneths til March, not much differing from our Countries, or frō 
                           Spain, in that time they both plant, build, and gather in their fruites and ſeedes: but day and night are al of a length, onely that in Nouember they differ a little, and in the plaine land it is contrary, for when it is ſummer in the hils, it is winter there, ſo that in the plaine countrie ſummer beginneth in October, and continueth til the moneth of Aprll, where as then winter beginneth: and ſurely it is a verie ſtrange thing to thinke how ſo great difference ſhould be in one countrey, where a man may vppon one day in the morning, trauaile from the hilles, where it raineth, and befo
                              •
                           e night bee in the plaine

countrie, where it neuer or verye ſeldome raineth, for that from the beginning of October, al the ſummer long, it neuer raineth in that countrey, onely there falleth certain dew, which in many places hardly layeth the duſt of the ſandes, wherefore the inhabitants of the plaine countrey muſt continually water their groundes, and not till nor plant any more lande, then they can bring the water vnto: in other places by reaſon of the vnfruitfulneſſe of the country, there is no graſſe, as beeing all drie ſandie and ſtonie grounds, the trees growing theron, are vnfruitfull, with verie few leaues, there likewiſe groweth diuers thiſtles and thornes, and in ſome places nothing at all: when it is winter in the plaine countrie, there are certaine thicke and cloſe cloudes, onely as if the aire hung full of raine, from whence there onely proceedeth a certaine ſmall miſeling, that can hardly lay the duſt of the ſande, which notwithſtanding is a verie ſtrange and wonderfull thing, that the ayre being in that ſort ſo thicke and cloſe, there falleth no other moyſture, and yet the ſunne for many daies becauſe of the clouds, cannot be ſeene, and as the hilles are verie high, and the coaſt low, it appeareth that the hilles draw the cloudes vnto them, not ſuffering them to fal vpon the plaine lande, ſo that when the waters do naturally keepe their courſe, it raineth much in the hils, and not in the plaine countrie, but therein cauſeth a great heat, and when the dew falleth, then it is cleare weather vpon the hils, and raines not there: likewiſe it is very ſtrange that for the moſt part of the yeere ther bloweth but one kind of wind in the plain countrie, that is, ſouthweſt windes, which although in other countries they are commonly moyſt, and cauſes of raine, there they are cleane contrarie, I thinke becauſe they are ſuppreſſed by the high hilles, from whence they blow, that they draw no moyſture or dampeneſſe out of the ſea into the aire, wherby any great raine ſhould folow: by theſe windes alſo it happeneth that the water in the South ſea runneth into the North, and maketh a hard nauigation from Panama to Peru, both againſt winde and ſtreame, in ſuch ſort that it cannot be done, without lauering and ſtriuing againſt the winde.
                        There is yet another thing to bee marked, which is, that vnder the line in ſome places it is moyſt, and in ſome places colde and moyſt, and in thoſe plaine countries of Peru, colde and drie, and departing from thence to the other ſide, it raineth continually.
                     
                     
                        Here followeth the deſcription of the coaſt of the plaine countrey of Peru (with the hauens and riuers lying therein) between the towne of Lyma, and the prouince of Dechia, as alſo the degrees and the manner of the ſayling on that coaſt.
                        THe Ships that ſaile from the towne of Lyma or of Kings, take their courſe towards the ſouth, and ſo come to the hauen of Singalla, which is verie great, whereby at the firſt the Spaniards were in mind to haue built the town of kings in that place, it lyeth diſtant from Lyma 2
                                 •
                              . Spaniſh miles, or 105. Italian miles, whereof fiue make a Duch mile, which is one and twentie Duch miles, it lyeth not ful vnder fourteene degrees on the ſouth ſide of the line. Hard by the hauen of Sangalta, lyeth an Iſland taking the name of the ſea Wolues: al the coaſt from thence forward is very low, although in ſome places there are ſmal hils of plaine ſtone, and ſome ſandie downes, wherein as yet, neither before, nor til this time it euer rained, where alſo there falleth no other moyſture, then onely the ſmal dewe, whereof I ſpake before: about this Iſland of ſea Wolues, there are ſeuen or eight other Iſlandes, which lie in Triangle, wherof ſome are high, ſome low, and all vnhabited, hauing neither water, wood, trees, graſſe, nor any thing, onely Sea Wolues, and great ſtore of ſande. The Peruuians of the firme land, (as they thēſelues ſay) in times paſt vſed to goe into thoſe Iſlands, and there to offer ſacrifices, where it is thought much treaſor lyeth hidden, theſe Iſlands are diſtant from the firme land about three miles. Further in the ſame courſe vnder 14. and 1/
                              •
                            lyeth another Iſland of the ſame name, and from thence ſailing on, and coaſting along the ſhore ſouthweſt, and ſouthweſt and by ſouth, and being 9. miles beyond the Iſland, you come to a point called Naſca, lying vnder fifteene degrees leſſe ¼ vnder the which the ſhippes may anker, but yet they cannot land with their boates, neither throw foorth their Bocken: following the ſame courſe vnder fifteene degrees, 1/
                              •
                            there is another head or poynt called S. Nicolas, and from this cape the coaſt runneth ſouthweſt, and when you haue ſayled nine miles in that ſort, you come to a hauen called Hacan, which lyeth vnder ſixteene degrees, from whence following on the coaſt, you come to the riuer Diocouna, on which ſide the coaſt is altogether wilde: A little further there is another riuer called

                           Camana, and ſomewhat further the riuer Quilca, and about halfe a mile beyonde it there is a verie good grounde where the ſhips may ride and anker, which hauen is alſo called Quilca, like the riuer: and from thence as men put out, they ſaile to the towne of Arequipa, which lyeth 12. miles from this towne, the hauen and the towne lying vnder ſeuenteene degrees ½: ſayling along the coaſt of this hauen, about three miles diſtant you ſee certaine Iſlands, in the which certaine Indian fiſhermen of the firme lande doo lie to catch fiſh: about twoo miles further there is another Iſland hard by the firme lande, where on the loofe ſide the ſhips may harber, it is called Chul
                                 •
                              , from whence there are wares ſent to Arequipa and is from Quilca nine miles▪ it lyeth vnder ſeuenteene degrees and a halfe.
                     
                     
                        The way by lande from Lyma or Cidado de los Re
                              •
                           es to Arequipa.
                        DEparting from Lyma, and following the coaſt about three ſpaniſh miles, or twelue Italian miles you come to the vally of Pachacama, in our card Pachamma, a moſt pleaſant place, and wel known among the Peruuians, becauſe of the moſt ſtatelie Temple that ſometimes ſtood therein, for riches exceeding al others in that countrey, being placed vpon a litle hil made of ſquare ſtones and earth: in the which temple were many painted doores & wals, with formes of wilde beaſts: in the middle therof where the idoll ſtood, were the prieſts, that ſhewed themſelues to be verie holie, and when they offered ſacrifice for all the people, they turned their faces towardes the gates of the temple, and their backs to the Image, caſting downe their eyes, and ful of fearefull demonſtrations, made great ſtamping (as ſome of the old Indians ſay) like the maner of the ſacrificators of the Idoll Apollo, when the people ſtaied to heare the propheſies. Thoſe old Indians likewiſe ſay that they vſed to offer many beaſtes and ſome men vnto this Idol, & at their cheefe feaſtes this Idol gaue them anſwere to their demaunds, and what he ſayd they beleeued: in this temple there was great treaſor of golde and ſiluer hidden, and the prieſtes were greatly eſteemed, the Lords of the countrey being much ſubiect to their commaundements: rounde about this temple were certaine houſes made for Pilgrims, and no man was eſteemed worthie to be buried about that Church, but onely their kings, noblemen, and the prieſts that came thither on pilgrimage, bringing certaine offerings with them: when they helde their greateſt feaſt in al the yeare, there aſſembled many people, that according to their manner plaied on inſtruments: when the kings of Caſco ſubdued the vallie, they hauing a cuſtome throughout al their countries, to erect temples in the honour of the ſunne: and beholding the greatneſſe and auncientnes of that temple, with the perſwaſion that the common people had of the holineſſe of that place, as alſo the great deuotion vſed therein, they thought it not conuenient to deſtroy that church, but appoynted another to be made by it in honour of the ſunne, which ſhuld be eſteemed the greater, which according to the kings commandement being finiſhed, be indowed it with great gifts, ſending thither certaine women, wherwith the diuell of Pachacan
                                 •
                              a was verie well pleaſed, as it appeareth by the anſwere hée gaue vnto them, being ſerued as well in the one temple as in the other, and keeping the poore ſoules vnder his power: and now although this temple is defaced, yet hee ceaſeth not ſecretly to ſpeake with ſome of the Indians, telling them that the ſame God which is preached by the Spaniards and hee are all one, thereby to keepe them in obedience vnto him, and not to become chriſtians. In ſteede of thoſe Idols, there are croſſes erected, as they think to pleaſe the diuel, the name of the diuell was Creator of the world, for Camac is creator, and Pacha world: but God permitting Francis Piza
                              
                                 •
                              ius to take King Atabaliban priſoner, he ſent his brother Fernando Pizarrus to deſtroy the temple, and to take away the treaſure, although the prieſtes before his comming had hidden part thereof, which could neuer be founde, yet a great part was carried away. This vallie is verie fruitful, rich, and ful of trees, abounding with kine and other cattel, as alſo good horſes. From the vally Pachacama you come to Cilca, where there is a notable thing to be noted, for the ſtrangeneſſe thereof, for it neuer raineth there, neither is there any riuer, whereby they may conuay the water, therwith to water their groundes, yet the moſt part of this vallie is ful of Maiz and other rootes that are good to eate, with fruitfull trees: the meanes they haue to helpe themſelues therein, is thus, that they make certaine deepe pits within the earth, wherein they ſow their Maiz and other rootes and other fruits, and by reaſon of the cleare and pleaſant aire, as alſo the ſmal dew and moiſture that falleth, God ſendeth them great aboundance of Maiz and other things, but no other corne, neither would that likewiſe

grow therein, if they did not throw one or two heades of the fiſh called Sardinia into the ground with euerie eare of corne, which fiſh they take with nets in the ſea, and by that meanes it groweth in great aboundance, whereby the people maintain themſelues. The water that they vſe to drinke, they take it out of great deepe pittes, and for the better prouiſion of their corne, they do euerie yeare fiſh for ſo many Sardines as they ſhal neede, both to eate, and ſowe theyr corne. There was likewiſe in that country many houſes for prouiſion and munition, belonging to the King of Peru, therein to lodge and reſt themſelues when they trauaile through their countryes. Two miles and a quarter from Ci
                                 •
                              ca is the prouince of Mala, where there runneth a faire riuer, the coaſt whereof is ful of trees: and not full foure miles further lyeth Goarco, well knowne in that countrey, being great and broade, and ful of fruitful trees, ſpeciallie of Guuyas, a certaine Indian fruit, verie pleaſant of ſmel and taſte, and alſo Guauas, and Maiz in moſt great aboundance, with al other things, as wel Indian as Spaniſh fruites. Beſides this there are great numbers of Pigeons, Turtle Doues, and other kindes of foules, in the woods and wilde countrey, which make a good ſhadow in the vallie, vnder the which there runneth certaine ſtreames of freſh water. The inhabitants of this country ſay, that in times paſt that place was verie populous, and that they ruled and hadde commandement ouer ſome of the hils, and ouer plaine countries, and when the Ingen or Kings of Peru or Cuſco came to ſubdue them, they held wars againſt him for foure yeares together, minding not to looſe the liberty, which their predeceſſors before them had ſo long maintained. During the which wars, many ſtrange things happened, which are herein needleſſe to rehearſe, becauſe my meaning is not to make a Hiſtory, but onely to deſcribe the coaſt: and although the Kings of Peru in ſummer time, becauſe of the great heate withdrew themſelues into Cuſco, yet they had their Captaines and Souldiours that helde continuall warres, and becauſe they might the better bring their affaires vnto effect, the Ingen in this vally cauſed a newe Caſco to be built, whether he and his nobilitie repaired, giuing the ſtreetes and other places the names of the olde Cuſco, & when he had ſubdued that people, the ſaide reſidence of the King and the towne did both decay, yet in ſteede thereof there remaineth a goodly Caſtle, which he left in ſigne of victory, ſituate vpon a hil within a goodly vallie, the foundation beeing of foure ſquared ſtones, ſo cunningly cloſed together, that it could not be perceiued how they were ioyned: frō the which Caſtle there went a vaſt vnder the earth to the ſea coaſt, ſo that the waues beat againſt the entrie thereof with ſuch force, that it is wonderful to think how that péece of worke was made: which Caſtle was moſt curiouſly painted, and in it alſo there was a great part of the kings treaſor, the ruines whereof in regard of the Peruuians perpetual cōmendations ought not further to be ſpoyled, as being workes done by ſuch people, which vnto vs wold be altogether incredible, if they had not bin ſeene: a mile & a half further vpward from the caſtle of Goarco there is a riuer called Lunaguana, in our Card Laguna, which vallie is altogether like the former, and foure miles and a halfe from that is the great vallie of Chincha, much eſteemed in Peru, ſpecially by the auncient inhabitants. In this vallie there is a cloyſter of the order of ſaint Dominike. At the ſpaniards ariual there were aboue 25000. men in that vallie, where now there are ſcarce 5000. and were ouercome by Inga Iupangue, & of 
                              
                                 •
                              opaynga Iupang
                                 •
                              e, who had their gouernours therein, with many houſes of pleaſure, and the temple of the Sun, yet the inhabitants leſt not off to ſerue and honour their olde Idol called Cinciaycama, the king hadde likewiſe in this vallie many pentioners and ſouldiers, commaunding ſome of them for certaine moneths in the yeare to repaire vnto the Court, and goe to warres with him. This vallie of Cincia is one of the greateſt vallies in all the countrey of Peru, where it is a moſt pleaſant ſight to beholde the greene trees that grow in the waters that run vnder them, with moſt ſweete and pleaſant Citrons, not like the Spaniſh Citrons, although in forme not differing much, for that theſe being pilled are yellow, and of a good taſte, and ſo pleaſant, that a man can neuer ſatiſfie himſelfe therewith: in thoſe woods there are many birds, but beaſts verie few, becauſe of the continuall warres: in times paſt, there was likewiſe many graues in this country, wherein the Spaniards found much treaſor. Departing from this goodly prouince of Cincia, and trauailing further ouer the plaine countrey, you come to the pleaſant vally I
                                 •
                              a, which is no leſſe inhabited then the former, through the which alſo there runneth a riuer, which in ſome times of the yeare is ſo ſmall, that they ſhuld want water, but that they haue a channell of water that commeth out of the hilles: heerein are many fruites, there are likewiſe manie

yong horſes, kine, goates, pigeons, and turtle doues: from thence you come to the vallie and riuer of Naſca, otherwiſe called Caxa Malca, which in times paſt was verie populous, where they till their ground, and water their fruits, in manner before rehearſed. Theſe people for the moſt parte were ſpoyled and conſumed by the diſunion and contention of the Spaniards, in it were many great places and houſes of munition for the kings of Peru, and diuers graues, all ſpoyled and deſtroyed by the Spaniards: the vallies of Naſca are many in number, whereof one of them hath many canes that yeeld much ſugar: they haue likewiſe much ſugar, which they bring to ſel in the townes bordering vpon them: through all theſe vallies the kings great high way doth paſſe, and in ſome ſundrie places there are as yet certaine tokens or ſignes to ſhew the right way, that men ſhould not ſtray aſide, of the which way I meane to ſay more heereafter, when I come to ſpeake of the kings of Peru: from this vally commonly called Naſca you goe to Hacary, and then to Ocuna, Icamanna, and Iquilca, where there are great riuers, and although at this preſent there are but few inhabitants, yet in times paſt they were no leſſe populous then the firſt, they are fruitfull and very fatte to feede cattel: in the vallie of Quilca lyeth the hauen of Arequipa, and the towne, ſo that from Lima or the Kings towne to Arequipa are ninety Spaniſh miles, or thrée hundred and ſixtie Italian miles: the town lyeth about eleuen miles within the vally of Quilca, diſtant from the ſea in the beſt and moſt pleaſant place of all the vallie to bée built vpon, where there is a verie good and temperate aire, whereby it is commended for one of the moſt holſomeſt places in all Peru, and the pleaſanteſt to dwell in, being a Biſhopricke, and vnder the Iuriſdiction of Lyma, hauing in it about thrée hundred Spaniſh houſes: the countrey thereabouts is verie fat, and yéeldeth verie good Corne, whereof they make bread: the limites or Iuriſdiction of the towne reacheth from the vallie of Hacari, to Tarapaca, and in the prouince or countrey of Condeſuyo: they haue likewiſe authoritie ouer certaine places, which are vnder the Spaniſh gouernment: thoſe of Hubnas, Ciqui Guanitta, Quimiſtaca, and Colagnas, are all vnder the commandement of this towne, in time paſt very populous, and now moſt part deſtroyed by the Spaniards: they pray to the ſun, as other Peruuians do, and weare ſhirts and mantles, moſt of their ſiluer and treaſor is brought from Charcas, and the mynes of Potoiſi, and Porco, from thence it is carried to Lyma, and ſo to Panama and Spaine: about this towne there is a hill of Brimſtone, which burneth continually, whereby it putteth the countrey in great feare, doing great hurt vnto the countrey and the town: ſometimes by reaſon thereof they haue certaine earthquakes: this towne was builded by Franciſco Pizarro in his maieſties name, in the yeare of our Lord 1536.
                           153
                                 •
                              
                            Many Spaniſh wares (as wine, oyle, oliues, meale, corne, or wheate. &c.) are brought thither, therewith to ſerue the Countrey of Charcas, and the mines of Potoiſi & Porco. There alſo many of the Inhabitants of the p
                              ••
                           ne countrey do come and traff
                              •
                           ke, concerning the mines aforeſaide, wherby much ſiluer and treaſor is brought thither, to be conuayed frō thence into other places: therabouts on the ſea coaſt are many great Gieren, that ſpread their wings at the leaſt fiftéene or ſixteene handfulles broade, that liue vpon Sea Wolues, which they take, picking out theyr eyes, and feeding of theyr bodyes. There are likewiſe great numbers of Sea Mewes, by the Spaniards called Alcatraces, that likewiſe liue of ſea fiſh and ſea crabs, and ſuch like. Their fleſh is ſtinking and vnholſome, ſo that many who for want of meate haue eaten them, died therof. And thus much for the firſt part of the plain countrey of Peru, lying along the ſea coaſt.
                        Nowe before I procéede further, I will ſpeake ſomewhat of the Peruuians dwelling vppon the hilles, and of their townes, withall not forgetting their kings, that ruled ouer all thoſe people, and haue ſo rich a country of gold & ſiluer: Peru is in length 525. Spaniſh miles, or 420. Duch miles, which are 2100. Italian miles in breadth: in ſome places 75. Spaniſh, or 60. Dutch miles, in ſome places broader, and in ſome narrower, accounting the length from Quito, to the towne Delia Platta: in this country of Peru are thrée ſorts of hilles, wherein men cannot inhabite: the firſt parte of the hilles are called Andes, which are full of great Woods, the country being vnfit and vnholſome to dwell in, which likewiſe were not inhabited, but beyonde the hilles: the ſecond parte of the hilles taketh her courſe from the Andes, which are verie colde, and are great ſnow hilles, ſo that there alſo no man can dwell, becauſe of the great colde and aboundance of ſnow, which maketh the ground ſo ſoft, that nothing can grow therin. The third parte of the hilles are the Sandie Downes which runne through the plaine land of Peru, from Tumbez to Tarapaca, where it is ſo hot, that neither

water, trées, graſſe▪ nor any liuing creature is ſeene thereon, but onely certaine birdes that flye ouer them. Nowe Peru beeing ſo long, and ſcituate in this manner, there are many wilde and deſart places not inhabited, for the cauſes before rehearſed, and ſuch as were inhabited were great vallies and dales, that by reaſon of the hils are throwded and defended from the windes and ſnow, wherby thoſe vallies and great fields are verie fruitful, ſo that whatſoeuer is plā
                           ted therein, yéeldeth fruit moſt aboundantly: the woods about them bring vp manye beaſts and birds: the Peruuians that dwel betwéene theſe hils, are wiſer, ſtronger, and ſubtiller then thoſe in the plaine countrey lying on the ſea coaſt, and apter to gouerne and for pollicy: they dwel in houſes made of ſtone, whereof ſome are couered with earth, others with ſtrawe, becauſe of the raine, whereof thoſe in the plaine countrey by the ſea ſide, haue no care at all, couering theyr houſes, thereby to keepe them from the ſun, with painted mattes, or boughs of trees, out of theſe vallies lying betweene the hilles, there runneth many ſtreames of good water into the ſouth ſea, and moyſten the plain countrey of Peru, cauſing many fruitfull Trees, corne, and other things neceſſary for mans life to grow therein, as I haue already declared.
                     
                     
                        Of the people and countries that are therein lieing from Paſto to Quito.
                        THe village of Paſto lieth in the vallie Atris, which is in the land of Quillacinga, people without ſhame and good manners, as alſo they of Paſto, little eſteemed by their neighbours, trauailing from Paſto you come to Funez, and two miles and ¼ furder to Iles, from thence to Gualnatan are two miles and a halfe, and from thence to Ipiules two miles and a quarter, in al theſe villages is very little maiz by reaſon of the colde, although they are ſo neere vnto the line, but much Papas and other rootes that are to be eaten: from Ipiules you trauaile to Guaca, but before you come at it you may ſee the Kings hie-way, which is no leſſe to be wondred at, then the way that Hannibal made through the Alpes, whereof hereafter I will ſpeak: alſo you paſſe hard by a riuer, vpon the ſide whereof the King of Peru had made a fort, from whence he made warre vpon thoſe of Paſto, and ouer this Riuer there is a bridge, by nature ſo artificially made, that arte coulde not poſſibly mend it, it is of a high and thick rock, in the midle whereof there is a hole, through the which, with great fury the ſtreame paſſeth, and vpon that rocke men may go ouer it, this rocke in their ſpeech is called Lu
                                 ••
                              ch
                                 •
                              
                              ca, that is, a ſtone bridge, about that place is a fountaine of warme water, wherein a man cannot endure to holde his handes, although the countrie about it and alſo the riuer are verie colde, whereby it is hard trauailing: by this bridge alſo the King of Peru ment to haue built another caſtle, therin to keepe garriſon, but he was preuented by the Spaniardes ariuall in thoſe countries: in this countrie there groweth a certaine fruit as ſmall as plumbs, and blacke, by them called Mortunnos, whereof if any man eateth, they are drunke and as it were out of their wittes for the ſpace of foure and twentie houres. From this ſmall countrye of Guaca you come to 
                              
                                 •
                              uſa where ye prouince of Paſ
                                 •
                              o endeth: not farre from thence you come to a little hill, wherevppon alſo the Kings of Peru had a caſtle much defended by the Peruuians, and going furder you come to the riuer of Mira, where it is very hot, an there are many kinds of fruits, and certaine faire melons, good connies, turtle doues, and partriges, & great aboundance of corne, barley and maiz: from this riuer you trauaile downe to the rich and coſtly houſes of Carangue, & before you come thither, you muſt firſt paſſe ouer a lake in India called Aguarcocia, in our ſpeech the opē ſea, becauſe Guianacapa king of Peru, at the Spaniards ariuall cauſed 20000. men of the places thereabout to be aſſembled, & deſtroyed them all becauſe they had diſpleaſed him, and threw their bodies into that lake, making the water red with their blood. The houſes of Carāgue are in a little place, wherin there is a goodly fountaine made of coſtly ſtone, and in the ſame countries are many faire houſes belonging to the kings of Peru, all made of ſtone, and alſo a Temple of the ſame, wherein there was alone 200. maides, that ſerued the temple, and are verie narrowly looked vnto, that they commit no vncleanes, if they did they were cruelly puniſhed, and hanged, or buried quicke, with them alſo were certaine prieſts yt offered ſacrifices and offerings, according to their religious manner. This Temple of the ſunne in time of the kings of Peru was holden in great account, being then very carefully looked vnto, and greatly honoured, wherein was many golde and ſiluer veſſels, iewels and treaſure, the walls being couered with plates of golde and ſiluer, and although it is cleane deſtroyed, yet by roums you may ſtill behold the great magnificence

thereof: in times paſt the kings of Peru had their ordinary gariſon in the houſes of Carangue, with their Captaines, who both in time of peace and warre, continued there to puniſh offenders. Departing from the houſes of Carangue, you come to O
                                 •
                              aballo, which is alſo rich and mightie, and from thence to Coſeſqui, and before you come thither, you muſt paſſe certaine ſnowie hills, where it is ſo colde, that men trauaile ouer them with greate paine: from Coſeſqui you goe to Guallabamba, which is three miles from Quito, and becauſe the countrie thereabout is lowe and almoſt vnder the line, therefore it is there very hot, yet not ſo hot, that men cannot dwell therein, or that it hindereth the fruitfulnes thereof: by this diſcourſe you may perceiue the eror of many ancient writers, that ſay that vnder the line by reaſon of the great heate no man may dwell, but to the contrary you ſee that after their maner they haue both ſummer and winter, in ſome places colde, and in ſome places hot, as alſo that vnder it there dwelleth many people, and there many fruites and ſeeds do grow, In this way you paſſe many riuers by bridges, whereabouts are greate houſes, and ſtrange things to be ſeene, and to conclude, at this preſent the Spaniards by them maintaine their cattaile.
                     
                     
                        The deſcription of Quito.
                        AMong the towns that lie in the hills of Peru, and at this time inhabited by the Spaniards, Quito is one of the chiefeſt, it lyeth in the valley Annaquito, about fiue miles beyonde the ſouth ſide of the Equinoctial line, in time paſt it was a very faire, rich, and pleaſant towne, ſpecially in the yeares of our Lorde 1544.
                           1544 and 1545. then it floriſhed, becauſe the gold mines (which euerie man regardeth) were firſt found out, but by the warres that Pizarro made, it is almoſt deſtroyed, the earth thereabouts ſeemeth to be vnfruitful, yet it is found contrary, for in it are many catell, as alſo al other prouiſion of corne, fruit, and foule: the ſituation of the countrie is very holeſome and pleaſant, not much vnlike Spaine both for hearbes, and ſeaſons of the yeere, for that ſummer beginneth there in the moneths of March and Aprill, and continueth til halfe Nouember, & although there is much cold, yet they haue no leſſe ſeede then in Spaine: there is likewiſe much ſpaniſh fruite, thoſe people are cōmonly friendlyer, and ciuiler then thoſe of Paſto, and of a meane ſtature, and go apparrelled at this time like other Peruuians. About Quito there vſed to be great numbers of ſheepe, yt were not much vnlike camelles, but not ſo great, only in forme, fit both to carry men and other burdens, but not aboue three or foure miles a day, and being wearie they lie downe, ſo that they can hardly be forced to riſe again: there are likewiſe many hogs and hennes, that are bred of our countrie hens, & great abundance of connies, very pleſant of taſte, and no leſſe quantity of goates, partridges, pidgions, turtle doues, and ſuch like foule: among other things which are by the Peruuians laid vp for prouiſiō (beſides maiz) one is Papas, which is rounde like a turnup, which being ſodden or roſted are altogether like cheſnuttes, another is a kinde of fruit called Quinua, ye truncke of the tree or ſprig being as high as a man, with leaues like beetes, whereon grow certaine ſeeds, ſome red, ſome white, wherof they make their drinke, and eate it likewiſe as wee do rice: the people are very ſkilful in tilling the land but not after our manner, for there the women do it, the men ſpinne, weaue, & make clothes, and looke to their armes. From Quito you come to another town caled Frā
                              ciſco del quito it lieth on ye north ſide in the loweſt prouince of Peru, this town is much colder then warme, and hath but few fields about it, lieing in a ſmal valley like a pit, al compaſſed with hills: from S. Franciſco you go to ye pallaces of Tomebamba (being about 30 miles diſtant) and from thence to Panzaleo: the inhabitants of this countrie differ ſomething from their neighbours, as touching the binding of their heades where by the Indians of all places are knowne: they had likewiſe another ſpeech differing from their neighbours, yet al of thē learned the Cuſcan ſpeech, which if the fathers did not teach their childrē they were puniſhed, the men weare long haire tied vp with a hairelace, they go in ſhirts without hands or ſleeues, and cloſe all about them, onely where they muſt put forth their heads and armes, ouer the which they weare long wollen mantles, and ſome of cotten, the Lords wear ſuch as be verie fine, and painted of diuerſe coulours, their ſhooes were made of leaues, the women goe in long gownes couering all their bodies, tyed about them with a wollen bande, going many times about their bodies, and therewith make themſelues a long body, ouer the which they weare a fine wollen gowne pinned about their neckes with certaine golden and ſiluer pinnes, which they call Topos, hauing great flat heads, and very ſharp pointes, about their heads they tie a

faire fillet or headband, by them called Nin
                              
                                 •
                              i
                                 •
                              
                           : to conclude, the manner of their apparrel and alſo that of Cuſco, is the faireſt and beſt in al America. They are verie careful to combe their haire, which they weare long: they are white of face, of good complection and manners, wherein they differ much from the women of the plaine country: two miles from Pancalco lyeth Mulahallo, in times paſt alſo verie populous, but at this preſent moſt conſumed: on the right ſide of this villag lyeth a hill of brimſtone, which whē it burſteth out, it caſts forth many great ſtones, with feareful ſights: a little further lyeth I'acunga, in time paſt not leſſe then Quito, as well for houſes as other things, as by the ruines may yet bee ſeene.
                        From Tacunga you come to Muliambato, and from thence to the riuer Ambato, and two miles further to Mocia, and frō thence to Rio Bamba, lying in the Prouince of Puruaes, where there are goodly fields and good hearbes and flowers, altogether like Spaine: from Rio Bamba you come to Caiambi, and then to Tumb
                                 •
                              z, or Teocallas, and Ticiquiambi
                           ▪ and from thence to Thomebamba, in the Prouince of Canares there were likewiſe great houſes of ammunition, as alſo throughout the whole countrey, at euery eight, ten, or twelue miles, wherein was al things that belonged to the wars, and thereabouts likewiſe were certaine of the Kings garriſons and captaines, hauing commandement of the countries, thereby to hold the countrey in peace, and to puniſh ſuch as rebelled, though they were their owne ſons. Thomebamba lay in a plaine countrey, where twoo riuers met together, and ranne into the ſea, being nine miles compaſſe, in a colde place, where notwithſtanding were many wilde beaſtes, as Goates, Conies, &c. there likewiſe was a Temple of the Sunne, made of browne, greene, and blacke ſtones, like Iaſper ſtones.
                        The gates of the Kings Pallace were brauely guilded, wherein were ſet certaine Emeraulds platted in golde. From Thomebamba you goe to Bracamoros, in our Carde Boamo
                                 •
                              aces, founde out and diſcouered by Iohn Porzel, and Captaine Vergara, who therein hadde made two or three fortes, thereby to ouerrunne and ſubdue the places lying about it. The Prouince of Bracamoros, is about ſixtie miles from Quito: trauailing along the hill about fiue and fortie miles further, lyeth the Prouince of Chichapoyas, or Cachapo
                              
                                 •
                              as, wherein the Spaniardes haue a towne called Frontiera, on Leuanto, where the countrey is verie fruitfull of all kinde of Spices, and of rich Golde mynes: Leuanto by reaſon of the ſcituation of the place, is verie ſtrong, and well kept, as being almoſt compaſſed about with a deepe vallie, wherein for the moſt part there runneth a certaine riuer, whereby the towne of Frontier builded vppon Leuanto, is not eaſie to bee woonne, if the bridges be once broken downe. This prouince was built with houſes, and peopled with inhabitants of the Spaniſh nation, by Alonzo de Aluarado, in the yeare of our Lord 1536.
                           1536. Therin are faire and white women, fairer then in any other parte of Peru, alſo very gracious and courteous, and withall, verie well apparrelled. From thence you goe into another Prouince called G
                                 •
                              ancas, a goodly countrey, both thoſe people of Cachapoia and Guanca, are ſubiect to the Spaniardes of Frontiera, as alſo thoſe of Caſcayunga, people of another prouince. In all thoſe Prouinces the kings of Peru hadde their houſes of amunition, and in ſome of them rich mynes of Golde. Both men and women in theſe countreyes go apparrelled: In time paſt they hadde their Temples, and offered to theyr Idols, and were verie rich of Cattell, and made much coſtlie apparrell for the king, as yet at this day they doo, and many fine couerlets and carpets. In thoſe Prouinces there are manie fruitfull trees, and the countries are ful of Wheate and Barlie.
                        Touching their ceremonies, cuſtomes, burials, and offerings, they are like all the other Indians, they burie much ſiluer and golde with their dead, and ſome liuing women: they offer vnto the Sunne, as I will declare when I write of the Kinges of Peru. This Andes or hill beeing paſt, you come to Maiobamba or Moyobamba another great riuer, and ſome places inhabited: From Mayobamba, you trauaile to Guanuco, a towne inhabited by Spaniardes, and lyeth about fortie miles from Cachapoya, it is likewiſe called Leon de Guanuco, hauing the name of a Spaniſh Towne, by the commaundement of Vacca di Caſtio, borne in Leon. The ſcituation of this Towne is verie good and wholſome, becauſe the morning and night ſeaſons are verie temperate, where alſo by reaſon of the temperate aire men liue verie healthfull. There they gather much Maiz and other graines, Quinces, Figges, Citrons, Lemons, and other Spaniſh fruites, as alſo much of their own country fruit: beſids this there is much Platain, & becauſe it is a verie

good ſoyle, it is thought the towne will increaſe, for all their kine, goates, horſes, and other beaſts are kept in the fieldes. There are likewiſe many Partriges, Pigeons, and other Birds, wilde Hawkes and tame, therewith to catch the other birdes. In the hilles there are ſome Lions, Beares, and other wilde beaſts: and in moſt parte of the places that are vnder the gouernment of this towne, the kings high way doth paſſe, and there are likewiſe many houſes for amunitiō: among thoſe people were certaine ſouthſayers and coniurers, that were ſkilful in the courſe and nature of the ſtarres, in time paſt there were ſo many of their countrie ſheepe, that it was incredible, which by meanes of the Spaniſh warres were moſt part conſumed. Their houſes are of ſtone, and couered with ſtraw. The liuing womē in thoſe countries are buried with the dead men, and are not ſo vnchaſte as others are. In their countrey are good mines of ſiluer: Fortie miles further from Guanuco de Lion, lyeth another towne, inhabited by the Spaniards, and builded on the hils, by Franciſco Pizarro in the kings name, in the yeare of our Lord 1539.
                           1539. and called S. Iohan dila vitoria di Guamanga: the cauſe why it was made, was chiefly to cleare the paſſage betweene Cuſco and Lyma, from inuaſion of the Peruuians, before the countrey was wholly ſubdued: by this towne there paſſeth a riuer of good ſweete water to drinke, and there are verie faire ſtone houſes and ſome towers, the market place is plain and verie great, and there it is a wholſome aire, for that neither ſunne, aire, nor elements do any hurt, but are verie temperate, round about the towne the Spaniards haue their houſes for cattell, which lie in the vallies vpon the riuers ſide. The greateſt riuer that paſſeth thereabouts is called Vinaque, where there are many ruines ſeene, of great foure ſquare pallaces, built in other ſort then the Peruuians vſe to do, that make theyr houſes long and narrow. They ſay thoſe houſes were built in olde time by ſtrange people, but what they were they knew not. There is likewiſe goodly wheate, whereof they make as good bread as any in Spaine, and all kindes of fruites in great aboundance: from Guamanga to Cuſco are fiue and fortie miles, little more or leſſe, in this way you paſſe the fields of Chiupas, where the cruel battell was fought betwéene Vacca di Caſtra, and Dondiego di Almagro, and being eight miles beyond Guamanga, lyeth Vilcas, which is ſayd to be in the middle of all the countreyes, that are vnder the gouernment of the Kings of Peru, for that Vilcas lyeth in the middle betwéene both, and is as farre from Quito as from Chile, where alſo were great and coſtly houſes for the king, and a temple of the ſunne, from whence fiue miles further you keepe on the kings high way to Vramarca, whereabouts there is a bridge of two arches, verie cunningly made, that paſſeth ouer a riuer: in breadth 166. paces. The Riuer of Vilcas runneth out of the Prouince of Soras, verie fruitful and aboundant in victuals, golde and ſiluer mines, and of warlike people, apparrelled in wollen clothes, and wel eſteemed of by the kings of Peru. From thence to Andagnayla vpon the Riuer Abamcay, are ſeuen miles: and trauailing ſixe miles further, you come to another Riuer called Apurim
                                 •
                              , there the wayes are verie badde, rough, and ſharp, ouer hils and ſtony waies, dangerous to deſcend, for that many horſes laden with gold, do ſtumble and fall into the Riuer, & ſo are ſpoyled: from Apurima you come to Ma
                                 •
                              ambo, and paſſing the hilles of Vilca conga, you come to Xaqui Xaguana, which is verie euen, but neither long nor broade: in this vallie were certaine goodly houſes and pallaces of pleaſure for the kings of Cuſco, who vſed to go thither to recreate themſelues, and is ſcarce 4 miles from Cuſco, through the which alſo paſſeth the kings high way, and otherwi
                              •
                           e it wold hardlie be trauelled, as hauing certain mooriſh groūds which croſſe the way cloſe by the wals: and from thence you come to Cuſco, in times paſt the cheefe of all Peru, and the whole countrey gouerned by the kings, made by Mango Capo, the firſt king of that race, in a verie rough and ſharpe place, compaſſed with hilles and betweene two ſmall riuers, whereof one runneth through the middle of the towne, and is inhabited on both ſides it hath a vallie on the Eaſt ſide, & the ſtreame that runneth through the towne, taketh her courſe on the weſt ſide: in this vally becauſe it is colde, there are verie few fruitful trees, onely certaine Molles, whereof hereafter I will ſpeake, becauſe therewith they make their drinke. On the north ſide this towne had a Caſtle vpon a hil, which for the greatneſſe and ſtrength thereof, was much eſteemed, but now moſt part deſtroyed, although the foundation and ſome towers thereof are yet to be ſéene: it hath likewiſe on the eaſt and north ſide, the Prouince of Andeſuyo and Cinciaſuyo, on the ſouth ſide the countreys of Callao, and Condeſuio, vnder the which lyeth Callao, betwéene Eaſt and South, and Condeſuyo betweene ſouth and weſt: a part of this Cittie was called Hauan Cuſco, & the other Oren Cuſco, places

where the Noble men, and Gentlemen, and principall of the towne dwell: on the other ſide the hill Carmenga, where there ſtoode certaine ſmall towers, wherein they noted the courſe of the ſunne: in the middle where moſt of the people dwell was a great place from the which there paſſed foorth high wayes, that went into the foure partes of the kingdome: and this towne onely was orderly and fairely built with ſtone houſes, and richer and mightier then all the other Townes of Peru, for that vpon paine of death no man might carrie any gold out of the ſame: therein was the richeſt temple of the ſunne in all the world, which was called Curicanche, & in it was the high Prieſt, by them called Villaona, and part of this citie was inhabited by M
                                 •
                              timaes, which are ſtrangers, that all were holden vnder good policie, lawes, & ceremonies of their Idols, moſt wonderfull to heare: the Caſtle was made of ſo great foure ſquared ſtones, that ten paires of oxen could hardly drawe one of them, ſo that it cannot be imagined howe by mans handes thoſe ſtones were brought thither, hauing neither oxen, horſes, nor any other beaſts to draw withall. The houſes at this time inhabited by the Spaniards, are moſt built by people of the countrie, but are ſomewhat repaired and made greater: in the time of their kings this citie was diuided into foure parts, according to the foure partes of the worlde, and hadde the names from the foure prouinces that lay vpon each corner of the Cittie, and when the Kings were liuing, no man dwelling in one quarter of the Citie might remooue houſhold into another, vppon great paine and puniſhments inflicted: and although this Citie lyeth in a colde place, yet it is very holſome and better prouided of all ſortes of victuals, and greater then any other thorowout all Peru: round about it there vſed to be certaine mines of gold, but now conſumed, and are left for the ſiluer mines of Potoſi, becauſe now the profit is greater by ſiluer, and leſſe danger. In this towne was great reſort from the parts of Peru, for till the nobilitie were forced to ſend their children thither vnder pretence of learning the ſpeech, and to ſerue the king, but were there rather for pannes, that in the meane time their fathers might not riſe vp againſt the kings: other people dwelling about it, were forced to come thither to build houſes, to make cleane the Caſtles, and to doo other kindes of workes, whatſoeuer they ſhould be commaunded: about this Cittie there lyeth a great hil, called Guanacaure, of great account with the kings, wher they offered both men and beaſts: and although in this Citie there were people of all nations, as of Chile, Paſto, Cagna
                                 •
                              es, B
                                 •
                              acamo
                                 •
                              o, Chacapoyas, Guancas, Charcas, Collao, &c. yet euerie nation dwelt in a place by themſelues, appoynted for the purpoſe, and helde the ceremonies of their auncetors, onely that they were forced to pray vnto and honour the ſun, as the high God, by them called Mocia. There were likewiſe in this Cittie many great buildings vnder the earth, wherein there dwelt certain coniurers, ſouthſayers, and ſuch as told fortunes, who as yet are not all rooted out, and in thoſe holes there is daily found great quantities of treaſor. About the Citie are many temperate vallyes, wherein there groweth certaine trees and corn, although in times paſt euerie thing was brought thither in great aboundance. Vpon the riuer that runneth through the towne they haue their corne milles: nowe they haue likewiſe many Spaniſh capons and hens, as good as any are in Spaine, as alſo kine, goates, and other cattell: & although there are but fewe trees, yet there groweth much peaſe, beanes, tares, fitches, and ſuch like, becauſe therin was the moſt rich and ſumptuous temple of the ſunne and high prieſt. I think it not vnconuenient to ſpeak ſomething of their Religion, and of the Pettigree of the Kings of Peru, and then in bréefe manner to go on with our courſe, of ſhewing the 
                              •
                           ownes lying on hilles, til you come to Arequipa, as alſo the coaſt reaching to the ſtraights of the Magellanes.
                        
                     
                     
                        The Religion of the Peruuians.
                        TOuching their Religion, they acknowledge, and after their manner worſhipped a creator of heauen and earth, whome they caled Pachacama, which ſignifieth creator, & a ſon of the Sun & Moone, like that in the vallie of Pachacama, where they had made a great temple, yet they accounted and held the Sun for the greateſt God, as a creator of all liuing creatures, which in Cuſcan ſpeech they caled Ticebiracoce, and although they had this knowledge and vnderſtanding, yet they vſed their olde cuſtomes, not onely to pray vnto the Sunne and Moone, but alſo to trées, ſtones, and other things, the diuell through them giuing them anſweres, and becauſe they had no certaine knowledge out of any writings or bookes of the ſcriptures, or of the creation of the worlde, neither yet of the floud, therefore they obſerue that which their forefathers told them, which was that

a notable and worthy man (which they call Con) in times paſt came out of the north, into their countries, with moſt ſwift paſe, that had no bones nor ioynts in his body, neyther was it knit together by any kinde of ſubſtance, that in one day could throwe downe, or raiſe hilles, and fill deep vallies, and paſſe through a place where no wayes nor meanes to paſſe was found, and that this man had made their predeceſſors, giuing them hearbs and wilde fruits to liue vpon, and that he being offended with the Peruuians inhabiting the plaine countrey, conuerted their fruitfull land into ſandie grounds, and cauſed raine not to fall therein, yet being moued with pittie, becauſe of the beaſts, and to water the drie fieldes hee opened diuers fountaines and riuers, whereby the people might moiſten theyr groundes. This Con being ſonne of the Sunne and Moone, in times paſt they honoured for the higheſt God, vntill an other came out of the ſouth called Pachacama, (which ſignifieth Creator) who alſo was ingendered by the Sunne and Moone, and of greater power than Con, at whoſe comming Con departed away: and this Pachacama conuerted the people made by Con into Sea coltes, Beares, Lions, Parats, and other birdes, and made other men that were the predeceſſors of the Peruuians now liuing, and taught them the manner of planting and tilling the earth, whome they after that eſteemed for their God, building Churches for him, and praying vnto him, and called a whole Prouince after his name Pachacama, lying foure miles from Lyma, as already is declared, where in times paſt the Kings and noblemen of the land were commonly buried: which theyr god Pachacama was long time worſhipped by them, til the comming of the Spaniardes into Peru, and after that he was neuer ſéene. Againe▪ it is to be thought it was a Diuell, who vſed that manner of ſubtiltie, thereby to deceiue and blinde the people, who in thoſe times appeared in forme of a man, as it is euident, that before the Spaniards arriuall, he ſhewd himſelfe in that great coſtly temple, in forme of a man, and anſwered the Prieſts, which anſwere the Prieſtes deliuered vnto the poople. They do generally beleeue and tell, that once there was a great floud, whereby all the worlde was drowned, onely a few perſons, that hidde themſelues in certayne high hollow trées, and hauing prouided victualles, ſtopping the holes, by that meanes ſaued themſelues from the common miſery of al mankind: and that when th
                              •
                           ſe men thought the raine and waters to be gone, they ſent out two dogges, who returning all wet backe againe, they geſſed the water not to be conſumed, and ſo thought it not time to goe foorth. After that they ſent the two dogges forth againe, and perceiuing them to come home all dirtie, they then knew the water to be gone, and came foorth, where they found great numbers of ſnakes, which the ſlime earth had bred, whereby they hadde worke enough to kill and deſtroy them. They likewiſe ſay that the world ſhalbe deſtroyed, but not before there ſhal firſt come a great drought, and in manner a burning of the ayre, whereby the ſunne and moone ſhal be darkened and taken away, wherefore when there happeneth any Eclipſes or darkeneſſes of the ſunne or moone, but ſpecially of the ſunne, then they ſing ſorrowfull ſongs, and make great mournings, thinking the world ſhall be deſtroyed, and that the end approcheth. What are theſe but cloudes of their religion? which the diuel in ſo great blindneſſe could neuer driue out of theſe poore peoples hearts, ſo that thoſe of Braſilia beleeue the immortallitie of the ſoule, and the Peruuians beleeue not onely the immortalitie of the ſoule, but the reſurrection of the body, as it appeereth not onely by the manner of their graues, but alſo by the requeſt made by them vnto the Spaniardes, (when they opened their predeceſſors and Kings graues, to take out the treaſure) deſiring them not to take away or ſcatter the bones of the dead, that they might not want them at their reſurrection. Touching the manner of their graues, their Kings and Nobilitie are buried with great magnificence, being ſet in ſeats within their graues, apparelled with their beſt cloths, one or two of their liuing wiues buryed with them, being the faireſt, and ſuch as in his life time hee loued beſt, for the which when time ſerueth, great controuerſie riſeth among the women (which by the king in his life time is ordained and appoynted) they bury likewiſe with him two or thrée of his ſeruauntes, and much golde and ſiluer, and the beſt they had, alſo fruit, bread, maiz, and ſuch like things: and which is more, the laſt ſeruice the friendes doe for him, is, that with reedes or pipes they powre a certaine meaſure of theyr drinke called Cicha into the dead mannes mouth, to this ende, that hee may not want drincke before hee commeth into the other worlde: in which his iourny he vſeth that meate, and the company of his wiues and ſeruantes, which manner is vſed almoſt

through all Peru and Mexico, onely that euery one dooth more or leſſe according to his eſtate: but they vſe moſt in Peru to burye liuing women, which miſchiefe ſprang from the diuell that blinded them, that at ſome time appeared vnto them in ſhape of thoſe that were dead, walking vpon the earth, and women with him. So great is the power and blindeneſſe of Sathan in the children of the vnbeleeuing. In Eaſt India the diuell ſo wrought, that hee got them to burne liuing women with the dead, & here in Peru hath perſwaded them to bury liuing women with dead bodies. They mourne many dayes for theyr dead, and vppon the graue they place the Image of the dead perſon. The common people and handiecrafteſmen place ſomething of their handiecraft vpon their graues, and the ſouldier ſome kinde of weapon vſed in the warres, whereby it may be ſeene who lyeth buried in that place.
                        So then the Peruuians pray vnto the Sunne and the Moone, and acknowledge them for the higheſt gods, and ſweare by them, as alſo by the earth, which they eſteeme to be their mother: and if at anie time they ſpeake with the diuell, aſking counſell, and attending anſwere of him, they did it more for feare they hadde to bee hurt by him, than for any worſhippe: that they held and accounted the Sunne for the chiefe and higheſt God, firſt it appeereth by many and ſo coſtly temples, by them erected, throughout al the kingdom of Peru, as alſo by the anſwere of king Atabalida, made to the Dominican Friar Vincentius de Valle Viridi (after firſt Biſhop of Peru) who ſhewing him of the creation of the world by God, and the redemption thereof by the death of Ieſus Chriſt, he anſwered him, that no man made the world, but onely the Sunne his god, that died not as Chriſt did, and ſaid, that he might beléeue in the crucified and dead Chriſt, if it pleaſed him, but for his part, he would beleeue in his owne god, and his Guacas which dieth not: this Guacas were certaine ſtones, that with weeping they honoured and called vpon.
                     
                     
                        Their maner of praying to the Sun.
                        THe Peruuian (as I ſaide before) had diuers great and ſumptuous Churches of the Sunne in al places of the countrey, many of them hauing the walls and Pillers couered and plated with gold and ſiluer, with moſt coſtly ſtooles and benches, and when the Prince, Lords, or Prieſts would deſire any thing of the ſunne, they riſe betime in the morning, before the ſunne riſeth, and get them vpon a high ſtone ſcaffold made for the purpoſe, where holding downe their heades, and with wringing and folding their hands, and then preſently lifting vp and ſpreading their armes, as if they would receiue the Sunne into them, they murmure certaine wordes, ſhewing their requeſts, and in the ſame manner they vſed to pray vnto the ſunne ſince they were ſubdued: they fal downe before the Spaniardes, and deſire them to be mercifull vnto them, and not vtterly to deſtroy them: in ſome places, ſpecially vnder the Line and thereabouts, they placed the gates of their temples in the Eſt, and couered them with certaine cotten linnen: in euerie Church there ſtood two grauen Images, of faſhion like blacke Buckes, before the which they kept a continuall fire of ſweete wood, which I thinke to be Cedar, becauſe the barke being taken off, there iſſueth a certaine ſweete gumme, which is moſt excellent to preſerue the bodyes of dead men, and to the contrarie corrupteth the bodie of a liuing man. Likewiſe there are in thoſe Churches certaine Images of great Serpents, which they pray vnto, but this is only about the line in Peru and Cuſco, and not where they haue the Guacas, which are ſtones, about the which no man may come, but onely the Prieſtes, that are apparrelled al in white: and comming to them, they take in theyr handes certaine white cloathes, and fal vppon the ground, ſpeaking to the Image in a ſtrange ſpeech, becauſe the common people may not vnderſtand it. Thoſe Prieſtes receiue all the offerings that are giuen vnto the Idol, burying the tenth part thereof in the Church, and keepe the reſt for themſelues: and you muſt vnderſtand that all the offerings muſt be wrought with golde and ſiluer, and of ſuch forme and faſhion as the thing is which they deſire to haue of their Guaca. They offer alſo liuing men, and all kindes of beaſtes, looking in the hearts and intrailes of the men or beaſtes which they did offer, for certaine ſecret tokens, which if they founde not vpon the offerings, they ſtill offered newe men or beaſts, vntil they founde the tokens, thinking the Idoll not to be pleaſed with ſuch offrings as had them not. When the prieſts ſhould offer ſacrifices, then they abſtaine from the company of their wiues, and ceaſed not all night to doo nothing but crie out, and pray to the diuell, running into the fieldes, and to the places where the Guacas ſtande, whereof there were ſo many, that euerie man hadde

one before his dore, and the day before they ſhould ſpeake with the diuell, they faſted, ſome binding a thing before their eies, and ſome thruſt them cleane out, and it hath often bene ſeene that ſome of them haue done it of meere deuotion. The kinges and noble menne enterpriſe not any thing before they haue conſulted with the Prieſtes, and the Prieſts with the Idoles: in their ſacrifices, they vſe not onely beaſtes but menne and children, but they eate not mans fleſh, as the Caniballes do. When the Spaniardes ſpoyled their Temples, they founde therein many pottes full of the dried bones and fleſh of dead children, that had bin offered to their Idolles: they offer likewiſe birdes and other beaſtes, and with the bloud of their offerings they annoint the mouthes of their Idolles, and the dores of their churches. There was likewiſe among the golde that lay by their idolles certaine ſtaues and myters for Biſhops, ſuch as our Biſhops vſe when they are in their robes, or as the Painters vſe to ſet foorth Saint Nicholas
                           ▪ with his Croſſe and Myter: and being aſked what thoſe things meant, they knew not what to anſwere, neyther from whence they came. Beſides thoſe great temples of the Sunne and Guacas, there were in all places of the countrey of Peru, many other Churches and Cloyſters, for yong maides, wherein ſome had one hundred, ſome two hundred, and ſome more, al obſeruing chaſtitie, or at the leaſt, vowing to keepe it, and to honour the Sunne, like the Vaſtal virgins in Rome, or our Nuns. Thoſe they called Mamacomas, and were bound to ſtay in the cloyſter during their liues, and neuer to depart from thence, dooing nothing but ſpinne, weaue, and ſowe, very fine cloth of cotten and wooll, apparell, and furnitures for their Idolles, or as others affirme, the clothes by them made, were burnt with the bones of white ſheepe, the aſhes whereof as a ſigne and token of godly honour they threw into the ayre againſt the Sunne. Thoſe maides were verye narrowely looked vnto by certaine Prieſtes, and other men, appoynted for the purpoſe, wherof ſome were gelded, becauſe they ſhould not ſeeke to defile them, which if the maides once committed, they were eyther put to death, or buried quicke, but if the maide with childe would take her othe that it was begotten by the Sunne, then the childe was free from death: and euerye yeere in the moneth of Auguſt, when they had gathered in their corne, or maiz, the Per
                                 •
                              uians that dwelt in the hilles made a great feaſt, they ſet vp in the middle of their Market place two great hie trees, like our Maie-poles, and in the top of them they placed certaine Images, made like men compaſſed about with flowers, and ſo in roundes, yet in good order, comming thither they ſtrike vp drummes, throwing and ſhowting one after the other with ſtones and arrowes at thoſe Images, making great noyſe with whooping and hallowing and euery man hauing ſhott and thrown. The Prieſts brought an other Image, which was ſet belowe on the neather part of the trees, whereunto they offered, either a man or a ſheepe, annoynting the Image with the bloud thereof, and after they perceiued the tokens in the heart or intrailes, they certified it vnto the people, and the tokens being found, the feaſt was ended, eyther with ioy or ſadnes, moſt part in drinking, wherunto they are much addicted, and ſo daunced, turning and paſſing vnder each others armes, each man hauing either a bill, clubbe, or ſome other weapon in his hand: ſuch as are deſirous to know more of their ceremonies and falſe worſhippings of Idoles, let them reade the hiſtories of the Spaniſh Indies.
                        The countrey of Peru was firſt ruled by Iudges, which are Kings or Rulers, that come from the great lake called Titicara, or as ſome write, Titicaca, lying in Charcas, being foure ſcore miles in compaſſe which runneth weſtward through a great riuer, which in ſome places is halfe a mile broad, and then runneth into an other ſmall lake fortie miles diſtant, and it is to be wondered at, how the abundaunce of water that runneth out of the great lake, is comprehended in ſo ſmall a place, where it is not once perceiued to increaſe. The lake beeing ſo ſmall, and the water ſo great: but it is reported, that in that lake there is no botome or ground, and that the water runneth vnder the ground thorow the earth into another ſea or riuer, as it is ſaide of the riuer Alpheus, that it runneth from Peioponces or Moica to Cicilia, vnder the ground: and from this lake or thereabouts the kings of Peru had their originall, the petegree of which kings is by Iacob Fernando, a Spaniard, declared in this manner. Frſt Mango Capa, who according to the Indians report, was not borne of a woman, but ſprang out of a ſtone, which vntill this day is yet ſhewne by them about the towne of Cuſco, hee by his wife Mama Guaco, had iſſue one ſonne called Sicheroca, that ruled after his father, and was the ſecond Ingen or king, you muſt vnderſtand that the inheritance

of the kingdome continueth in the iſſue ſons ſucceſſiuely, and not vnto the children of the ſonnes, before all the brothers haue raigned one after another, but firſt the eldeſt ſonne is King, then after his death his ſecond brother ſucceedeth in the kingdome, and not the eldeſt brothers ſonnes, and the ſecond brother dying, there being no more brethren, the crowne falleth vnto the eldeſt brothers ſonnes, without alteration or change: this Sicheroca was a valiant ſouldier like his father, and broght many of his neighbours to ſubiection, and by Mama Cura he had iſſue a ſonne called Locuco Pangue, the third king, who ſtudied rather to holde thoſe landes he had vnder his ſubiection, then to win or increaſe more vnto them: and being aged, he married a wife Mama Anauerque, by whom he had a ſonne called Maita Capa, that augmented his kingdome, and thervnto ioyned the prouince of Cuſco, and by his wife Mama Iacchi Dela he had iſſue a ſonne, called Capa Cyupangu, of whom there is nothing worthy memory, onely that he left a ſonne (by his wife Mama Cagna) called Inga Ruca, who likwiſe did no ſpeciall thing during his life, but onely by his wife Mama M
                                 •
                              cay he had diuers ſonnes, and one among the reſt called Iaguar Guacinga Iupangue, of whome there is a ſtrange hiſtory recited, which is, yt he being a child of ye age of thrée monthes, was taken by certaine Caciquen that are likewiſe Lordes or kinges, that thought to kil him, and while they cōſulted amongſt themſelues cōcerning his death, it chanced that as the childe cried, certaine drops of blood iſſued out of his eyes, whereby they were abaſhed, eſtéeming it for a miracle, they left the child and departed, which being taken vp by a ſtranger, was caried to the king, and after that became great and proued a braue ſouldier, ſo that he ouercam many of his neighbours, and brought them in ſubiection vnder him, he had to wife Mama Chipuia, and by her had his eldeſt ſonne named Vi
                                 •
                              a Cocham, that ſuccéeded him in his kingdome, and much increaſed his dominions: after him raigned Pachacoti his ſonne, borne of Mama Yunta Cayan, this Prince was much valanter then al his predeceſſors, whereby he ouercame many people, and by him the foundation of the caſtle of Cuſco was firſt begun: and dying, he left for heire and ſucceſſor of his kingdome 
                              
                                 •
                              opa Inga Iupangue his ſonne, borne of Mama Anaberque, that followed his fathers ſteppes, and ouercame many people, and brought them in ſubiection, and finiſhed the caſtle of Cuſco begun by his father. The prouinces by him won, were C
                                 •
                              i
                                 •
                              e, and Quito, and he cauſed the kinges hie-waye (ſo much wondered at of all the worlde to be made from Cuſco, through the prouince of Charcas vnto Chile, in the which way, from halfe mile to halfe mile, he had placed poſtes by them called Chaſquis, which were Indians that went faſter then any of our horſes, to the great eaſe and contentment of trauailers, for by that means they might ſhorten their way, and in three dayes trauaile 120 L
                                 •
                              uken (that is 240 miles) by reaſon of the ſwiftnes of the men that bare them and ſtoode for poſtes,, after the A
                                 •
                              trican manner in the kingdome of Congo, as I haue already declared, for that after the ariual of the Spaniardes, there were neither horſes, aſſes, nor mules within the country whereon men ſhould ride or trauaile withal. This king dying, left iſſue aboue 150. ſonnes, among the which one of them named Guaynacapa, begotten vpon Mama Oclo his wife, ſucceeded him in his kingdom, not any thing inferior for valour, wiſedom, and councell, both in peace and war, much augmenting and increaſing the limites of his countrie, obſeruing great order and equitie in all thinges, both concerning the gouernment of the countrie, and the people, appointing better orders, and manie olde and ancient lawes that were vnfit and not conuenient, he cauſed to be abrogated, and newe deuiſed in their place: hee maried a wife called Coyam Pilico vaco, by whom hauing no children, he maried diuers other wiues, ſo that the number of his children was much greater then his fathers, who notwithſtanding had 150 ſonnes. Among his children the eldeſt was called Guaſcar Inga, his mother being called Raua Oclo, and as I ſaid before this king Guainacapa much increaſed in his kingdome, and ouercame many people, among the which hee helde ſo good gouernment and order, as it ſéemed in manner vnpoſſible, ſpecially among ſuch rude & ſimple people, that were wholy without learning, wherein appeered a moſt manifeſt example of great ſubiection and loue in his ſubiects towards their naturall Lordes: and herevpon to his great honour, they made the two notable and coſtly hie-waies (ſo much eſteemed in al coūtries) and may well be accounted for one of the ſeauen wonders of the world, for when Guainacapa was gon from Cuſco with his armie to make warre againſt the prouince of Quito, diſtant from thence at the leaſt 500 miles, he was forced to paſſe ouer high hills, whereby both he and his people indured great trouble and miſerie, becauſe

                           
                              〈◊〉
                            war was full of hard and rough ſtones, before his returne againe being victorious, his ſubiects in token of great ioy, as alſo for his further 
                              •
                           aſe and comoditie, becauſe hee and his ſouldiers had indeed ſo hard and labourſome a 
                              •
                           ourn
                              •
                           e) cut downe and digged vp all the 
                              〈◊〉
                            waies and ſtonie cliffes, making the waye euen and plaine, ſo that in ſome places there were vallyes of twentie or thirtie mens height, that were filled vp and made euen with the hilles, which way they made in that maner for ye length of fiue hundred miles, ſo plaine and euen that any cart or wagon might trauell theron, which way, after the Spaniards ariual in the contrie was in diuers places ſpoiled and deſtroied, to let the Indians from traueling that way, and thinking this not ſufficient, when the ſaide Guainacapa went to viſit his country of Quito, and tooke his waie through the plain country, they likewiſe made him another way, to fill all the vallies and 
                              •
                           riſh places therein, and to make them euen, which way they made about fortie foote broad on both ſides with high walles, and in the ſandy waies they ſet great 
                              •
                           roughes with ropes tied vnto thē, becauſe men ſhould not loſe themſelues in the wa
                              •
                           e, which ſtretched likewiſe 500, miles, the walles as yet in ſome places are to be ſeene, but by meanes of their warres the Banks for the moſt part are taken away and burnt, and beſides all this, he him ſelfe cauſed many temples of the ſunne and other Idoles, and diuers Ta
                                 ••
                              bo
                                 •
                              
                            which are houſes of munition and of pleaſure (for the benefit and commodity of his ſucceſſors in time of warre) to be made and builded as wel on the hils, as in the plain countrie, both on the riuer ſides, as in euery way, the riuers whereof are at this day in many places to be ſeene, whereby may be coniectured the greatnes and riches of thoſe kings, and the great care they had for the defence, and ſafetie of their countries, for that heereby when they trauailed through the countrie, not only they and all their companie might lodge in thoſe houſes, but the houſes were ſtill furniſhed and prouided (by the people inhabiting about them) not only with victuals ſufficient for a whole armie, but alſo with apparel and al kinde of weapons that were vſed in the warrs, therewith preſently to apparell their ſouldiers, and to make them ready for the warres, as bowes, arrowes▪ pikes, halberds, clubbes, bils, &c. for 20000. or 30000 men preſently to bee raiſed, wherof there was no want, and thoſe houſes were ſome 8 or 10, and ſome twentie miles at the furtheſt one from the other, neuer further diſtāt then a days iourney. As touching the ornaments of the kings of Peru, which they in ſteed of crownes and princely ſepters vſed to weare therby to ſhew their power and maieſtie, they ware certaine taſſels of red woole bound about their heads, hanging downe vppon their ſhoulders, almoſt couering their eies, whereat there hung other threeds, which they vſed when they would haue any thing done or executed, giuing that thrid vnto one of the Lordes that attended on them, and by that commandement gouerned the prouinces, and by that token they commaunded al whatſoeuer they would deſire, which by their ſubiects was with ſo great diligēce and dutiful obedience fulfilled, that the like was neuer knowen in any place throughout the world: and if hee chanced to command that a whole prouince ſhuld be clean deſtroyed, and vtterly left deſolate both of men and all liuing creatures whatſoeuer, both yong & old, if he ſent but one of his ſeruants to execute the ſame, although he ſent no other power or aide of men, nor other commiſſion then one of the theerds of his Quiſpell, it was ſufficient, and they willingly yeelded themſelues to all dangers of death or deſtruction whatſoeuer. Theſe kings were borne in chariots or ſeats made of beaten golde, borne on the ſhoulders of 1000. Lordes and councelours at times thereunto appointed, wherof if any of them vnaduiſedly ſtumbled & ſtaggered, he was preſently put to death, and no man ſpake vnto the king at any time, but they brought him certaine preſents, and if they went to ſpeake with him ten times in a daie, ſo often muſt they preſēt him with new gifts, it was likewiſe accounted for a great fault, ſo looke ye king in the face. Being in the wars, and hauing ouercome any countrie, or prouince▪ they obſerued the ancient cuſtom of Rome, which was, to take the people with them that they might not riſe vp or rebell againſt them, yet with great diffrence from the Romaines, for that hauing won 
                              •
                           ame land or prouince, they tooke many or 
                              ••
                           we out of it, according to the number of people that were therein, & if theſe whom they had conquered inhabited in a hot countrie, they were placed in another warme country, & if theirs were cold, they likewiſe went into a cold countrie, where they had the lands deuided among thē, that each man might liue vpon it. And it the naturall count
                              ••
                           men of any prouince or place w
                              •
                            to 
                              ••
                           bel againſt their prince, the kings Li
                              •
                           tenants and Cōmaunders vſed the 
                              〈◊〉
                            as 
                              •
                           hat is the ſtrange people to keep them in ſubiection,

and to the contrarie, if the Mitimaes ſeemed once to ſtirre or riſe vp, they kept them in ſubiection by the naturall inhabitants, and by this policie they maintained their countrie in great peace and quietneſſe. Beſides this they vſed another meanes, not to bee hated of their ſubiects, for that they neuer tooke the rule or authoritie (of any people that were ſubdued by them) from the Caciquen or Lords that were nobly borne, if any of them diſliked thereof, they puniſhed him, yet gaue his office either to his children or to his brethren, commaunding them to bee obedient when they went to hunt and take their pleaſures, which they call Chico, they aſſembled many men together, according to the ſcituation of the countrey, ſome times foure or 5000. men, whom they placed in a ring together, that many times compaſſed at the leaſt two or three miles, and ſo ſinging a certain ſong, they followed each other foote by foote, vntil they were ſo neare togither, that they might reach hands, and yet nearer till they could imbrace each other, & the nerer they went together, the cloſer they made the ring, by which meanes al the beaſts by them incloſed, they killed as they thought good, with ſo great a noyſe and crie, as ſeemed incredible, not much vnlike the maner of the Duch Princes, in their general huntings, ſpecially of the Wolues, onely that they haue not ſo many men, nor ſing not, yet make a great noyſe. The beaſts that they take are wild Sheepe, Rheen, Foxes, Lions, blacke Beares, Cattes, many Hogges, and other beaſts, & foules, as Turtle doues, Quailes, Spetchten, Parrots Hawkes, &c. The tributes and talages, that the kings receiued of their ſubiects, were things of their owne increaſe: out of the countreyes that were vnfruitfull they brought him Hoopwik, of Crocadiles, by them called Caymans, and many other wormes. This Guaynacapa renewed the temple of the ſunne in the Citie of Cuſco, couering the wals and ruffes with plates of gold and ſiluer, and as I ſaid before, the prouince and countrey of Quito was woon by him, which countrey pleaſed him ſo well, that for a time hee continued therein, meane time leauing his eldeſt ſon Guaſcar, Iuga Mango and other of his children in Cuſco, to gouerne the countrey, and in Quito hee married another Wife, daughter to the Lord of the ſame prouince, and by hir he had Atabalipam, a ſon whom he greatly loued: and when he trauailed to Cuſco, hee left him and others in Quito, yet before he dyed, he went once againe to Quito, partly becauſe the country liked him ſo well, and partly to ſée his ſonne Atabalipam, and there before he dyed, hee ordained that the countrey and towne of Quito ſhuld remaine to his ſonne Atabalipam, and his heires for euer, as beeing taken from his forefathers, which his ſonne Guaſcar after his fathers death would not permitte, and for the ſame cauſe raiſed warres againſt his brother, which in the ende was the ouerthrow and ſubiection of Peru, whereof, as in the life of Gualca
                                 •
                              , (that after his fathers death ruled all the countrey vnto Quito) it appeareth. Guaſcar ſignifieth a cord or cable, for that at the time of his birth, the king cauſed a cable of gold to be made, as great as two hundred Indians could carry, hee vſed likewiſe a plate of golde whereon hee ſate, worth at the leaſt 25000. duckets (which after fell into the hands of Franciſco Pizarro, firſt gouernour of Peru) and all his veſſel was of golde, whereby it appeareth that golde was likewiſe much eſteemed by them.
                        The Kings in Cuſco had many goldeſmiths ſhoppes, therein to make and worke al kinde of veſſels, Iewels, and images of men, beaſtes, foules, and hearbes of golde, al in good proportion: and although theyr Goldſmithes vſed not any iron tooles, yet they make moſt excellent workmanſhippe, although ſomewhat groſer and plainer then ours. The manner of working was in this ſort, firſt they tooke the ſiluer or golde that they would melt, and put it in rounde or long melting veſſels, made of cloath, paſted about with earth and beaten colours, which being drie, they ſet it in the fire, with as much golde and ſiluer therein as they would melt, or as it would hold, and ſo with fiue or ſixe reedes blowe ſo long about it, vntill the mettall melted and became redde hot, and the ſkimme being taken off, it being taken out of the melting veſſell, euerie man had his part, which they ſitting vppon the earth, with blacke Ke
                                 •
                              ci
                                 •
                              ick ſtones (made in form like hammers) they forged & framed theyr images of Gods, veſſels, and Iewels of gold, chaines, and formes of all kinde of beaſtes, birdes, and hearbes, with all manner of things.
                        But to returne vnto our former matter, the Sonnes of Guaynaca
                                 •
                              a called Guaſcar and Atabalipa, were the cauſe of the deſtruction, ruine, and ouerthrowe of the countrey of Peru by reaſon of the wars by them made one againſt the other, for the gouernment of the country, which was ſo cruell, that they once met & fought for the ſpace of thrée whole dayes together and neuer ceaſed, where many people were ſlaine 
                              •
                           
                           
and Atabalipa taken in the battel and kept priſoner in the prouince of Tomebamba, and there very ſtraightly kept in one of the Kings Caſtles, yet by ſubtiltie, and intreatie made to certaine women: he had a copper inſt
                              ••
                           ment brought vnto him, wherewith hee brake the walles of the Caſtle of Tomebamba, and gote out of priſon, at the ſame time that his brothers ſouldiers and captaines were making good cheere, drinking their Cicha, whereunto they are much addicted, and dauncing for ioy of the victorie: and being at libertie, he fled vnto Q
                                 ••
                              
                              to, telling his people, that he was by his father conuerted into a ſnake, and ſo crept out of priſon at a little hole, his father promiſing him victorie, ſo that his men would once againe returne with him to battaylet whereby his people were ſo well incouraged, that they went with him agayne into the fielde, where Fortune fauouring him, and being victorious, hee tooke his brother Guaſcar priſoner, (to whome not long before he hadde beene priſoner) and therewith obtained all the Countrey, making himſelfe chiefe ruler thereof, keeping his brother priſoner within Cuſco.
                        
                        About the ſame time Franciſcus Pizarrus arriued in Peru, being Oyuaer of thoſe two mightie kings, and by reaſon of theyr diſſenſion, made him maiſter of ſo great and rich countries of gold. Hee that deſireth a larger deſcription hereof, may reade the Spanniſh Hiſtories, that write of the deſcription of the new worlde. Pizarius being in the Countrey, made warre againſt Atabalipam, and in thend ouercame him, and for a time kept him priſoner: and during his impriſonment hee agréed with Pizario for a certaine ranſome, and when it was ready, hée cauſed his brother Guaſcar to be ſent for out of Cuſco, and by the way, before he came at him, he cauſed him to be ſlaine, fearing (and not without a cauſe) that if Guaſcar once came before the Spaniard, and ſhould declare his miſfortune, he would without all doubt offer a greater ranſome (as he had done) then hée ſhould pay, and by that meanes he ſhoulde remaine in priſon, and his brother at libertie, hauing hadde al the treaſure of his predeceſſours, as alſo his fathers. But A
                                 •
                              
                              tabalipa hauing brought his ranſom which amounted vnto 3088235. gilderus, was not long after, by crueltie of the Spaniards without any cauſe, and alſo againſt theyr othe and promiſe, moſt ſhamefully by certaine Moores, at the commaundement of Pizarius, openly ſtrangled in the Market place: and as ſome write, his body was after burned to aſhes. This was the 
                              〈◊〉
                            able end of the mightie K. Atabalipa, a man of a meane ſtature, wiſe, and high minded, wholly giuen to rule. Twenty dayes before his death there appeared a blazing ſtarre, which when he perceiued, he prophecied, that in ſhorte time after a gr
                              •
                           at Prince of that country ſhould die, not thinking it to be himſelfe. Guaſcar and Atabalipa being both dead, the gouernment f
                              •
                           l vnto Mango Inga the third brother, who dying, left his kingdome to his ſon Xaires Topa Inga, that maried a wife caled C
                                 •
                              ya daughter of a noble man called Cuxi V
                                 •
                              rcay Guaſcaris: and he before he entred into the gouernement, chaunged his name to Mango capa Pachuti Iupan, withall making himſelfe ſubiect vnto Philip King of Spaine, which hapned 1557.
                           1557 on the ſixt of Ianuary being Twelfe day. Thus much touching the kings of Peru.
                        
                     
                     
                        A deſcription of the places or townes lying among the hils.
                        THrée miles from Cuſco, lieth the valley Iucay, a very pleaſant valley, lying betwéene two hilles, very freſh and wholeſome aire, as being therin neither ouer hot, nor colde: and two miles beyond it lieth Tambo, another valley, wherein are ſeene great ruines, of the kings munition houſes. And trauelling further, you come to Condeſuyo, a prouince, where in times paſt there dwelt certaine warlike people, their townes ſtanding betwéene high hils, where there were many wilde and tame beaſts. Their houſes were of ſtone, couered with ſtrawe: therein alſo were many houſes and pallaces of noble men. They haue all one maner of liuing with the reſt, the Peruuians offering lambes and other beaſtes in their churches, wherein at certaine times the diuell ſhewed himſelfe: the riuers are rich of golde, and there are made certayne couerlets of fine wooll cunningly wrought in diuers colours. This way before called Andes, is very long, for it runneth cleane through Peru, to the ſtraites of Magellanas wherein there lieth many prouinces and townes, and diuers high trees, ſome couered with ſnowe, others with flames of burning brimſtone, whereby it is very hard to be trauelled, ſpecially, becauſe therein for the moſt part, it commonly raineth. Trauelling many miles further, you come to the countrey called Collao, wherein is the lake called Ti
                                 •
                              icaca,
                           
where there is an Iſland, and therein a Temple of the Sunne, wherein they ſowed their maiz, and kepe their treaſure.
                        Round about this lake are many villages, and therein much good fiſh is taken. Somewhat further you come vnto the town of Plata, which is a hundred and fiftie miles from Cuſco, in the prouince of Cha
                                 •
                              
                              cas, in a colder aire then any other place in all the hilles: there are but fewe inhabitants, but ſuch as are verie rich▪ and moſt becauſe of the mynes of Porco and Potoſi, for Poto
                                 •
                              i is not aboue eighteene miles from the towne of Plata, diſcouered by the company of Captaine Caruaial, for that as ſome of the Indians with one Ian de Villa Roel a townſman of Plata trauelled thorow the countrey, they found a high hil lying in a flat and euen vallie wherein perceiuing certaine tokens of ſiluer▪ they melted a peece of the Minerall, and found it ſo rich, that one quintal made fourſcore marks ſiluer, the like whereof was neuer heard of.
                        This newes being come to Plata, preſently the cheefe gouernours of the towne went thither, where they diuided vnto euerie man as much as he could doo or labour in, whereby ſuch reſort came thither, that in ſhort time the place was inhabited by more then 7000. men: the Indians working and making contract with the Spaniards their maiſters, how much ſiluer they wold weekly deliuer. This mine is of a wonderfull ſtrange nature, becauſe it wil not be molten by blowing with the bellowes, neyther in fornaces like other mynes, but only in ſmal furnaces by them caled Guairas, which they ſette vppon the higheſt parte of the hill, placing the mouthes ſouthwarde from whence the winde dooth continually blowe, throwing into the mine fire, coales, and ſheepes dongue, whereby the winde made the fire to burne ſo hot and cleare, as that not any bellowes or other inſtruments coulde doo more: and the Peruuians working in this maner, by ſo eaſie means had ſo great gain, that ſome of them got weekly beſids theyr maiſters parte, fortie thouſande Pezos, but by reſort, it became likewiſe to be ſcarſe, for that they left other mines, as Pero, and the riuer of Caraba
                                 •
                              a, wherein they founde golde, to come thither, becauſe there they made more profite.
                        In thoſe hilles, and al the land thorow, there are many vaines of all colours, wherof men may make faire colours: the ſiluer found in this myne, and which belongeth to the king for his parte, is carried by lande to Arequipa, and from thence to Lyma, Panama, Nombre de Dios, and Spaine.
                        
                     
                     
                        A further deſcription of the ſea coaſt from Arequipa to Chile, and from thence to the ſtraights of Magellana.
                        
                           CHulli a Hauen of Arequipa, lieth vnder ſeuenteene degrees and a halfe, and one mile and a halfe from thence the Riuer of Tambopalla, and ſeuen miles and a halfe further, there reacheth a poynt into the ſea: not ful a mile beyond, or further out then the other lande, vpon the which poynt there are three cliffes: about this poynte not ful a mile from it, there is a goodly hauen called Illo, in our Carde Rio de Vl
                                 •
                              e, and there runneth a riuer into the ſea that hath good water, and is alſo called Illo, lying vnder eighteene degrees and ⅓: from thence the coaſt lyeth ſoutheaſt, and ſoutheaſt and by eaſt: and fiue miles & a halfe further, there is a poynt which the Sea men call Moro del Diauolo, that is, a rounde houſe or houel of diuels. This coaſt is al wild and deſert, and with great Ba
                                 •
                              zen: not full foure miles further from this poynt, there is another riuer not verie great, but good water. From this riuer Southeaſt, and Southeaſt and by eaſt, ſayling ſeuen miles and a halfe, there reacheth another round houel, which is verie high, and maketh certaine downes: beyond this poynt is an Iſland, and therabouts lieth the hauen of Arica, which lieth vnder 19. degrees and 1/
                                 •
                              
                           : from whence the coaſt reacheth Southweſt: not ful ſeauen miles further, there runneth into the ſea a riuer called Pizagua, and in the ſame courſe ſayling along the coaſt, you come to the hauen Taracapa, which is 19. miles ¼: harde by Taracapa lyeth a Iſland, little more then a mile in compaſſe, and is diſtant from thē about one mile and a halfe, and there maketh a ſtrand or bay of Sand by the hauen, vnder 21. degrees: from Taracapa you ſaile along the coaſt ſouth & by weſt, about foure miles, and then you come to the poynte of Decacanna, and 12. miles beyond this point you come to the hauen Moxillioni, which lyeth vnder 22. degrees and a halfe: from this hauen ſailing vpwardes ſouth ſouthweſt about 67 miles and a halfe, the coaſt lyeth in a manner ſtraight, and therein are ſome poyntes, creekes, and ſandie baies, at the ende whereof there is a great creeke, where there is a good hauen, called Copayo lying vnder 27 degrees, aboue the which lieth a ſmal Iſlande, about halfe a mile from the firme land, & from thence beginneth the country of Chile, inhabited with people: being

paſt this hauen of Copaypao, a little frō thence, there lieth a point which makeh another creeke, wheron ſtandeth two cliffes, & at the end therof is a riuer of good water, called E
                                 •
                               Glaſco, this point lieth vnder 28. degrees & 
                              •
                           : following the coaſt ſouthweſt on, about eight miles and a half, there is another poynte, which maketh a great hauen for ſhips, but therein is neither freſh water nor wood: and hard by this hauen lieth the hauen of Coquinbo, & betweene this and the poynt paſſing by ſeuen Iſlands, there is a hauen vnder 29. and a half, & ſeuen miles and a halfe further, following the ſame courſe, there is another poynt, about the which there is a great creeke or bay called Antogayo, in the Carde Bahio de Tage, about foure mile further lieth the Riuer Limara, in the Card Lemare, from this riuer, you keepe the ſame courſe to another creeke or bay about 7. miles diſtant, which hath a cliffe, but no freſh water, lying vnder 31. degrees, and is called Choapa, in our card Cupa: further in the ſame courſe, about 15. miles, there is a verie good hauen, called de Q
                                 •
                              i
                                 •
                              nic
                                 •
                              o, in our Card Cutero at Quintero: it lyeth vnder 32. degrees, & ſeuen miles and a halfe further, is the hauen Val Paraize, and from the town of S. Iacomo by vs called Chile, after the name of the country. Touching this country of Chile it is very great, ſtretching along the ſea coaſt, reaching aboue Chaicas and Peru, a cold countrey, which is by reaſon of the ſcituation thereof, as lying by the Pole Antartico, wherefore it is called Chile, that is the cold countrie, partly becauſe of the great cold which men indure, trauailing ouer the Andes, vnto this countrey, and partly becauſe of the coldnes of the countrey it ſelfe, although it is much like Spaine, touching the temperateneſſe of the aire. This countrey was firſt diſcouered by Petro de Valdiuia, in the yeare of our Lorde 1539.
                           1539. and is all inhabited: in ſome place it is hillie, and in other places plaine fieldes, poynted and running very crooked, by reaſon of the inflection and crooking of the ſea. Touching the reſt of the ſcituation, as I ſayde before, it is verie temperate, hauing winter and ſummer, as it is in Spain, yet at contrary times, for their ſummer is winter in Spaine, and the Spaniards winter theyr ſummer. The ſouth ſtarre that ſhould anſwere and be right diſtant to our ſtarre, being there on land cannot be ſeene, but onely a ſmall white cloude, betweene day and night making a ſmal circuite or compaſſe, about certaine places of the Pole Antarctike. There likewiſe you ſee foure ſtarres, in forme like a croſſe, with three other ſtars following them, which make ſeauen ſtars, like ours, without any difference▪ that may be perceiued, onely that the foure which in the ſouth make the form of a croſſe, ſtand cloſer together then thoſe of our Pole Antarctico. Touching their day and night, they are in Chile according to the ſcituatiō, ſhort and long, as with vs, yet contrarie to ours, for that our ſhorteſt dayes are theyr longeſt daies. Their apparell and meates are altogether like thoſe of Peru, both men and women are of good complection and behauiour, vpon the coaſt of this countrey are many riuers, which by day do runne with water, and by night they are without water, becauſe the ſnow by day melteth, by reaſon of the heate of the ſunne, and ſo runneth downe from the hils, which by night by reaſon of the cold aire, congealeth, and ſo runneth not. In Chile and Chaicas they haue many ſheepe, that are like camels, but that they haue not a hill vppon their backes like the Cammel. The Spaniards vſe them to ride vppon, as being able to beare a man foure or fiue miles a day, but being wearie, they lie downe, and will not riſe whatſoeuer they doe vnto them, be they neuer ſo much beaten: and whoſoeuer rideth vppon them, the ſheepe being wearie, ſhee will caſt vp the head towardes him that ſitteth vpon her, and blowe a filthie ſtinke into his face, thereby to bee eaſed of her burthen. Theſe beaſtes are verie profitable and neceſſary, no leſſe then Cammels in Egypt & Affrica, and are fedde with a little Maiz and other meate, ſpecially thoſe that they vſe to ride vpon, to labor, and to carry burthens. They goe likewiſe as Cammels doo, foure or fiue dayes together without drinking, and but little meate: ſome of them called Pachos haue verie fine wool, with long fleeces, wi
                              •
                           h verie good, holſome, and ſauorie fleſh, like our gammons of Bacon. The hauen of Chile or S. Iacomo lieth vnder 32. degrees, and 2/
                              •
                            parts: ſayling further along the coaſt in the ſame courſe, you come to the riuer of Calma, diſtant from Chile eighteene miles: it is here alſo to be conſidered, that all the coaſt from Tumbez to this place, is verie good to ſayle by, and a calme ſea, without tempeſtes or foule weather, whereby the ſhippes may lye at anker where they think good. Nine miles from Calma you ſee the poynt of the riuer called Manque or M
                                 •
                              ule, in our card Maole and ten miles and a half further there is another riuer called I
                                 •
                              ata, in our Carde Rio Tatu
                                 •
                              a, and ſo ſailing ſouth and ſouthweſt eighteene miles, there is another called Biobio, lying almoſt vnder eight and thirtie degrees, in the ſame

courſe, kéeping along the ſhore, full eleuen miles diſtant, there is a great Iſland about foure miles diſtant from the firme land caled Lucengo, and ſomwhat further beyond this Iſland is a great broad créeke called Valdiuia, in our carde La Baldibia, wherein there runneth a great riuer caled Ayntlendo, in our Carde Rio Aymlendos, this Créeke lieth vnder 39. degrées and ⅔. Following the ſame courſe further by the ſhore, to ſouth ſouthweſt, you come to the Cape S. Maria, lying vnder 42. degrées, and 1/
                                 •
                              
                            towards the ſouth, and from (as the Pilots report) the coaſt reacheth ſouth
                              ••
                           ſt to the ſtraits of Magellana, and betweene them lie many hauens and places needleſſe to rehearſe, as being noted in the carde: inwarde in the land there is the Countrey of Patagonen, wherein there are Giantes of nine and of tenne foot high, that paint their faces with diuerſe colours made of hearbs, preſſing out the ſap. And heerewith making an end, for the reſt I referre the Reader to the Carde.
                     
                  
                  The end of the ſecond booke.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE THIRDE BOOKE.
                  The Nauigation of the Portingales into the Eaſt Indies, containing their trauels by Sea, into Eaſt India, and from the East Indies into Portingall, alſo from the Portingall Indies to Malacca, China, Iapon, the Ilands of Iaua and Sunda, both to and fro, and from China to the Spaniſh Indies, and from thence backe againe to China, as alſo of al the coaſt of Braſilia, and the Hauens thereof.
                  With a deſcription of the Firme land and the Ilands of the Spaniſh Indies lying before it, called Antillas, together with the Nauigation of Cabo de Lopo Gonſalues to Angola, in the coaſt of Ethiopia, with all the courſes, Hauens Ilands, Depthes, Shallowes, Sands, Drougths, Riffes and Cliffes, with their ſituations, alſo the times of the yeares when the winds blow, with the true tokens and knowledge of the tides and the weather, water, and ſtreames in all the Orientall coaſts and Hauens as they are obſerued and ſet downe by the Kings Pilots, in their continuall and dayly Viages.
                  Tranſlated out of Dutch by W. P.
                  
                  
                     IEHOVA
                     world map
                     I Wolfe excu.
                     W: Rogers sculp
                  
                  LONDON Printed by John VVolfe, 1598.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  The third Booke.
                  
                     The Nauigation of the Portingales into the Eaſt Indies, containing their trauels by Sea, into Eaſt India, and from the Eaſt Indies into Portingall, alſo from the Portingall Indies to Malacca, China, Iapon, the Ilands of Iaua and Sunda, both to and fro, and from China to the Spaniſh Indies, and from thence backe againe to China, as alſo of all the coaſt of Braſilia and the Hauens thereof. With a deſcription of the Firme land, and the Ilands of the Spaniſh Indies lying before it, called Antillas together with the Nauigation of Cabo de Lope Gonſalues, to Angola in the coaſt of Ethiopia. With all the courſes, Hauens, Ilands, depthes, ſhallowes, Sands, drougthes, Riffes, and Cliffes, with their ſituations. Alſo the times of the yeares when the winds blow, with the true tokens and knowledge of the tydes, and the weather, water, and ſtormes, in all the Orientall coaſtes and Hauens, as they are obſerued and ſet downe by the Kings Pilotes, in their continuall and dayly Viages.
                  
                  
                     THE I. CHAPTER. Of the courſes and Viages of the Portingales into the Eaſt Indies.
                     
                     
                        FIrſt you muſt vnderſtand that all Chriſtendome lyeth on the North ſide of the Equinoctiall line, and Lisbone vnder thirtie nine degrées and a halfe, and lyeth with the Iland of Madera Northeaſt & ſouthweſt, the Viage being 172 Spaniſh miles, and Madera lyeth vnder 32 degrées, and is diſtant from the Iland la Palma (which the ſhippes ſayling to India may eaſily perceiue) 63. miles. The Iland la Palma lyeth vnder 28. degrées ¼ & from thence you muſt ſayle Southward, as long as time will permit, for commonly when you come vnder fiue or ſixe degrées, you find ſouth eaſtwardes and then you muſt ſaile ſouthweſt, as much as you can, vntill you paſſe the cape of S. Aguſtine which lieth vnder 8 degrees ½. on the ſouth ſide that is vpon the coaſt of Braſilia, from the Ilande la Palma, to this Cape of Saint Auguſtine are 900. miles the courſe lying Northeaſt and ſouthweſt, when you are paſt the point you muſt ſayle Southweſt, becauſe the winde is there commonly ſouth and ſoutheaſt, and from the Ilands of Triſtan da Cunlia, lying vnder 34. degrées, on the ſouth ſide of the Equinoctial you muſt hold ſouthweſt, and when you thinke you haue paſſed theſe Ilands, you muſt ſayle till you come vnder 36. degrées, and kéepe Eaſtward, vntill you haue paſſed the Cape de Bona Speranza, and then you muſt holde Northeaſt towardes the land, and hauing knowne the land, according to the place you then haue knowne, you ſhall ſet your courſe to Moſambique, or outward about the Iland of Saint Laurence, from the Cape of Saint Auſtine to the Cape de Bona Speranza are 1060. miles, which Cape de Bona Speranza lyeth full vnder 34 degrées and a halfe on the ſouth ſide of the Equinoctiall, and is Eaſt ſoutheaſt and Weſt, Northweſt with the Cape Das Agulhas which is 32.
                        
miles, and Cape das Agulhas, is full vnder 35. degrées, lying with the Cape do Infante Eaſt and Weſt, and ſomewhat Eaſt and by North, and Weſt and by South, the courſe is 26. miles, Cabo do Infante is vnder 34. degrées and 2/
                              •
                           . and lyeth with the Cape Talhado, Eaſt Northeaſt, and Weſt Southweſt 19. miles, Cabo Talhado is vnder 34 degrées, & lyeth with Bahija Fermoſa Eaſt and Weſt 1
                              •
                           . miles, Bahija Fermoſa is vnder the ſame hight of Cabo Talhado and lyeth with the Ilands Chanos Eaſt northeaſt, and Weſt Southweſt, 37. miles, and with the firſt point called Punta Primiera Northeaſt and Southweſt, and ſomewhat Northeaſt and by Eaſt, and ſouthweſt & by Weſt, the courſe is 50. miles, Punta Primiera is vnder 32. degrees, and lyeth from the laſt land called Terra do Natal 50. miles, which is vnder 30. degrées and a halfe, and lyeth with the land called Terra dos Fumos, Northeaſt and Southweſt, and ſomewhat of Northeaſt and by North, and Southweſt & by South, and the courſe is 75. miles, the land of Terra dos Fumos is vnder 27. degrees and a halfe, and lyeth with the Cape das Correntes, Northeaſt, and Southweſt, and ſomewhat Northeaſt and by Eaſt, and Southweſt and by Weſt, the courſe is 95. miles, Cabo das Correntes is vnder 24. degrees and a halfe, and lyeth with Inſulas Primieras Northeaſt and Southweſt, and ſomwhat Northeaſt, and by North & Southweſt and by Weſt, the courſe is 132 miles, the Inſulas Primieras are ſcarce vnder 17. degrees and a halfe, and lye with Moſambique Northeaſt and Southweſt, the courſe is 52. miles, Moſambique is vnder 15. degrees, and putting forth from Moſambique towards India, you muſt ſayle Northeaſt, vntill you come before the Iland of Comora the courſe is 80. miles, till you come vnder 11. degrées and then you muſt yet take your courſe Northeaſt, vnto the Iland As Ilhas do Almirante, which are vnder thrée degrées and a halfe on the ſouth ſide, being paſt thoſe Ilands, you muſt take your courſe Northeaſt, and Northeaſt and by Eaſt, wherewith you ſhal come to the Ilands As Ilhas Queimadas, which are vnder 16. degrées, vppon the coaſt of Goa, or India, here you muſt remember that at this time the ſtreames in that countrie doe alwaies runne Northweſt, that is towards the Straights of Mecca, or to the red Sea, therefore preſently when you are vnder 16. degrées, (to kéepe your right courſe) you ſhall ſtil hold your courſe aforeſaid, which is Northeaſt and by Eaſt, or ſomewhat more, as you finde occaſion, your Compaſſe will alwaies ſhew you what you may doe, and thus muſt you ſayle for ye ſpace of 200 miles, towards the coaſt of India being ſure you goe no lower then 15: degrées, to auoide the drougths called Os Baixos de Pandua, which lie vnder 13. degrees Northward, alſo when you thinke to bee vppon the coaſt of India, you muſt ſtill hold aboue 16. degrées, for that the ſtreame and water vpon that coaſt runneth Southward, & commonly the wind is there out of the North & Northweſt, and to know when you are vppon the coaſt of India, you ſhal find theſe tokens, that is 300. miles from the coaſt you ſhall ſee Crabbes, and 50. miles from the coaſt you find Snakes in the water as big as Eales or Lampernes, which is alwayes moſt certain, and within 20. miles from the land you haue ground at 80. fadome, and 14. or 15. miles from the ſhore 70. fadome, you néed not feare to fall on the coaſt, for it is faire and without danger, and hath good Ankeridge, and all the Ilands and Cliffes vpon the coaſt, lie cloſe to the Firme land, whereby there is no danger, and all the coaſt called India, lie North and South, and ſomewhat North and by Weſt, and ſouth and by Eaſt, and you muſt vnderſtand that al the coaſt of India, Perſia, Arabia, the Straights of Mecca, or the red ſea, the coaſt of Choramandel, Seylon, Bengalen, Pegu, Sian, Malacca, Camboia, Cauchinchina, China, Iapon, &c. lie on the north ſide of the Equinoctiall line.
                  
                  
                     The 2. Chapter The courſe or viage to Eaſt India, made and ſet downe by the Kings Pilot called Diego Aſtonſo a Portingall.
                     
                        SAyling from Lisbone to the Iland of Madera, you muſt ſet your corſe Southweſt and make towards the Iland Porto Santo, & from thence you muſt paſſe betwéene the Iland Deſerta, and Madera, ſhunning the Ilands or Cliffes called Os Saluagiens, lying two miles ſouthweſtward frō the Madera, for thereabouts are great drougthes, which by night are very dangerous, you may paſſe by thē on the Eaſt ſide, & ſo keepe your courſe to the Iles of Canares, and hauing paſſed thoſe Ilands of Canares, you muſt ſet your courſe Southward till you come vnder 14. degrées, kéeping 50. miles downwards from Cabo Verde, and from thence you muſt ſet your courſe ſouthweſt and Southweſt and by Weſt, till you come vnder 6. degrées, and from thence ſouthweſt, and ſouthweſt and by South, ſo yt you hold your courſe 70. miles from the drougth of the ryuer called Rio Grande, & 80. miles

from Saint Anna, alwaies doing your beſt to get vnder the Equinoctiall line, letting your courſe ſtil be ſomwhat about the ſouth, and if the wind be South, then rather chuſe the Eaſt, then the Weſt ſide although you be vnder the line and as long as you haue no Southeaſt wind, hold Eaſtward, not once approching the land called I' erra do Mallagetta, neerer thē 
                        50. or 60. miles diſtant, and when you haue the Longitude and Latitude whereby you may know you haue paſſed the Cape Das Palmas, then when you Lauere, make ſhort turnings I meane vnder the line, or on this ſide therof, leaſt the ſtreame ſhould driue you within the Cape aforeſaid, but rather ſtricke all your Sayles, then driue in there, for otherwiſe you cannot ſaue your ſelfe neither yet get into India, I haue before ſhewed you what you ſhall do being an hundred & fortie myles vnder the lyne, then croſſe right ouer, ſo to paſſe before Braſilia, for that following the way and courſe aforeſayd, you can not fayle, but you muſt néedes paſſe by Braſilia: on the aforeſaid coaſt of Malagetta, the ſtreame (with a new Moone) runneth Southweſt, therefore as then you ſhall not ſet your courſe towards Braſilia, being vnder the lyne, but when you ſet your courſe South Weſt, hold you as long therein as the wynd continueth good, and then vſe all ſpeed and diligence, (as I ſayd before) to paſſe the lyne, ouer the ſyde of Braſilia, thereby to get vnder eyght degrees, vnder the which lyeth the poynt called Cabo de S. Auguſtin, and then if vnder thoſe eight degrees, you deſire to leaue the ſight of the land, then turne not vpon the other ſyde, but rather caſt anker, vntill the wynd commeth good, to keepe on your courſe, and you muſt vnderſtand that the ſtreame on this ſyde of Braſilia, Cape de S Auguſtin, and that coū
                        trey) runneth to the Antillas (which are the Ilands of new Spayne) wherefore I thinke it not your beſt way to Lauere, for if you do, without all doubt you will be forced to turne againe vnto Po
                              •
                           tingale
                              •
                           
                         from thence yt ſhall take an other way, vnto the Iland of Martin Vaas (hauing paſt the lyne) & the righter you keepe this way it is the better. From the Iland of Martin Vaas, or from the hight vnder which they lie, to the Ilandes of Triſtan de Cunha, hauing a fore wind, you ſhal hold your right courſe, without any racking or abatement of your reckening: for thoſe Ilands lie with the others all vnder one longitude and latitude, with the difference that the Compaſſe hath in thoſe Countries, that is by the Ilandes of Triſtan de Cunha wind or lay the needle of the compaſſe a ſtryke and a half Northeaſtward, and when it is an hower after twelue of the Clocke by the compaſſe, it is then by the Aſtrolabium but full twelue of the Clocke, and to know when you are hard by the Ilandes, you ſhall find it by this, that you ſhall ſee certaine Birds flying, fiue and fiue in ranks together, then you are hard by them, and from thence forward certaine birdes will follow you, by the Portingales called Feigions, full of blacke and white ſpottes, whereby they are eaſy to bee knowne, béeing South and North ouer this Iland you ſhall ſee certaine thinges driue in the ſea, by the Portingalles called Sargoſlo, and is almoſt like the weedes that is found by Vie
                              •
                           inghen in Holland. From theſe Ilandes of 
                           
                              •
                           rulan de Cunha, to the cape de bona Speranza, being in this countrie about the eight of Iune, you ſhall ſee in driuing the ſea, certaine weedes called Sargollo and Trombas, like peeces of thicke reedes, thoſe reedes are ſhort and full of branches, and are not ſo long as thoſe that are found, by the Cape de bona Speranza, here you muſt kéepe on your courſe till you finde them to increaſe, and be not abaſhed thereat, for it commeth by this meanes, that the more it ſtormeth and is foule weather in the Ilands the more of thoſe reedes & weedes are ſmittē down, which wt the water & the wind that commeth both from behind and ouer the Iland, driue towardes the Cape de bona Speranza, wherefore I aduertiſe you that if you find thoſe réedes and weedes, to keepe 150. miles further from the Ilandes of Triſtan de Cunha, for they are ſignes of that I told you of before. When you come vnder the hight of 35. degrees full or ſcarſe to the Cape de bona Speranza, you ſhall ſee Trombas or péeces of thicke reedes in the water, and when you ſee them, aſſure your ſelfe they come from the Cape de bona Speranza, and you are then paſt thoſe of the Ilands, when you find thoſe Trombas, then you are but 3
                              •
                           . or 
                           
                              •
                           0. miles from the Cape de bona ſperanza. Thoſe peeces of reedes are long almoſt like Baſuynen, but when you are vnder 35. degrées and a half then you ſee them no more, but certaine birds as great as Rauens, with white and flat billes, with blacke feathers, thoſe flie not paſt 20. or 30 miles from the Cape de bona ſperanza, and ſome gray birdes, by the Portingalles called Alcatiaſes, theſe are the right tokens you finde: from the Cape de Bona Speranza to the Cape das Agulhas, you muſt likewiſe vnderſtand, that the trauerſing or croſſe way from Braſilia, to the Cape de Bona Speranza, is much ſhorter or leſſe thē is placed in the ſea cards, but let no man ſeeke to know the cauſe thereof, as hauing no great matter conſiſting

therein cōcerning the voſage, & though there were, yet it is not cōuenient yt other nations and ſtrangers ſhould vnderſtand it: you find likewiſe betwéen the Ilands of Triſtan de Cunha and the Cape de bona Speranza, certaine ſea wolues, but being in that coūtry about the laſt of Iune, it may be you ſhal not ſée them, for then they withdraw themſelues from thence, becauſe of the cold, & kéepe vnder the land: but if you chāce to be by thoſe Ilāds of Triſtan de Cunha, about the 10 of May, then you ſhal not paſſe aboue 35 degrées, becauſe at that time the Weſt windes do there blow wt moſt great fury & tempeſts, ſpecially with a new Moone, leaſt it happen to you as it did to the ſhippe called the Bon Ieſus, which was ouerwhelmed in the ſea by the great waues, that the windes raiſed, as I my ſelf ſayth Diego Afonſo, haue ſeene beeing in the ſhippe called S. Clare of the Cape de bona Speranza: yt ſhall ſée certaine birds in the water called Antenas, which are great ſpeckled fowle, then you are by Cape das Agulhas, you ſhall likewiſe finde ſome fiſh bones, or cuttle bones (ſuch as the Goldſmithes vſe) driuing vppon the water, and when you haue the ſight of land, vnder the degrees aforeſaid, beeing thirtie miles from the Cape de Bona Speranza, as alſo comming vnder the 36. degrées, you ſhall finde thoſe birdes called Antenales, and when you are paſt the Cape de Bona Speranza, and haue ſéene land, whether it be ye Cape de Bona Speranza, or the cape das Agulhas, either beyond, or on this ſide, then kéepe aloofe from the land at the leaſt 30. miles into the Sea, and if you meane to goe to Moſambique, then you muſt ſaile North Eaſt, that is to the Baixos, or droughts of India. In the courſe from Braſilia, to the Cape de Bona Speranza many birdes follow after you, but as ſoone as you come within ye ſight of the cape de bona Speranza, they leaue you, & manie times the blacke Rauens aforeſaid: that you may be ſure to be within the Cape, that is on the eaſt ſide of India, you ſhall perceiue the waues of the ſea, that follow you from the Cape out of the Eaſt into the Weſt, doe preſentlie leaue you, as ſoone as you are paſt the Cape das Agulhas inwardes, vntill you come to others out of the South Weſt, that is inward from the Cape: alſo by this Cape the needle of the compaſſe is right and euen: ſo that when it is noone by the Aſtrolobie, it is likewiſe noone by the ſunne diall, or the compaſſe both agréeing in one, which is a good ſigne that you are North and South with the Cape das Agulhas, or betweene both, that is, the Cape de Bona Speranza, and the Cape das Agulhas, and this is a great ſigne, as well from Portingall into India, as from India to Portingall: but ſayling from Portingall to India, then the néedle of the compaſſe turneth Northeaſtward again, 30 miles frō the Cape das Agulhas towards Moſambique. The coaſt runneth Eaſt and Weſt, and you muſt bee carefull (being paſt the Cape das Agulhas ſixe or ſeauen miles into the ſea from the land called Auagda de Sanbras, not to take the way towardes the Cape, but towardes the South Weſt, and South Weſt and by Weſt, becauſe it is neceſſarie ſo to doe to ſaue a great deale of way by reaſon of the ſtreames and waters that runne inwardes towardes the land. If it chance you paſſe the Cape a farre off, and ſo ſee not any of theſe ſignes, thē take the height of the ſunne, and looke on your diall, but you muſt doe it aduiſedly and with a ſtraight thread, and then if you be 150. miles beyond the cape inward, it being noone by the Aſtrolabie. The ſhadow of the ſunne diall will not be vpon noone but wil want a ſtrike, and when it is noone by the diall, then it will be halfe a degree paſt the Aſtrolabe, which if you find to be ſo, then aſſure your ſelues, you are 150. miles inwards beyond the cape de Bona Speranza, or das Agulhas, and marke it well, for you ſhall finde it to be true, and when you ſet your courſe to ſaile within the Iſland of ſaint Laurence, you ſhall find ſome ſmall white birdes in companies together, they flie about twentie miles from the land, towardes the droughtes of India, and comming vnder twenty degrees, you ſhall moſt certainely find the birdes called Garagiaus, and Alcatraſes, that are like Sea-mewes, then you hold a good courſe, and if you ſée not any of thoſe tokens, looke well to your ſelfe, for thē you are hard by the Iſland of S. Laurence, or vpon the banks of the coaſt of Soffala, and ſéeing many birdes, you are but 10 miles from the droughtes of India, then take your courſe North Eaſt, and North Eaſt & by North, and ſo hold on till you come vnder 19. degrees and ¼ and from thence Sayle North Eaſt till you bee in eightéene degrées, from thence you ſhall runne North, and North and by Eaſt, till you come to ſixteene degrées, and ¾ beeing vnder thoſe degrees, and ſéeing many birdes called Alcatraſes in companies of 6.7.8. or 10. then you are but ten or fifteene miles from the Iſland of Ioan de Noua: therefore vſe all diligence both by day and night, not to come néere it, ſpecially when it is with a new moone, and ſaile North weſtward, and then you will come by the Iſlandes named dos Angoxes, and the more northward you run, you ſhall keepe the better courſe towardes

                        Moſambique, being carefull not to come neerer the land then twentie fiue fadomes déepe, for the coaſt is altogether droughtes & ſhallowes, where on Don Iohn Periera was caſt away, and yet is thirteene fadome déepe round about.
                  
                  
                     The 3. Chapter. The Nauigation from Cauo das Correntes, to the droughts called os Baixos de India, & from thence to Moſambique.
                     
                        AND if you chance to ſée the cape das Correntes, being 6. or 7. miles from you, and minding to ſaile to Moſambique, then ſaile Eaſt Northeaſt, hauing a ſharpe wind, and comming vnder 22. degrées, vnder the which height the droughtes of India lie. You ſhall ſée many of the birdes called Garagiaus flying in companies, and if you haue a full wind, then ſaile Northeaſt to the height aforeſaide, & to know if you be néere vnto the droughts, you ſhall ſée many of the birdes called Garagiaus, and Alcatraſes flying together, and if you ſée many Alcatraſes, then you are néere the droughts: but ſéeing the Garagiaus alone without Alcatraſes, then you are twentie fiue miles from thence. Frō thence you muſt ſaile Northeaſt, and Northeaſt & by North, to 19. degrées and 1/
                              •
                           
                         and then ſaile Northeaſt, to 18. degrees, and from thence north, & north and by Eaſt to 16. degrées and 1/
                              •
                           
                         and beeing vnder this height, you ſhall ſée many of the birdes called Alcatraſes, and ſo aſſure your ſelfe to be hard by the Iſland of Ioan de Noua, and if you ſee Alcatraſes by 6. or 7. together, then you are but 10. or 15. miles from thence, becauſe there they vſe to fetch their foode: therefore vſe all diligence to get your ſelues out of that height of the Iſland, which is 16 degrées and 1/
                              •
                           
                         and to bee out of danger ſayle Northweſt, whereby you come to the Iſlands of Angoxas, which are cloſe by the coaſts towards Moſambique, and the more Northerly you kéepe, the nearer you come to Moſambique, but as you ſayle from the Iſlands of Angoxas to Moſambique, beware you come not nearer then 25. fadome to ye Corals where Don Ioan Perreira was caſt away, and yet round about it is thirtéene fadomes water, beeing paſt the Iſlandes of Angoxas Northeaſt, then ſaile Northeaſt, & by Eaſt, which is a good courſe, alwaies kéeping at twenty fiue fadome as I ſaid before. The courſes aforeſaid from Cabo das Correntes forwards, may bee done nearer and ſhorter if you haue the wind Southeaſt, for then you may ſayle along by the Iſlands lying vpon the bankes of Solfala, the ſooner to Moſambique, and with an eaſt wind vnder, the degrées, and with the ſignes aforeſaide, you muſt likewiſe ſhun the drought of India and the bankes of the Iſland of S. Laurence that lye towardes the drougths of India, & betwéen thoſe two droughts it is 95. fadome deepe, and if you deſire to enter into the road of Moſambique, in the entrance you muſt paſſe by the two Iſlands of S. George, & S. Iames, and leaue them on the ſouthweſt ſide, keepe aloofe from S. George, about ſix or ſeuen fadome déepe, and ſo running forward til you be in, hauing care to keepe off from the bankes where you ſée the water breake, till you come cloſe before the Iſland and fortreſſe of Moſambique.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 4. Chapter. The Nauigation from Moſambique to India.
                     
                        WHEN you depart from Moſambique towardes India, then ſaile Northeaſt, whereby you ſhall diſcouer the Iſlande Alha da Comoro which is diſtant from Moſambique 94. miles, or 11 degrées, and ½ whereof the furtheſt point Northward is a verie high land, 15. miles from thence you ſhall ſée certaine birdes called Rabo
                              •
                            de Iuncos (that is tayles of ſtalkes of berries) for that they haue a long narrow taile, ſtretching out like the ſtalke of a berrie, and by night you ſhall heare the birdes called Garagiaus ſing or make a noyſe, following your courſe from this Iland or towards India, you muſt vnderſtand) as ſoone as you diſcouer the vttermoſt point of the Iland of Saint Laurence, towardes the North) that the water and ſtreames run North and Northweſt, toward the Cape of Guardafu, and to the mouth or entrie of the ſtraightes of Mecco, or the redde ſea, and you muſt marke, that if it chance that you ſayle with a halfe winde and ſhoot full, or ſayle before the winde, yet therefore you muſt not recken according to the courſe you hold, but alwaies take a ſtrike for abatement or cutting off, and being by the winde two ſtrikes becauſe the water and ſtreame driue you continually to the Northweſt and looke wel before you, that if you find many heights, it is by reaſon ye water driues

you as I ſaid before, & to be aſſured to fal vpon the coaſt of India, you muſt take héede to the needle of your compaſſe, that yéeldeth a ſtrike and more to the Northeaſt, and if you recken your courſe according to the way the ſhippe maketh, then you loſe all that which the néedle or compaſſe yéeldeth towards the Northeaſt, and that which the water driueth you towards the Northweſt, whereby you come too ſhort, and cannot get the coaſt of India. The ſtreame or drawing of the water towards the redde ſea, is from 4. to 7. degrées, wherefore you muſt alwaies haue great care to be forward, and not to come to ſhort. In thoſe countries you ſhall alwayes ſée many of the birds called Rabos de Iuncos, and when you are néere vnto the coaſt and droughtes of Pandua, then you ſee them no more, but onely about 5
                              •
                           . miles in the ſea you ſhal perceiue diuers Snakes like Eales & bigger, driuing in the ſea, you muſt likewiſe vnderſtand that the ſtreame of the water at the Cape de bona Speranza, till the times aforeſaid, doe alwaies runne from the Cape del Gado, or to the cape de bona Speranza ſouthweſtward, notwithſtanding yt ſome ſtreams runne croſſe through them that is along the Iſlandes, as I
                              〈…〉
                            P
                              ••
                           iera, runne Weſtward, vpon the bankes of Cabo das correntes, to the Riuer called Aguada de Boapaz, the ſtreames run likewiſe Weſtwardes towardes the creeke that lyeth by the Cape das Agulhas, at Agundi de San Bras the ſtreame runneth towardes the land, and vpon theſe coaſtes you ſhall find yt the ſtiffer the wind bloweth out of the Weſt, the more the water and ſtreames runne againſt the wind.
                  
                  
                     The 5. Chapter. Of the nauigation and courſe from Liſbone to the Eaſt Indies, written & ſet down by the Kings Pilot, called Rodriges de Lagos a Portingall.
                     
                        WHen you put out of the riuer of Lisbone, to ſaile to the Iland called Porto Santo, you muſt run Southweſt, and ſetting out of Lisbone, you muſt marke the ſunne by the Compaſſe to proue it, that is in the riſing and ſetting of the Sunne, and the middle betweene her riſing and ſetting, which is North and South, and as much as you finde the needle of the compaſſe, to lie northeaſtward ſo much you muſt run ſouthwarde, for 
                           〈◊〉
                        , lyeth northeaſt and ſouthweſt, with ye riuer of Liſbon, wherewith it meeteth full and euen, when you perceiue or haue a ſight of Porto Santo, or the Iland Madeia, ſayling to the Iland La Palma, then you ſhal giue all that which the Néedle of the Compaſſe lyeth Northeaſtward, and ſomewhat more, for that it lyeth more Eaſtwarde then it is ſet downe in the ſea Carde, and from thence to the Iſland de Ferro, to the which Iſland you ſhall likewiſe winde a little more Weſtward then it lyeth in the Carde, and hereof fayle not, as being negligent to obſerue it, for although you abate ten miles from your courſe to the Iſlande La Palma, as it is in the Carde, yet you ſhall go right vpon it, and hauing paſt the Iſland La Palma, then your beſt way is to run ſouthward, 30. miles from the Iſlands of Capo Verde, alwaies giuing all that which the Néedle of the Compaſſe lyeth Northeaſtward, or that you ſhall runne betwéene two meale tydes, that the one mealetide South, and the other South and by Eaſt, ſetting your courſe to the South, or the better to vnderſtand it, all that which the Néedle of the Compaſſe yeeldeth, which may be halfe a ſtrike, and rather leſſe then more, and ſayling from vnder 22. to 18. degrées, you ſhall ſée gréene water, which commeth from the point called Capo Branco, and from the créeke where the fortreſſe of A
                              •
                           gu
                              ••
                           n lyeth, which gréene water if you ſee it more then two meale tides, then it is a ſigne yt you are near the coaſt: but if you ſee but a little gréen water, that is leſſe then for the ſpace of two mealetides, then you are nearer to the Iſlandes: and comming vnder ten degrees as long as you are by the coaſt of Guinea, you ſhall giue the Needle of the Compaſſe no abatement, or cutting off, becauſe the water draweth towardes the land, whereby the Northeaſterne drawing of the Needle of the Compaſſe, (which may bee a thirde parte of a ſtrike) agréeth with the drawing of the water, and ſo the ſhippe runneth ſoutheaſt, and the water and ſtreame commeth alwaies out of the ſouth, whereby it is driuen vnto the ſhore. Sayling from 5. to 3. degrées, it is good to keepe off the coaſt, from 70. to 100. miles, and not more: for being more it would not be good for your voyage: the reaſon is, for yt being 100 miles or more frō the coaſt, thē you haue but few ſouth windes to get the coaſt againe, but rather haue all the thunders and lightnings from the Eaſt to the South, and ſoutheaſt, which kéepe you from getting to the ſhore, and becauſe thoſe thunders come vpon you on all ſides, therefore it is good to runne (if it be poſſible) from 
                           
                              •
                           0. to 8
                              •
                           . miles, that is to 2
                              •
                           . degrees, and 1/
                              •
                           
                         where you ſhall finde a ſoutheaſt wind, continuing from the 2
                              •
                           . of

Aprill to the 15. of May, but if you ſtay till the end of Aprill, it may happen that as then you ſhall not haue the ſoutheaſt wind, before you be vnder one degrée of the Equinoctiall line. The ſignes you haue vppon this coaſt of Guinea, are ſome of the birds Garagiaus, and if the thunders come out of the Eaſt, being 60. or 70. miles from the ſhore, you ſhal ſée certaine Swallows and Duckers, & when you haue the ſoutheaſt wind, and that you make towardes the point or bough of Braſilia, although in the firſt day of your nauigation it diminiſheth not ſo much in the height as it ſhould, you muſt not be abaſhed thereat, for that which you find to be leſſe diminiſhed, is not by reaſon that the water or ſtreame hindreth you, as many and the moſt parte of men are of opinion, for that the degrees hard by the Equinoctiall are greater then others that are higher, as you ſhall well perceyue ſayling to India, or comming from thence with a fore wind vnder the line, then the degrées diminiſh but a little, whereby it may be aſſured that the ſmall diminution or running forwarde is not by reaſon of the water or ſtreame that runne to the Antilhas or foure Ilandes of the Spaniſh Indies, comming to the line or a degrée further, then in any ſorte turne not againe vnto Guinea, for it woulde bee againſt your ſelfe, and thereby you ſhould ſpende your time in vaine, for that ſome ſhips that departed out of Lisbone in my company, that from vnder the line they would wind towardes Guinea, which I did not, but contrarily made ouer to Braſilia, whereby thoſe ſhippes came a month later then I did into India. In this bough or croſſing to Braſilia, you ſhall ſet your courſe as the wind ſerueth, and looke well to your Compaſſe, for that as ſoone as you are paſt the line, then the Néedle of the Compaſſe lyeth halfe a ſtrike and more to the Northeaſt, and ſailing from the 8. of the 18. degrée, then the more the Néedle of the Compaſſe lyeth Northeaſt, the further you are from the coaſt of Braſilia, and ſaie that you lay Eaſt and Weſt with Cape S. Auguſten, and that the Néedle of the Compaſſe ſhould yéelde two third partes of a ſtrike Northeaſtwarde, then you are 150. miles from it to ſeaward in, which is thus to be vnderſtoode, that if the Compaſſe were made in Portingall, & there lay halfe a ſtrike Northeaſtward, if it bee good and true, it will do the ſame vpon the coaſt of Braſilia, being Eaſt and weſt with the Abrolhos, and about 170 or 200. miles from it, then the Néedle of the compaſſe ſhal lie a whole ſtrike or ſomewhat more Northeaſtward for that the Meridian (of the Compaſſe, that in Portingall lyeth halfe a ſtrike Northeaſt) maketh the ſame Meridian 100. and ſo many myles within the countrey of Braſilia, which alſo likewiſe doth ſo agrée with the ſea. In this courſe aforeſaide you ſee many birdes called Rabos Forcados, that is hanging tailes, and by all the Iſlandes of Martin Vaas, you ſhal ſée white Garagiaus or ſea Mewes. Now when you come vnder the height aforeſaide, hauing a large winde, and that you might ſaile Eaſt Southeaſt, let the Compaſſe wind a ſtrike, or a ſtrike and a halfe, which will wind ſo much comming vnder 30. degrées, and although the Compaſſe windeth a ſtrike and a halfe, yet you ſhall not therefore reckon any abatement in your courſe, more then halfe a ſtrike, for this way is a ſtrike ſhorter then it is placed in the ſea Carde, and vſe all the meanes that you runne not higher then two and thirtie or 33. degrées towards the Iſland of Triſtan da Cunha, for you ſhal haue a better and ſurer courſe from very foule weather and leſſe ſtormes, for commonly for the moſt part you haue the winde there at North & Northeaſt, which to auoid, take this counſel giuē by me, becauſe I haue well tried it to be true: and comming by the aforeſaide Iſlandes of Triſtan de Cunha, you ſhall ſée ſome of the weed called Sargoſſo, driuing vppon the water, with diuers Trombas, which are thicke peeces of reedes, which when you ſee, then you are beſide the Iſlandes, you ſhall there likewiſe ſee great ſea Rauens, and ſome ſmall Rauens with white billes, which flie cloſe by the Iſlands, and when you are right ſouth and north with the Iſlandes, then the winding of the compaſſe Northeaſtward, beginneth to diminiſh, and lieth but a ſtrike and 
                           •
                         part for that 70. or 80. miles from this Iland you are in the middle or halfe way of the Meridian, betweene Braſilia and the Cape das Agulhas: alſo herewith you muſt vnderſtād, that vnder the height of 35. degrees, little, more or leſſe, you muſt account 330. miles for each ſtrike of the compaſſe from the Northeaſt, and when you ſee the tokens aforeſaid, you muſt runne to 35. degrees and 
                           •
                         which is a good height, holding your courſe eaſt, and eaſt and by north, till you be within 100. miles of the cape de Bona Speranza, then the compaſſe will winde no more but 
                           •
                         part of a ſtrike, likewiſe the water wil there draw you northweſt or north: now if by negligence you chance to faile, or by the windes are driuen vnder 35, degrees, then when you are 30 or fortie miles from the cape de Bona Speranza, you ſhall ſee many thicke peeces of reedes, and ſea wolues, which being vnder 36. degrees you ſhall not ſee, bee it full or

ſcarſe, and comming within 40. miles of the Cape de Bona Speranza, be it vnder 36. or 35. degrées, you ſhall ſee a gathering or running together of the water, that is in the day time, for by night if you cannot ſee it, becauſe that when you are once in it, then you cannot perceiue it: there you find many birdes ſitting vpon it, by the Portingalles called Cauoitoijns, and from thence to the Cape, there are ſome ſea Rauens, with white billes which is a great ſigne, for it may be you may find ground, and neuer ſée the birdes called Alcatraſes, and when you come North and South with the Cape de bona Speranza, from fiue and thirtie to thirtie degrées, then you ſhall find muddie grounde, to the Cape das Agulhas, and when you are paſt that muddie ground, you ſhall finde a kinde of yellowiſh ground, and ſomewhat more inwarde by the Cape das Vacquas, which is towards the Agua de de San Bras, you haue ſhelly and ſtone ground. The Compaſſe (as I ſaid that is fire at the Cape das Agulhas, muſt in Lisbone be marked or ſtriked, and muſt there lie a halfe ſtrike Northeaſtward, which they muſt very well know howe to marke, although ſome of our Pilots thinke it not neceſſary to knowe how much the Compaſſe turneth or lyeth Northeaſt, or Northweſt, ſaying that our predeceſſors vnderſtoode not the Compaſſe, and ſo marked the coaſt, whereunto I anſwere, that in ſome nauigations it may be excuſed, but in moſt part of the voiage or nauigation it is very neceſſarie, ſpecially from the Northeaſt and Northweſt, as you muſt ſaile from the Cape de bona Speranza to Moſambique, as wel in the courſe as to ſaile in the middle betwéen the Ilande of Saint Laurence, Soffala, it muſt haue a ſtrike from the Northweſt to ſaile in the middle of the channell, and this is neceſſarie to be known by al pylots that ſaile to India, becauſe oftentimes they find themſelues ſometimes vpon the Iſlandes, ſome-that by meanes of the ſtreames and wa-times vppon the bankes of Soffala, and ters as you take your courſe from Capo das Agulhas, to Moſambique, it is good to ſaile an hundred miles Eaſtward, thereby to ſhun the coaſt, becauſe of the water and ſtreames that runne ſouthweſtwarde, and comming north and ſouth with the Bay called Bal
                              •
                           a Del Goa, then the Needle of the Compaſſe will be 1/
                              •
                           . part of a ſtrike and no leſſe Northweſtwarde, from whence notwithſtanding you muſt not goe néerer then 60. miles vnto the coaſt, continuing your courſe as I ſayde before to kéepe your ſelfe off from it: from this place the Rauens with white billes will follow you, vntill the Cape das Correntes, be Northweſt from you, and ſo when the ſaid Cape lyeth right vppon that ſtrike, then the Rauens will leaue you, for that they are not found but from the Cape das Correntes, to the Cape de bona Speranza, & being North and ſouth with the point aforeſaid, then the Compaſſe will bee 1\
                              •
                           . of a ſtrike rather more then leſſe Northweſtwarde, and in the middle of the channell a whole ſtrike. Comming by the droughts of Os Baixos de Iudia, being Weſtward from them, or not ſéeing thē, then you ſhall ſée many of the birdes called Alcatraſes, that being 10. or 15. miles from them, but being 20. miles off, on the ſame ſide, you ſhall likewiſe ſée ſome, but the compaſſe will not winde a full ſtrike, but if you were on the ſide of the Iland of S. Laurence, within 10.12. or 15. miles, then peraduenture you may not ſée them, and when in the height of thoſe droughtes (which lie full vnder 28. degrées) you ſée the birdes called Alcatraſes, then paſſe not by the ſide of the Iland of S. Laurence, for that on that ſide towards the Iland you ſhall not ſee them, but hard by and on Soffala ſide you ſhal perceiue them 20. miles from the land: this is to bee vnderſtood at the time of the Monſons, which is at the time that the Portingall ſhippes (that depart from thence in the month of March) do paſſe by, for they that come in the Monſon or winter time, may poſſiblie not find them: for that it happened vnto me that comming in the Monſon of winter, in companie of the Earle Don Luis de Tayde, I paſſed 20. miles and more from the droughts towardes the coaſt of Soffala, and ſaw not one birde, but the day before I had ſéene ten or twelue of the birdes called Alcatraſes, and as ſoone as you perceiue the ſignes aforeſaid, then run no further North or North and by Eaſt, vntill you bee vnder 19. degrées and ¼. vnder the which heights ye Iſlands As Ylhas Prinneras doe lie, and ſomewhat more to the Weſt, for that holding your courſe Northeaſt, the ſtreame runneth ſo faſt, that you ſhould preſently fall vppon the bankes of Soffala, and if you chance to ſée the Ylhas Prinneras, truſt not vnder that courſe, for although you paſſe by them Eaſt Northeaſt, yet it is falſe, becauſe the firſt and laſt of them lie Eaſt and Weſt one againſt the other, till you come to a drie ſand, called A Coroa de Sanguaſe (that is, the Crowne of Sangaſe,) then you runne by the Iſlandes of Angoxas, Eaſt Northeaſt and Weſt ſouthweſt from this Crowne of Sangaſe to Moſambique you runne along the coaſt Northeaſt and Southweſt. From thence to Moſambique are ſome rodes or ankering places, from 18. to fiue and twentie fadome déepe, but my opinion

is, if it be poſſible, that it were better not to anker, becauſe that vppon that coaſt there are many cliffes and ſtormes which are oftentimes not ſéene, if the water breake not vpon them. The ſignes that are found within 14, miles from Moſambique, is a great thicke land, and a mile and a halfe from the coaſt, lyeth a banke, where you paſſe ouer, with fifteene fadome water: the land aforeſaid is called Maginquale, and vpon it along by the ſhore there are ſome trees, like Pineapple trees: from thence to Moſambique are twelue miles, and to Mocango 5. miles, hauing all that way the aforeſaid trees, and ſometimes the water breaketh about a mile from the ſhore. Now to put into Moſambique▪
                         you muſt take your courſe in the middle way betweene the Iland S. George and the droughtes of Canaciera, where you ſhal find 7.8. and ſometimes 9. fadome when it is high water, and being as farre as the Iland, ſo that in your ſight the Iland of Saint George, and that of Saint Iames are all one, then you are right againſt the Iſlandes, and from thence putting in, you ſhall ſet your courſe right vpon the ſtrand of S. Anthonio, in the Iland of Moſambique, vntil you be in a good depth, which ſhalbe a channel, ſtretching North and South, and comming with the ſame courſe to twelue fadome deepe, then winde Northwarde, alwaies keeping of the point called No
                              ••
                           a Senhora do Baluarte, which is a Church that ſtandeth vppon the higheſt part of the Iland vppon the water, without the fortreſſe of Moſambique, and alſo from the ſandes called Cabaciera, which lyeth on the other ſide right ouer againſt Moſambique. This Bay of Moſambique lyeth ſcarce vnder 15. degrees: in this hauen of Moſambique the Compaſſe windeth not a ſtrike Northweſtward, and from thence to the a Ilha do Comoro, you muſt run northeaſt, which Iland lyeth vnder 11. degrees, 1/
                              •
                           . that is, in the end of Southweſt, the courſe from this Iſland, or to the line is Northeaſt and northeaſt and by eaſt from hence to the line, certaine nightes you ſhall ſee ſhyning or white water till you come to three or foure degrées, and ſhall haue the wind Southeaſt, and from thence forwarde you ſhall beginne to haue it Southweſt and ſouth, ſo you begin to come from India in the winter time, from the Equinoctiall line, or to the height of Coa, that is vnder 15. degrées and 1/
                              •
                           . you muſt runne Eaſt Northeaſt, and in this way the Compaſſe will lie a ſtrike and a halfe Northweſtwarde, and as much as it lyeth Northweſtwarde muſt be ſayled north-Eaſtward vnto the afore ſaid height of Goa: the ſignes you alwaies find in this way, are alwaies about ten degrées, in the night time you haue white and ſhining water, and from thoſe ten degrees to the coaſt of India, ſometimes you ſee many birdes that come from the ſhore, that is from the coaſt of Arabia, as Quartelles, and other ſuch like ſmal birds, and 180. or two hundred myles from the coaſt of India, then the Compaſſe beginneth to leſſen in the Northweſt, for that in the hauen of Goa it lyeth but one ſtrike to the Northweſt, and 1/
                              •
                           . part, and rather leſſe then more.
                  
                  
                     The 6. Chapter. To ſayle from Goa to Cochin.
                     
                        FRom Goa to Batecola, you muſt ſaile two or three miles from the land, from twentie to fiue and twentie ſadom deep, for it is deeper there then neerer to Cochin, for about halfe a mile from the Iſlande of Batecola you finde ſixe and twentie fadome deepe: from thence it is good to runne Southeaſt, and Southeaſt and by South, to the fortreſſe of Barcelor, and to know if you be by Barcelor, or in the height thereof, you muſt vnderſtand that there are high hils, which beginne at Batecola, and continue to Barcelor, and right aboue Barcelor there is a round houell like darke miſte or clowde, which ſtandeth in the end of ye high hilles: on the South ſide of Batecola to this hauen it is foure or fiue miles, and halfe a mile from the ſhore it is all ſtonie. By Barcelor you may anker at ten fadome deepe, about a mile and a halfe from the ſhore, and deſiring to ſayle vnto Cochin you muſt holde your courſe South, ſouthweſt and ſomewhat more into the ſea, as the winde will permit you, for there are other Iſlandes and cliffes, being where you may paſſe by, (as I ſaide before) at fourteen fadome water: it is a good courſe to keep at ſixteene fadome: from thoſe Ilands three or foure miles forwarde there are nothing but Ilandes and cliffes, which hauing paſt, you come to ſee the Fort of Mangalor, as you paſſe by the ſhore at fifteene fadome deepe, from thence you ſayle to the Fortreſſe of Cananor: from Cananor to the Iſlandes as Ilhas Cagidar, which is 
                           •
                        . miles, let your courſe here be ſouth ſoutheaſt, & at 18. fadom deep: from the Iſlands of Cagadas to Chale are 7. miles, & ye courſe is ſouth ſoutheaſt & 18
                        
fadome deepe, from Chale to Panane are 9. miles in the ſame courſe, and from Panane to Cochiin are 10. miles, the courſe beeing ſouth, ſoutheaſt, and at twelue & ten fadome deepe, which is a good way.
                  
                  
                     The 17. Chapter. The courſe or Nauigation from Cochin to Portingall, written by the ſaid Rodri
                           •
                         de Ligos.
                     
                        THe towne of Cochiin lieth vnder nine degrees, and 
                           •
                        /
                           •
                         rather leſſe than more, and departing out of Cochiin towards Portingall, you muſt hold your courſe Weſt and as much Frorth till you come 
                           •
                         miles from Cochiin, and being there you ſhall ſo ſet your courſe, that as you paſſe through the Iſlandes of Maldina and Ma
                              •
                           ale, you may come to the height of 8. or eight degrees and not to fall vppon anie Iſlands, although the ſea card in this courſe hath certaine Iſlandes, yet to ſay truth there are none. Thoſe Iſlandes being paſt, it is good to take your courſe Southweſt, till you come to foure degrees, and from thence ſouth ſouthweſt, to three degrées, on the ſouth ſide of the Equinoctiall, from Cochin all the way aforeſaid to this place. The compaſſe lieth northweſt a ſtrike and a halfe, beeing vnder three degrees on the ſouth ſide of the line, then you begin to haue the thunder out of the weſt, and northweſt, with a ſtiffe winde, and from thence you ſhall hold ſouth and ſouth, & by weſt, to ten or twelue degrees, in which you ſhal haue the wind ſoutheaſt vnder theſe twelue degrees, the compaſſe holdeth northweſtward a ſtrike and 
                           •
                         parts, but ſhall not therfore be made any abatement in your reckoning: for it is often found that the water or ſtreame doth there run to the weſt, which would then be two faults: for that as I vnderſtand it in this courſe, you muſt account all that is ſaid the ſhip hath gone, becauſe you ſhall likewiſe find ſtreames that draw to the ſoutheaſt being at 12 degrees, (as I ſaid before til you be vnder 15. degrees, thē you haue the winde ſometime ſouth ſoutheaſt, then you muſt not lie weſtward for it is not good, but rather runne eaſt and eaſt ſoutheaſt, alwaies keeping good watch to the eightéenth degrée, vnder the which lieth the droughtes called 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            Baxios dos Garagiaus, and hauing a ſouth-Eaſt wind, then it is good to hold your courſe ſouthweſt, vntill you diſcouer the Iſland of Diego Rod
                              •
                           ges, and if it lieth right before you then you ſhall ſée ſome of the birdes called Alcatraſes, and ſome hearbes called Sa
                           
                              •
                           
                         driuing in the water, and there the compaſſe goeth no higher, but beginneth from thence againe to diminiſh or leſſen, when you are paſt this Iſland or the point thereof, then runne ſouthweſt, and ſouthweſt, and by weſt to 26. degrees, vnder the which height lieth the firſt point of the Iſland of S. Laurence, & as ſoone as you are vnder this height, then you ſhall hold your courſe weſt, ſouthweſt to 29. degrees, and from thence weſt and weſt and by ſouth, and to know when you are north and by ſouth with the Iſland of Saint Laurence, that is with the middle of the vttermoſt land on the ſouth ſide, then marke the compaſſe well▪ and if you bee by the countrey aforeſaid, then your compaſſe will bee a ſtrike and 1/
                              •
                           
                         one from the other, northweſtward, from thence you ſhall hold your courſe, as winde and weather ſerueth, for being from about the 15. of Aprill, till the laſt of May, it is neceſſary to haue the Firme land on boarde: for that there, at thoſe times you haue the winde North, and northweſt▪ and being in the monthes of Februarie and March, then the winde is eaſt and ſouth, where you muſt rule your courſe as the wind ſerueth, and being right with the land north, & ſouth, then the compaſſe ſhall leaue a ſtrike rather more than leſſe to the Northweſt, which is a certaine ſigne to bee right againſt it, but if it be more, then aſſure your ſelfe you are not by the land, then beeing 30. or 40. miles from thence and though you be but 30 miles from the land, you ſhall ſee gréene water, but you finde no ground. The compaſſe that I ſpeake of ſhall be ſixe, and euen at the Cape das Agulhas, with thoſe that make them leane northeaſtward in Portingall, a halfe ſtrike rather leſſe then more, and when you come to the Cape das Agulhas, and hetherwards, as long as you haue not muddie ground, you are not at the Cape das Agulhas: wherefore ſpare not often to caſt your lead, for it will be for your owne good. Paſſing the Cape das Agulhas to the cape de Bona Speranza, it is not good to ſaile northweſt, as long as you haue ground, for that therewith you ſhould not paſſe the Cape de Bona Speranza, but being paſt it, then runne northweſt, til you come to 16. degrees, vnder the which height the Iſland of Saint Helena doth lie, or to 16. degrees and 1/
                              •
                           
                         and when you come to that height, then run weſt and ſomewhat ſoutherlie, or the firſt meale tide weſt, and by ſouth, becauſe of the compaſſe of the ſea in ſome ſtreames, for I thinke you ſhall finde no more heights, although you ſhould ſayle weſt, and by ſouth, and ſayling on that courſe you ſhall continue it 50. miles further, but no more, and when you perceiue the Iſland and cannot reach it by day, then ſtrike all your ſmall ſayles, holding about 5.
                        
miles from thence, in ſuch manner, that in the night time you hold weſt, and weſt, and by north, there the compaſſe beareth full northeaſt halfe a ſtrike, and as you make your reckinng well in your courſe from the cape de Bona Speranza, to this Iſland, with the aduantage of the compaſſe as it ought to be, you ſhall find that it lieth aboue ſeauentie miles more weſtward, then it ſtandeth in the Sea Card, departing from this Iland to ſaile to Portingall, and to ſée the Iland called Aſcention, you ſhall run northweſt, and northweſt, and by weſt for 70. miles, then you ſhal goe ſomewhat Eaſternly as ſome doe then it wil be needful to ſaile 100. miles northweſt, and by weſt, and from thence northweſt, vntill you come by the generall wind, but come no nearer vnto the land, for then you ſhould not make a good voiage, and although the ſouth winde doth continue longer in this courſe, which bringeth you to twelue & fourtéene degrées, on the north ſide, yet leaue it not for that, neyther put cloſe vnder the coaſt of Guinea, when you haue the general wind although you might more weſternly, neyther leaue off therefore to follow your courſe, for it will be large enough, althougl, ſometimes it ſcanteth, becauſe you are cloſe by the land. It is good to kéepe 150. or 200. miles from the coaſt: for although that by the ſea cardes you finde your ſelfe to bee two hundred miles from the land, notwithſtanding you are a good way nearer, the reaſon whereof is, that you ſayle from the point of the Iſland of S. Helena, which lieth in the ſea carde, and not from the Iſland that lieth 70. miles weſtward, as aforeſaid, and although the pointes doe aſſuredly lie towards the Iſland Flores, it therfore maketh no reaſon that it is not ſo, as I ſay, for that in the courſe through the ſea, where you finde the hearbe Sargoſſo, the winde being there alwaies northeaſt, the ſea or ſtreame runneth to the Antilhas, or fore Iland of the Spaniſh Ilandes, whereby the ſhips doe ſo little multiplie in the courſe of Sargoſſo, & if theſe waters and ſtreames doe chance to meete the ſhips when they are in the courſe of Sargoſſo, it happeneth often times that the ſhips beare too loofeward, but very ſeldome, and it happeneth oftentimes, that by Guinea the ſtreame runneth northward, and being ſomewhat neere the land, then the water draweth you preſently to the land, alſo the winde comming moſt out of the northweſt and north, which letteth you from ſayling northweſt, and being to Seaward you ſhal rather haue a northeaſt wind, and although you haue many meanes to kéepe you from going cloſe vnder the coaſt of Guinea, I ſet this downe here, becauſe I haue noted it my ſelfe: for that all the ſhips, in what courſe ſoeuer they be, which preſently winde themſelues to kéepe aloofe from the coaſt of Guinea, being in the courſe of Sargoſſo, they haue no full winde, but onelie northeaſt windes, and ſometimes calmes, which ſailing to lee ward you find not, where you haue the winde eaſt, and eaſt ſoutheaſt. All the ſhippes that come from the Antilhas or Spaniſh Ilandes, the ſcarſeſt windes that they finde are out of the Eaſt, whereby you may vnderſtand, that when you hold farre off from Guinea, it is no cauſe of hauing a longer Voyage: but you ſhall the ſooner finde a better and fuller winde, and ſo when you come vnder twentie degrees, and that the compaſſe keepeth ſteedie to twentie fiue degrees, then you are not to lee ward, there you beginne to ſée the hearbe Sargoſso, whereby that hearbe is called Sargoſso, and make no reckning of being too loofeward or too léeward, for there is no certaintie thereof: ſo when you ſaile north and northeaſt, and that the néedle of the compaſſe lieth not north weſtward, thē be wel aſſured that the Iland Flores is right before you, continuing ſo till you come to the Iland of Fayael, (which is one of the Flemmiſh Ilands called as Ilhas dos Alcores.) The compaſſe that within S. Helena was full halfe a ſtrike Northeaſtward, will be full if you marke it well, and when you come vnder thirtie ſire, or thirtie nine degrees, and ⅓ then you ſhall ſee the Iland Flores, with ſome Torteaur in the water, and being fortie miles from the Iland Flores, towardes the coaſt, then you ſhall ſée the birdes Garagiaus and Duckers, and the compaſſe will in a manner be euen, and if there be any difference, it will bee ſomewhat northeaſtward: for from the Iland Flores to the Iland Fayael, the compaſſe is full as ſix, as I ſaid before.
                  
                  
                     The 8. Chapter. The courſe and Nauigation from India, to the Cape de Bona Speranza, ſet downe by another Portingall Pilot.
                     
                        WHEN you depart from Cochiin, to ſayle for Portingall, you muſt doe your beſt to get vnder tenne degrees

and a halfe, till you be 50. miles Weſt ſouth weſt from it, whereby you will bee ſcarſe vnder 10. degrées, vnder the which hight lyeth the Ilands Mamales, for the ſtreame will alwaies drawe you to the middle of the Channel, betwéene theſe Ilands and the Ilands of Maldiua vnder 9. degrées & a halfe, you muſt paſſe full forward without ſéeing any of thoſe Ilands, and go ſhoare vnder 9. degrées & a quarter, although in the Cards they place many falſe Ilands. And if you chaunce to ſet ſayle from Cochin the 20. of Ianuarie, little more or leſſe, then run ſo that you may paſſe the Ilands on the ſouthweſt, and ſouthweſt and by ſouth, vntill you bee vnder the Equinoctial line, becauſe you go late to ſayle, and it may be that the wind and weather wil not ſerue you ſo well, to holde to Sea ward from the Iland of Brandaon, then you may hold your courſe betwéene the Ilands called Dos Irmaos, lying vnder 4. degrées on the ſouth, and from thence you muſt take your courſe to the Ilands of Pedro Maſcharenhas, and ſo following your way, if it chaunce being vnder 4. degrées ſouthward you haue much thunder, lightning and rayne, becauſe commonly it is found there in the moneth of Februarie, as I my ſelfe haue tryed, vntill 14. degrées, then doe your beſt, to get vnder 14. or 15. degrées, for commonly vnder 15 or 16. degrées you ſhall find ſoutheaſt winds and then put no further into the Sea, but paſſe betweene the Iland Brandaon, and the Iland of Lopo Soares, which is a good courſe and as ſoone as you are paſt the Iland, then take your courſe by the Iland of Ioan de Lisboa, betwéene the which Iland and the Iland of Pedro Maſcherenhas, you haue a good way, ſo that you come to paſſe 14. or 15 miles from the Iland of Saint Laurence, from thence ſet your courſe Weſt ſouthweſt till you come vnder 29. degrées, and then run Weſt, and Weſt and by South, to 34. degrées or as farre as you will, by this courſe running in this ſort, comming within 50. or 6
                              •
                           . miles of the land called Terra do Natal you ſhall ſee many Birdes, and the more it ſtormeth & is foule weather, the more Birds you ſhall ſee, and if you ſee many, then be aſſured you are farre from the land, and when you looſe the ſight of them, then looke well to your ſelfe, for the cloſer you are by the land, you looſe the ſight of them altogether, vnleſſe it bee the blacke Rauens with white billes, & the neerer you are to the land the more you ſhall ſee of them, although they are likewiſe ſeene at the leaſt 20. miles from the ſhore, but feare not, when you begin to come to the Iland of S. Laurence, but hold the courſe aboueſaid, and when you beginne to diſcouer the mouth of the Chanel, betweene Saint Laurence and Moſambique, then you preſently find the runing of the ſtreame towards the Cape de Bona Speranza, and feare not in that country to hold your courſe ſouthweſt for commonly after you haue the wind ſouth, and as much as you haue runne weſt Northweſt, ſo much you haue furthered your way, but take heede you keepe ſtill from the coaſt, and ſo you will make a better Viage, for the ſtreame will driue you to the Cape although the wind helpeth you not, and this is to bee vnderſtoode, that when you come late from Cochin, you ſhall alwaies thereabout finde great Weſt windes, alſo you muſt know, that (in March and Aprill, all the way from the furtheſt point of Saint Laurence to the Cape) commonly there bloweth North and Northeaſt winds, and if for a day or two it bloweth out of the Southeaſt, or South, it is a great wonder, therefore make no account of it, for at thoſe times they blowe verie ſeldome, in all the way aforeſaide to the Cape, and the néerer you come to the Cape you find the more northerly windes, but when the North wind commeth miſt and fléet, then be ſure of Weſt windes, for it is the nature of them in thoſe countries, and you muſt vnderſtand, that if you arriue in thoſe countries in a Schrickel yeare (for they are much more dangerous then other years, becauſe the coniunction of the heauenly Planets and bodies as then are different, as alſo the inferiour bodies, that are ſubiect to the ſuperiour, whereby they are gouerned:) then you ſhall finde from 30. degrées vpwards, that as ſoone as you haue a northerly winde with a ſmall or miſeling rayne, that there followeth great and foule weather, then looke well to your ſelfe, and take great héede, leaſt it fall not ſuddainely vppon you, for it by vnaduiſednes it ſhould fall forwards vpon you, it were not poſſible for you to find any meanes to keepe your ſelfe from being ouerwhelmed in the ſea without the ſpeciall fauour of God, for that they come with moſt great furie and outragiouſly, but if you chance in the beginning of Februarie to bee by the furtheſt point of S. Laurence 70. or 80. miles, inward to the Sea, then take your courſe to the Cape Das Agulhas, for then you ſhall find the windes alwaies Southeaſt, ſo you paſſe not further into the Sea then 36. degrees, which Nauigation you ſhall make departing out of India, in the ninth of December, you haue ground by the Cape Das Agulhas at twentie and twentie fiue miles from the land at a hundred and a hundred and thirtie Fadome déepe, vnder thirtie ſixe degrees and a halfe.
                  
                  
                     
                     The 9. Chapter. The Nauigation or courſe from Monte De
                           ••
                        n to Portingal, which is the chiefe hill in India, and lyeth in the countrie of Malabar, ſixe miles Northwarde from Cananor, and from Goa ſixtie one miles Southward.
                     
                        DEparting from the hill or Monte Delijn towards Portingall, by the way without the Iland of Saint Laurence ſo ſet you Northeaſt, & ſouthweſt, with the hill Monte Delijn, taking your courſe Eaſt, and Eaſt, and by South, and then you ſhall come by an Iland lying vnder 10. degrées and a halfe, fiftie miles from Monte Delijn, and then you muſt take your courſe Southweſt, and Southweſt and by Weſt, and then you ſhal come 25. miles beyond this Iland, vnder the hight of 9. degrées and frac34;. taking care not to goe more ſouthward towardes the Iland of Maldiua, from whence halfe a mile it is déep and faire, and as ſoone as you are paſt this Iland whether it be early or late in the yeare, then runne ſouthweſt and ſouthweſt and by South, vntill you haue paſt the line, and if there you finde the wind Weſt, then runne South, and South and by Weſt, if you can, if not ſouthward, which is a good way, and in this courſe you hold fréely without feare, if in this courſe from 13. degrées vpwards, you find diuers Birdes called Garagiaus, flying in companies together, feare not therefore to follow your courſe, & being late in the yeare, then alwaies keepe on the South ſide, thereby to auoide the drougthes called O
                              •
                            Baixos de Lopo Soares, and Garagiaus, lying vnder 16. degrées holding this courſe you may boldly ſayle both by day and night, for you ſhall find no let as I my ſelfe haue well tryed. The 16. degrées not being paſt, you muſt alſo paſſe betweene the drougthes aforeſaid, and the Iland of Brandaon, and comming to the hight, there looſe a nights ſayle to bee the ſurer, and make your account that when you find many Birdes called Garagiaus, with other ſpeckled Birdes among them, flying in companies together, then you are 40. miles beyond the Ilande, from whence you ſhall ſaile ſouthweſt, and ſouthweſt and by South, for certaine meale tides, and it being early in the yeare, when you ſet ſayle from India, then auoide all thoſe Ilands and drougthes, and take your courſe to Sea wards towards the Cape Das Agulhas, and if it chance that about the ſeuenth of Februarie you find your ſelfe 100. miles little more or leſſe, from the furtheſt point of the Iland of S. Laurence, that is vnder his hight as I haue béene, then runne Weſt ſouthweſt vntill you bee vnder the hight of the Cape de Bona Speranza, take héede to the ſtreame, that might deceiue you, becauſe there in Februarie, they runne verie ſwift, by reaſon of the Eaſt windes which as then blow verie ſwiftly, & ſo runne your courſe to the Cape de Bona Speranza till you be vnder 36. degrées and a halfe, and when you are by the Cape Das Agulhas, then looke when it is noone by the Aſtrolabe, and if as then it is likewiſe noone by the ſunne Diall, or not wanting aboue the thickneſſe of a thréede, then it is a good ſigne, as well outward, as comming backe to Portingall, for ther the néedles of the Compaſſe are right and a like, and being vpon the one ſide or the other, they will lie either Northeaſt ward, or Northweſt ward, as you are paſt the Meridionall line, and ſo much it differeth from equalitie with the Sunne Diall, alſo when you come to the Cape Das Agulhas, or further forward, then looke vpon the water, and if it be gréene, then turne backe againe vnder 36. degrées and a halfe, and caſt foorth your Lead, and you ſhall find 30. fadome deepe, and being vnder 36. degrées 2/
                           •
                        . degrées you ſhall find 90. fadome, and then you ſhall not ſée many blacke Rauens with white billes, nor Alcatraſes, but on both ſides of the Cape Das Agulhas you ſhall ſée many, both on the coaſt and 20. miles to Sea ward, but not further, and you ſhall find the water (ſo that you be not vpon the depthes aforeſaid) light and gréeniſh, as alſo ſome of the Saſ-been driuing in the water, and as ſoone as you haue found grounds, without ſéeing the land of Cape de Bona Speranza, then runne ſtill along by this ground till you looſe it, and then bee aſſured that you are paſt the Cape Das Agulhaas, then holde your courſe Weſt Northweſt, and ſo you ſhall find 12. miles from the Cape, and when you begin to leaue it, then you ſhall begin to ſée thicke Reedes ſwimming vppon the water, for the ſpace of ten or fiftéene miles from thence. In the courſe aforeſaid, and when you ſée them, it is a good tooken and you may be aſſured to haue paſt the Cape de Bona Speranza, when you are by the Cape Das Agulhas then marke the Sunne Diall, and the water of the ground, and they will ſhew you when you are there, for by this Cape, the néedles of the Compaſſes are fix and euen, and within or without that Cape, they lie either Northeaſtward or Northweſt ward, as I ſaid before, the Nauigation from the Cape

                        de Bona Speranza to Portingal is without danger to the Equinoctiall, for that you alwaies find a Southeaſt wind, and from the line to Portingall it is dayly ſayled, whereby it is commonly knowne to euerie ſimple Pilot, yet ſuch as are deſirous to know it, may ſée it in this Booke, where it is ſet downe, as alſo in mine owne Viage from India to Portingall where it is particularly declared till you come to the towne of Lisbone.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 10. Chapter. Of the right tokens and knowledge of the Cape Das Correntes and the Ilands as Ilhas Premeiras and of all the Hauens and coaſts of Moſambique.
                     
                        THe bankes of Soffala begin at the Cape de S. Baſtian, and reach to the Ilands Primeras all along the coaſt, and the coaſt lyeth North and South to Soffala, and hath ſomwhat of North and Weſt, & South and Eaſt, herein are ſome ryuers, but onely fit for ſmall ſhippes, the ryuer called Mataca, or Monemone lyeth vnder 21. degrées and a halfe, it is a ſmall ryuer, beeing at high water within the Hauen but thrée Fadome déepe, and for a marke hath a high trée ſtanding on the South ſide, and along the ſhore ſome Sandie dounes, which in ſight ſhew like Ilands without trées, on the North ſide lie certaine ſhallowes, you enter into the Hauen Northweſt on, that is on the ſide where the trées ſtand, and there as you are within the point you may Anker at fiue and ſixe fadome déepe. Quiloan or Quiloane lyeth vnder 20. degrées and a halfe, and on the South ſide hath a high Palme trée, and the land on the ſame ſide is like a hooke, and if you deſire to put into Quiloane, although it were with a ſhippe of foure hundred tunnes, you may well doe it, being high water, but you muſt take heede of a drougth, lying thrée myles from the Hauen. This Hauen at high water is fiue Fadome déepe, and when you are in hard by the point of the ryuer you find fiue or ſixe Fadome water, with muddie ground, you enter therein Weſt, Southweſt, and Southweſt and by Weſt, and the drougthes aforeſaide lie Eaſt, Southeaſt and Weſt Southweſt like Quiloane. From Mataca or M
                              •
                           nemone to Quiloane you ſhall ſee land, at thirteene or fourteen fadome déepe, and beeing vnder 21 degrees and 60 fadome deepe, then you ſhall be fifteen myles from the land, & ſhall find Corall vpon the ground, and from thence inward ſmall ſands, ſayling from Quiloane to Soffala you muſt runne North and north and by Eaſt, without the poynt or hooke, til you be at 12 or 13 fadome déepe, and till you ſée Soffala: and if you deſire to ſtay there, then runne till you be vnder 6. or 7. fadome, which is 6. or 7. miles from the land: the Hauen of Soffala changeth euerie yeare, therefore you can not put into it without one of the countrie Pilots, and it hath for a marke a companie of palme trees ſtanding together on the north ſide: & ſailing frō thence to Moſambique, you muſt runne Eaſt, till you come to fourty fadome water, and from thence Eaſt north eaſt, running fiftéene or ſixtéene myles from the Ilandes Primeiras, you ſhall alwaies in theſe countries all along the coaſt, find ſmal, thinne, blacke ſand, mixed with the earth, although you ſayle cloſe in ſight of the land. Soffala lieth vnder twentie degrees, and the Hauen called Bango vnder nyntéene and ½, and the riuer of Cuama vnder eightéene and 
                           
                              •
                           /4: and you runne along the Coaſt from Soffala to Cuama, North Eaſt and South Weſt, beeing thirtie myles, and if you haue occaſion to enter into the Riuer of Cuama, to take in freſh water, you muſt enter with a ſmall Boate, for within it is all freſh water, from Cuama to the Ilandes of Primeiras, you runne along the coaſt eaſt and Weſt, and ſomewhat Eaſt and by north and Weſt and by South. There are two ſights of land, and beeing vnder eighteene degrees, you finde therne fyue fadome deepe in ſight of land, for the Bankes in thoſe Countries are verie ſmall: the courſe is fiftie miles. The Riuer called Dos Bonis Sinais or of good tokens lyeth vnder ſeuentéene degrees and ¾, and hath theſe markes, that is vppon the North eaſt ſyde: at the mouth of the Hauen there ſtandeth an heap of trées, and on the ſouth ſyde it hath a ſandie ſtrand, and vppon the furtheſt poynt outwardes, there is a ſand Hill or Downes, which farre off ſheweth like an Iland: the entrie is on the South Weſt ſyde, along by the ſand: the Hauen at the mouth with lowe water is two fadome, and beeing within it you may ly at 6. or 7. fadome water: you can not ſee the entrie as you are without, but on the North Weſt ſyde you ſee the begynning of the land, that hath a heape of trees ſtanding vppon it, which a farre off ſhowe like the Maſte of a ſhippe, and the neerer you drawe to the land, the leſſe you ſee thereof, ſo

that beeing in the Riuer, you ſee nothing at all, becauſe it is hindered by the other branches. The Channell of the Ilandes Primenas, and of the Ilandes of Angoxas are all one, and you ſayle Eaſt, North eaſt, and Weſt ſouth weſt, and it is 30 myles, with tenne or twelue fadome deepe, and neerer to the Ilandes then to the firme land, and if you will ſtay by one of theſe Ilandes with a Weſt wind, you may freelie inough goe cloſe vnto it, for it is deepe and paſſing good ground.
                     The firſt of ye Ilands of Primeiras lyeth vnder 17 degrees & ½, & if you deſire to run betwéene them, then runne Southweſt from the Iland, and you ſhall freelie enter the chanell without feare, for it is déepe inough, for the drougthes lye a myle and a half diſtant from the Iland: and if you deſire to put in there with a weſt wind, then goe cloſe to the Iland, running to the middle therof▪ towards the ſouth ſyde, where you may anker, within the length of a great ſhot, at 6 or 7 fadome déepe, and deſiring to paſſe either in or out betwéene the droughtes (which lie Northeaſt) you may very well doe it, and though you beare all your ſayles, kéeping alwaies néerer the ſand of the Iland, then to the droughthes in the middle Iland, for it is all one vpō what ſyde of the Iland you ſayle, for there is no cauſe of feare, but onlie where you ſée the water breake: and deſiring to anker by the middle Iland, you may fréely doe it, and that cloſe by it, for it is 12 fadome déepe at low water with a Weſt wind, but not with an Eaſt wind: in the middle way, on that ſide which lyeth againſt the firme land, there ſtandeth a heape of trees, by the which you ſhall find a lake of freſh water to ſerue you, if neceſſitie requireth, and lyeth a little inward from the ſtrand, and if you can not well goe farre inward to the lake, doe but digge in the ſtrand, and you ſhall preſentie find freſh water, but it muſt be when it is an eaſt wind▪ for with a Weſt wind the water ſtriketh with ſo great a force vpon the ſhore, that you are not able to ſtay there with your boate. The middle Iland, which lyeth North eaſt hath no paſſage at all to the ſea, but from thence to the drouthes called Acoroa de S. Antonio are ſeuen miles, and to the firſt Iland of Angoxa fyue miles, and is all one courſe with the Ilandes: you may fréelie paſſe by the land, with what ſhippe ſo euer you will, for it is déepe inough: all the Ilandes of Angoxas haue thorow fares, one running through the other, al déep and good ground: ſo that there is betwéene the Ilandes and the firme land, at the leaſt eight fadome déepe, but you muſt alwaies ſayle néerer the firme land then the Ilandes. There lyeth a ſandie drougth betwéene the Iland of Angoxa, which likewiſe is to bee ſayled on both ſides. Theſe Ilandes of Angoxas are 4, and betwéen the two middle Ilandes ly the aforeſaid ſand drougthes, wherfore I wiſh you not to go too néere them, for they are dangerous. There lieth a ſand drougth 4. miles from the firſt Iland of Angoxa towardes Moſambique, which euerie ſpringtide is couered with the ſea, hauing other ſandes round about it, that are alwaies couered with the ſea, therefore I wiſh you to take héed of them: you may from thence runne along the ſhore, where it is déepe water, from theſe drougthes 14 or 15 miles towardes Moſambique, there is a hauē, called Os Coaraias, that is the Corales, from the which hauen about a mile and a half into the ſea lieth a clif, which is very dangerous, and which a man can hardly ſhunne till he be almoſt vpon it, and with a Springtide the water breaketh not ouer it, wherefore you muſt take héed vnto it, for many ſhippes haue ſtriken vpon it, and Don Ioan Periera fell vpon it: when you paſſe it, you muſt put 3 miles from it into ye ſéa, North eaſt & northeaſt & by Eaſt, being by night, but by day you may ſayl wt more ſecuritie, and looke about you, yet nothing going neerer to the ſhore then 25 fadome déepe: in this courſe you ſhall paſſe by the drouthes of Muſicatte, and following your courſe North eaſt, you ſhall come right vpon the Ilands of Moſambique: if you haue occaſion to anker before you come to Muſicatte, then keepe off from the cliffe towards the land, til you be at 15 fadome, and there you may anker, for it is good groūd, yet but in few places, only vnder the point of Muſicatte, at 20 fadome and more, you ſhall haue faire ground: the point of Muſicatte lieth with the Ilands of Angoxas North eaſt and South weſt, being 18 miles diſtant: from thēce to Moſambique you runne North eaſt along the coaſt: the Eaſt ſide of the Iland Premeira lyeth with the drongthes Northeaſt & South weſt and ſome what North eaſt and by Eaſt, and South weſt and by Weſt: the land of the Ilandes Premeiras, on the ſide of Moſambique lyeth vnder 16 degrees and and ¾ & you runne along by thoſe Ilands and ſands, Eaſt and Weſt, and Eaſt by North and Weſt & by ſouth: and if there you find your ſelf to bee inwards at 12 or 13 foote and leſſe, within a length of a great ſhot of the Ilands, yet bee not abaſhed, but beware of the outſide, which is full of ſtones and other filth, whereby no meanes you can anker, as being nothing but wood & ſton
                           •
                        : if you chance to be in the middle way betwéene the Ilands & the drougths, with an Eaſt wind, then you muſt paſſe in

& out betweene the firſt Iland & the drougth, which Iland lyeth in middle way from the Ilands Premieras, on the ſide of So
                              ••
                           ala, as alſo from the third Iland towardes Moſambique, running along the Weſt ſide at 7.10 & 12 fadome déepe: the other drougthes lie in the middle way, vnder the ſtone cliffes, therefore you néed not feare them, but betwéene the Iland from the trees, that are vpon the Eaſt ſide, you can by no meanes paſſe, for it is all ouer nothing but droughthes and ſhallowes. From the South weſt ſide of theſe Ilands Premieras, and Northeaſt and ſouth weſt, with the firſt Iland, 7 miles from it there lyeth a ſand drougth of foure fadome déepe, hoth in lēgth & breadth, the cariage of a great ſhotte in length tenne or twelue myles from the Ilands Premieras, lieth the Riuer Quilimani, where the Coaſt reacheth Eaſt and Weſt, and ſomewhat Eaſt & by North, and Weſt and by ſouth, and you ſhall find 6 or 7 fadome déepe within three miles of the land, where you find no other drougthes then that of Quilimani, which you muſt take héed of, for they reach 6. or 7. miles into the ſea, and if you find your ſelf inwards from Cauo das Correntes, you may at all times anker, for it is good ground, becauſe you are vpon the banks, and haue no cauſe to feare, becauſe the wind blowing from the land wil alwaies helpe you, whereby you may put into the ſea, as you thinke good.
                  
                  
                     The 11. Chapter. The courſe from India to Porto Piqueno de S. Iago, that is the ſmal hauen of S. Iacob, which is the mouth of the Riuer Ganges lying in the kingdome of Bengala.
                     
                     
                        HE that deſireth to ſayle from India to Po
                              •
                           to Piqueno or the ſmall hauen, lying in Bēgala, I mean outward about the Iland of Seylon, he muſt ſet ſayle out of the Hauen of Cochiin betweene the which and the 20. of Aprill, holding his courſe along the ſhore, to a place called Briniao, which lieth vpon the Cape or poynt of Comoriin, (that is the furtheſt poynt or end of the Indian coaſt, ſouthweſtward) & from thence holding his courſe ſouth, till he be vnder 6 degrées & ¾, and from thence South eaſt to 5 degrées and ⅔, and being ther he muſt runne Eaſt, till hee ſeeth the Iland of Seylon, for the point of Seylon called A Ponte de Gualla (that is the poynt of the Galley) is the fartheſt land from thence lying in the ſouth, vnder 6 degrees: therefore if you hold your courſe Eaſt, till you be vnder 5 degrees and ⅔, you can not fayle to ſee the land of the Iland Seylon: this way and courſe you muſt alwaies hold, ſetting out of Coch
                              ••
                           , from the 10. of Aprill, to the 20. of the ſame, (as I ſayd before,) for yf you depart later from thence, you muſt ſtay longer, becauſe as then the wind beginneth to blow ſtifly out of the South, at other tymes hauing the wind Southweſt, and Northweſt, blowing verie ſtrong and bluſtering: whē you ſée the Iland Seylon, you ſhall ſayle along the coaſt, Eaſt and Weſt, and ſomewhat Eaſt & by North, and Weſt and by ſouth, to the firſt drougth lying ſcarſe vnder 6. degrees, and the other drougths ly farther vnder 6 degr. & ½ 7 miles diſtant one from the other, in the ſame courſe of Eaſt and Weſt, and Eaſt and by North, and Weſt and by ſouth, from the point A Punta de Gualla to the firſt drougth, are almoſt 28 miles. Beeing 10 or 15 myles beyond the drougthes, you ſhall ſayle Northeaſt, till you bee vnder 16 degrees and ½, from thence running North, whereby you ſhall come to the Coaſt of the firme land, about tenne or twelue myles from the land, called O pagode de Iorganatte (that is the Idole or Idoles Temple of Iorganatte, which is a verie good courſe for this voyage: when you perceiue this land, which hath certaine high Hilles, you ſhall ſee ſome round Houels, that are rounder and higher then the Hilles, ſtanding vppon them, called Palur, by the which you ſhall paſſe along Northeaſt, and Southweſt, and ſomewhat northeaſt and by Eaſt, and Southweſt and by ſouth, vntill you come to the thinne and low land, and paſſing by it, you ſhall come to a Riuer, which hath for a marke a flat high field of ſand, and an other plaine with a houell, hauing on the one ſide ſomewhat further in the ſhew of an other thicke Houell with trées, and kéeping on your courſe til you come right ouer againſt ye riuer, thē the houels ſéem to be right ouer againſt the other thicke lād: it ſheweth thus when you are about a myle & ½ & to the ſea ward from it: frō this riuer to the firſt Pagode or Idole, there is about three or foure myles, and from this Pagode forward you finde no more high hils, like that you haue paſt before, and paſſing ſtraight from thence ſome of them ſhew as if they had tables or plaines vpō them: this Pagode lieth ful vnder 20 degr. your beſt way is alwaies to looke out for it, as being requiſite for you thereby to make a good voiage: beyōd this firſt Pagode, there ſtādeth an other Pagode,
                        
as great as the firſt, with 2 or 3 ſmall Pagodes ſtanding ſomewhat further: from ye firſt Pagode to ye ſecōd is about 4 miles, and the coaſt from the one to the other lyeth Eaſt and Weſt, here you muſt not kéepe too cloſe to the ſhore, for you ſhall hardly put off again becauſe it maketh a créeke, likewiſe before you come to the firſt Pagode you muſt kéepe off from the land, becauſe two miles before you come at it, there lyeth a ſmall drougth, ſtretching a mile into the Sea. From the firſt Pagode to the ſeconde, you ſée certaine houels and trées, and from the ſecond Pagode to Sataguan, it is a lower land, all waſte and wilde ground, being altogether bare to the point called a Punta das Palmerias (that is the point of the Palme trees, and you run Weſt along the coaſt, from the Pagode aforeſaid, to a point with a Riffe (lying 12. miles from the point of Palmerias) there lyeth a riuer, the point aforeſaide reacheth a great halfe mile into the Sea, you runne along the coaſt Northeaſt, and from the aforeſaid Riffe point to the Palmerias, the coaſt runneth Northeaſt, and Northeaſt and by Eaſt, and to knowe the Riffe and the lande thereof you muſt vnderſtand that the land of the Riffe, is greater and thicker then the other land of the Cliffe, and maketh ſhow of an Iland, and preſently ſomwhat further you ſhall ſee nine or ten trees, ſhewing like round houels, from the Pagode to this Riffe are about 12. miles, from thence forward you ſhall runne along the coaſt at nine & ten fadome deepe, vntill you come to the ſaid Palmerias, whereof the fore part of the land is verie low, hauing a bare houel, which ſheweth it ſelfe like the Arenas Gordas, or redde Downes, lying by Saint Lucas de Barameda, in the coaſt of Spaine, frō this donne or houel to the Palmerias, it is altogether a low and bare land without any trees or buſhes, the Palmerias were wont to be ten or twelue Palme trees, now there is but one, hard by the ſame Palmerias on the ſide of Sataguan there ſtande certaine Houels, and from thence forwards, you haue no pointes, hookes, trees, nor any more buſhes, but the land for a mile way is nothing but like a Riffe. And when you ſee the point of Palmerias, then you ſhall holde your courſe Eaſt, vntill you bee 12. Fadome deepe, and from thence Northeaſt, till you find eight Fadome and a halfe, and being in the daye time, you ſhall preſently ſee land, which ſhal be beneath all the Riffes, and if the land be couered with any dampes or miſtes, you ſhall then not ſee it before you bee at 4. fadome deepe. This courſe you ſhall hold with a Compaſſe, that faileth not, for if it doth, you muſt make your reckening thereafter, this land whereby you ſhall paſſe is a flat low land, without either buſh or tree, and paſſing forward along the coaſt, you ſhall vpon the Eaſt ſide perceiue a long blacke Houel, like a Champana without a Maſt (which is an Indian Caruell) and ſomewhat further from this Houell, there are a companie of trées, which are about thrée or foure, that ſhew greater then the houell, theſe trees ſtand ſomewhat low, and a little from theſe trees beginneth the Riffe of the countrie of Orixa, which hauing ſeene, you ſhal preſently ſee the water to Seaward breake, which is vpon the drougthes of Bengalen, for there the Chanell is ſmaleſt, and behind you leaue many Riffes on the ſide of Bengalen, which doe all lie to Sea ward, wherefore you cannot ſee them, and paſſing by them, you approach the Riffe of the land of Orixa, for although you ſayle cloſe by, you neede not feare other then that you ſee before your eyes, the depth is three Fadome, with ſmall blacke Sand in the bottome. On Bengalen ſide you ſhall haue foure or fiue fadome water with muddie grounde, on the which ſide you muſt not goe, for that beyond that muddie ground, you ſhould come to a banke of Sa
                           ••
                        , comming from Bengalen, when you find this ground, you ſhall (if néed be) come Northeaſt and by North, vntil you be at thrée fadome, for this is the right way, the aforeſaid Riffe of Orixa being paſt, you ſhall preſently find more depth, and if you deſire to runne along by the land of Orixa, then ſet your courſe right vpon the firſt point, that you ſée before you, the leaſt depth you ſhall find is thrée fadome, which is the right way vntill you be cloſe by the land, where you ſhal find 5. or 6. fadome déepe, and if you néede any wood to burne, then goe on the other ſide of the land of Bengalen, for there the wood is better then on the ſide of Orixa, but hauing done you muſt again put to the ſide of Orixa vntill you bee paſt two ryuers, lying on the ſame ſide of Orixa, whereof the firſt is liker a Créeke then a ryuer, the other lyeth about a mile further in, which hath a great mouth or entrie, two or thrée miles further beyond that Riuer, there are ſome flowing Beken with trees, & a mile beyond them, there is woode or wilderneſſe full of thicke trees, like Palme trees, from the beginning whereof you muſt croſſe ouer to the other ſide of the land, called Guinette) right vppon a tree, ſtanding on the ſame ſide, which is higher then all the reſt, and ſtandeth on the left ſide of the riuer called Chandecan, from thence forwarde it is all ſhallowes, wherefore you muſt paſſe

further therabouts with a ful ſea, if you deſire to paſſe through the channell of the land, you ſhall take your courſe as I ſaid before, & from Palmieras to the Northeaſt, you may runne at fiue fadome, and being by day you ſhall runne at thrée fadomes, and running at this depth along by the land, although you come ſometime to leſſe depth, yet you néede not feare, with the which courſe you ſhall ſée the Riffe of Orixa, and when you ſée it, you ſhal make towardes it, and make 2/
                              •
                           : parts of the way towards the land, and a third part towards the Riffe, and ſo you haue the right way as aforeſaid.
                  
                  
                     The 12. Chapter. An other deſcription of the ſame courſe, from India to Porto Piqueno, or the ſmall Hauen of Bengalen, ſet downe by an other Pilot, large and better deſcribed, with the whole ſituation and courſe thereof.
                     
                        SAyling from the coaſt of India to the hauen called Porto Piqueno, in the kingdom of Bengalen, outward about the Ilande of Zeylon, you ſhall take your courſe along the coaſt of India, till you come to ſée Briniaon lying by the Cape de Comorin, which is the furtheſt point of the land of India, from thence taking your way croſſe ouer, for from thence forward it is a good countrie, and make the ſhorteſt croſſe you can, thereby to goe ſure, and not to fall inwards, or betwéene the Iland of Zeylon, and when you ſée Barreias, which are the Dounes of Briniaon aforeſaid then you ſhal ſayle Southward running ſo at the leaſt fiftéene or twentie myles, and from thence forward you ſhall ſhorten your way, as you thinke beſt to get vnder fiue degrées, and being there, you ſhall ſayle Eaſtwarde, as much as you thinke conuenient, that you may be aſſured to paſſe the point of Gualle. which is the furtheſt point of the Iland of Zeylon on the Southweſt ſide, lying vnder ſixe degrees, when you thinke you are at the point de Gualle, to be aſſured thereof, make towards the Iland, to know it, before you come to the drougths, betwéene Tanadare (which is fyue myles from Punta de Gualla) and the firſt drouth, where commonlie all the ſhippes know the land, ſuch I ſay as wee ſayle to Bengalen, or to any of the Hauens thereof, as Porto Piqueno, or Porto Grande, that is, the ſmall or the great Hauen, where the Portingalles doe traffique, and hauing ſight of the land of the ſayd countrie, goe as cloſe vnto it as you will, but not paſſing aboue twelue fadome déepe towards the land, becauſe there ly certaine cliffes along the ſhore, whereof we know not certainely the danger, beſides the ſandes, betwéene the which and the land you may paſſe through, as hereafter ſhal be ſhewed, and ſayling thus as I haue ſayd, along the ſhore, you muſt vnderſtand that the land of Tanadare is for the ſpace of fyue myles to the Drougthes on the ſea ſyde altogether lowe land, and when you are further to landward in, you begin to ſee certaine hilles, that is thrée great hilles, right againſt it, and then you ſhall preſently ſée the firſt drougth, betwéene the which and the lād you may well paſſe, for that moſt of the ſhips that goe and come by the Iland, run through that way: in the middle way you ſhall finde betwéene it and the land 11. and 12. fadome déepe, of faire, & in ſome places ſtony ground, and you néed not feare any thing, but onelie that you ſee before your eyes. This firſt drougth or ſand lieth full vnder 6 degrées and ½ and right againſt it vpon the land, you ſee a houell ſtanding alone, and no more in all that country to be ſéene, 6 miles further from that firſt great drougth: there lieth an other ſmall drougth, which is diſtant, Northeaſt, & Southweſt, and ſomewhat northeaſt and by Eaſt, and ſouthweſt and by Weſt: this ſmall drought lieth vnder 6 degrées and ¼, about 2 miles from the land: and if you deſire to runne betwéene it and the land, you may well doe it, for it is 
                           •
                         or 6 fadome déepe at low water, with ſandie ground, which I know by thoſe that haue paſſed that way aboue 30. tymes, as well going as comming backe again, but if your ſhip be great, then it is better to ſayle about further into the ſea. Thoſe drougths or ſandes béeing paſt, then runne along by the land, and neuer put from it, for it is your beſt courſe to goe cloſe by it, and paſſing by the Iland of the hilles, and the high land, you ſhall ſee a high ſharpe Hill among others from whence there runneth a point that lieth out towardes the Southweſt. This hill is called O Capello de Frade, that is, the Fryers coule, and lieth full vnder 8 degrées: I ſet not downe the courſe you muſt commonlie vſe to take along the Coaſt to the ſaid Capello de Frade, becauſe you come vpon no direct line: this fryers coule maketh a point of lād, frō ye
                        
whence there runneth a Riffe about halfe a mile into the ſea, whereon in ſome places you may ſee the water breake from this point to Trinquanamale are 17. miles, and you run by the coaſt north and ſouth, which is all low land with a bankie ground, and from thence you ſhall ſee no land, but the land that lieth inward fiue miles. Before you come to Trinquanamale you finde a ſmall riuer. Trinquanamale is a great hauen, beeing in the entrey more then 3. miles in bredth, & all low land, but very déepe round about, he that will anker therein may lie vnder certaine Ilands, and inward it maketh a riuer that runneth to Seyta vaqua, the other to it is all low land, to know Trinquanamale a farre off, at the mouth thereof on the north ſide, lieth a yellow Sandie Downe, and hath vpon one of the hookes or pointes, two long hilles riſing vp, and reaching inwardes to the coūtrie, and no other high land, neither behinde them, nor before thē in all that coaſt, comming by Trinquanamale, and hauing knowne it, you muſt then preſently croſſe ouer, for there it is beſt to follow your courſe, and from thence you muſt runne North, and North and by eaſt, alwaies reckning the declining or winding of the compaſſe, and if it be in the monſons of the winds, in the month of Auguſt, then you ſhall ſayle full north, becauſe as then the ſtreame runneth very ſtrōg into the ſea, and this courſe you ſhall hold till you come vnder 17. degrees, which is the heigth of the point called a Punta de Guado variin, lying on the coaſt of Choramandel, which is the beginning of the kingdome of Orixa, and being vnder 17. degrees, from thence you ſhall put to the coaſt of the Firme land, to make a good voiage, alwaies taking care not to run aboue 19. degrées & ½ without ſéeing land, becauſe that vnder 19. degrées, there lieth a riuer called Puacota, frō the mouth whereof 3. miles into the ſea, there lieth a rocke or ſtonie cliffe of the length of a ſhip, which may eaſily be ſeene, for it lieth aboue the water, you may paſſe betwéene it and the land without danger of any thing but only that which you ſée before your eyes, all this coaſt from the point of Guadovariin, is altogether great thicke land, and hilles which may bee ſéene far off from the riuer of Puacota, to another riuer called Paluor or Palura are 12. miles, and you runne by the coaſt Northeaſt, and Southweſt, aboue this riuer of Palura there lieth a verie high hill, called a Seira de Palura, that is the hill of Palura, which is the higheſt hill in all that coaſt. This riuer lieth full vnder 19. degrees, and ½ from this riuer to the point called a Derradeira terra alta, that is, the laſt high land, you keep the ſame courſe along the ſhore, and is in length ſeauen miles, and lieth full vnder ninetéene degrees, and ⅔. I ſet downe this deſcription of the laſt high land, becauſe ſuch as ſayle along by the coaſt, may vnderſtand that there all the hilles and high landes doe end, and from thence forward it is altogether low land, and ſandie ſtrandes, till you come to the place called as Palmerias, or Palme trées: from the laſt high land, or Derradeira terra alta, to the riuer called Rio de Manicapatan, the coaſt runneth northeaſt, and ſouthweſt, and reacheth 5. miles, and to know when you are right againſt the Riuer of Manicapatan, you ſhall ſée a high trée ſtanding alone vpon the ſea ſide, and is a very flat land on the ſea ſide, hauing a bankie and ſhallow ground, the trée ſtandeth on the left hand of the entrey into the riuer, from Manicapatan you runne along the coaſt Eaſt, Northeaſt, and weſt ſouthweſt, to the Pagode de Iorganate, that is the Idoll or temple of Iorganate, and reacheth thrée miles. This Pagode of Iorganate lieth vnder 20. degrées and ¼, from this Pagode of Iorganate, to another great blacke Pagode or Idoll, the coaſt runneth eaſt and weſt, & ſomewhat eaſt and by north, and weſt & by ſouth, and reacheth 7. miles. This blacke Pagode lieth not full vnder 20. degrees and ½, from this blacke Pagode to the riuer of Cayegare the coaſt runneth northeaſt, and ſouthweſt and ſomwhat northeaſt and by eaſt, and ſouth weſt and by weſt, and reacheth 10 miles, the riuer of Cayegare lieth not full vnder 21 degrees, and about 4. miles before you come to it, there lieth 5. houels which ſhew like a Hauen of the Sea, built with Cottages, in the mouth of the riuer aforeſaid, there lieth two ſandes, running a good mile ſouthweſtward, and at the entrey therof lieth a Riffe running along by the coaſt for halfe a mile into the ſea, the entrie of the riuer is 4. fadome déep, and you goe in and come forth northweſt and ſoutheaſt, the ſandes aforeſaid, as you enter, lie on your left hand, and there the depth runneth along. To know Cayegare a farre off, you muſt vnderſtand that when you haue paſſed the houels aforeſaid, then Cayegare ſheweth like an Iland, hauing three or foure trées higher then the reſt, and a little beyond it ſtandeth a ſmall Pagode, and ſomewhat beyond this Pagode, there is a little wood, verie thicke with trées, which ſéemeth to bée part of Cayegare, and other wood there is none beyond it, by the ſaide Pagode there ſtandeth ſome Sandie Downes of red colour, with ſome water Beecken from the Riuer of Cayegare to the point called a punta das Palmeiras, the Coaſt

runneth northeaſt, and ſouthweſt, and ſomewhat northeaſt and by eaſt, and ſouthweſt, & by weſt, and reacheth eleauen miles 2. miles before you come to the point of Palmerias, you ſhall ſée certaine blacke houels ſtanding vppon a land that is higher then all the land there abouts, and from thence to the point it beginneth againe to be low ground, and right ouer againſt the houels you ſhall ſée ſome ſmall, (but not ouer white) ſandie Downes, the markes and tokens which you ſhall finde being right againſt the point de Palmerias are, that vpon the point there is neyther trée nor buſh, and although it hath the name of the point of Palmtrees, it hath notwithſtanding right forth, but one Palme trée. If you fall vppon it by day, being by Caijagate, and deſire to follow your way, then ſaile at the depth of twelue fadomes, northeaſt, & northeaſt and by eaſt, alwaies with your lead ready in the hand with good care and diligence, and being at 16. fadome, you ſhall preſentlie winde northeaſt, vntill againe you finde 12. fadome, alwaies keeping at that depth, till you finde but 7. fadome, and lie thereon by night, where you ſhall anker till it be day, and then hoiſe vp anker, running the ſame courſe of Northeaſt, and northeaſt and by north, till you come to foure fadome, and comming thether you ſhall ſend a man into the top, to know the land. This coaſt reacheth Eaſt northeaſt, till you come to a houell, which ſheweth like a Champana without a maſt, with a boat following it, thoſe Champanas are Caruels of India, wherewith they ſayle in the ſea, and along the coaſt, this is the beſt marke you finde vpon the coaſt of Orixa, and alwaies take good héed to your depthes, and if they begin to increaſe, that is, aboue fiue fadome, then you ſhal preſently turne againe to 3. and 3. fadome and ½ ſcarſe, and this is the right courſe: for that if you ſaile ſtill at 5. and 6. fadome, you ſhould in the end come on ground, & when you ſee the houell called Chā
                        pana, (as I ſaid before) you ſhal runne along by it till you ſée thrée trées ſtanding together, yet ſomewhat diſtant each from other, which trées are called as Aruores da Conhecenſa, that is the trées of Markes. Right againſt thoſe trées lieth the riffe of Orixa, and being to ſeaward you ſhall ſée the water breake vppon it, on Bengalen ſide, and you cannot ſée the markes aforeſaid but in cleare weather, and if it be miſtie, darke, or cloudy weather, then haue the lead readie, without neglecting it for you muſt runne at 3. and ½ and 4. fadome déepe, and you muſt vnderſtand that on the ſide of Bengalen you finde hard ſandie ground, and on the ſide of Orixa muddie and ſmall blacke ſand. I ſet this downe becauſe I my ſelfe haue paſſed ouer it with great ſhips, being paſt the riffe of Orixa, and Bengalen, you ſhall ſée the Iland called a Ilha dos Gallos, that is the Ilands of Cocks, & you muſt runne right vpon it without feare, for it is deepe inough, and on the other ſide of Orixa it is all banks, therfore I counſell you to goe neere to the Iland of Cocks ſayling along by it, whereby you ſhall preſently come to a riuer called Rio de Chamdequan, which hauing paſt, you ſhall from thence croſſe ouer to the ſide of Orixa, where you ſhall ſee a hooke or point of the riuer Angellijn, this point of land will lie northward, and comming thether you ſhal alwaies haue your lead in hand, and the depth that you ſhall finde in thoſe places, are 3.3. ½ and 4. fadome, but beeing full ſea it is deeper, which wil continue till you be right againſt the riuer of Angelijn: for from thence forward you haue many depthes, and being right againſt the riuer of Angelijn you ſhall runne along the ſhore till you come to a riuer called Gilingoa, & being right againſt that riuer, I wiſh you not put too farre from the ſhore, towards the right hand, for there you finde a ſand drougth, whereon Bartholomeus Rodriges de Moraiis was caſt away with a ſhip full laden, as hee put out, therefore I aduiſe you to keepe on the left hand, for there it is deepe enough, from this riuer to certaine high Beecken or downe falles of water, you may haue wood to burne, and from thoſe Beeckens you muſt croſſe ouer on the other ſide of Guijnette, where you ſhall preſentlie ſée 5. or 6. trées higher then the reſt, vntill you be cloſe to the other ſide. Thoſe trées ſtand at the mouth of the riuer Chandequā
                         on the eaſt ſide, the depthes you ſhall finde vppon thoſe bankes are 2. & ½ and thrée fadome déepe, till you be on the other ſide, for there you finde manie depthes, from this place forward you néede no other aduiſe, for the Fiſher men as then will bring you where you ſhould bee, you ſhall paſſe ouer the water with halfe flood, but I aduiſe you once againe, that if you ſaile in the morning by the aforeſaid riuer of Cayegare, then runne along the coaſt, till you come to the point das Palmerias, and from thence to 17. fadome deepe, frō thence holding your courſe northweſt, and northweſt and by north, this way muſt be folowed with a Compaſſe that yeeldeth one ſtrike till you come to 12. fadome deepe, and then running the ſame courſe, till you come to 4. and three fadome, and ½ wherewith if it bee cleare weather, you ſhall preſentlie ſee the lād of Orixa, but if it be darke and miſtie weather, then runne no more towards the land, keeping ſtill at 4. and 3. fadome, and ½ runrunning

Eaſt, for the leade and the depthes will bring you well in, and take héede you come not into many depthes kéeping ſtill as I ſaide before at the ſmall depthes, and if it bee night being at ſeuentéene fadome, then runne towards the 2. Ilands, and ſee you anker not, for it is badde ankering there, and paſſing by the aforeſaide Punta das Palmeiras, running in by night, you ſhal then not paſſe aboue 7. or 8. fadome vntill it be day, wherewith as then you may go in, & if you chance to be there with a ſmall ſhippe, then keepe at 2. and 2. fadome and ½. till you be in the ſight of the riffe of Orixa: and when you begin to be right againſt it, then runne within the length of a great ſhot neere vnto, for it is deepe enough, and from the ſide of Orixa it is all banks and ſhallow ground. The riffe aforeſaid ſhall bee on your right hande, that is to ſeaward from you, and from thence you muſt make right with the Iſland A Ylha dos Gallos, or if you will to the point of the Riuer Angelijn, where you may freely ſayle, for there you ſhall find two and a halfe and thrée fadome déepe, but it muſt bee with a ſmall ſhip as I ſaid before.
                  
                  
                     The 13. Chapter. The courſe from India to the hauen of Aracan, which is the ſame way that you hold to Porto Grande, or the great hauen, lying in the countrie of Bengalen.
                     
                     
                        SAyling from India or Cochijn to the hauen of Aracan, you muſt holde your courſe to the Iſlande of Seylon, in manner aforeſaid (as in the deſcription of the courſe to Porto Pequeno) running ſo to the pointe or ende of the ſandes or droughtes (lying full vnder 6. degrées) and vppon the point of the lande, which runneth Eaſt and Weſt, comming by this point or hooke, you ſhall from thence put off from the land, running 7. or 8. miles Northeaſtward, to come out vnder the Iſlande, and then let your courſe be Northeaſt, and Northeaſt & by North, till you be vnder 12. degrées, and that Manacoſta be ſouthweſt from you and from thence you ſhall runne Northeaſt, till you be almoſt vnder 20. degrées, which is the height of Aracan, and if then you ſée no land, you ſhall runne Eaſt vnto Aracan, vnder the ſame height of 20. degrées: thrée or four miles from the land there lyeth a riffe, whervpon the water breaketh, and at low water is vncouered: it is in greatneſſe and length about the length of ſeuen ſhips, both waies: and when you ſée it you muſt take heed of it and goe no nearer then the ſhotte of a great peece. The hauen of Aracan lyeth vnder 20. degrees, and being fiue or ſixe miles to ſeawarde from it, you ſhall there find twentie fadome deepe, ſandie grounde, and being at 19. degrees and ½. toward the lande you ſhall find deepe muddie ground, at the leaſt 6 miles from the ſhore, and being but three or four miles from the land thirtie fadome déepe muddy ground, you muſt be careful at 19 degrees and ½. not to runne in with the lande, but do as I ſaid before.
                  
                  
                     The 14. Chapter. The courſe from India to the hauen of Martauan, lying in the kingdome of Pegu, with the ſituation of the coaſtes.
                     
                        SAyling from India to Martauan, or to ye kingdome of Pegu, you ſhall hold your courſe (till you be paſt the Iſland of Seylon) as they doe that ſaile to Bengalen, and being about the Iſland, you ſhal make to the Ilands called As Ylhas d' Andemaon, whereof the firſt Iland lyeth ſouth vnder 11. degrées, and the furtheſt land in the North vnder 14. degrées, you runne on the Eaſt ſide of them, Northeaſt and Southweſt, from the Ilands d' Andemaon, to the firme lande, are aboue 60. miles, and running to Andemaon, you ſhall vſe all the meanes you can to paſſe by them vpon the North ſide, and being paſt you muſt (as I ſaid before) make towardes Martauan, (which lyeth vnder 16. degrees) and when you are at 14. degrées you ſhall make with the lande, but better at 13. degrees, becauſe of the creeke or winding in of Martauan, (where you finde a very ſtrong ſtreame alwayes drawing Northweſt, and if you make with the lande being at 14. degrees, you ſhall ſée many Iſlands which you may freely paſſe cloſe by, for it is all ouer very deepe, for there it is 12. and 13. déepe muddie ground cloſe by the ſhore, beſides the Iſland Pulo Comudo, which is about 6. or 7. miles from the hauen of Martauan, betweene this Iſland and the firme lande there lyeth many riffes, notwithſtanding if you chance to fall betwéene thoſe Iſlandes, you ſhall make towardes the ſide of the Iſlande, but not too cloſe, where you ſhall find a channell of thrée fadome deep, and on the ſide of the firme land

you haue many ſands and ſhallowes, paſſing from thence to the hauen of Martauan (being paſt that Iland) you ſhall paſſe along the ſhore, where you ſhall ſee certaine cliffes lying towards the ſea, which ſhew like Almadias (which are Indian Scutes, by them vſed in ye riuers) which cliffes lie about 2 miles from Pulo Comudo towardes Martauan, and right ouer againſt theſe cliffes you haue on the firme lande a point or hooke of high land, and on the North ſide of this point there lyeth a ſandie ſtrand vpon the low land: this land belongeth to Xemiin Vegarum, that is in Pegu ſpéech, the Lord of Vegarum, for Xemiin is Lord, and Vegarum the name of the land: from thence Northward the land is high, in ſome places hauing créekes, cliffes and Iſlandes: before you come to the hauen of Martauan there is a white houell or land, that ſerueth for a marke, hauing cloſe by it two Palme trees: and about two miles further you ſhall ſee a thicke top of lande, vppon the end whereof towardes the ſea lyeth an Iland, which cannot be ſéen nor diſcerned from the land, till you be right againſt it, and that you haue diſcouered the Riuer within where the hauen of Martauan lyeth, and being paſt this Iland, you ſhall ſée a white houel, which lyeth likewiſe on the South ſide: within the Iland there is a lake that hath good fiſh, and before you come to the hauen (comming from the Ilande of Comudo) about a mile, or a mile and a halfe to ſeawarde from the land, you ſhall ſee a round Iſlande full of buſhes, called 
                           A Ilhas de Cebollas, that is, the Iſland of Onions, by the which Iſland on the ſouth ſide thereof, there lyeth a cliffe whereon you ſée the ſea breake: from this Iſland to the hauen of Martauan, there are about two miles, & comming from Pulo Comudo, you muſt put off from it towards the land, holding your courſe as aforeſaid, as not hauing any cauſe of feare, but onely of that which you ſée before your eyes, you muſt likewiſe vnderſtande that from the Iſlande Das Cebollas forward towards the North, there is no other Ilands nor cliffes, which is a verie good marke of this creeke, for that being on this ſide thereof, you are no ſooner paſt one Iland but you ſee another, but from thence forward you ſee not any, as I ſaid before, but you muſt bee ſure not to paſſe beyond the hauen of Martauan, for that being at twelue fadome, not long after you ſhould fal vpon the drought. This hauen of Martauan is about a mile or a half and a half broad, hauing on the North ſide a low flat land euen with the ſea, and is an Iland called Momua: you may ſee it as you paſſe along the ſhore, from Pulo Comuda, towardes the hauen, you muſt ſtill keepe at twelue fadome, and comming to 8. or 9. fadome, then you ſhall anker, for then you are in the hauen; and put no neerer to the ſhore, neither runne not further from the creeke to the banke, for then you ſhall find leſſe depth: this riuer of Martauan runneth Northeaſt & Southweſt both out and in, but you may not enter therein without a Pilot, for that within the Riuer vpon the Eaſt ſide it hath a ſtone cliffe or rock, which draweth the water vnto it, therefore you cannot enter without a Pilot: alſo in the entrie of this riuer and hauen, on the right hand there lyeth a ſandie banke, where in the middle way there runneth a channell of ſixe or ſeuen fadome deepe, which you ſhal knowe by this, that is, in the deepeſt parte thereof it hath much fiſh, which you may ſee, and this hauen of Martauan lyeth vnder 16. degrees and 
                           
                              •
                           /4;. and the towne of Martauan vnder ſixteene degrees: vpon the furtheſt end of the Iland of Andeman on the North ſide there lyeth two Ilands, betweene the which and the Iland of Andeman you may ſafelie paſſe: alſo on the furtheſt point of the South ſide of the Ilande of Andeman lying vnder 11. degrees, there lyeth ſome Ilandes, and from thence to the Ilandes of As Ilhas de Nicobar, ſouthwarde there reacheth an Iland: alſo as you put off from the Ilandes of Andeman towardes the coaſt, meeting with ſome gatheringes of water, you neede not feare them, for it is nothing but the water it ſelfe without any ſands, although there lyeth ſome vpon the coaſt: there lyeth onely in the middle way an Ilande, which the inhabitantes call Viacondam, which is a ſmall Iland hauing faire ground round about it, but very little freſh water, and nothing els but Pine trees, wherefore you neede not go into it.
                  
                  
                     The 15. Chapter. The courſe from Cochiin in India to Malacca.
                     
                        HE that will ſaile to Malacca in the great Monſon (which is the principall time when the windes ſerue to go thether) in the Month of Aprill, then (to make a good voyage) you muſt ſet ſaile from Cochiin vppon the ſixe and twentith of Aprill, and being out of the hauen, you muſt hold your courſe ſouthward till you be vnder 7. degrées, and from thence ſouth ſoutheaſt to 6. degrees, and being vnder

                        
                        
that height, then you ſhall runne Southeaſt almoſt to fiue degrées, and from thence Eaſt vntill you are paſt the Ilande of Seylon, and being there you ſhall keepe on your courſe till you be vnder 5. and ⅓. and 5. degrees, and 
                           •
                        . from thence you ſhall make towardes the Ilands of Gomeſpola, which lie vnder 6. degrées by the point of Achiin, in the Ilande Sumatra, and comming to the Iland of Gomeſpola, if you feare not the Acherins, (which are ſubiects to the kingdom of Acheiin in the Ilande of Sumatra, and deadly enemies to the Portingals) then take your courſe along by the Iland of Sumatra, to the Cape called Taniamburo, lying on the ſame coaſt of the Iland almoſt 30. miles from the Ilandes of Gomeſpola, and from thence you ſhall take your courſe towardes the coaſt of Malacca, running as farre to loofewarde as poſſible you may to diſcouer Pulo Sambilao, which is an Ilande lying cloſe vpon the coaſt vnder 4. degrées, and ⅔. and diſtant from Malacca 40. miles Northweſt and by North, for that ſuch as diſcouer and come to this Iland, maketh a quicke voyage to Malacca, and thoſe that fall to leeward towardes Pulo Pinan (which is an other Iland vnder fiue degrées and ½. lying with Pulo Sambilao, North and by Weſt, 12. miles, & neere Pulo Batun there is another Iland lying Northweſt and by North from Pulo Pinaio ten miles, & vnder 6. deg.) might peraduenture find Southeaſt windes, which blow much on that coaſt: therefore he that goeth late to ſaile hath a long voyage, wherefore it is beſt to depart earlie from Cochiin, to make a better voyage.
                  
                  
                     The 16. Chapter. An other & larger deſcriptiō of the courſe to ſaile from Goa in India to Malacca, with the deſcription of the coaſts.
                     
                        SVch as deſire to ſaile from Goa, or out of India to Malacca, muſt put 20. miles into the ſea, that he may ſaile without ye Ilande of Seylon, vnto the Ilandes called As Ilhas de Nicobar through the middle of the channell, which lyeth vnder 7. degrees, and ½. and in that countrey you muſt looke to the ſtreame, becauſe with a weſt wind they run towards the Gulfe of Bengalen, and with an Eaſt wind into the ſea, about 20. or 30. miles frō the Ilandes, there is ſuch a concourſe & breaking of water and ſtreames, as if there were ſands. Whē you com to ye middle of ye Ilands of Nicobar, ther you find a channel, lying vnder 6. degrees and ½. the Ilands being diſtant one from the other about a mile and a halfe, where you may paſſe through without feare, as hauing nothing to fear, but yt you ſée before you, the depth you find there is 12. & 13. fadom, & at the end this channel, by ye North Ilande of the Ilandes of Nicobar lyeth an Iland, where you may paſſe throgh wt yt greateſt ſhippe that is: the South end of this Ilande lyeth vnder 6. degrées and ¼. and the channell aforeſaid vnder 7. degrées: if you go through the middle of the channell lying vnder 6. degrées, you ſhal at the entry to the Ilands ſee 4. Ilands, whereof thrée lie halfe a mile from the Iland: two of them are great and high, the other ſmall: the fourth lyeth diſtant from the Ilande about thrée miles, and is a great round Iland, flatte on the top, and Northward you ſhall ſee another Iland, lying vnder 8. deg. the entry of this Iland hath a thicke high backe, flat at the end, and being in the middle of the channel you ſhall ſée another Iland, lying hard by that vnder 8. deg. a flat land, diſtant from the other about two miles: from the Ilandes of Nicobar to the Northerly Ilands are about 7. miles, and there you néed not feare any thing: at the end of this channell the Ilande of Nicobar hath a round houell, at the foote whereof lyeth an Iland, I counſel you not to paſſe by the ſouth ſide of the Ilande Nicobar, thereby to kéepe your ſelfe out of the daunger of thoſe of Acheiin in the Ilande of Sumatra, which are continually thereaboutes, and are deadly enemies to the Portingalles, but rather doo your beſt to paſſe the way I ſpake of before, although you ſhould ſaile vnder 8. and ¼. or 8. degrees and 
                           •
                        . for you may paſſe without danger, for they are all channelles or thorow fares: being paſt the Ilandes of Nicobar as I ſaid before, you ſhall take your courſe towards the Iland Pulo Cuto, you runne betweene Pulo Cuto and Nicobar Eaſt and Weſt, and ſomewhat Eaſt and by South, and Weſt and by North: the courſe is nyne miles and lyeth vnder 6. degrees and 2/
                              •
                           . to know Pulo Cuto, comming out of the Sea towardes it, vpon the Eaſt ſide thereof you ſhall ſee a high round land, on the ſhore very low: they are thrée Ilands together, hauing on the South ſide, on the furtheſt point of them 3. or 4. cliffes or rocks that lie vncouered, & on the North ſide an other mouth or opening, running between the great Ilande & the Ilande of the ſea: in this Ilande on the Southeaſt ſide there is a very good place to take in freſh water, lying by a long point of lande: you may likewiſe take your courſe frō the Ilands of Nicobar to the Ilande Pulo Pera, which is a ſmall round Iland, without trees, lying vnder 5. deg. and ⅔. the courſe being about 100. miles, you run Eaſt Southeaſt, and Weſt Northweſt, from Pulo Pera
                        
to the Iland Pulo Pinaon, are 15. miles, and are one from the other Eaſt and weſt, & ſomewhat Eaſt and by South, & Weſt and by North. This Iland Pulo Pinaon lyeth 5. miles from the firme lande, full vnder fiue degrées and ¼. the marke thereof is, that it is high in the middle, hauing on the North point a round houell, and an Iſland lying in the middle way from the ſame Iſlande, and comming along by the lande, it hath a great creeke with a ſandie ſtrand, at the end wherof lyeth an Iland, where there is a place of freſh water: on the South point it is lowe land, making an other Iland. Pulo Pinaon lyeth with Pulo Sambilaon North & ſouth, there you muſt looke well to your ſelfe, for frō this Ilande Pulo Pinaon there runneth a banke, reaching to a point or booke of high land, which runneth into the ſea at the leaſt 2 miles: vpon it you ſhal find 5. fadome déepe & ſomewhat more, but towards the land leſſe: & when the point aforeſaid lyeth frō you eaſt, & eaſt & by north, then you ſhal ſee Sambilaon: the courſe from Pulo Pinaon to Pulo Sambilaon is 22. miles, and lyeth almoſt vnder 4. deg. Eaſt & Weſt from Pulo Sambilaō, 4. or 5. miles to ſeaward lyeth the Iland called A Ilha das Iarres, which is a ſmal round Iland ful of trees, and on the Southweſt ſide it hath freſh water, but verie little, but in Pulo Sambilaon you haue very good freſh water in all the 4. Ilands thereof, the greateſt wherof neareſt the land lyeth in the middle, in the which on the North ſide there ſtā
                        deth a houel, on both ſides whereof are ſandie ſtrandes, wherein are freſh water: likewiſe the other 3. Ilandes that are in the middle, haue euery one vpon the eaſt Northeaſt ſide ſandie ſtrands, in the middle whereof where there is an opening, you ſhall finde very good freſh water at the foote of a great trée by all theſe Ilands, as well on the ſea as the lande ſide, as alſo through the channel running betweene them, you may freely paſſe without feare, for it is deepe enough, & you may anker in ſight of the land at 20. & 25. fadome deep. If you deſire to paſſe through the great channell of Pulo Sambilaon, then you muſt run ſouth & ſouth and by Eaſt to ye Iſlands called As Ilhas d'Aru, which lie vpon the coaſt of ye Iland Sumatra: they are 3 ſmal flat Ilands, full of buſhes and woodes, and when you are within a mile of theſe Ilands, you ſhall ſayle ſoutheaſt, ſoutheaſt & by eaſt, & eaſt ſoutheaſt till you be at 10. fadome déep, towards Pulo Parcelor, which is a high hill lying vppon ye coaſt of Malacca, ſhewing far off to be an Iland, it ſtandeth in a flat land, whereby the land is not ſeene vntill you be full vpon it: frō 
                        Pulo Parcelor to ye point called Cabo Rachado, that is, the clouen point lying ful vnder 2. degr. & ½. you ſaile to Malacca Eaſt ſoutheaſt, & Weſt Northweſt, along ye coaſt forwarde it is altogether a countrie full of points and houels, but high and being in the middle way betweene Cabo Rachado and Malacca, you ſhall preſently diſcouer the Ilands that lie about halfe a mile from Malacca cloſe by the land.
                  
                  
                     The 17. Chapter. To ſaile from Pulo Sambilaō, or through the great channel to Malacca.
                     
                        SAiling from Pulo Sambilaon to the Ilandes As Ilhas de Aru, lying on the coaſt of the Iſland Sumatra, you ſhal hold your courſe ſouth, for the ſpace of 13. miles, whereby you ſhal come vpon ye banke, ſo that it is all one to ſaile from Pulo Sambilaon running ſouthward, as from the Iland das Iarras, (that is the Iland of pots) ſoutheaſt, & ſoutheaſt & by ſouth, for you come out al at one place, & whē the Ilands de Aru lie weſt, & weſt and by North from you, then caſt out your leade, and you ſhal finde ſandy ground, frō thence you ſhal hold your courſe ſoutheaſt, ſtil caſting out your lead, & finding 10. fadome, (kéeping the ſame courſe til you be at 13. fadom muddie ground) you ſhal runne ſoutheaſt, & ſoutheaſt and by eaſt, but finding 16. & 17. fadome ſandie ground, then winde towards the ſide of Malacca, to 12. & 13. fadome, ſetting your courſe againe ſoutheaſt, & ſoutheaſt and by eaſt, & if you finde your ſelfe to be at 10. fadome, then turne againe to the ſoutheaſt, alwaies ſéeking to be at 10.12. & 13. fadom, for it is the beſt ground and depth of ye channel, & when you ſee a round hil right before you (which ſheweth like an Ilande) yt is Pulo Parſelar, to the which the droughts or ſands aforeſaid do ſtretch, notwithſtāding you ſhal not let to paſſe on your way, not cō
                        ming nearer to Pulo Parſelar, then 2. miles Northeaſtwarde, for then you are paſt the drougthes aforeſaid, from thence forward put towards the lande, about a mile diſtant, holding your courſe ſoutheaſt, towardes ye point of Cabo Rachado, & before you come within 3. miles thereof, you find a Riffe lying foure miles from the coaſt, which is but 4. fadome deep at high water, & to ſeawarde frō thence there is a channel of 10. fadom deep, running from the Iſland of de Aru to Pulo Parſelar, you ſhal vſe all the meanes you can to haue the greateſt Ilande de Aru, Southweſt and ſouthweſt & by weſt from you, holding your courſe ſoutheaſt, alwaies at 18. & at the leaſt 17 fadome, & if you wil put from Pulo Parſelar, to the Ilandes de Aru, you ſhal let Parſe
                              •
                           ar lie Northeaſt, & northeaſt & by eaſt,

from you running northweſt, & Northweſt and by Weſt, alwaies at 16.17. & 18. to 15 fadome deep: this way is not otherwiſe to be done, for I haue paſt ſo my ſelfe, and founde it a very good way.
                  
                  
                     The 18. Chapter. The courſe from Malacca to Goa, with the ſtretchings, and ſituations of the Coaſtes.
                     
                        DEparting from Malacca, to Goa or India, your beſt courſe is to ſaile a mile, or a mile and a halfe along by the coaſt of Malacca, alwaies hauing in ſight the ſtrikes and neather partes of the Trées that ſtand vpon the land, till you be at Pulo Parcelar, and from thence you haue from 16. to 27. and 28. fadome déepe, but you muſt remember not to paſſe aboue 14. fadome, neyther on the one ſide, nor the other, and ſailing from Malacca about two miles and ½ or 3. miles from thence, you finde 2. or 3. droughts of ſtonie cliffes, reaching about halfe a mile into the ſea, lying right ouer the ceſterne, or the Kinges Bath, by the Portingales called Tanque del Rey, you ſhall likewiſe looke that you goe not neere the chéeke of Cabo Rachado, which Cape lieth vnder two degrees, and ½ vppon the ſame Coaſt of Malacca Northweſt, and by North ten miles diſtant, as well vpon the Southeaſt, as the Northweſt ſide, and goe not neare the land by a mile at the leaſt, as I ſaid before: there you haue a good mile and a halfe to the principall part of the channell that runneth to Parcelar, and paſſing by Pulo Pacelor, and deſiring to croſſe ouer from the droughts, you ſhall kéepe off from Pulo Parcelor about 2 miles, becauſe that from it there reacheth a banke that iutteth about halfe a mile into the ſea, being (as I ſaid) about two miles frō the land, to paſſe ouer the droughtes being with a flood, then Pulo Parcelor ſhall lie Eaſtward from you, and at an ebbe, Eaſt, Northeaſt: therefore it is néedefull for you to haue great care of the tides, that you be not deceiued, & comming in this ſort into thoſe parts, you ſhall runne weſt Northweſt, kéeping either on the one ſide or the other, as the tides fal, and if you croſſe ouer the ſea Pulo Parcelor, it is beſt for you to kéepe eaſt, and eaſt, and by ſouth from it, and being in the middle way to the Ilands of Daru, lying cloſe vpon the coaſt of Samatra vnder 3. degrees, weſt, Northweſt, and 30. miles from Malacca: then if you ſee Pulo Pacelor, let it be betwéen eaſt ſoutheaſt, and eaſt & by ſouth from you, and yet you haue a good courſe, and comming towards Pulo Parcelor, you muſt haue it to lie northeaſt and ſouthweſt, being two miles from it, but when you leaue it to make towards the Ilands of d' Aru, then it is beſt to haue it eaſt and eaſt, and by ſouth, and being in the ſight of the Iland of d' Aru, making towards the great Iland, you may run within a mile or two thereof ſafely and without danger, for it is all deepe ground. The depthes you ſhall finde by the droughts aforeſaid, paſſing through the Channell, are from 10. to 11. fadome, but not aboue, and the greateſt depthes you ſhall finde running through the channel are 12.13.14.15.16. and 17. fadome, and although at 3. or 4. caſtinges you come to 10.9. & 8. fadome of ſmall fine and blacke ſand, or muddy ground, yet your courſe is good, for you ſhall preſently againe come to 12.13. and 14. fadome, and hauing this depth and ground, and holding the courſe aforeſaid, although at ſome caſtings, you finde ſmall fine white ſand, yet your courſe is good, but if you finde great ſand or ſhels, then you are out of the channell, and when you finde the ground full of black ſhels and great ſand, I counſell you to ſeeke againe for fine ſmall and blacke ſand, or muddie ground, for the ground of great ſand and ſhels is out of the channell: therefore you muſt not ceaſe to caſt out your lead, to aſſure your ſelfe, it is likewiſe good to know the depth with two leads vpon each ſide of the ſhip one, with good and carefull ouerſight, alwaies hauing your ankers ready, with a cable of 12. or 15. fadome long, if need be, therewith to help your ſelfe, & becauſe herein there is mention many times made of Pulo Pacelor, I thought it good likewiſe to ſet downe vnder what height it lieth, although it is ſufficiently ſet downe us the Sea Cardes, it is a land that maketh a point like to a Cape lying on the Coaſt of Malacca, Northweſt, and by North, about fiftéene miles diſtant, ful vnder thrée degrées: alſo you muſt remember, that taking your courſe from Pulo Parcelor, to the Iland of d' Aru, being in the middle way, you muſt let Pulo Pacelor lie in Eaſt, and Eaſt, and by South from you, and beeing ſomewhat nearer the Iſlands, then Pulo Parcelor is from you almoſt Eaſt Southeaſt, that is as you goe neere the Iſlandes, for that running in this ſort you haue a good courſe, and are ſure and ſafe from the droughtes, and if by night you paſſe ouer the droughts, then you ſhall marke the land in the day time, as I ſaid before, hauing a good winde, alwaies looking to your tides that they deceiue you not, driuing you vpon the one or the other ſide: for there the ſtreame runneth verie ſtrong, as

well in the flood, and as in the ebbe, alwaies ruling your ſelfe according to the tides, and holding your courſe in ſuch manner, that you may caſt out your lead, and as the aforeſaide great Iſland of d'Aru lieth Southweſt from you, béeing about two miles from it, then you ſhall haue Pulo Sambilao right againſt it, ſo you fall not from the Iſlandes towards Samatra, holding your courſe as aforeſaide, towardes Pulo Sambilao without feare, becauſe the monſon, or time of the windes do as then blow from the land into the Sea, and if herein you chaunce to bee negligent, you ſhall doe your ſelfe great hurt, and procure great hinderance in your Voyage: the depthes and ground that you finde from the Iſland of d'Aru to Pulo Sambilao, and from 27. to 40. fadome muddie ground, and in ſome places ſand, and paſſing by the Iland of d'Aru, then you find from 40. to 50. fadome déepe, from the Iſlandes of Pulo Sambilao, to th Iſlands of Pulo Pinao, you ſhall kéepe along by the ſhore, not once putting from it, ſhunning a banke, (lying right ouer againſt the land called Barus, betwéene Pulo Sambilao, and Pulo Pinao) which is muddie ground, and it is ſaide that there you haue thrée fadome water, you ſhall ſtill vſe your lead, and runne not nearer then fiftéene fadome to the land, nor further then thirtie fadome to Sea ward, becauſe diuers times there commeth great blaſts (out of the hilles of Queda) from Northeaſt, and north, northeaſt, and ſometimes ſharper, & many times runne further from the coaſt, as I ſaid before, and ſo you ſhall holde your courſe without danger from the coaſt of the Iland Samatra, where in the monſon you haue greateſt cauſe to feare, and therefore you ſhall hold your courſe without putting from the land till you come to the Iſland of Pulo Pinao, and being by them, or at the heigth and length of them, and hauing the monſon (that is the winde which as then bloweth and is good for you) you may then put from the land doing your beſt to kéepe too loofeward off Pulo Pera, which is a good courſe: but if the winde ſerue you to make towards Pulo Batum, it is better: for from this place you muſt take your courſe towards the channell, vnder 7. degrées and ½, but hauing the monſon, as aforeſaid, although it be ſomewhat backeward, you ſhall looſe your time: for the monſon at the firſt is ſometimes ſharpe, and after that beginneth to be larger, as you turne or winde from the land or coaſt. With this courſe you ſhall runne to the channell, and paſſe it vnder ſeauen degrées, and 
                           
                              •
                           /2 and before you come vnder ſeauen degrées and 1/2 to ſeauen and 2/
                              •
                           
                         or leſſe hauing paſt the Ilands, you ſhall alwaies kéepe vnder the aforeſaide ſeauen degrees and ½, becauſe in that gulfe or countrie many times the winde is north, and north Northeaſt: in your courſe towards the Iſland of Seylon, you ſhall runne vnder ſeauen degrees and ½. and vnder ſeauen degrees, with the which you ſhall come to the Iſland of Seylon, to a place called Matecalou, which lieth too loofeward off the ſands, there you haue no ground but within two miles of the land, you muſt likewiſe vnderſtand, that from the middle of the Gulfe to the Iſland of Seylon, the water and the ſtreames in this time of monſon runne outward into the ſea, likewiſe the compaſſe yéeldeth more to the Northweſt: whereunto you muſt haue great regard, and béeing at the Iſland Seylon hauing it in ſight you ſhall not looſe it, but kéep your ground from thirtie fadome, (looking well before you, and taking heede of the droughtes that are very dangerous, the foremoſt of them béeing of ſtone Cliffes the length of a Galley, without any other then only thoſe you ſée) to fourtéene and ſixtéene fadome, and in the halfe way or middle thereof and the land, you ſhall finde the depth aforeſaid, and another Sand that lyeth behind you, which is the firſt, and cannot bee ſéene but that the Sea breaketh vppon it, and they ſay you may paſſe with ſmall Shippes betweene it and the land, béeing foure fadome déepe, but I thinke it is better to put from it to ſea ward, it is from thence to the land a mile, and you may goe neare it at ſixtéene & eightéene fadome, and if you fall vppon it by night, you muſt ſaile onlie with your Foukeſayle, when you are in ſight of vnknowne land, kéeping at eightéene fadome neare the land, and not aboue thirtie fadome to Seaward, from this ſand you ſhall runne along ye coaſt at fiftéene, ſixtéene, twentie, twentie fiue, and thirtie fadome, but in ſuch manner, that you looſe not ground, for you may haue a Calme, and ſo by that looſing of ground, the water and ſtreames might driue you to the Iſlandes of Maldiua: wherefore you muſt haue good regard, vntill you come to Negumbo, which is in the Iſland of Seylon, and from thence it is good to croſſe ouer to the Firme land, and comming to Negumbo, you ſhall not put off from the land, vnleſſe it bee from the fiftéene of Februarie, for from that time forwardes, then the ſtreame and waters beginne againe to runne inwardes, and being from the fiftéene of Februarie forwardes, you may put from the ſhore (that is from the Iſland of Verberyn which lyeth cloſe vppon the Coaſt of Seylon,) to the Portingales Fort called

                        Columbo, as it falleth out beſt for you, leaſt it happen to you as it hath done to many other ſhippes that for want of care, were driuen to the Ilands of Maldyua: from this laſt ſand to Tanadare, and to the poynt called A Punta de Gualla, along the Coaſt and ſea ſide: the Countrie is almoſt all of one higth, and right ouer againſt the ſandes aforeſaid inwards to the land, you ſee 3 high trees, and from thēce to Tanadare you haue ſandie ſtrands, and you may ſtill runne along the ſhore without feare, till you ſée Tanadare, which is verie well knowne, and deceaue not your ſelf, for that outwardlie it ſheweth like Punta de Gualla, but the markes and right tokens thereof are, that it hath a thyn point of land ſtriking out, in forme lyke a tongue, with a ſtone riffe hanging from it towards the ſea, as farre as you may throw a ſtone: this point of land or tongue ſtriking out, is full of Indian Palme trees, which ſhew verie faire, and a myle or two before you come at it, this poynt or tongue of land appeareth beyond the Palme trees, further into the ſea, but the Palme trees are thicke, and ſhew verie faire, and before you come to Tanadare you haue two or three ſandie bayes, not neceſſarie to be deſcribed, and whē you come right againſt the wood or buſhe of Palme trees, in the middle thereof you ſhall ſee a white Pagode, that is a Temple of the Indians Idoles, from this Pagode, towardes the North ſyde, you ſhall ſee certaine downes of white and redde earth, which are good markes, and the right knowledge of that Countrey: you muſt not goe too cloſe vnto the ſhore, for it hath a ſmall ſand ſtretching into the ſea, but not farre: when you ſee the downes aforeſayd, then you muſt runne at eyghtéene & twentie fadome déepe, for that if the wind beginneth to calme, and your ground to be deeper, you muſt caſt anker, for if you neglect it, you ſhould preſentlie fall on ground, becauſe the ſtreames and waters doe runne verie ſtrong to ſea ward: from Tanadare to Belliguao are about 6. myles: this place of Belliguao is a verie great créek, and from the ſouth ſyde thereof, there appeareth certaine great houels of redde earth, that lie within the Créeke, and can not bee ſeene till you be full before the Creeke, and on the North ſyde it hath two ſmall Ilandes cloſe to the land, from the which Ilandes there commeth a ſmall ſand, but it lyeth on the ſouth ſyde towardes the land. From Belleguao to Gualla are fyue myles, and the way betweene them is altogether on the ſea ſyde, ful of Palme trees, and betweene them lykewiſe lieth an Ilande hard by the land, all of ſtonie cliffes: and when you make towardes Gualla, you ſhall perceaue a high land full of woods, and a playne deſert, and from the North ſyde of the bay it hath a great wood of Palme trees, and if you haue occaſion to anker in the bay, you may well enter at fiftéene and fourtéene fadome deepe, but ſuch as deſire to keepe on their courſe neede not put in there. From Tanadare to this Hauen of Gualla (which are twelue myles) you runne from the one to the other, Northweſt and Southeaſt, and ſomewhat Northweſt & by Weſt, and Southeaſt and by eaſt, and all the way along this Coaſt to Gualla, is not to be ſayled, but onlie where you may ſee ground with your Lead. From Gualla to the point called Belitote, is fyue or ſixe miles, which point hath a thicke wood of Palme trees (and right ouer againſt it about half a mile there is a great Cliffe) and betwéen them both lyeth many ſtonie cliffes: along the ſhore, by the point of Gualla, are two ſandes, whereon the water breaketh, the one is before you come at the point which runneth into the ſea, about ¼ of a myle, and the other is right ouer againſt the bay, on the North ſyde, running a ſmall myle into the ſea, and of this you muſt take great care: you may well paſſe by it in the night, at twentie fadome deepe, ſo that you need not feare: vppon this ſame the ſea breaketh verie long, ſpeciallie when it is high water. From thence you ſhall take your courſe vnto Columbo, as the Coaſt reacheth, and from the Iland of Verberijn forward, the ground is full of Bankes and ſhallowes, and béeing hard by Columbo, about three or foure myles towardes Negumbo, you may anker at eight or nyne fadome, but by Columbo you cannot doe it, but if you haue great occaſion, then you may anker at eightéen fadome towardes the land. There you finde ſtonie ground, and the ſame you finde at the poynt where you haue twentie fyue fadome deepe, inwardes to the ſea, and that in moſt places, therefore you muſt bee carefull in throwing out your Anker, firſt prouing with a lead: the grounde of this Countrie is in ſome places ſmall, and in other places great ſand, which is the ſureſt, and in ſome places it hath redde ſand, and lykewiſe places of white and blacke ſand, which are tokens of the ground along the Coaſt, vppon all the which ground you may anker. The right markes and tokens of Columbo, (which is the place where the Portingalles holde their fort) are theſe, yt is, when you are within the Hauen then the Pico of Adam, ſo called (which is a high hill, higher then any other

in al the countrie about it,) ſhal be in the Eaſt and ſetting your courſe to the Hauen of this fortreſſe, then you ſhall looſe the ſight of all the hilles and Houels, and begin to ſayle by thinne flat land, which is a marke and a verie good token of the Hauen, the winds that you there ſhall finde for the moſt part of that time or Monſon, are North Northeaſt, Northeaſt, and ſometime Eaſt Northeaſt, and alſo Eaſt, the Viracoins (which are the winds that blow out of the Sea,) are many times North, and Northweſt, I write this, that men ſhould not wonder to find them ſo, in that place, likewiſe you finde there Weſt Northweſt, and Weſt Southweſt windes, according to the coniunctions of the times, when men are in that coaſt, the winds that are called Viracoins which commonly blow out of the weſt, throughout all India, at ſuch time as men vſe to ſayle vpon the Sea, which is in Summer from noone to twelue of the clocke at night, and come out of the Sea, towards the land, and therefore by the Portingales they are called Viracoins, that is wind out of the Sea, and from midnight to noone, the winds blow out of the Eaſt, which come ouer the land into the Sea, as it is at large declared in my Indian Viage, and is onely heere ſet downe becauſe it ſhould not ſéeme ſtrange to any man, to reade of theſe winds and their manner of blowing in theſe countries, when you will put to Sea by night with the Terreinhos, or land winds, if they be not Northeaſt, then you ſhall not ſet ſayle before midnight, & if they be not full, to Sea ward, then put not to farre off from the ſhore becauſe it would not bee good for you, to put to farre into the Sea, for that you could not well get the land againe, becauſe the Viracoins or ſea winds that come out of the North and Northweſt, doe often ſtay late, & blow but ſlowly. From Negumbo you ſhall croſſe ouer to Cape de Comorijn, to the Eaſt ſide of the Cape, towards the land, called das Areas Gordas, that is of the fat or thicke Dounes, which is 12. miles from Cabo de Comorijn, on the ſide of Choramandel, for it is good to put on there becauſe of ye ſtreame, which runneth verie ſtiffe outward with a hard wind by theſe Areas Gordas, as alſo ſome part of the way to the Cape, you finde ground (and many times ſée the land becauſe it is long) at 40. fadome and leſſe, and if you come inward from the Cape, being by night and find ground, then you may fréely paſſe ouer this ground from 12. to 18. fadome déepe, for as you come right againſt the Cape, then the ground is ful of white Sand, and you ſhal not find aboue 20. fadome to Seaward, from Areas Gordas to the Cape, for from Areas Gordas inwards, the ground is ful of banks, and ſmall blacke Sand, and you muſt runne a mile, a mile and a halfe, and two miles from the ſhore, vpon the ground and depthes afore ſaide. And when you paſſe by Cabo de Comorijn, to Coulaon, you ſhall holde your courſe along the coaſt, about a mile from the ſhore, that you may Anker, and not going néerer to the ſand then 12. fadome, but it is good to run from 15. to 18. fadome, alwayes taking héede of the ſtones of Trauancor, which lie betwéene the Cape and Coulaon, and being in the night time, the ſureſt marke to know if you be before Coulaon, is to find the ground full of bankes, for from Coulaon to Batecola (that is by Onor not farre from Goa) the ground is bankie, and you may Anker at 8. fadome without feare, from Batecola to Goa, the ground in ſome places deeper, whereby you may gouerne your ſelfe. Touching your Ankerage, from Cochijn to Cananor you néede not feare, onely to take héede of the Iland called Ilha Cagado, lying Southward from Cananor ſeuen miles, and thrée miles Northward from the fortreſſe of Mangalor, there lyeth a row of Ilands, Cliffes, and Rockes, along the coaſt vntill you come to the fortreſſe of Barcelor, from thence to Batecola you haue certaine Cliffes, but they are cloſe to the land, and the two Ilands of Batecola, you may paſſe betwéene the firſt of them, and the Firme land without feare, for it is 15. or 16. Fadome déepe, a little further lyeth the Iland of Honor, cloſe to the Firme land, then followeth the Ilandes of Angediua, which reach as the coaſt doth, and if it bee late in the yeare, you ſhal not put farre into the Créeke of Ancola, for as then there is no Terreinhos or land winds, to driue you out againe, therfore it is then better to runne ſomething far from the coaſt, for you haue many times the Viracoins or Sea winds ſomwhat farre off, and being néere the ſhore, they would not much helpe you. This muſt be from the twentie of March forward. If you chance to be by Angediua and had néede of a Road, or harber, you muſt enter into Angediua on the North ſide, as far from that land, as from the Firme land, and rather ſomewhat néerer the Iland, then the Firme land, where you haue a good Road or harber, for there many times diuers ſhippes doe winter, being conſtrained therevnto, within it is ſixe fadome déepe, a little further from Angediua, lie foure or fiue Ilands, from the ryuer Sanguiſijn, cloſe by the Firme land, and from thence about halfe a mile further forward lyeth the Iland of Goa

Velha, (that is old Goa) and then there are no other Ilands heerein to bee noted. You muſt vnderſtand that oftentimes it happeneth, that along the coaſt, you ſhall find the wind Northweſt, and North Northweſt, without chāging which bloweth very ſtrong with the which wind I aduiſe you not to ſet ſayle, although it blow out of the North, but if it be cleare day, then you may hoyſe Anker, and put to Sea wards and if the wind commeth not about, to Northeaſt, being foure miles from the land, and before noone, about nine or ten of the clocke, you ſhall Anker till it be noone, till the Viracoins or Sea winds come, therewith to ſayle againe towards the land, for in this ſort you ſhall get aduantage to loofeward, although it bee with paine and labour, as likewiſe the time will ſhewe you what you ſhall doe. I muſt further aduertiſe you, that when you are by the coaſt of Seylon, it being about the fifteene of Februarie or paſt, then you néede not ſayle, further then to the Ilands Verberijn, and from thence to the Cape de Comorijn, for as then you néede neither to feare water nor ſtreames, to driue you outward, yet you muſt not bee negligent therin, for ſome yeares the ſtormes come later & ſometimes ſooner, as the winds blow, whereof you muſt be carefull, and being the fiftéene of Februarie, or paſt, you muſt remember not to runne inwards, but kéepe out, for as then the ſtreames runne inwards, which might deceiue you, and the later it is in Februarie, the ſtronger they draw inward, comming to Cochijn betwéene the 15. and 20. of March, you may wel get from thence to Goa, although the Viage is ſome thing doubtfull, but being paſt the twentie of March, I would not counſell you to do it for that of late many years together, there hath béene vpon the coaſt of India (in Aprill and May) diuers bluſtering ſtormes of croſſe winds, blowing towards the coaſt, with darke and cloudie ſkies, which would bring you in great danger, therefore againſt that time it is beſt to chuſe a good Hauen, neuertheleſſe, God can ſend faire weather & winds when it pleaſeth him. To put into the Hauen of the fortreſſe of Barcelor, in the coaſt of Malabar aforeſaide, you muſt vnderſtande that when you ſee a round Houell vppon the end of the hil of Batecola, towards ye Northeaſt, and Northeaſt and by Eaſt, then you are right againſt the fortreſſe of Barcelor & may put in at 7. fadome, ſo you haue the fortreſſe Eaſt, and halfe a ſtricke to Eaſt and by North from you, and you ſhall ſée all the Cliffes lying along the coaſt, to the Ilands, as Ilhas de Saint Maria, which are altogether ſtonie Cliffes, but they ſtand cloſe to the land.
                  
                  
                     The 19. Chapter. A deſcription of all the Hauens, places, coaſtes, and Sands vpon the Eaſt and South ſide of the Ilands Seylon, with their heights, courſes, ſtretchings, & ſituations, with the courſe from thence to the fortreſſe of Columbo holden by the Portingales.
                     
                        FIrſt I will beginne with Trinquanamale, which lyeth vnder nine degrées, vppon the Eaſt ſide of the Iland Seylon, eight myles from thence Southwarde lyeth a ſmal ryuer, and before you come at it, putting from Trinquanamale, ther are ſome Ilands that with Birds fileings looke white, and in the mouth of the riuer aforeſaid lie two ſmal Ilands, full of trées, from Trinquanamale to this ryuer the courſe is North and South, and North and by Eaſt, and South and by Weſt, and running along the coaſt towards this ryuer, then you ſhall leaue the Ilands aforeſaid on the land ſide, ſayling without thē, for that betwéene them and the land are many ſtones and Cliffes, this ryuer and Trinquanamale lie diſtant from each other eight or nine miles at the furtheſt. From the ſaide ryuer (with the Ilands in the entrie thereof) to the ryuer of Mataqualou are 12. myles, and lieth vnder the hight of ſeuen degrées and 1/
                              •
                           . The courſe from the one to the other is Northweſt, and Southeaſt being paſt this ryuer, comming betwéene the Ilands & the mouth therof, you may go as néere the ſhore as you will, for it is without danger, & within a great ſhotte of the land it is 20. fadome déepe. From Mataqualou, about fiue or ſixe miles, the courſe is North and South till you come to the point or hooke, and from this point fiue or ſixe miles further you runne along the coaſt North and South, and North and by Eaſt, and South and by Weſt, further forward towards the firſt Sand about fiue or ſixe miles, Northward, there ſtandeth a woode of Palme trées, and comming right ouer againſt it, the coaſt runneth North Northeaſt, and South ſouthweſt, and ſomewhat North and by Eaſt, and South and by Weſt, from thoſe fiue miles to the firſt ſand, the courſe is North Eaſt and ſouthweſt, and

Northeaſt and by Eaſt, and Southweſt and by Weſt, and before you come within foure or fiue miles of theſe Sandes, you ſhall ſée ſome Houels and hillockes of red Earth, along the Sea ſide, & inward to the land there appeareth certaine high hilles, whereof one of them lying moſt Northward hath a Houell ſtriking out of the toppe thereof, which ſéemeth to bee a blocke houſe, being of redde Earth. You may paſſe betwéene the firſt Sand and the land at ſeuen or eight Fadome déepe, alwaies kéeping as farre from the land as from the Sand, for they are a good myle diſtant, and running about by the Sea, you ſhall find Sandie ground round about it, this Sand lyeth vnder 6. degrees, and from this firſt Sand about 6. or 7. miles ſouthward, there is yet an other Sand, and the courſe from this one to the other is eaſt, Northeaſt and Weſt ſouthweſt, along the coaſt, this ſecond Sand lyeth ſcarce vnder 6. degrées, betwéene the which and the Firme land are 12 and 13. Fadome déepe, all good ground, and from the laſt Sand to a Créeke called A
                              •
                           alla the coaſt runneth Eaſt and Weſt, and Eaſt and by North, and Weſt and by South, 4. or 5. miles further forward frō this Créeke, there lieth an other Créeke called Hulpulam from whence to Tanadare are about 7 miles. Tanadare is a point of the land, whereon there ſtandeth a woode of Palme trees, and when you are right ouer againſt it, you ſhall ſee a white Pagode (that is a Temple of the Indian Idoles) and on the North ſide of this Pagode, ſtand certaine Houels, of white and red Earth, and paſſing before it, you ſhal not goe to cloſe to the ſhore, for there abouts are certaine Sands, and beeing paſt this point, then goe preſently at 20. Fadome deepe, for it is al good and cleare ground, and if it ſhould be calme there you may Anker. From Tana dare to Belliguon are about ſixe myles, Belliguon is a verie great Creeke, on the South ſide wherof are certaine Houels of red Earth, that ſtand within the Creeke, for that you cannot ſee them, before you haue fully diſcouered the Creeke, and on the North ſide it hath two Ilands, lying cloſe by the land, & on the South ſide of thoſe Ilands along, ther lyeth a Riffe, or Sand. From Belliguon to Gualle are fiue myles, all this way from the one to the other, the land is altogether cloſe and full of trees, along the Sea ſide, about halfe a mile from Belliguon to Gualle, there lyeth a ſtonie Iland, cloſe by the land, and an other on the South ſide of Gualle, and making towards it, you ſhall ſée a high flat land full of trées, and an euen wilderneſſe, and on the North ſide of the bay, there ſtandeth a great wood of Palme trées, vppon the Sea coaſt, and within the Hauen you ſhall ſee a white houſe, which is a ſmall Chappell of the Virgin Marie, paſſing from Belliguon to Gualle (and comming right againſt this point) on the South ſide towards the Bay, you muſt put to Seaward thereby to ſhunne a Sand wheron you ſhall ſée the Sea breake, and to Anker you ſhal runne North & North Northweſt, in ſuch manner that you may alwaies ſée certaine Cliffes (that lie on the North ſide) and inwards from the Bay, you ſhall ſée the Palme trées, which will be vpon the ſouth ſide towards Belliguon, which lay hidden by the point, there you ſhall finde 14. and 15. fadome water, and running till you come to 13. fadome, & finding ſandie ground, you may Anker, for to Seaward it is altogether ſtones. From Tanadare to this Hauen of Gualle, (which are twelue miles) the courſe is Northweſt, and Southeaſt, and Northweſt and by Weſt, and ſoutheaſt and by Eaſt, this Hauen of Gualle lieth vnder 5. degrées and 1/
                              •
                           . from thence paſſing along the coaſt, you ſayle about the Portingalles Fort called Columbo, this courſe I haue already ſufficiently declared, in the Nauigation from Malacca to India, therefore it is néedleſſe here to be rehearſed.
                  
                  
                     The 20. Chapter. The righr courſe from Malacca to Macau in China, with the ſtretchings of the coaſts.
                     
                        DEparting from Malacca, to the Straights of Sincapura, and ſo to China, you muſt ſet your courſe to the Ilands called Ilha Grande, lying thrée miles from the Hauen of Malacca, paſſing (for more ſecuritie) without about the Ilands: from thoſe Ilands to the ryuer called Muar, are thrée miles, which hath for a marke a Houel full of trées, on the ſouth eaſt ſide, without any other high land thereabouts. From the riuer of Muar to the riuer called Rio Fermoſo, you run along the coaſt Northweſt and ſoutheaſt, and Northweſt and by Weſt, and ſoutheaſt and by Eaſt, the courſe is nine miles, this riuer of Fermoſo is great and faire, hauing in the entrie 6. and 7. Fadome déepe, and alſo within, you enter into it by the foote of a high hill, on the South ſoutheaſt ſide, and it lyeth on the South ſide of Malacca, it hath certaine bankes, ſticking out into the Sea (from the point lying North

eaſt, which is a flat & plaine countrie) which you muſt ſhunne. From this Rio Fermoſo to the Iland Pulo Picon, the coaſt runneth the ſame courſe, ſoutheaſt and by Eaſt, and the Iland Pulo Picon lieth halfe a mile from the coaſt, hauing thrée Ilands by it, two on the Sea ſide, and one vpon the land ſide, but you muſt not paſſe betwéene it and the land, for there are many Sands, it is diſtant ſeuen miles: ſoutheaſtward towards the Sea from Pulo Picon, there lyeth a great and a verie high Iland, with many Ilands about it, called Pulo Carimon, along by the Weſt ſide of the ſame Iland, towards the ſtraight of Sabon, which is the way to Sunda, and the Iland of Iaua, the nauigation and courſe whereof I will in an other place ſet downe, therefore for this time it ſhall not be touched, and will procéede to our matter aforeſaide. From this Iland of Pulo Picon, to a pointe of land that ſtretcheth out, called Taniamburo, you runne Eaſt ward by the coaſt, being about thrée miles, this point maketh a hooke, and from thence forward the coaſt turneth inward like an arme, running frō thence right ſouthward, about a mile frō this point lyeth a riuer, and a little mile further forward there is an other ryuer, with a great mouth, where there lyeth an Iland, called old Sincapura, being deepe and faire ground, this ryuer iſſueth out againe in the Hauen of Iantana, where Antonio Mello by chance did once enter with a ſhip of eight hundreth Bhares great (each Bhar waighing thrée Quintals and a halfe Portingall waight) & came out againe at the ryuer of Iantana, from this ryuer the land runneth downe towards the South (as I ſaide before) which maketh a hooke, where the mouth or entrie of the firſt ſtraight (yt you muſt paſſe through) beginneth. The land on the North ſide of this entrie is higher then the South, which is low and flat, hauing a Houell of trées, ſtriking out about all the reſt, there is the end or furtheſt point of that land, for that going Eaſtward on, then you finde Ilands and ſtonie Cliffes, which firſt reach ſouthward, and thē againe come Eaſtward out, making the forme of an arme, from the ſaid point of Taniamburo, to the mouth or entrie of this ſtraight, the courſe is 5. miles Eaſt & Weſt, at 7. and 8. fadome déepe. Hee that will paſſe through Sincapura to China (paſſing by Pulo Picon in the beginning of ye month of Iuly) he muſt go néere to the ſide of the great Iland Carymon, becauſe ye winds of the Monſon of Iaua (which are at ye time) doe alwaies blow from the ſouth ſide of Sumatra, likewiſe when you keepe by the ſide of Carimon (and being paſt it) you preſently haue the mouth or entrie of the ſtraight open vnto you, with ye marks aforeſaid, in this way you find manie depths, & paſſing along by Taniamburo, thē the land of ye entrie to the ſtraightes ſheweth as if the one ran through the other, which is a common and certaine marke, but hold you to loofeward, the better to enter at your pleſure. This firſt ſtraight at ye entry hath two riffs, on each ſide one, which come from the point or hooke of the land, the land on the ſouth ſide (from the entry thereof) is altogether Ilands reaching a whole line eaſtward, which make the ſtraight, & to enter therin you muſt kéepe neerer the ſouth ſide then the other, & at your firſt entrie you ſhall finde 12.10. & 9. fadom deepe, and being ſo far in (that the land on the South ſide (which are Ilands) make but one point, then on the other ſide before you, you ſhall ſee a hooke or point, whereon there ſtandeth a ſmall red Houell, which when you ſee, then you ſhall turne from the right hand towards that ſmal Houell, becauſe it is the firſt Iland, which you then haue paſt & from that Iland forward, there beginneth an other Iland, between theſe two Ilands lieth a Riffe, or Sand, which with a low water is part vncouered, & reacheth into the middle of ye chanell, where you muſt run with the Lead continually in your hand, which will ſhew you where you are, & comming to the point aforeſaid of the ſmall Houell, then put to the land on the right ſide, which is Ilands (as I ſaide before) for it hath only betweene the Iland aforeſaid, the ſaid Riffe, and then you ſhall run Eaſtward, about halfe a mile with the ſaide depth of 8. and 9. Fadome, & from thence forward, ye row of Ilands (whereby you ſayle) reach South Eaſtward, and preſently ſomewhat further, on the right hand of the ſame Iland, you ſhall ſee a round Iland, running a little out from the other, which will bee vpon your right hand, by the which you ſhall paſſe along, with good watch & there you ſhal finde 8. and 10. fadome deepe, muddie ground. The land on the left hand which is the North ſide, is Creeks and open ground, and hath a great Creeke which turneth towards the South, on the which ſide lyeth an other round Iland that is on the ſame ſide from you, you ſhall kéepe from this North ſide (which is nothing but Creekes) for they are all full of Riffes and ſhallowes, running as I ſaid before, along by the Ilands on the right hand, & comming by the aforeſaid round Iland, on the right hand, at the end of the row of Ilands whereby you paſſe, you ſhal ſée a ſmal flat Iland, with afew trées, hauing a white ſandyſtrand, which lieth eaſt and weſt, with the mouth of ye ſtraight of Sincapura, which you ſhal make towards, & when you beginne to come néere it, then the

ſtraight beginneth to open & diſcouer it ſelfe, you may ſayle neere it and wind about like a bow, ſo to auoid the riffes & ſhallowes of the North ſide, as alſo not to fal towards ye ſouth ſide of the mouth of the ſtraight, with the ride that runneth ther, for you haue many depths and foule ground, you muſt alwaies hold on ye North ſide, where there is a ſandie ſtrand, of the length of the ſhotte of a great péece, at the end thereof making the forme of a ſandy Bay where you find freſh water, & as farre as that ſtrand runneth it is all along faire ground, to Anker in if need be, and cōming to this ſtrand you haue the ſtreame that driueth you along by the land towards the mouth of ye ſtraight, which you haue not, paſſing further frō then
                           •
                         for then they driue you towards the déepe and foule ground, lying on the South ſide thereof, as aforeſaid, & once againe I aduiſe you, not to paſſe (frō the end of the ſtrand) to the north ſide for it is altogether Riffes and ſhallowes, as aforeſaide. The mouth or entrie of this ſtraight, entreth betwéene two high hils, being as broad as a man may caſt a ſtone, and reacheth Eaſtward, & is in length about the ſhot of a great péece, ye chanel of this ſtraight hath in length 4. fadome and ½. déepe, in the entrie at the foote of the hil on the North ſide there lyeth a ſtone Cliffe, which ſheweth like a Piller, this is cōmonly called of all nations that paſſe by it, the Varella of China, & on the South ſide, a good way from the mouth therof▪ it maketh a créeke, in the midle wherof lyeth a Cliffe vnder water from the which there runneth a banke towards the middle of the chanel ſomwhat further on the ſame ſide, the length of a ſmall ſhot, it hath an opening which runneth through on the other ſide into the Sea, making an Iland, this opening is ſhallow all ouer, ſeruing only for ſmal Foiſts to paſſe through, in the middle of this Créeke where this opening is, lieth a Cliffe, or ſtonie place two fadome vnder water, which ſtonie place commeth ſo far without the Créeke, as the point of the land reacheth, and ſomewhat more towards the midle of the chanell, being paſt this Creek, the land hath a hooke of a houell faling downward, where the ſtraight endeth, & in paſſing about this, there is a rounde Houel by the which you haue déepe and faire ground, & when you haue paſt about it, ye land from thence reacheth ſoutheaſt, on the North ſide of this ſtraight from the beginning to the end, there are thrée Créeks, whereof the two firſt are ſmall, & the third great, it is ſituate right ouer againſt the hooke or point of ye red Houel, where the ſtraight endeth, this thirde Creeke hath a ſtonie banke, which at a lowe water after a ſpring tide is vncouered, & reacheth frō the one point to the other, you muſt be carefull not to fall vpon it, & all that which lieth on the North ſide, and without ye Créeke all ouer the chanell from the one point to the other is faire ground, & without danger. In ye iſſuing of the ſtraight, beeing without it you haue two Riffes, whereof the one lieth right ouer againſt the iſſuing of the ſtraight, about the ſhot of a great péece towards ye Eaſt cō
                        ming from the land on the north ſide, & ſtretching ſouthward, the other lieth in the South the ſhot of a gret péece from the iſſuing of the land of the ſtraight, reaching Eaſtward ſo yt they make a croſſe one throgh the other, and betwéen thoſe two Riffes the chanel runneth and with the ebbe of a ſpring tide you may ſée them, the chanel yt runneth betwene thē both hath ſcarce 4. fadome deepe, the ground within ye chanel is muddie & without ſand. This I haue particularly noted vnto you, for their inſtructions yt hereafter ſhal paſſe through that way, for that the diſcriptions of the Nauigation or courſe thereof, heretofore written & ſet downe are very ſhort, and obſcure, for ſuch as haue not paſt through that way, wherby many ſhips haue run on grounde, ſtricken & paſſed many dangers, & ſome caſt away, but returning to our matter, and folowing ye courſe aforeſaid, whē you are as far as the mouth of the entrie of the ſtraight, then you ſhall paſſe right throgh the middle of the way ſomwhat towards the North ſide, becauſe of the ſands aforeſaid, that lie within ye ſtraights, alwaies with your Lead in your hand, looking rounde about you, for yt at the ſhaloweſt place in the middle of the chanel, it is 4. fadom and ½. alſo becauſe it is ſo narrow yt you can hardly caſt out your Lead, me thinketh it is your ſureſt way, vpon each Sand to ſet a Scute, or other mark, that may ſerue you for Beakens, ſo to auoide them, and going a little further by the Creeke, which hath the opening that commeth out of ye other ſide of the Sea, wher the Cliffe lieth two fadome vnder the water, then kéepe preſently towards the houel, on ye right hand, that maketh the point of the Creeke aforeſaid, wher alſo runing along by your Cō
                        paſſe, as before by the land on the left hand, ſomwhat neerer to it, thē on the other ſide, til you be out of ye ſtraight▪ alwaies taking héede of the land and creeke lying on the North ſide, right againſt this Houel, for it is ful of ſtones and Cliffs, as I ſaid before, likewiſe you muſt ſhun the eaſt ſide, right againſt the iſſuing of the ſtraight, for that the ſhot of a great peece from thence, it is altogether cliffes, as aforeſaid, & whē you are out of the ſtraight, & deſire to Anker, then make towards the South ſide along by the land, that you may get out of the ſtreame, you muſt Anker at 6. fadome, for if you ſtay in the ſtreame of the ſtraight, you

may chance to loſe an anker by the drawing and ſhaking of ye ſhip, or that you ſhuld driue and runne vpon the ſand: at this road you are right ouer againſt a ſtrand, where you finde freſh water whē néed requireth, & being out of the ſtraight, in manner as aforeſaid, you ſhal take your courſe along by the land, vpon the right hand, alwaies caſting out the lead, and not putting lower thē ſcarce 4 fadom, neither to the land, nor towards the ſea, and whē you are paſt half way to the ſtrand comming out of the ſtraight, you ſhal haue no more but ful 4. fadom déep, and being paſt this firſt ſtrand with a houell and cliffes, that ſtand at the end thereof, and a ſandie bay lying againſt the houel, being half way frō the other houel, which ſtandeth on the end of the aforeſaid ſandy bay, behind the which, that opening which is in ye ſtraight, commeth out again: then hold your courſe eaſtward, at 4. fadome, not turning to the one nor the other ſide, for you ſhould preſentlie find both drougthes & ſands: the channel is muddy ground, and you muſt ſtill haue the Leade in your hand, vntill you finde other depth, which wil not continue long, and for more ſecuritie it is beſt to run before with a ſcute to try the channel, for it will ſhew you both the channels, whē you are at 12. or 15. fadome: thē beware of the ſouth ſide, vntil you be aboue a mile beyond the ſtraight, for from 15. you ſhal come to 10. fadome, & frō thence to dry lād, for it is al riffes & ſand: this ſtraight hath 6. Ilands lying at the end of the land of Iantana, which is the North ſyde, and you run along eaſt & weſt, it is in diſtance about 8 miles, but you muſt not paſſe betwéen it & the land: the ſea by it about halfe a myle Southward is al faire & good ground, at 15. fadom ſandy groūd: in the middle of this way from the ſtraight, to the Ilands, or litle more or leſſe, lieth the riuer of Iantana, which hath a great mouth, the entry thereof being along the land on the eaſt ſide, where great ſhippes haue many times entred, & on the Weſt ſide, where there ſtandeth a houell of red earth: it hath a Banke of hard ſand ouer the mouth of the riuer, reaching about half a mile into the ſea, vpon the which many ſhips haue fallen, wherfore take héed of it: from the point of the Iland aboueſaid, lying at the end of the land of Iantana, there rūneth a riffe eaſtnortheaſt into the ſea, well 2. great miles, and whē it is calme wether you cannot ſée the water break vpon it, only that it hath a certain white ſkin ouer it, which is preſently ſéen and diſcerned: and when it is rough wether, then the water breaketh all ouer: betwéene this riffe and the Iland runneth a great Channell, all ſtonie groūd, and the ſhalloweſt place that I found therein, was 5. fadome, & ½, and then to 7. fadome & 1/
                              •
                           , and then againe I found 6. or 8. fadome & ½, and is in breadth about the ſhot of a great péece, right ouer, if you will paſſe this Channell, you muſt runne half a myle of from the Iland, & come no néerer to it, for if you ſhould you would run on ground: it were good that great ſhips ſhuld not paſſe through it, vnleſſe they were compelled thereunto, as it happened to Franciſco Dagmar, that there ranne on ground, and was in danger to haue caſt away his ſhippe, becauſe he ranne to néer the Riffes, and that the wind ſcanted: two myles from theſe Ilandes, Southſoutheaſt, lyeth Pedra Branca, (that is White ſtone) which is an Iland of white ſtone, rockes and cliffes, and hard by it there are other rockes and cliffes, on the South ſide thereof, on the which ſide likewiſe lyeth the Iland of Binton, which is verie long: in the middle whereof there is a high houel, wherevpon there is déepe ground, but not good to anker for ſuch as come from China: round about Pedra Branca, and cloſe by it, there are 6. fadome déepe, good ground, but you muſt take heed of the cliffes and riffes lying by it. I haue alreadie told you, that in paſſing through the ſtraight (when you are ouer the ſandes, at 15 fadome, in manner as aforeſaid) you muſt ſayle Eaſtward, towardes the Ilandes, which you ſhall preſentlie ſee, as ſoone as you are paſt the Riuer of Iantana: and when you begin to come neere them: thē you ſhall keep towards Pedra Brā
                           ca, and looke that you kéep half a mile from it taking heede you come not neere the ſyde of the Ilandes, for two cauſes, the one becauſe the windes at that tyme, when you ſayle to China, doe alwaies blow off from the ſyde of Binton, which is the Monſon that commeth out of the South ſouthweſt, and if the winde ſhould ſcant, and fall into the Southeaſt, as often tymes in thoſe countries it happeneth, being on the ſyde of the Ilandes, you could not paſſe by the Riffes, whereby you ſhould bee compelled to paſſe through the channell that runneth betweene Pedra Branca, and the Ilandes, or els you ſhould ſpend ſo much tyme in ſtaying there, and that the Monſon (that is the tyme of your voyage) to China would bee ſpent: the other is, that if you chance to bee there with a ſlow wind and tyde, or with few ſailes ſpred, then the ſtreames would driue you vpō the Riffes, before you could auoyde them, as it happened to the ſhippe of Don Diego de Meneſes, whoſe Pilot was Go
                              ••
                           alo Vie
                              •
                           a, who by the water was driuē vpō 
                        10. fadome, where he ankered, and then after he came to 7. fadom, where he ſpent 3 dayes by ankering to get out againe: for the which 2 cauſes I aduiſe you to keepe on the ſide of Pedra Branca, or the white cliffes aforeſaid.

Frō 
                        Pedra Branca to the Ilād Pulo T
                              •
                           nge yt run north & ſouth, & north & by eaſt & ſouth and by weſt the courſe is 13. miles: this Ilād is high and roūd, hauing in the middle a high ſharp hil ful of trées: it lieth by the coaſt of the firm land, & betwéene it & ye firm land, there is good ſayling, but it is not Oorbaer: this Ilād lieth with Pulo Timō
                         northeaſt & ſouthweſt and are diſtant about 7. miles to ſayle to Pulo Tinge, you ſhall take your courſe from Pedra Branca, a great myle Eaſtward, and from thence North and north and by Eaſt, alwaies with the lead in your hand till you be paſt the Riffes, & being at 14 fadome, being as you geſſe in that country, you ſhal preſently kéepe off from it, into the ſea, being before it, & you néed not feare any thing, but yt you ſée before your eyes: in this courſe to Pulo Tinge, in the ſight of the Iland, there lieth 4 or 5 Ilands, which ſhal lie on the land ſide frō you, and when you are hard by Pulo Tinge, then you ſhal preſently ſée Pulo Timon: the Ilād of Pulo Timon is great & high, and on the ſide whereunto you ſayl, are two eares of land which are ful of great high trées to make ſmall maſtes & ankers: becauſe in thoſe countries they vſe ſuch kind of wooddē ankers, and it is commonly couered with miſtes & clouds, and hath all ouer a cleane muddy ground: therein are 2 places, wher you find good freſh water, one being on the ſide of the land, in the middle of a long ſtrand, a little inward to the land, where you find a good réed, but whē you come early thereunto, as in the Moneth of Iune and the beginning of Iuly, it is dangerous to anker there, becauſe of the weſt wind which at that time bloweth with great force in thoſe countries, therefore I thinke it better to run to the other place, where you likewiſe find freſh water, on the Eaſt ſide towards the ſea, rūning right vpon the face of the Iland, & along by the Eaſt ſide, and being paſt a certain houel, that maketh a hooke, you ſhal find a ſandy Bay, where you muſt enter into the land, and when the point or hooke lieth ſoutheaſt, you may anker, where you may lie for the Momſon, and there you ſhal haue 20 fadome déepe: there is likewiſe great fiſhing for excellent good fiſh, and in the ſame bay, there lieth the place where you take in freſh water which runneth into the ſea, alſo on that ſyde you haue much better wood, & néerer to fetch, & there you ly ſafe from weſt winds, on that ſide of the land you haue certain Ilāds along the coaſt, & from the north point of this Ilād Pulo Timō, about the ſhot of a great péece, there lieth an other Iland, and by the South point an other, & likewiſe about 3 miles ſouth eaſtward, ther lieth 3 other Ilands, wherof ye one is great & roūd ye other 2 being ſomwhat ſmaller, & are called Pulo Laor: the Iland of Pulo Timō
                         lieth vnder 2 degr. & ⅔ on ye north ſide of the Equinoctial, & 12 miles northweſt ward ſtrō it, lieth the riuer Pan, in the firme land, ouer againſt the which about 2 miles to ſeaward, there lieth a ſmall Iland, hauing an euen round trée in the middle: & half a mile frō it, it is 6 fadom déep groūd. Frō 
                        Pulo Timō
                         to Pulo Condor the courſe is North northeaſt & Weſtſouthweſt 115 miles, Pulo Cō
                           dor lieth vnder 8 degr. & ⅔, it is a great Ilād, with high hils, hauing cloſe by it 5 or 6 Ilands, and on the northeaſt ſide it hath a ſmal Iland or ſtony cliffe, which ſheweth farre off like a ſhip vnder ſayle: it is ouer al good groūd at 10 or 12 fadome déepe, and on the Northweſt ſide it hath a place of freſh water, it lieth north and ſouth, with the riuer of Camboia, (which is called the hauen of Malaios) 12. miles diſtant, but you are not ſure to haue freſh water ther, for whē it is late in the yere you haue there the winds at north and northweſt, wt ſome thunder, whereby you may not ſtay with one ſayle only, for that being without ſayles, it would ſtrike you to ground, and caſt your ſhip away, when it is early in the yeare, thē you haue Eaſt winds. From Pulo Timon to Pulo Condor yu ſhal alwaies find ground at 35 & 38 fadome, and to hold your right courſe to Pulo Condor, you ſhall ſayl north northeaſt, not accounting any winding of the compas, for if yu ſhould do ſo, you ſhould run on the ſouth ſide, to ſeaward, and run by without ſéeing it, which is an euill courſe, for that ye winds alwaies in this courſe doe blow frō the ſide of the land: and if it chance that before you ſée the Ilād Pulo Condor, you find ye water thicke, troubled & foule then caſt out your lead, & you ſhal find 18 or 19 fadome water, with a ſoft muddy ground, & ſo runne half a ſtrike in that courſe, til you come to 17 fadome, and being there, then rune northeaſt, and being at 1/1 6 fadome, before you ſée the Iland, thē hold your courſe Eaſt & Eaſt and by north, alwaies at 16 fadome déepe, whereby you ſhall land on the ſouth ſide of the Iland, wher you muſt take héed of 2 Ilands lying 7 miles on the Weſt ſide of Pulo Condor, full of buſhes, a mile or thereabouts diſtant from each other, and if it be poſſible, you ſhall not runne betwéen them: for that without them and cloſe by, you finde good ground. I haue layne there at anker, with a calme, about a mile from the Iland, which lieth néereſt the land: there the ſtreames run ſtrong with the tyde Northeaſt and Southweſt. From this Iland Pulo Cōdor to ye Ilād Pulo Secir, the courſe is Northeaſt and Southweſt, & northeaſt, and by eaſt, and Southweſt & by Weſt, 45 miles. This Iland is low and long land, reaching North and ſouth, and on the North poynt it hath a ſtonie Iland, lying halfe a

myle from the land: you may paſſe betwéene it and the Iland, on the Eaſt ſyde it hath a Sandie Baye, where once a Iunco, (that is to ſay, an Indian or Chiniſh great ſhip) was laid on the ſhore to bee new dreſſed, belonging to a Rouer of Patane, (a countrey lying vpon the coaſt on the Eaſt ſide of Malacca, towardes the kingdome of Syon) I haue paſſed within halfe a mile to ſeaward by this ſandie bay, it is all good ground: this Iland is diſtant from the coaſt of Camboia or Champa nine miles: if you put to ſeaward from Pulo Condor, without ſeeing it vnder 8. degrees, you ſhall find 25. and 26. fadom deep, with black muddy ground, & much of the ſkin or Saſbeene driuing vpon the water, and being 12. miles paſt it, at the height of eight degrées, and ½ then you ſhall ſee certaine ſea Snakes ſwimming in the water, at 28. and thirtie fadome déepe, and ten miles further much of the Herbe called Sargoſſo vnder the water at the ſame depth, which depth you ſhall find to be 9. degrées, & 
                           •
                        . to this place you ſhall holde your courſe Northeaſt, for wee could run no higher becauſe the Weſt wind bloweth very ſtiffe, but from thence runne ſoutheaſt towardes Pulo Cain, thinking to get the coaſt of Champa, & when you come within two miles of the Ilandes, (lying nine miles Southward from Pulo Secir, you ſhal find muddie thick water, & comming by this Iland you ſhall find no grounde: thoſe two Ilandes aforeſaid were by the Chinars called Tomſitom, three miles diſtant from each other, you runne along Eaſt Southeaſt, and Weſt Northweſt: the Eaſt Ilande is high and round, on the ſea ſide being calme, in the vpper part therof it hath the faſhiō of a Cap, ſuch as ye 
                        Mandorijus (which are the Lords of China) doe weare: halfe a mile from it lyeth a Cliffe like an Ilande, and hath on the Weſt ſide reddiſh cliffes, and on the north ſide an other Iland: round about all theſe Ilandes and cliffes there is no grounde. I ſet this down for that I haue ſailed all this countrie and noted the way, as alſo all whatſoeuer I haue declared in this diſcourſe: we took this courſe aforeſaid for want of maſtes, for wee durſt not beare our ſeales becauſe of the ſtiffe Weſt windes, and if any man chaunce to fall in the like neede and troubles, let him not hope to finde the coaſt on the borde ſide: from thoſe Ilands you ſhall holde your courſe northerly, to diſcouer Pulo Secir, and from thence to the coaſt of Champa, for you muſt know that the ſtreames (from Pulo Condor and from the coaſt of Champa to Pulo Secir and thoſe Ilandes) runne Eaſtward, by which meanes you runne preſently to the coaſt, as hereafter I will ſhew: and as you paſſe by theſe Ilandes of Pulo Secir Northweſtwarde, th
                           •
                        n the ſtreame runneth to the coaſt of Champa, which wil driue you ouerthwart, from the aforeſaid Ilandes of Pulo Secir, there are no ſands nor ſhallows, as many men ſuppoſe, the worſt you find, is that there is no ground, theſe Ilands lye 18 miles diſtant from the coaſt: from Pulo Condor you ſhall preſently run to the coaſt of Champa, and if you paſſe by it on the ſouth ſide, then hold your courſe halfe a ſtrike North northeaſt, till you be in ſight of the coaſt, and halfe way in this courſe you ſhall find eight and twentie fadome deepe, and if you paſſe by it on the North ſide, you muſt runne Northeaſt, and Northeaſt and by North, and not higher to loofewarde, to ſhun the drougthes, whereon Mathias de Brito was caſt away: and if in the night time you paſſe by any land, then caſt out your lead, and finding fifteene fadome water, then put no neerer to the land, but preſently runne Eaſt Northeaſt, as the coaſt lyeth, for the ſands in thoſe countries lieth at 13. fadome along the coaſt, 4. mile from it. The coaſt of Champa along the ſea ſide is low land and great ſandy ſtrandes: you run along by them Eaſt north eaſt, and Weſt Southweſt to a point lying vnder 10. degrees and 
                           •
                        . and before you come within two or three miles thereof, the ſandie ſtrand and high way endeth, for this point is a verie high land, reaching Southwarde in, ſo that it maketh a Cape: from thence forward it is altogether verie high land to Varella, with great hils: within this point towards the Weſt Southweſt lyeth a creeke, and two miles on this ſide before you come at it. There lyeth cloſe by the land a ſmal, long, and low Iland, all of harde ſtony cliffes and rockes, which a farre off ſhew like a towne: from this Iland to Pulo Secir, there runneth a banke of 10. and 12. fadome deepe: vpon the aforeſaid coaſt of ſandie ſtrands, 15. miles before you come to the point aforeſaid, there is a riuer called Sidraon, where you may enter with ſhippes of 6
                              ••
                           . Barhes on this riuer lyeth the faireſt and beſt towne in all the kingdome of Champa: it hath for a marke a long houell wt 
                        2. tops: I haue paſſed within the ſhotte of a great peece neere to the ſtony Iland aforeſaid, and found 8. fadome deep, altogether euen ſtonie ground, with much of the hearbe Sargaſlo, whereby I could hardly make the lead to ſinke downe, and along by the aforeſaid high point or hooke there is 20. fadome déepe. When you are by the coaſt of Champa, then you ſhal runne Eaſt Northeaſt: within two or thrée miles at the furtheſt

it is altogether faire and good anker ground, to the point or hooke aforeſaid, you ſhal leaue the Iſland of ſtones on the land ſide, not paſſing betweene it and the land: from this point to another point are 12. miles, & you runne Northeaſt, and from this ſecond point yet 12 miles further there is another point: this courſe is runne halfe a ſtrike to the North Northeaſt: betweene this ſecond and thirde point there lyeth two creekes, the firſt wherof is the hauen where you lade blacke woode, which is called De
                              •
                           raon: from this thirde point to the Varella the coaſt runneth North, and ſeuen miles before you come to ye 
                        Varella there is a creeke where there lyeth a town, and two miles further there is an Iland of ſtonie cliffes cloſe to the land, which a farre off ſheweth like a man that fiſheth or angleth, whereby the Portingalles call it Opeſcador, or the fiſher, and if you deſire to runne to the Varella, (being paſt the Iland) you ſhall preſently be neere the land, where you haue a great ſtrande with faire grounde. This Varella is a high hill reaching into the ſea, and aboue on the toppe it hath a verie high ſtonie rock like a tower or piller, which may be ſeen far off, therfore it is by the Portingalles called Varella, (that is, a Cape, Backe or marke) at the foote of this hill on the South ſide it hath a verie great creeke reaching northward in, all of muddy ground, & 15. fadome deepe, you cannot ſée it far off, becauſe the one lande runneth through the other, but as you paſſe by the ſtrand aforeſaid, and beginne to come neere the Varella, then the creeke beginneth to open, which hath a verie faire entrie, and within hath two running ſtreames of verie good freſh water, hee that commeth thither with a ſhip by my aduiſe ſhall not put in there, becauſe hee ſhall haue much labour and trouble to bring the ſhip out again, for there the wind is ſcant: you may wel anker without at ye entry or mouth thereof as I haue done, or you may ſeeke for the other places where freſh water is to bee had, that ſtand on the other ſide of the hill, towards the North, at the foote thereof where the high lande that reacheth into the ſea endeth, where you begin to find a verie great ſtrand: to get this water you muſt goe verie neare to the point of this hill, and as you run along towardes it, when you compaſſe it about you ſhall ſee a ſmall ſandie bay, with the aforeſaid great ſtrand and place of watering, where you may anker when you will, for it hath good anker grounde, but it hath a great inconuenience, and miſchiefe, which is, that you lie compaſſed about by the country people that are great enemies to the Portingalles, and ſea Rouers, therefore you muſt keep good watch, with great care when you, fetch freſh water, as well within as without becauſe the country people vſe to ouer runne and ſpoile men on the ſodaine: this Varella lyeth vnder 13. degrées, this land of Varella is a hooke, and from thence to Pulo Cutuo the courſe is North, and north and by Weſt, for the ſpace of 48. miles, & from thence the land beginneth to be a great deale lower, then that you haue paſt, hauing in many places ſandie ſtrandes, where men may anker: ten miles from Varella forward, a mile from the land there lyeth a long flat Iland called Pulo Cambir, and betweene this Iland and the land are 12. fadome deepe ſandie ground, & in the middle of the Iland on the lande ſide, there is a ſmal ſandie bay that hath freſh water, where if need be you may anker, for it is good ground, and in the middle of the channel betweene the Iland and the land it is altogether faire being a ſmall mile in length: from this Iſland about twelue miles Northward, the land maketh a point, and from thence to the Iſland there is a great creeke, and inward to the Northweſt where the high land endeth, (which from this point inwarde runneth to the Weſt) it is an open or broken low lande where you find a riuer of thrée fadome deepe, within the hauen hauing ſandie ground, with a great mouth or entrie, and within it hath a Wel of 13. fadome deepe: this riuer runneth further into the land, & 4. or 5. miles inward from the entrie or mouth there lyeth a great village, where you may haue great ſtore of victualles and other neceſſaries: in the mouth of this riuer on the eaſt ſide there ſtandeth a high houell, and on the Weſt ſide a low ſandie ſtrande, you muſt enter right forth in the middle, and although it is verie wide, yet being within you muſt make your ſelf ſure wc ankers & cables, ſpecially from the weſt ſide, for yt if it were earlie in the yeare you ſhall there finde ſtiffe Weſt winds, which woulde driue you on the other ſide of the Riuer: in this Riuer is much fiſh: alſo in the land there is much wild fleſh, with Swine, Tigers, Rhinoceros, and ſuch like beaſtes: the countrey people were of good nature, but we haue giuen them cauſe of ſuſpition by our bad dealing with them: fiue miles further forward from this Riuer along the coaſt there are two Ilands with certaine cliffes about halfe a mile from the land, and you may paſſe betweene them and the lande, twelue miles from theſe Ilandes, there lyeth other Ilandes by the lande, where there are ſome places of rounde ſande with a ſandie ſtrande, and there is a ſmall Riuer, where you haue much Catte (that is, Ryce vnſtamped in the huskes as it growgroweth,

and is twelue miles from Pulo Caton, wherewith many haue deceiued thē
                        ſelues that runne croſſe ouer, when they ſaw it and tanne on ground, Pulo Caton is a long Iſland, with two high hilles at the ende thereof, and in the middle low, ſo that farre of it ſéemeth to be two Iſlandes, it hath a flatte and euen ground of buſhes, ſtretching northweſt, and ſoutheaſt, on the ſoutheaſt ſide it hath a Riffe, where the water breaketh forth running the ſhot of a great péece further into the Sea, on the land ſide it hath freſh water, and lieth diſtant from the coaſt 2. miles, and 
                           
                              •
                           /2, the channell betwéene both hath thirtie, and thirtie fiue fadome déepe, with good ground, right ouer againſt this Iſland lieth a riuer, with a great mouth or entrey, being within the Hauen 5. or 6. fadome déepe, it is verie well inhabited, and built with houſes, in this Hauen Gomes Barretto entered with his ſhip, this Iſland lieth vnder 15. degrées and ⅔, and North Northweſt, a mile and a halfe from it, there lieth another ſmall low Iſland, and you may paſſe betwéene them both, North, Northweſt 14. miles along the coaſt lieth the Iland of Champello, full vnder 16. degrées and ⅔, this Iland Champello is great and high, hauing vpon it certaine toppes or heades ſticking out, it lieth north northweſt, and ſouth ſoutheaſt, it hath two high hilles with a valley in the middle, that in the ſoutheaſt being much higher then the other, it hath likewiſe many trées, on the Northweſt ſide it hath a very high Iſland, with two ſmall Ilandes lying cloſe at the foot thereof, on the Weſt ſide it hath much and verie good freſh water, and is diſtant from the Coaſt about two miles, it is a very low land along the ſea ſtrand, and Weſt Northweſt from thence is the Riuer of Coaynon lying two fadome déepe, in the Hauen it is ſandie ground, where much traffique is vſed, but the people are not much to bee truſted, from this Iland of Champello Northweſt, for two or three miles it is full of trées, & two miles further, the Coaſt maketh a great thicke point full of trees, and thrée miles beyond this point, lieth a great créeke, which in the entrey hath an Iland for a defence or cloſure, and is all cleare ground, where you haue much victuals and Marchandiſes that come out of the countrie by the Riuer of Sinoha, this créeke was called the Enſeada, or créeke of Saint Don Iorgie, it hath much wood, & verie good to make ſhips of, fiue miles from it along the Ceaſt lieth the riuer of Sinoha, which hath in the Hauen 14. ſpanne of water, all ſandie ground, in this Hauen is the whole handling and traffique of the goods that come from Cauchinchina and thether, and to Champello you runne Northweſt. This Iland of Champello hath a good road, and ſafe harbour, but onely when it bloweth out of the weſt and ſouthweſt, and although the wind commeth from the land, notwithſtanding it troubleth you much by reaſon of the lownes of the land: you muſt vnderſtand that ten miles before you come to Varrella 13. miles within the ſea, there beginneth certaine Sandes that are verie dangerous, which reach as the land doth till you bee vnder 17. degrees, and run nearer to the northeaſt, at the end whereof, in the way to China there lieth 8. Iſlandes, three great, & fiue ſmall, all full of trées and ſandie ſtrandes, but without freſh water betwéene them, & round about it is altogether flat and foule way, ſo that as ſoone as you let fall the anker, the cable is preſently fretted in péeces, betwéene theſe Iſlands there is 4. fadome deepe. This information was giuen me by certaine people of Sian that loſt their Iunco or ſhippe in that place by reaſon of a calme, becauſe they ankered, and all their cables brake from the ground, & they ſaued themſelues in the boate, & run through all thoſe Iſlandes to find freſh water, and could ſée none: you run from the hooke or point of thoſe ſandes, to Pulo Caton Northeaſt, and Southweſt, and Northeaſt and by eaſt, and ſouthweſt and by weſt, for they lie like a bow: therefore truſt not the old deſcription of this Nauigation, that ſaith they haue channels from thence to Pulo Caton, running ouerthwart it is thirtie miles, but returning againe to the courſe from Varella to Pulo Caton, when you are as farre as where the coaſt ſtretcheth Northward, then your courſe ſhall be two miles off from the land till you come to Pulo Caton: for that if you come thether early in the yeare, you haue the weſt windes ſo ſtrong, that if you ſhould be far from the coaſt, they would carrie you by force vpon the ſands, without any remedie, as it happened to the ſhip called the Santa Crus, you ſhall not paſſe aboue two or thrée miles at the furtheſt to ſeaward from Pulo Caton, and if you chance to be on the ſide of the land, you may likewiſe paſſe through by the Channell that runneth betwéene the Firme land and the Iland, which is two mile and a halfe broad, all faire and good ground (as I ſaid before.) Pulo Caton lieth with the ſouth point of the Iland Aynon North and South, and North & by eaſt, and South and by Weſt, ſomewhat more then 50. mile. This ſouth point of Aynon lieth ſcarſe vnder 18. degrées, and ½, & reacheth from the point aforeſaid, ſouthweſtward 12. or 13. miles, and from the Eaſt ſide lyeth the way from China, which you run Northeaſt,

and north eaſt, and by north to 19. degrees, and ½, and on the ſide of the Firme land the Iſland compaſſeth about to the point or end of 19. degrees, and ½, from the Northeaſt ſide in ſuch manner, that the Iland is in forme foure ſquare, & the channell betwéene it and the Firme land, is in the narroweſt part 6. miles, where there lieth a hauen called Anchio, hauing certaine ſandes betwéene thē, yet with a channell wherein great ſhips may paſſe, ſeuen miles eaſtward. From Anchion lieth a créeke with good harbour, and a mile further about thrée miles diſtant from the land, there lieth a great Riffe and ſandes, but returning againe to the aforeſaid South point of the Iſland, which is right before a very high land that ſurpaſſeth all the reſt of the land in the ſaid Iland, at the foote thereof on the north ſide there is a good Hauen called Taalhio, at the mouth whereof lyeth a ſmall round Iland, and from this high land aforeſaid, it runneth 12. miles northweſtward, and from thence it is altogether low land on the ſea ſide, and inward hilles and houels from the end of the land Aynon, on the north ſide vnder 19. degrées and ⅓, to the Iland Pulo Gom in the ſame courſe of northeaſt, and northeaſt, and by north are 8. miles, and lieth 5. mile from the Firme land, it is a high land, in forme like a Bell, and on the ſide of the land it hath a road with a good harbour, wherein the ſhip Santa Crus lay, from thence you goe to the ſeauen Ilandes, called Pulo Tio in the ſame courſe of northeaſt, and northeaſt, and by north, being fiue miles, Pulo Tio are 7. Ilands great and ſmall, ſeperated one from the other without any Trees, from thence the Coaſt reacheth Northeaſt, and Northeaſt, and by North, to the Enſeada dos Ladroins (that is the Creeke of Rouers,) from Pulo Tio ſeauen miles lieth a Riffe, which reacheth 5. or 6. miles from the land into the ſea, and vpon the eaſt ſide therof about halfe a mile from it, there is foure fadome water flat ſandie ground, and a mile further from thence there lieth a great riuer, whether many ſhips doe ſaile▪ and put in a little further from this Iland lieth another Riuer, wherein I haue béene, which hath a good harbour againſt the monſons of China, and with a ſouthweſt winde is diſcouered, and threre alſo runneth ſtrong ſtreames, the entrie thereof is cloſe on the eaſt ſide along by a point of land, it is faire and good ground, and being about this point of land, you ſhall run till you come to a ſand bay, where you ſhall anker, for within, it is ſhallow and ſandie, on the coaſt betwéene theſe 2. riuers lieth 2. or 3. Ilands cloſe by the land, and from theſe 2. riuers, 6 miles forward lieth the Enſeada dos Ladroins which is very great, it hath on the weſt ſouthweſt ſide of the mouth certaine ſtonie cliffes, from the which there ſtretcheth a Riffe towards the ſea, wherupon one of the Portingall ſhips did fall, from the aforeſaide ſecond riuer to this créeke about halfe a mile from the coaſt, there is 7. or 8. fadome déepe faire ground. The land of this creeke, on the north northeaſt ſide hath a verie high hooke or point of land paſſing about this hooke for the ſpace of halfe a mile, (it is ſhallow but muddie ground,) you goe to the Hauen of Comhay: whereupon the coaſt is called the coaſt of Comhay, thether the ſhips of Sion or Sian vſed to come, it is like a créeke that is very great, hauing another point or end of high land, which reacheth North and South, and right ouer againſt this hauen on ye ſouth ſide lieth the Iland of Sauchoin about 5 or 6 miles from it, and is diſtant from the aforeſaid point of Enſeada dos Ladroins or créek of Rouers, 7. miles ſoutheaſtward. This Iland Sanchoan is great, high, and full of hils, among the which there is a crooked hill with high houels on the top thereof, like the ioints of a mans fingers, when his hand is cloſed, which is a ſure and good marke. This Iland hath many trées, great creeks & hayes, where in times paſt men vſed to traffique: betwéen this Iland, and the Firme land lieth 4. or 5. other high Ilands, without buſhes or trées, which lie vnder one courſe with the Firme land, and the Iland Sanchoan in ſuch ſorte, that Sanchoan maketh the furtheſt hook or end outward, and from thence reacheth towards the land, northweſt and ſoutheaſt, ſo that a farre off it ſéemeth to bee all one land, theſe are the firſt Ilands of Canton, which lie vnder 21. degrees, and 1/
                              •
                           , from thence to Lamon you ſaile outward about the Ilands eaſt northeaſt, and from Sanchoan to the land there runneth 3. channels or paſſages, which make thoſe Ilands, through the which you may paſſe with ſhips, the beſt channel is that which runneth along by the Iland of Sanchoan (which is the furtheſt outward to the ſea) of 6. and 7. fadome déepe, it hath in the entry therof vpon the ſame Iland, a ſmall Iland full of buſhes, and on the northweſt ſide lieth two great high Ilands, which make the mouth or entry, and at the entry along by the ſtrand there lieth ſome ſmall Ilands and hillocks, before the Ilands aforeſaid towards ye land lieth an other Iland, making another mouth or entry betweene this, and the two Ilands aforeſaid, from this Iland to the land is the third mouth or entry, through theſe two entries great ſhips doe paſſe with the tides, it is altogether ſoft muddie ground, to know the Iland of Sanchoan, beſides the

markes aforeſaid, or to know if thoſe Ilands lie before or behind, you muſt remember that Sanchoan maketh a point lying outward, and that from thence you runne towards the land northweſt and ſoutheaſt, & from thence further eaſt north eaſt, and weſt ſouth weſt, and marke the courſe with your compaſſe, and you ſhall preſently know whether you be forward or backeward, and if you be ſo far to ſeaward, that you ſée the one coaſt reacheth eaſt north eaſt, and the other northweſt, then you are right ouer againſt it, by this meanes I found it out, for I was the firſt that marked it, and ſuch as know it learned it of me. The courſe from Pulo Caton towards China is thus, you ſhall not ſaile aboue 2. or 3. mile at the furtheſt to ſeaward for the cauſes afore rehearſed, and being paſt then runne north northweſt, or northweſt, vntill you finde an opening betwéene the Iland and the Firme land, and as it beginneth to open, then runne halfe a ſtrike north north eaſt, towards the point of the Iland Aynon, and paſſing betwéene the Iland Pulo Caton and the Firme land, you ſhall keepe the ſame courſe, becauſe the ſtreame in that monſon runneth towards the créeke of Cauchinchina, and with this courſe you ſhall ſée Aynon being 7. or 8. miles to ſeaward from thence, and it may bee that if you come thether at a ſpring tide, or with a ſlacke winde, that you will be driuen further inward, when you perceiue the land then marke your compaſſe, and if the coaſt reacheth eaſt northeaſt, then kéep that courſe vntill you thinke you to bee paſt it, and if the coaſt ſtretch northeaſt, and north eaſt, and by eaſt, as the Iland lieth, then run ſo, till you may wel diſcerne the land, & being 5. or 6. miles from thence, & that from thence you deſire to ſayle to Sanchoan, then runne with the ſame courſe for halfe a ſtrike north northeaſt, whereby you ſhall ſée Pulo Tio, & if you be 4. or 5. miles frō thence to ſeaward, then runne northeaſt, & northeaſt & by north, and if you be but two miles from thence, thē run your courſe for halfe a ſtrike betwéene northeaſt, & northeaſt, & by north, with this courſe you ſhal come to the Iland of Sanchoan, & ſhall ſée the Iland called Do Mandoriin, which is a ſmall round and high land, & lieth 5. or 6. miles from the Ilands, & if you deſire to put into the Hauen of Macau, then runne north eaſt, & eaſt, and by north, running to ſeaward 5. or 6. miles from Sanchoan, & when you are within 15. or 20. miles of the Ilandes, then you ſhall finde muddie ground at 25. fadome déepe, & when you ſée the Ilandes (looke well to your ſelfe as I ſaide before) you muſt goe neere them, and run along by them: about a mile diſtant, from Sanchoan to Macau are 18. miles, & there are fiue channels or paſſages: the firſt betwéene the Iland Sanchoan, & the Iſland Vaſco de Faria about 5. miles broad. This Iland of Vaſco de Faria, lieth nearer the land thē 
                        Sanchoan, & hath a high pointed hil, & on the ſea ſide a high round houell, being betwéene it and the hill very low land, ſo that a farre off it ſheweth like two Ilands, & when you are hard by it, and that you begin to diſcouer the flat land, it ſheweth like a channell, and not farre from it towardes the 
                           〈◊〉
                         it hath two or thrée ſmall Ilands. This Iland lieth north and ſouth with Sanchoan, a mile from it lieth a ſmall long Iland without buſhes, which all along the Iland hath a crooked rigge or backe deſcending at the end, this Iland is called Pulo Baby: by this Iland, along by the land of Sanchoan lieth a Rocke ſomewhat aboue the water. I here place all theſe markes and tokens of this channell, becauſe it ſhould the better be knowne, to ſuch as haue occaſion to paſſe through it, which they may boldly do, & being paſt the Ilands, of the Iland Vaſco de Faria, the firſt that you then come to ſée, is in the fourth mouth or entrie, which openeth not becauſe an Ilād lieth right before it, 4. or 5. miles forward lie other Ilandes along by the Iland, (which you ſhall leaue on the Weſt ſouthweſt ſide) all vpon a row, and a farre off ſéeme to runne one through the other, but when you are right ouer againſt them, then they lie as I ſaide before, they are fiue or ſixe in all both great and little: from theſe Ilands about two miles Eaſt northeaſt, there lieth two Ilands cloſe together, ſtretching North and South, by theſe you haue others vpon the ſame row towards the land, all in the ſame ſtrike or courſe, in the entrey hard by thoſe two Ilands, there lieth a great high and round Iland betwéene the aforeſaid row of Ilandes, the Ilands aforeſaid, there is a good hold or opening through the which you haue the neareſt way to Macau: for the better knowledge wherof, about three or foure miles further, (eaſt north eaſt) there are thrée Ilands diſtant from each other, which from the land all in a row doe reach into the Sea, whereby they lie further outward then the other which you paſſe along by, ſo that they ly right ouer againſt you, and when you come to the mouth or entry of Macau, and begin to put into it, it is altogether opē (without any Ilande to bee ſayled or compaſſed about) ſayling right towards the firme lande, which is 8. miles Northwarde from thence, where the mouth or entry is, whereby you goe to Caton, by the Portingalles called A
                              •
                            Orelhas de Lebre (that is the hares eares.)
                     
                        In this entery it is 8.9. and 10. fadome déepe, and if you come thether at the ebbe of a ſpring tide, the ſtreame runneth ſo ſtrong & ſtiffe, that no wind will ſerue to get vp: therfore it is beſt to anker there with all your ſayles vp, vntill you ſée it flow running along by the row of Ilands that lie on the eaſt ſide, & ſo inward, ſhunning a rocke lying cloſe by thoſe Ilands aboue the water, putting to ſeaward, for that you cannot paſſe betweene it, and the Ilands with any ſhip, alſo you ſhall finde ano
                           ••
                        er Cliffe vpon the weſt ſide, being in the middle way, & ſéeing right before you a ſmall and low Iland, lying in the ſame rowe of Ilandes, in the Eaſt as you goe, then you are by the mouth or entrey of the ſecond chā
                        nell that runneth to Macau. This entery reacheth Eaſt and Weſt, and may be about a mile broad, you muſt make to that ſmal Iland, and leauing it vpon the North ſide, you muſt hold your courſe betwéene it and the other Ilands, and ſo put in, alwaies kéeping neareſt to the ſmall Iland, where the depth will begin to leſſen, and much more whē you are paſt it: for there you haue a banke of 28 ſpannes of water of ſoft muddie ground, the land lying vpon the ſouth ſide of the channell, is foure or fiue Ilands cloſe one by the other, which reach eaſt and weſt, and they haue on the north ſide a great and high Iland, which runneth to the hauen where the Portingales inhabite, and hath a créeke or bay that ſtrecheth Northward▪ at the mouth of this Hauen lieth a great and high Iland cloſe by the land on the north ſide, betwéene which and the Iland it is drie and ſhallow ground, and before you come to this Iland, there lyeth vppon the ſide of the north Iland a Cliffe vnder the water, to ſeaward towards the middle of the chā
                        nell: therefore you ſhall hold off from this north land and put nearer to the ſouth, and when you being to diſcouer the Portingales towne, with the Hauen where the ſhippes lie at anker, thē you ſhal put to the eaſt hooke of the entrey of this Hauen, kéeping cloſe to it till you be in, where you ſhall find foure fadome and ½, or 5. fadome déepe, ſhunning the weſt ſide, for there it is all ouer, bankes and ſands, and along by the point you finde muddy ground▪ this point or hooke is a high land, and from thence inward, about the ſhot of a great peece further lieth another point of ſād, and from the low land runneth a banke of 18 ſpannes of water, reaching croſſe ouer to the other ſide as far as the firſt houſes, and before you come to it, in the middle of the Riuer there lieth a Riffe: therefore you muſt hold vpon the eaſt ſide, and runne along by it till you anker, it is good muddie ground at foure fadome and ½ deepe.
                  
                  
                     The 21. Chapter. The courſe from the Kingdome of Sion, to China, with the ſituation of the places.
                     
                        DEparting out of the hauen or riuer of the towne of Sion or Sian, you ſhall holde your courſe Weſtward, and comming to it, you ſhall finde a Riffe lying on the north ſide of the coaſt Hauen called Bancolea two miles from the land, and betwéene it and the land there is a channell of foure fadome déepe, notwithſtanding you muſt paſſe without it, as farre aboue it as you can, this hauen of Bancoſea lieth with the Hauen of Sion northeaſt and ſouthweſt, and ſomewhat northeaſt and by eaſt, and ſouthweſt and by weſt, and being againſt the coaſt, you ſhall kéepe along by it for it is all good ground, and when you haue paſt the Riffe aforeſaid. The Coaſt vpon the ſhore is low land, hauing inward a ſmall houell, ſtretching North and ſouth 4. miles from Bancoſea Southward. This low land maketh a point reaching outward, lying vnder 14. degrées and ½ from thence forward you ſhall ſée a great thicke land, which ſéemeth to runne inward to the ſea: but before you come at it there is a riuer called Chaon, at the mouth whereof ſtand certaine trées like palme trees, and comming to the aforeſaid land, you ſhall ſee another great thicke land which ſheweth to lie eaſt, and weſt inwards to the land, hauing manie ſharpe rockes, there the land maketh a point or end, which is commonly called the point of Cuy, thetherto the lande reacheth Southeaſt, this point of Cuy lieth vnder 12. degrees and ⅔, and betweene it and the aforeſaid thicke land that lieth behind you, you ſhall finde 11. and 12. fadome deepe with good ground, when you are paſt or about this point of Cuy, then you ſhall hold your courſe ſouth ſoutheaſt for the ſpace of 25. miles, and then you muſt ſayle ſouth eaſt, and ſoutheaſt, and by ſouth, whereby you ſhall ſee an Iland which a far off ſhoweth like 3. Ilands, being long & flat, ful of trees, & lieth ful vnder 10. degrees, which will be on the eaſt ſide, all this way you muſt take care not to fall to leeward, and being by this Iland aforeſaid, you ſhall run ſoutheaſt, and rather hold aloofe to the ſouth, then to fall to the weſt, becauſe of the ſharpe winde which you commonly finde in that part, and in this courſe you ſhall ſee another Iland greater then the firſt, and reacheth Eaſt and Weſt beeing on the toppe thicke and flatte land. The Weſt pointe a great thicke hooke pointed

towards the ſea ſide, & Eaſtwarde it deſcendeth towardes a black lande, which ſéemeth to be a cloſe and thick buſhie place, lying full vnder 9. degrees, & ½. This Iland lyeth with the Iland of Pulo Wy, ſoutheaſt & northweſt and ſo you muſt runne 25. miles. Pulo Wy are two Ilandes, whereof the greateſt reacheth North and South, hauing a high houell on the South ſide, and on the North ſide two low houels▪ with a valley in the middle: thus the Weſt ſide ſheweth, but on the ſouth ſide it ſéemeth altogether high and rounde, with a ſmall valley in the middle, making 2. rocks, ſhewing like two men: the other and the ſmaller Iland lyeth on the ſoutheaſt ſide, ſomewhat diſtant from the other, making a channell betwéene both, where you may paſſe through, for it is fayre grounde: this ſmal Iland on the Southeaſt ſide hath a ſmal Iland of ſtonie cliffes, from the which there runneth a ſtonie Riffe, which you muſt auoide, for all the other places are good and faire, being twelue fadome déep: cloſe by the Iland, and in the greateſt Iland on the ſouth Weſt ſide, there is freſh water with a ſandie bay, and when you make towardes this Iland, comming to it you ſhall finde thereaboutes 14. fadome deepe with hard ground, and if you find muddie grounde, then you are hard by the land: from Pulo Wy to the firme lande of Camboia are 7. miles: this coaſt of Camboia is low land full of trées, and along by it, it is banky and muddy grounde: it lyeth Northweſt and ſoutheaſt to a point which lyeth with Pulo Wy, Eaſt Northeaſt and Weſt Southweſt, ſtretching likewiſe the ſame courſe of the aforeſaide point to the hauen of Camboia, which is twelue miles diſtant: this hauen is called Dos Malyos, (that is of the Malaquiters, or thoſe of Malacca) lying right ouer againſt Pulo Condor, which lyeth with this hauen or Riuer Northweſt and Southeaſt, and northweſt & by North, and ſoutheaſt and by South, from Pulo Wy Northweſtwarde there lyeth a great Riuer, being thrée fadome déepe within the hauen, on the ſide ſandie grounde, and in the middle muddie ground: the Chinars that ſaile frō 
                        Sion to China paſſe by ye north ſide of Pulo Wy, and when they are right ouer againſt it, then they run Eaſtward to knowe the hooke aforeſaid, running the ſame courſe to Pulo Condor, which they ſee vppon the North ſide, when you are right againſt this point or hooke, then you ſhall find ten fadome deepe muddie grounde, and ſomewhat further 13. fadome ſandie ground, but you muſt not run nearer then this 13. fadom towards the land, but rather kéep at 14. fadome, for it is ſurer: & take heed of 2. Ilands, that lie 6. miles from Pulo Condor, which will bee on the South ſide, and right before you, you ſhal haue the North point of the Ilande Pulo Condor, lying vnder 8. degrées, and ⅔. and you runne with Pulo Wy Eaſt & Weſt, and ſomewhat eaſt and by ſouth, and weſt and by North, and if you ſée Pulo Wy on the ſouth ſide, and ſo it ſhould be on your North ſide, then you ſhall runne within a mile or halfe a mile thereof, alwaies taking héede of the aforeſaid Riffe of the Ilandes, 
                           ••
                        king your courſe Eaſtwarde to Pulo Condor, with good regard of the Ilandes: the Ilande to the which you ſhall come on the ſouth point (paſſing by the South ſide of Pulo Wy, within 3. miles thereof) you ſhall finde 16. fadome deep, and keeping your courſe to Pulo Condor, at the depth aforeſaide you ſhall paſſe within halfe a mile to the ſouth ſide of the Ilandes, being 6. miles from Pulo Condor, but rather take the depth (for more ſecuritie) of ſcarce ſeuentéen fadome, whereby you ſhal come on the South ſide of Pulo Condor, within 3. or 4. miles thereof at the furtheſt, and when you are in ſight of the Ilands, then you muſt put to Pulo Condor as you will, leauing the Ilands on the North ſide, if you paſſe on the ſouth ſide of Pulo Condor to go to the firme land to the coſt of Champa, thē runne North Northeaſt, and Northeaſt and by north, which will bring you to the ſea coaſt, and to ſhunne the ſands whereon Mathias de Brito fell, which lie 4. miles from the land, if you runne along the ſhore at 13▪
                         fadome, then you come vppon thoſe ſandes, but when you are paſt them, all the reſt of the courſe from Champa forwardes is farye and good ground, and being in this Countrey you ſhall take your courſe as I haue ſhewed you in the deſcription and nauigation from Malacca to China: the ſands aforeſaid lie vpon the coaſt of Champa, runne with Pulo Condor North and South, and North and by Eaſt, and ſouth and by Weſt, and almoſt halfe a ſtrike more.
                  
                  
                     The 22. Chapter. Of the courſe from the Iſland Pulo Condor to the hauen of Sian.
                     
                        FRom Pulo Condor to Pulo Wy, there are about full 20. miles, lying from each other Eaſt and Weſt, and ſomewhat Eaſt and by North, and Weſt and by ſouth, and to go to Pulo Wy, hold your courſe right weſt, not reckening any abatement for the yéelding of the Compaſſe, and being founde what more thē halfe way, you ſhal finde a banke of muddie

ground, of 8. or 9. fadome deepe, and being northward in the ſterne of the ſhippe, you ſhal ſee the trees vpon the coaſt of Camboia which is a verie low lande, this banke aforeſaid being paſt, it will not bee long before you ſhall ſee Pulo Wy, right ouer againſt you, and as ſoone as you ſée it you ſhal make towards it on the north ſide: you muſt vnderſtand yt this land of Camboia maketh a point frō whence the banke aforeſaid runneth of, from this point to ye hauen of Sian, you run along the coaſt north northweſt by yt which lyeth many Ilands, ſtretching along by it till you bee vnder 12 and 12. degrees and ½. In this countrie ly the moſt and greateſt Ilandes, one by the other, and there make a hooke, for the land hath a créeke called A Enſ
                              ••
                           da de Lian, which runneth a good way inwardes and lyeth vnder 12 degrees and ½. the north point of the land of the mouth of this creeke lyeth vnder 12 degrees ¾. and the land of this point aforeſaide which lyeth inwardes, reacheth eaſt northeaſt, and hath many trees, wt a ſandy ſtrand: frō this point to ſea ward there lyeth 2. high round Ilands without any trees: you cannot paſſe beetweene the firſt Iland and the land, for the channell or paſſage lyeth betweene the firſt and the ſecond (or the better to bee vnderſtood) betweene them both, there is a ſmall channell, but very deep of 60. fadom water, and there runneth a ſtrong ſtreame vnder the hight of the point aforeſaid of this creeke, little more or leſſe, about half a mile from the land on the inner ſide, there lyeth a very long cliffe ſtretching as the land doth, which at low water may bee ſeene, you run from this point to the hauen of Sian, along by the land north and ſouth: the Iſlandes aforeſaide are within 10. miles of the hauen as you paſſe along, they are not ouer great, neyther haue they any trees nor freſh water, and all along you find good ground till you be within halfe a mile, and nearer you ſhall not goe, neither runne in betweene them and the land, but let them lie on the eaſt ſide, comming to Pulo W
                                 •
                              
                           , vntill the tenth of February, there you find much eaſt wind, whereby the weſt coaſt lyeth like an emptie wall, therefore you ſhal keepe on the eaſt ſide of the aforeſaid Ilands, that ly along by the coaſt, being ſure not to put in betweene them, keeping this courſe north northweſt, along the ſhore, as I ſaide before, and comming to the furtheſt pointe of the ſaid Iland (which is full vnder 12. deg.) without ſeeing any more Ilandes, then bee aſſured that you are within the creeke of Lyon
                        ▪ and being there, you ſhall preſentlie ſet your courſe Northweſt, & Northweſt and by North, to get out of the creeke, leaſt the ſtreame ſhould driue you inward▪ & with that courſe you ſhall come to ſée the two Ilandes aforeſaid, lying on the north point of the aforeſaid créeke, & it is in croſſing ouer twelue miles, & as you begin to ſee the coaſt on the other ſide, lying before the créeke northwarde, the Iland ſtretching in that ſort as I ſaid before, being paſt the point of the créeke you ſhall run thether, & being by it you ſhall ſayle without it about halfe a mile from the ſhore: theſe Ilands end about 10. miles before you come to the hauen of Sian, as aforeſaid, and the laſt of them are 4. or 5. ſmall Ilands, one running through the other along the coaſt: theſe Ilands haue no trees▪ & are of red earth, and comming to the end of theſe Ilands, then put to the ſhore, vntill the Ilandes bee right ſouth from you, then take your courſe right North, wherewith you ſhall ſee the hauen of Sian, which lyeth frō theſe Ilands 10. miles diſtant. The hauen of Sian lyeth in a low land ful of trees, & without any ſandy ſtrands, but altogether of ſoft muddie ground & dirte, & hath likewiſe a banke of muddie ground, reaching two miles and a halfe ſouthward: whē you enter firſt vpon this bank it is hard muddie ground: you cannot enter into this hauen with any great ſhips but with a ſpring tide: and although you ſhold fall vpon this muddie ground, ther is no danger, for you muſt come vpon drie land to put out, or in with the tides, comming from the Ilandes aforeſaid to the hauen of Sian, in manner as I ſaid before, ſailing northward, & as they ly ſouthward from you, being in the night time, you may boldly anker vpon the muddie grounde, for the next morning you ſhal find your ſelfe right ouer againſt the hauen, ſo that you ſhall plainly ſée it, for it is the mouth or entry of a great riuer, & you ſhall ſayle therein paſſing ouer muddy ground, & all with the tides and ſouth winds, which will bring you vpwards at pleaſure.
                  
                  
                     The 23. Chapter. Of the courſe from the hauen of Camboia to the Iſland of Pulo Tymon, & Pedra Branq
                           ••
                        .
                     
                        DEparting from the point of ye hauē of Camboia, & being about halfe a mile or thereabouts in the ſea, you ſhal hold your courſe Southweſt, whereby you ſhall ſee two Ilandes lying betweene Pulo Co
                              •
                           dor and Pulo Wy, from the which you ſhal ſaile about halfe a mile ſtil running ſouthweſt, not once putting Southward, becauſe of ye ſtrong ſtreams, yt run to ye
                        
Iland of Bornon, and if the wind begin to be calme, and that you deſire to Anker in the middle of the gulfe, you may well doe it, for it is at the leaſt 38. or 40. fadome déepe, therfore leaue not ſayling Southweſt ward, for with that courſe you ſhall come right vppon Pulo Tymon, the Iland of Pulo Tymon is great, high, and full of trées, and hath verie good freſh water, and if you néede, there you may haue it, right ouer againſt it in an Iland lying in a Créeke of the ſame Iland, when you put to this Iland of Pulo Tymon, on the Northeaſt point you ſhall ſée a round Iland, and deſiring to runne betwéen it and the Iland, or betwéen it and the Firme land, you may wel do it, for you may paſſe fréely round about in euerie place, and comming to Pulo Tymon, you ſhall hold your courſe South, and ſomwhat South and by Weſt, towards Pulo Tynge, which is a verie high & rounde Iland, much like a Doune, or a ſheafe of Corne, it hath ſome ſmall Ilands lying by it in the ſame courſe of South, and South and by Weſt, you ſhall come to Pedra Branqua or the white ſtonie Cliffe, & from thence you begin the courſe to Sincapura, running about thrée or foure miles Weſtward.
                  
                  
                     The 24. Chapter. Of the courſe out of the Hauen of Macau in China to the Iland of Pulo Tymon, & the ſtraight of Sincapura.
                     
                        WHen you depart from Macau to ye other coaſt, you muſt put out at the Eaſt chanel, if the wind bee Northweſt, if not, then you cannot paſſe, that way, but you muſt ſayle thorough the ſouth weſt chanel, which is a good way to paſſe out, running from the point of Varella, right vnto the land on the other ſide of Macau, to ſhunne the cliffe of Belchior Dalmeida, and when you are about a Harquebuſh ſhot from the other ſide, then you ſhall runne along to a point of land, which is the end thereof, where the Iland of Caſtro lyeth, from this point the banke hangeth off, for the which cauſe you ſhall runne neerer to the land of Caſtro, then to the point of land that you runne not on ground, for in thoſe countries you haue moſt of the ſhallowes in the land that lyeth on the left hand, and the depthes on the right hand, with a ſpring tide, at this banke you find 4. fadome and a halfe, and being without the banke, you ſhall ſayle vnto the mouth or hole, running as then to the point of the banke, to ſhunne the Cliffes, which will preſently bee ſeen, for that the water breaketh vpon them) vntill they be on your right hand, being out of the mouth of this entrie you ſhall ſayle the courſe hereafter following, and hauing alſo departed from Varella, being a Harquebuſh ſhot from thence, you muſt run to the Iland called Do Bugio, (that of the Meercatte) and being ouer againſt it, paſſe cloſe by it, for it is a good way, for the north winds which you find there abouts, and becauſe the wind on the other ſide is verie ſcarce, the aforeſaide Cliffe lyeth in the middle way of the chanell, and you muſt runne on that ſide from the north along the coaſt, to the Iland of Caſtro, and when you are out of the chanell, you ſhal keepe Southweſt along by the Ilands, if it bee cleare weather till you ſee the Iland of Sanchon, and when you are within eight miles of it, being to Seaward from it, then you haue good ſayling, for I doe alwaies hold this courſe, and paſſe well with it, being 8. miles to Seaward from Sanchon, you ſhall runne Southweſt, for the ſpace of two miles or that you bee 12. miles as you geſſe from the furtheſt hooke of the Iland of the Sands, and being there, you ſhal then runne Southweſt, ſo long as that you thinke that you are inward from the furtheſt point of the Sands towards Pulo Calon, and then againe running South ſouthweſt, and South, & South and by Weſt, by which courſe you ſhal come to ſee the Ilands of Ieronimo Pretto, which courſe I haue holden in this manner with a good and ſpéedie wind, being in ſight of the Ilands of Ieronimo Pretto, and ſometimes without to Pulo Cambir, and hauing a bad wind, not being North, then the time will ſhew you what you haue to doe, when you ſee thoſe Ilands, you may goe neere them if you will, for it is faire cleare ſandie ground, at fifteene Fadome, from thence to Pulo Cambir, the coaſt runneth North & South, and ſomewhat North and by Weſt, & South and by Eaſt, this Iland Pulo Cambir, is long and flat, and on the ſea ſide it hath ſome red ſpots or veines, the buſhes thereof being euen and alike, right ouer againſt the points thereof, Northward vppon the Firme land there lyeth a ryuer, which is the ryuer of Pulo Cambir, if you come thether in the Monſon of South winds, you may haue therein freſh water for it is verie good. You ſhal likewiſe vnderſtand, that being eight miles to Seaward from the Iland Sanchoan you wil take your courſe from thence South Southweſt, and then you ſhall likewiſe ſée the Ilands of Ieronimo Pretto, but it muſt bee wt a Compaſſe yt is fix, I aduertiſe you once

more, that when you are in ſight of Pulo Cambir, about thrée or foure miles from it, there lyeth certaine Ilands, and halfe a mile to Seaward from the South point there lyeth certaine ſtonie Cliffes aboue the water, that ſhow like Bucks hornes, you may fréely paſſe betwéene all the Ilands, and that Iland for it is faire and good ground. From thence to the Varella you runne along the coaſt North and South, & ſomewhat North and by Weſt, and South and by Eaſt, it is twelue miles diſtant, this Varella is a verie high tower, ſtanding vppon a point of land, that commeth out from the land and reacheth into the Sea, by this Varella there is a Hauen, which you cannot ſée, as you come outward towardes it, becauſe the one land runneth through the other, alſo vppon this point ſticking out on the ſouth ſide, there is a place of verie good freſh water, in the ſandie ſtrand and on the North ſide of the ſame point is an other place of freſh water, vpon an other ſandie Strand, the land there hath ſome Cliffes and ſmal Ilands, and when you come thether to fetch water, it muſt be with a good tide, for there you haue no Anker ground, but verie cloſe to the ſhore, the beſt way is, to put into the Bay, for it is a good Hauen, I haue béene in it, and it hath good Harber, for North and South winds, with 14.15. and 16. fadome déepe, ſandie ground, and if you deſire to goe any néerer to the land, you ſhall finde eight and ſeuen fadome déepe good ground, this hauen of Varella lyeth vnder 13. degrées, in this way from Varella to Pulo Seſir, there are ſome Ilands lying about 9. or 10. miles from Varella, from the point of Varella to theſe Ilands, the coaſt runneth North and ſouth, and from theſe Ilands to Pulo Seſir, you begin to runne along by the land North Northeaſt, and South Southweſt, this Iland Pulo Seſir taking the name of the land, (becauſe it lyeth on the coaſt, for there is an other of the ſame name lying to Seaward) is a ſtonie Iland, without buſhes, hauing in the middle a pointed hill, like a Varella, it is a flat Iland of yellow colour like the Sea water, to know Pulo Seſir, being a mile or two from it, vpon the Firme land you ſhall ſée an opening, this countrie is good to paſſe along by it, for the ſpace of two miles, where you ſhal haue ground at ſeuen fadome great ſand but put not off into the Sea from Pulo Seſir, for it is an euill way, becauſe you haue but 4 fadome déepe, with ſtonie ground: Pulo Seſir lieth from the land vnder 10. and 13 degrees, and the courſe from Varella to Pulo Seſir is about 50 miles: from Pulo Seſir to Pulo Condor you ſhall hold your courſe South ſouth weſt, and ſouthweſt & by ſouth, at 18. and 20. fadome deepe, whereby you ſhall ſee the Iland Pulo Condor: but I aduiſe you when you come ouer this croſſe way from Pulo Seſir to Pulo Condor, to holde your courſe from the ſandy point Southſouthweſt, at 18. or 20. fadome deepe, and when you find 15. fadome, thē you are right by the coaſt of Cambaia, and ſhall not ſée Pulo Condor, but on the land ſide: but for your better way, you ſhall ſtill hold at 18 and 20. fadome, and by this courſe you ſhall goe full vpon Pulo Condor, which is a great Iland, hauing many Ilands roūd about it, and in euery place much anker ground: there likewiſe you haue freſh water on the weſt ſide: it lieth vnder 8 degrees & ⅔ from Pulo Seſir to Pulo Condor are 50. miles, and from Pulo Condor to Pulo Tymon you ſhal hold your courſe ſouthſouthweſt to 30. and 35 fadome, muddy ground: in this courſe and depth you ſhal ſée an Iland being right ouer againſt the 7. points of the coaſt: it ſheweth like 3. hilles, which ſtand in the ſpace of two openings, which are in the middle of the land, and on the Northweſt ſide it hath a cliffe Iland. From thence to Pulo Tymon, you ſhall take your courſe ſouth, and ſouth & by weſt, at 28. and 30. fadome, being from the one to the other 115. miles, and you ſhall alwaies runne, as I ſaid before to the Iland of the 7. points called Pulo Tingaron, ſouthſouthweſt, becauſe of the the ſtreames that runne to the Iland of Bornon, & leaue not that courſe at any hand til you ſee it, for it is 20. miles diſtant from Pulo Tymon: this is a good courſe, and I aduertiſe you againe, that when you are in the way from Pulo Condor to Pulo Tymon, in the middle betweene them both, you ſhall find 25. fadome deepe: in the middle way to Pulo Tymon you ſhall haue 35. fadome. Pulo Tymon lieth vnder two degr. and ½ on the North ſide it is a great Iland, hauing other Ilands lying by it: on the North ſyde it hath freſh water, in a ſandy ſtrand, where the ſhips that come from Sunda, to goe for China, take in water: being in ſight of Pulo Tymon, you ſhall paſſe on the out ſide therof, till you paſſe by the ſouth poynt, along through the channell that runneth betwéen this point and an other Iland, which Iland ſhall bee to ſea ward from you: and as ſoone as you are in the channell, on the ſouthweſt ſyde, you ſhall ſee an other high Iland, called Pulo Tinge, to the which you ſhall goe, within a mile and a half, or two miles thereof, and being there you ſhall take your courſe ſouthward to Pedra Branca, or the white Cliffe, at 18. or 20. fadome deepe, alwaies with the lead in hand: & if in this courſe you come to leſſe groūd, thē put to ſea ward, till you be at 18 fadome, about

                        4 miles diſtant from the coaſt▪ to auoyd the riffe that commeth from the point or hook of Iantana, where the Ilands lie, which you ſhal preſently ſée, hauing good regard that you paſſe not by Pedra Branca: but when you ſée, you ſhall make towardes it, which you muſt keepe on the lee ſide, for yt being with a flood the ſtreames runne very ſtrongly to the Iland of Binton, wherby you ſhuld not paſſe by Pedra Branca, for there I was forced to caſt out 2. ankers, and you ſhal ſtill ſayl with your lead in hand, and when you find 15. or 16. fadom, thē you are at the end of the riffe, and it may be that as thē you can not ſée Pedra Branca, and comming to 18. fadome, then put no further to the ſea: and running in that ſort, till you ſée Pedra Branca, running as then to the poynt of the land, that you ſhall ſée on the land of Iantana, which is the land on the North ſide, which you ſhall paſſe along by, till you come to ſee redde Houels, lying at the Hauen of Ior: and before you come to the hauen of Ior, you ſhall hold off from it, not putting into the hauen: for there lyeth a Banke, but you muſt paſſe the redde Houels, and runne towardes the land, which is a ſandie ſtrand: and as you paſſe along to the mouth or entrie of the ſtraight of Singapura, you muſt be carefull that as ſoone as you are within Pedra Branca, you runne to the land of Iantana, without turning to the other ſide, for there it is verie bad ground, and the wind would hinder you to get ouer, and if you deſire to run on the inſide of the Iland Pulo Tymon, you may wel doe it.
                  
                  
                     The 25. Chapter. The courſe from Malacca to Sunda, lying in the Iland of Iaua Maior, with the ſituation of the countrie.
                     
                        SAyling from the great Iland lying 3. myles ſoutheaſt from Malacca, to the Riuer called Rio Fermoſa, your courſe lieth Northweſt & Southeaſt, and Northweſt and by weſt, and ſoutheaſt and by eaſt, which is 13. miles: all this way, if you will, you may anker, and it is not aboue 30. fadome déepe, good muddy ground. This Rio Fermoſo lyeth on the Coaſt of Malacca, within the entry, on the Southeaſt ſide hath high land, and on the Northweſt ſide low land: it is in the Hauen ſixe or ſeuen fadome deepe: when you enter into it you ſhall put to the Southeaſt ſyde, keeping from the Northweſt, for ther you ſhall find ſhallowes. From this Rio Fermoſo to the Iland Pulo Picon, which lyeth in the ſame Coaſt, a myle from the land aforeſayd, you runne Northweſt and Southeaſt, and Northweſt and by north, and Southweſt and by ſouth: betwéene this Iland and the firme land it is ſhalow groūd, and the courſe is 6 miles: from Pulo Picon to Pulo Carymon, which is a great and high land with trees, with ſome Ilands round about it: you runne North and ſouth, and north and by weſt, and South and by eaſt, and are diſtant 5. miles: from the Iland Carymon there is about 3. miles to the coaſt of Samatra, you muſt make towardes this Iland, and from thence run along by it, on the weſt ſyde, for it is good way. On the ſouth point of this Iland Carymon lyeth certain Ilandes: from theſe Ilandes two myles forward, lieth an other ſmal long Iland called Pulo Alonalon: there the channell is at the narroweſt. From this Iland beginneth the ſtraight called Eſtrecho de Sabon, that is ye ſtraight or narrow paſſage of Sabon, and being as farre as that Iland, you ſhall hold about half a mile from it: from Alonalon, to the great Iland of Sabon, are about 2 miles, in the middle of this channel, there lieth other ſmal Ilands, that ſhall all lie on the Eaſt ſide from you, hauing good regard not to fall vpon them: whē you run through this channel, you muſt be aduertiſed, that in the middle thereof there lieth a hidden Cliffe, vnder the water, whereon a ſhip did once ſtrike with her Ruther. Comming by the Iland Alanolon, on the Southweſt thereof, that is on the ſyde of Sumatra, you ſhal ſee two ſmall Ilands, with an other ſomewhat leſſe full of trées, bee all rampard, with certaine cliffes lying by them: and whē thoſe Ilandes are ſouthweſt & ſouth weſt & by weſt frō you: thē you ſhal hold your courſe South, where you ſhall find nyne fadome water, alwaies keeping off from the Coaſt of Sabon, which is the eaſt ſyde, for it is ſhallow, but run in the middle of the channel, for it is good ground: half a mile off from the Iland Sabon, lieth a ſmall Iland, called Pulo Pandha: this Iland in the middle hath a ſtonie cliffe, and when you are ſo farre that Pulo Pandha lyeth Eaſtſoutheaſt from you, thē hold your courſe ſouthward, and you ſhal find 9. fadome deepe, running half a myle diſtant from the Iland of Sabon: the Iland and cliffe aforeſaid being paſt, you ſhall find hard ground, holding your courſe South vntill the Iland Pulo Pendha lieth northnorth eaſt from you, where you ſhall preſently find muddy ground and from thence forward you may anker, if you will, and when the aforeſayd Cliffe lyeth from you as aforeſayd, then on the Weſt ſyde, you ſhall ſee two

Ilandes or Cliffes, whereof the firſt hath ſome trees, and the other (which lyeth neareſt to the mouth of Campar, in the Iland of Sumatra) hath no trées: they cloſe one to the other: from thence to Sumatra are many ſtone Cliffes: when you come to paſſe by theſe Ilandes that ſhall lie from you on the ſide of Sumatra, you ſhall runne through the middle of the channell betwéene the Ilandes and the coaſt of Sabon ſouthward, as I ſaide before, holding your courſe along the coaſt of Sabon, about halfe a mile from it, where you ſhall alwayes finde eyght fadome muddy ground, vntill you come to a ſmall Iland, lying hard by the coaſt of Sabon, hauing many Cliffes round about it and as you paſſe by it, you ſhall keepe outwarde from it, leauing it on the ſide of Sabon: there likewiſe you haue muddie ground, and the ſhot of a great péece further off, the depthes will preſently begin to leſſen, to ſeuen and ſixe fadome, and ½. from thence you ſhall runne to a point of the Iſland Sabon, lying right ouer againſt one of the mouthes of Campar: thoſe mouthes or holes ly on the coaſt of Sumatra, right in the face of this point, about two bowes ſhot from the land there lyeth two Cliffes, which at full ſea cannot be ſéene: they are called Batotinge, betwéene them and the land are ſixe or ſeuen fadome deepe, and betwéene them both nyne fadome: you may paſſe with a ſhippe betweene them, and to ſeawarde from them towards Sumatra, you finde hard by 12. and 13. fadome déepe, to make towards theſe cliffes, and alſo to paſſe by them you ſhall take your courſe, (as ſoone as you ſée the aforeſaide Iſlands that by the Iſland of Sabon being paſt as you do, paſſing along by Sabon, with your lead in your hand at ſeuen, ſixe, ½. & 
                           •
                        . fadom deep, and thether the depths will leſſen, being all muddie ground, which you ſhall haue vntill you come right againſt the higheſt houell of thoſe that ſtande vppon the point of Sabon, and with a point of the lande of Sumatra, being one of the ſides of the mouthes of Campar, called As Bocas de Campar, from whence the one land lyeth with the other, Eaſt and Weſt: in this country are the aforeſaid cliffs of Batotinge, being here, the depthes will preſently beginne to increaſe to ſeauen and eight fadome: which depthes you ſhall holde vntill the Cliffes lie behinde you, and from thence putting to ſea, towards the ſide of Samatra, leauing Sabon ſide being carefull to kéepe from it, for you haue nothing els in that place that can hurt you, but onely the cliffes which the ſtreames runne vnto, you ſhall likewiſe take heed on both ſides, as wel of Sabon, as Sumatra for they are all ouer, from thence along the coaſt full of bankes and ſhallowes. Theſe two Cliffes aforeſaid being paſt, which you ſhall almoſt leaue behinde you, you ſhall preſently runne to the land of Sumatra, with the lead in your hand, not paſſing leſſe then fiue fadome nere vnto the land, nor aboue ſeauen fadome to ſeaward, with your lead neuer out of hand: for in this countrie you muſt rule your ſelfe more by the lead and depthes, then by the compaſſe. When you are at the end of this Iland of Sabon, then you haue another Iſland, called Pulo Dure, which reacheth to another Iſland called Pulo Boyon, & then another Iland called Pulo Buron, which lie ſo cloſe to Sumatra, that they ſéeme to be all one land, at the end of this Iland Dure, lie 3. Ilands, one great and two ſmall. This Iland Dure lieth with the point of Sabon, (where the two ſmall Cliffes lie) north, northweſt, and ſouth ſoutheaſt, they are in diſtance about ſixe or ſeuen miles, with 6.7. and 8. fadome water muddie ground, & when you are right ouer againſt the Iland called Pulo Buron, which lieth cloſe to the coaſt of Sumatra, then run ſoutheaſt, and ſoutheaſt & by ſouth, and following that courſe, vntil you come to tenne fadome, then runne Southeaſt, vntill you come by a point of the land of Sumatra called Tanianbaro, from this point to the Iland of Pulo Buron are three miles, which is without the channell, and when this point of Tanianbaro lieth weſtward frō you, then run ſouth, and ſouth, and by eaſt, to the 3. Ilands called Calantigas, whereof the firſt hath an Iland lying by it on the ſouth ſide, the middle Iland hath nothing at all, and the third Iland that lieth moſt ſouthward, hath an Iland lying by it on the North ſide. Theſe Ilands as you paſſe by them ſhall lie eaſtward from you from this point Tanianbaro ſomewhat further, lieth an other point, called Tanianbaro, which is very euen with the ſea, betwéene theſe 2. points lieth the Riuer of Andargyn, and the aforeſaid point of Tanianbaro lieth with the Ilands Eaſt and Weſt▪ & betweene both the points are 9. miles. When you ſée this point, then from thence forward you ſhall no more ſée the land of Sumatra, becauſe there are many créekes, from this point, you make to the Ilands Calantigas Northweſt and Southeaſt, and is in length about ſeauen miles. Theſe Ilands lie vnder 1. degree vpon the ſouth ſide of the Equinoctiall, & on the eaſt ſide of theſe Ilands you haue many ſtonie cliffes, both aboue & vnder the water: therefore you muſt put off from them to ſeaward: for that betweene them & the Iland of Linga it is very foule and dangerous, if you will goe from

the Iſlandes Calantigas, to the Iſland Varella, then hold your courſe Southeaſt and Southeaſt, and by Eaſt, whereby you ſhall come to it. They are in diſtance 9. miles, and in this way you ſhall finde ſeuen or eight fadome déepe, and cloſe by the land ſixtéene, and ſeuentéene fadome on the North ſide, but on the South ſide it is leſſe. This Iſland hath freſh water, it lieth right ouer againſt a point of the land of Samatra, called Tanianbon, from the which point to the Iſland are two miles, and you runne North Northweſt, and South Southeaſt, and you muſt paſſe betwéene this Iſland and the point, leauing the Iſland to ſeaward. On the backe bord ſide, in the face of this point, lieth thrée Iſlandes, whereof the greateſt is called Iambe, but along by the land of Samatra, you haue neyther Iſlandes, nor Cliffes.
                     To runne from the Iſland Pulo Varella to the Straightes of Palimbon, then run Southeaſt, at ſeuen fadome muddy ground, and with this courſe you ſhall ſée the hill called Monte de Manopyn, which ſtandeth right in the face of the Iſland Banca. When you ſée this hill, then you can hardlie ſée the coaſt of Samatra, becauſe of the créekes, and you ſhall kéepe the ſame courſe to the ſaid hill runnning a mile and a halfe from it towards the coaſt of Samatra, leauing the hill on the northeaſt ſide, not comming any nearer to it, for it hath a great Riffe lying a mile from it, and when you are right againſt the hill Manopyn, thē you are right againſt the mouths or créekes called as Vocas de Palimbon, lying vppon the Coaſt of Samatra, a mile from the aforeſaid point of Palimbon forward, there lieth a ſmal or thin point of land, and on the ſouth ſide of the ſame point, there are many cliffes & rockes about a mile into the ſea al lying vnder the water, which make the riffes aforeſaid: wherefore I aduiſe you to kéep at the leaſt a mile and a halfe, or two miles from it, & be not deceiued by the great depthes that are along by thoſe riffes, for that from many depthes, you will at the laſt fall on ground, as it happened to a ſhip, which ſailing on that ſide, cloſe to the Iſland Banca, at fiftéene fadome ſtrak with his ruther vpon the ſtones. You muſt likewiſe bee carefull not to kéepe too neere the land called as Bocas de Palimbon, or the mouthes of Palimbon, for they are altogether ſhallowes and ſandes, let your Lead be ſtill in hand, and goe no nearer then fiue fadome and ½, to the land, vntill you be paſt them, nor aboue eight fadome to ſeaward, and if you come to eight fadome, then rather kéepe at leſſe depth (as I ſaid before.) You runne from this hill Manopyn) which ſtandeth in the Iland Banca) to the mouthes or creekes of Palimbon (that lie on the other ſide of Samatra, north northeaſt, & ſouth ſouthweſt, and is in courſe fiue miles. From thence beginneth the ſtraight called Palimbon, which reacheth ſoutheaſtward, and ſometimes eaſtward, and in other places ſouthward, till you be paſt through it, being paſt the hill of Manopyn, about two miles beyond it, you ſhall hold your courſe to the firſt mouth or creeke of Palimbon, with the Lead in hand, keeping a mile from it, at 5. fadome and ½, and goe no nearer to it, for they are altogether ſhallowes and ſandes: wherefore I counſell you not to goe nearer then 5. fadome and ½, and towards Banca not nearer then 8. fadome, holding your courſe in this manner, till you be about a mile beyond the laſt mouth of Palimbon, & being there, you ſhall make with the land of Samatra, till you be within halfe a mile thereof, where th
                           •
                         land about a long mile right out before you, maketh a point, and being by this point, you ſhall ſée another point, which is diſtant from the firſt point 4. miles, and the courſe from the one to the other is eaſt ſoutheaſt, & weſt northweſt, and beeing at this ſecond point, about a mile beyond it on the ſame coaſt lieth a ſmall riuer, and betwéene this point and the riuer, you runne halfe a mile of the ſhore or coaſt of Samatra, alwaies with your lead in hand. From this riuer aforeſaid, you ſhall put from the coaſt, from this Riuer to another point, (lying 5, miles forward) it is altogether bankes, and ſhallowes with muddie ground: therefore you ſhall ſtill ſaile with your lead in hand, & goe no nearer then 5. fadome to the coaſt of Samatra, for if you doe you run on ground, and at this depth you ſhall run to the aforeſaid point that lieth before you, & right againſt it on the other ſide of the Iland Banca, hath a point or hooke of high land, where the channell is at the ſmaleſt, and comming by this point aforeſaid, you ſhall preſently finde more depthes. When you come to this point aforeſaid, then runne ſouth ſoutheaſt, holding that courſe till you come to the Iland of Laſapara, which lieth right before you, being diſtant from the ſaide point 9. miles. This Iland is ſmall and low land, being round about full of ſands and ſhallowes, and when you ſée it, then runne South and South and by eaſt, within two miles of the land, on the ſouth ſide of Samatra, and ſixe and ſeauen fadome, for it is your right way and courſe to paſſe before that Iland, and if you finde ten or twelue fadome, then turne againe to the coaſt of Samatra, ſéeking for fiue fadome, that you may runne at ſixe and ſeauen fadome, and beeing there keepe that courſe, leauing the Iland of Laſapara,
                        
on the eaſt ſide, and when you begin to enter therein, then run ſouthward, and being right againſt the Iland, then your depthes will begin to leſſen to 5. fadome, but bee not abaſhed, for it is the right depthes you find in that place, and when the Iland is Eaſtward from you then you are right ouer againſt it, from the Iland Laſapara twelue miles forward, there is an Iland (lying cloſe by the Land of Samatra) that maketh a ſmal créeke or bay, and for a marke it hath this token, that the trees thereof are higher then thoſe of the coaſt, and ſéeme little woodes: you runne from this Iland to Laſapara North North: eaſt, and ſouth ſouthweſt, from the which Iland there runneth a Riffe, reaching two miles and a halfe into the ſea: therefore if you deſire to ſaile thether, being in the night time, you ſhall run ſouthward with your lead in hand, at 8. and 9. fadome, and though you come to 11. fadome, yet your courſe is good, but you ſhall not runne vnder 7. fadome, and as you thinke you are paſt by the Iland, then you ſhall take your courſe againe towardes the land, and there you ſhall finde 8. and 9. fadome, & comming to this Iland in the daie time, you ſhall put ſo far from it into the ſea, that you may onely ſée the toppes and vpper parts of the trees, and when it lieth Northweſt from you, then you are paſt the Riffe, & then againe runne in with the land at 8. and 9, fadome déepe, as aforeſaid: for the right way and courſe is alwaies along the Coaſt: beyond this Ilād forward, there lieth a gréene creeke vpon the coaſt, which you ſhall ſhun: for there it is altogether ſhallowes, and the corner therof towards the ſouth hath a thick point of land, that ſticketh further out then al the reſt that are there abouts: within this hooke toward the créeke lieth a Riuer, from whence there commeth a banke, reaching 2. miles into the ſea, and is foure fadome deepe, all hard ſand, in that countrie where I haue paſſed: therfore I aduiſe you not to leaue the depthes of 8. & 9. fadome, which is the right courſe, and you paſſe from this Iland to the aforeſaid Riffe, ſouth, ſouthweſt, and North, Northeaſt, being diſtant ten miles from this point of the creeke, to two Ilandes (lying on the ſame coaſt of Samatra forward) you run in the ſame courſe of north northeaſt, and ſouth ſouthweſt, and is in courſe ten miles, in all this way you ſhall finde 9.10. and 11. fadome. Theſe Ilandes are diſtant from the land 3. or 4. miles, and comming to theſe Ilandes, then the land and coaſt of Samatra maketh a thicke crooked ridge or backe, and if it be cleare weather you ſhall ſée right before you two high landes, wherof one lieth ſouthweſtward from you, which is the land of Samatra, and the other ſouthward, which is the land of Sanda, part of the Iland Iaua Maior. From the two Ilands aforeſaid, you ſhall alwaies hold your courſe along by this crooked thicke ridge of the coaſt of Samatra, & being at the point thereof, then the land beginneth againe to be low, and then you begin clearely to ſée the two foreſaid lands. Betweene thoſe two high landes, there runneth a channell or ſtraight inward to the ſea, betwéene the land of Samatra, and Iaua Maior (which is called the ſtraight of Sunda) & beeing paſt the great thick ridge of the coaſt of Samatra, and comming againe by the low land, then runne no longer by the coaſt, but if you haue a good forewind, then preſently croſſe ouer, holding your courſe ſouth ſoutheaſt to the land of Sunda, to the ſoutheaſt ſide of a point or hooke of that land, by the which lieth the way to Sunda: therefore I aduertiſe you hauing a good forewind to croſſe ouer, for that if the winde ſhould begin eyther to be calme in the middle way, the tide being with you, the ſtreame would driue you to the channell, which is no good courſe, for the leaſt depth of the channell is 40. fadome and more, & the ſtreames and tydes therein runne very ſtiffe both out and in, and if they ſhould driue you in, as the ſtreame commeth forth, being with a Northeaſt or eaſt winde, you ſhould finde the waues of the ſea hollow, and full, that no cable would be ſtrong enough to hold againſt them, & by force would driue you out againe, which would be no ſmall labour and paine to you. I ſay this, becauſe I my ſelfe haue found it ſo comming into it, by mine owne vnaduiſednes, in croſſing ouer to the high land, lying on the ſide of Sunda, and held our courſe right vpon the midle thereof, but the ſtreame draue you ouerthwart before we perceiued it: therfore I aduiſe you that you runne ſoutheaſt to it: for the more you runne eaſtward, the leſſe depth you ſhall haue to anker in, if the winde ſhould calme: and it is good ground, and being by the land aforeſaid, cloſe by it you ſhall preſently ſée a great & flat Iland, full of trées, with many hilles, hauing to ſeaward from it or toward the northeaſt, another flat Iland, and from thence to the hauen of Sunda, it is about 4. miles▪ you ſhall hold your courſe to the Hauen along by the Iland that lieth on the coaſt, keeping to ſeaward, or halfe a mile from it, for it is all faire and good ground, at 6 and 7. fadome deepe, and ſo you ſhall runne along to the end therof, and being there about a mile ſoutheaſtward, you ſhall ſée a ſmall Iland full of trees, which you ſhall leaue on the ſoutheaſt ſide, running inward from it, right to a high pointed hill, (that ſtandeth within the land) and when you begin to come

néere it, then you ſhall ſee the houſes of the towne, which lieth along by the ſtrand, and there you may anker at 4. and 3. fadome, as you thinke good, for it is all muddie ground, and if you deſire to runne into the Hauen through a Channell, which paſſeth betweene the great Iland, and the high land of Sunda, you may well doe it, alwaies running along by the land, vntill you be by the Hauen: for you ſhall leaue the Iland aforeſaid, and ſix Ilands more (that are ſomewhat further) to ſeaward, but you finde but two fadome and ½ ſtonie ground: wherefore the way paſſing about is the beſt, as I ſaid before.
                  
                  
                     The 26. Chapter. The courſe from the Hauen of Bantam, to the Hauen Calapa, called Sunda Calapa, both lying on the north ſide of the Iland Iaua Maior.
                     
                        SAyling from the Hauen of Bantam, to Sunda Calapa, you ſhould holde your courſe, betweene the little Iland and the Iland (lying right ouer againſt the crooked point, becauſe the ſtreames runne towardes the Channell or ſtraights, ſayling about the ſhot of a great peece from all the Ilands, or along by them, for it is all good way, at fiue and ſixe fadome deepe muddie ground, becauſe that frō the hooke of the bow or crooked point) there runneth a great banke or ſand, and being about this hooke, you ſhall run 6. or 7. fadome deepe, till you be a good mile from it, for from this crooked point to another that lieth on the ſame land, it is altogether bankie & ſhallow ſandie ground, and to ſeaward from this point lyeth a long Iland called Pulo Tunda, and three or foure miles Eaſtward from thence there lieth a whole row of Ilands both great and ſmall, which are al vnder the ſame courſe: at the end of thoſe Ilands, which are foure, one great and thrée ſmal, they are ioyned together with Riffes, and along by thoſe Riffes you ſhall finde twentie foure & twenty fiue fadome deepe, and you ſhall leaue al thoſe Ilandes, ſtanding on a row to ſeaward from you: from the point aforeſaid called the crooked hooke. All the coaſt vnto Calapa runneth Eaſt, and ſomewhat Eaſt and by ſouth, & you runne along by it at 7. and 8. fadome: for if you put further to ſeaward, then the ſtreames run too ſtiffe towards the ſtraight, or the channell that runneth outwardes betweene Iaua and Samatra, which is againſt you, and is of manie depthes: 
                           •
                        oure miles frō the crooked hooke or point forward, then the coaſt hath another point of land, where right ouer againſt it about a mile to ſeaward from it▪ there lieth a round Iland, but you muſt not paſſe betweene it, and the land: for it is very ſhallow & ſtonie ground, only ſmall fuſts may paſſe through it, but you ſhall runne about halfe a mile to ſeaward from it, for it is all along nothing but ſtones, a little mile beyond this Iland, there is another Iland, and then yet a little further cloſe by, there lyeth another little Iland: from theſe two Ilandes a mile ſoutheaſtward cloſe by the land, there lyeth two other Ilands, & betwéene the two firſt Ilands, and theſe two Ilands, there is a channell of 6. or 7. fadome deepe, which paſſing through you ſhall runne nereſt to the Ilands that lie moſt to ſeaward, & if you will not paſſe through, then run about to ſeaward from them, at 12.13. and 15. fadome déepe, from this long Iland northward, endeth the Ilands that lie to ſeaward, hauing the Riffs, as I ſaid before, and make a mouth or opening of a channel, of a great mile long: you ſhall here run neareſt to the Ilandes that lye cloſeſt to the land: for that running by to the Ilands that lie to ſeaward you ſhall preſently ſée the Riffes, which with a low water are moſt part vncouered: being paſt this long Iland, & the other that lieth the ſhot of a great péece from it, as alſo the two that lie further forward, & the land of the coaſt that hath the point, then ſomewhat beyond this point 4. other Ilands, betwéene the which and the land you may by no meanes paſſe, & a ſmall mile further eaſtward, there lieth other 4. Ilands, two and two together, at the end whereof to ſeaward there is a white ſād that alwaies lieth vncouered, all theſe Iſlandes you ſhall leaue on your right hand, on the land ſide, and being on the ſouth ſide ſomewhat paſt this white ſand, you ſhall ſée two high hils within the land which lie eaſt & weſt one from the other, & at the foote of the eaſt hill lieth the hauen of Calapa, where you ſhall anker, if you wil enter into the hauen, being paſt the foreſaid ſands, & an Iland that lyeth from thence toward the land, then there wil foure Ilandes lie ſoutheaſtward from you, which teach towards the land, & another cloſe by he land, then you ſhal take heed of a ſand, lying north eaſt cloſe by the hauen, which you may alwaies ſee, and when it is high water it is waſhed away by the flood, you ſhal runne towardes theſe Iſlandes which lie to ſeaward from the hauen béeing day time, to ſhunne the droughtes aforeſaid.
                  
                  
                     
                     The 27. Chapter. The courſe from the Iland Pulo Timon, to the Hauen of Sunda in the Iland of Iaua Maior.
                     
                        FRom the Iland of Pulo Timon, you run to the Iland of Binton, to a point of land that from the ſame Iland runneth almoſt Eaſtward into the ſea ſouth Southeaſt, and North Northweſt, and hard by this point lieth certaine Riffes of ſmall rockes and cliffes, and on the north ſide of this point it hath an opening or mouth, wherein there lieth a great Iland with two hilles, and a vallie in the middle, and along by this point, leſſe then halfe a mile from the land, there are eight fadome deepe of flatte and cleare ſandy ground, and hath no foulenes but the ſtone Cliffes, & Rockes that lie cloſe by the land: from this point aforeſaid of the Iland of Binton, to the Southeaſt point of the Iland Pulo Panion, which hath an Iland lying to ſeaward from it, you runne Southeaſt, and Northweſt, & Southeaſt and by eaſt, and Northweſt and by Weſt: betweene this Iland Pulo Panion, and the Iland of Binton lieth an opening, which in the middle way hath two flat ſmall Ilands, full of trées, and if you cannot paſſe Pulo Panion on the eaſt ſide, then you may paſſe inward betwéene it and the land: it hath fiue and ſixe fadome déepe good ground, and you need feare nothing but that you ſée before you. This Iland of Pulo Panion, lieth cloſe to the land of Binton, and if you fortune to be ſo neare the land, that you may not paſſe by it on the ſea ſide, then you muſt runne to the northweſt point, where there lieth a roūd Iland, which you ſhall leaue on the ſide of the Iland, not running betwéene it and the Iland, but round about it cloſe to the land, for it is faire running ſo inward along by the Ilands as I ſaid before, on the ſoutheaſt point of this Iland Panion, there lieth many Ilands and Cliffes, and two miles Southeaſtward from it lieth a round Iland full of trées, you ſhall paſſe betwéene theſe two Ilands, towards the Iland of Linga, which is a faire cleare way and ſea, and if you chance to be by this aforeſaid mouth or opening, then you ſhall runne on your courſe outward about the Iland, for it is good way: from this round Iland or two miles ſouthward lieth a ſtonie Riffe, about the length of the ſhot of a great péece, and hath but one Rocke that is vncouered, yet you may ſée the water breake vpon them, which you muſt ſhun. From this Iland to the end of the Ilandes of the land of Linga, (lying cloſe on the Eaſt ſide of the ſame Iland) you ſhall holde your courſe South, and South, and by Eaſt, and runne Southward outward, alwaies along the Ilandes, which ſhall lie Weſtward from you, and when you haue ſayled twelue miles you ſhall ſée right before you on the Southweſt ſide, a ſmall round Iland lying to Seaward ſomewhat diſtant from the reſt, which is almoſt of forme like the Iland das Iarras, lying by Malacca, and foure miles before you come at it, you ſhall ſée two other ſmal round Ilands, lying along by the land, and ſeperated from the reſt but not far, and when you are as farre as the firſt round Iland, béeing cleare weather, then you ſhall ſée the high land of the Iſland of Linga, lying Weſt, Southweſtward from you aboue, or beyond the Ilandes (whereby you paſſe) which are all low houels and vallies, and in this ſort you ſhall runne along by the Ilands, & comming about thrée miles beyond the round Iſland, you ſhall ſée a ſmall Iſland ſomewhat diſtant from the land, which at the firſt ſheweth like two Cliffes, and there the land hath a point from thence running inwards making a créeke (called a Enſeada de Linga) and when you are as farre as this ſmall Iſland, then Weſt, Northweſtward, you ſhall ſée the high land of Linga, which ſheweth like two high rockes or hils, ſeperated from each other, and reach North and South, that in the North hauing two toppes like a Hares eares, and Weſtward you ſhall ſée another Land, which maketh a high crooked ridge ſomewhat ſtéepe downeward. In all this way to the aforeſaid round Iland, you ſhall finde ſeauentéene and eightéene fadome déep hard and faire ground, to the point or end of theſe Iſlands, and by it you ſhall haue twentie eight fadome, and comming by this point, (where you diſcouer the land lying Weſt Southweſt from you) to goe to Pulo Pon, (which is an Iſland diſtant from Linga 8. miles, on the North ſide hauing two ſmall Ilandes, and when you are on the Northeaſt ſide, it ſéemeth to be round, with a ſharpe hill in the middle, and from the Southeaſt ſide it ſheweth two Hilles with a Vallie in the middle, as in effect it is,) then you muſt runne South Southweſt, and being thrée or foure miles forward, you ſhal ſée the Iland of Pulo

Pon lie before you: in it you haue freſh water, and round about it is fayre ground: when you ſee it, you ſhall make towards it: on the Weſt ſide, and halfe a mile from it you ſhall finde 15. fadome deep, and being by it runne South, and ſouth and by Eaſt, with the which courſe you ſhall ſée the hill of Manopijn, lying vppon the point of the Iſlande Banca, where the ſtraight of Palimbon beginneth, and the ſeuen Ilands, called Pulo Tayo, ſhall lie ſoutheaſtwarde from you, which are diſtant from Pulo Pon 7 miles, and if in this way you find your depthes to be aboue ten fadom, then you are on the Eaſt ſide, and hauing ten fadome, then you are 6. or ſeuen miles from Banca, and finding 8. fadome, you ſhall not be long before you ſée the land of Sumatra, and as ſoone as you ſée Manopijn, then runne within two miles thereof, before you enter into the ſtraight or channell, in the ſame manner holding your courſe to the mouthes or créekes of Palimbon towards the coaſt of Sumatra, ſhunning a great créek, lying Northweſt frō ye mouthes of Palimbō, vpon ye ſame coaſt of Sumatra, which hath a verie great hauen and entrie, whereby many ſhippes haue béene deceyued that entred therein: it hath no ſhallowes, and preſently (as you paſſe along the coaſt) you ſhall ſée the lande thereof ſtretching ſouth ſouthweſt: from thence forwarde you holde your courſe to Sunda, as in the voyage from Malacca to Sunda and Iaua is alreadie ſet down, therfore it is not neceſſarie to rehearſe it againe.
                  
                  
                     The 28. Chapter. The courſe along the coaſt of Sumatra, f
                           •
                        ō the outſide, beginning at the f
                           •
                        rtheſt point lying vnder fiue degrees, on the North ſide of the Equinoctiall, to the ſtraight of Sunda, and ſo to the Iſlande Iaua Maior, with the ſituation of the coaſts.
                     
                        BEing by the furtheſt point or ende of the Iſland of Sumatra, on the out ſide then you muſt runne ſouth along the coaſt: it is a very high and pleaſant country to behold, with many great créekes, and Bayes along by the coaſt. From this firſt & further point, (called Achein) 12. miles forward to another point that reacheth into the ſea, the coaſt runneth South, and from thence to the ſands called Os Baixos de Triſtan de Tayde (that is the ſandes of Tryſtan de Tayde,) you muſt runne along the coaſt Southeaſt, and ſoutheaſt and by ſouth: the courſe is fiftie miles: by theſe Ilandes of Triſtan de Tayde, there are many ſandes and ſhallows that lie round about them on the weſt, Northweſt, and North ſides, with many Ilandes and Cliffes on the ſame ſides: theſe Ilandes aforeſaid are ſomewhat like the Ilandes of Pulo, Sambilon, lying on the coaſt of Malacca to ſeawarde from theſe Ilands of Triſtan de Tayde, there lyeth 2. Ilandes called Ilhas d'Ouro, that is, the gold Ilandes, whereof the neareſt lyeth at the leaſt 10 or 12. myles diſtant, the other 12. or 13. miles further into the ſea: they lie vnder two degrées, and ½ on the North ſide of the Equinoctiall line: from thence you runne to the ſtraight of Sunda, hauing many Ilandes all along as you paſſe, as firſt thrée Ilands lying vnder a degrée and a halfe, on the ſouthſide of the Equinoctiall, Eaſt and Weſt from theſe Ilands lyeth a point vppon the coaſt of Sumatra, called Cabo das Correntes, (that is, the point of the ſtreame) becauſe there the ſtreame runneth very ſtrong towardes the Southweſt, wherefore there is no other remedy then onely to runne cloſe by the ſhore: if you deſire to goe to the ſtraight of Sunda, you muſt be verie careful, for there are ſo many Ilandes along by the coaſt, that they are not to be numbred, from the Iland of Triſtan de Tayde, to the Ilandes of Manancabo are about 100. miles, and your courſe is Northweſt, and ſoutheaſt, & ſomewhat Northweſt and by North, and ſoutheaſt and by ſouth, you muſt run between the Ilandes As Ilhas d'Ouro, and the lande by which courſe you ſhall come to the poynt O Cabo das Correntes, which is verie high, running into the ſea further then all the reſt of the land, but you muſt not go too neere to the point, for there are certaine ſandes and cliffes ſticking out from it: this point lyeth vnder one degrée and ⅔. on the South ſide of the Equinoctiall. I ſet down no other marke to know the countrie of Sumatra, becauſe the ſtreames draue to ſeaward, without all theſe Ilands. & ſo I could not take a better courſe then to put to the Iland called Ilha d'Ouro de Manancabo, that is, the golde Iland of Manancabo, and I fel on it vpon the ſea ſide running for the ſpace of 4. or 5. daies, along by it: it is a verie high and faire Iland to behold, ſo that you may eaſily iudge & well perceyue that it hath Gold: it is altogether of a ſmooth ſtéepe grounde, & along by the ſea ſide it is about 10. or 12. miles in length, you run by it North & ſouth, and ſomewhat north

and b
                           •
                         Weſt, and ſouth and by Eaſt: it hath on the ſea ſide 5. or 6. Ilandes, about a myle and a halfe diſtant from the land vnder thrée degrees, which is the height that I found, but they are diſtant from the firme lande of Sumatra 8. or 9. myles, the Riuer of Manancabo lying on the land of Sumatra right ouer againſt this countrie, I think it to be a verie great riuer: for from thence there runneth a great ſtreame, and much wood and other traſh driueth from it at the leaſt 10. or 12. miles into the ſea. The beſt marke we found vpon this coaſt of Sumatra was, that we neuer left the ſight of land, but ran along by it, for by that courſe you come to the Iland Ilha de Ouro, ſcarce to 3. and 3. degrées and ½. I write this becauſe you ſhall not truſt to the running of the ſtreame, that draweth Southweſtward, as I ſaid before: from the Iland Ilha de Ouro you run to the ſtraight of S
                              •
                           nda ſoutheaſt, and Southeaſt and by ſouth, and being paſt Ilha de Ouro there lyeth two Ilandes, which reach North and ſouth one from the other, in the ſame courſe with the Iſland of Gold about 5. or 6. miles: nowe to runne to the mouth or entry of the ſtraight of Sunda, you muſt not leaue the coaſt of the firme land, hauing good reſpect to the Ilandes and cliffes, whereof there are very many lying by it, that you can hardly know where to find ye mouth of the ſtraight, but onely by the knowledge of the Iſlande, which is very high, lying right ouer againſt a point of the Iland of Sumatra, on the north ſide: this firme land of Sumatra endeth there, where with the Iland of Iaua Maior, it maketh the ſtraight: it hath on the Northweſt ſide of this ſtraight two or thrée Ilands, lying about a mile from the land, and vpon the Ilandes that lie néereſt to the lande there was once a ſhippe taken with French men, the great ſhotte being kept by the kinges of the Iſlande of Banda, and Cal
                              •
                           pa, and a
                           •
                         mile ſouthwarde from the lande lyeth the Iland that hath a high ſharpe pointed hill, as I ſaide before, and on the North ſide of this high ſharp hil or Iland, are 4. Ilands, whereof one is verie high, reaching Northeaſt and ſouthweſt: they lie ſomewhat further from it, that is by the aforeſaid Ilands cloſe by the point on the Northeaſt ſide: betweene al theſe Ilands & the land there is a great créeke, of man
                           •
                         hidden cliffes lying vnder the water, whereof ſome are vncouered, and thinke not to enter into this créeke, vnleſſe it be with a Fuſte, or a very ſmall ſhip, for it is better to runne towardes the Iland lying on the ſouth ſide thereof, along by the point, which you neede not feare, for it hath nothing that can hurt you, and then you ſhall preſently ſée lying before you on the Northeaſt ſide a poynt of lande, which ſheweth to haue 2. or 3. Ilands at the end thereof: along by this point lyeth the mouth or entrie of the ſtraight of Sunda, where you muſt paſſe through: this point reacheth North and ſouth, hauing in the North a high houell, the ſouth ſide being the ende of the ſame land: cloſe by the mouth of the ſtraight, for a better marke Northeaſtward from you, you ſée a long Iland, and on the ſoutheaſt part a high land, which land lyeth aboue Bantam, a hauen in the Ilande of Iaua, where the Portingalles lade Pepper, which groweth & is gathered in that Ilande, and behind the aforeſaide high lande lyeth the towne of Bantam, and before you come to the ſaid land that lyeth aboue Bantam, you ſhall in the Eaſt Northeaſt perceiue two or thrée Ilands, and if you deſire to go to Bantam, you may paſſe betweene theſe Ilands, but I once againe aduiſe you of the Iland lying in the mouth or channell or ſtraight of Sunda aforeſaide, which is for a marke of the ſaid ſtraight, being very high, and deepe withall, and hath this token, that when you are paſt or about the firſt point or hooke, you may then anker at 20. and 25. fadome deepe as you haue occaſion, vnleſſe it be cloſe to the land, where there lyeth many white ſtones, and rockes, and further to ſeawarde it is altogether muddie grounde, at 20. and 25. fadome, but it is beſt for you to anker as neere the lande as you may for your beſt ſecuritie, for there are many ſtiffe blaſtes that come out of the land: this high Iſland or poynted hill lyeth vnder fiue degrees and ½. for there I haue often taken the height of the ſunne as I lay at anker, and the mouth or entry of the ſtraight of Sunda lyeth vnder ye ſame height: to ſea warde you haue theſe Ilandes as you paſſe to the mouth or entry of the ſtraight, the firſt Ilandes lying Weſt to ſeaward, from the aforeſaid pointed high hill, or Iland, and Weſt Southweſt, or ſeuen miles from thence there is a rowe of Ilandes, with certaine Cliffes lying about them, and Southward other ſixe or ſeuen miles there lyeth other high and great Ilands, and alſo Southweſtward from thence there are other Ilandes, betweene all theſe Ilandes there are many channelles, which are ſo narrow, that men can hardly get out of them: the beſt channell to runne through I founde by the aforeſaide high pointed hill or Iſlande on the South-Eaſt ſide, reaching Northeaſt and ſouthweſt: in all theſe channels you neede feare nothing but that which lyeth before your eies.
                  
                  
                     
                     The 29. Chapter. To ſaile from Calapa in the Iſlande Iaua Maior to China, with the courſes and ſituations of the coaſts particularly ſet downe.
                     
                        SAyling out of the hauen of Calapa, you ſhall runne to an Iland lying by the poynt of Carauon, that lyeth néereſt to the land, wherby you ſhal preſently ſee two points of ſandie downes, which reach towardes the Ilands that reach to ſeaward: when they are on your right hande, then you muſt put in betwéene the Ilandes, through the channell where the winde giueth you beſt way, for it is all fayre and good ground: being paſt theſe Ilandes, you ſhall runne along by the coaſt to the point of Carauon, which lyeth Eaſtward about two and a halfe, or thrée myles in length, from thence to take your courſe croſſe ouer to the Iſlande of Luſepara, and from this point of Carauon, lying on the coaſt of Iaua, you runne North and South to the Iland of Luſepara or Laſapara, and ſomewhat North and by Weſt, and South and by Eaſt: the courſe being fiftie miles the courſe is holden in this manner, becauſe the Eaſt and Eaſt Southeaſt winds as then beginne to blowe in thoſe countries, that is as ſoone as the month of May commeth on, and likewiſe as then the waters and ſtreams beginne to runne with the Monſon of the year, (which is the coniunction and time of the certaine winds) towards the ſtraight of Sunda, the channell of Lampon, which beginneth from the mouth, & reacheth to a thicke point and créeke with a Riffe, lying on the coaſt of Sumatra, about 18. or 19. miles from Luſepara, in the Countrey aforeſaide: by the point Carauon (which lyeth thrée myles frō the hauen of Calapa) you ſhall take your courſe North Northeaſt for 8. or 9. miles, whereby you ſhall ſée a round Iſland, which will lie on the ſide of the land of Sunda or Iaua, and being paſt this Iſland, Weſtwarde from thence you ſhall ſée a rowe of Iſlandes, that do all reach North and ſouth, paſſing by the countrey of the mouth or ſtraight of Sunda, by this aforeſaid round Ilande you ſhall find ground at 20. fadom, at the which depth you ſhall take your courſe North, & North and by Weſt, whereby you ſhall alwaies be within the ſight of the aboue named Ilands, to the ende of them, with the aforeſaid depth of 20. fadome: when you beginne to loſe the ſight of theſe Ilandes, being paſt them you ſhall preſently come to 14. and 13. fadome, and being at 13. fadome, you ſhall runne the ſame courſe of North, and North and by eaſt, vntill as you thinke you are within 15. or 16 miles neere the Iland of Luſepara, and being there, then run North, and there the depthes will begin to leſſen to 11. fadome, which is a good courſe, for that running at more depth you ſhould go outward at Luſepara, & thus ſayling North, and at 1
                              •
                           . fadome, as I ſaide before, you are in your right courſe till you come to 9. fadom, and being there then looke about you, for you ſhall not runne long, but you ſhall ſée the Iſland of L
                              •
                           ſepara, which will open like two ſmall houelles, lying Eaſt and weſt one from the other, yt in the eaſt being greater thē the other: in all this w
                           •
                        y in ye Month of May I found Eaſt & eaſt ſoutheaſt windes, as I ſaid before, and according to the times of the waters, windes, and ſtreames, you ſhall gouerne your ſelfe in ſuch manner, that in your courſe you alwaies run Northward, for it is your right courſe, & beſt way from the point Carauon to the Iſland Luſepara, and if you go later to ſaile, hauing a ful wind, without any abatement or cutting off, you ſhall holde your courſe right North, for it is very daungerous to ſaile without the Iland Luſepara, therefore you ſhall take your courſe in ſuch manner, that the Ilande may ly Eaſtward from you, becauſe Luſepara lyeth twelue myles Eaſtwarde from the other Ilande, which is called Luſepara falſa, that is, falſe or wrong Luſepara, becauſe many ſhippes haue been deceyued by it, thinking it had béene the right Luſepara, when they came from the Iland of Iaua, and therefore they haue giuen it the name of Luſepara falſa: you muſt take heede of it, for that northward from it, it hath a great creek lying in the Iſland of Banca, and ſuch as put into it, can hardly gette out againe the right way, for there the windes are very ſcant, whereby you might indure great paine and daunger to get into the ſtrayght, as it hath happened to ſome ſhippes, that were deceyued by Luſepara falſa: therefore I aduiſe all men when they ſayle to Luſepara, that they put not in aboue eleuen fadome, letting the Iſlande of Luſepara lie on the Eaſt ſide, ſo aſſure them of their way. And when you ſée Luſepara, being within 3. miles thereof, you ſhall take heede you goe not right North and ſouth towardes it, for that on the North ſide, as alſo on the ſouth, for more then two miles and a halfe: it is altogether bankes and ſands, that are very dangerous,

therefore you ſhall hold on the Southweſt ſide, in ſuch manner that you ſhall keep two miles from it towardes the lande of Sumatra, I haue paſt within leſſe then a mile from it, whereby I diſcouered the whole ſtrande, and a white ſtrande, which banke lyeth on the North ſide, and in this courſe I founde fiue fadome and ½. muddie ground, but as ſoone as the Iſland was ſoutheaſt frō vs, we had but four fadome and ½. and 4. fadom, and ſtrake twice on grounde without rother but verie ſoftly: wee founde all ouer ſandie ground, but as ſoone as wee put to the land of Sumatra, wee had preſently deepe ground, therefore I wiſh you to keepe two miles from the Ilande towardes Sumatra, and when you beginne to come neere it, you ſhall hardly find fiue fadome muddy grounde: and when it lyeth Eaſtward from you, then you are right ouer againſt it, and then you ſhall preſently ſee a point of the lande of Sumatra, wherevnto you ſhall runne, and there you ſhall find more depthes, and running towardes the coaſt you may goe within halfe a myle neere the ſaide point of lande, where you ſhall finde ten fadome deepe of harde flatte ground, vntill you be a good way from the point, you runne from the coaſt of Sumatra, from the ſtraight of Sunda to this point, North Northeaſt, and South South-Weſt: from this firſt pointe thrée miles further there is another poynt vpon the ſaid coaſt of Sumatra, and you ſhall make thether, kéeping halfe a myle from the coaſt, alwayes with the lead in your hande, where you ſhall find the ſame depthes of 9. or 10. fadome, harde ground, & as you begin to go néer to the aforeſaid 2. point thē you ſhal find muddy ground, & right ouer againſt it in ye Ilande of Banca, there lyeth an other hooke or point of land, where the channell is at the narroweſt, it is from the one land to the other about three miles: from the firſt point to the ſecond the courſe is North and South: from the ſeconde poynt ſixe miles forwarde, there is another point vppon the coaſt of Sumatra, which you muſt runne with the other poynt North Northweſt, and South ſoutheaſt, and betwéene them both it is altogether bankie and very ſhallow muddie ground, which reacheth alſo about by the middle way of the channell, being aboue foure miles in length, along by the coaſt of Sumatra to a Riuer, which you ſhall ſée, and being as farre as the aforeſaid point, be not negligent in caſting forth your leade, and there you ſhall come to fiue fadome muddie ground, but runne no lower, for then you ſhoulde preſently bee at foure fadome, you muſt rule your ſelfe according to your depthes, alwaies holding your courſe on the coaſt of Sumatra not paſſing aboue ſeuen fadome, and when you ſee the aforeſaide Riuer, and beginne to bee neere it, then your depthes will preſently begin to increaſe, running cloſe by it, vntill you bee right againſt it, being within halfe a mile of the point: foure miles from this third point lyeth yet an other point, which lyeth with the third point Eaſt Southeaſt, and Weſt Northweſt, holding your courſe along by the coaſt, within halfe a mile of the lande, at ſeuen and eight fadome déepe, it is altogether to the fourth point muddie ground: from this fourth point to ye firſt mouth or creek of Palimbon (called A Premeira Boca de Palimbon) is about two myles, and you runne Eaſt and Weſt, and Eaſt and by South, and Weſt and by North, and being about a mile beyonde this fourth point aforeſaide, you ſhall keepe off from the coaſt to ſeaward to ſhun the mouth of Palimbon aforeſaid, running two miles from it (becauſe of many ſands and ſhallows that are thereabout) alwayes with the lead in hand, not running aboue ſixe fadome néere the land, to be the more aſſured: for from 5. fadome you come preſently to foure, and then on ground, and runne not too néere towardes the ſide of the Iſlande Banca, for there you find ſtones and rockes, whereupon the Iunco (that is the ſhippe) of Antam de Payua, did runne, which was at fiftéene fadome, and ſtrake with his rother vpon ſtones & cliffes: therefore I aduiſe you not to runne aboue 8. fadome, nor vnder ſixe or fiue fadome and ½. from the ſecond mouth or creeke, called A Secunda Boca de Palumbon, cloſe by the third mouth: for when the hill of Manopi
                              •
                           n (that is, the point of the Iland Banca) lyeth full Eaſtward from you, then you ſhal croſſe ouer, kéeping your courſe two miles from it, to auoide a Riffe that lyeth ſoutheaſt from it, & being in this parte whereby the hill of Manopi
                              •
                           n lyeth ſoutheaſtward from you, then you ſhal run North and Northeaſt & by eaſt, by ye which courſe you ſhal ſee 7 Ilands, lying altogether, by the country people called Pulo Taye, which lie about 15. miles from Manopi
                              •
                           n: theſe Ilands ſhall lie on the ſoutheaſt ſide from you, & being right againſt theſe Ilands, you ſhal ſee a little Iland lying in the Northeaſt, which hath 2. houelles in forme like two men: it lyeth about ſeuen miles frō the aforeſaid Ilandes, & is called Pulo Pon. From theſe Ilands aforeſaid then your courſe lyeth along by this Iland, and if it be cleare wether, beyond this Iland you ſhall perceiue the Ilād of Ling
                              •
                           , which is very great,

hauing two high rockes lying north & ſouth from each other: on the ſouth rocke vpon the North poynt thereof, it hath a high ſharpe point, with two houels ſtiking out like hares eares: in this courſe you ſhall find 9. or 10. fadome water, all muddy ground. About 5. or 6. myles Northeaſtward from theſe aforeſaid Ilands there lyeth an other Iland, & hard by the Iland of Banca, you ſhall ſee 2. or 3. Ilands, and whē you ſee them, then paſſe not by them, for they are the Ilandes of Pulo Tayo, which you ſéeke, being by theſe Ilāds of Pulo Tayo, as I ſaid before: you ſhall doe your beſt to runne cloſer to them, then to the Iland Pulo Pon, holding your courſe north, and north & by eaſt, whereby you ſhall ſee the Ilande of Binton and Pulo Panyon, which is hard by, on the Eaſt point, making a ſmal channel betweene them both. From this Iland Pulo Panyon, about two miles ſoutheaſtward, lyeth a round Iland, full of trees, you may paſſe betwéene both the Ilandes, or outward about the round Ilande, for it is all faire and good ground, ſhunning a riffe lying in the South, about two miles from the roūd Iland, wherevpon you ſhal ſée the ſea breake: it is about the length of the ſhot of a great péece, being beyond this Iland: then runne North, whereby you ſhal ſee Pedra Branca, that is, the white ſtone or cliffe, which in the courſe from Malacca to China we haue oftentimes ſpoken of, from thence forward you ſhal hold your courſe, as I haue ſet it downe in the deſcription of the courſe from Malacca to China, therefore here again néedleſſe to rehearſe. From the Iland Pulo Tayo aforeſaid, to the aforeſaid Iland Pulo Panyon, it may be about 37 miles, litle more or leſſe.
                  
                  
                     The 30. Chapter. The courſe together with the deſcriptiō of the Iland of Canton, with all the coaſts, hauens, and pointes of the kingdom of China, to Liampo & Nanquin, with the ſituation and ſtretchings of the ſame.
                     
                        IN the deſcription of the nauigation from Malacca to China, we haue ſhewed the entrie of the Channelles of the firſt Ilandes called Canton, lying vnder 21. degr. & 
                           •
                        , which is the Iland called Ilha de Sanchoan, and the other lying to landward from thence, as alſo the Ilād of Valco de Faria: you muſt vnderſtand that from this Iland Sanchoan, (which as I ſaid) is the firſt & furtheſt to the ſea ward, to a point lying 12. miles from the Iland Lamon, you runne without all thoſe Ilands eaſtnortheaſt, & weſtſouthweſt: theſe Ilandes reach about 38. or 39. miles along by the Iland of Sanchoan, and from this Iland to Lampacon, are 11. miles, and in the hauen of Macau eighteene myles, and from Macau to the end of the Ilands, are twentie one miles: theſe Ilands lying from Sanchoan to Macau, from the ſeaward vpon the row, are many and cloſe one to the other, which farre off ſéeme to be all one land, & from thēce forward they begin to leſſen, and to ſeparate one from the other, whereby they may eaſily be perceiued to be Ilands: all this way to the end of them, to ſeaward from them, you need not feare any thing, but that you ſee before your eyes, onlie that you haue 10. or 12. Ilandes or ſtony cliffes, lying 10. miles from Macau forward, to ſeaward from an Iland, betwéen the which Iland and cliffe you may well paſſe, running along by the Iland, for it is a faire and great Channel: or if you will, you may paſſe to ſeaward without the cliffes if you deſire not to runne between them, you ſhall holde the courſe as I heere ſet downe. Thorough the Channell that is betweene theſe Ilandes called As Ilhas de Sanchoan, or of Canton, and fourteene miles North-northweſtward: from the Iland Sanchoan there lyeth a poynt of land, which reacheth from thence to the hauen of Comaye: alſo from thence the land runneth Eaſt, for the ſpace of fyue miles, where it maketh an end, reaching from thence foure myles inwarde towardes the North, from whence againe it putteth outward to the Eaſt, to Macau: in this land that ſtretcheth North, there is a ſmall Creeke, from whence you runne Eaſtward to Comaye: it is much ſayled by the Lanteas and Bancoins, which are the barks and Lighters of China, that carie the Marchandiſe and goods aborde the Iuncos or ſhippes that come thether from Sian to take in lading: this land maketh an Iland called Taaquinton: three miles beyond the aforeſaid ſmall Creeke lyeth one of the mouthes or entries of the Riuer of Canton, which is called Camon: it is a verie good entrie, for that through it the great Bancoins or Chiniſh Lighters doe paſſe to the Towne of Canton. Beyond this mouth or entrie of Camon lyeth the Hauen of Pinhal, to the ſeaward, and cloſe by the entrie thereof lyeth a ſand, which you muſt ſhunne, and 2. miles beyond this hauen of Pinhal: there is the other mouth or entrie, where you put into Canton with ſmall Lanteas and Bancoins, which by the Portingales is called As Orelhas de Lebre, that is, the Hares eares, becauſe that inward to the land it hath two high and ſharpe pointes of land like a Hares eares: a little within this entrie lyeth a riffe,

which may eaſily be ſeene: from thence to the Hauen of Macau are about three myles: you runne along by the land, thorough a ſmall & ſhallow Channel, which is but a fadome and a half deepe, at high water: the Weſt poynt of Taaquinton aforeſayd lyeth North and South, with the middle of the Channel, from the entrie of Sanchoan and the Iland of Vaſco de Faria. This Ilande of Vaſco de Faria reacheth Eaſtward, like Taaquinton, and they lie north and South from each other. This entrie or Channel which both theſe Ilandes make, is faire and good muddie ground, therein to anker, and you anker cloſe by the Iland of Faria, in the midde way, where it is good freſh water: from the Eaſt point or hooke of this Ilande aforeſayd, to the poynt of Taaquinton, there is a Banke of three fadome deepe muddie ground: the deepeſt part thereof is by the Iland of Faria aforeſaid, and being paſt that, you haue more depthes: if you deſire to ſayle from the Iland of Sanchoan to Macau, you haue two wayes, whereof the ſafeſt is outward: through the mouth or Channel betweene the Iland of Vaſco de Faria, running to ſeaward along by the Ilandes, like thoſe that come outward from the ſea: the other way is Eaſt, through the Channell of Taaquinton and Vaſco de Faria, and béeing at the end thereof, about foure miles Northeaſtward, you ſhall ſee the hauen of Lampacon, which is two great and high Ilandes, with manie trees lying Eaſt and Weſt. The mouth or entrie of this hauen, which is betweene the Ilandes aforeſayd, hath within foure or fyue fadome déepe, of verie ſoft muddie ground, therefore it is hard ankering there, and beſides there runneth a great ſtreame: at the entrie on the weſt ſide it hath a great Iland or ſtony cliffe, right in the middle of the mouth: ſuch as deſire to enter on the weſt ſyde of this Hauen, muſt runne between this great Cliffe and 3. Ilands: there you find a bank of 8. ſpannes of water, muddy ground: on the South part of theſe 2. Ilands, there is an other great & high Iland, which reacheth northeaſt & ſouthweſt: betwéen this Iland and Lampacon you may paſſe through: on the eaſt ſide of the mouth or entry of the hauē of Lampacon, lieth a great and high Iland reaching north and ſouth: the ſouth point of this Iland lieth Eaſt and weſt, with the Eaſt poynt of the North Iland of Lampacon, and the chānell that runneth betwéene theſe 2. Ilands, which reach Northward: it is déepe and faire, hauing about the length of the ſhot of a great péece in breadth: right on the Eaſt point of the ſouth Iland of Lampacon, lieth a round ſtony cliffe, and ſomewhat eaſtward lieth a great and high Iland, reaching on the north ſide eaſt and weſt, and on the weſt ſide, northweſt & ſoutheaſt: the channel which this ſtony cliffe maketh is faire and déepe: from this ſtonie cliffe Southeaſtward ther is an iſſue or going forth reaching inward to ſea, al ſandy ground, with 3 fadome déepe, through the which al the ſhips do paſſe that come from Lampacon, and deſire to be outward, what way ſoeuer they go, for on the weſt ſide it is ſhalow, as I ſaid before. Frō 
                        Lampacon 7. miles eaſtward lieth Macau, and there is a row of Ilands in the ſame courſe of Macau: al theſe Ilandes ly on your ſouth ſide, and from thence to the firme land are 5. or 6. miles: this gulf or ſpace betwéene the Ilands & the firm land, as alſo from Lampacon to Macau is altogether an open ſea, & hath no more but 2. or 3. Ilandes, yet it is all ouer bankie ground, for the déepeſt part therof is but 2. fadome, which reacheth about a mile néere the firme land, and the Channell which runneth from the ſea to the mouth or entry of the riuer of Canton (called the hares eares) runneth along by the Ilands of the hauen of Macau: but returning backe again to the Iland of Vaſco de Faria, comming right ouer againſt the end thereof, there you haue an other high round Iland, and betwéen theſe 2. Ilands you runne through to ſea ward, and beyond this Iland there is a row of other Ilands, which reach to the mouth or Channel, (where you paſſe through, when you come out of the ſea to Macau, and lie Eaſtnortheaſt: all this Channell or paſſage that runneth betwéen them out of the ſea, is faire and good way, and there is nothing to be feared, but that you ſée before your eyes: you muſt run along by theſe Ilandes, leauing them on the ſouth ſide, on the north ſide hauing the Ilands of Lampacon, and when you are right againſt them northeaſtward, you ſhall ſée an Iland that hath a point of land, of very white ſand, to the which point you ſhal goe, for frō thence to the Iland of Lampacon there is a ſandie banke, the déepeſt part thereof being along by this point, by the which you ſhal run along, within the length of a ſhot of a great peece: and when you are paſt this point, run Northeaſt, and then on the Northweſt ſide: there wil be a great high Iland, which lyeth eaſt & weſt, with the ſouth Iland of Lampacon: and betwéen it & Lampacon there is no other hinderance, but onely the great ſtony cliffe aforeſaid: you ſhall run by the ſoutheaſt point of this Iland, leauing it on the Northweſt ſide, paſſing through the channell that runneth betwéene it and another Iland that lieth weſtward, and being through it, thē you are in the channel, which comming from the

ſea, runneth to the mouth or entrie (called the Hares eares) northward, and from the channell weſtward lieth the way to Macau. I ſet not down this courſe, for that I haue ſhewed it in an other place, in the Nauigation from Malacca to China: if you paſſe betwéen theſe Ilands, you muſt alwaies run with the lead in your hand, to find the depthes. From Macau 
                        
                           •
                         miles northeaſtward lieth a very great and high Iland, with a very high ſharp point, which lieth in the greateſt mouth or entry of the riuer of Cantō, through the which ye great Iunco
                              •
                           
                         (that is the Spaniſh ſhippes for marchandiſe doe paſſe) where our ſhips (I meane the Portingals) may likewiſe paſſe through, and on the Weſt point of this Iland, halfe a mile ſouthward, lieth certaine ſtone Cliffes, betwéen the which and the Iland, it is al déep & faire ground, as alſo along by the Iland on the ſouth ſide, beyond theſe ſtony cliffes to ſeaward, there lieth certaine ſmal Ilands, and beyond theſe Ilands, ſomewhat further to ſeaward, there lieth other great Ilands: but you muſt not paſſe betwéene the aforeſaid ſtony cliffes and the ſmall Ilands, but betwéen the ſmal & the great Ilands you may fréelie paſſe without feare. From Macau 4. miles ſoutheaſtward, lieth a great and high Iland, being deuided in 
                           •
                        . parts, by a ſmall running water out of the ſea, & a farre off ſheweth like a ſhip, hauing neither trees nor buſhes, and halfe a mile from thence towardes the land, there is an other long Iland, with trees in the middle of the channel: between theſe 2. Ilands, in the entrie thereof, on the ſide of Macau, lyeth a rock or cliffe, which the water waſheth ouer, which you muſt ſhunne, for all the reſt is fair and good way. From this great Iland that deuideth it ſelf in 2. parts, 6. miles Eaſtſouth eaſt, lyeth an other long high Iland (with a very black ſhining wood of trees) called Tō
                           quion, and frō thence half a mile to ſeaward, lieth a row of 10. or 12. Ilands or cliffes: you muſt run betwéene them and the land, where it is faire ground, or if you will you may paſſe outward to ſea from all the Ilands: from this Ilande aforeſaid, to the land, about a myle or thereabouts diſtant from it, lyeth an other low & long Iland with trees in the middle of the channell: betwéene theſe 2. Ilands, there lieth an Iland or cliffe, and an other by the Iland that lieth by the land: betwéen this cliffe in the middle of the channell & the Iland that lieth to ſeaward, it is déepe & faire, and on the Eaſtnortheaſt point of the Iland to ſeaward, on the land ſide, there is a ſmall créeke or bay, where there is a good harbar for the Monſon of the ſouth winds: and there is likewiſe good freſh water roūd about this Iland Tonquion, it is all faire ground: but turning again to the great Iland with the ſharpe pointed top, lying in the mouth of the Riuer of Canton, from the weſt point of the ſame Iland 
                           •
                        . or 8 miles eaſtſoutheaſt lieth a great high long Iland, which reacheth northweſt & Southeaſt, & is altogether without trées or buſhes: from the Southeaſt point of the ſame Iland, half a mile to ſeaward, lyeth an other round & high Iland, and the channel that runneth between them is faire and good: on the northeaſt ſide of this great Iland, from the middle thereof to the land there lieth 2. or 3. long clouē Ilands or rockes, cloſe by, of a reddiſh earth, without any trees: betwéene the Northweſt end of the aforeſaid Iland & the land, runneth a ſmal channel, through the which the ſmall Bancoins (which are the Chiniſh barkes or lighters) doe paſſe. From Canton to the aforeſaid Ilande the water maketh a gulfe or créeke: through this Countrie you paſſe when you come from Iapon. From this round Iland, from the mouth that is betwéene both 7. myles Eaſtnortheaſt, the land hath a point, with a high and euē land vpon it ful of black ſhinning buſhes, hauing on the Weſtſouthweſt ſide a ſtill ſtéepe land, and on the Eaſtnortheaſt ſide, it is all Valleyes. From this land there runneth a poynt into the ſea, and right againſt this point, about the length of a harquebuſe ſhot, there lyeth a great long Iland, reaching as the coaſt doth. The channell betwéene this point and the Iland aforeſaid, is ſcarſe 3. fadome déep: within the poynt towardes the land, on the Weſtſouthweſt ſyde, there are many and good roads to anker for the Monſon of China, at 7. & 8. fadome déepe, muddie ground. I haue layne there at anker comming from the Iland of Iapon, & came through the aforeſaid ſmal channel: here al the Ilands called As Ilhas de Canton, or the Ilands of Canton do end: this way from the 2. aforeſaid Ilands, to this poynt or hooke of land, maketh a golfe, by meanes of the great Creeke: al this croſſe way is faire and good, and when it is any hard wether, then there goeth a verie hollow water, ſpeciallie cloſe by the Channel of the two Ilandes. From this poynt of the land aforeſaid, and the poynt of the Iland, 6. miles along by the coaſt lieth a creeke with certaine Ilands and cliffes in the mouth thereof, on the eaſtnortheaſt ſide, which are good defence againſt ſtormes & foule wether: there you haue victuails & other neceſſaries, and being 
                           •
                        . miles to ſeaward, there lieth a ſtony rocke or cliffe▪ yt a farre off ſheweth like a ſhippe vnder ſayle) lying vnder 22. degr. & ½, this coaſt along by the ſea is ſandie ſtrand, inward béeing a high land, it reacheth eaſtnortheaſtward to a point of land, lying fifteene myles from the poynt

                        Lamon, you may anker al ouer, and is in diſtance to this point of land 18 miles, you muſt vnderſtand that from the countrie, lying at the end of the Ilands of Canton, to the Iland Lamon, 18. miles to ſeawarde, there lyeth certaine ſandes and riffes, of red ſād, which at low water are vncouered, in the which place all the fiſhermen of that country do meete, all the aforeſaid ſandes and riffes are cloſe without any channell or paſſage, from the aforeſaid point of land, lying fifteene miles from the Iland Lamon, to the Enſeada dos Camoriins, that is the creeke of Garnaet, by the Chinaes called Cai
                              •
                           to, lying full vnder 25, degrees and ½ you run along the coaſt northeaſt and ſouthweſt, and northeaſt and by north, and ſouthweſt and by ſouth, without all the points and hookes, it is in courſe 86. miles, and turning againe to the point from thence to Lamon, are 15. miles, and 10 miles from the aforeſaid point lyeth a riuer called Rio do Sal, that is the riuer of Salt, from whence the ſalt is carried to Canton, it is a great hauen and entrie, being paſt this riuer of Salt, foure miles forward, there is an other riuer lying by an other point or hooke, which riuer by the Chinaes, is called Chaochen, and by the Portingales Por
                              •
                           o de Pecas, that is the hauen of Peces, for there are made the good peeces of Chiniſh ſilkes, and other coſtlie wares. This riuer is verie great, and hath manye places and villages to land ware, that are inhabited lying along by the water, it lyeth with the ſouthweſt point, of this Iland Lamon, eaſt ſouthweſt, and weſt northweſt, the land of Lamon, lyeth vnder 23 degrees, and ¼ it is great and verie high, couered with buſhes & trees, it reacheth as the coaſt doth, about a mile from the firme land, as you come from Macau ſayling along on the weſt ſouthweſt ſide, it ſheweth like 2 Ilāds although it is but one, it hath on the ſouthweſt, or the land ſide, ſome ſtony cliffes, cloſe by it, which at low water are vncouered, and at high water the ſea breaketh vpon thē, but all the reſt of the channell, betweene the Iland and the firme land is faire and deepe inough, yet you may not paſſe through, for it is full of buſhes and other ſtuffe that driueth, although I haue paſt through it by cō
                        pulſion, but with great paine, therefore I counſell no man to paſſe through it, vnleſſe it be with a Soma, that is a Chiniſh Caruell, wherewith they ſayle along the coaſt, for the traffick, on this aforeſaid ſouthweſt point of the Iland, to ſeaward there lyeth certaine ſmall flat Ilandes, and other rockes, betweene the which and the Iland you may not paſſe, and on the northeaſt point: on the land ſide a verie great creeke, where there is a verie good harbor and low road, for all windes, where likewiſe our ſhippes may enter, if occaſion ſerueth, it is three fadom and ½ deep, ground muddy and to enter in you goe nere on the ſouthweſt ſide, for I haue beene in it. From this ſouthweſt point of the Iland aforeſaid, a mile and a halfe inward to ſea, there is a riffe that ſheweth aboue the water, being of ſome black ſtones, that reach all on a rowe Eaſtward, about three myles, and on the ſyde thereof three flat long Cliffes alſo in a row, whereof that outward is the greateſt: you may by no meanes paſſe ouer, nor betwéene this riffe, and cliffes, but betweene the riffe and the Iland: there is a verie good channel, for I haue paſt through it, it is 20 fadome deepe, ſmal thinne flat ſandy ground, and you haue nothing there to care for, then onlie to keepe by the Iland: and the aforeſaid Riffe: it is good for thoſe that come from Iapon, to paſſe through it, for if you paſſe outward by the ſea, to auoyde the Riffe, it happeneth oft tymes that there you finde the winde ſharpe, and therefore can hardlie reache the Coaſt, whereby (if it chance) you muſt indure great payne, before you can get it. From this Iland Lamon 6. or 7. myles Eaſtnortheaſt, lyeth the Hauen of Chabaquon, which is an arme of the ſea, that runneth northeaſt, very déepé to lādward: at the entrie thereof, on the ſoutheaſt ſide, there lyeth a thicke and great poynt of land, which from thence ryſeth very high, and on the Northweſt ſyde it is a low land of ſandie ſtrandes. From the aforeſaid point of land, in the ſame courſe, about the length of the ſhot of a great peece, lyeth a Ryffe of ſand, wherevpon the water breaketh: if you deſire to enter into this hauen, you muſt put to the Southeaſt ſyde, running along by the poynt of the entrie, where it is two fadome and ½ deepe, half a mile aboue the aforeſayd poynt of land, on the Southeaſt part of the land, there lyeth a ſmall Créeke or bay of muddie ground, which is a good harber in foule wether, and for more ſecurity, you may run ſo cloſe to the land, that you may runne into the mud, & ſo leap on ſhore, on the northweſt ſide, which is by an Iland, where there lieth a town or village where you finde much prouiſion of victuails & other thinges. This courſe is done with Iuncos & Somas, which are Chiniſh ſhips & boates, & this hauen lieth vnder 23. deg. & ½: behind this créek on the ſea ſide, lieth another créek, by yt which forward about the lēgth of the ſhot of a great péece, lieth 4 or 5 Ilāds, betwéen the which & the lād you may paſſe: this créeke of the Iland is a barber for the Monſon of Malacca, that is

for the windes that blow when you ſaile from Malacca to China,) within it is very good and faire ground: the land lying betwéene theſe two aforeſaid créekes, is a high and greene cuntrey without buſhes or trées, & the aforeſaid iſlands are round and high, ſtretching along all in a rowe. Frō this Hauen of Chambaqueo to Chinchon, the coaſt runneth Northeaſt, and Northeaſt and by Eaſt, and is in diſtance 22. miles: it is all high land, and cloſe by the land it is ſixtéene fadome déepe, and there runneth many hard and great ſtreames. From Chabaqueo ſix or ſeuen miles forward lyeth Enſeada Pretta, that is, the Blacke créeke, by the country people called Lauho, aboue the which there lyeth a high land with very black ſhining buſhes, and in the mouth of the entry it hath two Iſlands, within it is very good and faire ground, béeing a harbour or defence againſt certaine windes, wherein Ruij Lobo with his ſhip, & another Iunco or Chiniſh ſhip did winter. Two miles to ſeaward from it lye two Iſlands of white ſtonie cliffes cloſe togither, betwéene the which & the Firme land it is all faire & good ground. From this Enſeada Pretta or Bla
                           •
                        ke creeke, ſeuen myles forward there lyeth two high and ſmall Iſlands (ſome what longer than round) without either buſhes or trees, cloſe by each other, reaching Northweſt & ſoutheaſt, betwéen both hauing thrée or foure ſtone cliffes: Theſe Ilands and cliffes lie diſtant from the Firme land about halfe a mile, & right ouer againſt them lyeth a ſmall Créeke, from a verie lowe hooke or point of land along by the ſea, and on the Iſland that lyeth neareſt to the lande on the Southweſt ſide, lyeth a Sand baye, which is a good Hauen or Rode of ſeuen or eight fadome déepe, where (the Cliffes lying to Sea-ward on you, make a defence) you may goe cloſe to the lande of the Sand bay, for I haue laine in it, becauſe I put into it with a ſtorme as I came from Iapon: the Iaponers haue many times wintered therein with their ſhippes. The entry thereof lyeth on the Northeaſt ſide, cloſe along by the point of the Iland that lyeth towardes the land: and when you enter in you ſhall holde towards the Iſland not to miſſe the Hauen, and you may alwayes goe out and in as well on the Northeaſt as on the Southweſt ſide: in this Iſland you haue freſh water. Theſe Iſlands are called Chiocon
                        ▪ it is all ouer very faire cléere ground, only one ſtonie Cliffe, whereupon you ſée the water breake, lying a ſhot of a great péece Weſtward from the rowe. From theſe Iſlands of Chiocon thrée miles forward, lyeth the Hauen of Chinchon, and two myles from the land lyeth two Ilandes of white ſtonie Cliffes, betweene the which and the land, as alſo outward to Seaward, it is all faire ground: from theſe Iſlandes two myles forward, and halfe a mile from the land, there lyeth a high round iſland, from whence there runneth a riſſe about halfe a myle into the Sea, whereon you ſée the water breake, which you muſt ſhun. Betweene the land and this iſland it is altogither ſhallowes, and betwéene this iſland and the hooke of the mouth of Chinchon, lyeth a ſmall Créeke, where the ſhippes (in the monſon of China) do anker. All this coaſt from Chabaquon to Chinchon is high land, with deepe and faire ground, onely the aforeſaid riffe of the iſland. The Hauen of Chinchon on the Southweſt ſide hath lying aboue it a very high land, with a ſtonie rocke vpon it like a pillar (as the Varella in the coaſt of Champa hath.) This high land or hill deſcendeth downewardes to a hooke or point of land, and comming to the Northeaſt ſide from the ſea, it hath a great opening, with certaine iſlands in the mouth thereof, from the aforeſaide point the lande reacheth North about a myle and a halfe, and from thence it runneth Weſt Northweſt, hauing an arme of the ſea that runneth a great way inwarde to the lande: in the ſame courſe on this land (that reacheth from the point of the ſea, where the land lyeth Weſt Northweſt) there is a long high iſland without trées or buſhes ſtretching like the ſame land, and is a ſmall halfe mile diſtant from the land, and on the land ſide it hath a good Sandie bay: in the middle way from the ſame iſland the ſhot of a great péece Weſtward, lyeth a hidden Cliffe or ſtonie place of eightéene ſpannes water, going a little way all the reſt is faire and good ground to anker in. In this iſland is good freſh water: herein Diego Pereira wintered with his ſhippe: you runne not on the South ſide of this iſland, but about by the Eaſt ſide, comming into the Hauen on the North ſide. From this iſland a quarter of a mile further

on, there lyeth thrée iſlands ſtretching Eaſt and Weſt one with the other: from thence to the Weſt part of the land there is a channell of about halfe a mile broad faire and deepe, you may likewiſe if you will eaſily paſſe betwéene the firſt and the other two Iſlands. The Iſland that lyeth Eaſtward is the longeſt and greateſt of all the thrée, theſe Iſlands are diſtant from the Northland, about a great mile, which land is very high ground. The ſhot of a great péece from the Eaſt Iſland Northward, lyeth a great and high Iſland reaching North and South, which on the Weſt ſide hath a ſandy bay, and vnder this ſandy Bay cloſe by the land, there is a good Road to anker in, with very good ground, where oftentimes the Portingales ſhips haue laine to lade their wares and marchandiſes, ſuch as are there to bée had. The ſhot of a great péece from this créeke Southweſtward, and the like ſhot of a great péece from the aforeſaid Iſlands, lyeth a flat ſand of twelue Spannes of Water, all the reſt is faire and good ground by the Road, and along by the Iſlands there runneth a great ſtreame: the beſt place to anker and to lie ſafeſt, is cloſe by the South point, to lye out of the ſtreame you muſt not paſſe by the point of the ſtrand (by the Créeke that lyeth Northward) for it is ſhallowe. Thoſe that come from Liampo and Iapon, put into this Hauen by the channell that is betweene this Iſland and the thrée Iſlands, which is faire, at fiue or ſixe fadome water, which you likewiſe find along by the Iſlands, as well on the land ſide as the Sea ſide, onely at the ſandy place aforeſaid. This Iſland by the C
                              •
                           mais is called Tantaa. Two miles to ſeaward from this Iſland lyeth a ſmall clouen Iſland called Tantheaa, from the Iſland Tantaa to the Northland it is about a mile, which is altogither ſhallowe ground, ſo that you can by no meanes paſſe, nor a great way from thence to Sea ward. From this Iſland Tantaa, a myle Weſtward lyeth the Mouths or entery of the arme of the Sea, which may bée halfe a myle broad: on the South part it hath a point of land, againſt the which on the other land Northward, lyeth a Créeke or Bay with a great harbour, thereabouts the King of Chinaes Shippes doe lye, and a myle from the aforeſayd point of land, inwards of the Riuer, there lyeth an Iſland (by the South ſide) with certaine redde downes. In the middle way from this Iſland on the South ſide of the land there reacheth a point, and ſomewhat beyond this point Weſtward there lyeth a Bay in the ſame Iſland, wherein the Shippes anker, and there you lye out of all the ſtreames, vnder the defence of the aforeſayed point of land. It happeneth oftentimes, that the Shippes by negligence lye drie, becauſe they runne cloſe to the land, yet it hurteth them not, for it is ſoft muddy ground. From this point aforeſayd to the Eaſt point of the ſame Iſland there is a very good place to lay the Shippes on land to newe rigge them, where the Portingales haue often dreſſed their Shippes. Likewiſe there you haue great ſtore of victuals and other prouiſions, and the ſhips that lye by the Iſland Tantaa, doe not ſtay there if it bée foule weather, but as ſoone as they perceiue any hard weather comming, they preſently hoiſe vp anker, and come to anker by this Iſland, in the mouth of the aforeſaid ſmall Bay, cloſe by the South land all this way is fayre. This Hauen of Chinchon lyeth vnder foure and twenty degrées and ¼. from the Iſland Tantaa, and the Iſland of this hauen of Chinchon, fiue miles Eaſt Northeaſt lyeth a point of land, in the which there is a good Créeke (againſt foule weather and the Monſon of China,) called Lialoo. The Road of this Créeke is cloſe by the aforeſaid point of land, for all the land from this Créeke to the Iſland Tantaa, is altogether (there along) of a bankey and ſhallow ground, and ſo continueth to the Iſland, for that betwéene the ſaid Iſland and the land, it is altogether drie and ſhallow as aforeſaid. From this Créeke of Lialoo forward, the land beginneth to bée lower, without any high hils (as the aforeſaid land) and hath but few buſhes, in many places none at all. It is a very faire coaſt, ſo that you néed feare nothing there, but that you ſée before your eies. From Chinchon to the Hauen of Foquyen are forty myles▪ and you runne Northeaſt and Northeaſt and by Eaſt. From the point of Lialoo two miles forward, lyeth a flat Iſland about halfe a mile diſtant from the

land, and another halfe mile further forward, lyeth two Iſlands by each other, ſomewhat cloſer to the land, and hard by them is a Riuer, at the mouth thereof hauing a ſandie ſtrand with low land, into this Riuer runneth the Somas or Chiniſh Shippes, that goe to the Towne of Enon, which lyeth within the ſame, where you haue much Marchandiſes of China on the coaſt ſeuen or eight miles further. There lyeth the point of Chencheu, which is a high and bare land, of white and reddiſh colour, reaching ſomewhat inward to ſea, on the Northeaſt ſide it hath a ſmall Bay, and aboue it a verie high ſteepe land, in this Créeke lyeth a great Iſland, betwéene the which and the point of land you may put in, from this Iſland a harquebuſh ſhot in length northeaſtward lyeth a ſtonie place of ground halfe a fadome déepe vnder the Water, and Northweſtward from the ſaid Iſland, betwéene it and the land lyeth another ſtone, and on the land ſide by this Iſland you haue a good harber to anker in. I haue laine in this Hauen ſomewhat neerer to the Iſland then to the land, with two Iuncos, which are great Chiniſh Shippes, each of them being of fiue hundred or ſixe hundred Bhares, Indian waight, which is aboue a hundred and eightie tunnes, and ranne in along by the point. Beyond this point of land at ye vpper part lyeth a great Towne, and North Northeaſt from this Iſland, there lyeth two long clouen Iſlands of redde colour, but they haue no faire ground, nor anie harber: two miles before you come to this point of Chencheu, inward to land towards Chencheu, there is a hill like to Monte Fermoſo, or the faire hill, this Hill lyeth diſtant from Chencheu thirtéene miles: in this countrey ſixe or ſeuen miles from the land you haue certaine boyes lying with coloured feathers and flagges, which ſerue for the countrey fiſhermen, where they caſt their Nets, and the Som
                              •
                           s of that Countrey, which are the Chiniſh Caruels, haue 
                           •
                        un ouer it with one ſaile onely, without any other furniture. From the point of Chencheu ſeuen miles further, on the Southweſt end of the Iſland (by the Portingales called Ilha dos cauallos) that is the Iſland of Horſes, and by the Chinares called Tachoo, hauing the name of a great Towne ſo called, not farre from thence about two miles along the riuer within the land, this Iſland lieth in the coaſt, cōpaſſed about with an arme of the Sea like the Iſland of Goa in India: which arme of the Sea iſſueth out againe about fiue miles further in the ſame coaſt, which iſſue or mouth is called Puyſu. The firſt mouth from the Southweſt may be about halfe a mile broad, and from the point of the Iſland inward, about halfe a mile, there is good anker ground againſt the windes of the Monſon of China, at ten and eleuen fadome faire ground: you muſt ſhunne the Southweſt land, which is low and ſandy ſtrands, and is all ouer blackiſh and ſhallow ground, for I haue run inward round about this Iſland, it hath many ſhallowes, and there is a channell the déepeſt part whereof is but two fadome, if you deſire to put in there, it were good to haue one of the Countrymen for a Pilote, I entered the mouth thereof from the Northeaſt, which is the narroweſt and ſhalloweſt place, and hath a hidden ſtony cliffe lying vnder the water, cloſe by the ſide of the Iſland, about the ſhot of a great peece inward towards the point. From this ſtony cliffe to the point, many Shippes may anker, and both theſe Hauens are without droughts or ſhallowes, and the coaſt betwéene them both from the one mouth vnto the other, hath ſome redde downes and bare land, but is all along faire ground. A mile from this mouth Northeaſtward, to Seaward lyeth a ſmall Iſland, and from the moneth of Aprill to September, there are many beaſtes paſtured in this Iſland, as horſes and ſuch like, wherevpon the Portingales called it the Iſland of Horſes, as aforeſaid, from the mouth of Puyſu, of the ſaied Iſland of Horſes eight miles forward by the coaſt, there is a great thicke point of land, with manie buſhes vpon it: Cloſe by this point lyeth a great round Iſland, whereof the chanell betwéene them is ſmall, yet very cleare, where if néede bee you may paſſe through from the point aforeſaied to the Southweſt, it is a high land with buſhes, and from thence to the Sea, it hath a great gréene field or plaine, and along by this gréene field it is very good ankering againſt the winds of the monſon of China, another ground vpon the aforeſayed point of land, there is a great Towne called Pinhay. From this point of Pinhay, fiue miles along the coaſt, lyeth the Hauen of Foquyen, which hath a

great Rode, and is all thicke land with buſhes, and inward on the Southweſt part it hath a great round Iſland with blacke ſhining buſhes, and beyond this Iland inward, lieth the mouth of the riuer, on the which lieth a verie great towne compaſſed with mightie walles and towers, and hath a Bridge running out from the land, whereunto the ſhippes that ſtay there are commonly tyed: the entrie is faire and cleare. From this Hauen of Foqueyen fiue miles, lyeth a Créeke, by the Portingales called Enſeada dos camoroyns, that is, the Créeke of Gannaet: and by the Chinars called Cayto: in this way lyeth certaine ſmall and high Iſlandes, without any trées or buſhes, about three great miles from the land inward to the Sea, and betwéene it and them it is all ouer full of Riffes and ſtonie Cliffes, and in ſome places it ſémeth to haue Channels or throughfares, for I went through it with a Pilot of the countrey: you muſt ſhunne this Iſland: and from the end of this Iſland two miles forward, there is a point of great thicke land, wholly without any buſhes or trées, and at the end of each mile Weſt Northweſtward there lyeth two Iſlands: and on the Southweſt ſide of this point there is a good harbour for the windes of the monſon of China, hauing faire ſandie ground, but it hath the winde verie ſcant to runne about without the Ilandes: for the which cauſe wée ranne betweene them, but it is not good for our ſhippes. On the other ſide Northeaſtward from this point aforeſaid, cloſe by the lande, lyeth a ſmall high Iſland, ſtretching Northweſt and Southeaſt: the Channell betweene this Iſland and the Firme land, being the ſhot of a great péece in breadth, at thrée fadome deepe, moſt part ſtonie ground, in ſuch manner, that as ſoone as you let fall anker, the ropes and Cables are preſently cut in péeces by the ſharpe ſtones. This channell can not bée ſéene farre off, and this Iſland hath on the land ſide a ſmall créeke or Bay, and if you come thither by hard fortune as I did, you ſhall put in there cloſe by the Iſland, and ſo néere it, that you ſhall touch the ſtrand with the kéele of your ſhippe, to anker in the depthes of the hard ground, for if you anker in the Sea, your Cables will preſently be cut in péeces, as mine were. This point lyeth hidden vnder a point: from thence Northeaſt, and Northeaſt and by Eaſt the land hath another point, lying about a mile and a halfe diſtant from the other aforeſaide, making betwéene them both a certaine Gitte. From this Iſland and point about halfe a mile Eaſt Northeaſt lieth a Riffe, whereon you ſee the water breake, reaching Northweſt and Southeaſt, and about halfe a myle long from this Riffe to the Northeaſt point of the aforeſaid Créeke, it is about a mile: all the reſt of the Créeke is faire and cléere. This is the Créeke called Enſeada dos Camarouis, the Rode thereof is vnder the harbour of the Northeaſt point aforeſaid, for it is good for the time of the windes of the Monſon of China, for ſuch ſhippes as come from Liampon & Iapon, to put in there: you muſt goe néere the land before you come at the point, and runne along by it till you haue gotten about the point, and are ankered within it, there it is verie good muddie ground by this Northeaſt point, ſo that the Riffe will be Southweſtward from you: therefore you ſhall put neare the point of the lande, not to fall vpon the Riffe, from this Créeke forward to the point of Sumbor, lying vnder 28 degrées and ¼. you runne along the coaſt Northeaſt, and Northeaſt and by North, without the aforeſaid Iſland, and the point of the ſaide Créeke, and from the créeke twelue and thirtéene miles, the land hath a point, and from thence it runneth inwards North Northweſt, and ſomewhat further Northeaſt, and Northeaſt and by North out againe. Two myles from thence lyeth thrée Ilands by each other, two great and high, and one ſmall, béeing all faire ground round about, but wholly without any Rode or ſuccour to defend the ſhippes in foule weather.
                     Theſe Iſlands are called Canton Sion, all this coaſt of Enſeada dos camarouis to theſe Iſlands and Hooke aforeſaide, is altogither lowe land with houels and valleyes with euen buſhes: and along by it, it is both faire and calme Sea, and pleaſant ground.
                     In this Countrey in the middle way from Enſeada dos Camarouis, to the Ilands of Canton Sion, about thrée myles to Sea-warde, there lyeth two Iſlandes by each other, and the Iſland lying neareſt the land, hath a great high hill in the middle, which runneth ſtéepe downe to the endes of the Iſland: they haue neither Trées nor Buſhes within them, being

faire and cleare round about them.
                     From the Iſlandes of Canton Sion forward the Lande and Coaſt reacheth inwards, & ten miles from thence, that is to ſay, two miles from the land, lyeth 2. high and great Iſlands nigh adioyning each to other, without Trees or buſhes, reaching as the coaſt doth: whereof the firſt lying on the Southweſt ſide, is very long, and that on the North ſide is in manner of a triangle, and the Channell ſeparating them is little more in breadth than a man can caſt a ſtone, but déepe and faire, for I haue paſſed through it: and harde by the Northeaſt point of the firſt long Iſland, which commeth out by the other, there is a ſandie Bay, cloſe by the which there is a verie good Rode, for this Sandie baye hath defence for all windes: and becauſe it is like a Hauen, it is by the Chinars called Pudeon, that is, a Sacke.
                     From this Sandie Bay about the ſhot of a great Peece Northweſt, lyeth a well of verie great depth, therefore you muſt be carefull in entring the Créeke, where you haue verie good ground at fiue and ſixe fadome déepe. In this Créeke or ſandie Bay there is very good freſh water, as alſo right ouer againſt it on the other ſide of the Iſland, there is a great place of freſh water. The channell betwéene theſe Iſlandes and the Firme land, is all faire and deepe, as alſo to Seaward from thence on the Northweſt part of the land of this Hauen aforeſaid, there is another Hauen called Fuychon, which is a riuer, but with a ſmall entry, béeing in breadth about halfe the length of the ſhotte of a great peece, with cleare and déep ground: from the mouth inwardes there is good water, running a great way into the land, and all faire. If you deſire to goe in there and to anker, you muſt gouerne your courſe by the Lead and the depthes. This Baye hath many townes and villages lying along by the riuer. From the aforeſaid firſt Iſland fiue or ſixe myles Southward to Seaward, lieth two ſmall Iſlandes, halfe a myle diſtant each from other, they are both without trées or any buſhes: the Iſland on the Land ſide is flat, and that to Sea-ward is very high, and hath a Créeke, but verie ſmall, and onely with a Northweſt wind it is harbourleſſe: the entrie is verie ſtraight, being round within, with good and pleaſant ground.
                     This Iſland in forme is like a Horſe ſhooe, for from the inner ſide of the Creeke towards the outſide to Seaward, it may be the length of a bow ſhot, in the breadth of the Iſland both theſe Iſlands are ſmall.
                     From this Hauen of Pudeon fiue miles along the coaſt, there lyeth two Ilands, whereof the firſt is long, reaching like the coaſt: the other reacheth from off the land towards the Sea, for betwéen it and the land you can not paſſe. The point of this Iſland reacheth beyond the Northeaſt point of the aforeſaid long Iland that lyeth to Sea-ward: betwéene them both is a ſmall Channell, but faire and déepe all along and round about this Iland, as well inward as outward.
                     From this Iſland to the land it is good muddie ground, at foure fadome, and is a good Hauen for the Monſon of China, but wholly open for a Southweſt wind, with the which wind I there loſt two Iuncos, which are Chiniſh ſhippes: This Hauen is called Guotimony. Before you come within two myles of this Hauen, vpon the coaſt there lyeth two Créekes cloſe togither, which runne about a myle into the land, and are aboue the ſhot of a great Péece in breadth, but are not fit for our ſhips. The ground therabout is faire, and inward it hath a village.
                     From this Hauen of Guotimony ſeuen or eight myles Eaſtward, lieth a verie great and high Iſland, on the South ſide hauing thrée or foure ſmal Ilands cloſe to it: it lieth about ſeuen or eight miles from the land, and a good way from the other Ilands on the Northweſt ſide, it hath two Créekes hard by each other, whereof that in the Northeaſt is the ſafeſt, with good and faire ground, reaching about halfe a mile inwards, within it hauing good freſh water, with a Sandie Bay, where they draw vp their ſhips to mend and dreſſe them when néed requireth: it is all faire round about, onely you muſt not run betwéene the ſmall Iſlands & the Iſland: This Iſland is called Lanquyn.
                     
                     From this Iſland Lanquyn fiue miles North, and North and by Eaſt, there are many Ilandes lying togither both great and ſmall, with ſome Trées, but thinne and lowe, reaching along the coaſt about ten myles forward: the firſt lie cloſe by each other to Seaward vpon a row. The channels betwéene theſe ilands are thrée fadome deepe, ſome leſſe, muddie

ground, if you haue occaſion to ſéeke for ſuccour in that place, with the windes of the monſon of China, you may anker in the mouthes of thoſe Channels, where you may lie ſafe, but in thoſe Monſons or coniunctions of times there is no foule weather, in the courſe of the generall windes, you ſhall not paſſe (from this firſt rowe of Iſlands lying to Seaward) to the land, for it is all bankie ground full of Sandie places, for the déepeſt place is but two fadome.
                     On the Northeaſt ſide inward from theſe Iſlands, there are two other Iſlands lying along by the Lande, which reach Northeaſt and Southweſt, whereof the Southweſt Iſland is greater and higher then that to Landward. The Channell betweene them is déepe and faire muddie ground: The ground of the iſſue on the Northeaſt ſide of this Channell is all Corall and Keſell ſtone, hauing many Ilands and ſtonie cliffes. Here the ſtreams runne ſtrongeſt with the Monſons of the winde.
                     A mile or more Eaſtward from theſe two Iſlands, there is a good and faire ſea, and ground: it is verie dangerous to paſſe with great ſhips betwéene theſe Ilands, for you can not paſſe.
                     On the Lande right againſt theſe Ilands, there is a Hauen called Hunchon, and the Iſlandes are called Lyon: From this firſt Iſland of Lyon to the point of Sumbor are about thirtéene miles, and you runne as aforeſaid Northeaſt and Southweſt. Theſe iſlands reach within three miles of the point of Sumbor, but in the middle way they are leſſe, and more diſtant from each other: and before you come néere the point of Sumbor by ſixe miles, there is an Iſland of Reddiſh earth, with two hilles like two men, and in the middle there is a valley, which reacheth Northweſt and Southeaſt. On the Southeaſt ſide it hath a good Hauen for the windes of the Monſon of China. This Iland is a good marke for them that come from Iapon.
                     
                     The point of Sumbor reacheth a great way into the ſea, it is a thicke land with a high riſing backe: it hath on the end of the Southweſt point, cloſe by, a long and high Iſland, and from the Northeaſt point of this Iſland, lyeth an Iſland or Cliffe making betwéene this Iſland, and the aforeſaid point a verie narrow channell, where the countrey ſhippes do paſſe through, inwardes from the Southweſt ſide, and from the Iſland the land maketh a great Créeke, which in compaſſe is about foure great miles: two miles from the point Southweſtward, there lieth two or thrée ſmall Iſlands. As you come outward to theſe Iſlands, there is déepe and faire ground, but from thence to the point and all ouer the Créeke it is all ſhallowe, ſo that at lowe water it is drie, and you may ſée the muddie ground, vpon the plaine of the aforeſaid point, on the ſouthweſt ſide, there is a great towne, where they haue many great Barkes, that are made with Orloopes and nayled, wherof ſome are 200. Bhares great.
                     On the Northeaſt ſide of this point, there is a Créeke running inward to the Land: at this point of Sumbor the Land maketh an end or Hooke that lieth vnder 28. degrées and ¼.
                     
                     From this point foure miles to Seaward Eaſt Northeaſt, there lieth two great Ilands without any trées or buſhes, whereof the firſt reacheth Eaſt & Weſt: and from the Eaſt point of this Iſland the other beginneth, which reacheth North and South: the Channell betwéen them both may be a ſhot of a great péece broad, déepe and faire. This Iſland which reacheth Eaſt and Weſt, on the Eaſt end hath a point ſticking out towardes the North, in the which point there is a ſmall Créeke of fiue or ſixe fadome déepe faire ground, where you may harbour in all weathers, except it be with a Northweſt wind. The North Iſland on the Weſt point hath two Iſlands lying on a rowe, whereof the one is great, the other ſmall and ſome what long, betwéene the which and the Iſland you may paſſe with ſmall ſhippes, and round about theſe Iſlands it is faire ground.
                     In this Iſland you haue verie good freſh water, and they are called Timbaſam.
                     
                     From theſe Iſlands a mile and a halfe or two miles Northward, there lieth two other ſmall Iſlandes which reach Eaſt ſoutheaſt & Weſt Northweſt, wherof the one is greater and longer than the other, they lie cloſe togither, & the channell betwéene them is faire & déepe, with harbor againſt North Northeaſt, & Southweſt windes, for I haue laine there at anker with a great ſtorme: From this point of

                        Sumbor to Liampo, you paſſe without the Iſlands North Northeaſt, and South Southweſt, and the coaſt all high ground, and from this point of Sumbor fiue or ſixe miles along by the coaſt, within the land there is a high ſtony Rocke, which ſheweth like a Monkies coule, in the Iſland Seylon, called O Capello de Frade, beyond this Friers coule or ſtonie rocke, other ſixe myles forward, lyeth the Hauen of Chapoſy, which is a Riuer of freſh water, and inward it hath a great Towne lying vpon it, where likewiſe there is a fléet of the country ſhippes continually kept for the ſecurity and ſafegard of the coaſt. The knowledge and right tokens of this Hauen are, that when you are hard by Chapoſy, the Sea hath ſome reddiſh leaues or Flagges driuing on the water, and ſome péeces of réedes, like Caſsia Fiſtola, or Spaniſh Réedes, which come out of this Riuer. Two miles Eaſt Southeaſt from this hauen to Seaward, there lyeth two ſmall and high Iſlands cloſe by each other, wholly without trées or buſhes, round about them it is twentie fadome déepe muddy ground, and from the mouth of the Riuer halfe a mile from the land Southward lyeth a long Iſland, reaching like the coaſt, betweene this and the land it is faire muddy ground of thrée fadome déepe, whereof the entry on the South ſide is the déepeſt, and along by the land it is ſhallow. From Chapoſy eightéene myles forward lyeth the Iſland of Liampo, where the Portingales vſed to Trafficke. Theſe Iſlands were called Sinogicam, & the Firme land Liampo, which along by the ſea ſide is a high land. The Portingales ſhips doe not paſſe along by it, but betwéene the Iſlands. At the firſt you haue but few and ſmall Iſlands, but being paſt them, then vpon the rowe of Iſlands, lying furtheſt out into the ſea, you haue a very great Iſland with high Trées and Creekes along by the Sea coaſt, and it is there all ouer faire and good ground, and on the Weſt ſide it hath a Créeke, in the middle whereof, there is a great and high Iſland, betwéene the which and the land you haue a Roade againſt the Monſons of the South and Southweſt windes. This entry is of fiue fadome déepe, but it is too narrow for a Shippe to wind in it, therfore you muſt bind it faſt, or caſt out ankers both before and behind. From this Iſland two miles Weſt Northweſt lyeth another great Iſland with very high Trées, and from the South Southweſt ſide of the ſame Iſland there is a good hauen for the Monſon of the North and Northeaſt winds, on the which ſide it hath very good aire and freſh water, and the other Iſland aforeſaid for the Monſon of Southweſt winds is vnwholſome. The channell betweene them both is 35 fadome déepe, but in the Road you haue ſuch depths as you would deſire. From this north Iſland to the land are about thrée miles, hauing ſome ſmall Iſlands in the way. On the firme land Weſt Northweſtward, there lieth a ſmal Créeke called Camocon, from thence you run to the Hauen lying on the coaſt, fiue miles beyond the Iſland, which is a riuer called Tinay, at the entrie it hath foure fadome déepe, without any ſands or ſhallowes. Theſe two Iſlands aforeſaid, of Synogicam, (where the Portingals vſed to traffike) lie vnder 29 degrees and 2/
                              •
                           , and theſe iſlands of Liampo doe reach full vnder one and thirtie degrées Northward, and are not as the Iſlands of Canton, hauing their Channell faire and cleare, without feare of any thing, but that you ſée before your eies. But betwéene theſe Iſlands, in ſome places you haue ſtonie cliffes and riffes lying vnder the water. From the Iſlands of Sinogicam forwards there alſo the tides runne verie ſtrong, about a third part of the Water at an Ebbe, and a third part at a flood, wherefore you muſt haue good regard to the croſſe ſtreames that come from the many channels and droughts, which runne verie ſtrong, and with ſo great force, that oftentimes they driue a man vpon the point and Hookes of the Iſland, when hée would paſſe by it. Wherefore hée that will ſayle by theſe Iſlands, muſt haue a Pilote that knoweth the Countrey: To Seaward from theſe Iſlands, it is all faire and good ground.
                     Putting out of the Iſland where you may Winter for the South winde, that is (from the Road of the Iſlands or Cliffes) to Sea-ward, you muſt alwaies runne cloſe by it, and when the Iſland beginneth to lye Eaſt-ward, then it maketh a point ſticking out, and before you come to this Point, there is a ſmall long Iſland which hath a ſmall Créeke in the middle, being inward of a clouen ſtonie Rocke,

at the foot whereof it is 20 fadome déepe, it is diſtant from the great Iſland about the ſhot of a great péece. The ſmal Iſland ſhall lye on the North ſide, and you ſhall alwaies keepe towards the great Iſland as much as you can, for this creeke aforeſaid draweth the water to it, ſo that if you were cloſe by it, it would draw you in, as it happened vnto mee: whereby I had great labor and danger before I could get out. From this Iſland halfe a myle Northward, there beginneth another great and high Iſland, which from thence reacheth Eaſtward, making a Channell betweene both that runneth in the Sea, which Channell from the Sea to this ſmall Iſland is all fair and cléere: but from thence to the point of the other North Iſland, and from both theſe Iſlands Weſtward, which is a great ſpace of the Sea, it is altogether riffes and Stony Cliffes vnder Water, that reach vnto the Channell, that runneth from the Iſland where you may Winter for the North windes) along by the Iſlands that lye on the land ſide: Therefore when you come from the South Iſland to Sea-ward you muſt goe cloſe by it to the point aforeſaid, lying on the ſame Iſland. From the Iſland (where you may Winter for the North winds) there runneth a channell, North Northeaſtward betwéene the Iſlands, ſo that it deuideth the Iſlands, leauing ſome on the land ſide, and ſome to Sea-ward, which channell oftentimes openeth and ſheweth it ſelf. From this Iſland aforeſaid (where you may Winter for the North windes) fiue myles further forward in the ſame courſe, there beginneth another great and high Iſland of fiue myles long, lying in the ſame courſe of North Northeaſt, and South Southweſt. This Iſland is very populous of euill natured people: from the South point of this great Iſland, the length of a Cannon ſhot Eaſtward, there is a hidden cliffe or Rocke of ſtone lying vnder the water, wherevpon a Portingales Shippe was caſt away, laden with Pepper and other Spices, which is a good marchandiſe to be brought out of India and all thoſe countries
                     The Riffes and Stones aforeſayde reach vnto this Stony Rocke, therefore if you will ſayle through this Channell or depth aforeſaide, you muſt runne on the Weſt ſide cloſe by the Iſland.
                     From the point of this great Iſland thrée miles Northeaſt, there is yet another great and high Iſland, (and is one of the Iſlands that lye to Seaward in a row) wherein there ſtandeth a Chiniſh Temple or Church moſt curiouſly built: wherefore by the Portingales it is called, A Ilha de Varella, that is the Iſland of the marke or token: and before you come at it, you leaue two or thrée ſmal Iſlands on the land ſide, and the great Iſland of fiue miles long, reacheth behind theſe Iſlands (to land ward) and to Sea ward from theſe Iſlands lyeth another great Iſland, reaching from the ſtony rock to the iſland of Varella. Betweene theſe two Iſlands there runneth a ſmall Channell: the whole Channell, from theſe thrée miles to the entery or paſſage of Varella, is thrée fadome deepe at full Sea, and that of Varella, as alſo the month of the chanell, (which runneth Eaſtward through it towards the Sea) is all deep: In the entery of the Channell of this Iſland (at the foote of Varella) it hath a Créeke with a Sandy baye, which is a good Road. From the South point of this Iſland of Varella or Chiniſh Temple to Sea ward, there lyeth thrée Iſlands all on a row cloſe by each other, reaching Eaſt and Weſt, which Iſlands alſo are named after the name of Varella, whereby the Channell is knowne. This Iſland of Varella or Chiniſh Temple lyeth full vnder thirtie degrées, and is diſtant from the Iſlands S
                              •
                           ong
                              •••
                           m aforeſaid eight miles. From the Iſlands S
                              •
                           ongicam eleuen or twelue myles, it is altogether great and high Iſlands, lying cloſe by each other: but from thence to full one and thirtie degrées, they begin to bée leſſe and ſomewhat more ſeparated. At the end of theſe Iſlands there lyeth two Iſlands together, whereof the Channell that runneth betwéene them hath a verye good harbour, it is called Lepion, they lye cloſe by a great Riuer, which is much inhabited and frequented by Marchaunts and other people. In this Hauen of Lepion the Iapons doe often Trafficke: from the end of this Iſland along by the Sea coaſt the land is low and bankey ground, for that a mile from the land it is but a fadome and a halfe déepe, being hard ſtones. The people of ye country paſſe ouer it with nailed barkes, with pitched or loopes, two péeces, ſailes of réeds or mats, & an yron dreg

with ſharpe téeth. This coaſt reacheth Northeaſt to foure and thirtie degrées, where there lieth a great riuer that commeth from Nanquyn, within the mouth or entry hath an Iſland that is inhabited by many people, both horſe and footemen. This Iſland maketh the Riuer to haue two mouths or entries, from thence forward the land reacheth North Northeaſt, and by Eaſt, and comming to that part which lieth Southeaſt, there the land hath an end or point, and by that meanes it maketh a great Créeke. From this point forward, the coaſt runneth North again, after turning again Northweſtward: Into the which coaſt thoſe of Iapon doe ordinarily come to Trafficke with the Countrey people called Cooray, and there you haue Hauens and harbors, hauing a kind of ſmall open péeces of wouen worke, which the Iapons fetch from thence, whereof I am certainely informed, as alſo touching the nauigation vnto that land by Pilots that haue ſailed and ſearched cleane through it, as followeth. From this point of the Creeke of Nanquyn twenty miles Southeaſtward, there lyeth certaine Iſlands, at the end whereof on the Eaſt ſide, there lyeth a very great and high Iſland much inhabited, as well by horſe as footemen. Theſe Iſlands by the Portingales are called, As Ilhas de core, but the great Iſland Core is called Chauſien, on the Northweſt ſide it hath a ſmall Créeke, wherein there lyeth an Iſland, which is the Hauen, but it is not very déepe. There the lord of the country hath his pallace and is continually reſident. Fiue and twenty miles Southeaſt from this Iſland lieth the Iſland of Goto, one of the Iſlands of Iapon, which lyeth from the point of the Créeke of Nanquyn Eaſt and by North, to Seaward ſixtie miles, or ſomewhat more. This inſtruction I had from a Nobleman of Portingale, called Pero da cunha, that hath ſéene and trauelled through all the Countrey, hauing by him all aduiſe ſeruing for the purpoſe, as being of great experience, hauing arriued and ſtayed in the Countrey aforeſaid by tempeſt and ſtormy weather againſt their wils, minding to ſayle to Iapon, and from thence againe to the aforeſaide Iſland of Goto, the Iſlands lying from this Iſland towards the land betwéene them, and cloſe about them all ouer, are many riffes and ſtones. The inſtruction of the Créeke of Nanquyn I had from an expert Pilote borne in the lande of Algaine in Spaigne, that loſt his Shippe vpon the Sands that ſticke out from the Riuer of Nanquyn, hauing runne round about all this Créeke with a Barke, and hée ſaide that being within when the Sunne roſe, it came from ouer the land, and that from the riuer of Nanquyn there ranne ſome ſands and droughts, reaching ſouthward to two and thirty degrées, and to the middle way of the Goulfe of Iapon. Here endeth the deſcription of the furtheſt parts that the Portingales haue ſailed, along by the Coaſts, lands, and Iſlands of the Kingdome of China, being that part thereof which at this day is knowne and diſcouered.
                  
                  
                     The 31. Chapter. The deſcription of a voiage made by a Portingale Pilote from Liampo to Iapon in a Chinchea Soma, that is a Chinchon ſhip, with the deſcription of the coaſt of Bungo, Miaco, Cacay, & the Iſland Toca, all countries of Iapon.
                     
                     
                        ON Wedneſday the thirty of Iune being the third day of the new moone, in the morning we ſet ſayle out of the northeaſt chanell of the Iſland Siongicam, with a ſoutheaſt wind, and being without the Iſland, we had the wind South Southeaſt, and ran eaſt, and ſomewhat Eaſt and by North, about euening we had a South Southweſt wind, running Eaſt, Eaſt and by South, and Eaſt ſoutheaſt, with very great billowes out of the ſouth, whereby we could hardly kéepe on our courſe, ſayling with our ſayles but halfe vp, and in the morning we ran halfe a ſtrike eaſt and by ſouth, and eaſt ſoutheaſt, becauſe the wind came ſome what ful to the South weſt, with ſhoures of raine and great billowes that roſe very high, by which means the waters and ſtreames in theſe countries run Northward, we made our account to haue ſailed, in the courſe of Eaſt and Eaſt, and by North 26 miles in one meale tide, which was til thurſday at noone, being the firſt of Iuly. We had alwaies great and mighty waues, becauſe it was a Spring tyde, all the night

hauing great lightnings out of the Eaſt, and in all the points of the Compaſſe from North to South. On thurſday the firſt of Iuly from noone to night, we had a ſouthweſt wind, running Eaſt and Eaſt and by South, and ſomwhat Eaſt Southeaſt, with great ſhowres of raine without any high wind: and being two houres within night, the ſkie cloſed round about and became cloſe with a great raine, wherwith the wind beganne to be calme, turning Northward, which the officers of the Soma perceiuing (being men of China) they began to be in great feare, for the Chinais doe hold for certaine, that in the Moone of the moneth of Iuly vntill it bee 12. dayes old, all along the coaſt of China there will follow great ſtormes, and as I thinke it is till S. Iames day, till when they alwaies looke for ſtormes and foule weather, for that I my ſelfe vpon the ſame day haue paſſed two great ſtormes. And touching our North wind ye began ſtill to encreaſe, they perceiuing it, put preſently Weſtward againe towardes the Iſlands, and had ſayled from noone to that time about ten miles, in ſuch manner, that as wee geſſed we were 36. miles from the land of China, and ſo wée held our courſe in that manner Weſt and Weſt and by North: after that hauing a cloſe ſkie with little wind, whereby we made very litle way. On Friday the North wind beganne to blowe higher, wee running ſo till noone, and in that Weſterly courſe wée ſayled about ſixe miles. From Friday at noone we ſailed with this North wind all that euening, and by night til Saterday in the morning, & then the wind came Northeaſt, & then Eaſt, and ſo Weſt till noone, whereby wee made our account to haue ſailed eightéene miles, letting the ſhippe goe Weſt, and Weſt and by North: and in all that time wée had neither Sunne nor Starre to take the height. On Saterday two or thrée houres after noone the wind fell South, the weather beginning to cleare vp, and ſo wée ranne one glaſſe, and perceiuing the weather to ſettle, we turned againe towards Iapon, being as then in mine opinion about 12. myles from the coaſt of China, and ſo we held our courſe that euening, and all the next night Eaſt, and Eaſt and by South, with a ſmall wind and calme Sea. The next day being Sonday at noone, we tooke the height of the Sunne at 30. degrées 1/
                              •
                           . part leſſe, & wée ſet out vnder 29. degrées and 
                           •
                        . accounting for one mealetide thirtéene miles: ſo that I geſſed as then to be 25. myles from China. On Sonday after noone we held our courſe in the ſame ſort, Eaſt and Eaſt and by South, for all that euening and the night following till the next day at noone, with a ſtill winde and water, and had no Sunne to take the height, but I made my account of eightéen miles for a meale tide at halfe a ſtrike to the Eaſt, and Eaſt and by North, the wind being ſcant South. From Monday at noon we ſtill had a calme South wind, which continued ſo, that euening, and all night: and about Tueſday morning, the wind was ſomwhat fuller till noone, whē I tooke the height of the Sunne and found vs to be vnder 29. degrees and ¾. running Eaſt, and Eaſt and by South, for the ſpace of 22. miles. From Tueſday at noone being vnder the height aforeſaid, I willed them to ſaile eaſt (hauing the ſame wind, but ſomewhat calmer) all that night to Wedneſday at noone, and then we began to ſée driuing in the ſea ſome Sea-ſcumme or Cuttle bones, hauing ſayled fiftéene myles, making my account to be yet 30. miles from the Iſland Tanaxuma, hauing neither Sunne nor Starres to take the heights. From Wedneſday at noone the wind began to blow ſomwhat full South Southweſt, and becauſe it was ſignified vnto me that the ſtreames in that countrey ranne towardes the Iſland of Lequeo, and perceiuing likewiſe in ſome places a certaine yellowe ſkumme driuing vpon the water (which appeared vnto vs like ripe Limons) I willed them preſently to holde Eaſt Northeaſt: and about euening wée ſawe many ſignes of land, as péeces of réedes, riſen, and ſuch like things. At night I badde them runne Eaſt and Eaſt and by North, but the firſt watch béeing done when the Chiniſh Pilot ſhould watch his courſe, hée had gone a great way out of the courſe: hauing runne Eaſtward till the morning, when againe I willed them to ſayle Eaſt and by North (the winde béeing as it was) till Thurſday at ten of the clocke, and then (although it was darke and cloſe weather) wee beganne to ſée a land that ſéemed verie cloudie, and couered with dampie miſtes, lying Southeaſt from vs, and were about thrée myles from it. Along by the ſame lande there lay two

Iſlandes, wée holding our courſe in the ſame ſort, vntill by the firſt land Eaſtward, wee ſawe another great high and long lande, and at the end of the aforeſaid high land Eaſtward, wée ſawe two other Iſlandes, whereof the one was verie great, ſtretching Northeaſt and Southweſt, and the other cloſe by it ſtretching North and South, being the ſmalleſt, with many pointes. On the North ſide of this ſmall Iſland about a mile from thence, there are fiue ſmall Iſlands or ſtonie Cliffes vpon a rowe: from the firſt Iſland that we ſawe (which is the laſt Iſland of thoſe that are called As Sete Irmaas, that is, the ſeuen ſiſters, lying on the Northeaſt ſide) to the aforeſaid ſmall Iſland with many pointes, it may be about ſixe myles Eaſtward, as we were right againſt the aforeſaid firſt Iſland of Stonie Cliffes, it might bée about fiue houres after noone, hauing run as we thought ſince wee had ſight of land about twentie and foure miles. The Thurſday aforeſaid in the morning, wée tooke the height of the North Starre, being vnder thirtie degrees and ⅙.
                     
                     Comming within two myles of the Iſland (that wée ſaw firſt) of the Iſlands of ſtonie Cliffes, wee ranne Northeaſt and Northeaſt and by Eaſt, and when wee were right againſt it, whereby it laie Southward from vs, béeing about thrée myles from it, on the North ſide thereof wée ſawe another great high and long Iland with many trees, which (as wée learned) is called Icoo: it reacheth Eaſt and Weſt, and wée were about three miles from it, but by reaſon of the darke weather and miſtes wee could not diſcerne it: and comming ſomewhat néerer to it wée ſawe another Iſland lying cloſe by the Weſt point of the aforeſaid Iland, beeing leſſe than the other: and becauſe wée were by the aforeſaid Weſt point, (betweene both) wee were fully determined to runne through the channell, that ſhewed betweene the ſaid two Iſlandes, but becauſe there was no man in the ſhippe that had any knowledge thereof, fearing Riffes and ſhallowes, wee durſt not aduenture, but wound vp to the Eaſt point, to paſſe by the winde about the high Iſland, running as much as wée might with a Southerly winde, hauing great waues that put vs to the lande, and ſo wee ſayled Eaſt Southeaſt, hauing yet about two myles to paſſe by the Iſland, but night came on beeing verie darke, ſo that wee could diſcerne no land, although wee were cloſe by it, and to keepe from it, wee ranne the ſame courſe till about one of the clocke after midnight, then the moone ſhined, yet wée could not ſee the Iſland, but made Northward towardes it with fewe Sailes to the Iſland of Tanaxuma, which (according to my account) ſhould lie right before vs: wherewith wée paſſed ouer the reſt of the night till the morning, when we ſawe the Iſland Tanaxuma, that laye right before vs, beeing about two myles from it, it beeing verie cloudie, and wée made Northward towardes it to paſſe by the Weſt ſide thereof, but wée could not doe it, by reaſon that the winde was Southweſt, and wee were by the South point thereof, running along by the Eaſt ſide, about halfe a mile from it. This Iſland reacheth North and South, beeing long and lowe ground, hauing white ſandie ſtrandes, with a verie gréene countrey of valleyes, it hath many Pine trees, but they ſtand ſcattering from each other, and verie open: it is about ſeuen or eight myles long, hauing in the middle way on the Eaſt ſide cloſe by the land, an Iſland or ſtonie Cliffe, which farre off ſheweth like a Foiſt vnder Saile. This Iſland lyeth vnder thirtie degrees and ½. right in the middle, it is all ſaire and cleare ground. From this Iſland of Tanaxuma Northwarde, wée ſawe a verie great and high lande reaching Eaſt and Weſt, about eight miles, making as it ſeemed on the ſame coaſt Northeaſt, and Northeaſt and by North from Tanaxuma, an opening, which is the mouth of the creeke called Xabuxij. This Créeke hath for a marke, that the lande on the Eaſt ſide thereof runneth all ſtéeping to the hooke or point of the Creeke, beeing a flatte ground: and on the Weſt ſide the land is as high as the firſt that wee ſawe lying North and South with Tanaxuma. This coaſt aforeſaid may lie diſtāt ouerthwart from the Iſland of Tanaxuma about ſeuen or eight myles. From the North point of this Iſland wee made towardes the Créeke, and béeing in the middle of our way, the wind fell Weſt Southweſt, whereby wee were enforced to lye by it, the weather béeing calme, ſo that the

water that with the flood ranne Eaſtward, draue vs off that wée could hardly get the Hauen, but the ebbe that after ranne very ſtiffe into it made vs get in, and with the glimſing of the euening and the light Moone, wée entred into a verie great goulfe, wherein lay the aforeſaide Créeke on the North ſide, and within on the Eaſt ſide it hath a ſmall Iſland full of trées, lying about the ſhot of a baſe from the land. Eaſtward from this Iſland the land hath a high houell, and on the South ſide of the ſaid houell, there lyeth a great opening, which on the other ſide hath a point of low land and white ſand ſtrands with trées. There is the Hauen called Minatto, which is a riuer better than that of Batecola, lying in the coaſt of Malabar. On the North ſide of this houell about a ſmall myle there is another opening, béeing in a land that is ſomewhat lower as the houell, with ſome trées. This opening right in the middle hath an Iſland, wherein is the place of Xibuxij, which is a great village full of people, and is a riuer of freſh water, but it is ſhallowe, for you can not put into it without a ſpring tide. From Xibuxij forward the Créeke runneth Weſt, all lowe land and ſandie ſtrandes, for the ſpace of two miles from thence it runneth Southward againe till it butteth vpon a high hill, which is that which wée ſawe comming from the Iſland Tanaxuma to the foote of the hill, there lyeth a ſmall riuer very ſhallow: From this riuer the land runneth Eaſt againe to the mouth thereof, which may bée about halfe a myle broad. The ground of all this Créeke and entrie is ſand and bad anker ground. All this high land aforeſaid is called Quimonſiquy. From this Créeke of Xibuxij ſeuen myles Eaſt Northeaſt, lyeth the Créeke of Tanora, which is one of the beſt Hauens of Iapon: you runne the coaſt Eaſt and Eaſt & by North, in the middle way from Xibuxij to Tanora there is a ſmall Créeke or Bay, which at the firſt ſhewe ſéemeth to haue a good harbor, but when you are right againſt it, then you may verie well perceiue it, for it hath many ſtonie Cliffes and Rockes, and runneth ſomewhat to landward. I heare ſet downe the deſcription of this Créeke, that no man ſhould deceiue himſelfe therby, that deſireth to goe vnto Tanora, as wée ſhould haue done. Béeing paſt this ſmall Créeke, you ſhall preſently ſée that the land maketh an end or point of high lande, from the which point forward the coaſt windeth inward, where you ſhall ſée a ſandie ſtrand with two Ilandes full of trées lying along by it: At the end of theſe Iſlands you ſhall ſée other ſmaller Iſlands, that lye off from the land inward to the Sea, with other great ſtones and rockes. Within theſe Ilands and Stones lyeth the Hauen of Tanora, and to put into this Hauen you muſt run to the point and the end of theſe Iſlands and Stones that reach into the Sea, and béeing paſt them, then on the Northeaſt ſide to Seaward there will lie a ſtonie Cliffe with an Iſland without buſhes or trées, béeing ſtéepe land, reaching North and South: betwéene this Iſland and the land there is a great Créeke where you may anker, for right ouer againſt it, it is 25 fadome déepe, but there is not the right Hauen: but when you are about the point and the end of the aforeſaid Iſlands and Stones that ſticke outward to Sea, then you ſhall preſently paſſe along thereby inward towards the land, which you may freely doe without danger, for it is faire and cléere, holding your courſe Weſtward, and a point of land will be vpon your right hand: and béeing paſt this point, you ſhall paſſe cloſe by, ſhunning the land on the Weſt ſide, and being there you are within the Hauen, which is a long Créeke or Bay reaching North till you be in: you may ancre in the middle thereof at foure fadome déepe, and then you are incloſed with a round bowe, it is there altogither muddy ground. Departing from Tanora to Fyunga the coaſt runneth North to a point of land, lying about fiue myles from Tanora: betwéene this point of land and Tanora there lyeth two Hauens, the one called Gico, not farre from Tanora, the other further forward (by ſome ſtonie Cliffes and Iſlands) called Vmbra. Theſe two Hauens are good harbors for Eaſt winds that blowe much on this coaſt, from the aforeſaid point of land to Fyunga, may be fiue miles more, from whence the coaſt & land doe turne in againe like a Créeke: comming ſomewhat further Northward out, this Créeke is a low land (along by the Sea coaſt) with ſandy ſtrands, and a mile beyond ye aforeſaid point of land, the coaſt hath an opening, and on the South ſide of this opening there ſtandeth a great round trée cloſe by the Sea ſide: here is a

good Hauen, which is called Vndo, and further forward there lyeth another Hauen called Toconoſuchy, this land is higher then the other hauen: on the Southſide it hath ſome high and great Trées, and on the Northſide a low land, the which farre off & outward ſheweth like ſmall Iſlands with trees. This hauen is not good to put in. A mile beyond this hauen there is another Hauen called Myme, which is a good hauen for ſmall ſhippes to enter, and hath two enteries, which you preſently ſée béeing without, and may well diſcerne them, in the middle hauing a flat Iſland full of Trees, theſe Trees make two openings, and you may ſee ouer the Iſland on the land (which is higher) a great gréene trée, the land on the South ſide hath a high land with a valey.
                     From this Hauen about two myles and a halfe lieth another ſmall Iſland called Tomxyma, beyond this Riuer a myle and a halfe endeth the low land, and then again it beginneth to be high, from thence two myles further, the land maketh a point or hooke of high land, and a farre off ſeemeth to be the point called Cabo de Ramos lying on ye coaſt of India by Goa. Sailing about this point, hard by there is a Riuer Northward called Camyco, which is two fadome deepe in the Hauen: this is the furtheſt land of the kingdome of Fiunga. From ye point of land aforeſaid (fiue miles diſtant from Tanora) to this point of Camico, the lande is like a Créeke or breech, the water therein making a croſſe ſtreame, for along by the land the Water runneth alwaies Southward, you runne this point with the aforeſaid point of land North and South, and North and by eaſt, and South and by Weſt, and are about eight miles diſtant: along by this Bréech you may anker at twelue and fiftéene fadome deepe, faire ſandy ground.
                     From this point called Cabo de Camico forward, the coaſt runneth north northweſt, and when you are right againſt this point, then you ſhall preſently ſée Northeaſtward, and Northeaſt and by Eaſt the land of Toca, which is an iſland, and is about fortie myles long, and reacheth Eaſt and Weſt, and Eaſt and by North, and Weſt and by South, it hath on the North ſide with the land of Iapon, a ſtraight or narrow paſſage which runneth to the Hauen of Saquay, and the land of Miaco, and from the ſide of the Iſland along by it, there are many ſmall Iſlands. The courſe you muſt hold through this ſtraight to the Hauen of Saquay or Sacay, is altogether along the coaſt and the land of Iapon, which hath many and good Hauens. At the end of this ſtraight both theſe lands haue each of them a point of land ſticking out, being from the one to the other about a mile: by the point of the land of Toca, it is banky ground, and all the people of this land (on the North ſide) are not in any ſort to bée truſted. Likewiſe, you may paſſe from the South ſide of this Iſland Toca to the land of Myaco, where all along it is good ſayling, and there are very good Hauens. The firſt hauen whereof lyeth on the firſt point of land, on the Weſt ſide of the Iſland, which cloſe by it hath certaine Iſlands and Cliffes: this Hauen is called Focora, it hath a good harbour for all windes, but not for Rouers, for there they haue many Foiſtes wherewith they roue and ſteale. At the Eaſt end of this Iſland Toca, lying with the land of Iapon, right ouer againſt it there is another ſtraight or paſſage like that on the Weſt ſide, where you runne to the Hauen and Town of Sacay. In the middle way from the aforeſaied Eaſt ſide of Toca lyeth a Hauen called A
                              ••
                           , which is inha
                           ••
                        ted by a very fierce and ſtout people. There is alwaies a great army of Foiſtes prepared for the warres, wherewith they robbe and ſpoyle all the Coaſt along. The Shippes and Foiſtes that deſire to paſſe through it, aſking leaue, they may paſſe without let or hinderance. On the Eaſt ſide aforeſaid, the land of Iapon reacheth much ſouthward, making a hooke or end called Cumano, and the coaſt that reacheth thether is called Bandol: It hath ſome Hauens that were inhabited by very rich and mightie people, but they are neither ſecure nor free. The Hauen of Sacay lyeth from the booke or end of the Iſland of Toca Northeaſt, about nine or tenne myles.
                     This Hauen of Sacay with a Weſt wind is harborleſſe, (which make many great tides) and hath a ſhallow ſandie ground: For the which cauſe, the Ships that come laden thether, are preſentlie vnladen, and the people leape on land, leauing the Shippe faſt bound, and ſometimes draw it on land.
                     From the point O Cabo de Camico,
                        
fiue myles to a point of land, you runne along the coaſt North Northweſt, and in the way you haue foure or fiue Iſlands and cliffes along the coaſt, and right ouer againſt the aforeſaid point, there lyeth two other Iſlands cloſe by the land, hauing betwéene them both a ſmal channel, and cloſe by both on the North and ſouthſide ſides, there are many Iſlands and Cliffes both great and ſmall. Theſe two Iſlands with the Iſlands and Cliffes lye Eaſt and Weſt with the Hooke and the end of Toca vnder thrée and thirty degrées and 1/
                              •
                           . All this coaſt is high land, with the Iſlands lying along by it, and hath ſixtie and ſeuentie fadome déepe cloſe by the land. From thence forward beginneth the ſtraight or paſſage to be narrow betwéene this Iſland of Toca and the land of Bungo, and if in this countrey you haue néede to anker, then put to the land of Toca, where you ſhall finde muddye ground. When you are about the aforeſaid point of two Iſlands, then the land beginneth Weſtward to turne in, all high land, hauing within cloſe on the Southſide a ſmall Iſland, you muſt take héed of this Créeke that the ſtreames drawe you not in: being paſt this Créeke, you ſhall (in the middle way of the channell in the ſtraight) ſée right before you a ſmal round Iſland, which ſhall lye on the Eaſt ſide from you, and along by the coaſt fiue miles, you ſhall ſée another Iſland lying hard by the land, which to ſea ward from it, hath many ſtony cliffes and Rockes. By this Iſland Northeaſtward, about a myle and a halfe, there lyeth two other Iſlands.
                     Beyond theſe two Iſlands another myle and a halfe, lyeth another long Iſland with a flat plaine or field on the top thereof, reaching Northweſt and ſoutheaſt, the Southeaſt and thereof being the higheſt. Within this Iſland towards the Weſt lyeth the Creeke of Vſquy, where the king of Bungo holdeth Court. If you deſire to put in there, you ſhall runne towards the firſt Iſland, kéeping from the aforeſaid Iſland, and the Iſlands and Cliffes lying by it, holding your courſe through betweene it and the other two Iſlands (that lye further forward) being paſſed in by this Iſland and the Iſlands and ſtony Cliffes, you ſhall ſee Weſtward within the Créeke a great, round, and a high Iſland full of Trées, wherevnto you ſhall runne, alwaies kéeping néerer the two Iſlands, then the Iſland of ſtony Cliffes, for by the Iland of Stony Cliffes, you haue ſeuentie fadome déepe, and within the two Iſlands Weſtward, you finde but 25 fadome, muddy ground, holding your courſe in that manner to the aforeſaid Iſlands that lye in the Créeke, kéeping on the North ſide, for there it is faire and cléere, and being right againſt this Iſland, you ſhall find twenty fadome déepe, where you ſhall anker, that from them you may ſée the hauens, which are two, the one lying (a ſmal mile from this Iſland towards the Southweſt) by a point of land▪ whereon there ſtandeth ſixe or ſeuen trées, ſeperated one from ye other with ſome buſhes, you muſt put to this point, which within it hath a ſmall Bay or Créeke, at the end whereof ſtandeth a riffe of ſtone reaching from thence into the Sea, in the which lyeth the aforeſaid ſmall Créeke, which hath a very good harbour, at thrée fadome déepe good and fair ground, where you ſhall anker, but it is not for great ſhippes. The other Hauen is Northweſtward, on the other ſide of the Créeke, hauing in it ſome Iſlands and ſtones, it is a great Bay which runneth inward to the land, making a bow with very good harbor: This hauen is for great ſhips.
                     From this Créeke of Vſquy ſomewhat further Northward, lyeth another great Creeke, which runneth inwards Weſt Northweſt. The Land and the point betwéene theſe two Créekes, may bee from the one Sea to the other, about the length of the ſhot of a great Péece in breadth, and halfe a myle from the end of the point Weſtward on the South ſide lyeth a ſmall Iſland cloſe by the Land, betwéene the which and the land runneth a channell of twelue fadome deepe, with faire ground of great ſand, where I haue ankered. Right ouer againſt this Iſland on the Northweſt Land, about the length of the ſhotte of a great Péece, lyeth a ſmall Creeke, with a village called Sanganaxeque, where Don Franceſco Maſcharenhas lay with his ſhippe for the monſon: This hauen with a northweſt wind is harbourleſſe.
                     From this Créeke about halfe a myle forward, you beginne to haue lowe land with ſandie ſtrands and Trées all along the Sea coaſt. By all this coaſt and the

low land, it is all bankey grounds, wherfore you muſt keepe from it about halfe a myle. In the middle way of this lowe land, there lyeth two mouths or entries of Riuers that are very ſhallow, whereby you may not enter into them by any meanes, and at the end of this low land you haue a riuer of freſh water of twelue Spannes in the Hauen at a Spring tide, and within the Riuer at lowe Water the Shippes lie drie, being ſandy ground. Cloſe by the Roade or entry of this Riuer lyeth a Village called Aquina Fama: Halfe a myle within the Land vpon the Riuer, lyeth the greateſt and mightieſt Towne in all the Kingdome of Bungo, where the Kings in time paſt held their Courts, where now all the Marchaunts of the Countries round about it, (who are very rich and aboundant in wealth) are reſident.
                     From this Riuer vpon the other ſide of the Creeke lyeth a very good Hauen, with harbour againſt all windes, it is a ſmall Bay, for the points or heights therof doe runne through each other, wherefore they make a good defence againſt the South windes. The entry of this hauen is faire, you need but run in through the middle of the Channell, where you haue foure and a halfe, and fiue fadome deepe, and there you haue great furtherance, for you runne in before the winde with the South Monſon, and you put out againe before the winde with the North Monſon: to vnderſtand it well, you muſt know that all this Countrey (as alſo all China, Malacca, India, and all the orientall places,) doe ſayle with the coniunction of the windes, which for certaine months together blowe out of one place, as now in the North then in the South, and that at certaine times and dayes in the yeare without fayling: which coniunction is called (as in other places I haue ſaid) the Monſon, as Monſon of the South winde, that is, when the wind bloweth out of the South and monſon of the North Windes in like ſort, wherewith through all India they make their accounts to paſſe from the one place to the other. And becauſe in this deſcription there is oftentimes mention made of ſome Hauens, Creekes, Riuers, Bayes and Iſlands, where you haue good harbor for the Monſon of the North and South Windes when they blowe, which is to bée vnderſtoode, (that if they bée againſt you in the way you ſhould hold) you ſhould know which hauen is good to ſtay in for that time, or to winter in: for in the Eaſt Countries you muſt Winter when the winde is againſt you, ſo that you cannot holde on your voyage, and of force you muſt ſtay for the wind and weather, that is, the Monſon which ſerueth you, and where you haue a good harbour to ſtay for the Monſon that you muſt haue, and then to follow on your voyage. Wherefore I thought it neceſſary to ſet this downe, that you might the better vnderſtand the meaning of the Portingall and Indian Pilotes, that firſt ſet downe, noted, and obſerued theſe courſes and Nauigations, vſing here the ſame manner and deſcription of the countrey, not chaunging the word of Monſon, although that in ſome places before, I haue ſaied ſome thing thereof.
                     But to the matter, you muſt knowe that the aforeſaid Hauen or Bay is called Fingy, but it is not free from Rouers and theeues. From the aforeſaid Riuer to this Hauen there is about three myles croſſewaies: In the Roade of the Riuer it is twenty fadome deepe cloſe by the land, but it is bad ground, and there it is not good to ſtay for the windes, for there you could not ſaue any thing. From this point you may ſee the Eaſt land, and at the end where this great Creeke endeth, it is low land, which is called M
                              •
                           ryee, and is all along faire and cleare. The aforeſaid Riuer and Towne lye vnder 33 degrees and 
                           •
                        .
                     From this point or end of M
                              •
                           ryee, two myles further, there is another point of land which lyeth with this point North and South, it is a low land with ſandie ſtrands, at the end whereof lyeth certaine ſtones and Rockes, from thence forward you runne Northward along the coaſt, and a myle beyond it, there is a Village called Tamboca, and another myle further lyeth another place called Tambico, lying both on the Sea ſide, but they haue no Hauens with harbours, alſo the people of the ſame places are not to bee truſted. Beeing right againſt this point of Land, you ſhall along the coaſt ſee a long Iſland, which a farre off ſheweth like two Iſlands, lying diſtant from the land about

two myles, it is called Fimexima, betwéen this Iſland and the land it is all ſhallows from the point of the Créeke of Bungo, to this Iſland aforeſaid. All this coaſt along for the ſpace of a great myle is bankey ground, Riffes, Stones, and other filth. All this way from the beginning of the Kingdome of Bungo, to this Iſland, you muſt runne on the Eaſt ſide, along by the land of Tocaa.
                     
                     From this Iſland of Fimexima aforeſaid, nine myles Northward there is a very high Lande which reacheth Eaſt and Weſt, that is the land of Amanguchen, a great mighty and rich country, for therein is one of the mines of ſiluer of the countrey of Iapon.
                     
                     In this coaſt are good Hauens, as alſo the Iſland of Meagima, which in times paſt (before the Portingales trauelled to Iapon) had great Trafficke, for there was the ſtaple of all the countrey of Iapon, for all kindes of wares and Marchandiſes. Along by this land of Amaguchen, and the country of the Iſland Fimexima aforeſaid, beginneth the ſtraight or paſſage to Facunda, of the which as alſo the other places thereabouts, I will ſpeake in another place, together with the Nauigation and ſcituation thereof.
                     To ſayle from the point of Moryee, in the Créeke of Bungo to the Hauen of Caminaxique, (lying in the country of Amanguchen) which is very ſure and good for all winds, and of great Trafficke: you ſhall holde your courſe Northeaſt, and Northeaſt and by Eaſt, being about ſixtéene myles. This Lande which you goe vnto is very great and high, and you runne all the aforeſaid coaſt along (to a Hooke or point of Lande) Eaſt and Weſt, and Eaſt and by North, and Weſt and by South, and from the Hauen of Caminaxique to the aforeſayed Point about fortie Portingale myles, whereof ſeuentéene and ½. make a degrée, as all the myles in this deſcription likewiſe doe, in the which coaſt lyeth the Hauens hereafter following, that is, from Caminaxique to Toraque, are about two myles and 
                           •
                        . from Toraque, to the Iſland Meagima are ſixe myles and a halfe. The Roade of this Iſland is betwéene it and the Firme Lande: from Meagima to Camangary are a myle and a halfe, from thence to the Iſland of Anooxyma are fiue myles.
                     From Anooxyma to Toumoo, are alſo fiue miles.
                     From thence to Xynaco are fiue myles.
                     From Xynaco to the Hauen of Vxymando are fiue myles.
                     From Vxymando to the Hauen of Muroo are fiue myles. And this Hauen is about fiue myles more from the Hauen aforeſaid. Beyond the aforeſaid point thrée or foure myles Eaſtward, lyeth the Hauen of Fyongo, and from thence ſixe or ſeuen myles further is the Hauen and Bay of Sacay. All this coaſt aforeſaid is faire and cleare, hauing all ouer anker ground. Theſe are (as I ſaid before) all Portingale myles, and two Iapon myles make iuſt a Portingall myle: which is found to bée true by the Portingall Pilotes, that haue therein taken the height of the Sunne, and made their account after the Iapon myles.
                  
                  
                     The 32. Chapter. The Nauigation from Lampaecon (which lyeth by Macon in the coaſt of China) to the Iſland of Iapon, and from thence to the Iſland Firando, with the deſcription thereof by another Pilote.
                     
                        SAyling from Lampacon to the Iſland of Iapon, you muſt paſſe through the firſt iſſue or Channell of the South Iſland, which reacheth South-eaſtward, hauing a Cliffe or Iſland in the middle thereof, betwéene the which and the point of the Iſland you muſt paſſe, becauſe of the ſcant winde, making as neare as poſſiblie you can to the end of the Iſland, alwayes with your Leade in hande. And comming to the middle way of the Channell of the Iſland lying vnto Sea-warde, you ſhall finde a ſandie banke, that in the middle hath not thrée fadome deepe: You ſhall vſe all the meanes you can to paſſe aboue a great and

high Iſland, which lyeth Eaſt Southeaſt from you. Being about this Iſland (with the other that lyeth to Sea-ward in the ſame rowe,) you ſhall paſſe along by the Iſland that lyeth to Seaward. Six miles further from this Iſland, you ſhall ſée a row of Iſlands, ſmall Iſlands, & Cliffes, and are nine, reaching further out to ſeaward then all the reſt that you paſſe by, and lye North Northeaſt, and South Southweſt, you cannot paſſe on the outſide of them, neither is it neceſſary, but you muſt runne betwéene them and a great high Iſland full of Trées, that lyeth to landward from you, which Iſland as you come néere it, ſheweth as if it were round, becauſe you goe right vpon the point: Notwithſtanding it is long, reaching as the coaſt doth. Hauing paſt ſomwhat beyond it, there is a channell that paſſeth betwéene it and another Iſland, lying cloſe by it. Behind this laſt Iſland Eaſt Northeaſt, there is a Hauen where ſome Ships come to lade certain Chiniſh wares, and is not farre from the mouth or entry of Canton. This Iſland aforeſaid, is by the Chinars called Tonquion. From thence you ſhal runne Eaſt Northeaſt to ſée the country that lyeth betwéene Chinchon and Chabaquon, which is faire and cleare ground, running two myles from it to ſhunne a Riffe that lyeth cloſe by Chinchon, which hath a round high Iſland lying cloſe by the land: you muſt runne the coaſt of Chaboqueo to Chinchon Northeaſt and Southweſt, and northeaſt and by Eaſt, and Southweſt and by weſt, and whē you are right againſt Chinchon, then about two miles into the Sea, you haue a high round Iſland, and within the land a high hill with a ſtony rocke on the top thereof, like Pulo Varella, in the coaſt of Champa, and the entry is through ſome Iſlands, this round Iſland afore, is by the Chinars called Toanthea.
                     
                     When you are right againſt Chincheo, as aforeſaid, then runne Eaſt Northeaſt vntill you are eight or ten myles from the coaſt to kéepe without all the Iſlands, and being there, then runne Northeaſt, in which courſe, you ſhall ſee the Iſland of Lequeo Pequeno, that little Lequeo lying vnder fiue and twenty degrées, it is a very high and long iſland, about eightéen miles diſtant from the coaſt of China, when you are paſt Lequeo Pequeno, comming into fiue and twenty degrees and ½: If you deſire to make to the land of Bungo, then runne Northeaſt, and Northeaſt and by Eaſt, in which courſe, you ſhall fall vpon the Iſlands lying on the South ſide of the Iſland Tanaxuma, which Iſlands begin at 29 degrées and ½. and reach to thirtie degrées and ½. and are in all ſeuen high and ſmall Iſlands, which reach one with the other, that is, the thrée firſt Iſlands Northeaſt and ſouthweſt, and Northeaſt and by North, and Southweſt and by South, the other thrée Eaſt Northeaſt, and Weſt Southweſt, and one at the end of them North and South. Theſe ſeuen Ilands being paſt, ſix miles further North northeaſt you ſhal ſée two other ilands lying eaſt and weſt with each other, wherof the Eaſt iſland is the ſmalleſt, the Eaſt end thereof hauing a high houell, which deſcendeth eaſtward, making a low point. You may well paſſe betwéene theſe two iſlands, for there is a good channell. The greateſt of theſe two iſlands which is high and long, is called Icoo, from the eaſt point whereof foure or fiue miles Northward, lyeth the iſland of Tanaxuma, which is a long iſland reaching North and ſouth of ſeuen or eight miles long. In the middle way of the ſame iſland on the Eaſt ſide lieth the Hauen, which is a ſmall Créeke within certaine ſtony cliffes, but it is not beſt to put into it. Weſt Northweſtward from this Hauen, about a mile and a halfe there lyeth a ſmal flat land that hath a houell in the middle ſeuen or eight myles Northward from Tanaxuma, you ſhall ſée a great high land which reacheth tenne miles eaſt and Weſt, which is the land of Iapon, and at the end or point of this coaſt, on the Weſt ſide lieth the Creeke of Cangoxuma, and the hauen of Amango, aboue it hauing a high pointed top, and right againſt the iſland of Tanaxuma, North and North and by Eaſt, lyeth the Créeke of Xebuxy, that is very great, hauing within it the Hauens of Minato, Eoxima, and Xaboxy, all thrée Riuers for ſmall Ships, And lying on the Eaſt ſide: on the right hand as you come Weſt-ward into the Créeke ſixe or ſeuen myles further North Northeaſt along the coaſt, lyeth the Hauen of Tanora, which is the leaſt Hauen of Iapon.
                     
                     If you deſire to put to the ſaid hauen of Tanora, then you ſhall holde cloſe to the ſhoare, ſayling néere vnto it, for it is faire ouer all, but you haue no anker

ground nor Roades, becauſe it is déepe, and when you paſſe by it, being beyond the Créeke of Xebury, then you ſhall come to a ſmall Créeke, which at the firſt ſight ſéemeth to haue good harbour, but being right againſt it, it ſheweth what it hath, that is, many ſtones and rockes reaching ſomewhat inward to land. I note it here, becauſe thereby no man ſhould deceiue himſelfe. Being paſt this ſmall Créeke, you preſently ſee a great thicke and high point of land: From this point, ye land windeth inward, where you ſhall ſee a ſandie ſtrand, and two Iſlands with Trées, lying there along. At the end of the which Iſlands, there are other ſmaller Iſlands and great Rockes reaching from the land to ſeaward. Within theſe Iſlands and ſtones lyeth the Hauen of Tanora, and to put into it, you ſhall take your courſe towards the end of thoſe Iſlands and ſtones that reach to ſeaward from the land. When you are right againſt the end thereof, then Northeaſtward from you to Sea-ward, there will lye another Iſland or ſtony Cliffe. You ſhall runne within this Iſland, and betwéene it and the Land there is a great Créeke, where you may anker at fiue and twenty fadome déepe if néed be, but there is not the right Hauen, but when you are about the Iſlands and ſtones that lye outward to Sea, then you ſhall preſentlie runne along betwéene a point of Lande, (Northward on the right hand,) and the Iſlands into the Hauen that you ſhall ſée lye open without feare, and being about this point of land, you ſhall preſently ſée a Creeke ſtretching Northward inwards, and then you ſhall put to that point of land, which will bée on your right hand where you may fréely enter, for it is foure fadome déepe, all muddy ground, and anker by the Eaſt land, ſhunning the Weſt.
                     From this Créeke of Tanora forward you runne Northward along the coaſt, which is the land of Fiungo and Bungo, all faire and cleare ground, hauing nothing thereon to feare then that you ſee before your eyes: and eightéene myles further, you ſhall find a very great Iſland, that will bee on the Eaſt ſide from you, which is the land of Toca, and reacheth Eaſt and Weſt, and Eaſt and by North, and Weſt and by South, about fortie myles long, comming out by Sacay and Miaco. The Southſide of this Iſland is faire and cleare, along the which you runne to Sacay, betweene this Iſland and the coaſt of Bungo, on the Weſt ſide thereof there is a ſtraight or paſſage of foure, fiue, or more myles broad, and ſuch as will goe to Bungo, muſt alwaies kéepe along by the coaſt of Tanora and Fiunga, ſhunning the coaſt of Toca.
                     
                     But returning to the coaſt of fiue and twenty degrées & ½. beyond the Iſland of Lequeo Pequeno, as aforeſaid: If you deſire to ſaile to the Iſland Firando, you ſhall runne from thence in the aforeſaid courſe of Northeaſt, and Northeaſt and by eaſt, to eight and twenty degrées and ¼. and being there, kéepe Northeaſt, by the which courſe you ſhall ſee two ſmall, long, bare, and broken Iſlands, lying North and South with each other, on the South ſide hauing two Iſlands or cliffes halfe a mile diſtant frō each other. Theſe two Iſlands aforeſaid lye vnder one and thirtie degrées and ¼. Thrée or foure miles Northeaſtward from theſe Iſlandes lyeth an Iſland or ſtony Cliffe clouen in the middle, hauing vpon it foure or fiue ſharpe points or toppes, when you are right againſt the aforeſaid Iſland, then you are yet tenne myles from the coaſt of Iapon Weſtward, and running the ſame coaſt Northeaſtward, you ſhall goe right vpon a very great high Iſland called Coiaquijn, which lyeth Eaſt and Weſt with the hauen of Angone, being three or foure myles diſtant from the coaſt, of thrée or foure myles long: on the Eaſt ſide towards the Land, it hath manie Iſlands and ſtony Cliffes. If you chance to fall within the Iſland, finding your ſelfe by the coaſt of Iapon, whereby you cannot paſſe without the Iſland, then take your courſe inward betwéene the Land and the Iſland, without all the Iſlands and Stones, about the length of the ſhotte of a great Peece from it, but goe not neare the coaſt, for that from the North Land there is a Point that reacheth to the other ſide. Being paſt the length of the Iſland along by the Iſlands and ſtony Cliffes, as I ſaid before, you ſhall preſentlie put along by the Iſland, outward to Sea-ward, whereby Northward you ſhall ſée the Point of Lande aforeſaid, which hath ſome Cliffes and Riffes: within the which, Northward lyeth the Hauen of Amacuſa. This point

of land lieth right ouer againſt another point of lande that ſticketh out from the Iſland, lying North and South with each other: and when you haue paſt beyond this point of lande, then you ſhall hold along the coaſt about a mile from it.
                     You runne along by this coaſt from the one point of lande to the other North Northweſt and South Southeaſt, and if you paſſe without the Iſland of Coiaquin, you ſhall take the ſame way (béeing paſt and about it) to come vnto the coaſt, and ſo runne along by it as aforeſaid.
                     From the aforeſaid point of Amacuſa that hath the Cliffes and Riffes, thrée or foure miles forward, there is another great and high point of lande in the ſame coaſt, and beeing paſt it, you ſhall ſée a great opening or entrie of a Channell, which is called O eſtrechio d'Arima, that is, the Straight of Arima: within this ſtraight lyeth two good Hauens, the firſt called Xiquij, which is one of the beſt Hauens of Iapon: This Hauen lyeth about halfe a mile from the entrie inwarde on the South ſide and the right hand Weſtward at the end of a great Créeke, which hath a harbour for all windes, with foure or fiue fadome déepe muddie ground, but in this Hauen three or foure Portingales were ſlaine: I thinke it happened by their filthie pride and preſumptuouſneſſe, for in all places they will be Lordes and maſters, to the contempt and embaſing of the inhabitants, which in all places will not be endured, namely in Iapon, being a ſtubborne and obſtinate people. But to to the matter. On the North ſide of this créeke, on the land lying on the other ſide, there lieth a high round Iſland, and hitherto it is all ouer faire and cléere ſea and ground.
                     To put into Arima you ſhall goe towards the North Lande, for on the South ſide (as ſoone as you are paſt the Creeke of Xiquij) you haue two ſtones, and thereabouts it is all ouer full of riffes and other filth. This ſtraight aforeſaid (as you firſt enter into it) reacheth Eaſtward, and then turneth Northwarde, and along by the point (where it turneth northward) there runneth ſtrong ſtreames, and ſo ſtiffe, that if you be not carefull, it will turne the ſhippe about, and put it backe againe, if you haue not a ſtiffe forewind to breake the force of the ſtreames.
                     Being about this point aforeſaid, on the ſame land there lieth a very good Hauen called Cochinochy, or Cochin
                              •
                           quyn, and then the Hauen of Arima, whereof the Straight receiueth the name, and lyeth halfe a mile Northward from Cochinochy, beeing a Creeke which is open for an Eaſt wind, and without any defence for foule weather. Somewhat further lyeth the Hauen of Simonbaia, that hath thrée Iſlandes which make a harbour againſt the North wind, but at low water the ſhippes lie drie. In this Straight there, are no other Hauens that are ſafe and good for All windes, but onely Xiquy and Cochinochy as I ſaid before.
                     From this Straight to the Iſland of Firando, along the coaſt there are many Iſlands and Cliffes, and a great Créeke. At the iſſue of the Straight of Arima ſixe miles forward, lyeth an Iſland cloſe by the coaſt called Cambexima, which is a great high land, hauing on the Sea ſide cloſe by it foure or fiue Iſlands or cliffes: and betwéene this Iſland and the Firme land, there is a good harbour, and in the ſame Iſland there is a village with many people, with a good ſmall Créeke or Hauen, where many Fiſher boats & Foiſts doe lie: from thence begin the Iſlands of Firando.
                     
                     From this Iſland Cambexima fiue or ſixe miles forward, there is a point of land ſticking out with many Iſlands and cliffes that reach from the land into the ſea: you muſt run to the ſame point northweſtward. This way from Cambexima to the aforeſaide point of land, is all one créeke, becauſe the land windeth inward, and becauſe that on this coaſt of Iapon (commonly at ſuch time as you goe thither) it is cloudie & miſtie weather: therefore you can hardly diſcerne the ſcituation of the land, but if it be cléere weather you ſhall preſently ſee the point ſticking out (that hath the Iſland and Cliffes at the end thereof) but if it be cloudie and miſtie weather, then you muſt not ſaile along the coaſt, but hold your courſe half a ſtrike from the Northweſt as aforeſaid, & when you are hard by it, you ſhall preſently diſcouer all the Iſlands and cliffes. The furtheſt to ſeaward of theſe Iſlands & cliffes, are two Iſlands ſeparated from each other, betwéene high and lowe, and longer then round, wholly without Trées: and that which lyeth furtheſt to ſeaward hath two riffes reaching out from it, one

lying Eaſtward, the other Weſt Northweſt, about halfe a myle by the Eaſt Iland of theſe aforeſaid two Iſlands, as I was tolde if is faire and good ground cloſe to it, as it ſéemeth to be: And vpon the North ſide it hath the harbour for the Monſon of the, South windes, and if you haue occaſion you may anker there.
                     From theſe aforeſaide two Iſlandes to the lande, there lyeth two Iſlandes or Cliffes in forme like two Pillars: betweene theſe Cliffes and another Channell (which the Iſlands begin to open before you) many Iuncos or Chiniſh ſhippes doe paſſe laden with merchandiſes to F
                              •
                           
                           rando and the Hauen of Vmbra, notwithſtanding you ſhall leaue all theſe Iſlands or Cliffes on the Eaſt ſide or your right hand, running about halfe a mile to Seaward from them: and béeing right oueragainſt theſe Iſlands, then three or foure miles further in the ſame courſe of North Northweſt, there is another point of an Iſland ſtretching right Weſtward from the Land, being a high and flat land on the top, and in the firſt appearance it ſéemeth like three Iſlands, although it is but one, for it hath two broken partes, and by that meanes maketh a ſhewe of thrée Ilands.
                     From the point of this Iſland thrée miles Weſtward to ſeaward, you ſhall ſee a round Iſland, hauing cloſe by it a long ſmall Iſland, and if it be cléere weather Weſt Southweſt or Weſt, you ſhall ſee the Iſland of Goto, which is very high and great, with many rentes and clouen peeces, on the toppe being all euen and flat ground.
                     When you ſée the Iſland aforeſaid that ſheweth like three Iſlandes, then runne ſtraight vpon the point thereof, that ſticketh outward, and if the tide chance to be againſt you with ſlat
                           •
                        e winde, then the water by this point ſticking out of the aforeſaid Iland) maketh a great roaring, and hath much ſcumme, ſo that it ſéemeth to be ſhallows which the water breaketh vpon: notwithſtanding it is all ouer faire and deepe, therefore you may fréely put towards it without feare, keeping a little from the point: and in this manner paſſing about the point, then you muſt ſaile along, where you haue a great and good creeke, where you ſhall put in till you find ten or eleuen fadome deepe: it is hard ground, where you may anker at pleaſure, it hath a good harbour for the winds of the Monſon, and being there you ſhall preſently haue Barkes and Fo
                           •
                        ſtes enough aboord your ſhippe, that will bring you to Firando.
                     
                     In the ſame créeke inward Eaſtward there is a Rode to anker, with good harbour for all winds. Likewiſe the length of the ſhotte of a great péece Northeaſtwarde, lieth another Hauen that hath a good harbour for all winds, wherein there may lie more ſhips then in the Eaſt Rode aforeſaid.
                     If you chance to come into this country at ſuch time as that you feare any foule weather, then you may fréely lie in any of theſe Hauens, where you lie ſafe from rouers and théeues, that may come thither. This Iland that ſeemeth to be thrée, is called Faquyn, and from thence to the Iland Firando are fiue miles.
                     From this Iland Faquyn, if it be cléere weather, you may well ſée the Iland of Firando, Northward from it, but becauſe for the moſt part you there find cloudie and miſtie weather, there is no certaintie, but from the hauen where you lie you ſhall preſently ſee a high and round Iland with ſome ſtonie rockes about it, about halfe a mile from the rode of the aforeſaid coaſt where you lie, which reacheth North Northeaſt, and North & by Weſt, about two miles and a halfe from you, you ſhall ſée another long, high, and flatte Iland, clouen in the middle, and ſo ſheweth to be two Ilands, ſtretching Eaſt and Weſt. About halfe a mile from this iland lieth a great round Cliffe: betwéene this Cliffe and the round Ilande (that lyeth halfe a mile from the Hauen of the aforeſaid Iland) there is a great créeke which maketh a chanell, through the which you paſſe to the Hauen of Vmbra, and when you ſée the Iſland that ſheweth like two Ilands, runne right vpon it to the Hooke or end thereof, lying in the Eaſt, to the which you ſhall go within the ſhot of an arrow, as alſo by the great Cliffe that lyeth Eaſtward from you, running inward, then you ſhall ſée a verie long land, which is the coaſt that maketh the ſtrait or channell betwéene the land and the Iland of Firando: you muſt ſhunne all the land that lieth on the Eaſt ſide, for it is all ouer foule ground, as you paſſe about by the aforeſaid Iland which is called Caroxyma, leauing it on the Weſt ſide

about the length of the ſhot of an arrowe from the ende thereof you ſhall ſée two Iſlandes, whereof that Weſtwarde is long, the other lying right before you béeing rounde, hauing a ſtonie Cliffe which you muſt ſhunne, and then preſently you ſhall ſée two other Cliffes, which ſhall all lie Weſtward from you, and béeing there you ſhall ſée the Iſland of Firando lying before you, being about two ſmall miles from you, you may fréely make towardes it, for it is all ouer faire, and paſſe aboue the coaſt of the Firme lande that lieth Eaſtward. When you are by the Iſlands and cliffes, then there are certaine ſmall Channels, which you ſhall ſhunne, kéeping cloſe by the Iſland of Firando, which is on your Weſt ſide, and is a verie great and long Iſland, and ſheweth (on that ſide whereunto you ſaile) with a great high Houell, in the middle way vpon a point ſticking out of the ſame Iſland: when you are cloſe by the ſame Iſland, you ſhall runne along by it, where you ſhall find an opening, ſtretching inwards like a riuer, you ſhall paſſe about a mile beyond it, where you ſhall haue a ſmall Créeke or Bay called Cochyn, wherein you ſhall enter vntill you finde twelue fadome deepe, and there anker: and although there you lie open to the South winde, yet the water goeth whole: beeing there, you ſhall ſend either by water or by lande to the towne where the Hauen is, for certaine Foiſts or Barkes that may bring you into the Hauen, which Hauen lyeth ſomewhat further, for the entrie thereof is ſomething dangerous, becauſe of the great ſtreames that haue their Current therein.
                     If you deſire to ſaile into this Hauen when it is almoſt high water, haue care, for the wind is ſtrong at your entring, and when the water beginneth to ebbe, then it helpeth to bring you in: then you ſhall runne in ſuch maner along by the Iſland as I ſaid before: and being paſt the créeke of Cochyn, to the firſt point of lande that you ſhall come vnto, that ſticketh out from the ſame Iſland (from the which point Northward there iutteth two ſtonie Cliffes) you ſhall goe neare the ſtonie Cliffes, the better to get into the Hauen, and you ſhall preſently ſée before you on the ſide of Firando, a great and high Iſland, full of trées, & when you ſée it, take your courſe right vpon the Weſt point of the ſame Iſland, vntill the ſaide Iſland lyeth wholly vncouered to Leeward from you, whereby preſently you ſhall ſée inwarde the point or end of the towne: and when you beginne to ſee the houſes, then put ſomewhat neerer to it, right ouer againſt the aforeſaid Iſland on the South ſide and the left hande, and there the Iſland hath a ſmall lo
                           •
                         poin
                           •
                         of lande comming from a high h
                           •
                        u
                           ••
                        , and ſtretcheth into the Sea, from the which point there runneth a Sand or Banke, therefore you ſhall put towardes the ſide of the houſes or end of the towne to k
                           •
                        pe out of the ſtreame, and when you are out being in calme water, if the winde be not good, then anker, and from thence be rowed in, either with Foiſts, Barks, or your own boat, Weſt & Weſt Southweſt into the Hauen.
                     All this deſcription and courſe of Nauigation, is in breefe to conclude, that when you come to the coaſt of Iapon, you ſhall leaue all the Iſlandes that lie along vpon the coaſt, on the Eaſt ſide, and vpon the right hand, and runne without them and the Iſlandes lying to Seaward from thence: whereof the firſt beginneth from the end of the Iſland of the row, called Saquyn, and the long Iſland Caroxyma, that lyeth further forwarde, which reach North, and North and by Weſt, from the ende of the rowe, and the two ſmall Iſlandes with two other ſmall Iſlandes or Cliffes lying further forward, and are ſeuen in all, leauing them all on the left hand or the Weſt ſide▪ with the which courſe you ſhall goe directly vpon the Iſland of Firando, as is before mentioned.
                  
                  
                     The 33. Chapter. A voiage made by a Portingale Pilot, (with a Soma, that is, a Chiniſh ſhippe) from Macau, or out of China, to the Iſland of Iapon and the countrey of Bungo, with the ſcituations of the places along the courſe.
                     
                        THe ninetéenth of Iune béeing Saterday, we departed from the Iſland called A Ilha das Outeas, (lying on the Weſt ſide of the iſſue or chanel of Macau) running outward to ſea,

putting out at the place where the ſhips of Malacca doe vſually enter, but becauſe we could not get aboue the Iſland, called A Ilha grande dos Ladronis, that is, the great Iſland of théeues, lying four miles Eaſt Southeaſt to Seaward from the Iſlande and the Hauen of Macau, therefore wée ranne to Leeward thereof. About the length of the ſhot of a baſe from it, there are two Iſlands lying ſomewhat diſtant from each other, with a very ſmall channell running betweene them, thorough the which they paſſed with Banko
                              •
                           
                         or Chiniſh Barkes. From thence about halfe a mile Northward, lieth another long Iſland full of trees and buſhes, and when you put in there, on the Weſt Southweſt ſide in the middle of the channell, there lieth a ſtone which is couered with the Sea.
                     Sixe miles Eaſt Southeaſtward from theſe Iſlandes, lyeth the Iſland of Tonquian, which is a high and long Iſland, full of trees and buſhes, and cloſe by it on the ſea ſide it hath nine or ten Iſlandes or Cliffes: and becauſe wee could not take the height to paſſe betweene the Iſlandes and the Cliffes, (which is a faire & good channell) wée paſſed to Leeward, between it and another Iſland, about a ſmall mile Northward from thence, which is a great Iland, and there lie two Ilands or cliffes, the greater hard by it, and the other further off, which we left on the left hande, running along by the Iſland of Tonquian, where it is all fair ground. Which Iſland on the point that lyeth Eaſt Northeaſt on the land ſide hath a ſandie Bay, which is a very good Rode for the Monſon of the South windes.
                     When wee were out beyond that Iſland, then wee helde our courſe Eaſt Southeaſt, vntill wee were as farre to Seaward as the furtheſt Iſland, and being in ſight thereof, wee tooke our courſe Eaſt and eaſt and by North for threeſcore miles, till wee were vnder the height of the Iſland Lamon, which courſe we helde thereby to ſhunne Rouers and Theeues, who at that time and in thoſe countries were continually riſident, making warre againſt the Portingales of Macau) and yet wee had the firme Land ſtill in ſight, I meane, the toppes of the Trees and Buſhes that ſtoode vpon the lowe flatte Lande: and comming to the coaſt of Lamon (although wee ſawe it not) wee preſently ranne Northeaſt, by the which courſe wee had the ſight of the high lande of Chabaquon lying on the coaſt of China, and beeing there wee found much badde water and hard ſtreames: and at the laſt wee eſpied the Varella or ſtonie Rocke, that ſtandeth aboue the Hauen of China, ſeeing nothing elſe but high hilles: and from thence forwarde wee ſawe no more of the coaſt of China, and running in that courſe of Northeaſt (which from Lamon wee alwaies held) wée perceiued the Iſland of Lequeo Pequeno, or, Small Lequeo, which was at the fourth mealetide after our departure from Macau, for wée eſpied it on Wedneſday in the morning, and ankered eight miles from it towards the coaſt of China, beeing on the Southweſt point thereof.
                     This Iſland Lequeo Pequeno ſtretcheth Northeaſt and Southweſt and Northeaſt and by North, and Southweſt and by South, it is a very high Iſland and about fifteene or ſixteene miles long: the furtheſt point or end Northeaſtward of the ſame Iſland lyeth full vnder 29. degrees ½. for there I tooke the height of the Sunne, with calme weather, being about fiue or ſixe myles from it, and from this Northeaſt point the coaſt of the Iſland runneth Southeaſt, at the end thereo
                           •
                         hauing another great and high Iſland, making a ſmall Channell that runneth betweene them both: and it ſeemeth that on the Nor
                           •
                        heaſt ſide there is a good Rode for the Monſon of South and Southweſt windes: and along by this coaſt of Lequeo for the ſpace of three daies we had calme weather, and after that wee had a good gale of winde of the Monſon, and I thinke wee had ſo great a calme becauſe wee kept ſo cloſe vnto the ſhoare.
                     About fiue and twentie degrées and 
                           •
                         from the point of Lequeo wee helde our courſe Northeaſt, and Northeaſt and by Eaſt, till wee came vnder nine and twentie degrees.
                     Ten miles from Lequeo forwarde wée ſawe great ſtore of Cuttle bones driuing on the water, and many other ſhelles that were verie white, ſhewing farre off much like vnto Cotton, but it was not long that they draue any thing thicke, for in ſhort ſpace after wee might perceiue them ſcattered abroad verie thinne, and but verie few,

vntill wée came vnder 26. degrées.
                     Comming vnder 29. degrées, wée held our courſe halfe a ſtrike Eaſt Northeaſt for the ſpace of eight or nine miles till the Sunne-ſetting, and then wée perceiued right before vs a round and high Iſland, being about ſixe miles from it, which was the firſt and furtheſt Iſland Weſtward of the ſeuen Iſlandes, which at this preſent are called As Sete Irmaas, that is, the ſeuen ſiſters, which lie vnder 29. degrées and ½.
                     
                     This firſt Iſland hath a ſharpe point on the Weſt ſide, in the middle at the foot thereof hauing a ſtone in forme of a Pillar, like the Varella in the ſtraight of Singapura by Malacca: and on the Northeaſt ſide about halfe a mile from thence, there lieth a round blacke Cliffe.
                     Béeing in the ſight of this Iſland wée preſently ranne North and by Eaſt, as before, all that night: and in the morning (béeing right againſt it) wee ſawe all the reſt of the ſeuen Iſlands, and ſtill held our courſe Northeaſt, vntill we were before the laſt of the ſaid ſeuen Iſlands: From whence about ſixe miles Northward, lyeth two Iſlands ſtretching Eaſt & Weſt, whereof that in the Eaſt is verie long and high, full of blacke ſhining trées, and that in the Weſt much leſſe and lower: at the Eaſt end or point of the leſſer Iland there is a high houell that deſcendeth Weſtward, making a long and lowe point. Theſe iſlands are about a mile diſtant from each other.
                     Weſtward from this Iſland about two miles and a halfe, there is another iſland, as great and high as the other aforeſaid: the firſt great high Iſland aforeſaid is called Icoo, and the aforeſaid ſeuen Iſlands ſhall all lie on the Southeaſt ſide from you, and from the firſt to the laſt they may be about ſeuen or eight miles: when wee were at the end of the ſeuen Iſlands, we held our courſe Northeaſt, towardes the channell that runneth betwéene the great high Iſland, and the Iland that hath the long low point, where we paſſed through, comming out againe on the North ſide. This channell is faire and deepe without any cliffes or ſtones.
                     Foure miles Northweſtward from this Channell, lyeth a verie high and round Iſland, which on the Weſt ſide ſeemeth to be full of Cliffes. This Iland hath a Mine of Brimſtone which lyeth in the middle thereof. A mile Northward from this fiery Iſland lyeth another ſmall and lowe Iſland, and from the aforeſaide fiery Iſlande about eight miles Eaſtward, lyeth the Iſland of Tanaxuma aforeſaid: the great high Iſland of Icoo aforeſaide lying on the Eaſt ſide of the Channell, on the North ſide thereof hath a lowe Lande, and all along by it is verie good harbour, béeing faire and good ground, reaching foure or fiue miles Eaſt and Weſt.
                     Thrée miles Northward from the Eaſt end of this Iſland of Icoo, lyeth the aforeſaide Iſland of Tanaxuma, as it is alſo declared in the Deſcription of the Courſe and Nauigation to the Iſland of Ferando.
                     
                     This Iſland of Tanaxuma ſtretcheth North and South, béeing altogither low Land and full of Houels and Valleyes, with Pine trées that ſtand farre diſtant one from the other, and is about ſeuen or eight miles long: and in the middle thereof on the Weſt ſide, lyeth a Hauen within certaine Cliffes and Rockes, and a mile and a halfe Weſt Northweſtward from this Hauen lyeth a very ſmall and lowe Iſland, with a little Houell in the middle. On the North end of this ſmal Iland there are ſome ſtones & rocks ſticking out about the length of the ſhotte of a great péece, all the reſt is faire. Likewiſe betwéene this Iſland and Tanaxuma it is all ouer faire and cleere. Seuen or eight miles Northward from the Iſland of Tanaxuma, lyeth the great and high Land of Iapon, which coaſt on the South ſide ſtretcheth Eaſt and Weſt for the ſpace of ten myles from the channell aforeſaid that runneth betweene the Iſlandes: you can not ſee Tanaxuma vnleſſe it bée faire and cleere weather: wee ranne Eaſt Northeaſt, and were about three miles diſtant from the aforeſaide Channell before wee diſcouered Tanaxuma, as likewiſe the great land of Iapon, which (as I ſaide before) is verie high, ſtretching Eaſt and Weſt about tenne miles, and becauſe Tanaxuma ſtretcheth North and South, being lowe land, and the land of Iapon high, therefore in that place where wée were, they ſeemed vnto vs like one Lande, becauſe they reach each through other. Wherevpon the Chiniſh Pilote which wee had at that time aboord our ſhippe, thought

then to be all one land, but when we put nearer to it, then wée began to ſée the Channell that runneth betwéene them, beeing diſtant one from the other croſſe ouer, about ſeuen or eight miles: and in that manner wée ranne halfe a ſtrike Eaſt Northeaſt towardes the land of Iapon, it being flood, where the tide ranne Eaſtward towards the ſmall Iſland that lyeth by Tanaxuma driuing vs thither, whereby we had much labour and paine to get aboue it, paſſing about the length of the ſhot of a great péece from it: wherefore it is neceſſarie for a man to runne No
                           •
                        theaſt vntill hée be paſt that ſmall Iland aforeſaid.
                     When we had paſſed about the Iſland of Tanaxuma, wée ranne North Northeaſt towards the coaſt, being three myles diſtant from it: and right againſt the creeke of Xebuxij we had a calme, beeing the laſt of Iune, hauing departed from the Iſland called A Ilha das Outeas, lying on the Weſt ſide of the mouth or channell of Macau, the nintéenth of the ſame moneth, hauing Sailed toward Iapon about eleuen dayes, whereof we had thrée daies calme, ſo that our Sailes lay flat to the Maſtes, being vnder the Iſland of Lequeo as aforeſaid.
                  
                  
                     The 34. Chapter. Another deſcription of the courſe from the Hauen of Macau along by the Iſland of China to the Iſland of Fyrando, and the Iſlands lying about it, to the Hauen of Vmbra in the coaſt of Iapon: with a deſcription of other Hauens lying thereabout, where they ordinarily vſe to trafficke.
                     
                        IF you deſire to Saile out of Macau towardes Iapon, in the Monſons of Iune and Iulie, and if in ſetting out you can not kéep to loofeward from a cliffe which you may eaſily perceiue lying by Macau, which ſheweth like a ſaile, you neede not feare it, for that leauing the Iſland Lanton on the Lée ſide, you may runne whither you will, for it is all faire, and you need not feare any thing: when yea are without the Iſland, you ſhall hold your courſe towardes the Iſland Branco that is, the white Iſland, or the white Stonie Cliffes) running Eaſt Northeaſt, towardes the Iſland of Lamon, and if you haue a faire winde, and that you depart about Euening from the ſaid Iſland, then on the Firme land you ſhall ſée a great high Land, on the Eaſt ſide deſcending ſomewhat flat, and in the middeſt thereof hauing a round houell like a loofe of bread. The depthes all along by that coaſt about two miles from it, is thirtie and fiue and thirtie fadome deepe, being muddie ground: From Ilha Branco to Lamon there are diuers ſmall Iſlandes lying by the coaſt of the Firme Land. In this place for twelue miles or thereabouts on this ſide Lamon, and ſeuen or eight miles from the Firme land, there is ſmall black ſand with ſome ſhels, at ſeuen and twentie and eight and twentie fadomes water, and being there you ſhall ſtil runne Eaſt Northeaſt, although you ſee no land, for that hauing the aforeſaid depth and ground, you paſſe fréely and ſafely from the Riffe of the iſland Lamon, and if it ſo fall out that you ſee no land, yet by the depthes and ground you may well know where you are, for from the iſland Lamon to Macau the depthes of the aforeſaid ground is from 25. to 28. fadome déepe, and by Lamon and thereabouts the ground is white, ſmall, and thinne, with ſome blacke ſande, and if you chance to paſſe by it in cloſe and darke weather, then you ſhall hold your courſe as aforeſaide Eaſt Northeaſt, for it is the beſt way: and when you make towardes the iſland of Lamon and finding the depthes of fifteene or ſixtéene fadome, it is a ſigne that you are farre to ſeaward (for in that country the ſtreame runneth very ſtrong Eaſt Southeaſtward) there as then you muſt runne Northeaſtward, ſo to holde your right courſe.
                     And running at the depthes of fiue and twentie or eight and twentie fadome ſandie ground, it is a good way, holding your courſe Eaſt Northeaſt, for in that ſort you are in the right way: in the middle way from the channell when you are paſt the Iſland of Lamon towardes Chinchon then the ſtreame runneth with you, and hauing the wind of the Monſon: the next day you ſhall ſée land on both ſides, whereof, that you find on the Stearebord ſide is the end or point of the Iſland Lequeo Pequeno, or, ſmall Lequeo: and the beginning of the Iſland called Ilha Fermoſa, that is, the faire Iſland, and on

the lareboord ſide, the Lande lyeth in forme like a hooke, although it is none, but it is the Iſland of A Ilha dos Cauallos, of the Iſland of Horſes, which is very high lying vnder fiue and twenty degrées and a third part, on the one ſide about foure or fiue miles to Sea-ward from it, hauing the Iſland of Baboxyn, and hauing ſéene this Lande, you muſt holde your courſe Northeaſtward, which is a good way, ſo to runne outward of all the Iſlands, for that from this Iſland of Horſes forward to the Cape of Sumbor, there are many Iſlands reaching into the Sea, wherfore this is your beſt courſe to goe to the Cabo de Sembor, and as you thinke you are right againſt ye Cape of Sumbor, although you ſée it not, you need not feare it, for that as then you are about eight or ten myles from it.
                     Being in this country, you ſhall holde your courſe Northeaſt, ſo to ſée the Iſland of Puloma, or Meaxuma, or the Iſland Guoto for it is a good courſe, for the winds of the Monſon, or if you haue any ſtormes or contrary winde, whereby you cannot holde your right courſe, then you muſt gouerne your ſelfe in ſuch manner, that you may fall againe into your right courſe, and ſo to ſée ſome of thoſe Iſlands. This aforeſaid Iſland of Puloma lyeth North North-eaſt, and South Southweſt, with the Iſland Guoto, about tenne or twelue miles diſtant from each other, and is deuided into foure or fiue parts, with many holes & péeces of ground round about it, yet you need not feare, for cloſe by it, there are many other péeces of ground, which I knowe, as hauing ſeene them all.
                     From this Iſland aforeſaid to the Hauen of Vmbra, or the Iſland of Firando, you muſt runne your courſe of Northeaſt, wherewith you ſhall ſée the land lying beneath Vmbra, which is very high, hauing along ye coaſt many ſmall Iſlands, among the which are two Cliffes, that ſticke out with very hard ſharpe Points like Diamonds. From thence to Vmbra are ſixe or ſeuen miles, and being there, about a mile from the Lande, you ſhall holde your courſe North, and ſo runne along by the coaſt, and being by it, you ſhall kéepe cloſe to it to know the Lande and markes thereof, which are theſe: that when you are cloſe by the Land on the right hand, there is a Point of Land, from whence there lyeth two Iſlandes to Seaward, which is hard by the entry of Vmbra, for from this Point inward, you runne Northeaſt towards it. Vpon this Hooke or point are three Pine Trees: and being right againſt this point to Sea-ward from it on the left hand you ſhall ſée a ſmal Iſland with a round cliffe, you muſt runne within this Cliffe, whereby right before, you ſhall ſee the land of Vmbra.
                     
                     When you perceiue a great Iſland or Cliffe, which is very plaine and deſcending downeward, lying inward to Sea, then on the Lande ſide you ſhall ſée great ſtore of wéedes driuing vpon the Water. This Iſland you muſt leaue on the Lareboord or left hand, running betweene it and the Land, for it is about halfe a myle broad: From this Iſland to the mouth or entry of the channell are two miles, with a Northeaſt courſe, whereby you ſhall preſentlye ſée the entry which is very broad.
                     From this Iſland or Cliffe there runneth a ſtony rocke, reaching to the mouth of the Riuer, ſome part of it lying aboue water, and part couered, yet you may plainely ſée it, ſo that you néed not feare any thing, but that you ſée before your eies. Betweene this Rocke and the Lande on the right hand, in the middle way there is fiftéene or 18 fadome déep muddy ground, when you ſee the mouth of the Channell, you muſt put right towards it, without feare, for it is a very good way: And being within this ſtraight or channell, whereby you diſcouer the Riuer, then you muſt holde your courſe on the right hand, whereby you ſhall preſently ſée a round Iſland, hauing a Croſſe on the toppe thereof: and although you ſée not the entry, yet you muſt put towards that Iſland: for when you are right againſt it, then you ſhall preently ſee the Road wherein the ſhippes doe lye, as alſo a Portingale Church ſtanding vpon the Lande, and béeing within- you muſt runne South-warde, about the length of the ſhot of a great Péece, where you may anker at tenne fadome déepe, being very good muddye ground, and there you ſhall make your Shippe faſt on the North Northeaſt, and South South-weſt ſides, and euen as the Winde dooth blowe, you ſhall winde the Béeke heade of

the ſhippe, making the ankers faſt vnder the ſtones, for there it is very narrowe: Notwithſtanding, you néed not feare, although the wind be great.
                     Take héed when you come from Cabo de Sumbor from ye coaſt of China towards the land of Iapon, although you ſee not the Iſlands aforeſaid, leaue not your courſe of Northeaſt vntill you be vpon the coaſt of Iapon, for although you fall by the Hauen of Arima, which is twelue miles from Vmbra, you néede not care, for in thoſe places you haue very good Hauens. By the Hauen of Arima aforeſaid, there lyeth an Iſland (ſomewhat néerer the North then the South) called Cabexuma, which on the inſide hath a very good Hauen, where you may lye and Trafficke freely. And if from thence you deſire to runne further inward, then holde your courſe North Northeaſt, and Northeaſt and by North, wherewith you ſhall come to a Hauen called Cochinochy, lying in the Kingdome of Arima, and departing from Cabexuma, you ſhall runne along by the Northpart of the land, about ſeuen or eight myles, whereby you ſhall come right againſt Cochinochy, which is a better hauen then Vmbra, becauſe therein the Shippes may anker at pleaſure, and before you come néere this Hauen, many Shippes and Barkes will come aboord you ſhippe, which wil fréely bring you in, and you néed not feare the creeke of Arima, for the old Pilotes were in doubt thereof, becauſe they knew it not ſo well as I, for that I haue ſayled all within and about it with a Foiſt, with trouble ynough. Right againſt Cochinochy, lyeth another very good Hauen, called Oxy, belonging to the King of Bungo, where you may freely trafficke.
                     You need not feare the entry of Arima for that beſides the hauens aforſaid wherin you may lye ſafely, there will many Foyſtes and Barkes come and boord you Shippe, that will bring you whether you will, and helpe you to your deſire.
                     You muſt likewiſe vnderſtand, that along by the coaſt of China you need not feare any thing, for it is all faire and good ground, keeping without all the Iſlands, for if you goe betwéene them, you ſhould hardly get out againe to your deſire: therefore it is beſt for you to keepe without them, running along by them, and ſo there is no feare: for it is all faire way, as well to the Iſland Firando as to the Hauen of Vmbra, onely that Firando lyeth ſeuen or eight myles North-ward from the Hooke or Point of Trées, and being there, you ſhall preſently ſée Firando, and in putting forward to it, you find a Varella, that is a marke of a ſharpe ſtony hill: & then you ſhall gouern your ſelfe as aforeſaid, for then you may preſently perceaue it, being a very high land, which ſtretcheth Eaſt Northeaſt, & Weſt Southweſt, in the middle way hauing many ſmall Iſlands, with channels betwéene them, thereby to runne from the one ſide to the other: but if you wil go from the Iſland of Cabexuma to Vmbra, you muſt alwaies kéepe cloſe to the land, for in the Iſland of Diamonds, or pointed Iſland, there is another very good hauen, where (as ſoone as you are in ſight thereof) many Barkes and Foiſts will boord you, and ſo bring in your Shippe. The Hauens in thoſe countries, are theſe that follow as well in the Land of Iapon, as the Iſlandes lying about it: whereof in this deſcription I haue alreadie made mention. Firſt in the Iſland of Cabexuma, there is a very good Hauen, alſo Cochinochy lying in the Kingdome of Arima is a better Hauen. The Hauen of Oxy right againſt Cochinochy, is alſo a better Hauen. In the Iſland called O Ilha do Diamon, that is, the Iſland of the Diamond, becauſe of the ſharpe pointed Rocke, there is likewiſe a very good Hauen, which is part of the Lande of Vmbra, alſo the Hauen of Vmbra is a good Hauen.
                  
                  
                     The 35. Chapter. A ſhort deſcription of the courſe from Macau in China to Iapon, and the Iſland Cabexuma to the Hauen of Langaſaque or Nangaſache, which at this day is moſt frequented of the Portingales: with all the courſes and ſcituations, by an expert Pilote, with a declaration of the winds called Tuffon.
                     
                     
                        AS ſoone as you are paſt ye Iſland of Ilha do Leme, which lyeth as you come out from Macau, then hold your courſe Eaſt northeaſt, wherby you ſhal paſſe about the Iſland of Lamon, and if it be in the night time, you

ſhall caſt out your Lead, and find two and twenty and thrée and twenty fadome déep with ſhels and blacke ſand on the ground, and then you are right againſt the Riffe, and when you are paſt it, you ſhall finde white and ſmall ſand. Then holding your courſe Northeaſt, and Northeaſt and by Eaſt, alwaies kéeping from the coaſt of Chinchon as much as you may, for the beſt way is to runne in the middle of the channell, as far from the Iſland of fiſhers as from the coaſt of Chincheo. And if you goe néerer the Iſland of Fiſhers called A Ilha dos peſcadores, you ſhall finde leſſe depth, and therefore you muſt look to your courſe, and when you are paſt the Iſland Lamao, caſt out your Lead, becauſe of the Iſland of fiſhers. And if in thoſe countries you haue a ſtorme with the winds called Tuffon, and come from the Northeaſt parts, then hold your courſe to Seaward as much as you may to ſhunne the coaſt, for the wind without doubt will be ſoutheaſt, which is right vpon the coaſt, whereby it lyeth right againſt you: and if it driueth you not vpon the coaſt, then it were beſt for you to ſtrike all your ſayles, and take them in, and ſo lye driuing, vntil the wind come South, and then to follow on your courſe againe. I giue you this counſell, becauſe that for the ſpace of two yeares one after the other, I haue béen in thoſe countries with ſtorms of the winds called Tuffon, ſo that one voiage we were almoſt caſt away, by ſéeking to put vnto the coaſt. Nowe to vnderſtand the meaning of this word Tuffon, it is a Chiniſh word, which the Portingales alſo doe holde without altering the ſame, and ſignifieth a ſtorme or Tempeſt, which you commonly finde in thoſe voyages from China to Iapon. If you faile of it at ſometime, it is not often, it commeth and beginneth from one point, and ſo runneth with a continuall ſtorme almoſt about all the points in compaſſe, blowing moſt ſtiffely, whereby the poore Sailers haue worke ynough in hande, and in ſuch ſort, that not any ſtormes throughout all the orientall Indies is comparable vnto it, wherefore it is neceſſary to looke well to it, and to chuſe your times, that by calmes ſodainely you bee not vnaduiſedly ouertaken, as euery man that hath ſayled thoſe wayes, can ſufficiently ſhowe you, and euery one or moſt part of them haue found it to be ſo.
                     When you are right againſt the Iſland A Ilha Fermoſa, then runne Northeaſt, by the which courſe you ſhall goe right vpon the ſtraight of Arima, which is a good way: and as ſoone as you finde ground on the loofe ſide, and haue ſeuentie fiue fadome water, then you ſhall goe right vpon the middle of the Iſland of Meaxuma, and hauing leſſe depth, then your courſe is not good, but of force you muſt ſéeke another courſe to ſayle the better, but being too loofeward, it is good, eſpecially when you ſee the Iſland Sancta Clare, which is a ſmal Iſland: on the Northeaſt ſide thereof hauing two or thrée Cliffes: and ſomewhat farther forward, the Iſland Co
                              •
                           aquyn which is very great, being deuided into thrée parts. I haue paſſed by the land ſide thereof, which is a very good way, and there you néede not feare any thing, but onely certaine ſtones that lye along by the Iſland, which you may eaſily perceiue, for the Sea breaketh vpon them. You muſt holde your courſe along by it, leauing the ſtones on the larboor
                           •
                         ſide, about the length of the ſhot of a Baſe from you: and when you are paſt them, then kéepe aloofe as much as you may inward to Sea, thereby to ſhunne thrée Iſlandes or Cliffes which lye on the other ſide right ouer againſt the thicke and great Lande, for betwéene them and it, it is all full of Riffes. And therefore your beſt courſe is to runne to Seaward from the Iſland of Coiaquyn, in the middle way from the aforeſaid great thicke Lande (that lyeth before the Iſlandes or Cliffes of the Riffes) lyeth the Hauen of Amacuſa, which is very great, where the Créeke of Arima beginneth. From thence North North weſtward from you, you ſhall preſently ſée the Iſland of Cabexuma.
                     
                     When you are right againſt Cabexuma, ſomewhat beyond it, you ſhall ſée ſixe Iſlands or Cliffes which you ſhall paſſe on the Sea ſide, and then Eaſt-warde, and Eaſt and by North you ſhall ſée the Iſland called Ilha dos Cauallos, or of Horſes, which on the Sea ſide hath a great houell, and on the other ſide towardes the Iſland of Firando two Cliffes lying along by the coaſt, which ſhew like two Ships vnder ſayle. Alſo further forward towards Firando, there is two flat Iſlands lying along the coaſt, called the Iſlands of Reſting as, that is, the Iſlands of Riffes.
                     
                        If when you come out of the Sea, you haue cauſe to anker▪ before you put into the Hauen, being by the Iſlands or Cliffes, then put out newe Cables, making them faſt, that you looſe not your ankers, for there it is very déepe and ſharpe.
                     Being right againſt the aforeſaid ſix or ſeuen Iſlands or Cliffes, then runne right vpon the Iſland Dos Cauallos, and when you are by it, that is, inward of the point. You ſhall along by the Iſland ſée a Sand aboue the water, all the other Iſlandes and Cliffes that you ſhall ſée ſhall lye on the lareboord ſide, which is vpon the ſide of the Iſland Facunda, and ſo you ſhall runne till you enter into the Hauen of Langaſaque, hauing nothing to feare, then that you ſée before your eyes: for there you haue both Sea and ground, as it is vpon the coaſt of Spaine.
                  
                  
                     The 36. Chapter. A voyage made from Macau in China to the hauen of Langaſaque or Nangaſache in the Iſland of Iapon in the ſhippe called the S. crus, the captaine being a Portingall called Franciſco Pais, and the Gunner Dericke Geritſon of Enchuiſen in the yeare of our Lord 1585 written by the Pilote of the ſame ſhippe.
                     
                        1585.
                        THe fift of Iuly Anno 1585 vpon a Friday in the morning wée ſet ſayle from the point that lyeth right againſt the Cloiſter of S. Frauncis, minding to runne to Loofeward from a round Iſland or Cliffe, lying Eaſt Southeaſt from thence: but becauſe the wind was ſo ſcant, wee could not doe it, ſo that we were forced to driue, ſo to get through the Channell of Lanton as wee did. The depth that wee found therein was from fiue to ſixe fadome water, and that was cloſe by the round Iſland that lyeth to Seaward from the Iſland of Lanton, and from thence forward it beginneth to bee déeper, being eightéene & twenty fadome, and that depth wee found till wee were without the Iſland called A Ilha de Leme, that is the Iſland of the Harquebuſh.
                     This Iſland of Lanton, as you make towards it, hath a point, where the wind fell very ſcarce, in ſuch manner, that wee could hardly kéepe of an Iſland, lying on the left hand of the chanell if the ſtreame had not beene ſo ſtrong, that it draue the ſhippe ouerthwart to Loofeward, otherwiſe we had indured great labor and trouble to paſſe through the channell, becauſe that towards night we were about foure miles from the Iſland Ilha do Leme, the courſe wee held that night was Eaſt and Eaſt and by South, becauſe wee had a ſharpe wind, hauing twenty and ſixe and twenty fadome déep muddy ground, about ſunne riſing wée ſawe right before vs the Iſland of Branco, or the white cliffe: and becauſe of the depths aforeſaid wée geſſed that we were about half a mile beyond it.
                     The ſixt of Iuly being Saterday, we could not take the height of the ſunne, becauſe it was right ouer our heads, hauing a Southeaſt and South Southeaſt wind, with very hote weather by day, but by night it was ſomewat colder, we held our courſe Eaſt Northeaſt, Eaſt, and eaſt and by North, as the winde blewe, and about noone we found fiue and twenty and ſeuen & twenty fadome water with ſmall black ſandy ground, being in ſight of lande, and at Sunne riſing we ſawe the Land of Lamon, which is a long flat land like a Table or plaine field: on the Eaſt Northeaſt ſide hauing a thin point of Land reaching inward to the Sea, and on the Weſt ſouthweſt ſide there runneth out another thinne point of ſand into the ſea, and hard by againſt the thickeſt part thereof, you ſée the forme of a white place which is the Iſland of Lamon, to Seaward whereof lyeth thrée Cliffes. Lying at the end of the Riffe of the Iſland of Lamon, there wée call forth our Leade, and found 27 fadome water, with ſmall, white and ſome blacke ſand with ſmall ſhels among it, being about ſeuen or eight miles from the land.
                     The ſeuenth of Iuly being ſunday, we had a calme, and ſomtimes (but not much) Southeaſt and South Southeaſt winds, holding our courſe Eaſt Northeaſt, northeaſt, and Northeaſt and by North, at 24 and 26 fadome water: and as ſoone as we had paſt the Iſland of Lamon, we preſently had ſmall thinne white ſand vpon the ground with ſome ſhels, being in the morning about ſeuen miles from the land of Chincheo, and ſaw the Iſland that is like the Iſland called Ilha dos Lymoins, that is, the Iſland of Lemmons, lying by Mallaca, and ſomewhat further wee ſaw a thinne Lande, with a ſharpe point

ſtanding vpon it, which is ſaid to bée a Varella do Chinchon, that is, the marke or Rocke of Chinchon being vpon the eight day, which was munday, the next night following wee had a calme, wherewith the wind came North, being ſomewhat cold, with ſome ſhoures of rayne: but with a South-eaſt winde we had no raine, yet in the night time we had two claps of thunder out of the South-eaſt, with lightning out of the Southeaſt and North parts.
                     The ninth being Tueſday, wee had the height of the ſunne at 23 degrées and ½. in the night hauing had the winde Eaſt Southeaſt with a good gale, and all night wée lay driuing without ſailes, with an Eaſt and Eaſt Southeaſt windes, and a good gale, caſting out our Lead, and found twenty and foure & twenty fadome déep, once hauing eightéene fadome, where wee found ſmall white Sand with ſome ſhels. In the morning very earely we had a north wind, wherwith we wound eaſtward, hauing nothing but the Foukeſaile and the Miſen vp, vntill euening, and at the depths aforeſaid wée tooke in our ſailes, minding to driue: the next day we ſaw land, which wee had ſéene the day before, and it lay Northward from vs, and halfe a point North and by Weſt.
                     The eleuenth being Thurſday wée tooke not the height of the Sun, becauſe wée lay driuing without ſayles, with an Eaſt, and Eaſt Southeaſt windes, the waues comming Southeaſt, our Shippe winding Northeaſt: this was by night, but by day wée had a Northeaſt, and north Northeaſt wind, in ſuch maner, that ſomtime we kept on the one ſide, and ſometimes on the other, as wind and weather ſerued, at twenty and foure and twenty fadome deepe, ſmall white ſand, and ſometimes eightéene fadome: the night before we had much lightening out of the Weſt and South parts, being the thirtéene day of the new moone, and the day before wée had the heigth of the Sunne at 23 degrées and ½. The land we ſaw we could hardly diſcerne, but we ſuppoſed it to bée the land we had ſéene the other day.
                     The twelfth day being Friday, wee tooke not the height of the Sunne becauſe wée lay driuing without ſayles, with an Eaſt South-eaſt wind in the night time, and in the day wée had it North-eaſt, at twentie and foure and twentie fadome déepe, and ſometimes eightéene fadome, with ſmall thinne white ſand, the ground at foure and twenty fadome, being ſomewhat greater ſand, with ſome ſhe is: when it began to be day, we were as we thought about fiue or ſixe myles from the land, and the night before wée had much lightening round about vs, and in the morning ſome ſhoures of raine without wind, the ſkye being thicke and cloſe, whereby it ſeemed the weather would chaunge. About euening we had a Southeaſt wind, preſentlie changing South South-eaſt, wherevpon we let fall our ſailes, holding our courſe North-eaſt, and North eaſt and by Eaſt, and alſo Eaſt Northeaſt, but moſt part Northeaſt, ſo that the depths began to bée greater, and were fiue and thirty fadome, with ſmall white ſand, the Moone as then being at the full, and the waues alwayes running out of the South-eaſt, and with that winde wée ſayled for the ſpace of fiue daies together.
                     The thirteenth being Saterday, wée tooke the height of the Sunne at foure and twenty degrées, that night running Eaſt Northeaſt till morning, then ſailing Eaſt and Eaſt, and by north, and found w
                           •
                         had ſayled twenty myles, being eight myles from the coaſt of China, and in the morning we ſaw land vpon the other ſide, the ground on that ſide was white, thinne, and ſome blacke ſand, and about ſunne ſetting we caſt out out Lead, and found fiue and thirtie fadome déepe, with very fine black ſand.
                     The fouretéenth being ſunday, we took the heigth of the ſun, being ſcarſe fiue and twenty degrées, hauing a ſouthweſt wind with very good weather, holding our courſe Northeaſt, and Northeaſt and by North, all that night at ſeuen and thirty fadome déepe, with very thinne ſand, & ſome black muddy ground, and at the laſt watch in the morning wee found muddy ground at the ſame depth of 
                           
                              •
                           7 fadome, mixed with blacke ſand, and when day began to appeare, we ſaw Lande, being part of the coaſt of 
                           
                              •
                           hina, being about four, fiue, or ſix miles from it, and we diſcouered the Lagarto with the two ſiſters, that is, the cockodril Iſlands ſo called, and ſo we caſt out our Lead, and found two and forty fadome déepe muddy ground, and ſomewhat ſandy, and ye ſame day alſo we ſaw the Iſland Fermoſa lying by Lequeo Pequeno, or little Lequeo, and then the winde ſéemed as

though it would haue blowne fuller.
                     The fiftéenth day being Munday, wée tooke the height of the ſunne at 25 degrées and 1/
                              •
                           . and in the night we had the winde North, with very good weather, running about to the northweſt, and we ran Eaſt northeaſt, Northeaſt & Northeaſt to eaſt, & whē it began to be day, we ſaw land, being the end of the Iſland Fermoſa, or ye fair Iſland, which is a long and low land, broken or rent in the middle, which ſéemeth to be a breach, but it is nothing els but as I ſaid before: and preſently after eaſtward we ſaw another higher land, which is Iands called Ilhas dos Re
                              •
                           s Magos, that is, the Iſland of the thrée Kings: we paſſed along by about 7. or 8. miles from them, and that night we had 34 fadome déepe, and deſiring to know what depth wee found, being in ſight of the land aforeſaid, wee found aboue 40 fadome, the aforeſaid land lying eaſt Southeaſt from vs, being muddy ground▪ that day we had a ſharpe wind of the Monſon, but it helde no longer then til euening, and then it was calm againe, and ſo held till morning, and then we had it Northweſt, ſo running about from the Weſt till it came Southweſt, and continued till night, and then it was calme, being Tueſday.
                     The ſixtéenth being in ſight of the Iſlands aforeſaid, the ſame day wee had the heigth of the Sunne at 26 degrées, leſſe ½. degree, and the end of the great Iſland lay eaſt and eaſt and by ſouth from vs, and the little Iſland eaſt ſoutheaſt. This little Iſland is higher on the ſouth ſouthweſt ſide, then on the Southweſt ſide, and the point or hooke of ye ſouthweſt part, hath a breach or rent, to the which, the néerer you approch, the greater it ſéemeth.
                     This Iſland is very high in the middle, and deſcendeth downeward towards the end. The Northeaſt point is lower then the ſoutheaſt, ſo that it maketh as it were a tongue ſticking out, which is very lowe. From thence Eaſt Northeaſtward are certaine Iſlands ſhewing like cliffes. The depth in that place is fiue and twenty fadome muddy ground.
                     Wedneſday being the ſeuentéenth, we had a North Northeaſt wind, and then it came North-eaſt, and began to blowe ſo ſtiffe, that we were forced to ſtrike all our ſailes, letting the ſhippe driue all that day Southeaſtward, and by night wee willed the man at the helme to ſteere northweſt, and about morning the winde began to blowe ſo ſtiffe with ſo great waues, that we were forced to go with half our foukeſaile, with all our cords wel bound & made faſt, and the ſtorm or Tuffon was ſo great, that wee were forced to bind all that wee had on boord, els it was preſently ſtricken in péeces. This Tempeſt began firſt North Northeaſt, and ſo ranne about till it was North Northweſt. At the departure whereof it was ſo boyſterous, that the waues ſéemed to touch the clowdes. This was vpon Thurſday, being the two and twentith day of the new Moone: the next night following the wind came weſt, but becauſe as then the Sea ranne verie high, we let not our ſailes fall, but in the morning we had the wind ſouthweſt, and then we let fall our ſailes, minding to follow on our courſe with great ioy throughout our ſhip, thinking certainely wee had the windes of the Monſon, but towards night it was calme againe, and then wee had a North wind, holding our courſe eaſtward, but not long after it was altogither calme, notwithſtanding the waues ranne out of the South, ſo that about two of the clocke we had the wind ſoutheaſt, wherewith we hoiſed ſailes, running northeaſt, and Northeaſt and by North, and when it began to be day, we ſaw the Iſland called Dos Reys Magos (that is, the thrée kings) lying South about tenne or twelue miles from vs, and there I found the heigth of the ſunne to be 26 degrées and ⅔. being the one and twenty day of the Moone.
                     The day before wee ſawe the Iſland Fermoſa, which is a very high Land, and ſéemeth to reach vnto the cloudes, & there wee had fiue and fortie and fiftie fadome water muddy ground. On friday at ſunne riſing we caſt out our lead, and found one and twentie fadome with blacke ſande. The firſt token that we had of the aforeſaid Tempeſt, was a ſmall Raine-bowe cloſe by the Horizon on the Sea ſide, being a faire ruſſet colour, with two other greater Rainebowes: whereof the point or end ſhewed almoſt like the cloud called Olhos de Bois (that is, Cats eyes) which are ſmall clouds, which at the firſt ſhewe, ſeeme no greater then a mans fiſt: about the Cape De bona Speranza, which by the ſailors that ſaile in the Eaſt Indian Seas are much marked, for they are tokens of ſuddaine falling Tempeſtes and cruell ſtormes, as in the voyage from India to

                        Portingale is alreadie partly declared: wherefore it is good to bée aduertiſed thereof, the better to looke vnto it, and to watch for them, to ye which end I thought it not from the matter to ſpeake of them in this place. But returning vnto our matter: I aduertiſe you that when you are come into thoſe countries, as long as the winde commeth out of the North, and ſo Southweſt, you are to make no account thereof, for it will preſently bée North Northeaſt and Eaſt, but when it is calme, then you ſhall haue a Southeaſt winde, and then South and Southweſt, which are the monſon and windes of that time, but if it beginne againe to be calme, it may ſo fall out that it will bée Eaſt Southeaſt, but it will preſently be ſoutheaſt againe, with faire weather, which wée alſo found in this Monſon of Iuly, Anno 1585.
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            Dom. 1585
                        
                     
                     Monday the two and twentie day, wée tooke the height of the Sunne at 27. degrées and 1/
                              •
                           . hauing a Southeaſt & Southſoutheaſt winde, with good weather, and helde our courſe Northeaſt, and as I geſſed wée had runne (after wée had faire weather and wind) about two and twentie miles, béeing from the lande of China from the Cape called Sumbor about 12. myles, being yet about an hundred miles from the Iſland of Meaxuma, and that day wée caſt out the Lead and found 55. and 57. fadome water, and ſawe many blacke and white Sea foules that helde thereabout, the blacke birdes by the Portingales being called Alcatraſes.
                     
                     The thrée and twentie beeing Tueſday, wée had verie good weather, in ſuch manner, that at that mealetide wée ſailed about fiftéene miles, béeing about twelue miles from the firme land of China. In the morning we caſt out the Lead, and found one and fiftie fadome, with white and blacke ſand.
                     Wedneſday being the four and twentie day, wee had the height of the Sunne at 29. degrées, with an Eaſt Southeaſt, and Southeaſt winde and good weather, holding our courſe Northeaſt, and Northeaſt and by North, and ſometimes (but not much) Northeaſt and by Eaſt. I made my account to haue holden Northeaſt and by North, and ſo to haue ſailed 16. miles. being yet from the Iſland of Meaxuma about 70. miles, lying Northeaſt from vs, and there we caſt out our Lead and found 49. fadome déepe, ſandie & muddy ground▪
                     
                     Thurſday the 25. of Iuly, wee tooke not the height of the Sunne, becauſe wee lay driuing without ſayles with an Eaſt wind, winding Southward, and ſo helde till the 26. day, and draue Weſtward, finding two fadome leſſe in our depth.
                     The 26. we wound Northward without ſailes, yet not long after wee let our foreſaile fall, (but wholly againſt my mind) but onely at the importunate deſire of the Chiniſh Pilat, ſaying that the ſame day wee ſhould haue the winde larger, which was not ſo, but cleane contrarie, ſo that all the way wee made in that ſort was more troubleſome vnto bs: wherefore it is better for ſuch as finde themſelues in thoſe countries of 29. degrées, to ſtay for Southeaſt windes, and then to runne North Northeaſt, Northeaſt, and Northeaſt and by North, becauſe the waters and ſtreames runne verie ſtrong towards Liampo, and when you are vnder 30. and 31. degrées, hauing a South Southeaſt winde, then you ſhall haue great labour and much paine to get the Iſland Meaxuma, for ſo it happened vnto vs, becauſe the wind was ſo ſtrong, that we could beare but our foreſaile, and halfe the maine top-ſaile, as alſo becauſe the Sea ranne very high and hollow, and put our ſhippe out of courſe, and that the ſtreames ranne Southeaſt: This is about 25. or 30. miles from the Iſland Meaxuma.
                     
                     But as ſoone as the winde came full, whereby wee ranne Eaſt, Eaſt and by North, and Eaſt Northeaſt, at 40. and 34. fadome water, the ground being verie ſmal ſand, holding as much Eaſtward as poſſibly we might, and ſometimes eaſt and by South, wherby we began to haue more depth, yet very ſlowly, that it would haue wearied vs if the ſhip had gone hardly forward, but becauſe the water ranne very hollow, whereby the ſhippe was not verie well ſtéered (wherein we onely put our truſt) at the laſt wee had 50. and 60. fadome deepe muddie ground, and then 
                           
                              •
                           0. and 75. fadome with ſmall thin ſand, and a little after that wée had 80. fadome deep, but I beléeue that chanced becauſe the Lead hung ſomewhat backewarde. At that caſting, the ground was ſomewhat greater ſande, and becauſe (as wee made account) wée were neere vnto the Iſland Meaxuma, I preſently tooke in the

maine toy and myſſen in, contrary to the opinion of ſome Pilots, euery quarter or 
                           •
                        atch in the night, caſt the Lead continually ou
                           •
                        , and preſently in the morning we hoyſed the maine top-ſaile vp againe, & ſailing ſo for a little time, we ſaw land, which was part of the Iſland Meaxuma, although other Pilots that were in the ſhippe ſaide it was the Iſland of Guoto, but therein they were as perfect, as in all the reſt of their iudgements.
                     This Iſland of Meaxuma in the firſt diſcouerie had a high ſlope lande, lying loweſt to the Southweſt, and when you are right againſt it, at the end therof you finde a Cliffe which ſheweth like a Fortreſſe, it was told vs, that not farre from that Cliffe there lieth a Cliffe vnder the water, whereupon the water breaketh.
                     This Iſland of Meaxuma ſheweth like three or foure Iſlands, whereof the firſt on the Southweſt ſide ſheweth as I ſaid before, hauing on the top or vttermoſt part thereof two round Houels like womens breaſts, or like a ſaddle: the other two Iſlandes or likenes thereof, in the middle way, are like great Cliffes, with many rockes and crags ſticking out like Organ pipes, and the other Iſland or likenes of an Iſland lying Northeaſt, ſheweth like a verie long, but not ouer high cliffe, we ranne along by the Iſland holding our courſe Northeaſt, about two miles beyond it, and when we left Meaxuma becauſe the winde ranne Southeaſt, then we ranne Northeaſt, Northeaſt and by Eaſt, and Eaſt Northeaſt, and in the morning they ſaid that we had the length of the land of Amacula, and being to Leeward we eſpied a great thicke land, lying cloſe by the Iſland Cabexuma. This Iſland Cabex
                              •
                           ma is long flat land, verie ſmooth, on the North ſide hauing a Cliffe: this was the laſt of Iuly, and the ſame day wée entred into the Hauen of Langaſ
                              •
                           que, which is the Hauen & place where at this day the Portingales haue their moſt trafficke.
                  
                  
                     The 37. Chapter. The right markes of the Iſland Meaxuma, as well by the depthes as by the opening of the land, with an aduertiſement how you ſhall put into the Hauen, and in the Rode of Langaſaque or Nangaſache in the land of I
                              •
                           pan.
                     
                     
                        FIrſt, when you are at ſeuentie fiue fadome water, you muſt go right vpon the middle of the Iſland, and ſeeing Land at that depth, it will be a high plaine ſteepe land, but not verie great, on the vppermoſt part thereof hauing two p
                           •
                        ps, and when you goe néere it, you ſhall preſently ſée another long land, béeing flat and euen on the toppe, betwéene them both hauing two great cliffes, with many ſmall, lying togither, which you ſaile cloſe by: about two miles from them, this Iſland on the Southweſt ſide hath a Cliffe, and a little further to Seaward from it, there lyeth another ſtonie Cliffe vnder the water, whereon the Sea breaketh, and at the Northeaſt end it hath another Iſland or Cliffe. You muſt vnderſtand, that comming to Iapon, and finding more depthes then aforeſaid, and ſéeing land, then it is not the Iſland of Meaxuma, but rather the Iſland called Sancta clara, & if you find leſſe depth then ſeuentie fadome, then it is Meaxuma, but then it will bée on the Starrebord ſide. The Iſland of Meaxuma lyeth vnder 31. degrées and 2/
                              •
                           . Hée that deſireth to goe to Langaſaque, paſſing from this Iſland about two miles Eaſtward from it, he muſt runne Northeaſt, and Northeaſt and by Eaſt, hauing a full wind: but if you ſaile by the winde, you muſt rather ſaile Eaſt Northeaſt, & with this courſe you ſhall get the Iſland of Cabexuma, and you ſhall likewiſe ſée the hilles of Amacuſa, as alſo ſome ſmall cliffes lying right ouer againſt Cabexuma, which you ſhall preſently ſée: and if you deſire to be put into Langaſaque, then you muſt holde along by the cliffes aforeſaid to Seaward from them: and béeing paſt thoſe cliffes, you ſhall preſently ſee the end of the Iſland dos Cauallos, or of Horſes, which on the Northweſt ende hath certaine Pine trées: you muſt put towardes that point, and when you are right againſt it, you ſhall not preſently fall vpon it, becauſe of the billowes that come from ouer the Iſland Caffury, which commonly you find moſt certainly in that place: and when you find thoſe billowes, you ſhall put forwarde as much as you thinke conuenient, thereby to put into the middle of the Hauen, and when you are in the middle then you may fréely put on, for there you haue no cauſe of feare, and when you begin to put in, then you

ſhall preſently ſée the water breake vpon the ſtonie place, which lieth as farre as to the middle way of the Iſland dos Cauallos, ſo that in the entrie of Langaſaque there is nothing els to doe, then onely to runne in through the middle thereof, till you be in the Rode, where you muſt anker, hauing foure fadome, and ½. and fiue fadome water, which is when a trée that is right againſt the great and principalleſt Church is euen with the toppe of the Church, and you ouer againſt it, then you are at the right place, and it is a very good place to anker in: but when you are hard by the point of land that commeth right from the Church, you muſt take care to kéepe on the left hand, thereby to ſhunne a Riffe of ſand that commeth from the ſame point, and ſo anker as aforeſaid.
                     And if you chance by night to paſſe by the Cliffes aforeſaid, and deſire to anker by them at fortie fadome, (as ſome ancient Pilots aduiſe you) in danger of an Eaſt wind, then my opinion is, that you were better runne betwéene them and the Iſland Cabexuma, and certaine Iſlands that lie in the ranke of the Iſlands dos Cauallos, which is a verie broad and good channell of twentie fadome déepe, and there you may wind and lauere from one bough to the other as he will, ſo that you may anker there at twelue or fiftéene fadome which you will, vpon a flat and euen ground hard by the Iſland Caffury, wherby you are ſafe from the northeaſt to the Southeaſt and South, béeing in more ſafetie and better aſſured in the morning to ſet faile, betwéene the Ilands dos Cauallos and Caffury till you be in, which is a verie good channell of ten fadome déepe: you néed but paſſe right thorough the middle, and to be the better aſſured, you may ſend a boat in before you, which ſhall lie there where ye riuer is narroweſt, thereby to ſerue you for a Baye or Sea-marke.
                  
                  
                     The 38. Chapter. The right courſe to ſaile from the Iſland Meaxuma to the Hauen of Cochinochy and to Facunda, with the ſcituation of the Places.
                     WHen you ſée the Iſland Meaxuma, go within a mile and a halfe or two miles néere it, or ſomewhat cloſer if you will, for there you néed feare nothing but what you ſée before you, and deſiring to ſaile from thence to Cochinochy then you ſhall hold your courſe Eaſt, and Eaſt and by North, ſtil kéeping Eaſtward, whereby you ſhall come to the Créeke of Arima: and if it bée by night, and that you deſire to knowe when you are by the land, then caſt your Lead continually out, and béeing at fortie fadome, then you are about two miles and a halfe or thrée miles from the lande, and béeing in the mouth of the Créeke, you ſhall finde hard and great Sand: and when you are at fortie fadome, you may anker if the weather be faire: if you thinke it bée falling water, and ſo ſtay till it bée daye, for there the ſtreame runneth verie ſtrong into the Sea, your Lead will direct you what you ſhall doe.
                     If it bée day, you ſhall preſently ſée the Lande of Cabexuma, to Seawarde from you, lyeth a Cliffe which ſheweth like a Saile. This Cliffe you can not ſée, but when you are cloſe by the point: to Léewarde from this point Northward, lyeth certaine ſtonie cliffes, but it is not beſt for you that you ſée them when you goe to Cochinochy, becauſe they lie to Lée-warde, as I ſaide before. And wen you ſée lande, which is at fortie fadome water, then you ſhall preſently diſcouer the Créeke of Arima, as alſo the point of Cabexuma on the one ſide, and the lande of Amacuſa and Xiquy on the other ſide, which is very high. This lande lyeth on the South ſide, and Cabexuma on the North ſide, when you ſée the point of Cabexuma, goe within a mile of it, becauſe of a ſtonie cliffe which lyeth in the mouth of the Creeke, holding your courſe cloſe by Cabexuma, about a mile and a halfe from it, or along by the land of Amacuſa.
                     
                     If the winde within this Créeke bée ſharpe, then ſtay vntill the floode commeth, which ſhall bring you where you deſire to be, and being there you haue Cochinochy right before you, where you ſhall haue Barks and Scutes great ſtore to bring you in.
                     Hée that deſireth to goe to Facunda, muſt hold his courſe Eaſt Northeaſt, and Northeaſt and by eaſt, and when you are cloſe by the land, you ſhall find the depths

aforeſaid, and beeing to Léewarde from Cabexuma, you ſhall there finde harde ground and if it be right ouer againſt the mouth of the creeke, you ſhall haue ſandie ground, as aforeſaid: and when you ſee the point of Cabexuma, then make towards the lande, and by the lande about a mile diſtant you ſhall ſée certaine ſtonie cliffes, by the which you ſhall holde your courſe to Seaward from them: by theſe firſt ſtonie cliffes lyeth a round Iſland, with a trée in it, and ſomewhat beyond this Iſland with one Trée, there is another Iſland, ſtretching Northweſt and Southeaſt, called Ilha dos Cauallos, that is, the Iſland of Horſes: you muſt make towards the Iſland to a point of land that lyeth out on the North ſide of the ſame Iſland. This Iſland on the Northweſt ſide hath for a marke certaine Pine trées; when you are cloſe by the aforeſaid Northerly point, then from thence hold Eaſt Northeaſt, till you put in where you ſhall find a Creeke, and right ouer againſt this Iſland North Northeaſt, lieth a ſharpe pointed Houell, reaching to Seawarde, which you muſt ſhun, for half a mile from thence forward lieth two ſtones, which you ſhall preſently ſee when you enter into the creeke, going within an Iſland or cliffe which will be Eaſt Northeaſt from you: you muſt put towards it about the length of the ſhot of a great péece, and ſo runne along by it till you be in, and within on the right hand vpon the lande you ſhall ſée certaine downes, and on the left hand a groue, hauing on the ſea ſide as you paſſe along many ſtones like Kefell ſtones. Right ouer againſt this Iſland on the left hand, lie the two ſtones aforeſaid, which you can not ſee: then with an ebbe of a ſpring tide, and running in after this manner, you ſhall ſee a croſſe ſtanding vpon a point of land: and right ouer againſt this croſſe is the Rode, and from this croſſe Eaſtward there is a verie good Hauen, where you muſt make your ſhip faſt and ſure from the South ſide, that is, the Hauen of Facunda.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 39. Chapter. An inſtruction of the courſe out of the Hauen of Langaſaque or Nangaſache, to the cape de Sumber, in the coaſt of China, where the Portingales are reſident.
                     
                        SAiling out of the hauen of Lang
                              •
                           ſaque to China hauing a North wind, if you haue cauſe to anker, below by the thrée Iſlands or cliffes, béeing right ouer againſt the Iſland dos Cauallos, on the ſide of Facunda, then anker there along, for it is déepe enough all ouer, as I with my lead haue prooued: there you ſhall ſtay the firſt night, that in the morning very early you may haue the winde from off the lande, wherewith you ſhall ſet ſaile, looſing as much as you can vntill you be gotten about the Iſland dos Cauallos, for becauſe we did it not (being in the ſhip of Triſtan Vaas da Veiga) we were in danger not to haue béene able to get about the Iſland.
                     Béeing paſt the Iſland dos Cauallos, you muſt hold your courſe Weſt, Weſt and by South, and Weſt Southweſt, and if the wind be bigge then put not towards the Iſland Guoto, for that there at that time you haue certaine South windes, which I knowe for certaine, becauſe I haue béen there at other times, in the ſhip of Manoel Trauaſſos in great trouble, becauſe it is croſſe wind right vpō the coaſt, and there you haue no ground, as alſo by night not to fall by the Pannellas (which are called Pottes, and by ſome Cliffes) wherefore your beſt courſe is to runne to Loofeward from the Iſland Meaxuma. Along by the Southweſt ſide of the Iſland of Meaxuma lieth a cliffe, from thence forwarde you ſhall holde your courſe Weſt Southweſt, although you haue the wind ſcant, yet you may hold that courſe, for that being halfe way from the gulfe to the coaſt, you ſhall without doubt finde the wind large enough.
                     In this way (kéeping well to Loofewarde) about 35. or 40. miles from the Cape de Sumbor, you ſhall find a Banke of 35.37. and 38. fadome déepe, which (by ſuch as knewe it not) might bee taken for the ground of the land of China.
                     
                     Being paſt this Banke, you find more depthes, but when after that the depthes begin to leſſen, then looke to your ſelfe, for then moſt certainly you are by the land. When you ſée the land of Sumbor, then in the night time you muſ
                           •
                         runne South Southweſt, and by day make towardes the land, thereby at times to kéepe ſomewhat to Seaward from the land, thereby

to ſhun the cliffes called As duas Irmaas, or the two Siſters, which lie far inward to ſea, as alſo the Iſland called do Baboxyn, which lieth croſſe ouer againſt you, being diſtant from the firme land to Seaward about foure or fiue miles, ſtretching Northweſt and Southeaſt, you runne along all the coaſt of Sumbor Northeaſt and Southweſt, and ſomwhat Northeaſt and by North, and Southweſt and by South: When you are paſt the aforeſaid Iſland of Baboxyn, then runne the courſe aforeſaide for the ſpace of thrée or foure miles, and from thence Weſt Southweſt, whereby you ſhall come to the Iſland of Chinchon, where you ſhall finde ſand vpon the ground (which in all the coaſt aforeſaid you can not find) with 18. or 20. fadome water.
                     From the Iſland of Chinchon to the Iſland of Lamon you ſhal hold your courſe Southweſt, or as you thinke good, and when you are right againſt the Iſlandes or Cliffes called Os Ilhas de Ruy Lobo, you ſhall find vpon the ground great ſand with ſhelles, and from thence to Lamon, which is twelue miles, you finde the like: by the Iſland of Lamon you find ſhelles, and blacke ſand, with oyſter ſhels among it: if you chance to be in that countrey by night, runne not vnder 22. fadome water, for that along by the riffes it hath 21. and 22. fadome with ſhels and blacke ſand vpon the ground, and runne ſtill Southweſt, without leauing that courſe, and if it chance before day or by day to be cloſe aire (running Southweſt) and that you haue ſmall thin white ſand, then you are by Lamon, and then hold your courſe weſt Southweſt, and ſo you ſhall goe right vpon the middle of the Iſland called Ilha Branco, and from thence runne Weſt vnto the Channell, whereby you goe vp to Macau.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 40. Chapter. Another voiage made from the Hauen of Langaſaque to Macau, which is from Iapon to China, with certaine deſcriptions and accidents which happened by the Iſland Gu
                              •
                           to, with the deſcription of the Hauens thereof, accompliſhed in the yeere of our Lord 1584. by a Portingale Pilot.
                     DEparting out of the Hauen of Langaſaque the 25. of Februarie, Anno 1584.
                        15
                              ••
                           . and paſſing along by the Iſland of Facunda, wee had a Weſt Northweſt wind, ſo that wée ankered: the 26. day it began to blowe ſo ſtiffe, that wee were conſtrained to put for harbour into Tomache.
                     
                     The 27. wée hoiſed anker, with an Eaſt Northeaſt, and an Eaſt winde, and cleare weather, and comming to the Iſland dos Cauallos, we had a South wind againe, wherewith we made back againe to Facunda, from whence we ſet out.
                     The eight and twentie being Friday, wée ſet ſaile againe from Facunda, it beeing thrée dayes before the newe Moone, with a cold Eaſt Northeaſt wind.
                     And beeing within thrée miles of the Iſland dos Cauallos, we had a Southeaſt wind, running on the Southweſt bough all that day, and the winde began to bee ſomewhat coole, and then we geſſed it to be thrée or foure miles beyond the Iſland of Guoto, but in the morning watch wee firſt eſpied the point of Guoto, being a houell lying on the Northweſt part thereof, there we had a ſharpe wind and it began to riſe high out of the South Southeaſt, as much as the ſhip with all his Sayles might heare: wee let the maine ſaile vp, the better to make way, and not long after the winde came about to the Southweſt, and Weſt Southweſt, with two thunder claps, and much lightning, wherwith wee hoped it would haue beene ſtill weather, but it was not ſo, whereat wee woondered.
                     On Saterday by day light wee were right ouer againſt the point of Guoto, almoſt vpon the end of the Iſland that lyeth Northweſt, being about two myles from the lande, hauing with the Weſt Northweſt winde, a croſſe ſtorme, with the waues of the ſea out of the ſouthweſt, which were verie hollowe and mightie high, which toſſed the ſhippe monſ
                           •
                        rou
                           •
                        ly, although the winde was ouer much, but onely the force and power of the waues troubled vs moſt, which fell behind at our ſterne, for there wee found a very ſtrong ſtreame, and becauſe the wind was ſlack, we doubted we ſhould not get aboue the point of the Iſland, neither from the one ſide nor from the other, for wee had the croſſe vpon the Iſland.
                     At the end of this Iſland we ſaw another Iſland of low land, being about two miles long, and was about a mile and a

halfe diſtant from Guoto, ſome of our ſhip affirmed that there was a verie good Hauen, running in on the one ſide and comming out againe at the other: wherefore we determined to put in there for our better ſecuritie, as we did, and we ranne in Weſt Northweſt. At the entry there of it hath a verie great houell with two cliffes lying on the Southeaſt ſide of the point. The Iſland that lieth without, is on the left hand till you be about a mile from it, betweene which and the lande, it is all faire: you may boldly goe as néere the Iſland of Guoto as you will, and néed feare nothing but what you ſee before you: The entry of the Hauen reacheth Northweſt and Southeaſt, hauing within it a great Bay, which is all ouer verie déepe from twentie to thirtie fadome water, and nothing therein to be feared. From this Iſland to the land you haue all ouer the depthes of thirtie and fortie fadome, and yet I haue tried it from the halfe way to Guoto, and found eightéene to thirtie fadome, with ſand and ſhels on the ground, in ſome places hauing good ground: inward in ſome places you haue Sand, and in ſome places muddie ground: frō thence wée were brought out againe by Scutes about halfe a mile forward, ſo that after that the North wind ſerued well to ſaue vs, and to driue vs forward from the point lying on the South ſide, which hath certaine ſtonie Cliffes, wée ranne along the land Northeaſtward, and it fell out well for vs, for therby we had twentie or thirtie Scutes of the Iſland, that for 20. taes Chi
                              ••
                           
                         money holpe vs well, and pulled out our beat: we likewiſe gaue them 50. taes, and about 20. depeſas to haue our ſhippe ankered and ſtayed, but they aſked vs 30
                              •
                           . whereupon we ſent one of our Portingales on land, whome they helde for a p
                           •
                        w
                           •
                        e, although by certaine practiſe we got him out of their hands againe: and when after that wee ſéemed to complaine, they cried vs mercie, and ſent him backe againe, although wee vnderſtoode verie well, that they were our friends by force, as perceiuing they had no meanes to hurt vs, becauſe wee coulde helpe our ſelues without them: but we marked ſo much in them, that if they coulde haue hindered vs, they would not haue failed to doe it, or elſe wée muſt haue ſtopped their mouthes with money. There wée vnderſtood that the Iſland of Guoto hath ſixe or ſeuen Hauens that are very good, running from the one ſide to the other, but the Hauen aforeſaid had no iſſue, but ſo much pleaſure it did vs, that there we had the new Moone, which was the firſt of March, and the third day wee ſet ſayle againe, it being Shroue Tueſday, with a North Northeaſt winde, and a verie cléere morning: and béeing out, wée helde our courſe Southweſt, following on our courſe, wherewith wée ſawe the Iſland Meaxuma and the Pannellas, or Pots, lying South Southeaſt from vs, wée tell right vpon the middle thereof. Thoſe Panellas are two ſmall ſtones, and Meaxuma is an Iſland, and when you are Northeaſt and Southweſt right ouer againſt it, it ſheweth like two or three Iſlands, wherof that on the Northeaſt ſide is long, and the greateſt, and ſheweth as if it had a Cliffe: This Iſland is the longeſt but not verie high, and that in the middle is ſmall, hauing thrée ſharp points like Organ pipes, with a Cliffe likewiſe lying Northeaſtward: The other Iſland on the Southweſt ſide is round and plain ſtéepe lande ſhewing higher then all the other, and ſéemeth to haue Cliffes round about it. On the other ſide lie the Panellas a
                           •
                        oreſaide, and although I ſaid before they are but two ſtones, yet they are three, two ſtanding togither, and the other ſomewhat further from them, and lie with the Iſland Meaxuma Northweſt, and Southeaſt. From thence forward wee held our courſe to China and Macau, in ſuch manner as I ſhewed in another place, and hereafter once againe I will declare.
                  
                  
                     The 41. Chapter. Another voiage made out of the Hauen of Langaſaque from the Iſland of Iapon to Macau in China, in the Santacrus the Gunner being Diricke Geri
                              •
                           ſon of Enckehuſ
                              •
                           n in Ann. 1586.
                     
                        THE 20. of March we departed out of the Hauen of Langaſaque, it being the firſt day of the newe Moone, vpon a Thurſday with a northeaſt and North Northeaſt winde, and by nine of the clocke in the morning, wée were as farre as the Iſland dos Cauallos,
                        
running Weſt Southweſt, and being two myles beyond the Iſland Dos Cauallos, wee had a calme, and then the wind came Northweſt, in ſuch ſort, that wee ranne Southweſt, and Southweſt and by weſt, and ſometimes halfe a ſtrike with a ſlacke winde. The next day in the morning we ſaw the Iſlands of Corequyn and Guoto, and about eight of the clock in the forenoone, we ſaw the Iſland Meaxum
                              •
                           , ſo that we ſawe thoſe three Iſlands all at once, and about twilight, we were eaſt Southeaſt, and Weſt Southweſt, with the Iſland of Meaxuma, and ſo helde our courſe Southweſt, hauing a hard Northeaſt wind with raine, the aire being very darke and cloſe, yet the Rackes came out of the Southweſt: Vpon Sunday we caſt out the Leade, and found ſomewhat more then forty fadome water, muddye ground, and was about forty myles from Meaxuma. This depth is a banke lying in the middle way betwéene the Iſland Meaxuma and Cabo de Su
                              ••
                           bor, in the firme land of China.
                     
                     Vpon munday the foure and twentith day wée tooke not the height of the ſunne, becauſe we ſaw it not, hauing ſo ſmall a winde, that the ſhip might ſtéere vpright, and becauſe we made little way, wee caſt out the lead, and found forty fadome muddy ground, this was at noone, and at night about ſunne ſetting we caſt it out againe, and foun
                           •
                         fiue and fifty fadome, whereby we perceiued that wee began to paſſe ouer a banke, at that time we had all one wind being Northeaſt, and North North-eaſt, with a good blaſt, and yet the clouds came South-weſt, and South South-weſt, ſo ſtrong that they put vs in feare, doubting the wind would be there, but we had certaine men in our ſhippe that had ſeene and found it ſo in that place, and yet no alteration, whereby they put vs in ſome comfort, in ſuch ſort, that wee followed on our courſe with that wind. Vpon Tueſday at noone, wée tooke the height of the Sunne not full nine and twenty degrées, hauing not long before as I geſſed, marked one point in the Card, and eſtéemed that wee had ſayled a hundred myles from the Hauen of 
                           
                              •
                           angaſaque, but by the Sunne it was not ſo.
                     The ſixe and twenty being Wedneſday, wee tooke not the heigth of the ſunne, becauſe it was a cloſe day, but wee had a good Northeaſt wind, and made good way, ſo that wee ſeemed to make thirtie myles 
                           •
                        n one mealetide, but I made account but of fiue and twenty myles, becauſe wee thought the ſhip ſailed not ouer faſt, that day we ſawe many Cuttle bones driuing vpon the water, & held our courſe Southweſt till morning, and becauſe the winde beganne to bee ſtiffe, I thought it good to make towards the land to know it, therefore as day appeared wee ran Weſt till it was euening without knowing Land, by reaſon of the miſtine
                           ••
                        e of the aire, but by the depths & our geſſing, wee thought wee were about 5 or 6 miles from the land, our depth was 37 fadome, and being towards night with cloudy weather, we ran ſouthweſt, and ſouthweſt and by ſouth, all that night, and when day came being thurſday wee geſſed to bee ouer againſt the Laga
                              •
                           to or Crocodille (a cliffe ſo called about fiue or ſixe miles to Seaward from it, but wee found it to be ſomewhat more.
                     Thurſday being the ſeuen and twenty, as ſoone as day appeared, we ran
                           •
                        e Weſt towards the Land, and about foure of the clocke in the afternoone, we ſaw the land, being the Iſlands Dos Camaro
                              •
                           s that is, the Iſlands of Granata) thoſe Iſlan
                           •
                        s are not too high: as ſoone as we ſaw them, wee helde our courſe South Southweſt▪ and hauing ſailed a little way, we ſaw another round Iſland called Ilha do B
                              •
                           box
                              ••
                           , which lay right before vs, as ſoone as wee ſaw it, we preſently ran South to ſhun it, becauſe we were not aboue a quarter of a mile from it, there wee found ſo ſtrong a ſtreame and courſe of water which ranne with vs, that in ſhort time we were two or three myles from the aforeſaid Iſland, in ſuch manner, that all that night wee ranne South, and South and by Weſt, and South Southweſt, and when the moone roſe, we held our courſe ſouthweſt.
                     The eight and twenty being Friday, about morning we began to runne Weſt Southweſt, weſt, and weſt and by South, and at noon or thereabouts, we caſt out the Lead, and found nine and twenty fadome muddy ground, and running ſo with that courſe for a little time, we ſaw land, but it was ſo cloſe and miſty, that we could not know it, but about two or three of ye clock in the afternoone it began to cleare vp, and then we knew it to be the Iſland of Chinchon being North from vs, and there wee caſt out the Lead, and found nineteene fadome water ſandy ground, and not long after we ſawe the whole coaſt and firme Land of China, and ſo we ran all night at

the depths of ninetéene, twenty, and two and twenty fadome with ſo clear & bright a ſky, that almoſt all the night we ſaw the coaſt, and when day began to appear, we were ſomwhat beyond the Iſlands called Ruy Lobo, and preſently thervpon we ſaw the Iſland of Lamon, there we beganne to haue certain ſtormes, as I geſſe it is from Ilhas de Ruy Lobo, to the Iſland of Lamon ten miles, by the Iſland of Lamon we ſaw the water ſhynne and burne to Seaward, in ſuch ſort, that wee paſſed cloſe by the Riffe: thoſe that come from Iapon, muſt firſt paſſe by the Iſland, and then by the Riffe, this Riffe lieth Northeaſt, & ſouthweſt, and is dangerous, for thoſe that ſaile from Macau to Iapon, we ran about thrée miles from it with a ſtrong northeaſt, and Eaſt Northeaſt winde, ſo that wee made good way, whereby it ſéemed we made fifty miles in one meale tide, but the ſtrēgth of ye water and ſtreames againſt vs were ſo ſtiffe, that we ſailed but fiue and twenty myles in a mealetide. This ſtrong ſtreame and ſtiffe water commeth (as we were informed) out of the Riuer of Tancoan, and continueth till you be paſt the Iſland Branco, & being paſt it, the ſtreame runneth preſently towards the Iſland Ilha de Leme, which lyeth cloſe by Macau, from Lamon we ran Weſt ſouthweſt, and in truth we found the way from Lamon to Ilha Branco, very ſhort, for by night wee ſtroke all our ſayles, and ſo lay driuing without ſailes, winding Southweſt, alwaies at the depths of fiue and twentie and ſix and twenty fadome water, and at the midnight watch, we began to hoiſe vp our maine ſaile and our foukeſaile, in that manner running Weſt to get to twenty fadome deepe, which is the middle of the chanell where we muſt paſſe through, and in the morning we ſaw the Iſland Do Leme, (that is the Iſland of the harquebuſh) lying ſomwhat on ye lareboord of vs. This Iſland Do Leme, if you go eaſt and Weſt vpon it, ſéemeth very ſmall, and the déeper you are within the channell, the bigger it ſheweth, in the entry wherof on the right hand it hath two Iſlands or Cliffes, and from thence forward, the Iſlands begin to lye on a rowe till you come to Macau, as I ſaid in another place.
                  
                  
                     The 42. chapter. An inſtruction and large declaration of the courſe from the Iſland Firando in Iapon, to the coaſt of China, & the hauen of Macau, with all the courſes, ſituations, and ſtretchings of the ſame, done by a Portingale Pilote.
                     
                        HE that deſireth to ſaile from the Iſland Firando, to Macau or Canton in China, as ſoone as he is out of the hauen of Firando, if he hath time inough to get to the Iſland Guoto, he muſt preſently ſaile forward, if not, hée muſt anker about a mile from Firando, at 28 fadome déepe, where hee may prepare himſelf, and make faſt his boat, yt the next day in the morning he may ſet ſaile.
                     As ſoon as you are ſet out from Firando to follow on your courſe, you muſt runne along by the land of Firando, till you bee at the end thereof, and as you run ſouth weſt, vntil you be by the land, you ſhal hold ſomwhat néerer ſouth-weſt, and then on your Weſt ſide there will bee 3. or 4. Iſlands, and paſſing by the formoſt of them ſouthward, you ſhall preſently ſée the channell that runneth betwéen that Iſland and the Iſland Guoto, and through it you muſt paſſe. By this channel there lieth another Iſland, betwéen the which and the Iſland Guoto you muſt likewiſe paſſe: when you are through and out of this Channell, and that the Iſlands weſtward from you, then you muſt runne along by Guoto vntil you are paſt it to ſeaward, ſo to kéepe on & further your courſe: and if in paſſing through the channel, the wind chanceth to be ſtill, you may boldly anker therein, cloſe by the land of Guoto. In this Iſland Guoto are very good Hauens, which paſſe through and through againe, therfore it is not one Iſland, but deuided into foure parts. Whē you are two myles from Guoto, you muſt hold your courſe Weſt Southweſt, vntill you are paſt the two Iſlands, one called Xuma, ye other Meaxuma, which are eight myles diſtant from the Iſland of Guoto. Being paſt thoſe Iſlands, you muſt run Southweſt, & néerer ſouth from the aforeſaid Iſlands, there is another Iſland called Meaxuma, which you muſt likewiſe paſſe by: by thoſe Iſlands aforeſaid, it is all faire way without any trouble, neither yet by the Iſland, this Iſland lyeth vnder 31 degrées and 1/
                              •
                           . You muſt run betwéene the Iſland, and the ſmal Iſlands, and whē you are paſt them & the Iſland of Guoto, then you muſt runne Southweſt, & ſouthweſt and to ſouth.
                     When you are paſt this and the other Iſlands, running ſouthweſt as aforeſaid, you ſhal goe right vpon the point of Cabo

de Sumbor, which lieth on ye coaſt of China vnder 28 degrées & 
                           •
                        /
                           •
                        . and if it be clear weather, & yt you there deſire to know the land, you may well doe it, if not, then put not too neer the coaſt, becauſe of the many Iſlands that lie all along by it, for you muſt runne outward from it, alwaies kéeping as far from it, as you thinke néedefull, that you may be frée from it, and by night not to put in betwéene it, for that all the coaſt from Cabo de Sumbor to Chinchon, is nothing but Iſlands. You muſt likewiſe ſée, that you put not too farre inward to Sea to kéepe cloſe to the winds that blowe off the Land, and to Sea-ward you haue the Iſlands of ſmall Lequeo, called Lequeo Pequeno, and the Iſland of fiſhers, which are diſtant from the Firme land about twenty miles: if you haue a cléere night, you may well paſſe along by the Iſlands, yet with great foreſight. The moſt daungerous Iſland vpon that coaſt, is the Iſland of Camaroyns, which lyeth to Sea-ward out from all the reſt: I haue paſſed twice betwéene it and the Land, it is an Iſland that is deuided in two partes, by a rent or breach that is in it. Foure myles forward beyond this Iſland, lyeth a ſmall Iſland which is flat and euen with the Sea, hauing certain ſtones lying Northeaſtward from it, but not many. If you chaunce to paſſe by it in the night time, you muſt bee carefull to auoid it, for it is flat and little without any trées, you muſt likewiſe ſhun the Iſland of Baboxyn, which likewiſe lieth outward into the Sea, in ſuch ſort, that when you fall vpon it with good aduiſe and warely, you may fréely paſſe by it, for you néede feare nothing then what you ſee before you.
                     And when you are fiftéene myles from Cabo de Sumbor, accounting from ye point of the firm land, and not from the Iſlands lying by it, thē you muſt hold your courſe Southweſt, and ſo run without all the Iſlands, whereby you ſhall be out of danger of the Iſland Lequeo Pequeno, alſo ye time and the weather will ſhew you what you ſhould doe when you are paſt Lequeo Pequeno, or before, if it ſo fall out, you muſt ſeeke to know the land, for it is neceſſary for you to ſee it, becauſe of the Iſland Lamon, as alſo not to kéepe too farre to Seaward. You runne along by the coaſt from Sumbor to Chinchon Northeaſt and Southweſt, and ſomewhat northeaſt and by North, and Southweſt and by South, but not much.
                     And when you are right ouer againſt Chinchon, and that by marking the land, or by the heigth of the ſunne you know it, being foure miles from the land, you muſt hold your courſe ſouthweſt, ſo to go without the Iſland of Lamon, and if you deſire to paſſe within the Iſlands, you may well do it, for it is faire ynough, and you néede feare nothing: But if you feare to m
                           •
                        e Lamon, then it is better to runne as aforeſaid, for then you ſhall be farre inough from the Riffe of Lamon, which is very dangerous. There you muſt haue great foreſight, for when you are paſt Lamon, then you muſt holde your courſe to the Iſland of Lanton. The Iſlandes you ſée before you come to Lamon, are called, Os Ilhas de Ruy Lobo, that is, the Iſlands of Ruy Lobo, from the which, that which lyeth Northeaſt is the ſmalleſt, the other being ſomewhat greater: Vpon the greateſt are ſéene certaine Buſhes, from thence to Lamon are ſeuen or eight miles, on the Sea ſide it is twentie fadome déepe with ſhels on ye ground, from thence you ſhal run ſouthweſt, and holde a little ſouthweſt and by South, and if it be in the day time, you ſhall preſently ſee the Iſlands lying at the end of the Riffe of Lamon, from whence the ſaid Riffe hath his iſſue, reaching a myle and a halfe or two miles with this courſe, you ſhal make good way, but if it be night, you muſt looke well to your ſelfe.
                     And running the aforeſaid courſe of Southweſt, you muſt keepe to Sea-ward from the ſtones of Lamon, and doe 
                           〈◊〉
                         beſt to paſſe by in the day time, and 
                           〈◊〉
                         you are paſt the Iſland of 
                           〈…〉
                         
                        
                           •
                        
                        ſently make towards the 
                           〈…〉
                         paſſe along by it. From 
                           〈…〉
                         
                        15 miles from thence the co
                           •
                         of 
                           〈…〉
                         land reacheth Northeaſt and Southweſt, and from thence Eaſt Northeaſt, and Weſt South-weſt to the Iſland 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        Branco, which lyeth diſtant from the co
                           •
                        ſt about fiue miles, vnder 22 degrees and 
                           •
                        . right ouer againſt the creeke of Fu
                              ••
                           da de Bona Ventura, that is, the creeke of good fortune, you may paſſe cloſe by the Iſland Branco, both on the ſea ſide, as you thinke beſt, and being paſt that Iſland, 
                           〈◊〉
                         the Iſlands of Canton lye on a rawe: From this Iſland Branco to the Iſland De Sanchoan▪
                         are fifty miles.
                     When you are paſt Ilha Branco, then you muſt runne weſt Southweſt, & from Branco to Macau are foure and twentie

miles, that is twelue miles before you enter into the chanell that runneth betwéen the Ilands: and twelue miles from thence to Macau, you ſhall ſéeke to enter by the firſt channel you find, by the which lyeth certaine high round Iſlands, which will be on the Northeaſt ſide of you, and on the Southſide it hath two Iſlands, whereof one is very high and plaine ſtéepe ground, on the ſea ſide therof hauing a ſtony cliffe, and being ouer againſt thoſe high bare Iſlands, on the Northſide thereof you ſhall ſee a channell, which I neuer paſſed: but leauing the aforeſaid Iſlandes on your ſtarboord, and ſo running Southweſt, you ſhall preſently ſée the mouth of the chanell which you muſt paſſe through, & although it ſheweth narrow, notwithſtanding it is very good, for I haue run into it by night: you muſt as I ſaied before leaue the great Iſland to ſeaward from you, and runne in with the flood weſt, weſt and by north, and weſt Northweſt, and ſo you ſhall go right to Macau, alſo the wind and weather will ſhew you what you ſhall doe.
                     And when you come from Iapon, right ouer againſt the cape De Sumbor, being fiftéen miles to ſeaward from it, then caſt out your lead, and you ſhall find fortie and fiue & fortie fadome water muddy ground, with many ſtreames of foule water, and when you ſée the land, then you muſt run along by it to the laſt Iſland of Chinchon, which lie eight miles into the ſea, whereby you ſhal find boies of nets and fuycken with whings and Flags, which the fiſhermen of that Countrey haue ſet vp for markes. From thence to Chincheon are twelue miles.
                     Right ouer againſt thoſe boyes with whings and flags vpon them, lieth a town called Guara, from that Towne forward you muſt hold towards the land, and to know the Somes, (which are Chiniſh carnels and Barkes) vſed in thoſe countries, they beare but one ſaile. Now to make toward the Lande as you would, you muſt runne Weſt, you muſt likewiſe knowe that the Varella of Chinchon (that is, the banke or marke of Chinchon) is a high Lande, lying along by the entry of Chinchon, on the Southeaſt ſide hauing a high land reaching ſouthweſt, ſtéeping downeward, reaching ouer towards an Iſland lying thrée or foure miles inward to Sea: along by the point of the Varella lyeth an Iſland about a mile diſtant from it, from the which runneth a riffe of ſand, at lowe water being two fadome déepe, reaching about the length of the ſhotte of a great Péece, towards ye other Iſlands aboueſaid lying right ouer againſt the entry, which in length reacheth Eaſt and Weſt, in the middle hauing a ſharpe Hill, and Southweſtward the aforeſaid land of Laylo runneth very lowe, being there, then you are cloſe by it, and you haue nothing els to do but paſſe about the point, and anker at four fadome muddy ground: on the Northeaſt ſide lie certain Iſlands, cloſe by the Point of Laylo, and two miles to Seaward from it, you haue twenty fadome water, ye water of that country being very blew: from thence to Lamon, 3. or 4. miles from the land, you paſſe not aboue the depth of 18. or 20 fadome, and being paſt Chinchon towards Lamon, You ſhal find thin ſmal ſand vpon the ground with ſome ſhels, & being right ouer againſt Chinchon, or towards the northeaſt, pou ſhal find muddy ground, with the ſame depth of 18 and 20 fadome, and right ouer againſt Lamon, you haue ſome blacke ſand vpon the ground.
                  
                  
                     The 43. Chapter. How you ſhall runne in, out, and through the channell betweene the Iſlands and cliffes of Macau, with all the markes, ſignes, and tokens thereof, ſo to ſaile into the Hauen of Macau.
                     
                     
                        IF you deſire to ſaile out of Macau, you muſt vnderſtand, yt as ſoone as you hoiſe anker in the road where the ſhips lie, which is right ouer againſt the Bulwarke of Gaſpar Borgies, you ſhal preſently ſée in the Northeaſt a white vlacke ſtanding vpon the hil, and preſently after towards the Eaſt, you haue two houels, which with the Hill of the white vlacke make thrée.
                     The ſecond houell which lyeth in the middle, is bare & wholly diſcouered, appearing through the rocks & cliffes yt lie vpon the top of ye field called Dos Pa
                              •
                           anas, which is in the middle of the chanel, being by the laſt houſes of the town: and when you are right againſt ye aforeſaid houſes, then you ſhal preſently diſcouer the 3. houel, ſo that when you are right againſt ye ſandy point (lying cloſe by ye 
                        Varella) called Dos Mandorins, then the ſaid houel is almoſt wholly vncouered, where you ſhall find four fadome and a halfe déepe, with a full ſea of a Spring tide, and as ſoone as you are paſt the ſandy Point, then you beginne to find

more depths, that is fiue and fiue fadome and a halfe, and running in that ſort, you ſhall go right vpon a broken land lying on the other ſide ouer againſt the Iſland called Ilha do Bugio, that is, the Iſland of ſea Cats.
                     When you are at the depths aforeſaid, then ſouthward from you, you ſhall ſée an opening called Enſeada de Gonſato vaaz, which within it hath a hil on the eaſt ſide, which ſheweth like an Iſland or Cliffe, and on the Weſt ſide it hath two Points ſticking out, and when thoſe two Points are right ouer againſt each other, thē you are in the middle of the channell, and you muſt be carefull to ſée yt they lye one right againſt the other, for by that marke you ſhall runne in the déepeſt and beſt place, which is at 27 Spannes of water, with a ſpring tide, as I haue found it, in the time of the Monſon, when you ſaile to Iapon, hauing an Eaſt winde, for with a North wind, you haue leſſe water there.
                     Now to know when you are as farre as the banke, you muſt vnderſtande, that Northward towards the Iſland Do Bugio, there lyeth a ſtony cliffe, which ſheweth like a houell, which lieth moſt Northward of all the reſt, & along by the ſtrand it hath a clouen Rocke with two Points, when you haue the aforeſaid ſtony Cliffe like a houell, right ouer againſt the middle of the aforeſaid clouen rocke, then you are vpon the aforeſaid banke, and when the aforeſaid marke ſtandeth vneuen, on the one or other ſide, then you ſhall preſently find more depths, which ſhall bee thus, that as you run Southeaſt right vpon the thickeſt and greateſt land, on the other ſide vntill you be at foure and fiue fadome water, which is the point called Varella, and deſiring to paſſe through the eaſt channell, then you muſt runne Southeaſt and Eaſt Southeaſt, vntill you haue diſcouered the Iſland Do Laſtro, wholly by the end of the Iſland Do Bugio, then it is not good for you to runne more ſouthward to ſhun the ſtone lying right ouer againſt the Varella, and when you haue diſcouered the Iſland Do Laſtro as I ſaid before, then you muſt runne along by the aforeſaid ſtone about two cables length from it there you ſhall haue the depth of 28. and nine and twenty ſpannes of water with a ſpring tide: and to know when you are néereſt the ſtone, it is whē you haue wholly diſcouered the firſt cliffe of two that lye on the Northſide of the Iſland Do Laſtro, and then you are about a ſtones caſt from the aforeſaid-ſtone, at the depth aforeſaid, and when you haue wholly diſcouered the ſecond Cliffe, then you are beyond the ſtone, you may likewiſe know it by another marke, which is a white vlacke ſtanding vpon the Hill which you ſee ouer the Towne, and hath a ſtone which ſheweth like a mans head.
                     When you bring the aforeſaid white vlacke in the middle of the top of the houſe of Don Ioan d Almeyda, then you are right ouer againſt the aforeſaid ſtone, and whē you are paſt it, it is good to make towards the land on the Southſide, in ſuch ſort, that you leaue the two third parts thereof on the ſide of the town, and one third part on the Southſide, and running in that ſort, you ſhall haue more depths then in the middle way, vntill you be vpon the banke which hath no more then ſixe and twenty Spannes Water, with high Water of a ſpring tide. And deſiring to knowe when you begin to be right againſt it, it is when you haue the croſſe part or dore of ye great church, right againſt the toppe of a houſe, that ſtandeth on the ſtrand, which commeth vpon the ſame way of the ſame dore right to the ſtrand, ſo that ye dore is wholly diſcouered, there you haue ſeuen & twenty or eight and twenty Spannes water, which ſhall bee when you ſée or diſcouer the clocke houſe or top of S. Paules church, with a hill that ſtandeth behind the ſame church, and as ſoone as the ſaid clockhouſe is couered, then you ſhall preſently finde more depths, as two and thirtie ſpannes water, which is foure fadome, which is right ouer againſt the place where you fetch freſh Water: and going ſomewhat further forward, you ſhall finde foure fadome and a halfe & fiue fadome at a ſpring tide, this was the Road where the ſhippe called S. Crus, of the burthen of fourteene or ſixtéene tunnes did anker, and when the ſaid ſhip did wind with an ebbe, then the Iſland Do Laſtro lay vncouered, although it was a good way from the Land. You haue a very good token or marke to know when the land on the Southſide is neereſt to you, then you muſt make to the Iſland Do Laſtro, and Northward from it, there is two cliffes, and when thoſe two cliffes are one againſt the other then you are in the déepeſt of the channell, vntill you bee ouer the banke.
                  
                  
                     
                     The 44. Chapter. Of the courſe and ſtreames of the water in the way from Malacca, in the time of the Monſon, when they ordinarily trauell thether.
                     
                        FRom the Iſland Pulo Catao (lying on the coaſt of Champa part of the Land of Camboia) to the Varella, (which is a place lying in the way from Pulo catao, towards Malacca, in ye ſame coaſt of Champa or Camboia) ye ſtreames run very ſtrong towards the ſouth: from the Iſland Pulo Catao fiue miles forward, ye ſtreams run very ſtrong towards the Iſland Champello, and the créeke called A Enſeada de Cauchinchina.
                     
                     And in the monſon of China, when you ſaile from Mallacca, in the months of October, Nouember, and December, thē the ſtreames in that part run Northweſt.
                     And from the Month of Ianuary forward, they run ſouthweſt, that is, towards the ſands: therfore ſuch as trauel that way muſt obſerue certain times, and that with good aduiſe, and as they begin to goe néere the country where the ſands lie, (that are right againſt the coaſt of Champa) betwéene them and the entery of the coaſt, the ſtreames run as ſwiftly into the ſouth as a ſtone ſlyeth out of a mans hand.
                     But I aduiſe you not to goe ſo néere the Iſland Aynao, that you may ſée it, vnleſſe it be with a Northwind, for with an Eaſt wind you would be in great danger.
                  
                  
                     The 45. Chapter. Of the tides and increaſing of the waters of Malacca.
                     
                     
                        IN the entry of the Hauen of Patane, (lying on the Eaſt ſide of the country and coaſt of Mallacca) to the Iſland of Bintao, (which lyeth by the ſtraight of Singa Pura vnder the Equinoctiall line) the ſtreames doe alwaies runne Southward in the months of Nouember and December.
                     From the Iſland Pulo Condor (lying right againſt the hauen and land of Camboia) to the Iſland Pulo Timao) lying on the Eaſt ſide of the coaſt of Malacca, at ſuch time as you come frō 
                        China) holding your courſe halfe a ſtrike from the ſouth) the ſtreams run towards the Iſland Borneo, and being halfe a ſtrike Southweſtward, then the ſtreames run towards the coaſt of Pan, which lyeth on the coaſt of the Eaſt ſide of Mallacca.
                     
                     From Pulo Condor, to the Iſland Pulo Seſir (lying right againſt the coaſt of Camboia) the ſtreames run Eaſtward, and by Pulo Seſir in the way towards China, the ſtreames runne to the coaſt of Champa, and from the Falce Varella (which is diſtant from the right Varella fiftéen miles, lying on the coaſt of Camboia) ye ſtreames runne Eaſtward about fiue or ſixe myles from the coaſt, which is at the end of Iuly, and in the month of Auguſt.
                     In the Monſon of the South windes, when you ſaile from Mallacca to China, the ſtreames (from the Gulfe of Pulo Catao
                        ▪ and the Iſland Aynao) runne to the créeke of Enſeada da Cauchinchina, vntill the laſt of December, and from Ianuary forward, then the ſtreams (in that Gulfe and countrey) runne towards the Sands that lie ouer againſt the coaſt of Champa, in Camboia) from the other ſide, and the later it is in the yeare from the Month of Ianuary forward, the ſtronger they run towards the ſands.
                     In the Monſon of China, when you ſaile from China to Mallacca, then the ſtreams run very ſtrong from the Iſland Pulo Catao, to ye Iſland Puto Cambir, both lying on the coaſt of Camboia or Champa.
                     
                     It happeneth oftentimes, that from the eight and twenty of Iuly to the fourth of Auguſt from the Varella to Pulo Catao you haue calme ſea, and then you haue the Terreinhos, which are Windes blowing from the land, out of the Weſt and northweſt, and the Viracoins, which are winds that come from the Sea, out of the Eaſt, Southeaſt, and eaſt Northeaſt, & being in the North, they preſently change into the ſouth, whervpon it becommeth calme till the Terreinhos or land winds doe come again, and thus they hold about two miles from the coaſt, and not further, for they are winds that do only blow vpon ye coaſt, as in other places it is already ſufficiently declared, in ſpeaking of the Terreinhos and Viracoins.
                     
                     When you ſaile by the Iſland of Lequeo Pequeno, or ſmall Lequeo, towards the land of Bungo, in the Iſland of Iapon the ſtreames in that country do run eaſtward to the Iſland of Tanaxuma.
                     
                     From 30 degrées Northward, a little further thē to the middle way to Iapon, the ſtreames (from that country to the coaſt of China) run northward towards the créeke A Enſeada de Nanguyn, in the monſon of the ſouth and ſouthweſt winds.
                     
                        In this monſon of South and Southweſt winds, the ſtreams from the Iſland Pulo Tayo (lying by the Iſland Aynao in the coaſt of China) run Southweſtward to the Iſlands of Sanchoan and Cantao.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 46. Chapter. Of the tides both for ebbe and flood by the daies and houres of the Moone, in the hauē of Macau in China, with the height of the ſame Hauen, found by experience of an expert Pilot.
                     
                        THe 19. of September I marked the courſe of the Tides of China, within the hauen of Macau, it being Full Moone, and I found it to be full ſea about halfe an houre and ſomewhat more after eight of the clocke in the morning, which I tryed at the Full moone to ſée if it would agrée with the New Moone.
                     
                        1585.The 3. of Februarie An. 1585. I tooke the height of the Sunne, which as then was about 13. degrées from the line, and I found that the Hauen of Macau lieth full vndec 22. degrées, & 1/
                              •
                           . and as then I likewiſe tried the tides of the ſame hauen and found it to be full Sea a little after 12. of the clock, the moone being thrée daies old, in ſuch ſort, that by the ſame account with a new Moone it is full ſea in that hauen at ten a clocke and 2/
                              •
                           . in the morning, which I alſo tried by the new Moone.
                     
                        1585.The 16. of Februarie Anno 1585. I marked the Tides within the Hauen of Macau, it being then full moone, and found the firſt day of the full moone that it was high water at eleuen of the clocke and a halfe before noone.
                     
                        1585.The 2. of Iune Ann. 1585. I marked the tides in the Hauen of Macau, & found it to be full Sea iuſt at 12. of the clocke at no
                           •
                        ne, the moone being foure dayes old, ſo that after the ſame account it is full ſea at nine of the clocke in the morning, béeing new moone: but theſe Tides of China fall not out iuſtly, vnleſſe it be foure daies before and fiue daies after the changing of the Moone, for then there is as much water as vpon the third day, which I affirme to be moſt true, becauſe I haue often and many times tryed it to be ſo. The cauſe is, for that before it, it is all Iſlands and Channels, ſo that when the waters beginne to fall, they ebbe not aboue thrée houres, but with an Eaſt wind they ebbe with a greater courſe.
                  
                  
                     The 47. Chapter. Of the ſignes and tokens of the tides, waters, and windes vpon the coaſt of China and in the way to Iapon.
                     
                     
                        IN the time of the monſon of the South and Southweſt windes, it is moſt certaine in the whole coaſt of China and the way to Iapon, that when the winds of the monſon blow, and from thence run into the Eaſt, that they turne not againe out of the Eaſt into the ſouth, but from thence into the North: and hauing continued there for a certaine time, they turne againe into the eaſt, and from thence into the South, & if it be a Northeaſt wind, then it turneth often times into the Southweſt, and not into the Eaſt, but not often, but the ſureſt is as aforeſaid. It changeth alſo often times from North to South, and not into the Eaſt, which is very common, and when the Sunne ſetteth and hath ſome red carnation cloudes about it, and that many beames iſſueth from the Sunne, in ſuch manner, that it ſéemeth to blaze, then it is a ſigne of great ſtormes and tempeſts. Likewiſe in the riſing and going downe of the Moone, if it ſheweth in the like maner, it is a ſigne of ſtormes and tempeſts.
                     When the Sunne riſeth ſo faire and cléere, that you may in a manner ſée into it, and perfectly diſcerne the compaſſe thereof, then it ſignifieth good weather, The like doth it ſignifie in the ſetting of the Sunne: and when the Sunne in the riſing or ſetting is red and of a dead couler, and ſo darke that you may ſée it round about, not caſting forth any beames, it ſignifieth calme weather: The like doth the Moone.
                     In the time of the monſon when the Northeaſt winds doe commonly blowe, and that the clouds at the Sun-ſetting bée red, then it ſignifieth North winds, when in diuers places of the ſea you ſée ſkumme driuing vpon the water as white as Cotton, being about a finger long, then it ſignifieth tempeſts and foule weather: This ſkum procéedeth of the ſmall waues that breake, wherof there are many in ye place.
                     In the moneth of Iuly there bloweth other winds in thoſe places then the monſon running from one place to the other, till in the end they be northeaſt, then it is certain it will be tempeſt & foule weather.

If from the Iſland of Lamao to the Cape of Sumbor, in the manſon of the South and Southweſt winds, you find an Eaſt winde with great heate, and ſame great droppes of water, it ſignifieth foule weather.
                  
                  
                     The 48. Chapter. In what dayes and moneths you find tempeſts and foule weather in the coaſt of China.
                     
                     
                        FRom the ſeuenth to the eleuenth of Iune, often and commonly vpon the coaſt of China there are great tēpeſts. From the beginning of Iuly to the 26. of the ſame moneth, you are neuer frée nor out of danger of tempeſts and foule weather, for that all that time you haue foule ſtormie weather, the wind neuer ſtaying in one place, but running round about the compaſſe. From the 12. of Auguſt forward, in the whole Moone of September to the end of October, all that time there is continually foule weather.
                  
                  
                     The 49. Chapter. Of the times of faire weather vpon the coaſt of China.
                     
                     
                        THe whole moneth of Iune (except it be from the ſeuenth to the eleuenth day) there is very litle ſoule weather, for that vnleſſe it be vpon the daies aforeſaid, you haue the windes of the monſon, with faire and cléere weather without ſtormes, to ſaile from the Iſland Pulo Cantao to the Iſlandes Cantao and Macau without ſtormes: you muſt ſet ſaile on the 26. of Iuly, and ſaile till the 12. of Auguſt, and all that time you are without tempeſts. In the middle way from the Iſland of Iapon to the coaſt and land of Liampo, you haue alwaies Weſt windes, which blowe in Iapon in the moneths of Nouember and December.
                  
                  
                     The 50. Chapter. A briefe deſcription of the courſe from Macau in China, to Noua Spaigna, with the ſcituations of the countries.
                     
                        PVtting out of the Eaſt channell of the Hauen of Macau, then you muſt hold inward to ſea as much as you may, and hauing a contrarie winde, runne as long as the wind giues you leaue to kéep that courſe, but if the winde be ſcant, whereby you may not holde your courſe Northeaſt, or Northeaſt and by North, then turne on the other ſide as long as the wind ſerueth, that you may run Southeaſt for the ſpace of thrée or foure daies, for it is better to kéepe Southeaſt then to run Northward. This courſe you ſhall holde as the winde ſerueth you, vntill you think you are 300. miles from the land; and being there, you muſt run 200. or more miles beyond Iapon, and although you holde your courſe North, yet you néed not feare any thing, kéeping good account of the wracking or winding of your compaſſe towardes the Weſt, for it might hinder you much, running as often as you can Southeaſt, or to Loofeward, as alſo not leauing ye courſe of Northeaſt, as often as you can, vntill you be vnder the height. In the gulfe you ſhal ſée certaine great blacke birds, which, is a ſigne that you are farre to Seaward, and if you ſée them about euening, & that they ſtretch their legs out along by their tailes, then looke to your ſelfe, for it ſignifieth foule weather: When you come within 200. miles or more of the other land, then you ſhall looſe the ſight of thoſe birdes, and if the wind and weather driue you vnder many heights, and that you ſée many heapes of wéeds driuing vpon the water, which are commonly ſéene when you are 100. and 120. myles inwarde to ſea, then you muſt runne on the outſide of Iapon Southeaſtward, till you be vnder 31. and 32. degrées, and as then knowing the land, which will lie hard by: whē you ſee it firſt, you muſt runne without it, and beware you run not vpon the Iſland called Ilha de Sedros, that is, the Iſland of Cedar trées, and make no account by the courſe of the Sea or compaſſe, for the Iſland of Cedars lyeth by the Cape of S. Lucas, béeing verie falſe in the courſe, becauſe the land (if it lay by it) doth come more and likelier out, then it doth towardes the South. The Cape of Saint Lucas, is a high land, and ſheweth (when you are hard by it) as if it had ſtonie cliffes ſticking out of it, the end thereof béeing verie blacke ſhining and darke, the Land thereof preſently running inwards towards the North, and if you néed freſh water, within the cliffes of the ſaid Cape of S. Lucas, there is a great ſandie ſtrande, where you haue a verie good Rode to anker,

where cloſe by the ſea you find great ſtore of freſh water. From thence you ſhall croſſe ouer to the other ſide, vpon the Southeaſt bough, without the Marias, which is a better courſe then inward: all the coaſt is faire and good, ſo that you may well runne along by it, vntill you come to certaine cliffes lying by the Hauen called El Puerto de la Natiuidad, where within the créeke you preſently finde the Hauen of Saint Iago de Colima, the marks wherof are thoſe: On the Eaſt ſide it hath a round houell that deſcendeth downward, if you be forced to put into it, you muſt vnderſtand, that it hath a great mouth or entrie aboue two or thrée miles wide, wherin you haue no cauſe to feare any thing, but that you ſée before your eies: you muſt runne into it till you be cleane within the point, where you haue a riuer of freſh water that runneth into the Sea, where you ſhall find Spaniſh Fiſhermen: if you deſire to ſaile further, you muſt frō thence to the hauen of Acapulco run for the ſpace of 80. miles along by the ſhore, for it is verie faire and cleare till you be at the end of the high land, that is, to the Hauen called El Puerto del Marques, which a farre off ſheweth like an Iſland, but when you goe ſo néere it that you may well diſcerne it to be firme land, then on the vpper part thereof you ſhall ſée ſome white ſtones, which ſhewe like white Runderen, that goe in the way, you may fréely runne towardes it, till you begin to ſée the mouth therof, and then put into it. This in briefe in my opinion, is the beſt courſe that you may bold in this voiage, which I would likewiſe haue holden if I had gone thorough with the voiage.
                  
                  
                     The 51. Chapter. A true deſcription of the courſe from the Iſlands of Los Lucones, or to the Hauen of Acapulco in new Spaine, and how you ſhould ſaile thither from Macau in China, with a note of the commodities and profits made by the wares and merchandiſes of China, with the ſcituation, courſe, times, and miles of the ſame countries: all particularly ſet downe for ſuch as deſire to trauell into thoſe countries.
                     
                        YOu ſhall put out of the Hauen of Manilla lying in the Iſland of Lucones, vnder 14. degrées & ½. on the North ſide of the Equinoctial line, the mouth being Southweſt, in the moneths of Iune and Iuly, as wind & weather ſerueth to put out, running along the coaſt of the ſame Iſland and betwéene the Iſland of Mindoro, or by the Eaſt point, vntill you be out of the Channell (where you enter when you come out of the ſea, lying 100. miles from Manilla vnder 13. degrées and 1/
                              •
                           .) betwéene the laſt and the furtheſt point of the ſame Iſland of Lucones and the point of another Iſland called Tandaya, betwéene the which the aforeſaid channell doth runne: and when you are out of the Channell, you muſt runne Eaſtward as long as the winde ſerueth: which courſe you ſhall alwaies hold, vnleſſe the wind let you, becauſe you depart vnder 13. degrées and ⅓. ſailing to the hauen of Acapulco, lying vnder 17. degrées, but becauſe the winde in thoſe countries in Summer (which is the time that men ſet ſaile as aforeſaid) is very ſlacke, although it be the monſon, in ſuch manner, that when it beginneth to riſe, you may not hold your courſe Eaſtward, & as long as the winde is not Southeaſt, you muſt ſtill runne Northeaſt as long as you can, but when it is Eaſt Southeaſt, and Eaſt, then you muſt wind Southward, till the wind ſerueth to runne Northeaſt: in this manner you ſaile 1700. miles, to the coaſt of the countrey of Noua Spaigna, ſtill kéeping to ſeaward from the Iſland of Iapon as much as poſſibly you can, becauſe that certaine ſhippes that went late to Saile (paſſing cloſe by Iapon) had ſtormie weather, and ſaw the Iſland called A Ilha do Fogo, that is, the fiery Iſland, one of them putting into the Hauen of Xaxuma in the Iſland of Iapon, there to ſane it ſelfe, as it did: therefore ſuch as kéepe 100. miles to Seaward from it, holde a good courſe, for that running farre to Loofeward from thoſe Iſlandes, you fall vpon the coaſt of new Spaine vnder ſmall heights, but whē you fall on the coaſt vnder 35. degrées, there you hold a good courſe, but when you come to it vnder 38. and 40. degrées, which is the furtheſt lande that is diſcouered or knowne (called El Cabo de Mendoſino) you ſhall haue great labour and paine, becauſe that there you begin to haue high and hollowe waues, by reaſon winter is at hand, as alſo becauſe the ſhippes comming from the Iſland of Lucones, are but eaſily prouided of their neceſſaries.
                     When you ſée the coaſt and lande of Noua Spaigna, then you beginne to haue Northweſt winds, which from thence is

a right fore winde, becauſe you runne almoſt all along that coaſt, although in ſome places you kéepe ſomewhat further off, becauſe of the créekes that are therein, you runne along by the coaſt, which is all faire and cléere till you come to the Hauen of Acapulco, which is ſixe or ſeuen hundred miles.
                     And if you deſire to ſaile thither from Macau in China, you muſt be ready to ſet ſaile as ſoone as the winde is Southweſt, to put out with the coniunction of the Moone in the moneths of Iune and Iuly, holding your courſe towards the furtheſt point or hooke of the Iſland of Lucones, lying vnder 20. degrées, called Cabo de Bo
                           
                              •
                           ador, which is nintie miles from the Hauen of Macau.
                     
                     From the Iſlands called Ilhas dos Baboranes (lying by the coaſt of the ſame land and Cape de Boiadar) to the Iſland of Ca
                              •
                           agon, that is, (the Iſland of the Kettle) you runne Eaſt and Weſt, and when you are paſt thoſe Iſlands, running betwéene them, then you muſt holde your courſe as you did from the Hauen of Manilla as aforeſaide, alwaies keeping it as much as wind and weather will permit, which is the way the Spaniards doe now meane to ſaile, running to the Iſlands of Maluco, and from thence croſſe ouer to Noua Spaigna, which is the ſame courſe that Franciſcus Gualle (Captaine and Pilot of the ſhippe that came out of Noua Spaigna into the Hauen of Macau) helde: from whence hee departed againe the 25. of Iuly with a Southweſt wind, in the time and coniunction of a full moone, with whome at the ſame time departed the ſhippe of Ayres Gonſalu
                              •
                           s de Miranda, which captaine Gualle is ſaid not to haue beene longer in his voiage then thrée moneths and a halfe to the coaſt, and from thence a moneth and a halfe more to the Hauen of Acapulco, and another ſhippe that the ſame yéere ſet ſaile from Manilla, was betweene eight and nine moneths at ſea, and in the end arriued in the Hauen of Acapulco, all then being almoſt dead a
                           •
                         the ſhips in manner ſpoiled, and another ſhippe was but fiue moneths on the way, but the ordinary voiage is about ſixe moneths, little more or leſſe. The reaſon why it is better ſailing from Macau then from Manilla, is, becauſe there you haue no hinderances nor lets, but you may preſently hold on your courſe as you are for the ſpace of 10
                              •
                           . miles frō 
                        Manilla along through the chanell, till you be out, wherby ſome ſhippes haue conſumed ſo much time, that it was the cauſe that ſome of them were cōſtrained to put back againe, and could not performe their voiage: but being in the mouth or iſſue of the channell aforeſaid, then it is a better voiage then from Macau, becauſe it lieth 150. miles further to Loofewarde, if it had not the other hindrance of comming out, as I ſaid before.
                     When the ſhips ſaile from Noua Spaigna to Manilla or Macau, then they ſet ſaile in Lent, alwaies ſailing with a forewind, with the windes called Briſas, which are Eaſt and Eaſt Northeaſt winds, which doe blowe there with the monſon of the time, and it chanceth often times that many of them ſaile 50. or 6
                              •
                           . daies togither without ſtriking any of the ſailes, ſtill hauing a full wind, neuer ſeeing any land nor till this day euer any ſhip was caſt away in thoſe countries.
                     The ſhippe wherewith you will make this voiage muſt be very good to ſaile in a wind, as alſo very well prouided of all neceſſaries, ſpecially a Spaniſh Pilot and 12. Saylors, (becauſe that through all the coaſts of the Orientall Indies, they vſe Indian Saylors, as Arabians and ſuch like, that are not vſed nor can not ſkill of other voiages, and would be verie farre to ſa
                           •••
                         if they ſhould be led a new courſe) among the which it were good to haue ſome Spaniards (ſuch as haue ſailed that way) to know the land, which you ſhall alwa
                           ••
                         find at Macau, if you find them no
                           •
                         in 
                           
                              ••
                           
                           dia. For other neceſſaries concerning to ſhippe, you ſhall finde of all things ſufficient in China.
                     
                     The gaines and profits of all ſortes of wares of China are verie great, except rawe ſilke, whereby they haue verie little gaine, for there they rather deſire it readie ſpunne: and although there ſhould bee much ſolde there, yet that were no reaſon or cauſe why they ſhould carrie much thither, becauſe it ſhould not hinder the voiage and trafficke of them of Iapon into the Eaſt Indies, for there are many other kindes of wares great ſtore to carrie thither, wherein there is much more profit then in ſilke.
                     Of the common wares and merchandiſes that the Spaniards in the Iſlands of Lucones or Phillippinas doe buy, (and yet they buy them much d
                           ••
                        er there then they ſhould buy them in China) in newe

                        Spaine, they gaine but ſixe for one, and in Peru ten for one, whereof they are ſure, for that the Portingales that haue gone from hence thither, in the ſhip that came hither haue gained ſo much by the wares they carried with them, that the time that they ſtayed for their returne, ſéemed to them a thouſand yéeres: and as they repo
                           •
                        t, the Viceroy of Noua Spaigna and all the other gouernours and gentlemen of the countrie, haue a great deſire to vſe the trade, and doe much looke after it.
                     Many are of opinion, that to ſaile that way to Peru, it would be a longer voiage, for that when you are at Acapulco, you muſt take another way and hold another courſe of 700. miles long, from Acapulco to the Hauen of Callande Lyma, which is the Metropolitane Cittie of Peru, lying vnder ten degrées on the South ſide of the Equinoctiall, and you ſhould make your voiage in the ſame yeere: and further it is a countrey of great charges and expences, whereby you ſhould looſe and ſpend all that you ſhould gaine, more in that countrey then in new Spaine, becauſe the countrey of newe Spaine is more aboundant in all kinde of neceſſaries & victuals then Peru, and therefore your charges is leſſe.
                  
                  
                     The 52. Chapter. The true and perfect deſcription of a voiage performed and done by Franciſcus de Gualle a Spaniſh Captaine and Pilot, for the Viceroy of new Spaine, from the Hauen of Acapulco in new Spaine, to the Iſlands of Iu
                              •
                           ones or Phillippinas, in the Hauen of Manilla, and from thence to the Hauen of Macau in China, and from Macau backe againe to Acapulco, accompliſhed in the yeere of our Lorde 1584.
                     
                        THe tenth of March in the yéere of our Lord 1582. wée ſet ſaile out of the Hauen of Acapulco, lying in the country of new Spaine, directing our courſe to the Iſlands of Lucones or Philippinas Weſt Southweſt,1582. running in that manner for the ſpace of 25. miles, till wee came vnder 16. degrees, that ſo wée might ſhun the calmes by ſailing cloſe by the ſhore. From thence forward we held our courſe Weſt for the ſpace of 30. miles, and being there, we ranne Weſt, & Weſt and by South, for the ſpace of 1800. miles, to the Iſland called Ilha d'Engano, which is the furtheſt Iſland lying in the South partes of the Iſlands called de los Ladrones, that is, the Iſlands of Rouers, or Iſlas de las Vellas, vnder 13. degrées and ½. in latitude Septentrional, and 164. degrées in longitude Oriental, vpon the fixed Meridional line, which lieth right with the Iſland of Tercera. From thence wée held our courſe weſtward for the ſpace of 280. miles, till we came to the point called El capo de Eſpirito Santo, that is, the point of the Holy Ghoſt, lying in the Iſland Tandaya, the firſt Iſlād of thoſe that are called Philippinas, Lucones, or Manillas, which is a cuntry with few hils, with ſome mines of brimſtone in the middle thereof. From the point aforeſaid we ſailed Weſt for the ſpace of eighteene miles to the point or entrie of the channell, which runneth in betwéene that Iſland and the Iſland of Lucon. This point or entrie lieth ſcarſe vnder 12. degrées. All the coaſt that ſtretcheth from the entry of the chanell to the point El capo del Spirito Santo, is not very faire.
                     Eight miles from the ſaid point lyeth a Hauen of indifferent greatnes, called Bahya de Louos, that is, the Baye of Wolues, hauing a ſmall Iſland in the mouth thereof: and within the Channell about halfe a mile from the end of the ſaid Iſland, lyeth an Iſland or Cliffe, & when you paſſe by the point in the middle of the channell, then you haue 25. fadome déepe, with browne Sand: there we found ſo great a ſtreame running weſtward, that it made the water caſt a ſkum as if it had béene a ſand, whereby it put vs in feare, but caſting out our Lead, we found 25. fadome déepe.
                     From the aforeſaid entrie of the channell North, and North and by Eaſt, about ten miles, lyeth the Iſland of Catanduanes, about a mile diſtant from the land of Lucon, on the furtheſt point Eaſtward, and from the ſame entrie of the channell towards the Weſt and Southweſt, lyeth the Iſland Capuli about ſixe miles from thence, ſtretching Weſt Southweſt, and Eaſt Northeaſt, beeing fiue miles long and foure miles broad, and as wée paſt by it, it lay Northward from vs, vnder 12. degrées and ¼. and ſomewhat high lande. Foure miles from the aforeſaid Iſland of Capuli Northweſtward, lyeth the thrée

Iſlands of the Hauen of Bollon in the Iſland of Lucones, ſtretching North and South about foure miles, diſtant from the firme land about halfe a mile, whereof the furtheſt Southward, lyeth vnder 13. degrées: In this channell it is twentie fadome deepe, with white Sand, and a great ſtreame, running Southeaſt, wee paſſed through the middle of the channell. From this Channell wée held our courſe Southweſt, and Southweſt and by Weſt, for the ſpace of twentie miles, vntill wee came to the Weſt end of the Iſland of Tycao, which reacheth Eaſt and Weſt 13. miles. This point or hooke lieth vnder 12. degrees and 3/
                              •
                           . In the middle betweene this Iſland and the Iſland Capuli there lyeth three Iſlands called the Faranias, and we ranne in the ſame courſe on the North ſide of all the Iſlands, at the depth of 22. fadome with white ſand.
                     From the aforeſaid Weſt point of the Iſland Tycao to the point of Barya
                              •
                           , it is Eaſt and Weſt to ſaile about the length of a mile, or a mile and a halfe, we put into that channell, helding our courſe ſouth and ſouth and by weſt about three miles, vntill we were out of the channell at ſixteene fadome deepe, with halfe white and re
                           ••
                        ſh ſande in the Channell, and at the month thereof, whereof the middle lyeth vnder 12. degrees and 
                           •
                        . and there the ſ
                           •
                        reames runne Northward.
                     The Iſland of Bayas ſtretcheth northweſt and Southeaſt, and is lowe land, whereof the Northweſt point is about three mi
                           •
                        es from the coaſt of Lucon, but you can not paſſe between them with any P
                           •
                        ppe but with ſmall Foiſts and Barks of the countrey. This ſhal
                           •
                        ow Channell lieth vnder 12. degrees, and running thorough the aforeſaid channell between the Iſlands Tycao and Bu
                              •
                           yas, as I ſaid before, we ſailed Southward about 2. miles from the Iſland of Masbate, which ſtretcheth Eaſt and Weſt eight miles long, being in breadth foure miles, and lieth vnder 12. degrees and 1/
                              •
                           . in the middle thereof, and is ſomewhat high land.
                     From the ſaid channell betwéene Tycao and Buryas, we held our courſe Weſt Northweſt for thirteene miles, leauing the Iſland Masbate on the South ſide, and the Iſland Buryas on the North ſide, at the end of thirteene miles we came by an Iſland called Banton, which is in forme like a Hat, vnder 12. degrees and ⅔. when we had ſailed the aforeſaid thirtéene miles and eight miles more, on the South ſide we left the Iſland called Rebuian, which ſtretcheth Northweſt, and Northweſt and by North, and Southeaſt, and Southeaſt and by South, for the ſpace of eight miles, béeing high and crooked Lande, whereof the North point lieth vnder 12. degrees and 
                           •
                        . and there you finde 35. fadome deepe, with white ſand.
                     From the aforeſaide Iſland of Banton Southward nine miles, there beginneth and followeth three Iſlandes, one called Bantonſilla, which is a ſmall Iſland in forme of a Sugar loofe: the ſecond Crymara, beeing ſomewhat great in length, reaching Eaſt and Weſt about 2. miles: the third I
                              •
                           aa, or the Iſle of Goates, hauing certaine Houels. By all theſe Iſlandes aforeſaide you may paſſe with all ſortes of Shippes, whereof the foremoſt lyeth Southward vnder 12. degrees and 1/
                              •
                           . from the Iſland Bantonſilla, or ſmall Banto
                              •
                           , we helde our courſe Northweſt, for the ſpace of foure miles, to the Channell betweene the Iſlands called de Vere
                              •
                           e
                              •
                           , and the Iſland Marinduque, the Vere
                              •
                           es lying on the South ſide vnder 12. degrées and ¼. (which are two ſmall Iſlands like two Frig
                              ••
                           te
                              •
                           
                        ) and the Iſland Marinduque on the North ſide vnder 12. degrees and 
                           •
                        . which is a great Iſland, ſtretching Weſt Northweſt, and Eaſt Southeaſt, hauing in length twelue, and in breadth ſeuen miles. On the North ſide with the Iſlande Lucon it maketh a long and ſmall channell, running ſomewhat crooked, which is altogither full of ſhallowes and ſandes, whe
                           •
                        y no ſhips can paſſe through it. The 
                           •
                        urth
                           •••
                         point Weſ
                           •
                        ward of the ſame Iſland, lyeth vnder 1
                              •
                           . degrees and ¼ it is high lande, on the Eaſt ſide hauing the forme of a mi
                           •
                        e of brimſtone or fiery hill, and on the weſt ſide the land runneth downeward, at the point thereof being round like a loafe of bread: in the Channell betweene it and the Vere
                              •
                           es, there are eighteene fadome deepe, with ſmall blacke ſand.
                     From the aforeſaide Channell of Vere
                              •
                           es and Marinduque, we held our courſe Weſt Northweſt twelue miles, to the lande of Mindoro to the point or Hooke called Dumaryn, lying full vnder thirteene degrees: fiue miles forwarde from the ſaid Channell, on the South ſide wee left an Iſland called Ilha del Maeſtro del

Campo, that is, the Iſland of the Coronell, lying vnder twelue degrées and ¼. which is a ſmall and flat Iſland: In this courſe wee had 45. fadome déepe, with white ſand.
                     By this point or end of the Iſland Marinduque, beginneth the Iſland of Myndoro, which hath in length Eaſt and weſt fiue and twentie miles, and in breadth twelue miles, whether of the furtheſt point Southward lieth vnder thirtéen degrées, and the furtheſt point Northwarde vnder thirtéene degrées and 1/
                              •
                           . and the furtheſt point Weſtwarde vnder thirtéene degrees. This Iſland with the Iſland of Lucon maketh a Channell of fiue miles broad, and ten or twelue fadome déepe with muddie ground of diuers coulers, with white ſande. Fiue miles forward from Marinduque, lieth the riuer of the towne of Anagacu, which is ſo ſhallowe, that no ſhippes may enter into it. From thence 2. miles further, lieth the Iſlands called Bacco, which are thrée Iſlands lying in triangle, two of them being diſtant from the land about thrée hundred cubits, and betwéene them and the land you may paſſe with ſmall ſhippes: and from the lande to the other Iſland are about two hundred cubites, where it is altogither ſhallowes and ſandes, ſo that where the ſhippes may paſſe outward about 150. cubits from the land, you leaue both the Iſlands on the ſouth ſide, running betwéen the third Iſland and the riuer called Rio del Bacco, ſomewhat more from the middle of the Channell towards the Iſland, which is about a mile diſtant from the other: the Channell is ten fadome déepe, with
                           ••
                        ood and ſhelles vpon the ground: the riuer of Bacco is ſo ſhallowe, that no ſhippes may enter into it. From this Iſland with the ſame courſe two miles forward, you paſſe by the point called El capo de Reſcaſeo, where wee caſt out our Lead, and found that a man may paſſe cloſe by the land, and there you ſhall find great ſtrong ſtreames: and halfe a mile forward with the ſame courſe, lyeth the towne of Myndoro, which hath a good hauen for ſhippes of three hundred tunnes. Three miles Northward from the ſame Hauen, lyeth the Iſland called Cafaa, ſtretching Eaſt and Weſt, béeing Hill ground.
                     From the ſaid towne of Myndoro, wée helde our courſe Weſt Northweſt eight myles, till wée came to the point or hooke of the Sandes called Tulen, lying vpon the Iſland of Lucon, which Sande or Banke reacheth into the ſea halfe a mile from the coaſt: you muſt kéepe about an hundred cubites from it, where you finde eight fadome water, muddie and ſhelly ground: you runne along by thoſe ſands North, and North and by Weſt for the ſpace of two myles, till you come to the riuer called Rio de Anaſebo, all the reſt of the coaſt called De los Limbones to the mouth or entrie of the Baye called Manilla, (which are foure miles) is ſayled with the ſame courſe. The Limbones (which are Iſlands ſo called) are high, in forme like a paire of Organs, with good Hauens for ſmall ſhippes, running along by the Limbones: and two miles beyond them on the South ſide, wee leaue the Iſlands of Fortan, and foure Iſlands more, but the thrée Iſlandes of Lubao, which are verie lowe lying vnder thirteene & 13. degrées and 1/
                              •
                           . and the Limbones lie in the mouth or entrie of the Baye of Manilla vnder 14. degrées and ¼.
                     
                     From thence wée ranne Northweſt for the ſpace of ſixe miles to the Hauen of Cabite, kéeping along by the land lying on the Weſt ſide, where it is ſhallowe, and is called Los Baixos del Rio de Cannas, the ſhallowes of the riuer of Réedes; all along this Baye in the ſame courſe, there is from ten to foure fadome deepe.
                     Beeing by the point or Hooke of Cabite, then wee kept but an hundred paces from it, running Southweſt, South Southweſt, & South, vntill wee diſcouered the whole mouth or entrie of the bay, where wée might anker at foure fadome about two hundred cubits from the 
                           •
                        and, and then the towne of Manilla was two miles Northward from vs.
                  
                  
                     The 53. Chapter. The courſe and voiage of the aforeſaid Franciſcus Gualle out of the Hauen or Roade of Manilla, to the Hauen of Macau in China, with all the courſes and ſcituations of the places.
                     
                        SAyling out of the Hauen of Cubite, lying in the Bay of Manilla, wée helde our courſe Weſtward for the ſpace of eightéene myles, to

the point called El Cabo de Samballes, and when wée were eight miles on our way, wée left the two Iſlandes Maribillas on the South ſide, and ſailed about a mile from them: the point of Samballes aforeſaid, lyeth vnder fourtéene degrées, and ⅔. being low lande: at the end of the ſame coaſt of Lucon, on the Weſt ſide.
                     Frō the hooke or point aforeſaid, we ran North, and North and by Weſt, for the ſpace of fiue and thirtie miles (about a mile from the coaſt of Lucon) to the point called Cabo de Bullinao, all this coaſt and Cape is high and Hill ground, which Cape lyeth vnder ſixtéene degrées and ⅔. From this Cape de Bullinao, wée helde our courſe North, and North and by eaſt, for fiue and fortie miles to the point called El cabo de Boiador, which is the furtheſt lande Northward from the Iſland Lucon lying vnder 19. degrées.
                     The Cape de Bullinao béeing paſt the land, maketh a great Créeke or Bough, and from this Créeke the coaſts runneth North to the point of Boiador, béeing a land full of Cliffes and Rockes that reach into the Sea, and the land of the hooke or point is high and hilly ground.
                     From the point of Boiador, we helde our courſe Weſt Northweſt an hundred and twentie miles, vntill wée came to the Iſland called O Ilha Branco, or the white Iſland, which is a ſmall Iſland, lying in the beginning of the coaſt and Baye of the riuer of Canton vnder two and twentie degrees, hauing foure and twentie fadome browne muddie ground.
                     From the ſame Iſland Ilha Branco, wee helde the aforeſaide courſe of Weſt Northweſt, for the ſpace of ſixtéene miles, to the Iſland of Macau lying in the mouth of the riuer of Canton, and maketh the riuer two mouths or entries, and is a ſmall Iſland about three miles great.
                  
                  
                     The 54. Chapter. The Nauigation or courſe of the aforeſaid Franciſco Gualle out of the Hauen of Macau to new Spaine, with the ſcituation and ſtretchings of the ſame, with other notable and memorable things concerning the ſame voiage.
                     WHen we had prepared our ſelues and taken our leaues of our friends in Macau, we ſet ſaile vpon the foure and twentie of Iuly, holding our courſe Southeaſt, and Southeaſt and by Eaſt, beeing in the wane of the Moone, for when the moone increaſeth it is hard holding the courſe betwéene the Iſlands, becauſe as then the water and ſtreames runne verie ſtrong to the Northweſt, wée ſayled through many narrow Channels by night, hauing the depth of eight and ten fadome, with ſoft muddie ground, vntill we were about the Iſland Ilha Branco, yet we ſawe it not, but by the height we knew we were paſt it.
                     Being beyond it, we ran Eaſt ſoutheaſt, an hundred and fiftie miles, to get aboue the ſands called Os Baixos dos Peſcadores, and the beginning of the Iſlands Lequeos on the Eaſt ſide, which Iſlandes are called As Ilhas Fermoſas, that is, the faire Iſlandes. This I vnderſtood by a Chinar called Santy of Chinchon, and hée ſaid that they lie vnder 21. degrées and ¾. there it is thirtie fadome déepe, & although we ſaw them not, notwithſtanding by the height and depth of the water we knewe we were paſt them.
                     Being paſt the faire Iſlands, we held our courſe Eaſt, and Eaſt and by North, for two hundred and ſixtie miles, vntill we were paſt the length of the Iſlands Lequeos, ſayling about fiftie myles from them, the ſaid Chinar told me, that thoſe Iſlandes called Lequeos are very many, and that they haue many and verie good Hauens, and that the people and inhabitants thereof haue their faces and bodies painted like the Byſayas of the Iſlands of Lucon or Philippinas, and are apparelled like the Byſayas, and that there alſo are mines of gold: He ſaid likewiſe that they did often come with ſmall ſhippes and Barkes lade
                           ••
                         with Buckes and Hartes bides, and with gold in graines or verie ſmall pieces, to traffique with them of the coaſt of China, which he aſſured me to be moſt true, ſaying that he had béene nine times in the ſmall Iſland, bringing of the ſame wares with him to China, which I beléeued to be true, for that afterward I enquired thereof in Macau and vpon the coaſt of China and found that he ſaid true. The furtheſt or vttermoſt of theſe Iſlands both Northward and Eaſtward lie vnder 29. degrées.
                     Béeing paſt theſe Iſlands, then you come to the Iſlandes of Iapon, whereof the firſt lying Weſt and South is the

Iſland of Firando, where the Portingales vſe to trafficke, they are in length altogether a hundred and thirty miles, and the furtheſt Eaſtward, lyeth vnder two and thirty degrées, we ran ſtill Eaſt, and Eaſt and by North, vntil we were paſt the ſaid a hundred and thirty miles.
                     All this information I had of the aforeſaid Chinar, as alſo that there I ſhould ſée ſome mynes of Brimſtone, or fiery Hils, being ſeuenty miles beyond them, & thirty miles further I ſhould finde foure Iſlands lying together, which I likewiſe found as hee had tolde mee: For that being in Iapon hee ſaid hee had there ſéene certaine men of a very ſmall ſtature with great roules of Linnen cloth about their heads, yt brought gold in ſmall péeces, and ſome white Cangas of Algodon, (which are péeces of Cotton, Linnen ſo called by the Chinars) as alſo ſalt fiſh, the Spaniſh Atun, or Haberdine, which hee ſaid, came out of other Iſlandes Eaſtward from Iapon, and by ye tokens and markes he ſhewed me, I geſſed whereabout thoſe Iſlands ſhould bee, and found them not farre from whence hée ſaid they lay, hee ſaid likewiſe that all the Iſlands of Iapon haue good hauens and Channels, being a country full of Rice, Corne, Fiſh, and Fleſh, and that they are an indifferent and reaſonable people to Trafficke with, and that there they haue much ſiluer.
                     Running thus Eaſt, and Eaſt and by North about three hundred miles from Iapon, we found a very hollow water, with the ſtreame running out of the North and Northweſt, with a ful and very broad ſea, without any hinderance or trouble in the way that we paſt, and what winde ſoeuer blewe, the Sea continued all in one ſort, with the ſame hollow water and ſtreame, vntill we had paſt ye ſeuen hundred miles, about two hundred myles from the coaſt and land of newe Spaigne, where wee began to loſe the ſaid hollow ſea and ſtream, whereby I moſt aſſuredly thinke and beleeue, that there you ſhall find a Channell or ſtraight paſſage, betwéene the Firme land and new Spaigne, and the Countries of Aſia and Tartaria. Likewiſe all this way from the aforeſayed ſeuen hundred miles, we found a great number of whale fiſhes, and other fiſh by the Spaniards Atun, whereof many are found in the coaſt of Gibraltar in Spaigne, as alſo Albacoras and Bonitos, which are all Fiſhes, which commonly kéepe in Channels, ſtraights, and running waters, there to diſperſe their ſéed when they bréed, which maketh me more aſſuredly beléeue, that thereabouts is a Channell or Straight to paſſe through.
                     Being by the ſame courſe vpon ye coaſt of new Spaigne, vnder ſeuen and thirty degrées and ½. wee paſſed by a very high and faire land with many Trées, wholy without Snow, and foure miles from the land you find thereabouts many drifts of roots, leaues of Trées, Réedes, and other leaues like Figge leaues, the like whereof wee found in great abundance in the countrey of Iapon, which they eat, and ſome of thoſe that wée found, I cauſed to be ſodden with fleſh, and being ſodden, they eat like Colewortes, there likewiſe wee found great ſtore of Sea wolues, which wee call Sea dogges, whereby it is to bée preſumed and certainly to bee beléeued, that there are manye Riuers, Bayes, and Hauens along by thoſe coaſts to the Hauen of Acapulco.
                     
                     From thence wee ranne South-eaſt, Southeaſt and by South, and South-eaſt and by Eaſt, as we found the wind, to the point called El Cabo de Saint Lucas, which is the beginning of the land of Califfornia, on the Northweſt ſide, lying vnder two and twenty degrées, being fiue hundred myles diſtant from the Cape De mendoſino.
                     
                     In this way of the aforeſaied fiue hundred myles, along by the coaſt, are manye Iſlands, and although they bee but ſmall, yet without doubt there are in them ſome good Hauens, as alſo in the Firme Land, where you haue theſe Hauens following, nowe lately found out, as that of the Iſland of Saint Auguſtine, lying vnder thirtye degrées and ¾. and the Iſland called Ilha de Sedros, ſcarce vnder eight and twentie degrées and ¼. and the Iſland lying beneath the Saint Martyn, vnder thrée and twentie degrées and ½. all this coaſt and Country, as I thinke is inhabited, and ſheweth to bee a verye good Countrey, for there by night wee ſawe fire, and by day ſmoake, which is a moſt ſure token that they are inhabited.
                     From the Point or hooke of Saint Lucas, to the South-eaſt ſide of Calliffornia, wee helde our courſe Eaſt Southeaſt, for the ſpace of eightye myles,

to the point called El cabo de las corrientes, that is, the point of the ſtreames lying vnder ninteene degrées & ⅔. and running this courſe Northward about a mile from vs, we ſawe thrée Iſlands called las tres Marias, (that is, the thrée Maries) running the ſame courſe. About foure miles from the other Iſlandes, there are other Iſlands reaching about 2. or thrée miles: All this way from the mouth or Créeke of California aforeſaid for the ſpace of the ſaid 80. miles, there are great ſtreames that runne Weſtward.
                     From the point or Cape de las Corrientes, wée ranne Southeaſt, and ſometimes Southeaſt and by Eaſt, for the ſpace of an hundred and thirtie miles to the hauen of Acapulco. In this way of an hundred and thirty miles, being 20. miles on the way, we had the Hauen of the Na
                           
                              •
                           iuidade, that is, the birth of the Virgine Mary: and other eight miles further, the Hauen of Saint Iago, or Saint Iames: and ſixe miles further, the ſea Strand called la Playa de Culyma, that is, the Strand of Culyma. All this coaſt from California to the Hauen of Acapulco is inhabited by people that haue peace and traffique with the Spaniards, and are of condition and qualities like the people of the other places of new Spaine.
                     
                     
                        The Concluſion of the Author of this laſt Voyage.
                        ALl this Deſcription and Nauigation haue I my ſelfe ſéene, prooued, and well noted in my Voiage made and ended in the yéere of our Lord 1584.
                           1584. from great China out of the Hauen and riuer of Canton, as I will more at large ſet it downe vnto your honour, with the Paralell and Meridian thereof, as God ſhall permit me time and leyſour, whome I beſéech to ſend you long and happy daies: and the ſame haue I truly tranſlated out of Spaniſh into low Dutch verbatim
                            out of the Originall coppie, that was ſent vnto the Viceroy of the Portingall Indies.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The 55. Chapter. The Deſcription of a Voyage made by a Pilot called Nuno da Silua for the Viceroy of new Spaine, the 20. of May in the yeere of our Lorde 1579.1579. to the towne of Mexico, from whence it was ſent to the Viceroy of the Portingall Indies, wherein is ſet downe the courſe and actions paſſed in the Voyage of Sir Francis Drake that tooke the aforeſaid Nuno da Silua by the Iſlands of Cabo Verde, and carried him along with him thorough the Straightes of Magellanes, to the Hauen of Guatulco in newe Spaine, where he let him goe againe.
                     
                        
                           NVno da Silua borne in Porto, a Citizen and inhabitant of Guaia, ſaith, that hée departed out of his houſe in the beginning of Nouember in the yéere of our Lorde 1577.
                        1577 taking his courſe to Cabo Verde, or the gréene point, where hée ankered with his ſhippe cloſe by the Hauen of the Iſland of Saint Iames, one of the Iſlands of Cabo Verde aforeſaid, béeing the nintéenth of Ianuarie in the yéere of our Lorde 1578.
                        1578 and lying there, there came ſixe ſhippes, which ſeemed to be Engliſh men, whereof the Admirall boorded his ſhippe, and by force with his men hée tooke him out of his ſhippe, bringing him in the boat aboord the Admirals ſhippe, leauing ſome of his beſt men aboord his ſhippe: and although the fortreſſe of the Iſland ſhot foure or fiue times at them, yet they hurt not the Engliſh men: who hauing done, ſe
                           •
                         ſaile from thence to the Iſland of Braua, that is, the wild Iſland, taking with them the ſhippe of the ſaide Nuno da Silua: béeing there, they filled certaine veſſels with freſh water, from thence holding their courſe inwarde to Sea, hauing firſt with a boat ſet the men of Nuno da Siluas ſhippe on lande, onley kéeping Nuno da Silua in his ſhippe, as alſo his ſhippe with the wines that were therein, and Nuno da Silua ſaith, the cauſe why they kept him on boorde was, becauſe they knewe him to be a Pilot for the coaſt of Braſilia, that hée might bring them to ſuch places in thoſe countries as had freſh water.
                     Béeing put off from the Iſland of Braua, they helde their courſe to the lande of Braſilia, which they deſcried vpon the firſt of Aprill, vnder the height of 30. degrées:

and without landing or taking in freſh water, they held on their courſe to the riuer Rio de la Plata, that is, the riuer of Siluer, lying vnder fiue and thirtie degrées, little more or leſſe, where they went on lande, and prouided themſelues of freſh water. From thence they helde on their courſe till they came vnder nine and thirtie degrées, where they ankered: and béeing there, they left two of their ſixe ſhippes behinde them, and ſailed but foure in companie (that of Nuno da Silua béeing one) till they came to the Baye called Baya de las Iſlas, that is, the Baye of the Iſlands, lying vnder nine and fortie degrées, where it is ſaid, that Magellanes lay and wintered there with his Shippe when hée firſt diſcouered the Straight, which now holdeth his name. In this Bay being the twentie of Iune, they entred, and there ankered ſo cloſe to the land, that they might ſend to it with a Harquebuſh ſhot, and there they ſaw the land to be inhabited with Indians, that were apparelled with ſkinnes, with their legges from the knées downwarde, and their armes from the elbows downward couered, all the reſt of their bodies béeing naked, with bowes and arrowes in their handes, being ſubtill, great, and well formed people, and ſtrong and high of ſtature, where ſixe of the Engliſh men went on land to fetch freſh water, and before they leapt on land, foure of the Indians came vnto their boate, to whome the Engliſh men gaue bread and wine: and when the Indians had well eaten and drunke, they departed thence: and going ſomwhat farre from them, one of the Indians cryed to them, and ſaide: Magallanes, Eſta heminha Terra, that is, Magallanes, this is my countrey: and becauſe the Engliſh men followed them, it ſéemed the Indians fledde-vpward into the lande, and béeing ſomewhat farre off, they turned backe againe, and with their arrowes ſlewe two of the Engliſh Shippers, one being an Engliſh man, the other a Netherlander: the reſt came backe againe and ſaued themſelues in the boate, wherewith they preſently put off from the ſhoare, and there they ſtayed till the ſeuentéenth of Auguſt, vpon the which day they ſet ſaile, running along by the coaſt about a mile and a halfe from the lande, for there it is all faire and good ground, at twentie, and fiue and twentie fadome déepe, and were about foure or fiue dayes before they came to the mouth or entrie of the Straightes, but becauſe the winde was contrarie, they ſtayed till the foure and twentie of Auguſt before they entred.
                     The entrie or mouth of the Straight is about a myle broad, on both ſides béeing bare and flat land, on the North ſide they ſawe Indians making great fires, but on the South ſide they ſaw no people ſtirring. The foure and twentie day aforeſaide, they beganne to enter into the ſtraights, with an Eaſt Northeaſt wind. This Straight may be about an hundred and ten miles long, and in breadth a mile about the entry of the Straight, and halfe way into it, it runneth right forth without any windings or turnings: and from thence about eight or ten miles towardes the end, it hath ſome boughes and windings, among the which, there is one ſo great a hooke or running in, that it ſéemeth to runne into the other land: and there it is leſſe then a mile broad from one lande to the other: and from thence forwarde it runneth ſtraight out againe: And although you finde ſome crookings, yet they are nothing to ſpeake of. The iſſue of the Straight lieth weſtward, and about eight or ten miles before you come to the end, then the Straight beginneth to be broader, and it is all high lande to the end thereof after you are eight miles within the Straight, for the firſt eight myles after you enter is low flat land, as I ſaide before: and in the entrie of the Straight you finde the ſtreame to runne from the South ſea to the North ſea: and after they began to ſaile in with the Eaſt Northeaſt winde, (being entred) they paſſed along without any let or hinderance either of wind or weather: and becauſe the high land on both ſides lay couered with ſnow, and that all the Straight is faire and cleare, they held their courſe a Harquebuſh ſhot in length from off the North ſide, hauing nine and ten fadome déepe, with good ground, as I ſaid before, where (if neede require) a man may anker: the hilles on both ſides béeing full of trées, ſome of the hilles and trées reaching downe to the ſea ſide, in ſome places hauing plaine and euen land, and there they ſaw not any great riue
                           •
                        s, but ſome ſmall riuers that iſſued out of the Riffes and Breaches of the lande: and in the

country where the great Bough or crooking is, on the South ſide they ſaw certaine Indian Fiſhermen in their Canoas or Scutes, being ſuch as they ſawe firſt on the North ſide, but more people they ſaw not on the South ſide.
                     Beeing out of the Straight on the other ſide, béeing vpon the ſixt of September of the aforeſaide yeere, they held their courſe Northweſt for the ſpace of thrée dayes, and the third day they had a northeaſt winde, that by force draue them Weſt Southweſt, which courſe they helde for the ſpace of ten or twelue dayes with fewe ſailes vp: and becauſe the winde began to be verie great, they tooke in all their ſailes, and lay driuing till the laſt of September.
                     The foure and twentie day of the ſame moneth hauing loſt the ſight of their pinnace which was about an hundred tunne, then againe they hoiſed ſaile becauſe they came better, holding their courſe Northeaſt for the ſpace of ſeuen dayes, and at the end of the ſaid ſeuen dayes, they had the ſight of certaine Iſlands, which they made towards for to anker, but the weather would not permit them: and béeing there, the winde fell Northweſt, whereby they ſailed Weſt Southweſt.
                     The next day they loſt the ſight of another of their companie, which ſhip was about three hundred and ſixtie tunnes, for it was very foule weather, ſo that in the end the Admirals ſhippe was left alone, for the Ship of Nuno da Silua was left in the Baye where they wintered before they entred into the Straights, and with this foule weather they ranne till they were vnder ſeuen & fiftie degrees, where they entred into a Hauen of an Iſland and ankered about the length of the ſhot of a great peece from the land, at twentie fadome deepe, where they ſtaied thrée or foure dayes, and the winde comming Southward, they hoyſed anker, holding their courſe Northward for the ſpace of two dayes, and then they eſpied a ſmall vnhabited Iſland, where béeing arriued, they ſtroke ſayles, and hoiſed out their boat, and there they tooke many birds and Sea wolues.
                     The next day they ſet ſaile againe, holding their courſe North Northeaſt, and North, to 
                           •
                        nother Iſland lying fiue or ſix myles from the firme lande, on the North ſide of the Straight, where they ankered about a quarter of a mile from the lande, at twelue fadome water. This Iſland is ſmall and lowe lande, and full of Indians, the Iſland being altogither built and inhabited by them, where they hoyſed out their boate, wherein the Admirall and twelue Engliſh men were entred going to fetch freſh water, and to ſéeke for victuals, and beeing landed vpon the Iſland, the Indians in exchange of other things, brought two Spaniſh ſhéepe, and a little Mais or rootes whereof they make bread, and becauſe it was late, they returned againe vnto their ſhippe, without doing any other thing for that day. The next day the ſaid Captaine with the aforeſaide twelue men being Harquebuſhers, rowed to land again, and ſet two of their companie on ſhore with their veſſels to fetch freſh water, and by the place where they ſhould fill their water there lay certaine Indians ſecretly hidden, that fell vpon the two Engliſh men and tooke them: which they in the boat perceiuing, went out to helpe them, but they were ſo aſſailed with ſtones and arrowes, that all or the moſt part of them were hurt, the Captaine himſelfe béeing wounded with an arrowe on the face, and will, another arrowe in the head, whereby they were conſtrained to turne backe againe, without once hurting any of the Indians, and yet they came ſo neare the boate, that they tooke foure of their oares from them. This done, they ſet ſaile againe, running along the coaſt with a South winde, ſailing ſo for the ſpace of ſixe miles, paſſing by the Hauen called Saint Iago, or Saint Iames, where they put into a Hauen, and there they tooke an Indian that lay fiſhing in a Scute or Canoa, giuing him linnen and Butchers chopping kniues, with other trifles, and not long after there came an other Indian aboord their ſhippe called Felippe, and hée ſpake Spaniſh, hee gaue the Engliſh Captaine notice of a certaine ſhippe that lay in the Hauen of Saint Iago, which they had left ſixe miles behinde them: with that intelligence the Indian béeing their guide, the next day they ſet Saile and put to the aforeſaide Hauen of Saint Iago, and entring therein, they tooke the ſaide Shippe, wherein they found a thouſand ſeuen hundred and 70. Bortigas of Spaniſh pots full of wine, & other thinges, which hauing done, they leapt on land, where they tooke certaine

ſackes with meale, with all whatſoeuer they could find, they tooke likewiſe the ornaments and other Relickes out of the Church, wherewith they departed from thence, taking the aforeſaid ſhippe, with two menne (that they found in her) with them, and ſo departed from that Hauen, which lyeth vnder 32 degrées and ½. running along by the coaſt till they came vnder one and thirtie and thirty degrées: which was the place where they had appointed to méet, and there to ſtay for each other, if by tempeſt or foule weather they chanced to be ſeperated, and ſo looſe each others company.
                     And comming vnder thirty degrées, they found a very good Hauen, wherein they entred, and ankered at ſixe fadome deepe, the ſhotte of a great Péece from the Lande, which was right ouer againſt a Riuer, where they tooke in ſixe Pipes of freſh water, and to defend them that fetched the water, they ſet twelue men vpon the Land, and being buſied in filling of their water, they eſpied a company of men comming towards them, wherof halfe of them were Spaniards, being about two hundred and fifty horſemē, and as many footemen, but they had no ſooner eſpied them, but they preſently entered into the Boat, and eſcaped away, looſing but one man.
                     The ſame night they ſet ſaile againe with both their Shippes, running along the coaſt about ten miles further, where they tooke in ſome freſh water, but becauſe they perceiued certaine horſemen, they departed without lading any more water.
                     Frō thence they folowed on their courſe along the coaſt for the ſpace of 30. myles, where they entred into a deſert or vnhabited Hauen, yet they went not on Land, for euery day they ſawe people vpon the ſhore, and there they made out a ſmall pinnace, the péeces whereof they brought readye framed out of England, and hauing prepared it, they launched it into the Water, wherein the Captaine with fiftéene men entred, with the cheefe Boateſman called Ian de Greicke, (being Maiſter of the ſhippe which they had taken in the Hauen of S. Iago,) wherewith they went to ſée if they could finde the two Shippes that they had loſt by ſtormy weather as I ſaied before, and likewiſe thinking to goe on Land to fill certaine veſſels with freſh Water, they durſt not venture, for they ſawe people on all ſide of the ſhoare, ſo that in the end they returned againe without hearing of the other Shippes, being there, they tooke all the Ordinaunce out of their Shippe, and newe dreſſed and rigged her, which done, they put a ſmall péece of Ordinaunce into the Pinnace, wherewith they ſet ſaile againe, following on their courſe.
                     Hauing ſayled thirtéene daies, they came to an Iſland lying about the ſhot of a Baſe from the Lande, where they ankered, and there they found foure Indian Fiſhermen in two Canaos, who tolde them that on the Firme Lande they might haue freſh water, but they vnderſtanding that there was not much, and that it was ſomewhat within the Lande, they would not ſpend any time about it, but ſet ſayle againe, leauing the Fiſhermen with their Canaos, following on their courſe along by the ſhore.
                     The next day being ſomewhat further, they eſpied certaine Indian Fiſhermen that were vpon the Lande in their houſes, which the Engliſh Captaine perceauing, preſently entered into the Pinnace, and rowed on Land, where hee tooke three of the ſaid Fiſhermen, taking with him halfe of the Fiſh that lay packed vpon the ſhoare ready to bee laden, with the which Indians and booty, they came on boord againe.
                     The next day following, they ſawe a Barke laden with Fiſh, that belonged to the Spaniards, with foure Indians in it. This Barke with the Indians and the Fiſh, they tooke and bound the Spaniſh Shippe to their ſterne, and ſo drewe it after them, leauing the ſaid Indians within it, who by night vnbound the Barke, and ſecretly made away with Barke and Fiſh, and were no more ſeene. The next day the Captaine went into the Pinnace, and becauſe hee ſawe certaine houſes vppon the ſhoare, hee made thither, and beeing on Lande, hee found two menne in them, whereof one hee tooke, leauing the other behinde, and there hee found thrée thouſand Peſoes of ſiluer, (euery Peſo being the value of a Ryall of eight,) and ſeuen Indian Sheepe, Hennes, and all whatſoeuer they found▪
                        
wherewith they departed from thence, following on their courſe, and two dayes after they came by the hauen called Azijcka, where they found two ſhippes, the one laden with goods and Spaniſh wares, out of the which, they tooke only two hundred Bottigas (or Spaniſh Pots with Wine) and out of the other ſeuē and thirty Bharas of ſiluer, which are péeces of tenne or twelue pound each Bharre, and thinking to leape on ſhore (with two Barkes that they found in the ſaid Hauen, with about ſeuen and thirty Harquebuſhes & bowes) they perceiued on the land certaine horſemen comming towards them, whervpon they left off their pretence, and tooke with them a Moore that they found within the Barkes, with whome they retourned aboord.
                     The next day in the morning they burnt the ſhippe, that was laden with the Spaniſh wares, and tooke the other with them, paſſing forward with it on their courſe, the Captaine ſayling along the ſhore with his Pinnace, and the Shippe keeping about a myle from him to Seaward, to ſéeke for a ſhippe whereof they had intelligence, and hauing in that manner ſailed about fiue and forty myles, they found the ſhippe that lay at anker in a hauen, who about two houres before had beene aduertiſed of an Engliſh Pirate or Sea-rouer, and had diſcharged eight hundred Bharres of ſiluer out of her, and hidden it on the Land, which ſiluer belonged to the King of Spaine, of the which ſiluer the Engliſhmen had receiued ſome intelligence, but they durſt not goe on land, becauſe there were many Indians and Spaniards that ſtood to guard it, and they found nothing in the ſhip but thrée Pipes of water, the ſhippe they tooke with them, and being about a mile in the Sea, they hoiſed vp all her ſailes & let her driue, doing the like with the Shippe that they had taken in Azijcka, as alſo the other of Saint Iago, which likewiſe they let driue, following on their courſe with their owne ſhip, and the Pinnace.
                     Being ſeuen or eight myles from the Hauen of Callan de Lyma, they eſpied thrée Shippes, and boording one of them, they tooke thrée men out of her, and ſo helde on their courſe towards Callan de Lyma, where they entred, being about two or thrée houres within night, ſayling in betwéene all the ſhippes that lay there, being ſeuentéene in number, and being among the ſhips, they aſked for the ſhip that had laden the ſiluer, but whē anſwere was made them, that the ſiluer was laid on land, they cut the cables of the ſhips, and the maſts of two of the greateſt ſhips, and ſo left them. At the ſame time there arriued a Shippe from Panama laden with wares and Marchaundiſe of Spaigne, that ankered cloſe by the Engliſh Ship, which was while the Engliſh Captaine ſought in the other Shippes for the ſiluer. As ſoone as the ſhippe of Panama had ankered, there came a Boat from the ſhoare to ſearch it, but becauſe it was in the night, they let it alone till morning, and comming to the Engliſh ſhippe, they aſked what ſhippe it was, wherevpon one of the Spaniſh priſoners (by the Engliſh Captaines commandement) anſwered and ſaid it was the ſhippe of Michiel Angelo, that came from Chile, which they of the boat hearing, ſent a man on boord, who climbing vp, light vpon one of the great Péeces, wherewith hee was afraid, and preſently ſtept backe againe into the boate (becauſe the Shippes that lay there, and that ſayled in thoſe Countries, vſed to carry no great ſhotte) and therewith they were abaſhed, and made from it, which the ſhippe of Panama hearing, that was newely come in, ſhee iudged it to bée a Rouer, and therewith cutting her Cables, ſhée put to Sea, which the Engliſhmen perceiuing, ſhipped certaine men in their Pinnace, and followed her: and being hard by her, they baddde her ſtrike, which they of the ſhippe refuſed to doe, and with a Harquebuſh ſhotte, killed one of the Engliſhmen, wherewith they turned againe into their ſhippe and preſently ſet ſayle, following after the ſhippe, which not long after they ouertooke: which they of the Shippe perceiuing, hoiſed out their Boate, and leaping into it, rowed to Land, leauing the ſhippe with all the goods, which the Engliſhmen preſentlie tooke, and with her ſayled on their courſe.
                     The next day they ſawe a boat with ſayles making towards them, whereby they preſentlie miſtruſted it to bee a Spye, and not long after they perceaued two great ſhippes comming towards them, which made the Engliſh thinke they came to fight with them, wherevpon they let the Shippe of Panama
                        
driue, therein leauing Iohn de Greicke. With the two that they had taken the ſame day, they entred into Callan de Lyma, as I ſaid before, and preſently hoiſed all their ſailes, and ſailed forward, not once ſetting eye againe vpon the aforeſaid ſhippes, for they made towards the ſhippe of Panama, which the Engliſhmen let driue. From thence they ſayled againe along the coaſt, following on their courſe, and hauing ſailed certaine dayes, they met a Frigate that went towards Lyma, laden with wares and Marchandiſes of the Countrey, from whence the Engliſhmen tooke a Lampe and a Fountaine of ſiluer, and aſked the Pilote being a Spaniard, if they met not with a Shippe, that they vnderſtoode ſhould bee laden with ſiluer, but the one Pilote ſaid he met her not, and the other ſaid hee ſawe her about thrée dayes before. This Frigate came not to the ſhippe, but to the Pinnace, wherein the Captaine ſayled, for the Pinnace ranne cloſe by the ſhoare, and the ſhippe kept a myle and a halfe from the Lande, wherewith they let the Frigate goe, following on their courſe.
                     Two dayes after they came to the Hauen called Payta, where they found a Shippe laden with Spaniſh wares, which the Pinnace boorded, and tooke it without any reſiſtance▪ for as ſoone as the Spaniards perceaued the Engliſhmen, they preſently made to Land with their Boat, and two of them leapt into the Sea, none ſtaying in the ſhippe, but the Maiſter, Pilote, and ſome Moores, out of the which ſhippe the Engliſhmen tooke the Pilote, and all the Bread, Hens, and a Hogge, and ſo ſayled forward with the Shippe: but being about two Harquebuſh ſhotte to Seaward, they let it goe againe, not taking any thing out of it, and aſking after the ſhippe which they ſought for, they told them that about two daies before ſhee departed from that place, wherewith they followed on their courſe, and before night they met with a Shippe of Panama, which they preſently boorded, but tooke nothing from her but onely a Moore, and ſo left it, holding on their courſe.
                     The next day being the firſt of February, they met another Shippe that ſayled to Panama, laden with Fiſh and other victuals, & fortie Bharres of ſiluer, and ſome golde, but I knowe not howe much, which they tooke, and ſent the paſſengers (with two Friers that were in her) in a boat to Land. The next day they hanged a man of the Shippe, becauſe hee would not confeſſe two plates of golde that hée had taken, which after they found about him, which done, they let the Shippe driue, following on their courſe.
                     The firſt of March towards noone, they eſpied the ſhippe laden with the ſiluer, béeing about foure myles to Seaward from them, and becauſe the Engliſh Shippe was ſomewhat heauy before, whereby it ſayled not as they would haue it, they tooke a company of Bottigas or Spaniſh Pots for Oyle, and filling them with water, hung them by ropes at the ſterne of the Shippe to make her ſayle the better, and the ſhippe that ſayled towards Panama, made towards the Engliſh Shippe to knowe what ſhe was, thinking it to bee one of the ſhippes that vſed to ſaile along the coaſts, and to tra
                           •
                        ficke in the country, and being hard by her, the Engliſh Captaine bad them ſtrike, but the other refuſing to doe it, with a great Peece hee ſhot her maſt ouer boord, and hauing wounded the maiſter with an arrowe, the ſhippe preſently yéelded, which they tooke, and ſayled with her further into the Sea, all that night and the next day, and night making all the way they could. The third day being out of ſight of lande, they began to ſearch the ſhippes, and to lade the goods out of her into their Shippe, which was a thouſand thrée hundred Bharres or peeces of ſiluer, and foureteene cheſts with Ryals of eight, and with golde, but what quantity it was I knowe not, onely that the paſſengers ſaid that there was great ſtore, and that thrée hundred Bharres of the ſiluer belonged to the King, the reſt belonging to certaine Marchaunts, that done, they let the Shippe with the men ſayle on their courſe, putting the thrée Pilotes in her that they brought with them▪ ſo that as then they had none but their owne men aboord, being the ſixt of March, and from thence they helde their courſe towards the Lande of Nicaraga.
                     
                     The thirtéenth of March, either the day before or after, in the morning they deſcried Land, not being very high, beeing a ſmall Iſland two miles from the Firme

land, and there they found a ſmall Baye, wherein they ankered at fiue fadome déep cloſe by the Lande, and there they ſtayed till the ſecond day. Vpon the which day there paſſed a Frigate cloſe by the Iſland, which with their Pinnace they followed, and taking her, brought her to the Engliſh Shippe, which Frigate was laden with Salſaperilla, or Pocke-root, and Bottigas or Pots with Butter and Honny, and with other things. The Engliſh Captaine went on boord, and caſt the Salſaperilla on the Lande, leauing all the reſt of the wares in the Frigate, and then hee put all his Péeces into the Frigate, that ſo he might lay his ſhippe on ſhore, to new calke and trim her, which continued till the thrée and twenty or foure and twenty of March, which done, and hauing made prouiſion of wood & freſh water, they helde on their courſe along by the coaſt, ſayling Weſtward, taking the ſaid Frigate and her menne with them, and hauing ſayled two daies, they tooke their men out of her, and ſet them in the Pinnace, among the which were two Saylers, that meant to ſayle to Panama, and from thence to China, whereof one they tooke with the Letters and Sea-cardes that hee had about him, among the which were the Letters of the King of Spaine, ſent to the Gouernour of China, as alſo the Sea-cardes wherewith they ſhould make their voyage, and direct themſelues in their courſe.
                     And ſo ſailing on till the ſixt of Aprill, about euening they diſcouered a ſhip that held two miles to ſeaward from the land, and before the next day in the morning, they were hard by her, and ſodainely fell vpon her while her men ſlept, & preſentlie made the mē enter into their ſhip, among the which was one Don Franciſco Caratte, which done, they followed on their courſe with the ſaid ſhip, out of the which they tooke certaine packes and other wares, but I know not what it was. They likewiſe tooke a Moore out of it, and thrée dayes after they both let the Shippe and menne goe whether they would, ſetting therein the two Saylers that ſhould goe for China, which they had taken in the Frigate, kéeping onely one ſaylor to ſhew them where they ſhould find freſh water, to the which end they tooke the empty veſſels with them to fill with water, and ſo kept on their courſe to the hauen of Guatulco, where they put in, being vpon munday the thirtéenth of Aprill, and hauing ankered, they ſtayed there till the ſixe and twenty of Aprill, and being about thrée or foure houres in the night, they ſet ſaile, holding their courſe Weſtward, and an houre or two before they let Nuno da Silua goe, putting him into another ſhippe, that lay in the Hauen of Guatulco. From thence forward the Engliſhmen paſſed on their voyage, to the Iſlands of Malucos, and from thence they paſſed by the Cape De Bona Eſperanza, and ſo to England, as it is well knowne, ſo that this is only the deſcription of the voyage that they made, while the ſaid Pilote Nuna da Silua was with them.
                     Hereafter followeth the Coppy of a Letter written by Sir Francis Drake (beeing in the South Sea of newe Spaigne, in his ſhippe called the golden Hart, with the ſhippe of S. Iohn de Anton, which hee had taken) to his companions in the other ſhippes that were of his company, and by foule weather ſeperated from him, as I ſaied before, The Contents whereof were theſe:
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 Maiſter Wouter, if it pleaſeth Godthat you ſhould chance to méete with this ſhippe of S. Iohn de Anton, I pray you vſe him well, according to my word and promiſe giuen vnto them, and if you want any thing that is in this Shippe of S. Iohn de Anton, I pray you pay them double the value for it, which I wil ſatiſfie again, and command your men not to doe her any hurt: and what compoſition or agréement wée haue made, at my returne into England I will by Gods helpe performe, although I am in doubt that this Letter will neuer come to your hands, notwithſtanding, I am the man I haue promiſed to bee: Beſéeching God, the Sauiour of all the world, to haue vs in his kéeping, to whome onely I giue all honour, praiſe and glory. This I haue written, is not onely to you Maiſter Wouter, but alſo to Maiſter Thomas, Maiſter Charles, Maiſter Caube, and Maiſter Anthonie, with all our other good friendes, whome I commit to the tuition of him that with his bloud redéemed vs, and am in good hope, that wee ſhall bee in no more trouble, but that hee will helpe vs in aduerſitie, deſiring you for the Paſſion of Chriſt, that if you fall into

any danger, that you will not deſpaire of Gods mercy, for hee will defend you and preſerue you from all daunger, and bring vs to our deſired Hauen, to whom bee all honor, glory, and praiſe for euer and euer.Amen.
                                 
                                 
                                    Your ſorrowfull captain, whoſe heart is heauy for you. Francis Drake.
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        An aduertiſement to the Reader.
                        
                           ALthough at the firſt it was my only intent to ſet downe the voyages and courſes of the oriental coaſts, Iſlands, and countries of the Eaſt parts, with ſome other Nauigations, of the places therabouts, with the ſituations thereof, as I haue already declared: notwithſtanding, for that among other my Record, I haue found the Nauigations of all the Hauens, Riuers, and Points of the coaſt of Braſilia, and the voiages of the Portingales vnto the ſame, together with the courſes, ſtretchings, and ſituations of the Antillas or fore Iſlands of new Spaigne, together with all the channels that runne betweene them, and the Hauens, as well of the aforeſaid Iſlands as of the Firme Land of new Spaigne, and likewiſe of the other ſide of the coaſt of Angola or Aethiopia, I thought it not vnconuenient to ſet them downe in this place, although it bee much different, and from the matter taken in hand. Touching the orientall parts, neuertheleſſe, becauſe it is vnknowne to our countrimen, as alſo commonly ſailed by the Portingales and Spaniards, whoſe voyages and trauels I haue herein onely ſet downe, it will not bee out of the matter, but rather very neceſſary to be ioyned therevnto, and as I thinke will bee wel accepted, and eſteemed off, inſomuch, as that at this time, our countrey men doe vſe to Trafficke and trauell into thoſe countries, hoping it will bee an occaſion of further increaſing and augmenting of their trauels, to the honour, praiſe, and glory of the Goſpell of Chriſt, and all Chriſtian Princes, and to the entiching and welfare of the Low countries.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 65. Chapter. The Nauigation from the Point of Cabo Verde to Braſilia, with the right courſe and knowledge of the Land and Hauens of Braſilia, to the Riuer called Rio de la Plata, with the ſituation thereof.
                     
                        SAyling from Cabo Verde (that is, the greene point) to Braſilia, you muſt ſaile ſouth ſoutheaſt, Southeaſt, and Southeaſt & by South, and being vnder fiue or ſixe degrées (or whereſoeuer you bee, you ſhall take your degrées on the Southſide, and leſſen them as much as you can, and you muſt remember, that as ſoone as you haue the generall winde, blowing from the South-eaſt, then you ſhall runne Southweſt, and Weſt Southweſt, and if the winde bee South and Southweſt, you muſt runne South-eaſt, but not too farre, for it helpeth you not, for that the more you kéepe that courſe, the more way you looſe, and you ſhall vſe all the meanes you can, not to runne vnder the coaſt of Guinea nearer then ſixtie or ſeuentye fadome from the Sandes, called Os Baixos de Sant Anna, for the winde will helpe you, in ſuch manner, that you may ſayle towards the Point of Braſilia.
                     
                     And if with this courſe you will ſayle to Pernanbuco, It being from the Moneth of October forward, and that you fall to Loofeward of the Iſland of Fernan de Noronha, being vnder eight & eight degrées, and ½. You muſt runne Weſt towards the Lande, and if you ſée Lande vnder eight degrées, they will bee white downes and then you are on the North-ſide, from whence you ſhall put to the South, that is, from October forward: for as then the Northeaſt and eaſt Northeaſt winds doe blowe, and if you bee vnder the degrées aforeſaid, you ſhall ſee the ſaid downes, and when you ſee the end of them on the South-ſide, and from thence not ſéeing any more, then you are by Capig
                              •
                           aramirini, and from thence to Pernanbuco are fiue or ſixe myles.
                     And ſo if you bee vnder eight degrées and a halfe, then you ſhall ſée a flat Lande, till you bee at tenne and twelue fadome déepe, and the Lande on the Sea ſide will bee euen bare, which is called Capiragua, when you are Eaſt and Weſt with this Lande, being the Countrey whereof I ſpeake, at twelue fadome déepe, it beeing in the Moneths of October, or after Februarye, then you néede not

feare any thing, but take héed you put not ſouthwards, for you muſt take héede of the Cape of S. Auguſtine, and Northward you ſhal ſée another point called A Punta d Olynda, where the Towne of Olynda lieth, and the coaſt of the ſame North Point, is ſailed North and South.
                     If you be eaſt and Weſt with the cape S. Auguſtine, then you ſhall ſée a Hill inward to the land, which ſheweth like the backe of a Cammell, on the Southſide hauing thrée Houels along by the Sea ſide, and the coaſt will ſtretch North-eaſt and Southweſt.
                     From this point of S. Auguſtine, to the towne of Olynda Northward are twelue miles. This point lyeth vnder 8 degrées and ½. and Olynda lyeth vnder 8. degrées and ⅓. & Pernanbuco vnder eight degrées, this voyage is thus to bee ſayled, when you ſet ſayle from Lisbon in the Moneths of October and Nouember.
                     But when you ſaile from Lisbon in February or March, then you ſhall looke for land vnder nine degrées: for from ye month of March forward, then the Southeaſt and ſouth Southeaſt winds do blow, and if you chance to bee by the land, vnder the height aforeſaid, you néede not feare any thing, but ſhall hold your courſe at ſeuentéene and eightéene fadome, for it is faire and cléere, and you haue nothing daungerous but the riffes lying cloſe by the land, whereon you ſée the water breake: & running Northward, if you finde certaine downes along by the ſea ſide, then feare not to run northward, for therby you ſhal ſée the point of S. Auguſtine, This point lieth on the ſea ſide, being euen ſtéepe land, ſhewing like the muzzell of a Whale, in the toppe hauing a round Hill, compaſſed with Trées: and being at the depth aforeſaid cloſe by the Land you ſhall ſée a ſmall Iſland called Ilha de S. Alexus, From this Iſland to Cape S. Auguſtine, are fiue or ſixe miles, and lyeth vnder 8 degrées & ¾.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 57. chapter. The courſe and Nauigation to the Hauen, called A Bahia de todos os Santos, or of all Saints, in the coaſt of Braſilia.
                     
                     
                        IF you deſire to ſayle to the Bahia de todos os Santos, that is, the bay of all Saints, then obſerue the courſe aforeſaied, taking the times of the yeare: From the Month of March forward, and from October as I ſaid before.
                     This Bay of all Saints, lyeth vnder thirteene degrées, and being from October forward, then you ſhall looke for Land at 12 and 12 degrees and ½. and being in ſight thereof, (which will bee white ſandy ſtrands, which ſhew like linnen that lieth too white) then you ſhall hold your courſe Southward along by the coaſt, vntill you be at the end of the ſaid ſtrands, where you ſhall ſée an Iſland (lying on the Northſide within the mouth of the Bay or Hauen) called Tapoon, From thence you runne along the coaſt Weſt, and Weſt and South.
                     And comming to this Bay, from the Month of March forward, then you muſt not paſſe aboue 13 degrées and 1/
                              •
                           . Southward, and when you are in ſight of Land, if it be not the aforeſaid white ſtrand, then you ſhall vſe all the means you can to run Northward, and when you ſée the ſandye ſtrand at 12 degrées and ½. Then you ſhall ſée a hill ſtanding along by the ſeaſide, and if you chance to be ſo néere the lande, that you can find no meanes to get off from it, then you ſhall know the Land well, for on the ſea ſide you ſhall ſée a round houel called O Morro de ſan Paulo, from the which houell to the bay are twelue myles: along by this houell on the northweſt ſide, there is a very great riuer called Tinhare, which is very good to put into if néed be, and is ſix and ſeuen fadome déep, and when you are at the aforeſaid Point vnder 13 degrées & ½. then put not to the Lande, for it hath a créeke that is very dangerous.
                     And if you deſire to ſaile from the Bay of all Saints, to Pernanbuco or to Portingale, then hold your courſe Eaſtward, and if the wind ſerue you, hold Eaſt, and Eaſt and by North, for the ſpace of 30 or 40. miles into the ſea, and look not for the land of Pernanbuco from ten to nine degrées, for if you be vnder 11 degrées, you wil fall into the Créeke called A Enſeada de vaza Bar
                              •
                           ys (that is, the Créeke of emptying of veſſels) and likewiſe when you come from Portingall, hauing ſight of land at eleuen degrées, then put not towards it to ſhorten your way, but rather holde your courſe Southward from it.
                     From this Bay of all Saints to Pernanbuco is a hundred miles, and you runne along the coaſt northeaſt and ſouthweſt. From thence to the Riuer Rio dos Ilhas,
                        
or the riuer of Iſlands, the coaſt runneth Southweſt and Northeaſt, and Southweſt and by Weſt, and Northeaſt and by Eaſt.
                  
                  
                     The 58. Chapter. The courſe or Nauigation to the riuer Rio dos Ilhas, that is, the riuer of the Iſlands, in the coaſt of Braſilia.
                     
                     
                        IF you deſire to ſaile to the riuer of the Iſlands (you muſt vnderſtand that the Iſlands lie vnder 14. degrées and ¾.) ſéeking to finde them, from the moneth of March forward, then you ſhall run to the height of 15. degrées and ½. and although you be vnder 15. degrées and 2/
                              •
                           . you néede not feare: and ſéeing the land vnder theſe degrées, then you ſhall ſee certaine high hilles, called As Serras dos Aymores, when you ſée thoſe hilles, then you ſhall come along the coaſt Northwarde, not fearing any thing, for from thence Northward there are no ſhallows: As ſoone as you ſée the Ilands (for there are no other) then on the ſame coaſt you ſhall ſée a roūd hill ſtanding along by the Sea ſide, on the North ſide whereof you put into the Riuer, and if you chance to be there at ſuch time as you can not put in, then hold your courſe to Seaward from the Iſlands, kéeping from them, and there by the ſaid Iſlandes you may anker: and if you be in that country when the Northeaſt winds doe blow, then looke for land vnder 14. degrées, and if you ſee a flat land, then it is the Iſland called Camamu
                              •
                           , by the which you ſhall run ſouthward, and being at the end of the flatte land, then you ſhall ſée a high land along by the ſea ſide like the other aforeſaid, all along by the ſea ſide.
                     In the place where this lande beginneth to ſhew high, there lieth a ſmall riuer called Rio das Contas, that is, the riuer of Beads, but it is not to be entered, and hath a white harde ſtone for a marke. From thence to the Iſlands are 9. miles Southward, and comming where the aforeſaid high land endeth, then you ſhall finde a great Créeke, and being Weſt Southweſt, you ſhall ſee another high land, at the foot whereof (which is almoſt in the middle way to the créeke) you ſhall ſee certaine white houſes, which are the Ingenies or Sugar houſes where the Sugar is prepared: and being there, you ſhal preſently ſee the Iſlands.
                  
                  
                     The 59. chapter. How to ſaile to the Hauen of Porto Seguro, that is, the ſure Hauen, lying in the coaſt of Braſilia.
                     
                     IF you deſire to ſaile to the Hauen of Porto Seguro, in the time of the Southeaſt windes (which is in March and ſo forward) you ſhall not put higher then to 16. degrées & ½. for there it hath a Reddiſh ſand called Os Baixos dos Abrolhos, which are very dangerous and run very far into the ſea, and when you ſaile Eaſt & Weſt you muſt not be negligent to throw your Lead out often times, & being by the land & that you ſée a long high hill like a ſharpe point, which is called Monte Paſqual, frō thence you ſhall run Northward, & weſt, the ſame hill is weſtward from you, then you muſt hold towards the land, yet with good regard and foreſight. And when you ſée the land, and that you perceiue a round Houell, then Southward from the ſaide Houell you ſhall ſee a Hill with a great ſtrand, on the North ſide whereof lyeth the Hauen of Porto Seguro, and running along by the coaſt, aboue in the lande you find the towne of Porto Seguro. This height is a white ſtonie rocke, and on the North ſide of this ſtonie rocke there is a great vally: when you are Eaſt and weſt with this ſtonie rocke, then Northward you ſhall ſée the water breake, which is vpon a ſand reaching two miles into the Sea, on the South ſide whereof you are right ouer againſt the towne of Porto Seguro.
                     
                     If you begin this voyage when the winds are northeaſt & come to 15. degrees and ⅔. not ſeeing any hills, then leaue not running along the coaſt, & when you are vnder 15. degrées, the firſt high land you ſhall ſée, will be with white ſandy ſtrands along the ſea coaſt, & if vnder that height you ſee a riuer, then make not towardes the land, for there it hath certaine dangerous ſhallowes called Os Baixos de Sant Antonio, from thence Southward lyeth Porto Seguro, and paſſing along the coaſt and ſéeing the water breake vpon the other ſand lying two miles further inward to ſea, then you ſhall paſſe by it, kéeping to ſeaward from it, and when you are at the end thereof, then the towne will be Weſtward from you, you may well put to it, alwaies hauing a care how you goe and anker vnder the height aforeſaid.
                     
                        Departing from the Iſlands to Porto Seguro, then you muſt run 10. or 12. miles to Seaward from them to ſhun the ſands, lying by the riuer called Rio Grande, that is, the great Riuer, and when you are paſt Rio Grande, then make towards the land againe to know it, as aforeſaid.
                  
                  
                     The 60. Chapter. How to ſaile to the Hauen called Bahia d
                              •
                            Eſpirito Santo, that is, the Bay of the Holy Ghoſt, lying in the coaſt of Braſilia.
                     
                     
                        SAiling to the hauen of Spirito Santo (béeing paſt the Sandes called Os Baixos dos Abrolhos) vnder 19. degrées and ½. then you ſhall ſée lande at 20. degrées, for in this coaſt you haue no monſons, or courſes of certaine winds.
                     If you chance to ſée land at 19. degrées and ½. and that it bée on the Northweſt ſide from you being flat land, then you are on the North ſide of the Hauen of Spirito Santo, which is the land lying aboue Criquare, and aboue ye riuer called Rio Dolce, that is, the riuer of Swéet or freſh water, you ſhall holde your courſe along by the land, vntill the land beginneth to riſe, hauing ſome Hilles, but truſt not to the firſt that you ſhall ſée, but you ſhall ſée a high round hill which lyeth along by the ſea ſide, and is called La Sierra de Meſtre Aluaro.
                     
                     And when you come to this Hill, on the North ſide you ſhall ſée a riuer called Rio dos Reis Magos, that is, the riuer of the thrée Kings of Cullen, and on the South ſide, then the mouth of the Baye will preſently open. At the end of the ſaid hill on the South ſide, there is a point of ſtonie Cliffes called A punto do Tubaron, that is, the point of the Hedge: And on the South ſide of the Baye there are two or thrée high hilles, being there, you ſhall put right ouer to the Bay, and ſo run Weſtward.
                     If you ſhould be in the ſame courſe vnder twentie degrées, then you ſhall ſée many hilles, among the which ſtandeth a high ſharpe point, called Serra de Guarapari, that is, the hill of Guarapari: it hath likewiſe another on the North ſide called A Serra de Pero Can, that is, the Hill of Peterwood: theſe hils ſtand on the South ſide of Spirito Santo. From theſe Hilles ſouthwarde you ſhall ſee a hill ſtanding alone, called Guape, & when you ſée it, then you ſhall likewiſe ſée thrée ſmall Iſlandes lying togither, on the ſouth ſide whereof lyeth another ſmall, round, & flat Iſland, and the land lying right againſt this roūd flat Iſland hath a great Baye, where (if néed be) you may put in and anker: if you deſire to goe into it, then you ſhall runne Eaſt and weſt with the hill, and ſo runne in, and then the round Iſland will bée on the North ſide. This Iſland is called Ilha de Repouſo, that is, the Iſland of reſt, it lyeth very cloſe by the land, and betwéene it and the land you may well anker.
                     From theſe thrée Iſlands aforeſaid to the bay of Spirito Santo are 12. miles, and holding your courſe Northward to Spirito Santo, you ſhall ſée another Iſland lying alone, which you paſſe, running to Seaward by it, and being by it, you ſhall preſently ſée the mouth or Hauen of Spirito Santo: this bay or hauen lyeth vnder 20. degrées.
                  
                  
                     The 61. Chapter. To ſaile from the Bay or Hauen of Spirito Santo, to the Bay of S. Vincent.
                     
                     SAyling from Spirito Santo to ye Bay S. Vincent, you muſt runne along the coaſt about 7. or 8. miles from it, to the point called Cabo Frio, that is, the cold point, vntill you come to it: in the way you haue a great bay called A Bayho de Saluador, the Baye of our Sauiour, which is diſtant from Cabo Frio 12. miles.
                     Before you come to Cabo Frio, there are two Iſlands, from the which you run to ſeaward, yet if néed be, or if you deſire it, you may paſſe betwéene them and the land. Cabo Frio hath an Iſland right ouer againſt it, which hath a point where you may anker if néede be on the Weſt ſide, where it is faire and cléere.
                     This Cabo Frio lieth vnder 23. degrées, from thence to the riuer called Rio de Ianero, that is, the riuer of Ianuarie are 18. miles: this riuer of Ianero hath thrée or foure Iſlandes in the mouth thereof: If you will enter into this riuer, you may well goe in, taking your way betwéene two of the Iſlandes that lie in the mouth thereof: on the South ſide of this riuer there is a Hill that ſheweth like a man with a Friars Coule or Cape vpon his head.
                     When you are vnder the height of this riuer, you ſhall to Landward ſee certaine high Hilles, which ſhewe like Organs,

which is a good marke to knowe that you are by the riuer, and when you begin to goe néere the lande, you ſhall ſee a round, high, and bare Iſland on the South ſide: the mouth of this riuer lieth vnder 23. degrées and ½. From this riuer to the Rode or open Hauen by the Portingales called Angra, are fiftéene miles, and there are two riuers in the way, but being in that country, put not to the land, vnleſſe you be compelled thereunto.
                     From the mouth of this riuer Weſt Southweſt, and Southweſt & by Weſt, you ſhall ſée a great Iſland called A Ilha de Sant Sebaſtian, which on the Southweſt ſide hath another ſmall high Iſland called A Ilha dos Alcatraſes, that is, the Iſlande of Seamewes: before you come at it, you muſt holde your courſe Weſtward, to ſhunne certaine Sands that lie by it, whereby you ſhall come to the mouth of the bay of Saint Vincent, where you ſhall ſee an Iſland called Ilha da Muda, that is, the Iſland of the Dumbe woman: and to put into the Bay of S. Vincent, you ſhall leaue the Iſlandes on the Eaſt ſide. The Bay of Saint Vincent lyeth vnder 24. degrées, and if you be to leeward from it, then you ſhall ſée many Iſlands, whereof ſome ſtretcheth outward, which are the beſt markes for this Hauen, and being there, you are Northweſt and Southeaſt with the mouth of the Bay.
                  
                  
                     The 62. Chapter. How to ſaile from Cabo Frio, or the cold point, to the riuer of Rio de Plata, or the riuer of ſiluer, with all the courſe thereof.
                     FRom Cabo Frio to the riuer of Ianero or Ianuarie, are eightéene miles, and you ſaile Eaſt and Weſt, and lyeth vnder 23. degrées, and hath theſe markes: Firſt, inward to the land it hath certaine high Hilles called Organs, but at this time moſt of them are falne down: and on the Weſt Southweſt ſide towards the Sea ſide, it hath the forme of the Maſſ of a ſhippe, and in the mouth of the riuer lieth foure Iſlands, whereof one is high and round which is a good marke, as alſo the Sugar loafe, being a houell that is called ſo, lying in the Hauen, although you can not ſée it when you are at ſea: you may ſaile along this coaſt without daunger, and you need feare nothing but that you ſée before your eyes. From thence to Saint Vincent the coaſt reacheth Eaſt Northeaſt, and Weſt Southweſt, and is in length two and fortie miles: and all that way there is neither ſhallowes nor Sandes, but there you finde good Hauens for all winds.
                     Twelue miles from the riuer lieth an Iſland called Ilha grande, or the great Iſland, which hath verie good Hauens as well on the Southweſt as the Eaſt ſides, with very good freſh water, and great fiſhing, it is a high lande with many trees, and inwarde to the lande it is verie high and ſharpe pointed: if you deſire to put in there, you néed not feare to do it, for there is no danger.
                     From this great Iſland to the Iſland of S. Sebaſtian are eighteene miles, and to the Iſland A Ilha dos Porcos, that is, the Iſland of Hogges, are fourtéene miles: the Iſles of Hogges hath a very good Hauen, but it is too farre inward. Frō thence to the Iſland of Saint Sebaſtian are foure miles, which is a great high Iſland, full of trees, it hath a verie good entrie, as well on the one ſide as on the other, it lyeth Northeaſt and Southweſt. From thence to the lande about halfe a mile diſtant lyeth the Rode: Southweſtwarde there lyeth another long Iſland called A Ilha dos Alcatraſes, or the Iſland of Sea-mewes. Cloſe by this Iſland there lyeth three Cliffes, on the South ſide whereof lyeth an Iſland, which is a verie good marke, for the land is ſometimes couered with miſte and thicke weather, whereby you can not knowe it, but when you ſee this Iſland, then you may knowe where you are.
                     From this Iſland to S. Vincents are twelue miles, which is a pleaſant way, and in that countrey there are three ſmall Iſlands called As Ilhas de Boa Sicanga. From theſe Iſlandes to the Hauen called A Berra de Birtioga are ſixe miles, which is a verie good & a deepe Hauen. Between the Iſlandes aforeſaid & this Hauen lieth another roūd Iſland called Monte de Trigo, that is, the hill or heape of wheate, which is a verie good marke for ſuch as deſire to put into the Hauen of Bertioga.
                     
                     From this Hauen to the Hauen called A Berra d'Eſteuao da Coſta, that is, the hauen of Steuen da Coſta, are fiue miles: this is a good Hauen for great ſhippes, it hath a very good Bay for ſhippes to lie in:

and if you will not put into it, outwarde cloſe by the land you haue an Iſland called A Ilha da Moela, that is, the Iſland of Chéeſe, where you may anker.
                     From this Hauen Southweſtward, lieth an Iſland called A Ilha Queimada, that is, the burnt Iſland, which is a flat Iſland all ſtonie, but along by it, it is faire ground, like South ſoutheaſtward. From the Hauen, lyeth a Cliffe, which of many men is not knowne: it lyeth aboue the water, and is in the middle way betwéen the Iſland Dos Alcatraſes and Ilha Queimada: From thence to the Iſland called Canaueas, that is, the Iſland of Réedes, are thrée miles, & you run North Northeaſt, and South Southweſt along by the coaſt. Canaueia is an Iſland that hath a verie good Hauen and freſh water, and lieth vnder 23. degrées and ½. on the ſouth ſide it hath two Rockie Iſlands, whereof the one is ſomewhat long and round, and right ouer againſt it lyeth the riuer called Rio de Canauea, where you may put in with ſmall ſhips.
                     From Canauea to the Iſland called A Ilha de Santa Caterina, are 48. miles, and you run along the coaſt North & South: This is a long Iſland full of trées, it lieth by the coaſt which reacheth North and South. On the North ſide at the entry of the Hauen it hath two Iſlands, and on the South ſide another Iſland called A Galle, that is, the Iſland of the Gally: on the North ſide thereof you can not enter but onely with ſmall Barkes and ſhips: but on the South ſide it hath a very good entrie for great ſhips, it hath much freſh water, and great ſtore of fiſh and wilde Deere. This Iſland lyeth vnder 28. degrees and ½.
                     
                     From thence to the Hauen called O Porto de Don Rodrygo are fiue myles, and fiue miles further forward lyeth the Hauen called dos Patos, that is, the Hauen of Géeſe, by ſome called La Laguna, that is, the Lake: This Hauen ſerueth for Barkes and ſmall ſhips that traffique in thoſe countries.
                     From thence to the riuer of Rio de Plata, there is not one hauen where you may put in, the coaſt reaching North Northeaſt and South Southweaſt. Sayling from the aforeſaid Iſland of S. Caterina to Rio de Plata, you muſt holde your courſe ſouthward to the height of 34. degrees & ⅔. Then you muſt put to the land, & when you ſée it, which at the firſt ſheweth like an Iſland called los Caſtillos, then you ſhall run along the coaſt, which will lie Southweſtward, Southweſt and by Weſt, and weſt ſouthweſt from you, and make not your account to ſée the Cape de Sancta Maria, for the land there is ſo flat, that there you can not diſcerne any ſigne or token of a point, but there you ſhall ſée certaine riffes, but you néed not feare any thing more then that you ſée before your eies: and if you chance not to ſée any land running towardes it, then caſt out your Lead, and there you ſhall find 10.14. and 18. fadome déepe, therfore feare not for it is all one kind of ground, and you are in a good way. Being there as aforeſaid, then run as long as you can well diſcerne the land, & then you ſhall ſée an Iſland called A Ilha dos Lobos, that is, the Iſland of Wolues, for there you ſée many wolues: it is a flat Iſland all full of ſtones, on the ſouth ſide it hath an Iſland and on the eaſt a Riffe, but you néede not feare any other then that you ſée before your eies. This Iſland is diſtant from the Firme land about two miles and ½. towards the northweſt, & from this Iſland of Wolues there lieth a ſmall flat Iſland, with a low wood cloſe by the land, which hath a good hauen to anker in, if you haue any tempeſt out of the Southweſt. If you paſſe along by this Iſland on the Eaſt Southeaſt ſide, then goe néere the point or hooke of the firme lande, which is a lowe ſtony point, and betwéene this point and the Iſland lyeth a ſand which you ſhall preſently ſée by the water that breaketh vpon it, and if you enter on the Northeaſt ſide you néede not feare any thing: and to anker, kéepe cloſe by the Iſland, for there you haue freſh water, and great ſtore of fiſh vpon the ground.
                     Béeing there, you muſt bée carefull, for there beginneth the firſt high Lande, and from it about eight or ten myles further, lyeth a ſand that is verie dangerous, and is about foure miles from the Firme Lande, being two myles in length: you muſt runne betwéene it and the Firme lande, and when you ſayle from the high land aforeſaide, for the ſpace of a mile and a halfe or two myles, you muſt kéepe harde by the ſhoare, becauſe of the ſande aforeſaide, and from thence with your Leade in your hande, with good watch and foreſight, and if it bee not ſeaſonable

weather to ſaile by night, then your beſt way were to anker and to ſtay till it bee day, the better to make your voiage.
                     And when you thinke you are paſt this ſand, then you ſhal ſée a hill called O monte de Santo Sered
                              •
                           o, which is a rounde high hill, the like whereof is not in thoſe countries to bee founde: betwéene the which hill and the ſandes aforeſaid, lyeth an Iſland called A Ilha das Flores, that is, the Iſland of Flowers, which you may paſſe about without danger.
                     And when you come into the ſalt or freſh water, which floweth fiue and twentie miles beneath the riuer called Rio de Buenos Aires, that is, the Riuer of good aire, where the water is verie freſh, then hold your courſe Weſt, and then you ſhal be eight or ten miles beneath the Riuer of good aire, which is the beſt courſe you can holde, but I aduiſe you ſtill to haue your Lead in hand, and when you are at thrée or foure fadome water, then ſaile no further if it bée by night, but in the day time you may ſée whither you ſaile, which muſt be in ſight of land, and ſo neere, that you may eaſily diſcerne the trées, holding two miles from the land, for you can not paſſe by the Riuer of good aire without ſéeing the houſes that ſtand vpon the ſame. The moſt part of the land of the Riuer of good aire, is a thicke land like a downe, about thrée miles along by the ſea ſide, as ſoone as you ſée this lande, then you muſt make right towards the houſes, yet ſomwhat more towards the ſouth ſide, where there is a place where the ſhippes anker: but if you deſire to runne on the North ſide, then you ſhall take your courſe from the Iſland las Flores, or from Santa Horodio about a mile and a halfe from the land at three and ½. or foure fadome, to the Iſlands of Saint Gabriel, which are thrée ſmal Iſlands, but they haue no good Rode: and if you chance to anker there, goe not a ſhore but verie warily, becauſe the inhabitants haue warres with the Spaniards and Portingales all along the riuer, but the beſt courſe is on the South ſide, from the freſh water inwards.
                  
                  
                     The 63. Chapter. How to ſaile from the Iſland La Gomera, one of the Iſlands of Canaria, to the Antillas or ſore Iſlandes of the Spaniſh Indies, and from thence to the coaſt of the Firme land to Cartagena and Nombre de Dios, as alſo the courſe from thence to the Hauana and the channell thereof, and ſo to the Flemi
                              •
                           h Iſlands, and from thence to Spai
                              •
                           ne, with the ſcituation of the places.
                     
                        SAyling from the Iſland La Gomera to the Iſland called La Deſſeada, that is, the Deſired Iſland, being one of the Iſlandes of the Spaniſh Indies, then you muſt holde your courſe South for the ſpace of a mealetide, ſo to get out of the calme: from thence you muſt runne Weſt Southweſt till you be vnder 20. or 22. degrées, and beeing there you muſt runne Weſt, and Weſt and by South, till you come vnder fifteene degrées and 1/
                              •
                           . which is the height of the Iſland La Deſſeada: If (when you are there) you haue a Weſt winde, then run Southweſt as farre as you thinke good, thereby to get againe vnder fifteene degrées and ½. running on the wether ſide Weſt Northweſt, to bring all to one point whereby you ſhall find helpe, from North and South, Eaſt and Weſt, becauſe you are cloſe by the lande, holding your courſe Weſt and weſt and by north, becauſe the compaſſe windeth a ſtrike into the Northweſt, with the which courſe you ſhall ſee the Iſland la Deſſeada. This Iſland lieth Eaſt and Weſt, and ſheweth like a Gallie with her tilt vp: on the eaſt ſide it is a low land, in forme like a bore-ſprit of a ſhippe or galley: from the Weſt ſide it is high land, ſhewing like the ſterne of a gally, and on the South ſide it ſheweth like halfe an Iſland, the hinder part thereof being like a horſe ſhoe.
                     The Iſland called Ma
                              •
                           galante is a low and flat land, and reacheth Eaſt & Weſt, being full of trées, on the Eaſt ſide beeing higheſt, and on the South ſide hauing certaine white downes, & on the Weſt ſide about halfe a mile from the Iſland it hath a blacke ſhining cliffe. This Iſland lyeth full vnder fifteene degrees.
                     The Iſland la Dominica is a great Iſland and reacheth Northweſt and ſoutheaſt, when you ſée it firſt (beeing on the outſide therof) it ſheweth like 2. Iſlands, by reaſon of a great opening it hath in the middle, but when you are cloſe by it, then you perceiue it to be all one Iſland, it is full of hils, on the Southeaſt ſide a lowe land, hauing a ſmall or thin point of land

with a houell vpon it, on the North-weſt ſide it is thicke high Land, hauing a Hill that ſeemeth to bee ſeperated, and to ſtand alone by it ſelfe, although it is not alone. Vpon this hil there is a rock which ſheweth like a clock houſe, & without the aforeſaid thicke high Land, there is a Rocke or cliffe which runneth off frō ye thick point. This Iſland lyeth vnder 15. degrées & ½.
                     
                     The Iſlands called Los Santos, are four Iſlands which are not very high, lying in Triangle. Betweene theſe Iſlands and the Iſland La Dominica, there runneth a good channell to paſſe through.
                     Sayling from the Iſland La Dominica to the Point of Coquibocoa, lying from the Firme Lande, you ſhall holde your courſe Weſt, and Weſt and by South, vntill you bee by the point, and if you ſée it not, then runne ſouthweſtward towards it, or Southward, vntill you ſée it. This Point of Coquibocoa is a low Land, running into Seaward, and within the lande it hath a rowe of Hilles, which are called the Oile Hils, which ſtretch along by Veuanſuela, where they end, which vpon the coaſt of the Firme land. From this Point you runne along the coaſt to the Point called Cabo de Vela, and betwéene theſe two Points there are two hauens, wherof one is called Bahya Honda, (that is, the deepe Bay. This lieth on the Eaſt ſide, and on both ſides where the Sea beateth, it hath downes: The other Hauen lying on the Weſt ſide, within it hath a high Land or Hill, which reacheth North and South. In both theſe Hauens you may enter with Ships of two hundred tunnes. All this coaſt to Cabo de la Vela is cleare and ſafe. The point Cabo de la Vela, is a high land like a ſuger loafe, and about half a mile from it, there is a cliffe, which ſheweth like a ſhip vnder ſaile, and therefore this Point is called Cabo de la Vela, that is, the point of the ſaile. This Cliffe lieth Northeaſt and Southweſt, with ye Point aforeſaid it is ſaid you may well paſſe betwéene it and the lande, and if you depart from the ſaied Point, to ſaile to the Cliffe and Point called Cabo de la aguia, (that is, the Point of the Néedle) then you ſhall runne Weſt South-weſt, by the which courſe you ſhall ſee it. They are foure Cliffes together, which ſhewe in forme like a Horſe ſhooe, and the Lande that is right againſt it, is a high Land. Beeing inward to the Lande ſome what higher, which is called Las Sierras Neuadas, that is, the Snowe Hils, when theſe hils are Southward from you, then you are right againſt the foure cliffes.
                     And comming to the beginning of the foure Cliffes, hauing paſt the Riuer De Palomina lying by the laſt Cliffe, then you ſhall ſee the Cabo de La aguia. This Cape is a ſtill Lande, deſcending downeward to the Sea ſide, but not very high, on the toppe hauing a Dale, which ſheweth like a ſaddle. It hath likewiſe on the out ſide (cloſe by it) thrée blacke ſhining Cliffes, which the water dooth almoſt flowe ouer: they lye with the Cape aforeſaid North and South. The ſaied Cape is bare, & ſheweth blackiſh and ſhining.
                     All this coaſt reacheth almoſt Eaſt and Weſt. From Cabo de Sancta Marta forward, you muſt runne along by the coaſt, alwaies looking to your courſe, becauſe of the Billowes and ſtreames that come from the Lande, which oftentimes fal vpon you. When you diſcouer the land of Charthagena, you ſhall ſée two Cliffes, which lye by the Hauen of Charthagena, you muſt runne along by the firſt Cliffe, betwéene it and the Lande, alwaies with your Lead in hand, and you muſt not goe néerer then ten fadome to the Land, there you ſhall find white ſandy ground, and being at fiftéene or ſixtéene fadome muddye ground, then kéepe aloofe to the Southeaſt and South, and ſo runne in, for you ſhall ſée the hole open before you.
                     Sayling from Carthagena to Nombre de Dios, (that is, the name of God) with the winds called Briſas (which are windes blowing from the Eaſt and North parts, generally called Briſas) then you muſt hold your courſe Weſt, and ſomewhat Weſt and by South, till you be vnder 9. degrées and ½. vnder the which heigth lyeth the point called Cantina, which are ſeuen Iſlands, whereof fiue ſtretch eaſt and weſt, the other two Northeaſt and Southweſt.
                     Being ſomewhat paſt theſe Iſlandes, you ſhall ſée a low point of Land reaching into the Sea, called A Punta de Lambras, which lyeth on the Weſt ſide, and Weſtward from it, it hath a Hill which is ſomewhat higher then the Point, which you may well diſcerne when you make to Sea-warde from it, and that the Point lyeth South-weſt-warde from you, the ſaid Hill hauing on the Southeaſt ſide certaine lowe Lande, and

ſomewhat more Weſtward, the Lande beginneth to bee higher, which endeth at the Riuer of Franciſco. At the mouth of this Riuer to Sea-ward from it, lyeth a ſtony cliffe, and from this Riuer to Nombre de Dios, it is all ouer a flat and red ſhining Lande, to the houell called Niquea, which is about a myle from Nombre de Dios, you ſhall likewiſe ſée the edifices or buildings of Capira, and if a man ſhould aſk you (when thoſe buildings lye Northeaſt from you) where you are, then you may anſwere him, that you are vpon the coaſt of the lande North-eaſt and Southweſt beneath Nombre de Dios.
                     
                     Sayling from Nombre de Dios to Carthagena, you ſhall holde your courſe Eaſt Northeaſt to the point, from thence you muſt runne Eaſt, whereby you ſhall diſcouer the Iſlands of Saint Barnard, which are low and yet Hill Iſlandes, with very faire ground along by them, and if you ſhould be in a Frigate, then you may paſſe betweene them and the land. Fiue or ſixe miles further you ſhall ſee the Iſlands called Braua which are foure ſmall Iſlands, whereof the furtheſt outward is the greateſt, they are all lowe, and bare Lande, hauing by them faire and cleare ground, and with a Frigate you may paſſe inward, but with a ſhippe you muſt not goe neerer then ſixe fadome. From thence eaſt Southeaſtward, you ſhall ſée the Gally of Carthagena, with the markes aforeſaied, & in the Eaſt and Eaſt Northeaſt bough, you ſhall ſee the Land Cariſcos, which is a high and hill land. From thence you muſt runne along by the coaſt, vntill you begin to ſée the Hauen, then you muſt put in, alwaies ſhunning the ſands of Carys, running along by the eaſt point, being there, if night falleth vpon you, then you may anker betweene Carys and Baru, in the ſureſt place you can finde, to defend you from the windes called Briſas, by the high Lande of Carys, and if you put out of the Hauen of Nombre de Dios, you ſhall lauere till you ſée the buildings that are beyond it, and ſayling into the Hauen, you ſhall doe as wind ſerueth.
                     Sayling from Carthagena to the Iſland of Hauana, you ſhall hold your courſe North-weſt, till you come to thirtéene degrées and 1/
                              •
                           . and when you are vnder thirteene degrées, then you ſhall let your ſelfe driue South South-eaſt and South, as the manner is, vntill you bee paſt the heigth, or bee out thereof, or in the depth, and when you are vpon the ground of the Serrana, then you ſhall ſleepe towardes it as much as you can, and if it bee poſſible you ſhall hold Northward, for ſo you ſhall the ſooner be there. From the point of Cabo de Camaron to Cabo de Roncador, with the Sea ſtrand that ſtretcheth from the one to the other, as alſo from Serrana and Serranilla, (being Iſlands and Cliffes ſo called) on the weſt ſide of all theſe ſands is great ſande, with Fiſh ſ
                           •
                        ales vpon the ground, and the leaſt depth you find there, is fiftéene fadome wa
                           •
                        r, being all faire and in this depth you ſhall runne till you bee ouer it, and being ouer, you ſhall preſently begin to multiply or riſe till you bee at fiftie fadome deep and ſomewhat more. Serrana lieth vnder foureteen degrees and ½. and Serranilla vnder ſixteene degrees. If you ſée Serranilla on the Weſt ſide, on that ſide it is a lowe ſandye Iſland, ſtretching Northweſt and Southeaſt. Sayling from Serranilla or Cabo de Roncador to ye point of S. Anton lying in the Iſland Cuba, yu
                           •
                         ſhall holde your courſe Northweſt, and Northweſt and by north, wherewith you ſhall diſcouer the Cape aforeſaied, or the Cape de coryentes, (that is, the Point of the ſtreames) which is a clouen Point towards the ſea ſide, being lowe Land, on it hauing ſome Palme Trees. From thence to Cabo de S. A
                              •
                           n, the Land beginneth to bée lower, & the coaſt ſtretcheth Northweſt and ſouth-eaſt. The cape de S. Anton is a low ſandy Point vpon it hauing two or three houels, and lieth vnder 22. degrees. If in this courſe you chaunce to ſee the Iſland called Cayman Grande, that is, the great Cayman. You muſt vnderſtand that it lieth vnder nineteene degrees, and is low land ful of Trees, ſtretching eaſt and weſt, on the ſouth-ſide hauing ſome white ſandy ſtrands. Sailing from the Point of S. Anton, with the windes called Vendaval, (which are Weſt and South windes, generally called Vendaua
                              •
                           es, as the Eaſt and North windes are called B
                              •
                           ſas) to the Hauana, then you muſt runne Northeaſt to ſhunne the droughtes that runne out from this Point, which reach to the beginning of the hils called Los Organos, (that is, the Organs) and when you are paſt the ſands, you ſhall hold your courſe along by the coaſt, for there you neede feare nothing more then that you ſee before you.
                     
                        The Organs are certaine high Trées, which make manye openings and rents, whereof thoſe on the South-ſide are called the point of Guanico, theſe Organs or hils reach to the Riuer called Rio de Por
                           
                              •
                           
                         that is, the riuer of hogs from thence begin the Hils called the Cabinas, which are high and doubled, on the higheſt of thē hauing a playne or flat Lande, there you haue a Hauen called El Puerto de Cabanas, Eaſtward from this point to the field of Mariam, it is low flat land ful of Trees, where there is another Hauen: From thence to Hauana it is all lowe land without any riſings, except one Houell, lying right ouer againſt the Hauana, which is a clouen hill, vpon it hauing a ſharpe point, called Atalaya, that is, a guard, and beeing North and South with the Hauen, within the Lande you ſhal ſee two Hils, which ſhew like two teates of a womans dugs, and to put into it, you muſt keepe your courſe along by the houell.
                     If you depart from the Point aforeſaid with the winds called Briſas, then you ſhall hold your courſe to the Cliffes called 
                           
                              •
                           ortugas (that is, the Torteaux) as winde ſerueth, and you muſt ſee what depth you find: for if there you finde fortie fadome water, then you are on the South-ſide thereof, and finding 30. fadome, then you are Eaſt and Weſt right againſt it, and being at any of theſe depths, you ſhal hold your courſe South South-weſt vntil you ſee the land, which you ſhall diſcouer from the field or Hauen thereof: and if you ſee a Land that is ſomewhat high, hauing ſome Hils and Dales that ſhewe like the fingers of a mans hand, then it is the land 
                           •
                        a
                           ••
                        d Narugo from thence you ſhal runne to H
                              •
                           ea
                              •
                           a, holding your courſe along by the coaſt.
                     Sayling out of Hauana to the Martirs, you ſhall hold your courſe Northeaſt, by the which courſe you ſhall ſee the Point, which is three ſmall Iſlandes, whereof that in the middle is the greateſt, the vttermoſt being the Eaſt coaſt, and the inwardeſt the North-eaſt and South-weſt coaſt. From thence North-eaſt-ward to the Cape De Canauerales (that is ye point of Reedes) the coaſt ſtretcheth North and South and North-eaſt-ward you ſhall ſee no land, and being vnder fiue and twentie degrees, then you are in the mouth of the channel, which to paſſe through, you muſt hold your courſe Northeaſt, and if you ſee not the Cape de Canauerales being vnder 28. degrees and 
                           
                              •
                           /2. then you are without the channell.
                     Sayling out of the Hauana (with the windes called Briſas) to the channell, you muſt runne outwards till it be noone, and after noone you ſhall make to Landward, that towards euening you may bee by it, and to vſe the Windes called Terreinhos, (which are Windes that blowe by night from off the land) running in this manner along by the coaſt, vntill you bee North and South with the Houell called El Pan de Matancas, (that is, the loafe of Matancas being North and South with ye ſame loafe, you muſt runne Northeaſt, if the winde will permit, if not, you muſt put to the coaſt of Florida, where the winde will driue you doing your beſt, in that way to goe out of your courſe as little as you may, for the ſtreames runne with great force towards that Lande, and when you thinke it time, then you ſhall put to the other ſide, as the winde will leade you, till you ſee the Lande, and when you ſée it, then winde, in this ſort running through, and being vnder 28. degrées and ½. then you are out of the Channell: hereof I aduiſe that the ſtrikes you make in lauering towards the land of Florida muſt be ſhort, and thoſe towardes the Coaſt of Minare long, for the ſtreames driue you to the Lande of Florida. The Hils of Chupiona come out by the loafe of Matancas (and are certaine not too high and euen Hils) flat on the toppe, with certaine white ſhining houels. The loafe of Matancas is a high Houell, flat aboue, ſtretching northeaſt and South-weſt, and on both ſides as well North-eaſtward, as ſouthweſtward, it hath two low Points, lower then ye ſaid loafe, which ſhew like the heads of Torteaux. On the North-eaſt ſide the Lande ſtretcheth lowe, and from thence Northward it maketh a ſmall Point. Behinde this Point lyeth the Hauen of Matancas, and to enter therein you muſt run Northeaſt and Southweſt right againſt the ſaid loafe, and then the Hauen will bee South from you, and you muſt runne ſouthward to it, it is a great Bay, and there you haue no Road, but cloſe by the Land, comming out you leaue the loafe on the South-ſide, and you muſt hold your courſe north-eaſt, till you be out.
                     And being out of the Channell, if it bée in Winter, you ſhall run Eaſt, wherwith

you ſhall holde Eaſt and by North, by the winding or declining of the compaſſe: By the which courſe you ſhall paſſe on the South-ſide of the Iſlands and Cliffes of Bermuda, and this courſe you ſhall holde till you bee vnder the heigth of the Iſland Fayael, one of the Flemiſh Iſlands, which is a great Iſland, ſtretching North-weſt and Southeaſt on the Southeaſt ſide, hauing a thicke Land, and on the northeaſt ſide ſomewhat lower land. To ſaile from thence to the Iſland of Tercera, you ſhall hold your courſe outward of the Iſland of S. George, eaſt, and eaſt & by North. The Iſland of S. George is a high Lande, ſtretching Eaſt and Weſt, as alſo Tercera, which on the Southſide hath a clouen hill, called O Braſil, and a little eaſtward from thence, there lieth thrée cliffes. The Iland of S. Michael is a great high Iſland, ſtretching Eaſt and Weſt, on the Weſt ſide being lowe, and on the Eaſt ſide high. It hath likewiſe a clouen hil, lying at the end on the Eaſt ſide. This Iſland lyeth vnder 38. degrées.
                  
                  
                     The 64. Chapter. The courſe and right markes from the Iſland La Deſſeada, to the lande and coaſt of Carthagena, Nombre de Dios, new Spain, and from the channell of Hauana.
                     
                     
                        IF you deſire to ſayle through the Channell that runneth betwéene the Iſland La Antigua, & La Deſleada towards the coaſt, you muſt holde your courſe Weſt to the Iſland of Montecerratte, running along by the Iſland of Guadalupe, which is an Iſland clouen through the middle, & higher on the Weſt then on the Eaſt ſide. The Iſland La Antigua, (that is, the old Iſland) you ſhal find on the Northſide of Guadalupe, ſtretching in length Eaſt and Weſt, and hath Hils with outward ſhew like Ilands, and lieth vnder 16. degrées and 1/
                              •
                           .
                     
                     The markes of the Iſland Montecerratte are theſe. It is round and high like the Iſland La Gomera in the Canaries, and hath ſome Hilles with certaine Water beakes. Sailing from this Iſland Montecerratte, you muſt runne Weſt Northweſt, whereby you ſhall diſcouer the Iſland Sancta Crus, but you muſt not runne too cloſe by it, for there it is foule, and no cleare ground, it ſtretcheth Eaſt and Weſt, and is Hilly, but not verie high, beeing higher on the Weſt then on the Eaſt ſide, in the middleſt hath a rent or partition, and on the Eaſt ſide there is a Roade where you may anker, for there it is faire ſandye ground. To ſayle from Sancta Crus to the Iſland of Puerto Riquo (that is, the Iland of the rich Hauen) on the Southſide, you muſt runne Weſt Northweſt, whereby you ſhall diſcouer the hill called Sierta de Loquillo, and from thence to Cabo Roxo you ſhall ſayle Weſt and Weſt and by North, keeping along by the land vntill you be by the cape aforeſaide, which is the vttermoſt part of the ſame Iſland.
                     This point called Cabo Roxo, (that is, the red point) is a thin and lowe lande, on the ſea ſide hauing certaine redde ſhining downes, and on the North-weſt ſide you ſée the hils called I as Sierras de S. German, which are very high, but not ſo high as thoſe of Loquillo. From this point of Cabo Roxo, you muſt hold your courſe weſt, and weſt and by North, whereby you ſhal diſcouer the Iſland called De la mona, that is, the Iſland of the ape, and you muſt run along. by the ſouthſide thereof. The Iſland La Mona, is a low land, and reacheth Eaſt and Weſt, on the ſea ſide being a plaine land deſcending downward, on the northſide it hath a Cliffe or ſmall Iſland called Monica, or the little ape. Betwéene it and the Iſland you may paſſe. On the Weſt ſide of Mona there is a Roade of faire and good ground, hauing likewiſe ſuch another Roade by the Point that lyeth Southweſt.
                     From the Iſland De la Mona to the Iſland De la Sahona, if that it be by day, you ſhall hold your courſe Southweſt, and by night Weſt, and Weſt and by South, and you muſt vnderſtand, that the Point called Cabo de Enganno, that is, the deceitfull Point, is altogether like the Point of Sahona, hauing a clouen houell on the vpper part of the Iſland, being betweene the loweſt Lande thereof that lieth on the Sea ſide. Betwéene Cabo del Enganno, and Sahona, lyeth a ſmall Iſland called the little S. Catalyna, the reaſon why you muſt there runne Weſt and South, is becauſe the Streames runne towards the Créeke.
                     The markes of the Iſland Sahona, are theſe. It is a lowe Iſland full of Trees, ſo that as you come towardes it, you firſt ſée the Trées before you perceaue the

land thereof, it ſtretcheth Eaſt Northeaſt and Weſt Southweſt, on the South ſide it hath certaine Riffes which run halfe a mile into the Sea: if you fall vpon this lande comming out of the Sea, and that ouer the Iſlandes you ſée certaine hilles, then they are the hils of Niquea, which you ſhall likewiſe ſée betwéen great Sancta Catalina and La Sahona: this Iſland Sahona on the Weſt ſide hath a Rode of eight or ten fadome deep, to ſaile from Sahona to Santo Domingos, (it beeing thrée miles to ſeaward from Sahona) you ſhall hold your courſe Northweſt, and Northweſt and by Weſt: From thence to Santo Domingos it is altogither low land, on the ſea ſide deſcending downward, and is the land which in that place reacheth furtheſt Eaſt and Weſt.
                     The markes of Santo Domingos are theſe, that when you are Northweſt and Southeaſt with the old mines, then you are North and South with the riuer of Santo Domingos, and ouer the riuer you ſhall ſee two houels which ſhewe like the teates of a womans breaſtes, when thoſe houels are North, and North and by weſt from you, then you are to loofeward from the riuer, ſo that by thoſe teates you ſhall knowe whether you be paſt or to Loofeward from it. On the Eaſt point of the entrie of the Riuer ſtandeth a Tower, which ſerueth for a guarde or beakon for the ſhippes that come out of the ſea. From this point aforeſaide runneth a hidden cliffe which you muſt ſhunne, and ſo you muſt runne in, but go not to neere the Al Matadero, that is, the Slaughter houſe, for there it is ſhallow: and being within the aforeſaid hidden cliffe, you haue foure fadome déepe, and ſo you ſhall holde your courſe to the Sandie ſtrand, lying on the Eaſt ſide, ſhunning the Cliffes of the fortreſſe, and going from the Fortreſſe inward, then you muſt let fall your ankers, right againſt the Admiraltie in the middle of the riuer, where the beſt place and Rode is.
                     From Santo Domingo being 4. miles to Seaward, you ſhall holde your courſe Southweſt, and Southweſt and by weſt, vntill you be North and South with the Iſland of Niqueo, and to goe from thence to the hauen of Oquoa, leaue not the coaſt, but run cloſe by it with all your ſailes, till you be paſt the riuer, for if you get off frō it without touching the Palma, which is a certaine banke ſo called where the ſhips vſe to anker, then you muſt not anker: being in the riuer, you muſt looke wel before you, that when you anker to make your ſhip faſt with an anker both out to Landward and to Seaward, and then you are ſafe.
                     Sayling from this Hauen and Bay of Oquoa, you ſhall runne outwarde to the South vntill you be about the point and thrée miles into the ſea, and then you ſhall hold your courſe Southweſt, and Southweſt and by South, wherby you ſhall diſcouer an Iſland called De la Beata, that is, the bleſſed Iſland, which is a lowe Iſland ſtretching Eaſt and weſt.
                     Two miles Weſtwarde from Beata, lieth an Iſland or cliffe called Altobello, which by night ſheweth like a ſhip: when you are paſt Beata and Altobello, then you muſt runne Weſt, and Weſt and by North, to the point called Cabo de Tubaron, that is, the point of the hedge. In this créeke are thrée or foure Iſlands or rocks which are called Los Frayles, that is, the Friers. Before you come to Cabo de Tubaron there is a Créeke, wherein lieth an Iſland called Iabaque, with more cliffes and Riffes lying about it, being foule ground. Behind this Iſland you ſee certaine hilles called Las Sierras de dona Maria, otherwiſe Las Sierras de Sabana
                        ▪ when you are right againſt Iabaque, then you muſt run Weſt Northweſt. The Cabo de Tubaron is a blacke ſhining Houell, on the ſea ſide being clouen, vpon it hauing certaine white places like water beakes. Within this point or Cape lieth a riuer of freſh water, where you haue ſtones for Ballaſt as you haue in the Riuer of Mynijcka. From thence to the point of Cabo de Crus, you muſt hold your courſe Northweſt vntill you are paſt the Iſland of Nabaſſa, running on the North ſide thereof, and if the ſtreames chaunce to driue you on the ſouth ſide, then you muſt obſerue certain times (if you be in a great ſhip) holding a good way into the Northweſt from it, to ſhun the ſands that ſticke out from the point de Morante, and reach betweene this point and Nabaſſa, & there in ſome places you haue aboue foure fadome déepe, and at the end thereof you may run from 15. to 20. fadome déepe.
                     
                        Nabaſſa is a round and lowe Iſland, on the Sea ſide being all flat and plain land: running on the North ſide of this Iſland,

you ſhall hold your courſe Northweſt, and Northweſt and by Weſt, and if you deſire to paſſe along by the Cape De Crus, it is a point ſticking out, which (as you come toward it out of the ſea) ſheweth as if on the top it were full of Trées, but it is inward to Lande. On the Eaſt ſide of this Point lyeth the hauen of Cabo de Crus.
                     
                     Now to ſayle to the Iſland De Pinos, you muſt runne Weſt Northweſt, wherby you ſhall diſcouer the Iſland. This Iſland De Pinos is a low land ful of Trées, ſo that as you come out of the Sea, you ſée the Trées before you ſée the land, it ſtretcheth Eaſt and Weſt, and in the middle it hath thrée houels, whereof that in ye middle is the greateſt.
                     From this Iſland De Pinos, to Cabo de Corrientes, you muſt runne Weſt Northweſt, by the which courſe you ſhall ſée it, This point on the ſea ſide is a Lande running downeward, vpon it hauing ſome palme Trées, and on the Weſt ſide a ſandy ſtrand, where there is a Roade where you may lye. Vpon this Point of Cabo de Correntes ſtandeth a picked Hill, which ſtretcheth further out thē all other points, when from thence you put in, you ſhall ſée on the Lande righter ouer you, a Lake of freſh water, where if néede bee, you may ſupply your want. To ſaile from thence to the Point of S. Anton. Beeing two or thrée miles to Sea-ward, you muſt runne Weſt Northweſt.
                     From the Iſland De Pinos, to Cabo de S. Anton, there are two great créekes: one lying from the Iſland De pinos to the cape De Corrientes, and the other from the Cape De Corrientes to Cape de S. Anton, and before you come to the Point of Cape de Corrientes, there is a point called La Punta de Guaniguanico, & behind the Land inward, you ſhall ſée certaine Hils, called Las Sierras Guaniguanico. Cape de S. Anton is a long Point full of trées with ſome buſhes with ſandye ſtrandes, and from it there runneth a bank or ſand, for the ſpace of 4. miles northweſtward. Sayling from the Point of S. Anton to new Spaigne, in winter time, yt is, from Auguſt to March, then you muſt hold your courſe without ye Iſlands and Cliffes called Las Alactanes weſt northweſtward, with yt which courſe hauing ſailed 60. or 70. miles, you ſhall find ground, which ſhalbe of ſhels or great ſād. This you ſhal find til you be vnder 24. degrées, & if you find ground at leſſe then 40. fadome ſailing with the ſame courſe, then hold your courſe north northweſt, & northweſt & by weſt, & when therewith you begin to increaſe in depth, then turn againe to your firſt courſe of northweſt, and whē you begin to loſe land, then for the ſpace of 20. miles you muſt ſaile Weſt, wherwith you ſhall be north & ſouth with the Iſland Bermeia. Frō thence you muſt ſaile ſouthweſt till you be vnder 20. degrées, & if you ſée not land, you ſhall run weſt, for at that time it is not good to goe beneath ye heigth. Vnder this height & courſe you ſhal ſée La torre Blanca. yt is, the white tower, & if you chance to diſcouer ye Riuer of S. Petro, & S. Paulo, then beyond ye riuer you ſhal ſée certaine gréene hils, but not very high.
                     If you finde 35. fadome déepe, with muddie ground, with ſhelles in ſome places, then from thence you ſhall hold your courſe South, and South and by Eaſt, vntill you bée right againſt the fieldes of Almeria: if you come out of the Sea, you ſhall ſéeke ground lower, and finding 30. or 40. fadome with ſome muddy ground, then you are Eaſt and Weſt with the riuer of Almeria, about ſeuen miles from the land: and if in the Southweſt you ſée the hilles called las Sierras del Papalo, and that they run one within the other, then you are Northeaſt and Southweſt from them. From thence you ſhall bolde your courſe South, and South and by Weſt, whereby the hilles of Papalo will begin to ſhew themſelues, which wil make two round hilles: you ſhall likewiſe ſee Las Sierras de Calaquote, which are certaine reddiſh hilles. This rowe of Hilles commeth out to the ſea ſide.
                     If you deſire to take the ground by the point of Villa Riſa, that is, the rich towne, thrée miles from the land, you ſhall finde 80. and 90. fadome deepe, muddy ground. The riuer of S. Peter and S. Paul lyeth vnder 21. degrées, and los Campos d'Almeria, that is, the fields of Almeria, vnder 20. degrées. Villa Riſa la Vieya, that is, olde Villa Riſa, lyeth vnder 19. degrees and 2/
                              •
                           . Villa Riſa la Vieya is certaine hils, whereof the one end reach vnto the Sea ſide: they are not very high, but make many openings or rents, (like the hilles of Abano, called Organs) ſtretching North and South: if you chaunce to come out of the Sea, and ſhould ſee the Hilles of Villa Riſa, then you ſhoulde ſee that they ſtretch North and South,

and the hils of S. Martyn ſtretch Eaſt and Weſt, you may know them another way, which is, that if you make Weſtward towards them, comming cloſe to them, they will ſhew to be lower then the Hils of S. Martyn, which are greater and higher, as you paſſe along the Sea coaſt by them, and béeing thrée myles to Sea-ward from Villa Riſa, you ſhall find ground, which by S. Martins you ſhall not find, although you were but halfe a myle from them. Laſtly, although you ſhould haue no knowledge of Lande, yet you might knowe it by the markes aforeſaid. To Léeward from Villa Riſa lieth a Cliffe, called N. Bernards, which is in forme like a ſuger loafe. From Villa Riſa la Vieya, or out of Villa Riſa, to S. Iohn de Luz, you ſhall hold your courſe South, and South and by Eaſt, and you ſhal find ground of ſhels & muddy ground, at thirty fadome towards the Land. By the Riuer of Vera Crus, you ſhall find ſandye ground, and in ſome places muddye ground.
                     If you were without, then you muſt knowe that from S. Chriſtopher, to S. Iohn de Luz, it is all ſandye ſtrandes, and being Eaſt and weſt with the point called Punta Gord
                              •
                           , then you are North and South with the Iſland of S. Iohn de Luz, and being North-eaſt and South-weſt with the Iſland at leſſe then forty fadome déepe towards the Land, then you ſhall haue reddiſh ground, and in ſome places ſhels, and from forty fadomes forward white muddy ground. If you come out of the ſea, and deſire to know if you bee Eaſt and Weſt with the Iſland, then you muſt marke a high houell that runneth out from the hils of Vera Crus.
                     
                     And when you are Eaſt and weſt with this Houell, ſo are you likewiſe Eaſt and Weſt with the Iſland, you muſt likewiſe vnderſtande, that when the Hill of Sierra Neuada, (yt is, the ſnowy hill) lieth Weſt & weſt and by ſouth from you, then are you likewiſe eaſt and weſt with the Iſland aforeſaid, & then you ſhall preſently ſée the point called Antō Niquardo, as alſo Mendano Montuoſo, (or the high Houell aforeſaid) and you ſhal likewiſe ſée the ſea-coaſt Medel
                              •
                           n, and on the North-weſt ſide the Point of Punta Gorda, & if you deſire with a North wind to be in the hauen, then run at 18 & 20 fadome déepe, whereby you ſhal paſſe to loofeward through the chanell, going cloſe to the bulwark, yet ſhunning it, you ſhall anker on the loofe ſide, for to Léeward it hath no great depth.
                     If you depart from the Point of S. Anton in ſummer time towards new Spain, then you muſt hold your courſe weſtward for 20 or 30 miles, wherewith you ſhall finde ground at 80 fadome, being ſhels. From thence you ſhal run weſt, and weſt and by South till you be at 30 fadome, and from 30 fadome weſt-ward to 30 fadome, with the which courſe you ſhould ſayle along this Countrey. And being a greater depth, you ſhall run weſt and weſt and by ſouth, wherby you ſhall come again to the former depth. By this courſe you ſhall paſſe through the Iſlāds of Ilha de Sconocida, & Ilha d'Arena, that is, the vnknowne Iſland, and the ſandy Iſland. From the Iland la de Sconocida to the Iſlād d'Arena, weſt, & weſt and by ſouth, you ſhall deſcry the Hils Las Sierras de San Martin, which are two high Hils, in the middle hauing a great opening or cliffe. Sailing from theſe Hils, you ſhall runne Weſt, by the which courſe you ſhal ſée the ſtony rock, which is a clouen hil, you ſhall run Northweſt, and northweſt & by weſt, wherewith you ſhall ſée the Riuer of Medelyn, which is a lowe land, & ſomewhat more to Loofeward lieth the Iſland called Ilha Blanca, or the white Iſland, as alſo ye Iſland Rio Riffias, which a farre off ſheweth like a ſhip vnder ſaile▪ & then preſently you ſhal ſée the Iſland of S. Iohn de Luz, and from the riuer called Rio Varado, to the Riuer of Vera Crus. There is no high land, but only one black ſhining hill, lying aboue the aforeſaid Hauen.
                  
                  
                     The 65. Chapter. How to ſayle from the Iſland La Deſſeada to the Iſland of Porto Riſo through the channell called De Paſſagie.
                     
                        SAyling from the Iſland La Deſſeada to the Iſland Puerto Riſo, yt is, the rich Hauen: Deſiring to paſſe through ye channel of De Paſſagie, that is, the thorow faire, you muſt vſe all ye means you can to runne betwéene the Iſlands of Moncerrate & Redonda, or to Loofeward, yt is, betwéen ye Iſland of S. Chriſtopher, and the Iſlands d'Eſtacio, and from thence you ſhal hold your courſe Northweſt, & ſomewhat more to loofeward frō the Iſlands of Eſtacio, which are 2. Iſlands, one greater thē the other, ſhewing almoſt like 2. loaues of bread, when you are by them you ſhall

find 10.12. and 25. fadome déepe, at the depthes of 10. & 12. fadome, you haue white ſandy ground, and at 25. fadome black ſand, to ſayle from this Banke to the Ilandes las Virgines (that is the maydes) you ſhal holde your courſe northweſt (for there the ſtreams draw Southweſtward) to ſhunne S. Crus, which ſtretcheth almoſt Northweſt and Southeaſt, and when you ſee las Virgines, the firſt poynt is the greateſt, and therefore it is called la Virgin Gorga, or the fatte mayde: and preſentlie after follow the reſt, which are long & full of Houels, they ſtretch Eaſt and Weſt, and runne one within the other, hauing certaine Cliffes and Rockes hard by them, running on the South ſyde: in the middle way frō them you ſhall ſée a great Cliffe, two myles into the ſea. This Cliffe hath for a marke, a grayiſh colour, and beſydes theſe there are manie other cliffes, and to know whē you are in the paſſage, running along by it to Porto Riſo, as aforeſaid: then you ſhal ſée white cliffes, that a farre off ſhew like a ſhip vnder ſayle: the whitenes of theſe cliffes procéedeth of birds filings, when you ſée them you muſt make towards them, and deſiring to run through the paſſage, you ſhall hold your courſe betwéene theſe Ilands & the Ilands las Virgines, & whē you are by them thē you muſt run northweſt to a ſmal Iland, which lieth two miles further forward called Ilha Ʋerde, that is, the gréen Iland, and being right againſt this Iland, thē you are out of the paſſage, or without the channel, and being ther, you ſhal preſently ſée the land of ye Iland Puerto Riſo, the firſt point wherof, called la Punto de Loquillo, lieth Eaſt & weſt with the Iland Ilha Ʋerde: if you chance to be by the aforeſaid cliffe, and that the winde ſcanteth, & yt you can not paſſe to loofeward from it, then you ſhall paſſe to léeward of it, for it is alſo a good chānell of 18. & 20. fadom deep, with ſand and ſhels vpon the ground, about a mile to léeward from it, to know whē you are out of the Channell with this courſe then this cliffe muſt lie Southeaſt from you, and being at 30. fadome déep, with white ſandy ground, you ſhall preſently (as I ſaid) paſſe by the Ilande of Ilha Ʋerde, running by the point of Loquillo, along by the land of Puerto Riſo, Weſtnorthweſt, and if you deſire to be in the hauen of Puerto Riſo, and that you cannot get thether, then you ſhal lauere, or ly driuing to léeward, with the point of Loquillo, Southeaſtward from you, and from midnight forward you ſhall follow your courſe, becauſe the ſtreames draw Southeaſtward: the marks you haue there are theſe that is ouer the hauē of Puerto Riſo, ſtandeth an hermitage, vpon a high hil, which is called Santa Barbara, and ſheweth like a white patch vpon a hill, and paſſing along by it, you ſhall ſee the Cloyſter or Conuent of Dominican Fryers, which is about a quarter of a myle from the hermitage, and then you ſhall preſently ſée the hill, that ſheweth like a clouen Iland: theſe are the right marks of this Hauen, and to put into it, you muſt goe néere the hill, but not too néer, to ſhunne a ſhallow place that lieth within the ſaid hill: after that you muſt loofe aſmuch as you can, vntil you comé wher you muſt anker, which is right againſt the houſes that ſtand on the Eaſt ſide of the hauen.
                  
                  
                     The 66. Chapter. The groundes and depthes by the coaſt and countrie of New Spaigne.
                     
                        BY the Ilāds called Alaclanes, lying betwéen the Iland Cuba and the coaſt of New Spaigne right ouer againſt the poynt called Punta de S. Anton. the ground is ſhelly: by the Iland called Ilha de Robos it is muddy ſlyme ground: by the Riuer of S. Pedro & S. Paulo, from 40. fadom to the land, it is ſhelly ground, by the fields or playnes of Almeria called Los Iſlano
                              •
                            de Almeria, at 40. fadome it is ſandy ground▪ & from thence outwards ſhelly ground: by 
                           Ʋilila Rica, or the rich ſtone, at 16 fadome, it is; muddy ground, Eaſt & weſt with the cliffes & ſands de Tortugas, of Torteaux, it is white ſand: Northeaſt and ſouthweſt with the ſame Tortugas, it is blacke ſand, and eaſtward frō it, reddiſh ſand, by the riuer of Panuco, from 40. fadom outwards it is white and red ſand, and towardes the land, muddy ground, by the riuer called Rio Hermoſo, or the faire riuer, frō 
                        30. fadome towardrs the land, it is white ſand, 
                           •
                         outward towards ye ſea, muddy groūd: by the riuer called Rio de Palmase de Mō
                           tanas, that is, the riuer of palm trees & of hils: frō 
                        40. fadom towards ye land you haue ſand, but moſt white, and outwards muddy groūd mixed with gray ſand.
                  
                  
                     The 67. Chapter. The courſe & right marke of the nauigatiō from the point called Cabo de Lopo Gonſalues, to the riuer of Co
                           •
                        go in Angola, ſouthwards in the coaſts of Guinea and Ethiopia, with the ſituation of the countries.
                     
                        SAyling from the point called Cabo de Lopo Gonſalues, which lyeth full vnder 1. deg. on the ſouth ſide of the Equinoctial line: in the Coaſt of Guinea or Ethiopia: the coaſt frō thence forward ſtretcheth northweſt & ſoutheaſt, being a flat long land: you haue the depthes of 10.
                        
and 9. fadome déepe water, towards the land, being all ground like ſand of ſand lopers, all through the country, except it be by the point Cabo de Catarina, where you haue great ſand & ſome ſtones: if you will make any haſt being vpon this coaſt and voyage, then euery night you muſt anker, till you haue the Terreintios (which are the winds blowing from off the land) holding your courſe in that manner, till you haue the Viracoins (which are ye winds out of the ſea) therwith again to make towards the land, vntil it be calme, or that ye are at 10. fadom déep, thē you muſt anker til the comming of the land winds, which come dayly at their times, as aforeſaid: if the ſtreames run wt the wind, thē you may wind from the one bough to the other, holding to léeward as aforeſaid: the coniunction or time whē the ſtreames run with the winds, is with a new Moone, about 2. dayes before or after, and 3. dayes before it is ful: if you deſire to run from one bough to the other, yt muſt rule your ſelfe in ſuch māner, that you be euery morning by the coaſt, to get before the winds that as then blow off the land: the marks of the long land are theſe, it hath certain great thicke houels, called As Sierras de ſanto Eſpirito, that is, the hils of the holy Ghoſt, and ſomwhat further you haue 2 other houels, which are very eaſy to be knowne: in this country you haue muddy ground, & further forward you ſhal ſée a high hill within the créek, called Palmella, for that it is like to Palmela, the which lyeth betweene Lisbon and Setuval: you ſhal likewiſe ſée ſomewhat further in the créeke, a land which ſtretcheth North & ſouth, as you paſſe along by it: cloſe by the ſtrand it hath a thicke flat houel, which is called Caſcars, becauſe it is like Caſcais by Lisbon: you muſt vnderſtand, that before you hoyſe vp anker in that countrie, you muſt let fal your ſayles, to ſee if the ſhippe may get out, and if it cannot get out, then lie ſtill till you haue the Viracoins that blow out of the ſea, for in thoſe countries the ſtreames runne very ſtronglie out of the riuer of Congo into the ſea, wherby the ſhippe can hardlie get out, when you are ſo far as the place called a Palmeirin
                              •
                           a, that is the woods of Palme trees, then let your beſt anker fall, for the groundes in this croſſe way is ſtiffe muddy ground, whereby the ankers oftentimes will hardly holde faſt but ſhip out againe. And when you are in the riuer of Congo, being at the depth of 30. or 40 fadome: then you ſhall loofe the ground, & then you ſhall turne your howreglaſſe, and when it is runne out then caſt out your lead, and you ſhall find 10 or 12 fadome water on the other ſide of the riuer of Congo and you ſhal ſayle about the length of a ſtone caſt from the land and the beſt courſe is cloſe by the land, for otherwiſe you could not get into the riuer, by meanes of the great force of the ſtreames, wherby many men are much troubled, as being the greateſt & ſtrōgeſt ſtreams, that are found in any place, and run aboue 12. miles into the ſea. Sayling from Congo to Angola in maner aforeſaid, and being 35. miles on your way, you ſhal ſée a high hill, by the which ther lieth an Ilād called A Ilha de Loanda, but if you be not very cloſe by ye lād, you ſhal not ſée the Iland, for it is very low & flat: if you chance to be by the land at 6. & 7. deg. then you ſhal be at the mouth of the riuer of Congo: and 10. myles to ſeaward from it, you ſhal ſée many tokens & ſignes thereof, as great ſtreames, thicke réeds, herbs, with many cutle bones, and whē you are by the land, at 7. & 8. degr. & ½, then you ſhall ſée a flat land with trées al ouer it: and in this country in euery place at 18. & 20. fadome, you ſhal haue good ground, from 2. to two miles and a halfe from the land, & on the ſea ſide you haue white downes, which ſhew like ſandy ſtrandes, & the ground by it is ſandy with ſome ſtones, that is from 7. to 8. deg. and you muſt vnderſtand that the land from 5 deg. ſouthwarde, is altogether high, all the ground being muddy, and a mile from it, it is 30. and 35 fadom deepe, good ground, being a cleare and faire coaſt, with cauſe of feare of more then is ſéen before your dayes, that is from 7 to 9 deg. and the land from 8. degrees ſouthward, is verie high, if you come out of the ſea, to the land, vnder 7. degr. and ½, then you ſhal ſée 7. hils or Houels, which ſtretch Northweſt and ſoutheaſt, called As ſete ſerras, that is, the 7. hils: if you come to the land vnder 8. degr. & ¼, then you ſhall ſee a hie land, lying eaſtwarde from you, this point in ſhew hath the forme of cape S. Vincent in the coaſt of Spaine, & comming to the land not full vnder 9 degrées then north or northeaſt, you ſhal ſée the aforeſaid point, hauing vnder it ſome whit downs that ſtrike ſomewhat out into the ſea, but you need not feare them, for it is faire and cleare: and therefore you may fréely go neere the land, thē better to know it, being vnder the hight aforeſaid of ſcarce 9 deg. then eaſtwarde to land, you ſhal ſee a round hil called monte Paſqual, when the point aforeſaid is northeaſt from you, then the other land ſhall ſtretch ſouthweſt, which is the furtheſt land lying without the Iland of Loanda, the land that lyeth ſouthwarde from you is a greate thicke land, at the foot thereof hauing ſome red and white downes, with certaine ſmall trees, vppon it, which ſhow like figge trees of Algaruen in Spaine: now to runne within ye land of Lo
                              •
                           nd
                              •
                           
                         you muſt hold your courſe right vpon the land, that lyeth ſouthward: ſo you may go cloſe co
                           •
                        t, about half a mile frō it

& being there ſouthweſtward, from the Iland you ſhal diſcouer the Iland which is very flat and of white ſand, whereby you can hardlie ſee it, but when you are cloſe by it, that is the hauen of Angola. This Iland of Loanda, is like an Iland called A Ilha das Caruns, lying by the cape called Cabo de ſanta Maria, in the land of Algaruen, vpon the coaſt of Spain, and from the ſame flat land it is higher, for it is 7. miles long, now to put into this Iland you muſt hold your courſe on the northeaſt point, & being cloſe by it within a ſtones caſt, you néed not fear, for ther it is 15. fadom deepe, and within it is all faire ground, this is the road on the ſide of the Iland, cloſe by if from this Iland to the firme land there is no more but a quarter of a mile, and you cannot ſee the entrie, till you be hard by it, and if there be any ſhips within the hauen, you ſhall ſee them before you can diſcerne or know the Iland, which ſheweth as if it were trees, yt ſtand vpon the land the fartheſt point outward on the northeaſt ſide of this Iland lieth vnder 9 deg. therefore deceiue not your ſelfe by the card, for ſome of them haue it vnder 9. deg. and others vnder 9 deg. and a halfe therfore beleeue none but ſuch as haue it vnder 9. deg. at the northeaſt end of the aforeſaid Ilād.
                  
                  
                     Hereafter followeth the degrees and hightes of all the principal hauens, riuers, points, Ilands, & places of the Nauigations of the Portingals & Spaniards, in the countries by them diſcouered, and part inhabited, each place with their right names and ſurnames, as they are by them called, and ordinarily named in their Seacardes.
                     Firſt from the furtheſt point outward of Portingale, called Cabo de Finiſterra, following along by the coaſt of Portingale, Spain & Barbary, to the line of Tropicus Caueri, and from thence along the Coaſt of Guinea to the Equinoctiall lyne.
                     
                        The degrees on the north ſide of the line.
                        
                            
                              CAbo de Finiſterra, that is the point of the lands end, lieth vnder degrees 43
                            The Ilandes of Bayona lie vnder 42.
                            
                              Porto de Portug. yt is Porte port ly vn. 41
                            
                              As Berlengas, yt is the Barles, ly vnder 40.
                            
                              Liſboa or Liſbō
                               & yt Ilād of tercera, vn. 29.
                            
                              Perſeueira and the Iland of S. Michael, lieth vnder 38.
                            
                              Cabo de ſan Vincente, and the Iland ſanta Maria, lie vnder 37.
                            
                              Traſtalgar lying on the coaſt, is vnder 36
                            
                              Larache lyeth vnder 35
                            
                              Soneia lyeth vnder 34.
                            
                              Cabo de Canty & Porto ſanto, yt is the holy hauē lying by the Ilād of Madera are vn. 33
                            
                              Rio dos ſaueis yt is ye riuer of faries is vn. 32
                            The Iland of Madera or the Iland of wood, is vnder the ſame heights of 32
                            
                              Taffatama lieth vnder 31
                            
                              Mecca and Ilha dos Saluaes, that is the Iland of the wilde men lyeth vnder. 30
                            
                              Cabo de non, and the Ilandes Palma and Lancarotte, being of the Ilands of Canarie lyeth vnder. 29
                            
                              A Ilha, or the Ilande de Forte Ventura lyeth vnder. 28
                            
                              Cabo de Bo
                                    •
                                 ador and the Ilandes of great Canarie and alſo A Ilha de Hierro, or Iland of Iron lyeth vnder. 27
                            
                              Angra dos Cauallos, that is the Hauen of horſes lieth vnder 25
                            
                              Rio d'Ouro or ye riuer of Gold lieth vnd. 24
                        
                     
                     
                        The line or Tropicus Cancri.
                        
                            
                              Angra or the open hauen of Goncalo de Sintra lyeth vnder 23
                            
                              Cabo das Barbas, or the point of Baerden, lyeth vnder 22
                            
                              Cabo Branco or the white point lieth vn. 21
                            
                              Rio de Sao Io
                                    •
                                 o, or the riuer of S. Iohn lieth vnder 20
                            
                              Furna de Santa Maria, or the caue of S. Marie lyeth vnder 19
                            
                              Sete monte or ſeuen hils vnder & the Ilands of S. Anna, S. Vincent, S. Lucia, and S. Nicolas lieth vnder 18
                            
                              Ante Rotte, and Ilha de Sal. or the Iland of Salt vnder. 17
                            
                              Rio or the Riuer of Canaga and the Iland Ilha de Ma
                                    •
                                 a, vnder 16
                            
                              Cabo verde, or the gréen point, & the Ilāds of S. Iago, and Ilha do Fogo or of fyer vnder 15
                            
                              Rio or the riuer of Gambia, vnder 14
                            
                              Rio das Oſtras or the riuer of oiſters vn. 13
                            
                              Cabo Roxo vnder 12
                            
                              Buguba vnder 11
                            
                              Rio do Pichel or the riuer of ye 
                              Can vnd. 10
                            
                              Rio or the riuer of Cachecache, vnder 9
                            
                              Rio de Serra Lioa, or the riuer of the Lions hill, vnder 8
                            
                              Rio das Palmas or the riuer of Palms, vn. 7
                            
                              Cabo de monte or the point of the hill vn. 6
                            
                              Cabo dos Baixos, or the point of ſands and the myne of S. George vnder 5
                            
                              A Ilha or the Ilād of Fernando Poa & Cauo dàs Palmas or point of Palmes, vnder 4
                            
                              Rio de Campo or the riuer of the field vn. 3
                            
                              Rio de Princepe or ye riuer of ye prince vnd. 2
                            The Iland of S. Thomas. vnder. 1
                        
                     
                     
                        From the Equinoctiall line to the ſouth ſide following the coaſt of Congo, Angola, and Ethiopia, to the cape de Bona Speranza.
                        
                           
                           The degrees of the ſouth ſide of the Equinoctial lyne.
                            
                              CAbo, or the point of Lopo Gonſalues vnder deg. 1
                            
                              Cabo, or the point of Catharina vnder 2.
                            
                              Angra da Iudia, or the hauen of the Iewe, vnder 5.
                            
                              Praya de San Domingos, or the ſtrād of S. Dominico vnder 6.
                            
                              Rio or the riuer of Congo vnder. 7
                            
                              A Ilha d' Aſcention, or the aſcention vnd. 8.
                            
                              Rio or the riuer of Angola, and the Iland of Loanda vnder 9
                            
                              Cabo Ledo vnder 10.
                            
                              Rio, or the riuer of S. Lazaro vnder 11.
                            
                              Cabo de Loubos, or ye riuer of wolues vn. 12
                            
                              Monte Negro, or the black hill vnder 14
                            
                              Serra Parda or the gray hill vnder 15
                            
                              Angra das Aldeas, or the open hauen of the villages, & the Iland of S. Helena vnd. 16.
                            
                              Manga das Areas, or the ſandy ſleue vn. 17.
                            
                              Cabo Negro, or the blacke point vnder 18.
                            
                              Os Mendoins vnder 19
                            
                              A Serra de S. Lazaro or Hill S. of Lazaro vnder 20.
                            
                              Praya or the ſtraight of Ruy Pires vnd. 21.
                            
                              Cabo do Padrao or the point of Coloſſo or Colume vnder 22.
                            
                              Praia Fria, or the cold ſtrand vnder 23.
                        
                     
                     
                        The lyne or Tropicus Cancri.
                        
                            
                              Ponta da concepſao, or the conceptiō vn. 24
                            
                              Praya das Ala-goas vnder 25.
                            
                              Feiaco da Boca, or the māner of the mouth vnder 26.
                            
                              Angra, or the hauen of S. Anthony vnd. 27
                            
                              Angra, or hauen of S. Thomas vnder 28.
                            
                              Angra or the hauē of S. Chriſtopher vn. 29
                            
                              Rio do Infante, or the Riuer of the Kinges ſonne vnder 32.
                            
                              Angra, or hauen of S. Helena vnder 33.
                            
                              As Ilhas, or Ilād of Triſtan de Cūha v. 34.
                            
                              Cabo de Bona Speranza, or poynt of good hope vnder 34. ½.
                        
                     
                     
                        From the cape de Bona Speranza northwards, along the coaſt to Soffala, Moſambique and Melinde, to the Equinoctial lyne, all being on the ſouth ſide of the ſame lyne.
                        
                            
                              CAbo das Agulhas, or the poynt of the Compas full vnder 35.
                            
                              Cabo de Infante, or point of the kings ſonne vnder 34. ½.
                            
                              Cabo Talhado. or the clouen point vnd. 34.
                            
                              Cabo das Vaccas, or point of cowes, & Baya Fermoſa, or the faire bay vnder 34.
                            
                              Cabo de Areciffe, or the point of the Cliffe vnder 33.
                            
                              Rio de infante or point of ye kings ſon v. 32.
                            
                              Ponta Primeira, or the firſt point vnder. 32.
                            
                              Terra do Natal vnder 31.
                            
                              Ponta or the point of S. Lucia vnder 28.
                            
                              Terra dos fumos or the lād of ſmok v. 27. ½.
                            
                              Rio d' Alagoa or riuer of the lake, and the Iland of Ioan de Lisboa, & vttermoſt ſouth point of the Iland of S. Laurence vnd. 26.
                            
                              Agoa de Boa Pas or ye riuer of peace vnd. 25
                            
                              Cabo das correntes, or point of the ſtreame vnder 24. ½.
                            
                              Rio, or riuer of Mataca or monument, & the Iland A Ilha do Maſcharenhas vn. 21. ½.
                            
                              Os Baixos da Iudia, or ye Iewes ſands vn. 22
                            
                              Cabo, or the point of S. Sebaſtian vnd. 21.
                            
                              Rio, or the Riuer of Quiloan or Quiloane, vnder 20. ½.
                            
                              Soffala and the Iland of Diego Rodrigues vnder 20.
                            
                              Porto, or the hauen of Bango vnder 19. ½.
                            
                              Rio, or the riuer of Cuama vnder 18. ¼.
                            
                              Os Baixas dos Gara
                                    •
                                 aus or ſands of Seamewes vnder 18.
                            
                              Rio dos bons ſinais, or of good tokens v. 17 ¼
                            
                              A Ilha, or Iland of Brandao vnder 17.
                            The Iland A Ilha Primeira, or the firſt Iland vnder 17. ½.
                            
                              A Ilha or Iland of Iohn de Noua vnd. 16. ½.
                            
                              Rio or riuer of Angoxa vnder 16.
                            
                              Moſambique vnder 15.
                            
                              Rio de S. Antonio vnder 14.
                            
                              Rio dereito, or the ſtraight line vnder 12.
                            
                              Ilha do Comoro vnder 11.
                            
                              Cabo del Gado, or thinne point vnder 10.
                            The towne of Quiloa vnder 9.
                            
                              A Ilha de Monfia vnder 7.
                            
                              Ilha de Sanſibar vnder 6.
                            
                              Ilha de Pemba vnder 5.
                            
                              A Ilha dos tres Irmaos, or Iland of three brethren vnder 4.
                            
                              A Ilha do Almirante, or the Iland of the Admirall vnder 3. ½.
                            
                              Mombaſſa, or riuer of Tacharigo vnder 3.
                            The howne and hauen of Melinde vnder 2.
                            The towne and hauen of Pate vnder 1.
                        
                     
                     
                        The Equinoctial lyne. The heigth and degrees of the Hauens, points, and riuers, of the Equinoctiall lyne, to the ſtraights of Mecca, otherwiſe called the red ſea, on the North ſide of the Equinoctiall. The degrees on the north ſide.
                        
                            
                              Barra Boa, or the good hauen vnder 1.
                            The town and hauen of Braba vnder 2
                            The town & hauē of Magadoxa vnder 2. ½.
                            
                              Zarzella vnder 6.
                            
                              Cabo, or poynt of Guardafu, and the Iland a Ilha de Sacotora vnder 12.
                        
                     
                     
                        From the point of Guardafu, inwardes to the red ſea, on the ſouth coaſt.
                        
                            
                              MIte or Barbora vnder 11.
                            
                              Zeila vnder 12.
                            
                              Ilha Dalaca vnder 15.
                            
                              
                              Ilha Soaquen vnder 18.
                        
                     
                     
                        From the North ſide of the red ſea or the ſtraight of Mecca.
                        
                            
                              TOor vnder 27.
                            
                              Gida and the hauen of Mecca, where Mahomet lieth buried, whereof the ſtraight taketh the name vnder 20.
                            A Ilha de Zeyban vnder 15.
                            
                              A Ilha Camaram vnder 15.
                            
                              Adem a fortreſſe of the Portingales, which in times paſt they held but not at this time vnder 13.
                        
                     
                     
                        The coaſt of Arabia to the ſtraightes or Sinus Perſicus, and the Iland of Ormus.
                        
                            
                              FArtaque lieth vnder 15. degrees.
                            
                              Diufar vnder 16.
                            The Iland of Curia, Muria, vnder 17.
                            The Iland a Ilha de Maeira vnder 22.
                            
                              Cabo de Roſalgate vnder 22.
                            
                              Curiata and Maſquata vnder 23.
                            
                              Hoor vnder 24.
                            
                              Cabo Mocandao vnder 27.
                            The Iland and towne of Ormus vnder 27.
                        
                     
                     
                        From Ormus or Perſia along the coaſt to to the cape de Comoriin.
                        
                            
                              CAbo de Iaſque vnder 25 & ½.
                            
                              Rio do Sinde or Indo vnder 24.
                            The towne and Iland of Diu vnder 21.
                            
                              Goga and the Towne within the Créeke of Cambaia vnder 33.
                            The towne and hauen of Chaul vnder 19.
                            The towne and hauen of Dabul vnder 18.
                            The Iland and towne of Goa & the Ilandes of os Ilhas Queimados vnder 16.
                            The fortreſſe of Honor and the Ilandes of Angediua vnder 14.
                            
                              Baricala and the ſandes of Baixios de Pandua vnder 13.
                            The fortreſſe of Mangalor and Monte de Ly vnder. 12.
                            
                              Cananor and Calecut vnder 11.
                            
                              Cranganor and Çochiin vnder 10.
                            The fortreſſe of Cay Coulao vnder 9.
                            
                              Cauo de Comoriin being the vttermoſt point of the coaſt called India vnder 7.
                        
                     
                     
                        From the Iland Seylon on the Eaſt and ſouth ſide about to the Weſt.
                        
                            
                              TRincanamalle vnder 9
                            
                              O. Capello de Frade or the Monkes coule vnder 8.
                            
                              Rio de Matacalou vnder 7 
                                 •
                              /3.
                            
                              Ponta de Gualle vnder 6.
                            
                              Cloumbo a fortreſſe of the Portingales vnder 7.
                        
                     
                     
                        From the Cape de Gomerin along the coaſt of Coramandel, Orixa, Bengala, Pegu, & Malacca, to the point of Singapura.
                        
                            
                              CAbo Negapatan vnder 11. degrées.
                            
                              Pouoacao de Saint Thomas, or towne of Saint Thomas vnder 13. 1/
                                 •
                              .
                            The towne and hauen of Muſelepatao vnder 16. 1/
                                 •
                              .
                            The point of Guadouariin vnder 17.
                            
                              O Pagode de Iorganate, or Idoll of Iurganate vnder 20. ¼.
                            
                              Rio de Puacota vnder 19.
                            
                              Rio Palura or Calauor vnder 19. ⅓.
                            
                              A Derradiera terra alta or the laſt high land vnder 19. ⅔.
                            
                              Rio Cayegare vnder 21.
                            
                              Rio de Ganges otherwiſe Porto Pequeno or the ſmall hauen vnder 22
                            The hauen and towne of Aracan vnder 20.
                            The hauen and towne of Martaban vnder 16. ¼.
                            The vttermoſt end on the north ſide of the Iland Andeman vnder 16.
                            The vttermoſt end on the ſouth ſide of the ſame Iland vnder 11.
                            The hauen and Towne of Tanasſeriin vnder 11
                            The hauen and towne of Gonſalan vnder 8. ½.
                            The Iland Pulo Cuto vnder 6 ⅔.
                            The towne and hauen of Queda vnder 6 ½.
                            The Iland of Gomeſpola, and the Iland Pulo Batum vnder 6.
                            The Iland Pulo Pera vnder 5 ⅔
                            The Pulo Pinon vnder 5, 2/4.
                            The hauen and towne of Pera vnder 4. ½.
                            
                              Pulo Sambillao vnder 4.
                            
                              Pulo Parcelar & the Iland as Ilhas d'Aru vnder 3.
                            
                              Cabo Rachado, or clouen point vnder 2. ½.
                            The towne and fortreſſe of Malacca vnder 2. ½.
                            
                              Cabo de Singapura vnder 1.
                        
                     
                     
                        From the Iland of Samatra on the North ſide of the Equinoctiall line.
                        
                            THe hauen of Achein vnder 4. ½.
                            The hauen of 
                                 
                                    •
                                 eder vnder 4.
                            The point of Taniamburo vnder 5.
                        
                     
                     
                        The place on the ſouth ſide of the Equinoctiall in the ſame Iland & els where.
                        
                            
                              Terra d'Arruen or land of Arruen vnder 2.
                            
                              
                              Ilha d'Ouro de Manancabo, or the gold land of Manancabo 3
                            The hauen of Campar vnder 4.
                            The ſtraight betwéene the Iland Sumatra and Iana Maior vnder 5. ½
                            
                              A Ilha Iaua Maior in ye midle way vnd. 6
                            
                              A Ilha do Iogo or Fire Iland vnder 7.
                            
                              A Ilha Solitaria, or the ſolitarie Iland vnder 7
                            
                              A Ilha Banda vnder 5
                            The Ilandes of Cloues of Maluco are vnder the Equinoctiall lyne. 
                        
                     
                     
                        From Cabo de Singapura following the coaſt to Sion, Camboia, Champa, and China, to the riuer of Liampo, & Nanquyn, with ſome Ilandes all vppon the North ſide of the Equinoctial line,
                        
                            THe Iland Pulo Timao vnder 2. ½
                            The hauen and towne of Pan. vnder 3. 1/
                                 •
                              
                           
                            The hauen and towne of Patana vnder 7. ⅔
                            The Hauen and towne of Sion vnder 14, ½
                            The point of Cuy vnder 12. ⅔
                            
                              Enſeada de Lion, or Creeke of Lyon vnder 12 ½
                            The hauen of Varella vnder 13
                            The Iland Pulo Condor vnder 8 ⅔.
                            The towne and Hauen of Camboia vnder 10.
                            The Iland Pulo Seci
                                    •
                                 
                               from the land vnder 10. ⅓
                            The Iland Pulo Caton vnder 15. ⅔.
                            The Iland Pulo Champello vnder 16 ⅔.
                            The vttermoſt South point of the Iſland Aynon vnder 18. ½.
                            The Northeaſt end of the ſame Iland vnder 19. ½.
                            The Ilands of Sanchoan vnder 21. ⅓.
                            The towne & Iland of Macau vnder 22. ⅓.
                            The towne of Canton vnder 24. ½.
                            
                              Ilha Branco or white Iland vnder 22. ½.
                            
                              Ilha Fermoſa, or faire Iland vnder 21. ¼.
                            
                              Ilha de Lamon vnder 23. ¼.
                            The hauen of Chabaquea vnder 23. ½.
                            The hauen of Chincheo vnder 24. ½.
                            
                              Enſeada dos Camaroins or Créeke of Granaet otherwiſe called Cayto vnder 25. ½.
                            The Iland Lequeo Pequeno vnder 25.
                            
                              A Ilha dos Cauallos or Iland of horſes vnder 25. ⅓.
                            
                              Ponto or Cabo de Sumbor vnder 28. ¼.
                            The Ilands as Sere Irmaas or ſeauen fifte as lying in the way to Iapan vnder 29. ⅓.
                            The Ilandes of Sionglean lying on the coaſt vnder 29. ⅔.
                            The Ilandes called Liampo lying on the coaſt vnder 31.
                            The middle of the Iland Meaxuma vnder. 30. 
                                 •
                              /2.
                            The Iland of Tanaxuma vnder 31, ⅔.
                            The riuer of Nanquiyn vnder 34.
                            The Ilands of Iapan in all hauing in Longitude 130. miles, and the furtheſt eaſtward lieth vnder 32.
                        
                     
                     
                        From the Ilandes of Phillippinas, otherwiſe the Luſons, or Manillas on the North ſide of the Equinoctial line.
                        
                            THe entrie of the channell betweene the Iland Luſon, and the Iland Tandaia vnder 12.
                            The Iland Capuly, and the Iland Ticao vnder 12. ¼.
                            The Iland Masbate vnder 12. ¼.
                            The Iland of Banton vnder 12. ⅔.
                            The Iland Rebuian on the north ſide vnder 12. ½.
                            The Iland de Vireies vnder 12. ¾.
                            The Iland Marinduque vnder 12. ¼.
                            
                              Cabo de Dumarijn in the Iland Mindoro and the Ilandes of Luban vnder 13.
                            The mouth or entry of the bay of Manilla the chiefe towne of the Iland of Lucon vnder 14. ¼.
                            The towne of Manilla vnder 14, ½.
                            The cape of Samballes in the Iland Lucon vnder 14. ⅔.
                            The Cape Bullinao in the ſame Iland vnder 16. ⅔.
                            The Cape de Boiador, which is the furtheſt point on the north-ſide of the Iſland Luſon vnder 19.
                            The furtheſt Iland eaſt and north from the Iland Lequeos vnder 29.
                            The Iland a Illas de las Velas otherwiſe de los Ladrones vnder 13.
                        
                     
                     
                        The countrie of new Spaine lying ouer againſt the Iſlands of Iapon.
                        
                            THe Iland of Saint Aguſtine lying on the coaſt vnder degrées 30. ¼.
                            The Iland de Sedros, or of Ceaders vnder 28. ¼.
                            
                              Cabo de ſaint Lucas, the beginning of the land of California vnder 22.
                            
                              Cabo de las Corrientes or point of ſtreams vnder 19. ⅔.
                            The hauen of Acapulco vnder 17.
                        
                     
                     
                        From the ſtraightes of Magellanes along the coaſt of Braſilia to the Equinoctiall line on the ſouth ſide.
                        
                           The degrees of the ſouth ſide of the Equinoctiall.
                            THe ſtraight or paſſage of Magellanes vnder 15. ⅛ degrées.
                            
                              Baſy
                                    •
                                  de las Iſlas, or the bay of the Ilandes vnder 49.
                            
                              Rio de la Plata, or riuer of Siluer vnder 34. ⅔.
                            
                              
                              Arreciffe or the Cliffe vnder 34.
                            
                              Bahia Aparcellada, or the bankie bay vnder 33.
                            
                              Cabo da Ponta vnder 32.
                            
                              Rio dos Negros or the riuer of the Mores vnder 31.
                            
                              Angra Onde Seuio o Battel, that is the hauen where the boate was ſéene vnder 30
                            
                              Ilha da Bahya, or Iland of the bay vnder 29.
                            
                              Ilha de Santa Caterina vnder 28. ½.
                            
                              Bahia do Repairo, or bay of defence vnder 28.
                            
                              Rio do Eſtremo, or riuer beyond meaſure vnder 27.
                            
                              Rio dos Dragos, or riuer of Dragons vnder 26.
                            
                              Ilha de Cananea, or Ilands of Réedes vnder 25. ½.
                            
                              Ilha Doropica vnder 25.
                            Bay of Saint Vincent vnder 24.
                            The riuer of Canane vnder 24
                            The Rio or riuer d
                                    •
                                  Ianero vnder 23. ⅓.
                            
                              Cabo Frio or cold point vnder 23.
                            
                              Bahia do Saluador, or bay of our Sauiour vnder 22.
                            The ſands called os Baixos dos Pargos vnder 21.
                            
                              A Bahia do Eſpirito Santo, or the Bay of the holy Ghoſt vnder 120.
                            The Iland of ſaint Barbara vnder the ſame height of 20.
                            The riuer of S. Luci
                                    •
                                 
                               vnder 19.
                            The riuer of Saint George vnder. 18.
                            
                              Porto S
                                    •
                                 guro or the ſafe hauen vnder 17.
                            
                              Rio das Santos Coſmos the riuer of Saint Coſmos and Da
                                    •
                                 ian vnder 16.
                            The Iland of S. Helena alſo vnder 16.
                            
                              Rio da Praia vnder 15.
                            
                              Rio dos Ilhas the riuer of ſmall Ilāds vnder 14. ½.
                            
                              Porto Real, or kingly hauen vnder 14.
                            
                              Bahya de Todos os Santos vnder 13.
                            
                              Rio Real or kingly riuer vnder 12.
                            The riuer of Saint 
                                 
                                    ••
                                 ancis vnder 11.
                            The riuer of Saint Michael vnder 10.
                            
                              Santo Alexo vnder 9.
                            
                              Cabo or point of S. Auguſtine vnder 8. ¾.
                            The towne of Olinda vnder 8. 3/
                                 •
                              .
                            
                              Pernanbuco, and the Iland of the Aſcention vnder 8.
                            Saint Domingo vnder 7.
                            
                              Artapica vnder 6.
                            
                              Santo Roque, & Santa Maria d' Arribada vnder 5.
                            The bay of Saint Lucas vnder 4.
                            The bay of das Tartarugas vnder 3.
                            
                              Rio de Arreciffe vnder 2.
                        
                     
                     
                        From the Antillas or ſore Iſlands of the Spaniſh Indies, & ſome places lying in the Firme Land, al vpon the north ſide of the Equinoctiall line.
                        
                            
                              Iſla la deceada, or deſired Iland vnder 15. 1/
                                 •
                              
                           
                            The Iland Marigalante vnder 15
                            The Iland la Dominica vnder 15. ½.
                            The Iland la Antigua or old Iland vnder 16. ¼.
                            
                              Cabo de Cantina vpon the Firme land vnder 9. ½.
                            The Iland la Serrana vnder 14. ½.
                            The Serranilla or little Serrana vnder 16.
                            
                              Cayman Grande, or the great Crocodile vnder 19.
                            
                              Cabo de S. Anton in the Iland of Cuba, vnder 22.
                            The riuer of S. Peter & S. Paul vnder 21.
                            
                              Los Cambos d'Almeria vnder 20.
                            
                              Villa Rica la vicia, or olde rich towne vnder 19. ⅔.
                        
                     
                     
                        The hauens and places lying vppon the coaſt called India, with the diſtance & ſituation of the ſame, beginning from the North ſide along the coaſt ſouthweſtward, as the countrie ſtretcheth.
                        
                           And firſt you muſt vnderſtand that the coaſt called India hath his beginning from the creeke called a Enſeada de Iaquetta, at a place called Eſpero, &c.
                            FRom Eſpero to Mangalor are 8. miles. 
                            From Mangalor to Patana are 8
                            From Patana to the point called Punta de Diu are 12.
                            Frō 
                              Diu to the Iland a Ilha do Bette are 9.
                            From the Ilha do Bette to Goa a towne lying in the creeke of Cambaia are 20.
                            From Ilha do Bette to the towne of Daman are 26.
                            From Daman to Surratte a towne lying in the creeke of Cambaia are 
                                 •
                              .
                            From Daman to Danu on the outward part of the coaſt are 7.
                            From Danu to as Ilhas das Vacas are 7.
                            From as Ilhas das Vacas to the towne of Baccain are 3.
                            Frō 
                              Baccain to the towne of Chaul are 12
                            From Chaul to Danda are 5.
                            From Danda to the creeke called a Enſerda de Pero Soares are 3.
                            From Enſeada de Pero Soares to Siffardao are 3.
                            From Siffardao to Dabul are 10.
                            From Dabul to Sanguiſerra are 6.
                            Frō 
                              Sanguiſerra to the riuer Be
                                 •
                              cele are 
                            
                              From the riuer of Bettele to Seyta Por are 3.
                            From Seyta Por to Carapam are 11.
                            From Carapam to the chiefe towne of Goa are 14.
                            From Goa to Angediua are 12.
                        
                     
                     
                        From this place forward beginneth the coaſt of Malabar, which is contained within the coaſt of India.
                        
                            FRom Angediua to Batecala are miles 12.
                            From Batecala to the fortreſſe of Barcelar, are 5.
                            From Barcelar to the Ilands called Primeiro are 6.
                            From Primeiro Ilandes to the fortreſſe of Mangalor are 6.
                            From Mangalor to Monte Fermoſo are 4
                            From Monte Fermoſo to Monte de Lin are 10.
                            From Monte de Lin to the fortreſſe of Cananor are 6.
                            From Cananor to Calecut are 8.
                            From Calecut to Coulette are 2.
                            From Coulette to Chale and Parangale are 7.
                            From Parangale to Tanor are 3.
                            From Tanor to Panane are 6.
                            From Panane to Cochiin are 15.
                            From Cochiin to a place called Arbore de Porca, or the tree of the Sow or Hogge are 9.
                            From Arbore de Porca to Caule Coulao are 9.
                            From Caule Coulao to the fortreſſe Coulao, are 6.
                            From Coulao to the Barreiras are 4.
                            From the Barreiras to Briniao are 8.
                            From Briniao to the Ilandes called Ilha de Tarauancor are 6.
                            From Tarauancor to the Cape de Comoryn are 6.
                        
                        There endeth the coaſt commonly called (in the Orientall coaſt) the Countrie of India wherein is contained the coaſt of Malabar as aforeſaid, all the reſt of the Orientall coaſtes haue their particular names ſeuerall from India, as I haue ſufficiently declared, and all the miles aforeſaid, as alſo all thoſe in the deſcription of the voiage to and from India, are all Spaniſh myles, whereof 17 and ½ are one degrée, which are fiftéene Dutch miles.
                     
                  
                  
                     Hereafter followeth an Inſtruction & memorie of the yeelding or declining of the compaſſe, in the Nauigations and courſes of the Portingales into the Eaſt Indies both outward and homeward, & in what places, and how much they yeeld northweſt, & northeaſt, that is, how much the needle of the compaſſe windeth or turneth, towards the eaſt or weſt, all perfectlie ſet downe, and truly marked by the Portingale Pilots that ſaile ordinarilie.
                     SAyling from Lisbone almoſt to the point of Cabo Verde, thē the néedles or lines of the compaſſe doe yéeld northeaſtward, that is towards the eaſt) two 3. parts of a ſtrike and more.
                     From thence about 4, or 5. degrées further, on the north ſide of the Equinoctiall being 70. or 80. miles from the coaſt, then the néedle of the com
                           ••
                        ſſe windeth Eaſtward, that is, northeaſtward halfe a ſtrike, & if you be 100. or 120. miles from the land, then it windeth northeaſtward ⅓ part of a ſtrike.
                     Running along by the coaſt of Braſilia to 7.8. & 10. degrées, on the ſouth ſide of the Equinoctiall, then the compaſſe will winde Northeaſtward, or to the eaſt ⅓ part of a ſtrike, that is when you ſayle cloſe by the coaſt of Braſilia: from 17. & 18. degrées, vnder which height lieth the ſands called os Baixos dos Abrolhos, then the compaſſe will winde Northeaſtward ¼ or ⅔ partes of a ſtrike, that is when you run not aboue 100. or 120. miles from the coaſt of Braſilia.
                     
                     Running along by the Iland of Martin Vaaz, thē the compaſſe windeth northeaſtward a ſtrike or more.
                     From thence forward till you bee vnder 33. degrées, the compaſſe windeth northeaſtward a ſtrike and a halfe, to ſeauentie or eightie miles beyond the Iland of Triſtan da Cunha.
                     
                     From thence to the Cabo de Bona Speranza, then the compaſſe beginneth againe to winde leſſe, and if you marke the compaſſe well, & that it windeth halfe a ſtrike, to the northeaſt then you are hard by the Cape de bona Speranza, not aboue 30. or 40. miles at the furtheſt frō it, for when you are north & ſouth with the cape, then the compaſſe wil winde northeaſtward ⅓. part of a ſtrike.
                     Sayling from thence forward, if you mark the compaſſe, & find it euen, then you are 80. miles eaſtward from the cape das Agulhas. Sayling

the Compaſſe, if it windeth Northweſtward ⅔. parts of a ſtrike, that is towards the weſt, then you are North & South with the point called Cabo das Correntes, and being vnder 25. and 26. deg. till you come vnder 20. degrées, and that the Compaſſe yéeldeth ¼. of a ſtrike, and more Northweſtward, then look out for the Iſlande called S. Laurence, for you ſhal preſently ſée it, & when you are right ouer againſt Moſambique, then the Compaſſe yeeldeth a ſtrike or ſomewhat leſſe towards the northweſt, & hath ye ſame differēce til you come to the Equinoctial line, towards India. Being 200. miles Eaſt and Weſt with the hauen of Goa, or the coaſt of India, to Cabo de Comorijn, then the Compaſſe, windeth Northweſtward a ſtrike and a half, and vpon the coaſt of India a ſtrike and ⅓.
                     Sayling from Cochiin to Portingal, vntill you haue paſt the Ilands Maldiua, ſouth and ſouthweſtward, then the Compaſſe will wind Northweſtward a ſtrike and a half, till you be vnder 8. and 10. degrées on the ſouth ſide of the Equinoctiall line, and if you find it leſſe then a ſtrike & a halfe, then you are on ye weſt ſide of the ſands called A Saya de Malha, that is the dublet of Iron rings, becauſe they are like it.
                     And when you are vnder 27. or 30. degrées, holding your courſe weſt, then you ſhall find that the Compaſſe yéeldeth a ſtrike and ¼. Northweſtward, and when you find it ſo, thē you are North & ſouth with the point of S. Roman, lying on the furtheſt end ſoutheaſtward from the Iland of S. Laurence.
                     
                     Being north and ſouth with the ſands called Os Baixos de Iudia, making towardes the land called Terra do Natal, til you bee vnder 30. and 31. deg. then the Compaſſe wil yéeld Northweſtward ¾. of a ſtrike, or ſomewhat leſſe, & then you ſhall be North & ſouth with the point called Cabo das Correntes.
                     
                     Comming vnder 32. & 33. degr. forward, and finding the Compaſſe euen, not winding Eaſtward nor weſtward, then you are right vnder the Meridian, you muſt vnderſtande that to marke the Compaſſe well, that it ſaileth not any thing at all, you muſt alwaies haue your eye vpon if in the Peylen the better to looke vnto it, for if you ſayle therin, you ſhal hardly geſſe right, nor make any good account. Hauing paſt the Cape de bona Speranza, ſayling to the Ilande of S. Helena, then the Compaſſe windeth Northeaſtward 1/
                           •
                        . part of a ſtrike, & in the Iſlande of S. Helena, halfe a ſtrike, and from the Iland of S. Helena to the Iland of Aſcention, then the Compaſſe windeth Northeaſtward ⅔. parts of a ſtrike.
                     When you ſayle from Portingall to Braſilia till you bee vnder the height of the point of Cabo de S. Auguſtin, & this Iland of Aſcention, then you muſt vnderſtand that the more the Compaſſe windeth northeaſtward or eaſtward, the further eaſtward you are from the ſaid point, therefore you muſt haue great regard thereunto, for that if you bee comming in Peylen you ſhall find it there to be euen as I ſaid before.
                     From the Iſlande of Aſcention to the cliffe called Penedo de S. Pedro, about 20. or 30. myles eaſtward from it, then the compaſſe is ſcarce halfe a ſtrike Northeaſtward.
                     From thence 17. or 18. degrées further, you ſhall find the Compaſſe euen and alike, by North and South with the Ilande of S. Marie.
                     
                     From thence forward if you haue a large wind, ſo that you ſee the Ilande of Flores, northweſtward from you, thē the Compaſſe will yéelde ½. ſtrike. And when you are 70. or 80. miles beyond the Iland of Flores, thē the Compaſſe is euen.
                     In the Iſland of Fayael, and from thence to the Iſland of Tercera, one of the Flemmiſh Ilands, the Compaſſe will yéeld ⅓. part of a ſtrike Northeaſtward and, from Tercera to Lisbone from ⅔. to ¾. parts of a ſtrike.
                     Now to know the wreaking, winding or declining of the Compaſſe, you muſt vnderſtand, that when you are vnder the Meridiā, that is vnder the line or ſtrike, which is placed in the compaſſe of the firmamēt from the one Pole to the other, yt is right in ye middle croſſe wiſe ouer the Equinoctial line, then euery Compaſſe (that is true and good) will be euen, without declining either Eaſt or weſt, and being vpon the one or the other ſide therof, then the néedle of the Compaſſe declineth on the one or the other ſide, that is when you are on the Eaſt ſide, then the néedle windeth Weſtward, which we call Northweſtward, & when you are on the Weſt ſide of the Meridian, then the Compaſſe declineth Eaſtwarde, which wee name Northeaſtwarde, which ſhal ſuffice to let you knowe what it meaneth, & how to gouerne your ſelf therein.
                  
                  
                     Certain queſtions & anſweres very profitable & neceſſarie to be knowne by all Saylers.
                     
                        IF a man ſhould aſke you how many degrées are in the Compaſſe of the whole world: you may anſwer, there are 360. degrees, each degrée being 15. Dutch miles, and 17. Spaniſh miles and a halfe.
                     
                        Queſtion. What are the Poles of the world?
                     
                        
                        Anſwer. Two points that are imagined or thought yt the world is born or hangeth vpon.
                     
                        Q. What is the Equinoctiall line?
                     
                        A. A ſtrike or line placed from Eaſt to weſt, about the compaſſe or roundnes of the worlde, which is the ſeperation or middle between both the Poles, and when the Sunne is vpon it, which is the 21. of March, and the 23. of September, (ſtilo nouo) then the day & night are of a length, and therefore it is called the Equinoctiall line.
                     
                        Q. What is the Meridian?
                     
                        A. A ſtrike or line placed in the Compaſſe of the world, from the one Pole to the other, and when the ſhadow is in the middle of this line, then it is your Meridian.
                     
                        Q. What is the Parallel?
                     
                        A. All things or places that lie right eaſt and Weſt from you are Parallel.
                     
                        Q. What is Tropicus?
                     
                        A. A ſtrike or line imagined or placed in the compaſſe of the firmament, which is the fixed place, how neare the Sun goeth to the line, & turneth back againe, which is the 21. of Iune (ſtilo nouo) it cōmeth vpō the north ſide of the Equinoctiall, to 23. degrées and ½. which place is called Tropicus Canc
                              •
                           i, and the 21. of Decemb. it commeth on the ſouth ſide of the Equinoctiall, to the like height of degrees, which place is called Tropicus Capricorni.
                     
                     
                        Q. How farre is it betwéene the Equinoctiall line, and any of the two Poles?
                     
                        A. 90. degrées, which is the fourth part of the compas of ye whole world or firmamēt.
                     
                        Q. What is the Horizon?
                     
                        A. It is the compaſſe you can ſee round about you, as farre as till that you think the earth and ſky meeteth together, which is 90. degrees from you and that is the Horizon.
                     
                        Q. What is the Zenith?
                     
                        A. All that part of the sky that ſtandeth right ouer your head, is the Zenith.
                     
                        Q. What is the longitude & the latitude?
                     
                        A. Longitude is the length, and Latitude the breadth of the way you make.
                     
                        Q. If you be vnder the Pole Articus or the North ſtar, whether as then your Compaſſe can ſhew you & guide you right in the courſe you are to hold?
                     
                        A. No, for being in that countrey the néedle of the Compaſſe where it is lined, will be drawne vpwards towards the glaſſe, wherby it cannot worke or ſhew his nature, but being ſomewhat from it, in ſuch manner that the Pole hath no more place or power ouer it, to draw it vpwardes, then the Compaſſe will preſently worke and ſhewe her effect, whereby you hold on your courſe.
                     
                        Q. If vpon the 2
                           •
                        . of Iune (ſtilo nouo) you be by the hauen of Hauana, in the coaſt of Florida, & new Spaine, how much height ſhall you find in the Aſtrolabe, in taking of the Sunne.
                     
                        A. That vpon that day you ſhall haue the Sunne for your Zenith, that is right ouer your head, and then you ſhal find no ſhadow on eyther ſide, then you muſt looke vppon the declination of the day, and all that you finde from the declination, ſo much you are diſtant from the Equinoctiall line towardes the ſun, and that is your height.
                     
                        Q. If you be in the ſame place vpon the 23. of December (ſtilo nouo) what heght of the Sunne ſhal you then haue in the Aſtrolabe.
                     
                        A. At that day the Sun is diſtant from the Equinoctiall line 23. degrées and ½. whervnto adding other 23. degrées and ½. they make 47. degrées, and then there wanteth 43. deg. to make vp 90. degr. theſe 43. degrées ſhall you take in the Aſtrolabe, for the height of the Sunne.
                     
                        Q. What is a degrée?
                     
                        A. Of 360. degrees or parts, wherewith the world is deuided & meaſured, a degrée is one parte, ſo that one degrée is 360. parts of the world.
                     
                        Q. If two men were diſtànt North and South from each other in equall proportion, whether as then ſhould they haue equall declination of the ſunne?
                     
                        A. I, but they muſt be one vppon the North ſide, & the other vpon the South ſide, of the Equinoctial line, which is to be vnderſtood vpon the 22. of March, and the 23. of September (ſtilo nouo) when the Sunne is in the ſame line.
                     
                        Q. If you were vnder the height of 10. degrees, hauing 5. degrées of declination, the Sunne and ſhadowe being gone, how much ſhall you take in the Aſtrolabe?
                     
                        A. 75. degrees and fiue for of declination are 80. degrées, then there wanteth 10. degrées, to make the 90. degr. & that is the Equinoctial line betwéene you and the Sun.
                     
                        Q. If you haue the Sunne and ſhadow vpon one ſide, being vnder 20. degrées, and haue 10. degr. for declination, what ſhal you then take by the Aſtrolabe?
                     
                        A. 80. then there wanteth 10, to make vp 90. and 10. for declination are 20. which is the height that you are vnder.
                     
                        Q. If you chance to take the height of the ſunne for 4.5. daies or more together at 90. degrées, how many miles ſhall you haue ſailed all that time?
                     
                        A. All that the ſunne hath gon forward, ſo that all the degrées & minutes that you find your ſelfe vpon the ſame dayes to bee diſtant

from the declination, thoſe are the miles and the way that you haue ſayled, that is, if the Sunne be riſen or deſcended 6. degrées more or leſſe, ſo haue you likewiſe ſo much furthered or gone on your way.
                     
                        Q. If you were by ye land in any place, vnder one degrée, on the Coaſt lying Eaſt & Weſt, holding your courſe 89. miles from thence Weſt, & weſt & by North, vnder what height and how far ſhal you as then be from ye land?
                     
                        A. Vnder the height of two degrées and 15. Dutch, & 17. Spaniſh miles and a halfe from the land.
                     
                        Q. If the Sunne were in the one Tropicus, & you in the other, what height ſhould you then make in taking of the Sunne?
                     
                        A. The ſunne is as then diſtant from ye Equinoctiall line 23. deg. & ½. with 23. deg. and 
                           •
                        . more that you are diſtant from it, which make 47. degrées, then there wanteth thrée 43. degrées to make vp 90. deg. thoſe you muſt take by the Aſtrolabe, thoſe you ſhall compare or ad to the declination which is 23. deg. and ½. it maketh 66. ½. then there wanteth 23. 1/
                           •
                        . degr. to make 90. and that is your height.
                     
                        Q. If you were in a place, & knew ye height thereof, but not the declination of the day, how would you know it without your book?
                     
                        A. Take the height of the Sun by your Aſtrolabe, and that you find you muſt adde to the height that the place lyeth vnder, and whatſoeuer it amounteth vnto aboue 90. degrées, or that it wanteth of 90. degrées, is the declination of the day.
                     
                        Q. Which are the places of ye world, wherin it is 6. monthes day, & 6. monthes night?
                     
                        A. Vnder the Poles of the worlde.
                     
                        Q. What is the height?
                     
                        A. All that the Sunne riſeth from morning to noone, likewiſe the height is the degrees, that you haue from the Pole to the Horizon: alſo the height is all the diſtance you haue from the Equinoctiall line.
                     
                        Q. How ſhall you know the declination of the Sunne?
                     
                        A. You ſhall take the height of the Sun vpon the 21. of Iune Stilo nouo, and then ſtayed till the 23. of December after, vpon the which day again you ſhal take the height of the Sunne, which done, you muſt ſubtract the leaſt number out of the greateſt, and that which reſteth you ſhall deuide in the middle, & in this ſort you ſhall find the declination.
                     
                        Q. What is the greateſt declination that the ſunne maketh in one day?
                     
                        A. Foure and twentie minutes.
                     
                        Q. How many degrees doe account for a ſtrike or line of the Compaſſe?
                     
                        A. Eleuen & 
                           •
                        . for 32. times, 11. ¼ maketh 360. degrees, which is the Compaſſe of the world.
                     
                        Q. How far is the ſouthſtarre diſtant from the Pole?
                     
                        A. Thirtie degrees keeping neither neerer nor further off.
                     
                        Q. What doth the Compaſſe ſignifie?
                     
                        A. The Horizon with the Compaſſe of the world deuided into 32. degrees.
                     
                        Q. What is the Sea Carde?
                     
                        A. The land and the Sea.
                     
                        Q. What is the Aſtrolabe?
                     
                        A. The 4. part of ye world, which is 90. deg.
                     
                        Q. Wherefore are the lines of the Compaſſe, or in the nauigation euen and alike, and paſſe altogether through the Center of one length, without difference in greatneſſe, or compaſſe of roundnes, & wherefore thē doe you recken more miles vpon one degree and line, then vpon the other, for yt by order they ſhould haue as many miles as the other.
                     
                        A. The great circles, or compaſſing lines, which ye Equinoctiall naturally hath, that is, the 32. deg. are altogether euē & alike, ech being 15. Dutch, & 17. Spaniſh miles, and ½. but the ſmal circles or comparing lines haue ſome more, ſome leſſe, according to ye eleuation of ye Pole, in ſuch maner, yt the nearer you be to ye Equinoctial line, ſo much longer your way wil be, & the nearer you go to the Poles the ſhorter will be your way, for the Pole riſeth or deſcēdeth one degrée, & running along by the line, it neither riſeth nor declineth.
                     
                        Q. How ſhall you at noone time knowe, how much the ſunne declineth Northeaſt in Northweſt, in any place of the world, whatſoeuer you ſhal be.
                     
                        A. You ſhal make a rounde circle or Ring vpon the ground, & ſet a néedle, or any other thing in the middle thereof, & ſo ſtay the riſing of ye Sun, & in the firſt comming out thereof you may mark where ye ſhadow lyeth, which hauing marked, you ſhal ſtay til euening, vntill the Sun goeth down, & thē looke where ye ſhadow of the néedle is, & marke it as before, whereby you ſhal make your account in this ſort: you ſhal meaſure how much there is frō the one marke to ye other, & ſo deuide it croſſe wiſe in equall diſtance, which ſhall bee your North & ſouth: now when the ſhadow of the Sunne commeth vpon thoſe lines or ſtrikes, then it is noone, now to know how much the néedle of ye Compas lieth northeaſt or northweſt, ſet the Compaſſe by, & thē you ſhal preſently ſée where the needle declineth, whether it be eaſtward or weſtward, and how much, whereupon you may make your account.
                     
                        Q. Where is the needle of the Compaſſe euen and alike?
                     
                        A. Vnder the Meridian, or at noone time?
                  
                  The end of the 3 Booke
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE FOVRTH BOOKE.
                  A moſt true and certaine Extract and Summarie of all the Rents, Demaines, Tolles, Taxes, Impoſtes, Tributes, Tenthes, third-pennies, & incommings of the King of Spaine, throughout all his Kingdoms, lands, Prouinces, and Lordſhips, as they are collected out of the originall Regiſters of his Chamber of accompts.
                  Together with a briefe and cleere deſcription of the gouernment, power, and pedegree of the Kings of Portingall.
                  Tranſlated out of Spaniſh into Low-Dutch by Iohn Hughen of Linſchoten.
                  And out of Dutch into Engliſh by W. P.
                  
                     HISPANIA
                     map of Spain
                  
                  LONDON Imprinted by John Wolfe. 1598.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  The fourth Booke.
                  
                     A moſt true and certain extract & ſummarie of all the Rents, Demaines, Tolles, Taxes, Impoſtes, Tributes, Tenthes, third-pennies, and incommings of the King of Spaine throughout all his kingdomes, lands, prouinces & Lord ſhippes, as they are collected out of the originall Regiſters of his ſeuerall Chambers of accomptes: together with a briefe and cleare deſcription of the gouernment, power and pedegree of the Kings of Portingall.
                     
                  
                  
                     To the Reader.
                     FOraſmuch as this mine itinerario or nauigation, is onely a Treatiſe of the lands and coaſts of the Eaſt-Indies & Orientall Countries, all which are at this day vnder the Gouernment and command of the king of Spaine: ſo do I thinke it not impertinent, nor from the purpoſe to ioyne herewithall an Extract, and Summarie of all the Rents, Demaynes, and Reuenewes of the ſame king in all his Kingdomes, Lands, Prouinces, and Lordſhips, euen as I haue drawne them all out of the Originall Regiſters of his ſeuerall Chambers of accounts, and tranſlated out of Spaniſh into the Low-Dutch tungue: wherein there are declared not onely the reuenewes of euerie Prouince, and iuriſdiction by themſeues, but alſo of all the Citties and countries of the whole kingdome of Spaine in particular, with their proper names and by-names: ſo that a man may thereby both ſhape vnto himſelfe a repreſentation and memoriall of thoſe rents, as well in groſſe as in ſeuerall: and alſo vnderſtand the number of Cities and countries throughout all Spaine. Hoping that it will be accepted in as courteous ſort, as it will be dilectable to all thoſe that are deſirous of nouelties.
                  
                  
                     A note or inſtruction what ſorts of monies are vſed in Spayne, wherewith they make their accountes.
                     
                        FIrſt you muſt vnderſtande, for the better explanation of ye matter enſuing, that in Spaine they vſe to reckē by Marauedies as wel in great ſums, is in little: and when they paſſe aboue a hundred thouſand in number, that is to ſay, tenne times a hundreth thouſande, they call it a Quento, which is properly a million of Marauedies. Vnder which two names, and diuiſions the ſaide rentes, reuenewes, &c. ſhalbe ſet downe and declared, according to the ordinances and cuſtomes vſed in the Kinges Chambers of accountes, throughout the whole Countrey of Spain: and you muſt know that 34. Maranedies are a Spaniſh Ryall of ſiluer (being vi. d. Engliſh money) and 11. Spaniſh Rials are a Ducket, (which is fiue ſhillings & vi. d. Engliſh money) and euery Quento or million of Marauedies is 2673. Duckets, 8. Ryals, and 26. Marauedies, (which is 735. l. v.s̄. x. d. ½. Engliſh money.) Theſe Marauedies ſhalbe written and ſet down after the Spaniſh manner, that is when the ſumme amounteth aboue hundreths of Marauedies then they ſet this marke V. before, beginning from the thouſandes vpwardes, ſo that thereby you may the better and more eaſily know them at the firſt ſight, which for your more eaſe and better intelligence, I haue ſet downe as hereafter followeth, and this I truſt ſhall ſuffice for inſtruction herein.
                  
                  
                     The 1. Chapter. The rents, demaines and reuenews of the King in his kingdomes of Spaine, Naples, Sicilie, Aragon, &c. and in all his Lordſhippes, except the kingdome & iuriſdiction of the Crowne of Portingall, which we will hereafter report by themſelues.
                     
                         
                           THe Salinas (that is,Salinas. the ſalt landes) belonging to the Crowne of Spaine, are yearely taxed to pay vnto ye King ninety thrée Quentos. 93. Quentos.
                         For the tenthes of the ſea,Biſcay. Guipiſcoa. Foure 
                                 •
                              ill townes. for marchandiſes that come out of Biſcay and the Prouinces of Guipiſcoa, with the 4. hilly townes lying on the ſea coaſt, they pay for all wares ſent from thence by land into Caſtilia, after the rate of one in euery ten, and is paid in the cuſtome houſes of Victoria, Horduna, and Valmas Ceda, amounting yearely for the King vnto the ſumme of ſeuentie Quentos. 
                              •
                           0. Quentos.
                         The tenth of the ſea for wares that paſſe

through the kingdome of Leon, by the hauens of Sanabria,
                           Leon. and Villa Franca yéelde yearely the ſumme of one Quento. 1. Quento.
                         The tenth of the ſea for wares that paſſe out of the principality of Aſturias,
                           Aſturia. by the towne of Ouieda, pay yearely the ſumme of Q. 375 V 000.
                         The rentes of the Prouoſtes office,Bilbau. within the towne of Bilbau which is for thinges that come into the towne pay yearely for the King Q. 490 V 000.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 2. Chapter. A declaration of the Alcauales and third-pennies which are paid in Spaine.
                     
                        TLl the Alcauales, thirdes and other rentes, which the king of Spaine hath in all the Prouinces, Townes, villages and Countries of al his kingdomes and Lordſhippes, as alſo what euery towne with their territorie; and precinctes doe ſeuerally pay, that you may the plainelier ſée and vnderſtand, you muſt firſt learne what theſe rents of Alcauales are, and what they do ſignifie: namely of all goods, marchandiſes, houſes, lands, and of all other thinges whatſoeuer they may be (none excepted) it is the cuſtome in Spaine, to pay ye tenth pennie to the king: and that at euery time and as often as ſuch goods, wares, houſes lands or whatſoeuer els, are ſold frō one to another: & this tenth pennie is called Alcaual: likewiſe all handie crafts men, Mercers, Haberdaſhers, and other trades, that buy and ſell in their ſaid trades, as alſo Butchers, Fiſhmongers. Inkéepers, or any other trade, occupation, victualling, or hand worke whatſoeuer, muſt euery man pay a tenth pennie of all thinges whatſoeuer, they ſell, and as oftentimes as they doe ſell any thing, where vpon euerie Citie, towne &c. doth compounde and agrée with the king for a yearely ſomme to be paide into his coffers, ſo that there are certain which do farme the ſame of the king, & pay it yearely accordingly, which ſummes are receyued cleerely into the kings coffers, all coſtes and charges deducted. To the ſame end there are in euery chiefe towne and prouince of the countrey, diuers receyuers appointed to take all accounts and ſummes of money in the kings behalfe, that ariſe of the ſaid Alcaualaos, and again to pay out of the ſame the Iuros, that is, ſuch ſummes of money as the king by warrant appointeth to be paide vnto certaine perſons, as alſo other aſſignations, appointed likewiſe to be paide, which paymentes the ſaid receyuers doe ſet downe in account for their owne diſcharge, and thereof as alſo of their receipts, do make a yearely and general account into the kings Exchequer. Now to vnderſtand what ye third pennie is, it is thus, that many yeares paſt the Cleargie of Spaine did of their owne frée willes, giue and graunt vnto the King the thirde pennie of all ſpirituall liuings, rentes, and reuenewes, which they did towards the aide, maintenance, and defence of the Catholike and Romiſh religion, which is likewiſe receyued by the ſaid receyuers, and officers of the Alcaual, and as I ſaid, is called Tercias, and are likewiſe rented out and farmed by the ſaid receiuers, in euery ſeuerall Cittie and iuriſdiction: ſome of theſe Alcauals the King hath ſold, and others he hath beſtowed vpon ſome men for rewardes, whereof mention ſhall bee made as time and place requireth.
                     
                         THe towne of Burgos,
                           Burgos. wt the iuriſdiction therof payeth yearly for Alcauala and Tertias the ſumme of 17 Q. 329 V 880
                         The Bayliwicke of Burgos, which is called Bureba, and lyeth cloſe by Burgos, payeth yearly the ſumme of 2 Q.Oca. 646 V 000
                         The hill of Oca payeth yearely the ſumme of 34 V 000
                         The Bayliwicke of the Prouince of Rioxa
                           Rioxa. payeth yearly 3. Q.Hebro 757 V 000
                         The Bayliwicke of Hebro payeth yearely 2 Q.Hebrohooke. 346 V 000
                         The Bayliwick called the Hook of Hebro payeth yearely 1 Q 402 V 000
                         The towne of Victoria payeth yearly 269 V 000Victoria
                        
                         The Prouince of Guipiſcoa payeth yearly 1 Q 181 V 000Guipiſcoa
                        
                         The Iron of the ſame Prouince of Guiſpiſcoa payeth yearely cuſtome 150 V 000.
                         The ſeuen Bayliwickes which are of olde Caſtilia on the hils pay yearly 942 V 000
                         The valley of Mena,
                           Mena. which is in the ſame old Caſtilia payeth yearely the ſumme of 229 V 000
                         The Prouince of the towne of Logronno payeth yearely 7 Q.Logronno 746 V 000
                         The towne of Iangas and her iuriſdiction payeth yearely 151 V 000Iangas
                        
                         The towne of S. Domingo payeth yearely 4 Q.Sancta Domingo. 812 V 000
                         The Bayliwicke of the towne of Diego payeth yearely 1 Q.Diego. 545 V 000
                         The Bayliwicke of Cande Munnon payeth yearely 4 Q.Cande Munnon 612 V 000
                         The Bayliwicke of Caſtro Xeres payeth

yearely 8 Q. 485 V 000
                         
                           Serrato.The Bayliwicke of Serrato payeth yearely 1 Q. 965 V 000
                         
                           MonſonThe Bayliwicke of Monſon payeth yearely 2 Q. 276 V 000
                     
                     You muſt vnderſtand that all the Bayliwickes that are named of old Caſtilia, are one Spaniſh Prouince.
                     
                         
                           PlacentiaThe Towne of Placentia and Prouince of Campos pay yearely 16 Q 940 V 000
                         
                           Carion.The towne of Carion payeth yearely 4 Q 945 V 000
                         The Bayliwicke of Carion payeth yearely 2 Q 910 V 000
                         The villages of Pedro Aluares de Vega pay yearely 655 V 000
                         
                           SahagunThe towne of Sahagun payeth yearely the ſumme of 2 Q 125 V 000
                         
                           SaldanaThe Towne of Saldana payeth yearely 1 Q 013 V 000
                         
                           PerinaThe Bayliwicke of Perina payeth yearely 178 V 000
                         
                           CampoThe Bayliwicke of Campo which are hils pay yearely 1 Q 730 V 000
                         
                           MirandaThe valley of Miranda, lying by the hilles payeth yearely 557 V 000
                         The foure townes, called the ſea coaſt, Laredo, S. Ander, Caſtra de Vrdiales, and S. Vincent pay yearely 3 Q 616 V 000
                         
                           Aſturias.The principalitie of Aſturias, and the towne of Ouiedo pay yearly 12 Q 345 V 000
                         
                           Lugo.The towne of Lugo lying the kingdome of Galicia, with the place of his Biſhoprick pay yearely 4 Q 137 V 000
                         
                           ModonedoThe town of Modonedo in the ſame kingdome pay yearely 1 Q 732 V 000
                         
                           OrenſoThe towne of Orenſo and her iuriſdiction in Galicia payeth yearly 6 Q 505 V 000
                         
                           S. Ieames in Galitia.The towne of Saint Ieames in Galicia, in Latin called Compoſtella, and the iuriſdiction of the Archbiſhopricke pay yearly 18 Q 212 V 000
                         
                           TuyThe towne of Tuy and the iuriſdiction of his Biſhopricke in Galicia pay yearely 5 Q 825 V 000
                         
                           Ponto Ferrara.The Towne of Ponto Ferrara in Galicia pay yearely 6 Q 350 V 000
                         
                           Leon.The towne of Leon and her iuriſdiction and Biſhoprick pay yearly 6 Q 350 V 000
                         
                           AſtorgaThe circuite of the towne and Biſhopricke Aſtorga u
                              •
                            
                           Leon paye yearely 2 Q 455 V 000
                         The villages of the Abbay of Leon and Aſtorga in the kingdome of Leon pay yearely the ſumme of 797 V 000
                         
                           Salas.The pariſhes of Salas in the principalitie of Aſturia pay yearely 231 V 000
                         
                           Samora.The towne of Samora and her iuriſdiction payeth yearly 15 Q 525 V 000
                         The town of Toro and her iuriſdiction payeth yearly 11 Q 112 V 000Toro.
                        
                         The towne of Vienna to the Duke of Ofſuna payeth yearly 062 V 000Vienna
                        
                         The valley of Guirena payeth yearlieGuirena. 2 Q 3
                              •
                           5 V 000
                         The towne of Bariſal de la Coina payeth yearly 250 V 000Bariſal de la Coma.
                        
                         The towne of Salamanca and her iuriſdiction payeth yearly 24 Q 300 V 000Salamanca.
                        
                         The towne of Rodrigo and her iuriſdiction payeth yearly 14 Q 345 V 000Rodrigo
                        
                         The iuriſdiction of Trigeros payeth yearlyTrigeros, 417 V 000
                         The towne of Olmillo payeth yearlieOlmillo 047 V 000
                         The towne of Torde Sillas and her iuriſdiction payeth yearely 2 Q 600 V 000Torde Sillas.
                        
                         The towne of Valla Dolid and her iuriſdiction payeth yearely 29 Q 730 V 000Valla Dolid.
                        
                         The towne of Torde Humos payeth yearely 827 V 000Torde Humos.
                        
                         The town of Medina del Camp and her iuriſdictiō payeth yearly 31 Q 375 V 000Medina del Campo
                        
                         The towne of Olmeda and her iuriſdiction payeth yearely 2 Q 149 V 000Olmeda
                        
                         The towne of Naua and ſeuen Churches pay yearely 333 V 000Naua
                        
                         The towne of Madrigal payeth yearelyMadrigal 802 V 000
                         The towne of Arenalo and her iuriſdiction payeth yearely 5 Q 31
                              •
                            V 000Arenalo
                        
                         The town of Auila and her iuriſdiction payeth yearely 19 Q 365 V 000Auila.
                        
                         The towne of Segouia and her iuriſdiction payeth yearely 12 Q 480 V 000Segouia
                        
                         The town of Aranda de Duero & her iuriſdiction payeth yearly 3 Q 350 V 000Aranda de Duero
                        
                         The towne of Roa payeth yearelie 1 Q 515 V 
                              •••
                           
                           Roa
                        
                         The towne of Cunnel de Y
                                 •
                              an belonging to the Duke of O
                                 •
                              luna payeth yearelie 154 V 000Gunnel de Y
                                 •
                              an
                        
                         The town of Sepulueda and her iuriſdiction payeth yearely Q 540 V 000Sepulueda
                        
                         The towne of Soria and her iuriſdiction payeth yearlie 10 Q 282 V 000Soria
                        
                         The iuriſdiction of the towne & biſhoprick of Oſina pay yearelie 4 Q 000 V 000Oſina.
                        
                         The townes of Agreda & Taraſona & their iuriſdiction pay yearelie 2 Q 083 V 000Agreda Taraſona
                        
                         The towne of Molina and her iuriſdiction pay yearelie 5 Q 792 V 000Molina
                        
                         The towne of Siguenca and her iuriſdiction payeth yearelie 3 Q 662 V 000Siguenca
                        
                         The towne of Cuenca and her iuriſdiction payeth yearlie 24 Q 645 V 000Cuenca
                        
                         The towne of Huete and her iuriſdiction pay yearelie 17 Q 916 V 000Huete
                        
                         
                           
                           Villa Rexo de Fuentes, &c.The towne of Villa Rexo de Fuentes payeth yearely 2 Q 512 V 000
                         The Prouince called the Marquiſat of Villena, which are the townes of Tinabilla Albaſlette, la Roda, S. Clemente, and the towne of Villena and her iuriſdiction payeth yearely 31 Q 503 V 
                              •
                           00
                         
                           BelmonteThe towne of Belmonte payeth yearely in Terceras onely for the Alcauala belonging to the Marquis 476 V 000
                         
                           MurciaThe towne of Murcia and her iuriſdiction payeth yearely 14 Q 820 V 000
                         
                           LorcaThe towne of Lorca & her iuriſdiction payeth yearely 5 Q 000 V 000
                         
                           CartagenaThe towne of Cartagena and her iuriſdictiion payeth yearely 2 Q 000 V 000
                         
                           AlcarasThe towne of Alcaras and her iuriſdiction payeth yearely 16 Q 984 V 000
                         
                           Segura de la SierraThe towne of Segura de la Sierra, and her prouince and iuriſdiction, which is of the maiſterſhippe of S. Iacob payeth yearely 11 Q 
                              •
                           91 V 000
                         
                           Villa Nueua de los in
                                 •
                              antesThe towne of Villa nueua de 
                                 •
                              os in
                                 •
                              antes and her Prouince, which is called El campo de Motye
                                 •
                              , which is of the maiſterſhip of Saint Iacob, payeth yearely 8 Q 664 V 000
                         
                           Ocanna & CaſtilliaThe towne of Ocanna, and the prouince named Caſtillia, which is of the maiſterſhippe of Saint Iacob payeth yearely 2
                              •
                            Q 000 V 000
                         
                           GuadalaxaraThe towne of Guadalaxara and her iuriſdiction payeth yearly 11 Q 264 V 000
                         
                           Pios & 
                                 〈◊〉
                              
                           The towne of Pios and Poſo pay yearely 160 V 000
                         
                           
                              
                                 〈1 paragraph〉
                              
                           The towne of Almonaſid and prouince of 
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                              , which are of the maiſterſhippe of S. Iacob paie yearely 1 Q 188 V 000
                         
                           V
                                 ••
                              da, 
                                 〈…〉
                              
                           The townes of Vzeda, Talamanca, Tordelaguna, and their iuriſdictions which are of the Archbiſhopricke of Toledo pay yearely 18 Q 250 V 000
                         
                           IepasThe Towne of Iepas payeth yearely 423 V 000
                         
                           Alcala de Henares BiriuegaThe towne of Alcala de Henares and her iuriſdiction, with the towne of Biriuega belonging to the Archibiſhopricke of Toledo payeth yearely 16 Q 250 V 000
                         
                           MadrilThe towne of Madril and her iuriſdiction payeth yearely 23 Q 250 V 000
                         
                           Puno en RoſtroThe Eareledome of Puno en Roſtro, that is, a fiſt on ye face yearely 1 Q 262 V 000
                         
                           Cubas & GrennonThe townes of Cubas and Grennon which belong to Don Aluaro de Mendoça, who receyueth the Alcauala, payeth one-onely in Tertias 117 V 000
                         
                           GalapagarThe towne of Galapagar belonging to the Duke of Infantadgo payeth yearely 16
                              •
                            V 000
                         
                           IleſcasThe towne of Ileſcas and her iuriſdiction payeth yearely 2 Q 297 V 000
                         The towne of Toledo and her iuriſdiction payeth yearely 
                              •
                           3 Q 000 V 000Toledo
                        
                         The rent of the hilles which is paid for paſturing of cattell which goeth to the country of 
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                               emadura to be fed, amoū
                           teth yearly to the king 19 Q 503 V 000
                         The villages of the Pryorie of S. Iohn pay yearelie 7 Q 
                              •
                           55 V 000
                         The towne of Almagro and her prouinceAlmagro which is called de Campo de Cala traua and is of the maiſterſhippe of Calatraua payeth yearely 7 Q 120 V 000
                         The Alcauala of the Herbage and Paſturage in the ſaid maiſterſhippe is yearely to the king 3 Q 4
                              •
                           8 V 000
                         The towne Cuidad Real payeth yearelie 4 Q 150 V 000Cuidad Real.
                        
                         The villages lying in the countrey called the Archdeaconſhip of Talauera de la Reyna pay yearely 14 Q 326 V 000Taleuera de la Reyna
                        
                         The town of Placentia & her iuriſdiction & ye
                           Placentia villages yt are accounted of the Archdeaconſhippe pay yearely 18 Q 475 V 000
                         The towne of Truxillo and her iuriſdiction payeth yearely 12 Q 224 V 000Truxillo
                        
                         The towne of Caceres and her iuriſdiction payeth yearelie 7 Q 850 V 000Caceres
                        
                         The towne of Badaios and her prouince andBadaios iuriſdiction pay yearlie 9 Q 972 V 000
                         The towne of Alcantara,
                           Alcantara her iuriſdiction & prouince, and is of the maiſterſhip of Alcantara paieth yearelie 9 Q 403 V 000
                         The Herbage of the ſame countrie whereon beaſtes doe paſture are yearely to the King 3 Q 481 V 000
                         The prouince of Serna of the maiſterſhip of Alcantara paieth yearly 
                              •
                            Q 570 V 000Serna
                        
                         The towne of Merida and her iuriſdictionMerida which is in the prouince of Leon being of the maiſterſhip of S. Iacob paieth yearelie 21 Q 234.Fuento el Maeſtro V 000
                         The town of Fuente el Maeſtro, & her iuriſdiction, being in ye prouince of Leon, and of the maiſterſhippe of S. Iacob payeth yearely 6 Q 973 V 000
                         The towne of Guadalcana and her iuriſdiction of the maiſterſhippe of S. Iacob paieth yearelie 3 Q 305 V 000Guadalcana
                        
                         The towne of Xeres de Badaios of the maiſterſhip of S. Iacob payeth yearelie 7 Q 100 V 000Xeres de Badaios
                        
                         The town of Siuillia her iuriſdiction & partition paieth yearely 182 Q 38
                              •
                            V 000Siuillia
                        
                         The rentes of the Lordſhippe of the ſame towne payeth yearely 2 Q 000 V 000
                         The townes of Palma and Guelues belongingPalma and Guelues. to the Earles of Palma and Guelues pay yearely 235 V 000
                         The townes of Teuar and Ardales,
                           Teuar and Ardales. belonging

to the Marqueſſe of Ardales pay yearelie 235 V 000
                         
                           IlerenaThe towne of Ilerena and her iuriſdiction which is in the Prouince of Leon and of the maiſterſhippe of Saint Iacob paieth yearely 3 Q 125 V 000
                         
                           CadizThe Towne of Cadiz payeth yearely 8 Q 452 V 000
                         The rent of Cadiz called the Almadrauas which is the fiſhing called Atun are worth yearely 3 Q 035 V 000
                         
                           GibralterThe towne of Gibraltar payeth onely the thirde pennie for they are free of Alcaualen by the Kinges licence payeth yearely 1 Q 500 V 000
                         
                           Xeres.The towne of Xeres de la Frontera and her iuriſdiction yearely 21 Q 050 V 000
                         
                           CatmonaThe towne of Catmona and her iuriſdiction yearely 9 Q 450 V 000
                         
                           Lora and Sette Filla.The townes of Lora and Sete Filla paye yearely 680 V 000
                         
                           EgijaThe towne of Egija with the ſuburbes payeth 15 Q 500 V 000
                         
                           CordonaThe towne of Cordona and her iuriſdiction payeth yearelie 48 V 995 V 000
                         The countrey called Rea lengos of Cordoua pay yearelie 17 Q 316 V 000
                         
                           AnduxarThe towne of Anduxar and iuriſdiction pay yearely 4 Q 800 V 000
                         
                           VViedaThe towne of Wieda and iuriſdiction payeth yearelie 11 Q 640 V 000
                         
                           BaeſaThe towne of Baeſa and iuriſdiction payeth yearlie 17 Q 316 V 000
                         
                           QuexadaThe towne of Quexada payeth yearlie 1 Q 415 V 000
                         
                           CarcolaThe gentilitie of Carcola payeth yearlie 6 Q 885 V 000
                         
                           S. EſteuenThe Erledome of S. Eſteuen payeth yearly 1 Q 340 V 000
                         
                           Martos.The towne of Martos and her iuriſdiction, being of the maiſterſhippe of Calatraua parte of Andoloſia payeth yearely 11 Q 436 V 000
                         
                           Iaen.The towne of Iaen and her iuriſdiction payeth yearely 15 Q 909 V 000
                         
                           GranadaThe towne of Granada and her iuriſdiction paieth yearely 42 Q 910 V 000
                         The ſilke of the kingdome of Granada was wont to be worth (before ye Moores were driuen out of the countrey) 42 Quentos, it is now but 22 Q 000 V 000
                         The rent which is called Aguella & Auilles of Granada paieth yearly 
                              •
                            Q 
                              •
                           50 V 000
                         
                           Loxa & AlbamaThe townes of Loxa and Alhama in the kingdome of Granada paie yearelie 3 Q 650 V 000
                         
                           BacaThe town of Baca in Granado, & her iuriſdiction paieth yearlie 10 Q 626 V 000
                         
                           GuadixThe towne of Guadix in Granado and her iuriſdiction payeth yearlie 6 Q 395 V 000
                         The towne of Almena in Granado and her iuriſdiction paieth yearly 3 Q 080 V 000Almena
                        
                         The townes of Almunecar,
                           Almunecar Mutril, Salabrena. 
                           Mutril and Salabrena in Granado pay yearelie 2 Q 643 V 000
                         The towne of Malaga in Granado pay yearely 16 Q 269 V 000Malaga
                        
                         The towne of Veles Malaga in Granada pay yearelie 5 Q 519 V 000Veles Malaga
                        
                         The towne of Pulchena payeth yearlie 410 V 000Pulchena
                        
                         The towne of Ronda and her iuriſdiction pay yearly 5 Q 334 V 000Ronda.
                        
                         The Ilande of Carnaria payeth yearely 4 Q 850 V 000Canary
                        
                         The Iſland of Teneriffe payeth yearely 3 Q 
                              •
                           00 V 000Teneriffe.
                        
                         The Iſland of La Palma payeth yearely 2 Q 400 V 000La Palma.
                        
                         The dayly contribution that the kingdomes or countries of Spaine doe pay yearly vnto the King, are worth 104. Quentos, 305 V 000 Marauedies, which contribution is gathered throughout all his Prouinces landes and townes of Spaine among the common ſort of people, or ſubiects, that are euery man taxed to pay according to their habilities, and giue yearely a certayne ſumme as their goodes doe amount vnto in value, which doth riſe vnto as I ſaide before yearely 104 Q 305 V 000
                         The cuſtome of the tenth pennie for drie hauens which are paſſages within the lande of the kingdomes of Valencia, Artagon and Nauarre, which men pay vpon all goods that are carried out of Spaine into the ſaide countries, and for ſuch as are brought into the ſame countries out of Spaine, paide one with the other the tenth pennie, which tolle amounteth to in the yeare the ſumme of 49 Q 035 V 000
                         The drie hauens or paſſages within the land comming in or going out, which border on the kingdome of Portingale, and lie in part of Spaine called Ca
                                 •
                              hlia, pay yearelie for the tenth pennie of all ſuch goods paſſing to and fro 34 Q 155 V 000.
                         The wolles that are yearely carried out of Spaine into other countries, pay for euery ſacke waighing about ten Aroben, each Arobe bein 25. pound two duckats: for ſuch as are naturall all borne ſubiects of the land, but a ſtranger payeth 4. duckets, which amount vnto, the yeare with the other 53 Q 586. V 000
                         The chiefe Almoxariffchay of C
                                 •
                              la is larmed of the king for 10
                              •
                            Q. 00 V 000. Marauedies yearely, and is for the tenth pennie of all wares & Marchandiſes of the Neatherlandes,

France, England, Portingale, Italie, &c comming into Spaine, and there to be diſcharged, which one yeare with the other amount vnto 154 Q 309 V 000.
                         The Almoxarif
                                 •
                              hap of the Spaniſh Indies by the towne of Ciuillia hath farmed of the King, which ariſeth of all the wares that are laden in Ciuillia and ſent into the Indies and are rated to pay the twentieth pennie, & arriuing in India, the ſame wares doe pay yet a twentieth penny more, and it is farmed out of the twentieth pennie due in Ciuillia, yerely for the ſumme of 67 Q 000 V 000.
                         The rent which the King receaueth by the mint in Spaine, which is of euery marke of Siluer that is coyned in the ſaid Mint, each marke accounted ſixe duckets in ſiluer, one Riall of plate. This rent is called El Sēno reaxo de la moneda, and the mint of Ciuill only riſeth to as much as all the others, this is yearely to the king 22 Q 000 V 000
                         The King hath farmed out the Maſter ſhips of Saint Iacob, Calatraua, & Alcantara to the ſuckers of Ausburge, and is the cuſtomes of corne, wine oyle & other things, that are rated at a tenth pennie, which in times paſt the ſaid Maſters vſed to haue. In theſe cuſtomes are not comprehended nether Tercias, nor Alcaualas, but are receaued apart, as I ſaid before. Theſe Maſterſhips are the cheiefe knights of the Croſſe belonging to thoſe thrée orders, which vſed to haue chiefe rulers ouer them, which were called Maſters, like the knights of Rhodes & Malta, or as in Cloyſters, and religious houſes, which were ſworne to be true and obedient ſubiects, and to obſerue certaine orders preſcribed, as it is yet at this day, which Maſterſhips were in times paſt (beeing offices of great eſtimation and account) onely giuen vnto the blood Royall, or els to ſome of the Kinges own children, hauing certaine lands apointed to them, and abſolute commandement ouer them but of late yeares the kings of Spaine haue taken the ſame offices into their hands, ſeruing, or at the leaſt preſenting their places as Maſters and commaunders ouer all knights of the Croſſe, of what order ſoeuer, the farme whereof amounteth yearely vnto the ſum of 98 Q 000 V 000.
                         The king hath likewiſe rented out the paſturage of the lands of the ſaid maſterſhippes yerely for the ſum of 37 Q 000 V 000.
                         He hath likewiſe found out the Quickſiluer of Almalen in the hil of Sierra Morena, in the fieldes of Calatraua for yerely rent of 73 Q 000 V 000.
                         The Bulles of the Popes of Rome, which are called the Santa Cruſada, yeeld yearely to the king 200 Q 000 V 000.
                         Which being reduced into Engliſh monie amounteth vnto the ſumme of one hundreth fortie ſeauen thouſand fiftie and eight poundes and fiftéene ſhillings. 
                         The rent called Subſedie, which is thus, all Prieſtes and ſpirituall perſons, that haue any benefices or ſpiritual rents of Churches, Cloyſters, Chappels, and ſuch like, muſt euerie man pay a certaine ſumme for a confirmation of his place, or an enterance into his Stipendio Sallarus, benefices and qualities, which is like our firſt fruites.) This is giuen to maintaine warres againſt Infidels, & Heretickes: for the which moſt Churches & Cloyſters haue agréed for a certaine ſumme yearely, which cleare of al charges they muſt pay vnto the king, & this Subſedie is worth yearely 65 Q 000 V 000.
                         Alſo all Biſhops & Churches of Spaine, giue yearely vnto the king a certaine ſumme of monie towards his warres againſt Heritickes and Infidels, which amounteth yearely 110 Q 000 V 000.
                         Theſe rentes are called El Excuſado, whereunto the Pope hath conſented by his letters or Pattent Apoſtolica Romana, ſo that the king may chuſe a receauer out of euerie Chappell and Church to receaue the tenthes o
                              •
                            the ſpiritualty, as of Corne, Barley, Wine, Oyle▪ &c. and of all other thinges that are gathered of the ground, and doe amount vnto as before. 
                         The mine of Guadalcana lying in the countrie of Eſtremadura, in the hilles of Sierra Morena, were wont to be worth in ſiluer yerely gottē out of the ſame 187 Q. 000 V 000 but what it now amounteth vnto, it is not knowne, as being of late yeares much diminiſhed. 
                         All the countries of Spaine giue vnto the king yearely a certaine rent called Excercitio towardes the keeping of Slaues, & maintenance and making of new Galleys the ſumme of 7 Q 750 V 000.
                         The rent called de la Moneda Forera, which is a rēt rayſing of euerie Heertſteede that payeth 7. Meruedies yearely, of what quality or condition ſoeuer it be, doth amount yearely to 6 Q 656 V 000.
                         The rent or profit that commeth yearely out of the Indies to the kinges owne coffers is the ſumme of 300 Q 000 V 000
                         The kingdomes of Valencia, Arragon, and Catalonia, giue yearely vnto the King, (beſides other paymentes) the ſumme of 75 Q 000 V 000.
                         The Ilandes of Sardinia, Maiorca, and Minorca yéeld the king no profit, for that the rents and reuenewes of the ſame, are alwaies

imployed to the defence and maintenance of the ſame Ilands againſt the enemy, and ſometimes more than is receaued. 
                         The kingdome of Cicilia payeth yearely vnto the king 375 Q 000 V 000.
                         The kingdome of Naples with the coū
                           tries of Pullia and Calabria, doe yéeld yearely to the king 450 Q 000 V 000.
                         The Dukedome of Millan payeth yerely 300 Q 000 V 000.
                         The Prouinces of the Neatherlanders, or Low countries, with Burgondie, vſed yerely to pay vnto the King the ſumme of 700 Q 000 V 000.
                         But now in theſe wars and troubleſome times, there is no account therof to be made. 
                         The farme of Cardes in Spaine is yerely worth vnto the king 20 Q 000 V 000. for that euery payre of cardes ſold there, payeth vnto the king halfe a riall, and amounteth to as it is farmed 20 Q 000 V 000.
                         The Raſhes and clothes of Florence, that are brought into Spaine, are worth yearely 10 Q 000 V 000. for that euerie péece of Raſh payeth ſixe duckats cuſtome to the king. 10 Q 000 V 000.
                     
                     ALl theſe accounts tolles, cuſtomes, Alcaualas, tenths, and third pennies, impoſtes, contributions, rents, demaynes, and reuenewes of the King of Spaine, are gathered & truely collected out of his exchequers of account in his ſaid kingdomes, and without any augmentation or diminiſhing, ſet downe and recorded herein, as they were farmed, receaued, and payde in the yeare of our Lord 1578. before the ſaid king of Spaine had any right in the kingdome of Portingal: for the which cauſe it is not here ſet downe, but ſhall hereafter follow particularly by it ſelfe, together with the pettigrée of the kings of Portingale, brieflie and truly deſcribed, by coppies receiued from the officers of thoſe countries: the whole ſumme of all the rents, reuenewes, &c. afore ſpecified and ſet downe, doe amount vnto yearely, the ſumme of 47 31, Q. 329. V. 880. Spaniſh monie, which amounteth in Engliſh monie, to the ſumme of three millions, foure hundreth thréeſcore, and nintéene thouſand, nine hundreth and ſeauentéene pounds, fiue ſhillinges and nine pence, which is the full ſumme of all his receites, Portingale excepted, which now is in the ſaid kinges handes, as hereafter followeth.
                     The kingdomes that are comprehended vnder the name of Spaine or Caſtillia are theſe: Leon, Arragon, Caſtillia, Nauarre, Granado, Tolledo Valencia, Seuillia, Cordoua, Murcien, Iaen, Gallicia, Gibraltar, and Catalonia, which are 14. in number and in times paſt were euerie one a Kingdome apart, & yet hold the name: the Kingdomes, Prouinces, and Townes, which are called to any counſell or aſſemblie in the Court of Spaine, and therein doe giue their voices, are the Kingdomes of Leon, Seuillia, Tolledo, Granado, Cordoma, Murcien, and Iaen. The townes called chiefe townes, or Cities which are Biſhoprickes, are Burgos, Sa
                              •
                           amanca, Segouia, Soria, Auila, Cuenca, Toro, Zamora, & Guadalaxara, & the townes that are no chiefe townes nor Biſhoprickes, and are called townes whether they lie walled or not: of theſe but two of them haue any voices, which are Valla Dolid, and Madrid, the other kingdomes as Arragon Nauarre, Valencia, and Catalonia, &c. haue their Viceroyes, & Gouernours apart, holding Parlements or Courts by themſelues, alwaies referred to the King of Spaines order and direction, as the kingdomes of Naples and Cicilia, with the Dukedome of Millan, &c.
                     
                  
                  
                     The 3. Chapter. A briefe diſcourſe of the notableſt and memorableſt things, ſituation, gouernment, and reuenewes of the kingdome of Portingale, called Luſitanea.
                     
                        THe kingdome of Portingale is in cōpaſſe 285. miles, that is, on the ſea coaſt 135 miles, and by land 150. miles. There are 1
                           •
                        . Townes in Portingale that are called Citties, which title no Towne may beare, but ſuch as are Biſhoprickes, vnles it be by ſpeciall licence from the King himſelfe: all the reſt are called Townes whether they haue walles or not: whereof there are many of theſe townes and Caſtles. There are in Portingale 4
                           •
                        0. beſides villages, it hath 3. principall hauens or riuers, which are Liſbone, Porto, and Seruual, and other thrée in the land of Algarue, (which is alſo vnder the Crowne of Portingale, which are Tauilla, Lag
                              •
                           s, and Villa Noua, the key or defence of the riuer and towne of Lisbone, is the Caſtle of Saint Iulian, by the Neatherlanders called Saint Gilles, which lieth on the firſt enterance of the riuer called Tegio, in latine Tagus, one of the moſt famous riuers of all Europe.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     The 4. Chapter. Of the Iuſtice and gouernement in Liſbone, and throughout all Portingale.
                     
                        FIrſt there is the Tribunale, called the ciuill Court or Law, whereof the chiefe Iudge is the Regidoer, that is the ruler in the kinges behalfe, with two other Iudges, then the Tribunale or Court for criminall cauſes with two Iudges, an Auditor or receauer of the kinges cuſtomes, called the Alfandega, a Iudge of Equitie for euerie mans proprieties, or own reuenewes, eight Iudges of the Weeſen, a Iudge of the Hoſpitals, (a chiefe Iudge called Correcteur) of the thinges and cauſes of India, Guinea, Capo verde, Saint Thomas, and Braſilia, from all theſe Courtes, they may appeale to the ciuill law, the Tribunale or Court of requeſts, whoſe Iudges are called Deſembargadores, which is as much to ſay as diſchargers: theſe are of great authority and credit, as the chiefe States, and Preſidents are in the Low Countries. To this Court are brought the appellations that are made vnto the ciuill law, their chiefe Iudge is called Correcteur of the requeſts, two Iudges that are called Deſembargadores da Fazenda, which is as much to ſay, as Auditors and Iudges of the Kinges cauſes and reuenewes, theſe are they that miniſter Iuſtice, betwéene the King and particular men, and from them there is no appeale, the councell of orders Tribunale Supremo or higheſt Court, which are called Deſembargadores of the pallace: Tribunale or Court of Conſciences, Tribunale or Court of Veedores da Fazenda, that is viſitors and ouerſeers of the Kinges reuenewes, Tribunale or Court of the Kinges Exchequer, which is vnder the courts of Veedores da Fazenda, the Kinges Councell, two Dukes, one Marques, ten Earledomes. The fortreſſes which the Portingales hold in Africa or Barbaria, are theſe. Tanger, Zepta, Arzilla, the Iland of Madera, the Flemmiſh Iſlandes called as Ilhas dos Acores, in thoſe are comprehended Tercera, S. Michael, Santa Maria, Saint Iorgie, Pico, Fayael, Gratioſa, the Ilandes of Flores, and Coruo, the Ilands of Cabo verde are S. Iacob, O fogo, Mayo, Boa Viſta, S. Antonio, and Saint Nicolaes, Arguyn a fortreſſe in the Countrie of Guinea, the Myne of Saint Iorgie & the Caſtle lying on the ſame ſide of Aethiopia, & alſo on the ſame coaſt the Iland del Principe, Saint Thomas, At
                              •
                           b
                              •
                           n, the Kingdome of Congo, and Angola, on the ſame Coaſt of Aethiopia lieth vnder tribute of the Portingale, the Iland Santa Helena, on the other ſide of the cape de Bona Speranza, the fortreſſe of Soffala, the Iland of Moſambique, the Iland of Ormus lying betwéene Perſia and Arabia, the towne and fortreſſe of Diu, the towne and fortreſſes of Daman, Bacayn, Chaul, Goa, where the Viceroy is reſident, all lying on the Coaſt of India, the townes and fortreſſes of Honor, Barcelor, Mangalor, Cananor, Cranganor, Cochin, and Coulan, all lying on the ſame Coaſt of India called Malabar, a fortreſſe in the Iland of Seylon, called Columbo, the townes Negapatan, and S. Thomas on the coaſt of Choramandel, the towne and fortreſſe of Malacca, the Iands of Maluco, which are Tarnate, Tydor Banda, and Amboyna, the land and coaſt of Braſilia, ſtretching 500. miles in length, and deuided into eight Captaineſhips, or gouernements, from whence euery yeare is brought into Portingale about 150. thouſand Arroben of ſugar, each Arroben waighing 32. pound, the Hauen called de Todos os Santos, or of all Saints, where the Gouernour of Braſilia is reſident.
                     The ordinarie rentes of the Crowne of Portingale, are yearely one million of gold, & 100000. duckets the rents & reuenewes of the Maſterſhip of the knights of the Croſſe, the king being alwaies Maſter, to whom belong the Ilands of Acores (or Flemmiſh Ilands) Madera, thoſe of Cabo verde, Saint Thomas, and de Princepe are yearelie 200000. Duckets, the rent of the Mine belonging to ye Knight of the Croſſe of Chriſt, is yerely worth 100000. duckets, Braſilia yéeldeth yearely 150000. Duckets, the cuſtomes of ſpices and other goods receiued out of the Eaſt Indies is yearely 600000. Duckets, the other rents, profits, and reuenewes of the Indies, and their townes are ſpent and diſburſed in defence & maintenance of the ſaid Countries and places, ſo that the rents and reuenewes of the Crowne of Portingale doe amount vnto the ſum of 220000 Duckets, at 5. ſhillings 6. pence the Ducket amounteth vnto in Engliſh monie, to the ſumme of ſixe hundreth and fiue thouſand poundes.
                  
                  
                     
                     The 5. Chapter. Of the yearely charges disburſed by the Kinges of Portingale.
                     
                         
                           THe fées and payments due to the miniſters & Iuſtices of the lawes and ordinances of the countrie of Portingale, for the executing of their offices, doth amount vnto yearely the ſumme of 100000 duckets.
                         The rentes which the King beſtoweth yearely, as giftes and rewardes vnto ſuch as haue done him ſeruice, which being dead, returneth vnto him againe, doe yerely amount vnto the ſumme of 300000 duckets.
                         The Iuros which are bought for monie, and fee farme or continuall rents to bee paide out of the kinges reuenewes, cuſtomes, and other demaynes yearely, and are neuer releaſed, but remaine from heire to heire, are yerely 150000 Duckets.
                         The charges of Maintayning the caſtles and fortes in Africa and Barbarie, doe yerely amount vnto the ſumme of 300000. duckets.
                         The charges of maintaining fiue Gallies yearely 50
                              •
                           00 Duckets.
                         The charges of the armie that doth yerely conuay the Indian ſhips thither, & fetcheth them back againe amount vnto 300000. Duckets.
                         The Moradien, that is the wages which the king payeth to his ſeruants called Mocos da Camara, Caualhe
                                 •
                              , Fidalgos, and other titles, as an honour to ſuch as hee will ſhew fauour vnto, or els in reward of anie former ſeruices, or in reſpect their Ancetors were true and faithfull ſeruitors to the king, with thoſe titles they are called ſeruantes of the kinges houſe, which is a great honour, & they doe receiue a yearely ſtipend (although not much, towardes their charges of finding prouiſion for their horſes, although they can hardly ſaue a paire of ſhooes, and yet neuer come on horſes backe all their life time, but it is onely a token of the Kinges fauour and good will, wherein the Portingales doe more glorie and vaunt themſelues, then of any thing in the world, yet is it not of much importance, and verie little paie, it amounteth yearely to 80000. Duckets.
                         The charge of the king of Portingales houſe is yearely the ſumme of 200000. Duc. which was wont to be farmed, as at this day it is: for the charge of houſhold of Don Alberto, Cardinall of Auſtria, Gouernour of Portingale, for the defence and maintenance of the Caſtles and Forts of Portingale the ſumme of 200000. Duckets.
                         So that the charges aforeſaid doe amount vnto in all, the ſumme of 1680000. duckets, at fiue ſhillinges ſixe pence the ducket is in Engliſh monie the ſumme of foure hundereth ſixtie and two thouſand pounds, which being deducted out of the receates of Portingale aforeſaid, that amount vnto 605000. poundes Engliſh monie there reſteth yearely for the king of Spaine, Coffers, one hundreth fortie and three thouſand pounds Engliſh monie. 
                     
                  
                  
                     The 6. Chapter Of the Towne of Lisbone.
                     
                        THe towne of Lisbone hath 
                           •
                        2. pariſh Churches, and aboue eleuen thouſād houſes, wherin there are aboue 
                           •
                        0 thouſand dwelling places, accounting the Court and the place thereunto belonging, it hath in people, aboue 120000. whereof 10000. of them at the leaſt are Slaues and Mores, which eſtimation is made according to the church bookes, which the Parſons, Vicars and Curats are bound to doe once euerie yeare, euerie one in his pariſh, among theſe are not accounted ſuch as follow the Court, neyther Cloyſters, Cobents, Hoſpitalles, nor any other houſes of religion: for that in all they would amount vnto as much as the houſes of the citie: alſo of other Churches▪ Cloyſters, and Chappels of the virgin Marie, and other Saints which are no pariſhes, there are ſo many, that they can not be numbred. The Towne hath aboue 350. ſtreetes, beſides croſſe waies and lanes, that haue no thorow fare, which are likewiſe a great number.
                  
                  
                     The 7. Chapter A ſhort diſcourſe of the pettigrees of kinges of Portingale, vntill Phillip now King of Spaine and Portingale Sonne of Charles the fift Emperour of Rome.
                     
                        THe firſt king of Portingale was named Don Alfonſo Henriques, ſonne of Earle Henry, who (as the Chronicles rehearſe) was ſonne of the Duke of Lorraine
                        
others thinke hee was ſonne of the king of Hungarie: but the trueſt Hiſtories doe report him to be of Lorrane, and that he came into the King of Spaines Court, being deſirous to imploy himſelfe in the warres of the Chriſtians againſt the Mores, which as then held the moſt part of the countrie of Spaine, and the whole land of Luſitania or Portingale, warring continually on the King of Spaine, and other Chriſtians bordering on the ſame: in the which warres hee behaued himſelfe ſo well, and did ſo valiantly, that the King knew not how, or in what ſort to recompence him better, then by giuing him his daughter in mariage, & with her for a dowrie gaue him the countrie of Portingale, that was as much as he had conquered, and brought vnder his ſubiection, with all the reſt if he could win it, with the name and title of Earle of Portingale, his ſonne aforeſaid called Don Alfonzo, was borne in Anno 1094.
                           
                              ••
                           9
                              •
                           . who wan the moſt part of the countrie of Portingale from the Mores, & after his fathers death was called Prince of Portingale, which name and title he enioyed for the ſpace of 27. yeares, which title in Spaine no man may beare but the Kings eldeſt ſon, and heire vnto the Crowne, and being of the age of 45. yeares, was crowned king of Portingale, by the fauour & ſpeciall priuiledge of the Pope of Rome as then being, & by that meanes Portingale became a kingdome. This firſt King maried when he was 52. yeares of age, and had one ſonne and 3. daughters, and beſides them one baſtard ſon, and a baſtard daughter, he raigned 46. yeres, and died in the towne of Coyinbra, his body being buried in the Cloyſter of Santa Crus, erected by him▪ as alſo the Cloyſters of Alcobaca and Saint Vincent without Liſbone called Saint Vincent de Fora.
                     
                     This King firſt wonne the Towne of Lisbone from the Mores, by the aide & help of the Flemmings, and Low countrimen, which came thether with a Fleet of Ships, (being by ſtormie weather forced to put into the riuer) that were ſayling to the holy land, whether for the furtherance of Chriſtian religion, they as then trauelled, which as I ſuppoſe was about the time that the Chriſtians won the great City of Damyate in the coū
                        trie of Paleſtina, where thoſe of Harlame did moſt valiantly defend themſelues, and ſhewd great valour, as the Sword & Armes as yet extant doe well bare witnes, which Fleet being come thether at ſuch time as the ſaid king beſieged the ſaid towne of Lisbone, hee vnderſtanding that onely cauſe of comming was to imploy their forces againſt the Infidels and vnbeleeuing Chriſtians, friendly deſired them, ſéeing it was Gods will they ſhould ariue there at ſo conuenient a time, to aide him againſt his enemies, ſhewing them that they might as well imploy their forces there, (as in the holie land,) to increaſe the faith of Chriſt, and ouerthrow the enemies of the ſame, whome if it pleaſed God to proſper, (as he doubted not but by their helpes to haue the victorie) they might as then fulfill their pretended voiage, both to the glory of God, & their owne honors, which in the ende they agréed vnto, in the which ſeruice they ſo well imployed themſelues, that they not only holp him to winne Lisbone, but many other places, thereby placing the king in his kingly ſeat: for which their good ſeruice the king acknowledging himſelfe much bound and beholding vnto them, in recompence thereof he indowed them with many priuiledges and fréedomes more than his natural ſubiects 
                           •
                        nioyed, which hee bound both him and his ſucceſſors kinges of that countrie to kéepe & obſerue, one whereof was, that all Dutchmen that would dwell within his Countrie, or traffique with in the ſame, ſhould bee free of all impoſtes, and exciſes for all things that they ſhould vſe, and haue in their owne houſes, and for themſelues and their familie, that they might weare what ſort of apparrell and Iewels they would, and of what ſtuffe ſoeuer, with their wiues and families, although they were Portingale women, which is forbidden to the naturall Portingales: for that they haue a law concerning apparrell, what kinde of ſtuffe euerie man according to his eſtate and qualitie ſhall weare, alſo to goe by night and at vnaccuſtomed houres when occaſion ſerued them, in all places with fiue or ſixe ſeruants with light or without▪ and with what armes or weapons they would, which is not permitted to the inhabitantes themſelues▪ that no Iuſtice ſhould haue power to atach or areſt any man in their houſe, or execute any Iuſtice vpon them, for what cauſe ſoeuer it were (treaſō only excepted) but onlie by their owne law, by the king himſelfe ordained & appointed, called Iuis dos-Alemaines or the Dutch law, alſo that their houſes might not be taken (whether they were hired or their owne fée ſimples) for the kinges ſeruice or any of his Court, as all other his ſubiects houſes are, as néed requireth, that they might not bee compelled to vſe or ſerue any office in the countrie, or for the king, as the Portingales doe, neyther yet rated to pay any contribution for the common profit of the countrie, & trauelling through the Countrie, ſhould for their monie be ſerued before any other man, with many other ſuch like priueledges, which for breuitie I omit, onely

I haue ſet downe the principalleſt of them, thereby to ſhew (as their owne Chronicles declare) through whome, and by whoſe help the Portingales, at this day doe poſſeſſe and enioy that which they hold in the ſaid Countrie of Portingale, which priuiledges are yet (as they haue alwaies béene) without anie deniall firmely holden and maintained, and by all the kinges ſucceſſiuely confirmed from time to time, with dayly increaſing of the ſame, by meanes of the continuall pleaſures done vnto the ſaid kings of Portingale by the ſaid Nation, as it is well knowne.
                     
                        2 Don Sancho.
                        Don Sancho Sonne of: the aforeſaid king was the ſecond king of Portingale, hee was borne in Anno 1154. and crowned king at the age of 31. yeares, hee had iſſue 15. children, Sonnes, and Daughters, and raigned twenty ſeuen yeares, he died in the towne of Coymbra in the yeare of our Lord 1212. being 58. yeares of age, and lieth buried in the Cloyſter of Santa Crus by his Father.
                     
                        3 Don Afonzo.
                        Don Afonſo the ſecond of that name, & the third king of Portingale, was crowned at the age of 25. yeares, he had iſſue two ſonnes, in his time liued Saint Dominick, Saint Francis and Saint Anthonie, he died in anno 1223. & lieth buried in the Cloyſter of Alcobaſſa.
                     
                     
                        4 Don Sancho Capello
                        Don Sancho Capello, his ſon fourth king of Portingale, was crowned at the age of 16. yeres, and died in the towne of Toledo, in the yeare of our Lord 1247, and is buried in the great Church of Toledo.
                     
                     After his death was choſe King, his brother the Earle of Bolonhien,
                        5 The Earle of Bologien. and was the fifth king of Portingale, hee raigned 31. yeres, and died in Lisbone, in the yeare of our Lord 1279. and is buried in the Cloiſter of Alcobaſſa.
                     
                     
                        6 Don Deniis.
                        Don Deniis his ſonne was Crowned in Lisbone, the ſixt king of Portingale, being of the age of 18. yeares, he raigned 46. yeres and died in the towne of Saint Arein, in the yeare of our Lord 1325. the 20. of Ianuary being 64. yeares of age, and lyeth buried in the Cloyſter of Oliuellas, which is about 2. miles from Lisbone, which he in his life time had erected, he maried with Donna Iſabella, daughter to Don Pedro king of Arragō, ſhe was cannoniſed for a Saint, her Sepulcher is in the towne of Coymbra which ſhee builded: where her body doth many miracles.
                     
                        7 Don Afonzo O Brauo.After him raigned his ſonne Don Afonſo o Brauo, which is the valiant, hee was crowned in the towne of Arem at the age of 35. yeares, and was the ſeuenth king of Portingale, hee died in Lisbone in the month of May Anno 1356. he lieth buried in the high quire of the great Church, hee ouercame the Mores in Salado, fighting in aide of the king of Caſtille.
                     
                     His Son Don Pedro was the eight king of Portingale,
                        8 Don Pedro. and ruled the land with great Iuſtice, temperante, and peace, & died in the yeare of our Lord 1366. and lieth buried in the Cloyſter of Alcobaſſa, hee had iſſue one ſonne, called Don Ferdinand, and before hee maried, he had two baſtard ſonnes by Dona Ines or Agnes de Caſtro, called Don Ioan and Don Denniis.
                        9 Don Ferdinand.
                     
                     After the death of the aforeſaid king, Don Ferdinand his ſon was crowned king, and was the ninth king of Portingale, he maried Dona Lianor Gonſalues Telles, whom he tooke by force from her huſband called Larenca Vaaz da Cunha, to whome ſhee was maried, and baniſhed him the land, neuertheleſſe he was verie louing to his ſubiectes, and puniſhed all offenders, and vagabondes, hée raigned 17. yeares, and died without iſſue, in the yeare of our Lord 1383. being of the age of 43 yeares, and lieth buried in the quier of S. Francis Church in the towne of S. Arein.
                     
                     After this kings death,10 Don Ioan. 
                        Don Ioan king of Caſtillia, with his wife Dona Beatrix, came into Portingale by force to poſſeſſe the Crowne of Portingale, but Don Ioan baſtard ſon of the aforeſaid king Don Pedro, & baſtard brother to Don Ferdinand the laſt king withſtood him, and fought with the ſaid king of Caſtille, whome he ouercame in the field, called S. Ioris, where for a perpetuall memorie of his victorie, he erected a great & rich Cloyſter, which hee called the Cloyſter of the battaile or victorie, becauſe he won the field in the ſame place againſt the Caſtilians. This baſtard Don Ioan was Crowned king of Portingale, being of the age of 31. yeares, & was the tenth king, he liued 76 yeres, and died in Anno 1433. the 14. of Auguſt, and lieth buried in the ſame Cloyſter of the battaile by him erected, hee wonne the Caſtle and towne of Septa from the Mores, in Barbaria or Affrica, and was Father to the Infant Don Ferdinand, that is Canonized for a Saint.11 Don Duarte or Eduart,
                     
                     After him raigned his ſonne Don Duarte, or Eduart, and was the 11. king of Portingale, he liued 42. yeares, whereof he raigned 5. yeares king, hee died in the Pallace of the couent of Thomar, in Anno 1438. he lieth buried in the Cloyſter of the battaile.
                     
                        Don Alfonſo his ſonne was borne in S. Arein in the yeare of our Lord 1432.12 Don Afonzo. and becauſe he was but 6. yeares of age whē his Father died, his vncle the Infant Don Pedro raigned in his place, vntill the yeare of our Lord 1448. Then the ſaid Don Afonſo was himſelfe crowned king, & was the 12 king of Portingale, he died in S. Arein in ye ſame chamber where he was borne the 28 of Auguſt 1481. and lieth buried by his Anceſtors

in the Cloyſter of the battaile.
                     
                        1
                              •
                            Don Ioan:After his death raigned his ſonne Don Ioan the great, called the ſeconde of that name, being the 13. King of Portingal: he was borne in Lisbone the 4. of May, anno 1455. hee did openly himſelfe being preſent, cauſe Don Fernando Duke of Be
                              •
                           ganca, vpon the market place of the towne of Euora to be beheaded, on the 22. of Iune in An. 1483. & with his owne hand with a Poynyard ſlew Don Domingos Duke of Begia, brother to his wife Dona Lianor, preſently calling Don Manoel, the ſaid Dukes brother▪ & gaue him the ſame Dukedome, with all that belonged therunto he liued 40. yeres, and died at Aluor in the bath the 25. of October An. 1495. & lieth buried in the Cloiſter of the battaile by his Anceſtors, & died without iſſue.
                     
                        14 Don Manoell.By his laſt Wil and Teſtament, he gaue the Crowne of Portingale vnto Don Manoel Duke of Viſeu, who was crowned king of Portingale, & was the 14. king, hée was crowned in Alcacer do Sal, the 27. of October, An. 1495. he cauſed all the Iewes in his land, eyther willingly, or by force (to ſuch as refuſed it) to be chriſtened, in the yere of our Lord 1499. and cauſed all the Mores that dwelt at Lisbone without the gate of Moreria to be baniſhed, whereof the gate to this day holdeth the name. In the 
                           ••
                        me of this king, there happened an inſurrection of Portingales in Lisbone, againſt the new Chriſtened Iewes, whereby they ſlew certaine hundereths of them, both men, women, and children, burning ſome of them, with a thouſand other miſchiefes, robbing their houſes, ſhops, and goods: for the which the king did great Iuſtice, and finding out the principall beginners of the ſame cauſed them to bée puniſhed. This king did firſt diſcouer, and by his captaines & ſouldiers, conquered ye Countries and paſſages into the Eaſt Indies, and ye orientall countries for ſpices, & alſo the hauens & paſſages in Preſter Iohns land, hee likewiſe conquered the towns & fortreſſes of Saff
                              •
                           in & Azamor in Affrica, he died in an. 1521. vpon S. Luces day, & lieth buried in the Cloyſter of Bethlehem, by the dutchmē called Royſters.
                     
                        1
                              •
                            Don Ioan 3.After his death raigned his ſon Don Ioan the 3. & was the 15. king of Portingale, he was borne in the month of Iune in Anno 1502. in the citie of Lisbone, where he was crowned in anno 1521. he was ſimple, curteous, & mild, and a great friend vnto all religious perſons, as alſo to all ſtudents, he foū
                        ded the vniuerſitie of Coymbra, and other colledges, & died the 11. of Iune An. 1557. & lieth buried in the Cloyſter of Bethelem, or Royſters.
                     
                     After his death was crowned Don Sebaſtian, and was the 16. king of Portingale,16. Don Sebaſtian, he was ſon to the Prince of Portingale, eldeſt ſonne to the aforeſaid Don Ioan, that maried with Dona Ioana daughter to the Emperour Charles the fift, and Siſter to Phillip king of Spaine, which Prince dying before his father, left his wife great with childe of this Don Sebaſtian, who after the death of his Grandfather was Crowned king of Portingale, he was born on Sebaſtians day, in the yeare of our Lord 1553. hee paſſed with a great armie into Africa to conquere the countrie, in the yeare 1578. where hee with moſt of his Armie was ſlaine, the reſt taken priſoners, and ſo died without iſſue.
                     After this ouerthrow and death of the ſaid king Don Sabaſtian,
                        17. Don Henricke. was Crowned Don Henricke a Cardinall, vncle vnto the ſaide Don Sabaſtian, and was the 17. King of Portingale, and died without iſſue, in Anno 1580. leauing by his laſt will and teſtament for heire of the Crowne of Portingale Don Phillip king of Spaine, as lawfull ſucceſſor vnto the ſame: for that his Father Charles the 5. maried the eldeſt daughter of the king Don Manoel, which was mother to Don Phillip king of Spaine, and ſiſter to the grandfather of Don Sebaſtian, and of the aforeſaid Don Henrick, although there had bin another brother of the ſaid don Henrick, named Don Luiis, who dying left a ſon called Don Antonio, that was Prior de Ocrato, of the order of the knightes of the Croſſe of S. Iohns, whome the Portingales choſe for their king, but by meanes of the great power and might of the king of Spaine, who by monie had gotten the greateſt part of the nobilitie of Portingale, to hold with him, partly by monie, and partly by force, he got the kingdome into his hands and ſubiection, driuing Don Antonio out of the countrie,18. Don phillip king of Spaine. & ſo in anno 1581. he came into Portingale, & in Lisbon was crowned king in the cloyſter of Thomar, by all the 3 eſtates of the countrie, that is the nobility, ſpiritualtie, and commons, & is the 18. king of Portingale, who as yet liueth, & raigneth ouer the ſame countrie: whereby the Crowne of Portingale is now fallen into the handes of the kinges of Spaine, hauing continued in the handes of the kinges of Portingales for the ſpace of 442. yeares, which their ſucceſſors till then inioyed, being of the race and progenie of the houſe of Loraine.
                     
                  
                  Thus endeth the fourth Booke.
                  FINIS.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                     
                        TYPVS ORBIS TERRARVM
                        QVID EI POTEST VIDERI MAGNVM IN REBVS HVMANIS, CVI AETERNITAS OMNIS, TOTIVSQVE MVNDI NOTA SIT MAGNI TV DO CICERO:
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           Exacta & acurata deliucatio cum orarum maritimarum tum etiam ſororum terreſtrium quae in regionibus China, Cauchinchin
                                 •
                              , Cambojn ſiue C
                                 •
                              ampa, Syao, Malaca, Aracan & Pegu, una cum omnium vicinarum iuſu: latum deſcriptione ut ſunt Samatra, Java utra
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                              , Timora, Molucca, Philippin
                                 •
                              , Luconja & de Leqveos dicta, nec non inſulae Japan & Corece, reliquae
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               omnes adſacentes, ubj etiam adnotauimus ſcopulos 
                                 •
                              revi
                                 •
                              i, omnia
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               Vadoſa loca & ſiquce alia a quibus periculum navigantibus. Qvemadmodum ſingula hoc ae
                                 •
                              o à Luſitanis nauium gubernatoribus còmperta, ina
                                 ••
                              gitata, & in tobula
                                 •
                               rela
                                 •
                              a fuere. Equo
                                 •
                              um recentibus ac emen da
                                 •
                              is tabulis perqàm ſtudioſe haec deſtribi ex primi
                                 •
                               curavimus in eorum hominum cōmodum quibus iſta uſvi voluptatia eſſe conſueuerunrit
                        
                        
                           The trew deſcription of all the Coaſts of China, Cauchinchina Camboyn, Syao, Malacia, Arraacan, and Pegu, together with all the Iſlands there abowts, both great and ſmale, with the Cliffes, Breathes, Sands, Droughts and Shallowe
                                 •
                              , all perfectly drawne and examined with the moſt expert Cardes of the Portingales Pilots.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           The discription of the Islandes. and Castle of Mozambique, lyeinge vppon the borders of Melinde, rich of Eban wood, fine Goulde, and Ambergrize frōwhence many Slaues are caried into India.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           Defineatiò Orarum maritimarum Ter
                                 •
                              re 
                                 •
                              vulgo indigitatae Terra do Natal
                                 •
                              tem Sofal
                                 •
                               Mozambica & Melindae, Inſulae
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               Sancti Laurentij, Inſularum Maldiuicarum, Seylon Jnſulae, & Promontorij Comorini, ad. Jndiam ſiti una cum Jnſulie, Scopulis, Pulinnis, Vadis, veci s Ʋentorum tractibus, Ʋgenuino ſingulorum loco: rum ſitu, ad exactiſſimas Jchno: graphicas Jndicarum tabulas recognita at
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               emendata
                        
                        
                           The deſcription or Caerd of the Coaſtes of the Countreys following call
                                 •
                               Terra do Natal, all the Const of Sofal
                                 •
                              . Mozambique, Melind
                                 •
                              , and the Jland of Saint Laurence, wi
                                 •
                              h all their Jſlands, Cliffes, Drougthes, and Shallowes, allſo the Jſlandes of Maldiuuia, to the Jſlande Seylon, and the Cape de Comori, Lieinge on the Coast of Jndia with the trew ſcituation and couers of the ſame, according to the 
                                 •
                              eweſt and last Ca
                                 ••
                              des made for the ſame Coaſtes
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           Diliniatur in hac tabula, Orce maritimae Abexia, freti Mecani al Maris — Rubri Arabiae, Ormi, Perſiae, ſuprà Sindam uſ
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                              , Fluuinis Indj, Cambaice Jndi
                                 •
                               & Malabari
                                 •
                              , Inſulae, Ceylon, Choromandelice, & Orixae, ſtinij Gangis, & Regni Bengale ſinus item Sinum, Inſularum, Scopulorum, Puluinorum, Vadorum, profunditatum
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                              , dictis oris adiacentium, cum genuimis ſingulorum ſororum. Nominibus, prout ab expretiſeimis nauium Gubernatoribus Luſitanicis, iniligetatur magno studio ex optimis tabulis Indias recognita omnia at
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               emendata
                        
                        
                           The deſcription of the coast of Abex, The ſtraights of Meca, otherwiſe called the Red Sea, the coastes of Arabia, Orinus, and Perſia, to the Riuer of Sinde of the Riuer Indus, of Cambain, India, and Malabar, The Ilands of Ceilon, Chora
                                 •
                              andel, and Orixa, The Riuer Ganges, and the kingdome of Bengala, As allſo the ſcituation of the Creekes, Cliffes, Banckes, Shallowes, and deptilies vpon or along by the ſaid Coastes, with the right name of euery place, as they are called by the Portingale Pilots, all truly deſcribed
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Typus orarum maritimarum Guinae Manicongo & Angolae ultra promontorium Bonae ſpei uſ
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            cum omnibꝰ portubus Inſulis Scopulis puluinis & Vadis vera
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            latitudine Oceani Aethiopici ab ortu in occaſū ad Fermambucum & promont S Auguſtini in ora Braſilienſi vergentis una cum eiuſdem oceani Inſulis praecipue vero S'Thomae S Helena Inſula Aſcenſionis multis
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            aliis earum
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            genuino tractu accurate omnia ex optimis Indicis tabulis hydrographicis decerpta & emend
                        
                           The deſcription of the Coaſt of Guinea, Manicongo, and Angola, and ſo proceeding forwards beyond the Cape de Bona Speranza, with all the Hauens, Ilands, Cliffes, Drougthes, and Shallowes, with ye whole bredth of the Ethiopian Ocean Seas which reacheth from Eaſt to weſt to Pernambuco, and Cape S. Auguſtine, lying on the Coaſt of Braſilia, together with all the Iſlands, namely S. Thomas, S. Helena, the Ilande of the Aſcention, and others, with their true courſes.
                        
                        
                           Imprinted at Londō by Iohn Wolfe. R.E. ſculpſir.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           Delinentio omnium o
                                 •
                              arum totius Aus
                                 •••
                              ti
                                 •
                               partis Americae, dictae Peru 
                                 •
                              ianae a Riſola Plata, Braſiliam, Pariam, & Cas
                                 •
                              ellam auream, una cum omnibus Inſulis An
                              
                                 •
                              ilus dict
                                 ••
                              , Hiſpaniolam item & Cubam comprehen 
                                 •
                              ſe
                                 ••
                              s 
                                 〈◊〉
                               promonat floridae, vulgo cabo de la flori 
                                 〈◊〉
                               ſ
                                 ••
                              n Ist
                                 ••
                               
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                               Panamam & Nombre de dios 
                                 〈◊〉
                               Peru cur 
                                 •
                              erae cum 
                                 •
                              n
                                 •
                               metrapoli Cuſco, & Com
                              
                                 •••
                              ſsimo portu L
                                 •
                              nae Orarum etiam Chilae f
                                 •
                              eti interi 
                                 ••
                              im Pata
                                 •
                              onem & cervam del fuego vulgo Este echo 
                                 •
                              s Fernando Magallanes Et omnium
                                 •
                               portuum, Jaſularum, ſcopulorum, puſianorum, & vadorum tractus
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               ventorum ex optimus Luſ
                                 •
                              tanitis cartis hydrographicia delineatio atque emendata
                        
                        
                           The deſcription of the whole coast lying in the South ſeas of Americae, called Peru, beginning at Rio de Plata, along the coast of Braſilia, Paria, and the goſ
                                 •
                              eli Castell, with all the Iſlands called Antilas, Hiſpaniola, and Cuba, to the Cape of Florida, together with the ſtraights and landes betwene Panama and Nombre de Dios, all the coasts and land of Golden Peru, with the cheef towne of Coſi
                                 •
                              , and Hauen of Lyma, alſo the coast from Chile, and the chanell, or narrow ſtraight of Paragonen, and terra del Fuego, with all the Hauens, Iſlandes, Cliffes, ſandes, depthes, and ſhallowes, with the trew ſcituation of them
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        INSVLAE MOLVCCAE celeberrimae ſunt ob. Maximam aromatum copiam quam to tum terrarum orbem mittunt: harum precipuè ſunt Ternate, Tidoris, Motir Machion et Bachion, his quidam adiungunt Gilolum, Celebiam, Borneonem, Amboinum et Bandam, Ex Inſula Timore in Europam advehuntur Santala ruben & albu, Ex Banda Nuces myriſticae, cum Flore, vulgo dicto Macis Et ex Moluccis Cariophilli: quorum icones in pede hujus tabellce ad vivum expreſſas poni curauinrus
                        map of the Molucca Islands
                     
                  
               
            
         
      
   