
      
         
            
            
            THE PRAISE
of Solitarineſſe,
Set down in the form
of a Dialogue,
Wherein is conteyned, a Diſcourſe
Philoſophical, of the
lyfe Actiue, and Contemplatiue.
            
            IMPRINTED AT LONdon
by Francis Coldocke and
Henry Bynneman.
1577.
            Qui nihil ſperat
Nihil deſprat.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT VVORſhipfull
my approued frende, Mr.
Edvvarde Dyer, increaſe of eſtimation
according to his vertue.
            
               SIR, though neither my
experiēce, nor skil, may
yeelde me any hope to
coūteruaile your worthineſſe,
by any worke,
or labor of mine, conſidering in youre
ſelf, your owne arte and abilitie of writing:
yet partely my affection, partely
yo
                  ••
                curteſie, and partly the loue you
beare vnto knowledge, haue together
by degrees preuailed to perſuade me, to
cōmend vnto you the willyng proffer,
of this my ſmall & ſimple preſent. The
rather, for that indifferently debating
with my ſelf of the matter, and conferring
myne opinion with the nature of
the time, wherin eche thing doth couet

to growe to perfection: I finde the ſame
ſo plētifully ſtored, with ſuch vertuous
precepts and well tempered rules, both
of publike and priuate behauiour, that
of it ſelfe it may liberally deſerue, to be
imbraced of all men: but eſpeciallye of
thoſe, that delighting in the ſtudy and
knowledge of good letters, are deſirous
in the ende, to reape the due fruite and
benefite of their labour: And wherein,
you chiefly aboue the reſt, may plainely
alſo as in a glaſſe beholde, a pleaſaunt
remembraunce of your contempl
                  •
               iue
delights: togither, with thoſe things ſet
down for precepts vnto others, that are
but matters, of daily practiſe with your
ſelfe. All which, though for the priuate
vſe of your own vnderſtanding, knowing
right well, howe generally you are
ſeene and acquainted in the languages,
I might with leſſe labor haue deliuered

to your hands, vnder thoſe very words
that the Author himſelfe hath ſet down
the ſame: yet therewithall conſidering
the nature of Vertue, which hath alwais
bene accompted to cary this propertie,
that is, to couet to haue eche thing to be
like vnto it ſelfe: I thought it therefore
more agreable to your liking, to ſee the
matter ſette plainely down, vnder ſuch
oure ordinary and vſuall phraſe, as the
vulgar ſort that haue affectiō to learne,
might thereby alſo gather ſome profit.
VVho, if indifferentlye as they haue
cauſe, they ponder the aduātage of that
whiche is profered, may well perceiue,
that what by example of your ſelfe and
ſuch like, & what by the precepts herein
contayned, they maye the rather
learne, howe firſte to auoide, the vſuall
haunte of ſuche ydle company, as bringeth
in the ende, no profite but repentaunce:

and after, how and in what ſort
to imploy their time at home, in the exerciſe
of ſuch knowledge, as bringeth
with it a contented world both of pleaſure
and delight: and ſuch alſo as adorneth
the minde, with the true diſpoſition
and habite of Vertue, whiche as the
Philoſophers affirme, is double, the one
Intellectuall, the other Morall, wherof
the firſte is to be gotten by reading, the
latter by practiſe, and they both, leading
the way to that eternall felicitie, which
of al mē is ſo generally deſired. Finally,
if by this occaſion it maye ſo come to
pas, that Knowlege the mother of Goodneſſe,
may the rather be imbraced, and
that Idlenes the nurſe of Miſchief, may
be aught the more auoided: the eſtimation
therof as it belongeth to your ſelf,
in reſpect of whom regarding your deſerte,
I was onely moued to vndertake

this attempte: ſo, if otherwiſe I maye
ſeeme by this meanes to deſerue, in the
iudgement of thoſe that are curiouſlie
diſpoſed, either blame or miſliking: I
likewiſe craue your friendly aſſiſtance,
by the helpe of your protectiō, to coū
               tenance
my procedings. In lieu wherof,
I am able to yeelde you no other recompence,
than that whiche was due
vnto you before, that is, the vnfayned
affection of him, that wholy remaineth
at your deuotion.
            
               ROGER BAYNES.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               
                  SINCE for the moſte parte
it commeth ſo to paſſe, that eche man either is,
or maye be thought parciall in his owne affaires,
and that it is a fault very eaſily committed,
to 
                  〈◊〉
                weene of our ſelues: to the ende, I
may auoyde the one, and diſcharge me of the
other as a thing without cauſe: I wil therfore,
neither ſeeme to aduiſe thee, nor determine to
intreate thee, to deeme any better of this my labour, than thy affection
will ſuffer to giue thee leaue: but as one well perſwaded of thine indifferencie,
will freely allowe thee the libertie of thy conſciēce, to like or miſlyke
therof at thy pleaſure. For diuers and variable are the hādy workes
of nature, and ſeuerall the opinions, that are ſeuerally nouriſhed, in bodies
deuided: In one ſhee planteth ſuche a ſpirite of temperaunce, that
no indifferent dealing may moue him to offence: in another ſhe frameth
ſuch contrary motions, that eche thing miſlikes hym that falles not in
his humor: thus, how one ſpeciall matter may be equally piled to the pleſing
of all men, I can gather no reaſon. Let eche man therfore beare the
burthen of his fortune, and let no man ſeem offended with that, which he
cannot amende: for this is certaine, that manye among the reſte are of
condition ſo frowarde, that the more they are intreated, the more vntractable
they are founde. VVhoſe vaine reports touching matters of knowledge,
as for the moſte parte they rather proceede, from the weakeneſſe of
their owne natures, than from any certaine or iuſte occaſion, ſo ſmall is
the care that ought in my iudgement to bee taken of the ſame: Only this
of all writers ought chiefly to be regarded, to ſatiſfye the good opinion of
thoſe, that either for loue to the Aucthour, or fauour to the matter,
are contented to conster eche thing to the beſt. Of whyche number, deeming
thee to be one, I betake thee my friende to the fauour of thy fortune,
and me thy welwiller, to the aduenture of thy courteſy
            VALE.
            
               Qui nihil ſperat,
Nihil deſperat.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The prayſe of Solitarineſſe,
ſette downe in the forme of a Dialoge,
vvherein is contayned a diſcourſe Philoſophical,
of the lyfe Actiue, and Contemplatiue.
            The Speakers.
LYSIPPVS, EVDOXVS. TALES.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               Firſt, what Vertue is, and whether a wiſe man that deſireth
to liue vertuouſly, ought rather to make choiſe of Solitarineſſe
or Societie.
            
            
               
                  LYSIPPVS.
               Well mette Eudoxus,
                  The place of meeting is to be ſuppoſed at Venice.
whence come you?
            
            
               EVDOXVS
               I come from a place wherein I
haue alwayes taken great pleaſure:
but whether walke you?
            
            
               LYSIPPVS.
               I came forth my friende, for
none other ocaſion, but only to looke
thée: for thou art not ignoraunt, how
yll I may endure the want of thy cō
                  pany
whome for the greatneſſe of thy vertue, and the ſingular
ſwéetneſſe, of thy pleaſant behauior, I haue alwayes dearely
loued.
            
            
               EVDOX.
               And I, ſuſpecting no leſſe than that whiche
is hapned, made haſt the ſooner to come abroade, fearing that
full hardly, thou wouldeſt elſe haue founde me, in the place
where I was. But nowe, ſince thus by good fortune we are ſo
well mette togither, determine I pray thée, with thy beſt aduice,
what way we ſhall take, to walke for our pleaſure, that
in conference abrode we may debate of ſome matter, according
to our accuſtomed manner.
            
            
               LYSIP.
               Abyde a whyle Eudoxus,
ſée, this is good lucke.
            
            
               EVDOX.
               What is that?
            
            
               LYSIPPVS.
               Behold, where our olde friende Tales poſteth hytherwardes
apace, therefore, let vs ſtay for him a whyle, and

according as he ſhall direct our iourney, ſo we wil determine
to paſſe on togither, vnto ſome ſuch place, as moſt conuenient
ſhal ſeme vnto him for this purpoſe.
            
            
               EVD.
               I like this motion
well, he is now at hand, vſe the matter therfore, I pray thée, in
ſuch ſort, y• he may be willing for company to accepte of the
ſame.
            
            
               LYS.
               Hem, Tales, whether walk you? I wold haue thée
my friend to vnderſtand, that we haue purpoſely here expected
thy cōming, for this occaſion only, that to what place thou art
appointed to walke, we may beare thée company.
            
            
               TALES.
               Certeſſe my friends, I déeme my ſelfe very farre vnworthy of
this preheminence, but that I ſée it procéedeth from the wonted
fauoure you haue alwayes borne me. Therefore, without
more adde, to the ende we maye a little recreate our myndes,
whiche we are taughte to ſolace with intermiſſion of ſtudie,
thereby the rather, that after ſome reſt, they may become agayne
more pregnant than before: I thynke it beſt (if ſo it
pleaſe you) to enter this Gundu
                        •
                     o, and in the ſame to beholde
all theſe places of pleaſure,Gundulo is a little boate, which is vſed at Venice, to rowe aboute the Citie for 
                        〈◊〉
                     . which as beautifull ſuburbes, are
bordering about this noble Citie: wherein, we may familiarly
talke and conferre, of what matter we liſt at our pleaſure.
            
            
               EVDO.
               It liketh me well.
            
            
               LYSIP.
               Let vs then determine,
to loſe no more time, but lette vs preſentlye all agrée to take
boate.
            
            
               TALES.
               Holla, waterman, bring hither thy Veſſell,
and deuiſe I pray thée, to rowe vs conueniently héere abroade
for our pleaſure.
            
            
               LYSIPPVS.
               Now I deſire Eudoxus to know, from what
place thou waſt then comming, when ſéeking for thée, thou ſooner
by chance didſt méete me on the way, than I looked for.
            
            
               EVD.
               Verily, I came at y• inſtant (my friēd) frō the Ile of S.
George the great,This Ilande ſtandeth on the ſide of Venice. the which, as well for the pleaſauntneſſe of
the place (whoſe ſea ſtill moiſting the ſoile, doth waſh the ſame
about) as alſo, for the ſtately building thereof, is vndoubtedly
amōg the reſt of al theſe Iles here adioining, eſtéemed the faireſt.
Where, when from the care of my worldly affayres I
finde any leyſure, withdrawing me wholly from the common

concourſe and multitude of the people, both ofte and many
times I beſtowe my ſelfe▪ to thinke vppon the rules and preceptes
of Philoſophie. For Solitarineſſe is doubtleſſe, a ſpeciall
friend of mine, as a Nurſe, that dothe cheriſh and mainteyne
all commendable ſtudyes: yelding to ſuch as do embrace hir,
both eaſe and quietneſſe. Beſides, ſhe cureth the weakeneſſe of
the minde, all idle carefulneſſe ſhe driueth away, ſhe auoydeth
luſt, and baniſheth feare. The which, ſince by daily experience
it commeth ſo to paſſe, you ſhal hardly (I preſume) fynde one amongſt
a number, that hathe earneſtly affected and fauoured
Philoſophy, but that he hathe rather delighted with few, than
with many to be conuerſant: In ſuche ſorte, that diuers vtterly
forſaking the dayly ſocietie both of Townes and Cities, haue
wholly in the ende betaken themſelues to the ſwéete delighte
and recreation of Solitarineſſe: Whiche playnely may appeare
by the ſaying of Flaccus, a Poet moſt excellent.
               
                  To me no ſimple care it is,
how I the ſacred ſprings may meete:
                  From whence I long the ſappe to ſucke,
of happie lyfe the preceptes ſweete.
               
               Which thing, we alſo vnderſtand that the Emperoure Auguſtus
did greately deſire, who writing to the Senate ſaid: that
ſo long as he cōſidered with himſelfe of the quiet repoſe of Solitarineſſe,
he found his minde delighted with a great and ſingular
pleaſure. Beſides; howe many other, both graue and wyſe
mē may we remēber, that haue wiſhed the ſame to haue falne
to their haps: who reſtrained therof, either by the care of their
peculiar affaires, or by the publique cauſes of ye cōmon welth,
could neuer attaine to trie by proofe, what happineſſe was cō
                  teined
in ye boſom of Solitarineſſe. LY. I know (my friēd) y• place
you ſpeake of, to be no leſſe by nature thā by art, ſo rarely poliſhed,
y• amōg. diuers ye beutiful ornamēts of this moſt excellēt

flouriſhing Citie, it may lawfully in my opinion be compared
with the beſt. But ſince the occaſion is already profered, of the
diſputation of Solitarineſſe, I déeme it beſt (if ſo it pleaſe you) to
touch this matter eare we leaue it, more fully.
            
            
               EVDO.
               Nothing
for my parte may contente me more, than to heare ſome
diſcourſe and debatement thereof: neyther wil Tales, I knowe,
diſagrée from the ſame. Wherefore, I dare boldly preſume,
that to eache of vs you ſhall doe (my friende) a ſingular pleaſure,
if ſo you will endeuoure to ſet downe your opinion concerning
this matter, not only, what you eſtéeme thereof youre
ſelfe, but alſo what preceptes concerning the ſame, you thinke
it néedefull to afoorde vnto vs.
            
            
               LYSIP.
               Since by this I vnderſtande
it is then youre pleaſure, to ſpend ſome time in the
diſputation of this queſtion, that I may fully, and that at fewe
words diſcharge the duetie and due regard of a friend, I wyll
preſently declare vnto you my mind what I thinke of ye ſame.
And to be playne, I do not a little Eudoxus diſagrée, from thys
opinon of ye
                     •
                  res: for whether you intend Solitarineſſe to conſiſt
in that, that a man withdrawing himſelfe from company, ſéeketh
rather to liue in the voide and deſolate places of ye earth,
and there, playing the Philoſopher in the open wilderneſſe,
doth ſéeme alone to contente hymſelfe: or that you déeme, the
ſubſtance thereof to remayne in the common ſocietie of man,
notwithſtanding, to be conuerſaunt but with few: I truely eſtéeme
it, no way to pertayne to the duetie of a wiſe man, to
whome it chiefly belongeth in all his actions, to haue ſpeciall
regarde to his end. For, it is not to be thoughte that the hygh
and ſoueraigne God, dyd firſte create man to the ende to lyue
wholly to himſelfe, neyther was he borne for hymſelfe onely,
but that of his birth, parte his Countrey as Plato ſayth, and
part his friendes are to challenge. Beſydes, if ſo it were neceſſary
for man to liue alone, then were it but néedeleſſe for hym
to haue a wife, but otherwiſe it appeareth, that God knowing
better our neceſſitie than we our ſelues, thought marriage a
thing very néedefull to be prouided. Wherefore, aſſure youre

ſelfe you ſhall commonly fynde, eyther fewe or none of thoſe
that are accompted wiſe, that wil rather ſéeme, to preferre Solitarineſſe
before ſocietie. But of ye other ſide many, that haue
vtterly condemned that vnciuile kind of life, which ignoraunt
people in the beginning of the world did brutiſhly leade, much
after the manner of vnreaſonable beaſtes. Among whome,
there was neyther ſocietie nor friendſhip maynteyned, no mā
liuing in the boundes of lawfull matrimony, no man certaine
of his owne children, nor any law to diſtinguiſh the good from
the euill mainteyned among them. What ſhoulde I ſay? eache
man then did careleſly raunge, and wander abrode in the deſolate
Wilderneſſe, hauing neyther dwelling nor place of abode.
But when reaſon had after taughte them to aſſociate themſelues
togyther, and that Moyſes that mightie Captayne of the
Iewes was alſo borne, by whome the eternall God gaue firſt
the lawe to the line of his inheritance: from thence I ſay, the
law makers and Philoſophers, firſt taking their inſtruction,
beganne to ſette downe both manners and inſtitutions of lyuing:
And after, as Townes and Cities were dayly erected, ſo
the people began to eſtéeme of Humanitie and to reuerēce Religion,
whereby in ſhort ſpace it came after to paſſe, that diuers
addicted themſelues to the fauor of Faith, and to the exerciſe of
Iuſtice, and dyuers other to ſubmit themſelues to the yoke of
obedience: ſo as by this time, each man did eſtéeme it a thyng
belonging to his duetie, not onely to employ the beſt of his labour,
but alſo to aduenture the loſſe of hys life, for the better
maintenance of the common Wealth. From thence likewiſe
both Solon and Lycurgus tooke firſte their lighte, from whyche
foundation of theyrs, ye renowmed Graecians became ſo famous,
for the due eſtabliſhmente of their equal lawes. From whome,
the Romaynes alſo did after deriue, their penal conſtitutions
cōteyned in their tables, by the which, they brought the people
in all their actions, from thenceforth to become both profitable
and honeſt: who though at firſt by the ſtraungeneſſe thereof,
they beganne to murmure and repine at ſuche bondage, yet

after, being better contented with reaſon to heare & vnderſtand
the ſame, frō wilde & vntamed creatures they brought them at
laſt, to ſhew thēſelues both gentle & méeke. Frō hence the maieſtie
of their Empire, frō hence the greatneſſe of their dominions,
from hence the multitude of their Magiſtrates, tooke firſt
their beginning. But, that I may not too perticularly runne ouer
theſe matters, if with diligēce you ſearch, you ſhal finde no
goodneſſe to remaine among the people, y• hath not happened to
ſpring from this fountayne of Societie. Yea, the ſacred knot of
friēdſhip it ſelfe, thā the which we haue nothing receiued more
pleaſant frō the Goddes, nor of greater reuerence & eſtimation
on the earth, tooke alſo hir original foūdation frō the 
                     •
                  ame. But
what thinke you of this, aboue the reſt O Tales?
               
            
            
               TALES.
               I
am not ignorant my friends, yt this queſtion may ſufficiētly be
debated on both ſides, notwithſtanding, ſince you demaund my
opiniō, I wil endeuour my ſelf to declare you my mind what I
thinke of the matter. It ſemeth therfore vnto me, that if a wiſe
man, ſhould only reſpect his priuate cōmoditie, or that he were
ſpecially addicted to his owne ſecuritie, he ought doubtles in y•
behalfe, to chooſe to liue rather to himſelf thā to others. But, if
ſo he be perſwaded, that nothing may be counted more honeſt,
nothing for a mightie & noble perſonage more worthy, than to
benefit as many as poſſible he may: he muſt vtterly thē decline
frō 
                  Solitarineſſe, & muſt earneſtly ſéeke to be cōuerſant abroade,
chiefly ſo lōg, as the neceſſitie of others ſhal ſo require ye ſame.
And according to the ſaying of Socrates, ſome with ſwéetneſſe of
oration, & ſome with example of pure & perfect life, he muſt labour
to enduce to ye reuerence of Vertue: knowing right well, y•
ſhe hath néede of an inſtructer, to acquaint hir to y• world, & that
nothing doth more allure the minds of the people to eſtéeme of
honeſtie, thā the dayly cuſtome & example of good mē.
            
            
               EVDO.
               Wil you graunt, my friends (ere we procéede any further) y• it
may be poſſible for a litle quātitie of gal, to make bitter a gret
deale of hony: or y• one infected kernell, may be able to corrupt

                     〈◊〉
                   whole cluſter of Grapes.
            
            
               TAL.
               Why not Eudoxus?
            
            
               EVD.
               
                  
Then wherfore I pray you do you ſuppoſe, that a wiſe mā being
placed amids ye infection of ſo many vices diſperſed abrode
both far & wide, may poſſible preſerue himſelfe vnpolluted: and
are not rather perſwaded, y• good men (the number of whome is
but ſmall) may be rather carried away by the greater number,
& ſo become infected of the multitude. For amōg diuers ye cauſes
of our euill demeanure, this is one, that for ye moſt part we
liue after the example of others, & are not gouerned by reaſon,
ſo y• the better ſort are ſooner drawen out of the way, by ye cuſtome
of y• which is euil, thā y• the multitude (leauing their error
& falſe opiniō, which leadeth them headlōg dayly vnto vice)
by example of their honeſtie may at al be brought to the due eſtimatiō
& reuerence of vertue: the which is therfore of al men
the rather neglected,The ſtrength of the mynde and of natures is double. bicauſe the ſtrēgth of the mind & of nature
is double. The one cōſiſting in deſire, which draweth a mā both
hither & thither, whervnto nature is alwayes moſt enclining:
The other cōſiſting in reaſon, which teacheth & explaneth what
ought to be done, and what to be auoided. But few there are (I
may ſay) y• willingly ſéeke to followe the footeſteps of Vertue,
with this gift of reaſon: for that, whē they determine with thē
ſelues to treade hir path, they find the ſame more tedious than
they looked, wāting both counſel, VViſedome, labor, & diligence,
as it may plainely be ſene by the ſhape and figure of Pithagoras
                  This letter Y. is called Pythagoras letter, as it is more playnely ſet downe in Vergile, his Epigra
                        ••
                     es the eight.
letter. By occaſion wherof they retire thēſelues backe, refuſing
the paine & induſtrie wherwithall noble minds are nouriſhed, &
ſo, remaine wauing (as it were) betwene the counterfet of Vertue
and the loue of profit, among whom, Falſhoode for the moſt
part doth hold the place and eſtimation of Trouth, chiefly ſo lōg
as it is generally ſo accepted and receiued of al men.
            
            
               LYSIP.
               Wel ſaid Eudoxus, now verily I thē perceiue, it wil be thought
néedeful (as the caſe requireth) that we firſt define what vertue
is: And after (if ſo it pleaſe you) we wil further cōſider, whether
Solitarineſſe or ſocietie may ſeme more cōueniēt for ye obteining
therof.
            
            
               EVD.
               Why ſo Lyſip. Wil this whole day ſuffiſe, as you
take, it to performe ye ſame? Doubtles I dare hereof be bold to

aſſure you, that looke how many there are, that haue ſeuerally
defined of Vertue, ſo many in a manner are their ſeueral opinions
concerning the ſame.
            
            
               LYSIP.
               It ſhall ſuffiſe Eudoxus in
this behalfe, if of thoſe diuers definitions of theirs, we repeate
ſome two or thrée of the moſt approoued. Let Tales therefore,
take in hande the dealyng of this matter for vs both.
            
            
               EVDO.
               Thereof would I be very glad, wherefore at this our earneſt
requeſt, I pray thée O Tales to accept of the ſame.
            
            
               TALES.
               I
am afrayde my friēds, leaſt you heape on me a greater charge,
than eyther in my power remaineth to performe, or may agrée
with my deſire, conſidering how little I haue bin trayned as
yet, in the grounded knowledge of the liberall Sciences: ſo that
in a matter of importance ſo greate, it behoueth me rather to
hold my peace than to ſpeake. For, what learning at all do you
perceyue in me? or what witte? that I may worthily ſéeme
on the ſuddayne to deale in a caſe ſo difficulte and of ſuche
weight, as requireth of it ſelfe, no ſmall ſkill and practiſe to be
looked for in him that ſhould meddle with the ſame. Verely my
friendes, of all thoſe cauſes that are hādled in Philoſophy, there
is no one thing more grauely vttered, or with a greater maieſtie.
Wherefore, this ought rather (if I may iudge) to be youre
charge and duetie, who in the ſtudie of Philoſophy, and of all other
knowledge, haue profit ably ſpente the greateſt parte of
your age.
            
            
               LYSIPPVS.
               Go to Tales, and deſpaire not with
thy ſelfe of thy owne habilitie, eyther to defyne or to diſpute of
Vertue, for as much, as the ornaments therof by the iudgement
of all men, do greately appeare in thée: In 
                     •
                  uche ſorte, as if the
Gods had pleaſed to appoint thée to haue bin borne in the time
when Socrates and Plato did liue, there woulde haue appeared
vnto them no other Phaedrus or Alcibiades than they ſelfe, in reſpect
of thy greate and ſingular towardneſſe giuen thée by nature.
Wherefore, perſuade thy ſelfe my friende, that for thy
knowledge, thou arte able to debate, and that exactly, of the
worthineſſe thereof, ſince by the gift of God, thou haſt obteined
to haue hir, the ruler and directer, of thy floriſhing life.
            
            
               EVD.
               
                  
I can for my parte Tales no otherwiſe thinke, of the perfection
of thy witte, nor of the eſtimation of thy behauioure, than as
Liſippus hath already thought: and in trouth, the moſt parte of
thoſe that know thée beſides, are of the ſame opinion. Wherefore,
to each of vs thou ſhalt do (my friend) a ſingular pleaſure,
if as in other things thou were héeretofore wont, ſo thou wilte
nowe at this our requeſt, ſet downe vnto vs ſome approued
rules and preceptes of Vertue, both what it is by the opinion
of others, & alſo what thou eſtéemeſt therof thy ſelfe.
            
            
               TALES.
               Thus it is to offer violence, neither dothe it oughte auayle by
what reaſon you perſwade me, ſince playnely you compell me:
for, to gaineſay the earneſt requeſt of my friends, (chiefly in a
matter of honeſtie) as it may ſéeme a thing vngratefull, ſo is it
vnreaſonable. Diuers therefore debating of Vertue, béeyng diuers
of opinion among themſelues, haue diuerſly ſpoken. But
Plato in his Booke entituled Menon, where queſtioning of many
things (as his manner was) he hathe expreſſed in order the
ſeuerall opinions of diuers writers, and with excellent reaſons
hath confuted them all,The firſt definition of VERTVE.
                   ſéemeth verily to define, That Vertue is
nothing elſe than goodneſſe it ſelfe. But what that goodneſſe is,
and where it doth remaine, there haue bin héeretofore, and are
ſtill, depending manye controuerſies among the Philoſophers.
The Stoickes did ſuppoſe the ſame, to remaine in Vertue. The
Epicures did eſtéeme it, to conſiſt in Pleaſure, as thoſe y• thought
it impoſſible to ſeparate Pleaſure from Vertue, nor any man to
liue honeſtly that liued not pleaſauntly, and againe, no man to
liue pleaſauntly that liued not honeſtly. The Peripatetikes were
of opinion, that there were thrée kindes of goodneſſe, that is to
ſay, of the Minde, of the Body, and of Fortune. The goodes of the
minde they thought to be thoſe things that remaine in aduice,
and in the excellencie of witte, as Prudence, Iuſtice, Fortitude, and
Modestie. Of the body, thoſe things whiche nature hath gyuen
profitable to the body, as Swiftneſſe, Force, Perſonage, and Health.
Of Fortune, thoſe things which by lotte or happie chaunce do
proſperouſly befall, as Birth, Education, Riches, Authoritie, Poſſeſſions,

Friendes, and ſuch like. But, for honeſties ſake we will in
this place omitte the opinion of the Cinicke ſecte, as thoſe that
liued no leſſe like Dogges than they ſpake, and will agayne
returne to the triple deſtinction of Goodneſſe: wherein, whatſouer
ſhall be ſayd of Goodneſſe, the ſame you muſt alſo intend to
be ſpok
                     •
                   of Vertue. For, if Vertue may rightly be termed goodneſſe,
no leſſe may goodneſſe as rightely alſo be called Vertue:
ſince by the rule of Logike, the definition, and the thing defyned,
may lawfully be conuerted. Nowe therefore, let vs farther conſider
what theſe former Philoſophers did properly accounte this
goodneſſe to be, or in what actions they placed y• ſame? Wherin,
I do many times with Cicero call in queſtion the wiſedome
of thoſe learned mē, who thought, the weake and chaungeable
gifts of the body,That goodneſſe doth not conſiſt in the giftes of the body, nor of Fortune. and alſo of Fortune, worthy only in ſpeach ye
name of goodneſſe, whē in very déede, they were thēſelues farre
otherwiſe of opinion, concerning the intēt and meaning of the
ſame: In ſomuche as Epicurus himſelfe, who referred all goodneſſe
vnto pleaſure, when he was vexed & diſturbed with hys
greateſt griefe, behaued hymſelfe both ſtoutely & boldly: Saying,
when the ſtopping of his vrine, & the incredible griefe of
his belly exulcerated, did pitifully torment him, O, how happily
do I endure this laſt,
                  The proofe of the firſt part of this argument. 
                  and ending day of mine. For as diuers & ſundry
times we may ſée, a great and mightie perſonage take his beginning
from baſe and lowe parentage, ſo may we alſo as ofte
behold a ſtout and valiaunt mind ſhrowded vnder a body, both
weake, deformed, & vnhealthful: And therfore, ſince nature can
daily make proofe vnto vs, that a noble & vertuous minde may
poſſible lie hid vnder each kind of forme, the deformitie of the
body ought not to embaſe y• eſtimatiō of ye mind, but the beautie
of the mind ought rather to adorne the feature of the body.
Neither is it to be thought, y• olde men, bycauſe the ſtrength of
their bodyes is decayd, are therefore to be worſe eſtéemed thā
yong men, ſince it is manifeſt yt the greateſt exploites are not
alwayes brought to paſſe, by ſtrength, ſwiftneſſe, or agilitie of body,
but rather by counſell, authoritie, and iudgement, wherein olde

men are moſt experienced. The whiche, if any man by contentiō
wil ſeme to denie, what other thing (I pray you) may there
follow therof, but that Bulles, Lions, Elephāts, & ſuch other beaſts
may alſo be ſaid to be better thā mē, bicauſe they are ſtronger:
which no man I thinke dare venture to affirme, vnleſſe ſome
ſuch as deſireth to be taken & accounted for a foole. For albeit,
I confeſſe that nature hath made man vnarmed, yet notwithſtanding,
ſhe hath giuē him two things eſpecially aboue y• reſt,
wherwith to defend his body frō the harme of ſuch as are ſtrō
                  ger
thā himſelfe, that is to ſay, Reaſon and Societie. But let vs
leaue to ſpeake of beaſts, & let vs returne to men themſelues,
who of body haue bin paſſing ſtrong. What then I pray you
ſhall we ſay of 
                     
                        •
                     iphaeus, Briareus, and diuers other Giants?
What of Milo? who is ſaid to haue paſſed the whole race of Olimpia,
with a liue Oxe on his ſhoulders, neuer taking his breth
by the way. What of Antheus and Hercules? ſhall we ſay y• ſuch
men are therfore better thā thoſe, who by force of their witte,
or by any other meanes, haue likewiſe performed dyuers notable
exploites. Let vs for the purpoſe cōſider, what thing hath
profited moſt ye Romaine Empire in the time of their daunger:
whether the great foreſight of Marcus Tullius, by the which he
found out the diſſention of the people, & ſo preſerued the libertie
of his countrey, frō the ſecret harme of rebellious Citizens: or
ye notable triumphs of C. Marius & Furius Camillus, with the famous
& victorious priſes, which by force of armes they broght
frō forrain Countreys. What would it (I pray you) haue profited
that noble Empire, to haue ſubdued ye whole circuit of the
world, if the like diſſention had befalne them at home, whiche
Horace lamenteth in his time to haue happened, ſaying:

                     By ciuile warre, now to decay,
another age is led:
                     And Rome hir ruine, hath by ſuch,
as ſhe hirſelfe hath bred.
                     
                        
Whom neither might their neighbors nere,
the Martians ſo ſubdue:
                     Nor fierce Porſenaes Trurian bande,
ſuch cauſe of griefe renue.
                     No Capua ſpight, no ſeruile hoſt,
of Spartacus aſſayle:
                     No Switſer with his vile miſhap,
in new attemptes preuayle.
                  
               
               The common wealthe being therefore by him thus preſerued
from danger, full worthyly in my opinion was he accounted
(as by the mouth of all men he was called) the father of his
Countrey, wherevpō, taking great comfort at that time in him
ſelfe, he vttered thys ſaying.
               Let warre giue place to Wiſedomes will,
and Laurell yeelde to Rhethorickes skil.
               This was the cauſe, why Agamemnon that mightie Captaine
of the Grecians, did neuer wiſh to haue had in his companie,
tenne the like of A
                        •
                     x but of Neſtors notwithſtanding he
wiſhed ſo many, from whoſe tong as Homer ſayth, there procéeded
ſpéech more ſwéet than any hony: which if it might haue
happened, he woulde not haue doubted but that Troy ſhoulde
ſone haue bene deſtroyed. Whereby it appeareth, that thoſe
auntient warriours had alwayes more affiance in the valor of
the minde, than of the body, and not vnworthily (as I take it)
ſince oftentymes it hath happened, y• they them ſelues with a
very few ſouldiers, haue vtterly ouerthrowen a gret & mightie

army, yea rather, by the ſingular knowledge and policie of the
mind, than by force of armes, or ſway of men: whereby, they
haue not only kept their Countreys frée from the daunger of
their enimies, but therevnto haue annexed both Kingdomes
and Empyres. And that it is ſo, Leonides King of the Spartanes
may very well teſtifie, who, when he made to his Souldyers
that ſingular oration, by the whiche he dyd encourage them
boldly to giue the onſet on that greate and mightie armye of
Xerxes, ſaying: My Souldiers and companyons, let vs fully determine
to make ſuch a dinner this day in the field, as though
we ſhoulde ſuppe togither this night, in the very lappe and intrayles
of the earth: he (I ſay) with foure thouſande Souldyers
at that time and no more, dyd victoriouſly vanquiſhe that vnnumerable
hoſt of the Perſians, with whoſe nauie the whole
ſea was cleane couered ouer at their arriuall into Greece. But,
what alſo ſhall we ſay of thoſe two famous Souldyers, C. and
P. Scipio? who eſtéeming it a thing both honorable and manly,
to die in the defence of their Countrey, did thinke it neceſſary
to ſtoppe the comming of the Carthaginians, with the apparaunt
daunger of their owne bodyes. What of Horatius Cocles,
who alone did defend the entraunce of a narrow bridge, which
lay vpon the riuer of Tiber, commaunding the whyle, the hynder
parte thereof to be taken away, that his enimies mighte
haue no paſſage on the ſame? What of Gedion, who with thrée
hundreth Souldiers, being armed only with heauenly power,
did miraculouſly ouercome many thouſand Philiſtians? What
of Dauid himſelfe▪ who being vnarnmed, with a ſting only and a
ſtone, did manfully ouerthrowe the great Golias, who both, for
armour and ſtrength, was there well appoynted as a Champion
to fighte, and proude
                     •
                  y did challenge the people of God?
Shall we rather ſay, that all theſe haue thus deſerued theyr
immortall fame and eſtimatiō in the world, for the greateneſſe
of their ſtrēgth, or for the ſingularitie of their Vertue?
               
            
            
               LISIP.
               What of that Tales? Do you therefore thinke, that the ſtrēgth
of the body is not good?
            
            
               TALES.
               Yea truely.
            
            
               LISIP.
               Is it

then to be déemed euill?
            
            
               TALES.
               Not ſo neyther. LISIP.
If you déeme that ſtrength be neyther good nor euil, what is it
then?
            
            
               TALES.
               We call (my friend) all ſuch like ornaments,
whether they bée giftes of Nature, or of Fortune, indifferent
things, which are thought to be common not onely vnto men,
but alſo vnto beaſtes: and that which may bée counted common,
as well vnto them as vnto vs, may verily vnto vs be no
way déemed good. For if ſo it were good, neyther might beaſts
obtaine the ſame, nor euill men haue the vſe thereof: or if they
had, yet could they by no meanes vſe it to their owne harme:
but by courſe it woulde followe, that loke howe far forth they
were furniſhed with ſuch like qualities, ſo much the more they
would therby become much better than others, ſince goodneſſe
it ſelfe is of this nature, that it maketh the poſſeſſor thereof farre
much the better. But ſince otherwiſe it happeneth, that thoſe
which for the moſt part are accounted ſtrongeſt, are therwithall
moſt commonly more hurtefull than others, what may we
therof thinke? May goodneſſe be noiſome to any man? or as with
Cicero we may ſay, May any man in the abundance of his goodneſſe
be deemed euil himſelfe? nay verily, we ſée that often all ſuche
like things, both lewde and wicked perſons poſſeſſe them, and
therwithall are offenſiue vnto thoſe that are good. In my opinion
therefore (as I haue ſaid before) that whiche either maye
hurt vs, or that whiche is common to euill perſons and wilde
beaſts togither with vs, may not any way poſſibly be déemed
good vnto vs.
            
            
               EVD.
               Thou ſayeſt my friend both well & truely
in this behalfe, but ſince by this reaſon it appeareth, y• good men
ought only to be reuerenced for their goodneſſe, there is yet another
error,The proofe of the ſeconde part of the argument before. but frō whence it procéedeth I know not, y• riche
mē are in all places honored, notwithſtanding they be euil mē,
and pore men deſpiſed although they be good men. And yet it is
not vnknowen vnto vs that it is giuen to all men to be for the
moſt part of a better iudgement in aduerſitie than in proſperitie:
And therefore it is daily ſéene, that miſerable and wretched
people are alwayes more forwarde to ſerue and worſhip God,

than thoſe y• are happie: For proſperitie is a thing, that withdrawes
vs frō goodneſſe.
               
            
            
               TAL.
               Thou art ignorant it ſéemeth Eudoxus,
that for the moſt part we value each thing according to opinion,
and not vnto nature: we firſt beleue before we giue iudgement.
Neither for any other occaſion are we rather thought to
be cōfirmed in our naughtineſſe, than for bycauſe, he y• flatters
vs in our euil doings, & is a partie to the ſame, is therby a prouoker
of al ſuch things in the which we offend. And cōmonly to
our euil demeanure, this alſo is annexed, y• when we offende, it
ſuffiſeth vs not to offend, to y• only deſtruction of one, but that
it greatly delighteth vs, to impart our naughtineſſe with many,
if ſo by any meanes, we may heape the ſame vpon the heds
of our neighbors. And herevpon it riſeth, that 
                     •
                  ur eyes béeyng
dazeled with the brightneſſe of gold, we oft times repete from
the botome of our heartes, this ſaying of Euripides,
                  
                     So riche I may be thought, how yll,
no care at all I take:
                     If riche he be, men aske, if good,
no men enquirie make.
                     Not whence, nor wherefore, asked is,
but what he hath to lende:
                     Eche man esteemed is no more,
than as he may diſpende.
                     What were vnfit for vs to haue,
doſt aske? nothing at all:
                     In wealth I wiſh to liue, if not,
for preſent death I call.
                     
                        
Who ſo doth dye, he well doth dye,
that makes a welthy ende:
                     This money is the greateſt good,
that God to man may ſende.
                     Than which, ne may thy mothers loue,
ſo much thy minde delight:
                     Ne loue of father, nor of child,
is halfe 
                           •
                        o deere in ſight.
                     No not the loue, of comely ſhape,
that in thy face doth ſtay:
                     Of men beneath, and Gods aboue,
ſhe beares the only ſway.
                  
               
               So therefore (I ſay) it delighteth vs to liue, as betwéene vs
and beaſtes there may be found no difference, but only that of
ſpéeche we enioy the libertie whiche wholly they wante. To
whome if like libertie were alſo graunted, if of them thou
wouldeſt then demaund, what thing aboue the reſt they chiefly
deſire, what other aunſwere at all would they make, but only
to enioy that whiche beſt delighteth their appetites, whyche
bringeth moſt pleaſure and delectation to their ſenſes, and all
this for no other reaſon, than for bycauſe they account the pleſure
of the body their chiefeſt felicitie. Therefore, let it be fartheſt
off from your opinion my friendes, that Riches are to bée
déemed good, the rather, ſince Democritus, Crates, and dyuers other
héeretofore haue forſaken their wealth, to the ende, that
being both bare and without encombance, they mighte ſo followe

                  Vertue the better, who of hir ſelfe is both ſingle and bare,
and conſiſteth not in the vncertentie of riches, made ſubiect to
forren inuaſion, but is otherwiſe eſtabliſhed, in perfecte firmeneſſe
and ſtabilitie, which Lucilius conſidering, ſaith:

                     That is not thine, which Fortune thine,
by chaunce hath made to bee:
                     What wiſhing brings, may wel betide
another, as to thee.
                  
               
               What ritches then is there I pray you, vpon the which
there doth not caſually depende, Neede, Hunger, and Beggerie, the
rather, ſince God hath ſo ordered the ſtate of humaine cauſes
to be ſuch, yt the beſt good things of this world are always held
with greateſt care, and that no man may ſo greatly be deceiued,
by repoſing his truſt in any ſtate or degrée of Fortune, as
vpō that which in the iudgemēt of the world is accoūted greateſt.
For this occaſion we thinke it alwaies néedeful of one felicitie
to maintaine another, bicauſe eche thing that happeneth
by chaunce is vnſtable, and that which riſeth moſt high, is apwed
teſt ſtill to fall. But that, which beſt aboue all things is allowed
vnto man, may neither be giuen nor taken away by any
man, for that it lieth without the power of man to diſanull the
ſame. The which ſince ſo it fareth, it is doubtleſſe therefore the
greateſt madneſſe that maye be, to followe the deſire of that
brittle ſubſtance, chiefly with al our ſtudie, care and diligence,
which is ſubiect ſtill to the inuaſion of others: The propertie
whereof is alſo ſo variable, that if at this day it be, to morow
it may hap to be found in no place. This verely was the cauſe,
why Stilbon when he had already loſt both his wealth and dignitie,
being aſked of Demetrius who held from him the poſſeſſion
of his Citie, what he had loſt, made aunſwere, nothing, For
al, that is mine doth remaine with me ſtil. And that B
                        •
                     as did alſo 
                     •
                  he

like, Cicero doth likewiſe teſtifie, who when his enimies had
taken from him his Countrey Pryenna, and that diuers did flie
from thēce, taking with them great part of their treaſure, being
admoniſhed by a friend of his to do y• like, made anſwere, Suerlie
ſo I do, for I haue alwaies about me as much as is mine. Whereby it
ſéemeth y• theſe contented perſons did thus contemne & deſpiſe
their welth, for that they eſtéemed nothing to be good, vnleſſe it
were honeſt: ſo as, of theſe vanities of Fortune which we call
ritches, they made no reconing, knowing, that it was to thē the
greateſt felicitie, not to want felicitie, & fully perſwading them
ſelues, yt the whole world was allowed vnto thē by nature for
their patrimonye, accounting alſo that wealth by the lawe of
nature was eſtéemed pouerty, and that nothing could ſéeme vnto
them more fooliſh & filthy, than to frame the goodneſſe of a reſonable
mind out of vnreſonable things.
            
            
               LISIP.
               Truly Tales,
thou haſt herein played the Philoſopher moſt excellently: But I
pray thée tel me, doſt thou take Wiſdome for a Vertue or no?
            
            
               TA.
               No verely.
            
            
               LISIP.
               What reaſon I pray thée perſwadeth thée
ſo?
            
            
               TALES.
               For that, if wiſedome were a Vertue, this thereof
would folow, that Vertue were not abiding within vs, but ſhold
come outwardly vnto vs, whiche abſurditie were great, ſince
Vertue is a thing, that may neither be giuen nor taken away by
any man, as before we haue declared: But Wiſedome we finde,
may conueniently paſſe ouer from one to another, & therfore, it
muſt conſequently enſue; that of it ſelf it is no Vertue: y• which
may be alſo proued another waye. For if Wiſdome were a Vertue,
it ſhould alſo be good, & if ſo it were good, it ſhould likewiſe
make them to be good which are counted wiſe. But ſince otherwiſe
it appeareth, y• diuers before this time haue become Philoſophers,
to the only end to know what were good & what were euil,
rather, than for that they deſire to become any thing y• better
by the knowledge of the ſame: It is therfore to be doubted
of no man, but that we haue rightly termed Wiſdome, y• is to ſay
Knowledge, to be no Vertue. For if Knowledge were a Vertue,
the doctrine therof might doubtleſſe be taught, which if it were

poſſible, then woulde there bée founde both teachers and
learners of Vertue, as of other ſciences. But for as
muche as they are no where founde, it thereby appeareth,
that neither Knowledge, nor anye other thing concerning
the Minde, maye be called Vertue, as Plato himſelfe doeth
plainely affirme.
            
            
               LISIPPVS.
               What then of Juſtice I pray
you, maye that be counted a Vertue or not?
            
            
               TALES.
               If
wée denie Wiſedome to bée a Vertue, wée leſſe yéelde Juſtice,
leſſe Fortitude, or Modeſtie of themſelues to bée Vertues:
ſince all theſe thinges (Wiſedome taken awaie) are not onely
worth nothing, but alſo doe rather more hurte than good.
For Juſtice without the gouernemente of Wiſdome, what
elſe maye it ſéeme than wilfull libertie? Fortitude what
elſe, than vnconſiderate raſhneſſe? Modeſtie what elſe, than ſlothfull
and diſſolute negligence? By this it therefore appeareth
that Wiſedome, that is to ſay, the Knowledge of good and euil, is
one thing, and Vertue another: For there maye be Knowledge
wythout Vertue, as plainely it appeared by dyuers of the Philoſophers,
who in déede did onlye vſurpe the name of Vertue,
when in effecte, what the ſame did rightly import, they
were altogither ignoraunt. Yet Knowledge, as to ſome men it
ſéemeth, is ſo conioyned with Vertue, that Knowledge goeth before
& Vertue foloweth: For little doth Knowledge profit, vnleſſe
y• action do alſo enſue. And therefore it may rightly be concluded,
that no kinde of goodneſſe, that the Peripatetickes did
in their time allow of, may be ſimply déemed good: For Vertue
it ſelfe is an other thing in déede than they dyd thynke off,
and from thence (as I take it) all goodnoſſe doeth procéede: the
reſte doubtleſſe, they are one daye good and another daye euill.
            
            
               LISIPPVS.
               Thou haſte herein Tales full truely ſpoken,
but ſo muche the rather by this it appeareth, that
Epicurus of all men was fartheſt wide from the knowledge
of this doctrine, as one that referred all Goodneſſe vnto
Pleaſure, and laboured ſtil to ſpeake as neare as he mighte
to the pleaſing of eache man, whiche ſéemeth farre differing

from the true diſpoſition and habite of Vertue: For this in effect
was the manner of his doctrine. The ſlouthful man he diſchargeth
from the knowledge of good letters. The couetous mā he
acquitteth from the expence of his money. The idle man he forbiddeth
frō the dealings of the cōmon wealth: The laſie man to
be exerciſed: or the coward to be a ſouldier he wil not ſuffer: To
him that hath euil children he cōmendeth the want of children:
Againſt vngodly fathers, he ſayth, there is no bonde of nature:
To him that is impatient and nice, he affirmeth that griefe is
the greateſt euil: who that ſeketh for Glorie and power, to him he
giues commaundement to folowe the Courte: and who that
can abide no trouble, him he perſwadeth to forſake the Court:
For this he generally affirmeth, That a wiſe mā ought alwayes to
doe eche thing for himſelfe.
               
            
            
               TALES.
               What marueyle thereof
my friende, when a guilefull f
                     •
                  lowe wyll not ſticke for aduauntage
to plaie vpon all handes, deſiring nothing more earneſtly,
than for the time to pleaſe eche man, and to be commended
and allowed of al men. Herevpon it roſe, that his diſcipline
was more honoured than the diſcipline of others, not for that
he came neareſt to the knowledge of that perfect Goodneſſe, but
for bicauſe▪ he did entice the people to the popular name of pleaſure.
For there is no man liuing, that is not pro
                        •
                     e vnto vice. But that
which aboue the reſt was moſt pernicious, vnto thoſe y• were
Vngodlie, he denied the helpe of Diuine prouidence. Notwithſtanding,
by the verie ſame reaſon by which he was moued to ſaye
that the Gods did care for nothing, for that he daiely ſawe, diuers
calamities to fall vppon good men, as Pouertie, Toyle, banniſhment,
with the loſſe of their friendes: and euill men on the other

                     •
                  ide to become very happie, to increaſe in power, and to be loaded
with honor: he ſawe likewiſe, Innocencie leſſe aſſured, wickedneſſe
committed vnpuniſhed, and death to encroch without
reſpect of manners, without order, or difference of yeares, comming
to ſome in their olde age, to ſome agayne in theyr infantie,
to whom nothing had yet happened but onely hope of life:
takyng ſome away in the middeſt of their ſtrength, other ſome

alſo in the floure of their youth, ſuffering diuers and thoſe of the
better ſorte to periſh in the wars, likewiſe vexing and perſecuting
mē if religiō with diuers grieuous afflictions, & vnto thoſe
that either deſpiſe God, or refuſe to doe him worſhip, offering
eyther little or no griefe at all: By the ſame reaſon (I ſaye) he
was fully confuted, and did thereby confeſſe, that in God our
creator there is prouidence diuine, and that it is neceſſarie to beleue
there is alſo a life to come, in which euil men for their offences
ſhall be puniſhed, and good men for their Vertue rewarded.
For if true it were that there remayned in God no Prouidence
diuine, how ſhoulde the worlde be ſo duely diſpoſed? howe
ſhoulde the raine fall, fruite ſpring, or trées waxe leaued? But,
it is (as I take it) no maruel at al, though for his part he were
ſo infected with that leude opinion, who was toward god a verie
vile and vnrighteous creature himſelf, and the firſt perſwader
and procurer of filthy pleaſure, for the fruition whereof he
thought man to be chiefly borne; notwithſtanding, it is in troth
ſo farre differing (my friendes) from all good doctrine, to thinke
pleaſure to be good, that Plato himſelf that Philoſopher profound,
affirmeth the ſame to be the bayte of all euill, bycauſe that mē
are therewithall dayly taken as fiſhe with a hooke. For Ambition
firſt, with the ſingular ſwéeteneſſe & deſire of honor (which
is likened to the inticing ſong of Mermaydes) draweth them
headlong one waye vnto hir. Couetouſneſſe an other way, allureth
them as faſt with the gain of money: and Wantonneſſe prouoketh
them, with enticements of luſt: ſo as, there is nothing
more true than the ſaying of Seneca, That no euil remaineth without
pretence of warrantie, and that al vice doth ſolicite vs with hope
of rewarde. The which that great and excellent man Architas
of Tarente very wiſely conſidering, ſayde, that there is no greater,
nor more pernicious a peſtilence giuen to man by nature,
than the pleaſure of the bodie, of which our fleſh being maruellous
gréedie, we are furthwith pricked on with deſire to obtaine
it. From hence the betraying of countries, from hence the
ouerthrow of common Weales, frō hence the ſecret conferēce

with forren enemies, is ſaide to procéede. Beſides, there is alſo
no miſchiefe nor no foule offence pretended, that thys deſire
of diſpleaſure doeth not enforce to be committed: All whordomes
and adulteries, and all offences whatſoeuer, are chiefly
procured by no other occaſion that onely bey pleaſure. And
whereas nothing is giuen vnto man, either by God or Nature
more excellente than the minde: There is none ſo greate
an enimie to this diuine gift of his, as this filthy pleaſure. For
where Luſt doth raigne, Temperance hath there no place, nor
within the dominion of Pleaſure, maye Vertue endure to abide.
The which to the ende it might the better be perceiued, he willeth
a man to ſuppoſe in his minde, himſelf to be prouoked with
as greate deſire of bodilye pleaſure as maye poſſibly be conceiued:
thinking thereby, that no man woulde then ſtande in
doubt, but that ſo long as he were ther withal delighted, he could
nothing profitte in minde, nothing in reaſon, nor any thing in
thought. Wherefore he fully concludeth, that there is nothing
more deteſtable, nothing more noyſome nor piſtiferous vnto
mankinde, than this deſire of pleaſure: The which, how muche
the more it doth increaſe and waxe bigge, ſo much the more it
darkneth and conſumeth the light of the minde. Sée therefore
then I pray you, how miſerable the ſeruice of Vertue ſhould be
made, being appointed as Epicurus would haue hir, a ſeruaunt
vnto Pleſure. For, it is not poſſible y• Vertue may be obtained by
pleaſure, but rather diminiſhed & loſt by the ſame: ſince al theſe
things are contrarie to the one, that are thought neceſſarie for
the obtaining of ye other, that is to ſay, Inceſſant labor, hardineſſe,
and reſiſtance againſt euil, whereof this life is very full. For, by
what meanes elſe are men made Modeſt, Gentle, chaſt, godlie, patient,
& louers of wiſdome, but only, by fearefulneſſr of pouertie,
dread of ſhame, and the bitter ſharpneſſe of continuall griefe?
It is therefore to be thought, that by the prouidence of God it
was ordeyned from the firſt, that Vertue ſhoulde labour here in
the trouble and vexation of the world: wherby it happeneth that
al thoſe, whom either wilfulneſſe or pleaſure hath headlong ouerthrowen,

are ſtil diſdaineful of ſuch as are followers of the
ſame, impatiently taking it, that anye other ſhoulde inioy that,
which they want themſelues. So that good men, bycauſe they
daily treade this difficult and painefull paſſage vnto Vertue,
are had in contempt of all thoſe, which pleaſauntlye walke in
the plaine and apparant waye to vice, waxing fooliſhly fonde of
eache flouriſhing floure and delectable fruite that they happen
to ſée, onely ſéeking to obtaine that, chiefly with all their ſtudie
and care, which among the mortal creatures of this worlde is
accounted good, that is to ſay, Honor, Riches, Quietneſſe, Pleaſure,
and all other ſuch enticements as wholly tende to the eaſe and
delight of the bodie:
            
            
               EVD.
               What then Tales, do you therefore
thinke that there ought to be taken no care of the body?
            
            
               TAL.
               That likewiſe on the other ſide were repugnant vnto nature,
who to all creatures hath giuen from the beginning of their
creation, a ſpeciall care to defende themſelues, their liues and
their bodies, and to auoyde, not onely thoſe things which therto
ſéeme hurtfull, but alſo to ſearch and trauaile to get al ſuch
things as are néedeful for the maintenance of the ſame. Therfore,
let the diligent laboure and care of mankinde be ſo employed,
as when Reaſon, Honor, or Faith, ſhall require it, he may
boldly aduenture the puniſhment both of fier, and of all other
torments whatſoeuer, for the preſeruation thereof. The which
we read, that Marcus Regulus did honorably performe, who indeuored
himſelfe to kéepe his appointment, made to his vtter
enemies, although he was ſure before, that if he returned to thē
againe, according to his promiſe, he ſhould preſently endure the
moſt bitter torments of death. But ſuch notwithſtanding was
the greatneſſe of his minde as byding in the middeſt of his extreme
puniſhment, neither his Honor, his Faith, his Conſtancie,
nor any other Vertue of his did forſake him. Neither could the
excellencie of his minde be ought at al tormented, which wyth
ſo many rare and notable giftes was defended, & with the felowſhip
of ſo many vertues encloſed: who although his bodye
were takē by y• hands of his enemies, yet doubtleſſe that noble

and inuincible mind of his, could poſſibly be taken by no meanes.
What ſhall we ſay of this (my friendes,) ſhal we thinke his hap
to be vnfortunate and miſerable?
            
            
               EVD.
               Nay, verily, but rather
m
                     •
                  ny opinion, of all men moſt happy: For happineſſe of lyfe is
not that as I take it, which is performed to the appetite of pleaſure,
but to the agreement of Nature.
               
            
            
               TAL.
               Therefore then, by
the very ſame reaſon we may boldly iudge the ſame, of that fayned
goodneſſe of Epicurus, that diuers of our profeſſion haue iudged
heretofore, that is, that his ſecte was rather a procurour of
vice, than a perſwader of Vertue or of any goodneſſe.
            
            
               LISIP.
               Doubtleſſe my friend ſo may we in deede, but doe you likewiſe
confeſſe, our happineſſe of life to be that whiche is performed to
the agreement of Nature, as Eudoxus very lately did ſeeme to affirme?
For if this be true, that thoſe men whiche liue according
vnto nature, ſhoulde therefore be good, there might happely then
come ſome one vnto vs, that might decerne of our children in the
time of their infancie, whiche of them would be good by nature:
By whoſe iudgement chooſing them forth, wée might do well to
lodge them in Towers, and with diligēce to preſerue them much
rather than Gold, leaſt any man ſhould corrupt them to the end,
that when they wa
                     •
                  e of conuenient yéeres, they might then become
both graue and profitable members for the cōmon wealth.
            
            
               TALES.
               Thou ſeekeſt a knot (according to the Prouerbe)
Lyſippus in a Bull ruſhe. For, I am not ignorant my frende but
full well thou knoweſt, that ech thing is named by his moſt worthy
part, which was the cauſe why Eudoxus (remēbring himſelfe
thereof) did ſo boldely affirme our happineſſe of lyfe, to be that,
whiche is ledde agréeable vnto Nature, that is to ſay, agreable to
that facultie and goodneſſe of the minde, which pertaketh of Reaſon,
and which is ſayde to be only peculiar vnto man. This therfore
being knowen, who is it would doubt, but that if mā ſhould
liue to the contrary, that is to ſay, according to the luſtfull parte
of the minde, he ſhould therein at all nothing differ in effect from
the behauiour of beaſtes. For Pythagoras and Plato have bothe
diuided the minde of 
                     〈◊〉
                   into two partes, the 
                     〈◊〉
                   partaking of

reaſon, the other voyde of reaſon, placing Tranquilitie, that is to
ſay, fixed and quiet ſecuritie, in that parte of the minde whiche
partaketh of reaſon: and in the other parte ſuche troubleſome
motions both of Wrath and deſire, as are enimies to the ſame.
Therefore, that man I pray you, which by the gouernement of
his reaſon, is made abſtinent, conſtant without feare, without
perturbatiō, and without luſt, is he not happie? For this is certaine,
that eche thing dependeth vpon his owne goodneſſe, and y•
in eche thing is termed to be good, to the which it was chiefly
created, neither is there any other good thing peculiar vnto mā,
but only reaſon: Wherupon I conclude, that 
                     •
                  ul bleſſed is that
man, and happie, that liueth alwayes agréeable vnto the ſame,
and reacheth therewith, to attaine to the end and courſe of hys
nature.
            
            
               EVD.
               Veryly Tales, thou haſt herein defended moſt excellently
my cauſe, decerning with the eyes of thy iudgement,
the very ſecrets of my minde, the true meaning whereof thou
haſt plainely expreſſed. Notwithſtanding, this alſo vnder correction
may ſéeme to be added to that which is ſpoken, that is
to ſay, the meane & occaſion, by the which we may reach, to this
deſired ende & courſe of our nature: which is this as I take it, if
truth be firſt made throughly perfect, if in ye doing of things ther
be obſerued order, meaſure, and comelineſſe, and that harmeleſſe
wil be made benigne & attentiue vnto reaſon, neuer ſwaruing
nor declyning from the ſame. By this verie way, the end
thereof may vndoubtedly be attained, from the which, we muſt
vnfainedly confeſſe, that happines of life, conioyned with ſafetie
and perpetual tranquilitie, doth onely procéede.
            
            
               LIS.
               I
cannot a little marueyle Eudoxus, ſince there is nothing among
vs here that may be termed happie, howe and in what ſorte it
may ſo come to paſſe, y• poſſible in this worlde we may come to
inioy, y• happineſſe of life which you ſpeak off.
            
            
               EVDO.
               What
néede you thereof to maruel at all, if willingly you wil allowe
but ſo much vnto man, as Plotinus thought good to impart vnto
beaſtes.
            
            
               LISIP.
               If that ſhuld be ſo, that a Man maie be happie,
hauing no more allowed him than is allowed vnto beaſts,

then haue we in my opinion, a greate deale more cauſe of
meruaile than before.
            
            
               EVDOXVS.
               His verie wordes
my frende if thou doe marke, ſhall giue thée thereof to vnderſtande
as hée ſpake them. Thus therefore, in the
bookes whiche he wrote of the happineſſe of life, he doeth
ſaye: Synce well to liue and to bée happie are accounted
as one, then whether doe wee alſo allowe the ſame vnto
beaſtes? if ſo it bée giuen to them by Nature, to paſſe
their liues without impedimente, according to the lawe in
whiche they were created, what then ſhoulde lette them
alſo to liue well, that is to ſaye, happyly? For whether
wée accompte this liuing well to conſiſte, in the well behauing
of youre ſelues, or in the due performing of oure
naturall duetie, wée muſte alſo be contented, to imparte
the ſame vnto beaſtes: To whō, it is both as poſſible to behaue
themſelues wel, and alſo to performe that ſpeciall worke of nature,
as it is vnto vs. For example, let vs firſte conſider of muſicall
birdes: Wherein it cannot I thinke be denyed, but that
they among the reſt do behaue themſelues well, for as naturallie,
they are taught, ſo duely they ſing, and thereby it ſéemeth
they maye rightly be ſayde, to followe a wiſhed and well behaued
kinde of life. But if farther it be ſayed, that there is
alſo required a happie ende to be made, which ought to conſiſt
in the laſt cloſing vp and concluſion of nature: By the ſame very
waye, we muſt likewiſe confeſſe they may be counted happie.
For when, by courſe of kynde they drawe to theyr ende,
the ordinarye motion of Nature doth ceaſſe in them, whereby
ſhe endeth that harmeleſſe life of theirs, whiche from the
firſte beginning to the departure of the ſame, ſhée throughlye
performed. And therefore, if eyther in the naturall endyng
of theyr lyues, or in the due performaunce of the duetie whervnto
they were created, there remaine anye happineſſe: The
                     •
                  
doubtleſſe may beaſtes be ſayde, to be both happye and bleſſed.
All whiche, if it be true Liſippus, according as Plotinus hath
ſette downe the ſame, what then ſhoulde hinder man, who

hath all his affections, ſubiecte vnto reaſon, and hath choſen
hir to guide him in his actions, that he alſo, ſhoulde not here
enioye that happineſſe of life. For, when the minde of
manne ſhall firmelye deſpiſe, all the caſuall aduentures
of thys tranſitorie eſtate, and ſhall haue broughte, all hir
familiar cauſes to depende vppon hir ſelfe, ſuppoſing alſo
all worldlye affaires to bée inferiour vnto Vertue, duelye
ſearching for that, than the whiche there maye nothing
be wiſhed for better, that is to ſaye Goodneſſe, perfectneſſe,
and Juſtice: It is neceſſarye then that it bee voyde of
perturbation, féeling in it ſelfe the fruite of tranquilitie,
and alſo of quietneſſe, by meane whereof it becommeth
happie: Notwithſtanding it bée ſtill abiding, within that
frayle and mortall bodie.
            
            
               LISIPPVS.
               I thinke it altogither,
inconueniente for mée, to anſwere at this time
to the ſaying of Plotinus, ſynce the matter he helde is in
effecte ſo abſurde, that there is ſcarſe anye one to be founde,
that will togyther aſſente with hym in the lyke. For
verilye for my owne part, I am yet to learne, in what cauſes
he woulde haue well behauiour to be placed: But let vs ſuppoſe
that beaſtes for the purpoſe, doe behaue them ſelues well
according to his ſaying, yet howe maye they by this reaſon be
accounted happie, who do not only not know, the goodneſſe of
theyr felicytie, but alſo are ignoraunt of their owne eſtate:
Or if they doe vnderſtande it, yet do they (as the Philoſophers affirme)
but groſely, vnperfectly, and obſcurely vnderſtande the
ſame. For although, it be common to them togither with vs,
to loue, to hate, to deſire, to feare, to ſorrow, and other ſuch like:
yet to foreſée (which nature hath only giuen vnto man) to diſcourſe,
to finde out, or to remember any thing they poſſibly can
not: Onely that whiche ſoone paſſeth ouer, hath nature allowed
them, that is to ſaye, the imagination of thyngs
preſente: But for things that are paſte, ſhée hath giuen
them a memorye altogither confuſed, whiche neuer calleth
any thing agayne to remembraunce, except by the viewe

of things y• are preſent: So alſo for things that are to come, ſhe
hath likewiſe allowed thē no knowledge at al. By what meanes
then (if I may aſke) may they be counted happie, whoſe caſe
is ſuch that they knowe not their owne eſtate, neyther yet are
able to make any difference betwéene good and euil? But nowe
on the other ſide, as touching the ſtate and condition of man,
who liueth (I pray you) ſo orderly, that at no time féeleth anye
trouble of minde? what man ſo perfect that neuer yéeldeth to his
paſſion? who ſo ſingular, but if he auoyde pride, couetouſneſſe
poſſeſſeth his hart? If he ſhunne couetouſneſſe, anger diſquieteth
his patience? if he ſuppreſſe anger, gluttony delighteth his
taſt? if he eſchewe gluttony, enuie conſumeth his carcas? if he
repulſe enuie, ſlouthfulnes ouerwhelmeth both ſoule and body.
Whereby it commeth ſtil to paſſe, that no man may be vtterly
found deuoide of fault, for as the Poet ſayth:
Eche man that is by nature fed,
is by his priuate pleaſure led.
               
               Which ſince it is ſo, I ſée not my friendes, how any man
in this life may be accounted happie, vnleſſe perhappes we ſhold
recken happineſſe, to conſiſt in wordes that are wiſely vttered,
vnder honeſt & eloquēt termes. The which if ſo it were, it wold
then come to paſſe, that ſuch as haue moſt learnedly diſcourſed
of Vertue, ſhoulde therefore be accounted more happy than others.
But that this is not ſo, not only experience, but alſo Cicero
himſelf in his Tuſculans queſtions, auoucheth. How many Philoſophers
cā you ſhew me (ſaith he) ſo honeſt in maners, ſo ſtaied
in iudgement, & order of life, as reaſon requireth. Who is he y•
obeyeth his own rules, or putteth his owne precepts in practiſe?
Some of them ſhall you 
                     •
                  ée, ſo ful of boaſting and vaunting, y•
it had bene better for them, to haue neuer learned the name of
a letter: other couetous of money, other deſirous of glorie, and

others made ſubiect to their owne luſte, ſo as, their liuing and
teaching are commonlye contrarie, whiche thing in my iudgement
is moſt vntollerable. For as he that profeſſeth himſelfe
a Gramarian, if he ſpeake barberouſly, or he, that challengeth the
name of a Muſitian, if he ſing vntunably, is the more to be reproued,
bycauſe he offendeth in that very thing, wherin he wold
ſeeme moſt ſkilfull vnto others: So likewiſe the Philoſopher offē
                  ding
in the order of his life, is the more to be condemned, bicauſe
he erreth in that parte of duetie, wherein his knowledge doth
principally conſiſt, and is faultie himſelfe in that, in whiche he
vndertaketh to be a teacher of others. For, when true it is, yt the
ſubſtaunce of Philoſophie doth conſiſt, not in termes but in matter,
it is a great ſhame for a man of knowledge, to haue it obiected
vnto him, yt he is a Philoſopher, not in workes but in wordes.
And therefore, it commeth verely to paſſe, that ſuch men are not
in déed, the true inſtructers of Vertue, bicauſe they are therof deſtitute
themſelues. For if Philoſophie be the ſtudie of Wiſdome,
as the learned haue defined, and that Wiſedome be nothing except
it be put in practiſe, thereby to ſhewe foorth hir operation:
It followeth then, that the doctrine of ſuche teachers, is altogither
barren and fruiteleſſe, bicauſe it worketh not y• in thē, whiche
it is wont to do in the moſt part of thoſe, of whom it is poſſeſſed.
For Cicero nameth Philoſophie, the manuring of the witte,
which pulleth vp all vice by the roote, and maketh apt the minde
to receiue, the fruiteful ſéed of Vertue, and as we may terme it,
planteth in vs ſuch pleaſaunt fruite, as yéeldeth in time a plentifull
increaſe. Wherefore, by this it appeareth that the propertie
of Philoſophie, is rather to make hir louers to liue wel in publique
conuerſation, thā to ſpeake & teach wel in priuate ſchooles:
Whiche thing, when by experience it frameth not accordingly,
it therby declareth ſuch ſuperficial Philoſophers, to haue rather
ſtudied this noble ſciēce, to the end to ſhew foorth the ſmoothneſſe
of their tongs, wherby to winne the praiſe of the people, than for
any good cauſe or cōſideratiō of liuing to be ſhewed in thēſelues.
Of whom, thus writeth Seneca, in his exhortations: Many Philoſophers
                  
are eloquent (ſaith he) to their owne reproofe, whome, i
                     •
                  
ſo it were your chaunce, to heare them declame, either agaynſte
Couetouſneſſe, incontinencye, ambition, or anye other ſuche like,
you wold veryly ſuppoſe, that they ſate in iudgement of their own
behauiours, ſo notoriouſlye the reproches they ſéeme to vtter againſt
the doings of others, do recoyle againe to their owne diſgrace:
Of whome, we ought to make none other accompt,
than of common Apoticaries, vppon whoſe boxes are outwardlye
they written the names of reſtoratiues, when inwardlye
they are ful of poyſon. Some of them beſydes are ſo ſtronglye
impudent, that no ſhamefaſtneſſe maye preuayle to withdrawe
them from theyr wickedneſſe, but that by ſhifting
they rather ſéeke, howe cunninglye to excuſe and to defende
theyr vncleanneſſe, that ſo at the leaſte wyſe they maye ſéeme
to offende wyth ſome colour of honeſtie. Ariſtippus ſometyme
Mayſter of a ſecte of Philoſophers named Cirenaicie,
vſed for hys pleaſure to haunte the companye of one Lays,
a famous ſtrumpet of Greece, whiche groſſe faulte of hys
that greate Doctour of Philoſophye dyd in thys ſorte defend:
Saying, that betwéene hym and the other of hir louers there
was thys difference, that where they were poſſeſſed by
Lays, Lays was poſſeſſed by hym. O, notable Wiſedome,
and Philoſopher well worthye whome all menne ſhoulde followe:
It were doubtleſſe, a thyng verye neceſſarye, to committe
our chyldren to ſuche an inſtructour, that thereby they
myghte learne, howe at leaſte wyſe to entertayne a Curtiſan.
Thys learned wanton perſwaded hymſelfe, that betwéen
hym and the reſte of hyr louers, there was a maruellous
oddes, for that hée, as he thoughte, wythoute trouble or
coſte obtayned hys pleaſure, when they on the other ſyde,
wyth laboure and expence, dyd purchaſe repentaunce. In
whyche verie poynte (notwythſtandyng thys difference) that
ſubtile Harlot wente ſomewhat beyonde hym, who in effect,
made that counterfayte Philoſopher hyr colourable bawde:

that ſo by the daylye example of ſo licencious a patron,
all the youthfull gentlemen of Greece, mighte thencefoorth
the rather frequent hir companye, and boldely aduenture to
followe theyr pleaſure, without any regarde eyther of ſhamefaſtneſſe
or modeſtie. Therefore theſe kynde of inſtruct
                     •
                  rs
(as I ſayde before) ſoughte not the waye by the ſtudye
of Philoſophie, that leadeth vnto Vertue, but onely the waye
that leadeth to Delight: whiche thyng, Cicero hymſelfe doth alſo
teſtifie. Verily, albeit (ſayth he) that the whole diſputation
of Philoſophie, contayne in it ſelfe a moſte abundant fountayne
of Vertue and knowledge, yet beyng compared wyth
the doyng and liuyng of the Philoſophers themſelues, I doubt
me, it hath rather brought vnto them a vaine delectation to
theyr ydle pleaſures, than eyther profite or commoditie to
their honeſt affaires. But nowe lette vs farther conſyder,
ſince occaſion is proffered, howe thys famous enricher of
the Romaine language, behaued hym ſelfe in hys owne aduerſitie.
He verily following the diſcipline of Panetius the
Stoike, ſette downe in writing the duetie of eache manne
excéedingly well, all whyche he comprehended vnder thrée
Bookes. But howe valiauntlye he hymſelfe dyd beare, eyther
the death of hys daughter, hys owne baniſhmente,
or the Monarchie of Ceſar oppreſſing the publike libertie,
Titus Liuius doeth brieflye declare: Of all hys euill happes
and aduerſities (ſayeth he) hée behaued himſelfe lyke a man
in none, ſaue onely in hys deathe. To what purpoſe then
I praye you, profeſſed hée the knowledge of Philoſophie?
Why thoughte hée it neceſſarye, to playe the Philoſopher
at all tymes, and in all places, according to the opinion of
Neoptolemus, as it is recorded in Ennius, if in hys mynde,
he perceyued no profite to ariſe by the ſame? for thoſe that
teache onely, and doe not accordinglye, diſcredite their owne
teaching: Neyther will any man obey hym, who by his doings
doth teſtifye, that he is not worthy to be obeyed. Yet is

it I confeſſe a thing to be praiſed, in him y• giueth ſuch precept
                     •
                  
of honeſtie, but vnleſſe the partie performe the ſame in his owne
life, he proueth himſelfe in effect but a lier: in whom it maye be
thought farre vnfitte for his calling, to haue honeſtie placed not
in his hart, but in his lippes, which contrariewiſe ought rather
to conſiſt, not in ſpeach and tongue but in life and manners. For,
if true it were that the Vertue of Philoſophie, did at al conſiſt in
the ſubſtaunce of words: who might them (I pray you) haue bene
accounted more happie, than the man himſelfe of whome wée
ſpeake, from whome all the glorie of Romaine eloquence had hir
only perfectiō? But that ye force of Philoſophie remaineth no wher
elſe than in a mind wel diſpoſed, himſelfe alſo in his Tuſculan diſputatiōs
doth plainly witneſſe, where wholy directing his talke
to Philoſophie, thus he writeth. O noble Philoſophie, the guide of our
life, the ſearcher out of Vertue and the expeller of vice, what were
we, or what were the life of man, without thy aide and aſsiſtance? Thou
(I ſay) were the firſt inuenter of all good lawes, the only teacher of
learning, of manners, and of all good nurture. Wherin, if but accordingly
we could put in practiſe all that we cal honeſtie, ſo eaſyly
as we may talke & diſcourſe of the ſame, ſhould not then (I pray
you) both we our ſelues, and al other that haue vſurped ye name
of Philoſophers, be iudged happie? But the caſe in very déed ſtā
                  ding
thus, that Philoſophie of it ſelfe requireth both liuing and
doing wel (which is hard to be atchieued) rather thā ſaying and
ſpeaking wel, which may eaſily be attained: from hēce, I ſay, it
procéedeth, that many men haue béene contented with the onely
name and title of Vertue, when of the true intent and meaning
therof, they were altogither ignorant. Notwithſtanding, in the
true iudgement of al men, he only is to be taken and accompted
for wiſe, who in worde and déede, both when thou ſéeſt hym, &
when thou heareſt him, is alwayes one and the ſame without
alteration. But the foole on the other ſide (as Salomon ſayth) is
changed like the Moone, now this in words, nowe that in action,
declaring therby the contrarietie of his minde.
            
            
               EVDO.
               Where
a little before we reaſoned (friende Liſippus) of the propertie of

                  Vertue, and of that happineſſe which ſhe beſtoweth vpon thoſe,
that guyding themſelues by hir warie order, liue an honeſt and
vertuous life: we were not (I remember) ſo farre foorth gone,
as to affirme, that anye man coulde liue deuoyde of faulte (for
this we knowe was the onlie and peculiar priuiledge of Chriſt
our ſauiour) neither went we about to proue, that all men embraced
Vertue: But this onely we ſaid, that if beaſtes, when they
performed their naturall operations, might be accompted happie,
according to the former opinion of Plotinus, muche more
ought we then to iudge the ſame of man, eſpecially, if Reaſon
haue that preeminēce in him as it ought, and that al his affections
be ſubiect ſtil to hir gouernement. But, if to that which is
ſpoken I may be lawfully ſuffered, vppon better aduiſemente
to adde one thing more, then thus I procéede. Albeit at ſome
time, certaine fonde affections contrarie to reaſon, do appeare
in vs, yet ſo lōg as they preuaile not, nor get the vpper hād of reſon,
a man is not therefore to be eſtéemed either euil or vnhappie:
For without faultes no man liueth, and he is beſt that is troubled
with feweſt. If this rule may but thus be graunted, as in trouth
it is euident, then without queſtion, we ſhalbe able to finde out
diuers notable good men: For in al ages there haue flouriſhed
many, who by their holy and iuſt liuing, by their manifolde and
notable vertues (for diuerſe are the giftes whiche the Soueraigne
God powreth downe vppon his people) haue deſerued
great honor and eſtimation in the world. Of whiche number it
ſhall not, I thinke be amiſſe, if I repete in this place ſome few.
And firſte, what ſay we of Socrates? who ſo manly demeaned
himſelfe in al his actions, that at no time, either in aduerſitie or
proſperitie, his countenaunce was founde to be altered: Neywas
it at all in him to be maruelled, ſince ſo lightly he eſtéemed
the verie terrour of death, that when oportunitie was conueniently
offered him to haue eſcaped the ſame, he vtterlie refuſed
the aduauntage thereof: knowing right well, that death was
onely dreadfull vnto thoſe, with whoſe mortal life all glory, all
honor, and all eſtimation did vtterly periſh, and not vnto thoſe,

whoſe Vertue and renowne was alwayes laſting and coulde
neuer decay: for he, according vnto Reaſon applied his doctrine
to the bettering of his life, accompting the ſubſtaunce of Philoſophie
to conſiſt, in the equal choyce betwéene good and euill: beſides,
in this one pointe be ſhewed himſelfe more wiſe than the
reſte, in that, he withdrewe the courſe of his diſputation, from
the ſearching out of celeſtiall and ſupernatural cauſes, wherin
many haue heretofore ſpent, both their witte and their time
to no purpoſe at all. What of Pithagoras? who ſhewed himſelfe
as a ſpectacle to the worlde, both of learnyng and Vertue, and
who among other hys manyfolde giftes was of modeſtye
ſo great, that being demaunded by what ſurname of honor he
woulde be called, refuſed the title which others his inferiours
had taken vpon them, and that, whiche in thoſe dayes was cō
                  mon
to al ſuch as were learned, chooſing rather to be called, not
Sophos but Philoſophos, not wiſe, but a ſearcher and louer of
Wiſedome. What of Plato? who though he were accompted
of al the wiſeſt, and alſo attained to ſo wonderfull perfection of
learning and eloquence, as if Iupiter himſelfe woulde haue diſcended
from the heauens, he coulde neuer haue vſed a more copious
ſtyle: yet notwithſtanding, he refuſed the title of his own
glorie wherevnto he had right, and aſcribed the honour of all
hys workes vnto Socrates hys Maiſter, ſhewing thereby himſelfe
no leſſe commendable for demeanour, than honourable
for his knowledge. What of Cato the elder? who in the iudgement
of all men was accompted, the verye image of Vertue,
the honor of the Romans, and the ſtaye of the whole Empire: he
I meane, whoſe name and Vertue was after ſupported by Cato
the yonger, that noble and princely ſonne of his. What of
Seneca? who was of ſtomacke ſo ſtoute, that with patience he
maſtered the very terrour of death, when by the cōmaundemēt
of Nero the tirant, he was therunto enforced. What of Fabricius
the Roman? a man ſo ſincere and vpright of minde, that not with
the vehement temptation of golde it ſelfe, he was able to be corrupted:
who firſt (as the ſtorie affirmeth) refuſed the large and

mightie proffers of Pirrhus, eſtéeming it more worthy and more
worth than a kingdome, to neglect and contemne the brybes of
a King: And after, whē the proffer was made him for the ſecret
diſpatche of that Romaine enimy, he woulde not only not ſuffer
the ſame to be done, but gaue him warning himſelf of the treaſon
pretended, adding thereunto theſe wordes that followe.
Enioye thy longer life, by this my meanes (O Pirrhus) and be nowe
glad of that whiche thou haſte heretofore lamented, that is, that
Fabricius thy enemye woulde not be corrupted. To conclude,
manye other there haue bene, who albeit they haue crred
in ſome pointes like menne, yet wholye in their mindes they
ſtyll embraced Vertue, by whoſe meanes theyr liues were
both Bleſſed and Happie: at all times ſo behauing themſelues,
that of theyr ſayings and doyngs, there ſtyll remayneth
to the worlde, a perpetuall remembraunce. So then
on the other ſyde, though manye there haue béene beſydes,
who haue not ſo ſufficiently bene able, to performe the ſame
in action, whereof, they haue ſo gloriouſlye talked: yet notwythſtandyng,
it can not therefore I thinke be denyed,
but that theſe men did alſo greate good in the worlde, whyle
diſputing of Vertue, they opened the waye by theyr holeſome
precepts, howe other mighte more eaſily attaine to the ſame.
For, if the lyfe of learned men were aunſwerable in all
pointes to the manner of their doctrine, who were to be accompted
ſo happie as they? but, we muſt remember, that they
entreate of Vertue and not of themſelues: they reaſon not howe
they dee liue, but how they and all other ought generallye
to liue, ſetting alſo the marke before our eyes whereat we
muſte 
                     •
                  ouell: the ſucceſſe whereof, though at all tymes it
proue not accordingly, by reaſon of the frayltie and weakeneſſe
of our fleſhe, yet the honeſt intente and purpoſe of good
menne, hath béene alwayes accompted prayſe worthye of
the wyſe. Wherein, thys certaynely ſoundeth very greatlye

                     〈◊〉
                   prayſe, that by the gouernemente of Reaſon,
they haue at leaſte wiſe founde oute for the benefytte of

man, what is beſt to be done, and what to be auoyded, ſéeking
further, and that with al their might, how to performe the ſame
in their owne behauiour, and according to their powers to liue
well themſelues. LISIP. You diſpute Eudoxus verie earneſtly,
ſéeking to withdrawe me from myne opinion, by manye good
and pithie reaſons, wherein, although you haue diligently laboured,
you haue not yet brought me to be of your iudgemente.
For this is to me an aſſured grounde, that nothing in thys
worlde may make a man Happie, conſidering, that the ordinarie
courſe of our life is but ſhort, and that we are al made thral vnto
miſerie: Where on the other ſide, Hppineſſe it ſelfe is wholy
made perfect, hauing nothing that may trouble or diminiſhe
the ſame. So as, not any thing in my opinion may be accompted
Happie, that is not voide of Corruption, and there is nothing
Vncorruptible that is not Immortall, wherby I conclude, that no
mortall creature may here attaine to this bliſfulneſſe of life, as
you would haue it, but rather, ſo long as he abideth on the earth,
I thinke him moſt miſerable: neither, do I onely not take him
to be Bleſſed, but that he cannot be accompted ſo much as Happie,
chiefly, ſo long as he remaineth within this troubleſome bodie,
the which, to the ende it may be diſſolued, it is neceſſarie firſt
that it be corrupted: but then onely ſhall he inioye this Felicitie,
when his ſoule being frée from the trouble of the fleſh, ſhal liue
wholy in Spirite. Yet this I deny not, but that God, who recompenceth
our wel doing with an incomparable rewarde, hath ſo
ordayned, yt they which here in the dayly miſeries & aduerſities
of this world behaue themſelues well, and eſchewing the enticing
baytes of pleaſure, giue themſelues wholy with al theyr
endeuour to the exerciſe of Vertue, paynefully wading throughout
all the daungers and troubles of aduerſitie to attayne to the
ſame: that they I ſay, euen here in this life ſhall receiue at hys
handes, a certaine pledge of their bliſfulneſſe to come, whereby
theyr trauailes may ſéeme vnto them leſſe gréeuous and heauy.
Which pledge I meane, to be the confidence and hope that in
them remayneth, ioyfully to attaine to that eternal glory which

by his word he hath promiſed: wherof euil men on the otherſide,
by occaſion of their naughtineſſe, ſée themſelues to be depriued,
ſo as, by the terror of their wickendneſſe which they haue wilfulfullye
committed, they liue alwayes in feare, whiche feare of
theirs, ſo troubleth and diſquieteth theyr guiltie mindes, that
they alwayes ſtande in dread of the vengeance of God: Whervpon
it followeth, that they ſuſpecte euery thing, they ſtande in
feare of euery thing, and that Death is to them ſo hateful an enimy,
that if it were poſſible, they would neuer ſo much as thinke
of the ſame: the remembraunce whereof, if by chaunce or occaſion
it fal into their mindes, forthwith they tremble and become
ſo feareful, that they are therewithall bereaued of al their quietneſſe:
So verie farre differing hath God deuided, the ſtate of
good men and euill men aſunder.
            
            
               TALES.
               By this reaſon it
ſéemeth then, that we may lawfully confute ye opinion of thoſe,
who ſay that Vertue is the greateſt Good, or Felicitie it ſelfe. For
Vertue as I take it, is not in déede that ſole and ſoueraigne
Good, but rather a worker and procurer of the ſame, foraſmuch
as thereto we cannot attaine, without the helpe and aſſiſtaunce
of Vertue. For, as Vice it ſelfe although it be euil, yet is not that
extreme & moſt peſtiferous Euil, ſo Vertue, although it be Good,
yet is it not that ſole and Selfe good whiche we call Felicitie,
ſince Selfe good is that, whiche néedeth not the aſſiſtaunce of
any other ſuperiour Good: but Vertue we finde, that it craueth ye
helpe of a further Good, and therfore it may not (as I haue ſaid)
be termed Felicitie: but rather a ſtep or degrée, wherby we aſcend
vnto the maieſtie of God, who is in déed, that vndoubted, y• moſt
excellent, and moſt ſoueraigne Good, to the which, by the waye
of Vertue (as the Philoſophers terme it) we are gloriouſly aduanced.
Therefore to conclude, that inferiour Good whiche we call
Vertue, ought not to be called that ſole and ſoueraigne Good,
ſince by the ſame we only aſcende, to a farre ſuperiour and more
celeſtial Good than it ſelfe, that is, to Felicitie. Notwithſtanding,
theſe antient Philoſophers being altogither ignorant of the true
effect and office of Vertue, and wherto it tendeth, finding nothing

beſides, whereof to accompt and to eſteeme more precious, 
                     •
                  ontented
themſelues with the onely title and reputation of the
ſame, whyche they ſayde, was to be ſought and deſired, withoute
anye hope, of aduauntage or profite to bée gayned
thereby: and ſo, made that thelt chiefe and principall Good,
bycauſe they knewe no other more celeſtiall or ſuperiour
Good, wherevpon to repoſe the hope of theyr Felicitie. But
doubtleſſe,Where
                        •
                     n Vertue doth chief by conſiſte. the true benefite and eſtimation of Vertue, conſyſteth
wholye, In the patient ſuffering of aduerſitie, as pouertie,
impriſonmente, griefe, baniſhmente, loſſe of friendes,
and ſuche lyke: and then onely is it moſte abſolute and
perfecte, when after theſe calamyties the mynde is made
contented, voluntaryly to ſuffer the ſharpeſte punyſhmente
of Death, chieflye, if eyther Reputation or Reaſon ſhall ſo
requyre the ſame: ſhewyng thereby, a contempte of Life
whyche others embrace, and a loue of Death whyche moſte
men doe feare. And therefore, ſince otherwyſe it can not
bée, but that in lieu of thys laboure greate guerdon
muſte bée hoped (for that paynes vndertaken vnto Deathe,
can not paſſe wythoute rewarde) and that no rewarde
ſufficyente to counteruayle the ſame maye bée founde vppon
the Earthe, for that, ſuche reſolute demeanoure diſpiſeth
all frayle and tranſytorie toyes: What then remayneth,
but that from contempte of theſe Earthlye matters, takyng
regarde of more heauenlye affayres, wée aſpyre
vnto the hope of ſome celeſtiall recompence, whyche is nothyng
elſe then Immortalitie, wherein, that ſoueraigne
Good, whyche wée cal Felicitie, is onely to bée founde, the
whyche is therefore accompted Bleſſed, bycauſe, it can neyther
Periſhe nor be corrupted. So that, if a man maye be Vertuous,
(whych can not be denyed) then maye he be Bleſſed, (for
it cannot be, that he may poſſibly be accompted Vnhappie, that is
endued with Vertue) and if he may be Bleſſed, he maye be alſo
Immortall, from whence thys Bleſſedneſſe doeth onely ſpryng:
but the ſame wée can not enioye, ſo long as we liue in thys

tranſitorie worlde, whiche is full of chaunge and alteration,
for that our life and our workes are both ſubiect to decaye.
And therefore Liſippus, I truely for my parte am alſo of opinion,
that you haue rightlye iudged of the Bleſſed and
Happie lyfe: For the Philoſophers themſelues when they
talke of a Wiſe man, they deſcribe hym to be ſuche as is not
to be founde, in the ordinarie courſe and practyſe of our life,
but rather they faine hym to repreſente ſuche a one, as were
to be imagyned or wiſhed for: As for example when they
ſaye, A wiſe man is troubled with no kinde of paſsion: and againe,
He that hath Vertue, wanteth nothing requiſit, to a bleſſed and happie
life: So likewiſe, to liue bleſſedyle and happilye, is nothing elſe,
than to liue honeſtlye and vertuouſlye: by theſe and ſuch other theyr
ſayings, they note vnto vs, ſuch a a ſpeciall and preciſe kynde
of Wiſedome, as no mortall creature hath euer atchieued.
LISIPPVS. True it is Tales that you haue ſpoken, for if
anye manne myghte reache that perfecte Wiſedome, hée
ſhoulde thereby alſo become Bleſſed, but bycauſe no man hath
hytherto attayned to the ſame, thys Felicitie is therefore of
ryghte reſerued, for thoſe diuine and celeſtiall ſoules of good
menne, who beyng ſette frée from the bondage of theyr bodyes,
are by God, aduaunced for theyr Good and Vertuous
liuyng, into the fellowſhippe of Aungels, where by reaſon
of the glorious ſighte of hys diuine preſence, they haue the
fruition of that eternall Bliſfulneſſe, whereof, wée haue hytherto
ſpoken. But for this our tranſitorie lyfe, it maye conuenientlye
be called a Theatre, wherein triall is made, by
God the creator of all thyngs, of the good and euill demeanour
of all men, who promiſeth a iuſte and mercyfull rewarde
vnto eache man, accordyng to his deſerte.
            
            
               TALES.
               Now therefore to procéede, let vs next (if ſo it like you) ſet down
a more perfect definition of Vertue.
                  A brief repe
                        •
                     . cion of that, which is alreadie ſpoken. We haue firſt declared how
theſe auntient Philoſophers, who were of all other then liuyng
accompted the wyſeſt, myſſed the true effecte and
knowledge thereof: Wee haue after noted, wherein

it ſéemeth principally to conſiſt, that is, in the patient ſuffering of
aduerſitie: And laſtlye, we haue likewiſe expreſſed what is the
true and perfect ende thereof, and that it can not be our chiefe
and ſoueraigne Good, for that our chiefeſt Good, is the finall
recompence and rewarde of Vertue. It remayneth therefore neceſſarie,
y• we now ſet down a more proper definitiō therof: whiche
thing, although it wold haue rather bene performed before,
euē in y• firſt beginning of our talke, yet ye maner of this our diſputation,
cauſed vs ſomewhat to alter the common courſe and
accuſtomed order. It is therfore, my friendes, to be conſequētly
noted,The ſeconde definition of 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                  that Vertue is alwaies one & the ſelfe ſame thing, notwithſtanding,
that according to the diuerſitie of matters wherein it is handeled,
it taketh diuerſe names: As the Vertue of a man is to be able
to manedge al maner his affaires, of a woman to gouerne and
diſpoſe the houſe, of a ſouldier to be valiaunt and forwarde in
battell, of a huſbandman to knowe the nature of his grounde,
and howe to manure the ſame: In like manner, the Vertue of a
yong man, of an olde man, of a fréeman, and a bonde man, are
different no leſſe in condition, for as Plato ſayeth, according to
the difference of their actions and ages, ſo diuerſe are the Vertues
that are founde in them. LISIPPVS. Verily Tales, then
haue we in my opinion bene greatly fortunate, in this our brief
diſputation, for where we ſought but for one onely Vertue, we
haue now found out a whole worlde of Vertues to be reſiaunt
among men. TA. This opinion of yours Liſippus, can not be
true, for as there is but one kinde of Health, wherewyth all
men are made Healthfull, and one kinde of Greatneſſe, whereby
all men are made Greate, and one kinde of Strength wherby
al men are made ſtrong: So al men are made Vertuous by one
kinde of Vertue, and are al made Good by one kynde of Goodnes,
for yt in al things whatſoeuer, ther is in troth, but one only ſubſtance
of Vertue, notwithſtanding, that it may ſeuerally poſſeſſe
diuerſe variable names, agréeable to the matters wherein it is
conuerſant. For, as all kynde of Sickneſſe in ye truth of Nature is
in effect but one, although, when it is in the handes wée call it

                  Chiragra,
                  
                     Chiragra, Po dagra, & Cephalea, are three ſeuerall names of the Goute. when in the legges Podagra, and when in the head Cephalea,
whereby according to the diuerſitie of our members
diſeaſed, it is diuerſlye called: So alſo of Vertue, althoughe
when it ſearcheth out the truth of eache matter, and warely
maketh choyce betwéene profitable and vnprofitable, and
betwéene good and euill, we call it by the name of Prudence:
when it laboureth about the mayntayning of humayne Societye,
and yéeldeth to euerye man that whyche is due, vſing
vprightneſſe in ſales and bargaines, we call it by the name of
Juſtice: when it conſiſteth in the courage and valor of an vnuincible
harte, we cal it by the name of Fortitude: when likewiſe it
pertaineth to the orderly diſpoſition of our ſayings and doings,
we cal it by ye name of Modeſtie: yet, are al theſe in truth, but one
onely Vertue. Therfore, to deliuer you my minde more plainely,
what maner of thing it is, thus as I take it, it may beſt be
defined: That Vertue is nothing elſe, than a good conſtitution of the
ſoule and minde.
                  The third definition of Vertue. For the obtayning whereof this is to be noted,
that it is not to be gotten by Greatneſſe of ſtrength, which ſhortely
decayeth: nor by Beautiful lookes, which wil ſoone fade away:
nor by abundance of wealth, wherof we haue no aſſuraunce: nor
by Sharpneſſe of witte, for that, by howe muche the more craftie
and ſubtile a man is, ſo muche the more ſuſpected and hateful is
his life, if therewithall he wante the eſtimation of honeſtie:
nor finally by Sweete and amorous pleaſures, whyche beyng the
profeſſed enemyes of Vertue, doe wholye wythdrawe our
myndes from the ſame: But, it is doubtleſſe poured downe
vppon vs from aboue,Vertue, is only giuen vs by God. by the liberall beneficence of the heauenlye
powers. In compariſon whereof, ſynce nothyng
in thys worlde maye bée founde ſo beautiful, what foloweth
then (I praye you) but as Vice on the one ſyde for
the deformitye thereof is to be abhorred and auoyded, ſo
Vertue on the other ſyde for the dygnitye thereof, oughte
the rather to bée deſyred: by the aſſyſtaunce whereof,
wée muſte earneſtlye laboure to obtayne that, than the
whych, nothyng may bée deſyred more excellent: that is to ſay,

a minde both good, noble, and rightly diſpoſed, which being ſo
qualified, is not otherwiſe to be eſteemed, than as a verie God,
laboring and trauailing in the bodie of a Man. Touching whō,
as an euill perſon turneth all things to the worſt, ſo he on the
contrarie vſeth all things to the beſt, as Riches, Strength, Witte,
and whatſoeuer he hath beſides, eyther of himſelfe or of Fortune.
For all theſe, are nothing elſe than inſtrumentes of force,
ſeruing the Wicked to the ruyne of themſelues, and alſo of others,
and the Good, not onely to their owne aduantage, but to
the generall profite and commoditie of al men. So that the maner
of the doing thereof, teacheth vs by what name the acte
is to be called: for that whiche is well done is termed Honeſt,
and that which is euil done is termed Vnhoneſt. As for example:
Eloquence when it is well vſed, there is nothing more prayſe
worthy, nothing more commendable, nor nothing more fit, eyther
to ſtirre vp admiration in thoſe that ſhall heare vs, to confirme
the hope of thoſe that ſhall néede vs, or to winne the fauor
and good will of thoſe that ſhall be defended by vs: but when it
is abuſed, nothing is then more hurtful than the ſame, whereof,
this writeth Cicero, in the preface of his bookes de inuentione:
I haue ofte times muſed with my ſelfe (ſayth he) whether Eloquence
haue bene occaſion, of more good or harme to the ſtate of
m
                     •
                  n, and to the maintenance of common weales: for when on
the one ſide I call vnto my remembrance, the diuerſe calamities
of the Roman Empire, & the lamentable ſubuerſion of manye
flouriſhing eſtates, I thē perceiue a great part of ſuch diſtreſſe,
to haue only procéeded from men of great eloquence: when after
on the other ſide I call to minde againe, by the recorde of
antient monuments, things done long ſince, far beyond the age
and remembrance of man, I finde, that many Cities haue bene
founded, many warres ceaſed, many leagues concluded, & many
friendſhippes ioyned, partly by Wit and Pollicie, but chiefly by
Eloquēce. By lōg debating wherof, in fyne I am thus reſolued,
That wiſdome without eloquēce may but ſmally aduātage, & that eloquēce
without wiſdom, maie manie times harme, but ſeldome profit.
                  
Wherfore, if any mā neglecting ye ſtudy of Philoſophie, wherby
Duetie is to be learned & Wiſdome increaſed, wil wholy ſpend his
time in ye exerciſe of Oratorie, what other benefite may therof ariſe,
but y• therby he ſhal become, an vnprofitable friend to himſelf,
& a dangerous mēber to the common Wealth. But he, that
furniſheth hymſelfe with Eloquence, to the entente to bende the
force thereof, not to aſſaulte, but to defende and maintaine the
wealth of his countrey, he I ſay (in my iudgemente) ſéemes a
member very profitable, both priuately for hys friendes, and
generally for the whole eſtate. Wherefore, the Minde of man
ought firſt to be well inſtructed, for from thence our reaſons,
from thence our words, and from thence the conformitie of our
bodie,Al our diſpoſitions are gouerned by the minde. both for countenaunce and behauiour do procéede: And
certaine it is, that the whole diſpoſition of our life, is tempered
and proportioned onely by our Minde, and by it is wholye gouerned.
For, if the Minde be well and in good plight, our talke, our
manners, and al the reſt of our demeanour, ſhall be fitting and
conuenient, for the credite of an honeſt man: But, if the Minde
be weake and euill diſpoſed, then all things come preſentlye to
ruine and decay. For the auoyding whereof, it is neceſſarie firſt
that we flée to the ſuccour of the Liberal ſciences, and after, to the
comfortable admonition of Diuine knowledge, ſince the Minde is
not otherwiſe ſtrengthened, than by good letters, and by the cō
                  ſideration
of things natural: For, y• goodneſſe of the Mind which
we cal Vertue (the whiche, as before we haue declared, falleth
downe from aboue) is toubtleſſe maintained and increaſed by
Studie. Wherevnto, that therby the rather we ſhould employe
our ſelues with pleſure and delight, it is ordained from the firſt,
that all men by a ſpeciall inſtinct of Nature are deſirouſly giuen
to learne, and are drawen on by Kinde to a ſingular loue & deſire
of knowledge: wherin, as to paſſe al others they accompt it a
thing of great eſtimation, ſo on the other ſide, to ſlide, to erre, to
be ignorant, or to be deceiued, they recken it as a matter of gret
diſgrace. For this occaſion Nature hath the rather giuen vs a curious
& ſearching wit, who being priuie to hir own Arte and excellēcie,

hath purpoſely appointed vs y• only beholders, of al ſuch
hir miraculous works, as appeares in the world: to this intent
(as it ſéemeth) that by the regarde of ſuche rare and wonderful
ſights both in heauen and on erth, we might yéeld vnto God ſuch
honor in the ſame, that the excellencie of his workes made ſubiect
to our knowledge, might not couertly paſſe away without
ſome teſtimony of his Glorie: All which he created to none other
end it appeareth, than y• by the view of ſuch viſible things,
we might intellectually aſcend to y• farther cōſideratiō of things
inuiſible: who although he hath made & ſubiected to our vſe all
ye inferior creatures of ye erth, yet is not this ye cauſe of our greteſt
wōder: But, it is rather a thing far ſurpaſſing ye reſt, that by
the knowledge therof he leadeth vs on, to a farther vnderſtanding
of things more Diuine: with the rare opiniō & imagination
wherof, we ar moued to ſerch into farther cauſes, thā are vſually
ſubiect to ye view of ye eie: wherby ye rather we are brought by
degrées, into a greater admiration of the handyworks of God, &
frō thence at laſt, vnto ye reuerence & worſhip of his holy name:
for he knoweth beſt how to do him worſhip, y• hath moſt vnderſtanding
of his omnipotent power, ſince perfectly & wholy, it is
vnpoſſible he may be cōprehended of any man, as the ſcripture
affirmeth. The ſtudy therfore of Diuine letters, is wont in ſuche
ſort to diſpoſe ye 
                  Reaſon & vnderſtanding of our Senſes, y• if y• mind
of a good mā were poſſible to be ſéen, we ſhould doubtleſſe find a
like perfectiō in the ſame, as remaineth in thoſe bodies that are
aboue the Moone, wher al things are both cleare & bright, without
either tēpeſt or trouble. For albeit he liue here, among the
manifold miſeries & calamities of this world, yet as the Sunne,
whoſe beames though they ſhine vpō diuers ſ
                     •
                  uttiſh & vncleanly
places, do gather notwithſtāding no corruptiō frō the ſame:
ſo he, aſſiſted always with the helpe of God, notwithſtanding he
daily remaine amōg the contagious alluremēts of Vice, preſerueth
himſelf ſtil perfect & cleane. Yet this I wold not haue you
to looke for at his hands, y• if for the maintenāce of any quarrel,
yea touching the honor of god himſelf, he were cruelly incloſed,

within y• ſcorching bul of Phaleris the tirant, he ſhould arrogātly
ſay togither wt 
                  Epicurus, y• it were ſwéete and pleaſant. For many
there be y• are rather endued with an hardnes of hart, than wt
any noble or manful courage, who wil not ſticke to affirme, y•
a wiſeman hath no féeling of griefe: But ſuch men ſéeme neuer
to haue taſted therof themſelues, or otherwiſe experience would
haue remoued thē in time, frō that their fond & arrogant opiniō,
& no leſſe enforced thē, though ſore againſt their willes, to haue
confeſſed ye truth. For as to haue a ſenſe & féeling of griefe, is incidente
to the nature of all men, ſo to endure the ſame with
ſtoutnes of corage, is ye propertie only of him y• is valiāt. Thys
(I ſay) is he, yt will patiently ſuffer any puniſhments whatſoeuer:
& yet not ſo, but that he muſt ſtill confeſſe, to haue a natural
motion and féeling therof. And therfore (my friends) ſuch as in
this ſort do rightly know how to ſéeke after Vertue, and hauing
therto attained how to order the ſame, ſéeme veryly in my mind
men worthy for God: in whom, to the example of others he may
apparantly make proofe, how much the nature of man is able to
ſuffer, for the maintenaunce of Vertue and Honeſtie. For doubtleſſe
a good man is inferiour but a little, to thoſe heauenly ſpirites
that are aboue, and is onely ſayde, to be the true diſciple
and aſſured ofſpring of God himſelfe: Whome that magnificent
Father, as one, that exactly requireth the good life of hys
children, bringeth vpto goodneſſe and diſcipline, according to the
manner of ſuche as are accompted both wiſe and ſeuere parentes.
But lette vs for the purpoſe admitte that ſome of
thoſe that are verye well learned, doe wylfullye abuſe that
theyr ſkill and knowledge, as well in matters of Humanitie,
as alſo Philoſophie, from whence there maye (as we haue alreadie
declared) ſo many commodities to good purpoſe procéede:
yet the ſciences themſelues, ought not as I take it to be therefore
diſproued, though ignoraunte people doe diſcommend the
ſame, vnaduiſedlye ſpeakyng accordyng to theyr knowledge,
and that in matters of greater importaunce, than are
any waye ſubiect to their barbarous capacitie: who neuer more

notably do publiſh their follie, then when moſt they would ſéeme
to be cunning in all things. For nothing truely, may appeare
more groſſe and abſurde to be graūted, than bycauſe at ſometime
through our owne abuſe they hurte vs, therefore to condemne
the ſinguler giftes and ornamentes of Nature: whiche if it were
tollerable, what thing (I pray you) ſo euidently 
                     •
                  ending to the benefite
of man may there be founde, but that the miſdemeanour of
euill perſons, may peruerſely apply to the contrary. For, if ſo we
ſhall wey the giftes of nature, by the behauiour of thoſe vpon
whome they are beſtowed, it will then appeare, that we haue receyued
nothing from hir at all, but that whiche tendeth to the
hurte and hinderaunce of our ſelues. For example, who by this
meanes may accompt it a cōmoditie to ſée, or to ſpeake? to whom
ſhall not life it ſelf (than the which, we holde nothing more déere)
be thought a very torment full of miſerie? But it is in truth ſo
farre beyōd reaſon, thus to reproue ether the benefites of Nature,
or of Artes, or of Sciences, or of any kinde of Knowledge, and that
for no other occaſion, than for the miſbehauiour onely of thoſe,
that peruerſly vſe them to their wicked intentes: as if we ſhould
condemne the Arte of Oratorie, for the faultie lyfe of ſome licentious
Orator. For albeit theſe good Artes, do not of themſelues
adorne our mindes, with the preſent poſſeſſion of Vertue, yet do
they prepare vs, and make vs apt, as we haue ſaydbefore, to receyue
the ſame: Neyther, coulde God haue giuen vs any other
thing, more fitte & conuenient to laye the foundation, for ſo great
a benefite. Thus muche at this time I haue thought it conuenient
to ſpeake of Vertue, and you (my friends) I do farther exhort,
that nothing than the ſame you eſtéeme more déere, & that withall
you preferre no worldly benefite before hir: Than the which,
though nothing more graue, nothing more diuine, nor nothing
more plentyfull, may be founde to be ſpoken of, yet I doubte not,
but many things I haue ouerſlipped, that might well haue bene
remembred, bicauſe you ſodenly enforced me (beyng altogither
vnprouided) to diſcourſe vpon a cauſe of ſo great importance.
            
            
               EVD.
               Therefore Tales, ſince on the ſudden you haue ſo learnedly

diſputed vpō ſo difficulte a queſtiō, we may eaſily coniceture
what farther ſucceſſe, by longer continuance is to be hoped
for at your hands: ſuch truely as not without cauſe, the moſt reuerent
Potentates of this our cōmon wealth, do greatly regarde.
For as in all other things you are ſufficientlye prouided, ſo by
this your orderly and wel piled communication, you haue gretly
ſatiſfied and perſwaded my fanſie, and no leſſe as I take it, the
lyking of Liſippus, but for my ſelfe I aſſure you, you haue fully
brought me, to be of your opinion: and verily I beleue that all
thoſe, that rightly déeme of Vertue as they ought, cānot but yéeld
vnto you the ſame. LISIP. And I for my part Tales, do the
rather agrée with you in opinion concerning Vertue, for that
Ariſtotle himſelf, and alſo diuerſe other wel learned Philoſophers,
haue ſo in effect defined of the ſame: ſaying, that Vertue is a good
qualitie of the minde, gotten by vſe and exerciſe.
                  The laſt definition of Vertue For as the profeſſors
of other arts, ſo ſoone as they begin to learn their principles,
are not forthwith entitled by ye names of thoſe ſciences, wherin
they ſéeme to haue a litle procéeded, but after, when by continuance
they appeare to haue very well profited, thē at the laſt they
borrow to themſelues, the ſurnames and titles of thoſe learned
maiſteryes, wherin they haue made ſome proofe of their ſkill,
and are therewithall beautified with ſuch other ornaments, as
ſéeme of right to belong vnto the ſame: ſo they that endeuoure
themſelues to the getting of Vertue, if perchaunce they performe
ſome two or thrée notable and ſingular exploytes, are not therfore
ſtraight ways to be accompted Good, or to be called Honeſt,
but then onely are they to receiue the recompence of that reward,
whē both by continuance and long experience, they haue
throughly attayned to ſuch ſingular perfection, that in ech kind
of Fortune eyther proſperous or aduerſe, they can patientlye
carrie one alwayes and the ſame vndiſturbed mynde, obſeruing
that in their manner, which in Horace is there ſpoken to Quintus
Delius.
               
               
                  
                  O Delius thou, to dreadful death,
that ſubiect art each day:
                  In aduerſe chaunce, of Fortunes froune,
thy minde ſee that thou ſtay.
                  And eke no leſſe, in proſperous hap,
ſo temper thine eſtate:
                  That out of rule, and meaſure thou,
ne ioye aboue thy rate.
               
               Wherin, for as much alſo as all our power, appeareth to be
placed either in Mind or Bodie, if therfore vſing rather y• authoritie
of the Mind, than the ſeruice of the Bodie, we remēber with
our ſelues y• the one of theſe twaine we haue cōmon with beaſtes,
the other wt 
                  God, vnderſtāding y• 
                  Vertue is alſo in our reach
& power to obtayne, & that, when by occaſiō therof we ſhal haue
throughly brought all our fleſhly deſires and earthly vanities,
in vs to be perfectly oppreſſed, oure victorious ſoules ſhal ioyfully
then returne vnto God, that is to the firſte originall, from
whence they procéeded. For which occaſion, Man onely, among
al other creatures, hath his countenaunce vpwardes towards
heauen, thereby to put vs in minde, that our chiefeſt good commeth
downe from aboue. Therefore to conclude, when thus
by diligence they haue wonne vnto themſelues, an aſſured
qualitie of a wel diſpoſed minde, then I ſay vpon good occaſion,
they maye well be called Honorable, Valiant, and Wiſe, and not
before. But for as much, as the prayſe of Vertue conſiſteth in
Action, I ſée not my maiſters, how a mā that liueth in theſe Solitarie
places, may haue any practiſe thereof at all. And therfore
it were nowe time (if ſo you pleaſe) that we returne againe vnto

our principal queſtion,Thus far concerning Vertue, and nowe of Solitarines and Societie.
                   that is, to the farther conſideration of
Solitarineſſe. What ſay you Eudoxus, how like you this motion?
            
            
               EVDO.
               It liketh me my friend very wel, for as you ſay, it were
neceſſarie in déede, after this our long diſcourſe vpō 
                  Vertue, that
we reduce our talke againe vnto that, whiche was the onely occaſion
of all our controuerſie. And to be ſhorte, I wyll firſte declare
vnto you my opiniō, what I thinke of the matter: touching
whiche though manye things I confeſſe maye on both ſides
be ſpoken, yet for my owne parte I am fully perſwaded, that
more may be alleaged, in the commendation of Solitarineſſe, than
of Societie. In playner proofe and declaration whereof, you
doubt not I am ſure, but that ye name of Solitarineſſe is naturally
deriued, from this worde Sole, or alone: whiche manner of lyuing
ſéemeth not of it ſelfe ſo much to be praiſed, as in reſpect of
the fréeneſſe and libertie of our minde, which is more when we
liue alone than with company. And yet my meaning is not to
haue ittaught, that by Nature we ar made ſo rude, as wholy with
out cauſe to auoyde Societie: for by this occaſion, both the bonde
of Nature, and the commaundement of God, which bindeth vs in
friendſhip to loue one an other, may ſéeme to be loſed. But when
indifferently I wey with my ſelfe, the common condition of humayne
Societie, I ſée among men, that generally to be accompted
for Honeſt, which is falſely ſuppoſed to be Profitable, and that
all men for the moſt part, by ſeparating Profite from Honeſtie, indeuour
thereby to ouerthrowe the platforme and ground work
of Nature, than whiche there is nothing that maye be compted
more hurtful. For with y• vaine eſtimatiō and loue of riches, are
the maners of men maruellouſly corrupted, that nothing maye
be founde ſo vile but they dare to aduenture, if therby they may
hope to attaine vnto that, which ſo earneſtly they deſire. By occaſion
whereof, theſe miſerable creatures driuen on in this ſorte
by the force of euill cuſtome, hauing willingly vnloſed the bridle
of Reaſon, are plunged at the laſte in the depth of all wickedneſſe:
whoſe vnſhamefaſtneſſe is ſuch, that boldly and impudētly
they dayly commit great offence againſt God, againſt themſelues,

and againſt their neighbours: ſo as, it is vnpoſſible for
any man, (although in eloquence he were comparable to Demoſthenes)
to diſcribe al their vices and madneſſe. All which, if god
ſhoulde dayly puniſh according to deſert, what chaynes, what
priſons, what whippes, or what tormentes woulde be able to
ſuffiſe for the ſame. Beſides, another thing ther is, but whether
it rather deſerue to be laughed at or lamented I knowe not, I
meane, that ſmall and petite robberies are ſeuerally puniſhed,
when great and horrible offences are prayſed and commended:
which was very well noted by a notable pirate, who falling to
the handes of Alexander the great, made aunſwere to him in his
own defence, that the greater rouer & pirate of them both was
Alexander himſelfe, for that where the one did offend for trifles,
the other daylye robbed and ſpoyled whole countries. Theſe
worldlings being therefore caried diuerſely away, ſome wyth
gréedineſſe of Pleaſure, ſome with loue of Riches, and ſome with
deſire of Honor, hauing baniſhed from their harts, al theſe holeſome
rules and admonitions of Reaſon, by the which, they ought
chiefly to be gouerned, and making at all no accompt of Innocē
                     cie,
ſéeme moſt I ſaye to eſtéeme of thoſe things, which are wont
among fooles to be accompted for good. So as to al thoſe of this
our time that liue in ſuch ſorte, this ſaying of Ouid may rightly
be applied.
               
                  For when of this our wicked age,Tranſlated by Arthure G
                           •
                        lding gentlemā in the firſt booke of the Metamorphoſis.
once opened was the vaine,
                  Then, then, al miſchiefe ruſhed foorth,
then faith and truth were faine,
                  And honeſt ſhame to hide their heades:
for whom ſtept ſtoutly in,
                  
                     
Craft, treaſon, violence, enuie, pride,
and wicked luſt to win.
                  So now for riches gan they digge,
in places neare to hell,
                  The ſpurres and ſtirrers vnto vice,
and foes to doing well.
                  Then hurtful yron came abroade,
then came foorth yellow golde,
                  More hurtful than the yron farre,
then came foorth battel bolde,
                  That fights with both, & ſhakes his ſword,
with cruel bloudie hand.
                  Men liue by rauine and by ſtelth,
the wandering gueſt doth ſtand,
                  In daunger of his hoſt: the hoſt,
in daunger of his gueſt:
                  And fathers of their ſonnes in law:
yea ſeldome times do reſt,
                  Betweene borne brothers ſuch accord,
and loue as ought to be.
                  
                     
The goodman ſeekes the goodwifes death,
and his againe ſeekes ſhe.
                  The ſtepdames fel, their husbands ſonnes
with poyſon do aſſaile,
                  To ſee their fathers liue ſo long,
the children do bewaile.
                  Al godlineſſe lies vnderfoote,
and Lady Justice last,
                  Of heauenlie Vertues from this earth,
in ſlaughter drowned, past.
               
               Nowe, the caſe ſtanding thus, what Happineſſe I pray you
may we imagine, to remaine on the earth? the Poet you ſée doth
apparantly witneſſe, that all Goodneſſe being put to flight, is alreadie
aſcended vnto heauen. The which, if god would ſo pleaſe
to commaunde againe to deſcende vnto the earth: where thinke
you then would ſhe chooſe hir abiding, but in ſome Solitarie wilderneſſe?
For there, liuing in continual meditation, ſhe mighte
conueniently declare to all ſuch, as would ſo deſire to vnderſtand
the ſame, both what were Good and what were Euil: ſhe mighte
alſo teache vs, that Vice for the lothſomneſſe thereof were to be
abhorred, and Vertue for hir dignity to be embraced: ſhe might
likewiſe admoniſh vs to loue & worſhip God, wherin ſhe might
eyther threatē vs, with the terrible feare of his euerlaſting tormēts,
or allure vs, wt the omnipotēt excellēcie of his diuine Maieſtie,
or winne vs, with the ſingular loue of his mercifull charitie,
or intreate vs, with the pleaſaunt remembrance of his infinite
benefites, or finallye, ſhe might fully perſwade vs, that he

created the worlde for none other intent, but onely that thereby
he might make vs pertakers, of his glorious Felicitie. For proofe
wherof, (leauing in this place to meddle with Diuinitie) we wyll
only conſider, what the auntient Philoſophers haue ſayde of the
ſame, and firſt of Seneca. Do you demaunde (ſaith he) what was
the cauſe why God made the worlde? I anſwere, his goodneſſe:
which thing he farther auoucheth, from the opinion of Plato,
where thus he diſputeth. What cauſed god to make the world?
he is good, he maketh good things, and enuieth not good men, to
haue part of that good wherewith he is ſtored. Furthermore,
whereas he chargeth vs, to exerciſe pittie towards our parents,
our friends, our countrey, and generally vnto al men, where alſo
he willeth vs, to deale no worſe with others, than we would
be delte withall our ſelues: yet principally and chiefly he moueth
vs, to haue a continuall regarde to the due preſeruation of oure
iuſt and honeſt minds: in the maintenaunce wherof he aduiſeth
vs farther boldely to aduenture, and committe our bodies to
the greateſt terror and torment of Death, both when and as oft,
as Reaſon ſhall ſéeme néedefull to require the ſame. Otherwiſe
he wylleth vs as carefully to take hede, that we endaunger not
our ſelues without occaſion, than the which, there may be nothing
accompted more deſperate and fooliſh. For dangers ought
onely to be vndertaken for one of theſe cauſes, either for the
mayntenance of our 
                     
                        •
                     ſtimation in the Worlde, or for the preſeruation
of our Faith vnſpotted towards God. After this ſort therfore
I meane, that in theſe deſarte and Solitarie places, honeſt
manners, right iudgement, and all other good Vertues may conueniently
be learned. Where on the other ſide, when by Deſire
we are carried away to dwel abroade, in the common Societie &
felowſhip of the worlde, al the contrarie occaſions of Vice, to vs
are dayly proffered. For the commō concourſe of the multitude,
naught elſe to vs cōmendeth, but Couetouſneſſe, Pleſure, and deſire
of honor, whereto all men for the moſte parte are enthralled as
ſeruaunts. Which opinion of theirs, if happlie we ſhal but ſéeme
to diſalowe, forthwith they become our moſte hatefull enimies:

whereupon, they preſently begin to ſlaunder and to reuile vs, 
                     •
                  s
fooles condemned to be voide of all wit: and to increaſe our diſpleaſure,
they diſpitefully pointe at vs (as we maye terme it)
with their fingers. Vpon which occaſion, a certayne wyſe man
miſliking of their madneſſe, ſayde thus of himſelf, that he neuer
deſired at al to pleaſe the variable liking and phantaſie of ye people:
For quoth he, What I know to be good that they eſteeme not, &
what they commend, thereof I like not, bicauſe, the opinion of the
people is gained for the moſt part, by ſome euil deſert: to whom
of neceſſitie if thou haunte their company, thou muſt make thy
ſelfe lyke, for that the fauour of ſuche diſhoneſt perſons, is not
otherwayes to be obteyned, than by diſhoneſt meanes▪ But, let
vs nowe goe ſomewhat more plainly to worke, and lette vs as
well ſet downe the trade of his lyfe, that liueth alone in his ſolitarie
Muſes, as of him that liueth in the fellowſhip of many,
and is cōuerſant dayly among his worldly affairs. He therfore
that is a dealer in the world, ſo ſoon as ye day beginneth to apere,
hath his gates beſet either with frendes or foes: He is ſaluted,
he is called for, he is drawn away, he is thruſt vpō, & he is torne
as it were in many péeces. The Solitarie perſone, his dores the
while are not ſo troubled, he hath frée choyce, either to ſtaye at
home, to walk abrode, or at libertie to go wherſoeuer he luſteth.
That man goeth foorth to the place of pleading, with a ſad and
louring countenance, ful of complaints, ful of buſineſſe, yea full
of trouble, and ſo beginneth the day with ſtrife & debate. This
man goeth out with a chéerefull heart, directing his courſe into
ſome pleaſant wood, full of ſecuritie, full of reſt, and full of
quietneſſe, where with ioy and gladneſſe, he cōſumeth the morning.
The one, ſo ſoone as he cōmmeth to the ſtately pallace of
ſome noble perſon, or to the dreadful ſeat of iudgement (mingling
truth and falſhode togither,) either oppreſſeth the iuſt & rightfull
cauſe of the giltleſſe or vpholdeth the wicked and vnhoneſt pretēce
of him that is giltie, or at the leaſt wiſe worketh ſomwhat,
tending either to the diſcredit of himſelf, or to the harm of ſome
other: the remorſe of whoſe conſcience as many times it biteth

him, ſo the feare of his follie likewiſe interrupteth him, wherby
it cōmeth many tymes to paſſe, y• he telleth lyes for true tales,
and one thing for another, at one time bluſhing for feare, at an
other time after as pale againe for anger, yea blaming himſelf
in the middeſt of this paſſion, that he had not rather followed
the priuate penurie of his contemplatiue libertie, than the publike
eſtimatiō of his toileſom authoritie, & therwithal wiſheth (as then
aduiſed) yt he had rathe bin made a miſerable Plowman, than a
pontificall Pleader: who as one out of countenance and conceit
with his practiſe, leaueth then on a ſodain all his cauſes vnperfect,
and ſhamfully withdraweth him vnto his deſolate lodging,
where ſhuttyng him vp into ſome priuate corner, he ſhroudeth
ſecretely from the ſight of all his clientes. The other agayne,
as a man without trouble or care of the worlde, fynding out
ſome Gréene and Solitarie banke, amidde ſome calme and pleaſant
downe, there reſteth and repoſeth himſelf at his pleaſure,
who ſo ſoon as the Sunne ſpreadeth forth his beames, beginneth
deuoutly to giue thanks vnto God not only for the ſame, but alſo
for al other his merciful benefits, beſtowed vpon mā: the which
he performeth with a far more ſwéete & pleaſant delight, if therwithal
there hap among the rocks to run downe ſome guſhing
ſiluer ſtreame, or if the ſmall and harmleſſe birdes, do but yelde
him the help of their tunable notes, to aide him in the comfort
of his contemplatiue deuotiō: wherin, he principally craueth at y•
hāds of God, Synceritie & Innocēcie, together with one thing more,
the which (as ſayth the Satyrical Poet,) maye ſafely be required
without danger of offence, that is, A holſome minde in a helthfull
body. This doone, knowing after that the ſtudie of Philoſophie,
bringeth with it great knowledge and excellencie, he diligently
applieth his minde to the ſame, and laboureth chiefly to make
himſelfe perfecte in that parte of Vertue, which wholy concerneth
the well fynding out and followyng of Truth, deſiring nothyng
ſo muche, as that in the ſight of God he may always appeare,
both honeſt and blameleſſe, and that he may delite himſelfe
in the exerciſe of Vertue, whyche onely yéeldeth a perpetuall
comfort and ſafetie to his conſcience, knowyng well that

the ſame, is the only grounde worke and foundation of Goodneſſe,
and that it were wholy in vaine, to repoſe his truſt in anye
worldly trifle, ſince he onely may wel be thought, to haue attained
perfection, that certainly knoweth wherein he ought chiefly
to take pleaſure and delight, and whoſe Felicitie conſiſteth not
in the power of others. For this is certaine, that all men by
Nature, are prone vnto Pleaſure, but where our beſt aſſured Pleaſure
maye rightlye be founde, thereof for the moſte part we are
altogither ignoraunte. A wiſe man therefore that knoweth in
this ſorte, how to behaue himſelfe in his Solitarie places, is vndoubtedly
repleniſhed with continual gladneſſe, and liueth therin,
both merily and pleaſauntly, and as it maye be ſayde, is felowlike
in a kinde with God himſelfe: to whome, he prayeth
not only for the ſafetie of himſelf and his owne eſtate alone, but
for the generall ayde and proſperitie of all men. Now therefore
I pray you, whiche of theſe twayne, maye be thought in your
iudgement, to liue moſt happily?
            
            
               LISIP.
               Of all that you haue
ſpoken, I thinke there is no man my friend that doubteth, ſince
in trouth they are clearer in ſight than the Sunne: For euery man
knoweth that the number is infinite, of ſuch as are ruled rather
by their Appetite than by Reaſon. But ſince our talke, concerneth
at this time the ſtate of a wiſe man, who for as muche, as
one man is borne for the benefite of an other, and y• it is the propertie
of Vertue to ſuffer Aduerſitie, as before we haue declared,
ought therefore to doe eche thing, wyth no leſſe regarde of hys
Profite and Honeſtie, than his Praiſe and Eſtimation, here re
                     ••
                  ſteth
(I ſay) the queſtion: Whether it were more conuenient for this
man to lurke in ſome Solitarie corner, or otherwiſe to be conuerſaunt
in the affaires of the worlde. Wherein, if I ſhall ſaye my
mynde what I thinke of the matter, I am for my owne part of
a contrarie opinion to that which is ſpoken, eſpecially, ſince the
fruite of our Wit, our Vertue, our Learning, and euery other good
qualitie of ours, is then ſayde to be chiefly commended, when it
is employed to the benefite of our neighbous: And that God him
ſelfe hath appointed his creatures, to liue togither in the world

as one verie bodie, to the only ende, that one man might therby
haue the helpe of another, whē either infirmitie or other neceſſitie
ſhuld ſo require. To this intent it is likewiſe reported,
y• 
                  Menenius Agrippa by a fable of Eſope, did cunningly reconcile
the people of Rome, to the fauor of the Senate: putting them likewiſe
in mynd of the common prouerb, That one man liueth by the
help of another. For this is moſt certaine, that no man was euer
created ſo general, that he coulde throughly ſupplye the wante
of the thing, that was requiſite and néedefull for himſelfe: the
which as we may gather, was ſo frō the firſt, prouided of purpoſe,
that one man in this ſorte néeding helpe of another, with
charitie therefore might cheriſh & loue one another the rather.
And for this occaſion wée may likewiſe ſay, that euery Countrey
was alſo ordeyned, to bring forth his ſeuerall cōmodities
therby the rather that mutuall acquaintance, by the conueyā
                  
                     •
                  
thereof from one to an other, might ſo bée maintained among
the people. By theſe and lyke reaſons, it therefore appeareth
that the dutie of a wiſe man, is to ſéeke to profit euery man as
farforth as he may, thā the which, there is nothing more noble,
nothing more worthy, nor nothing more agréeable to the eſtimation
of his Manhoode. To this onely purpoſe he ſhoulde perſwade
himſelfe to be ſent into the world, that therby (folowing
the example of his Creator) he might both benefite his neighbours,
and profit his Countrey: For, the ſafegarde wherof, he
ought to ſhunne no ſharpneſſe of danger, but y• in defence of the
cōmon welth, he ought patiently to endure al trouble what ſoeuer,
yea though the ſame doe apparantly tend, to the manifeſt
hazarde and decay of his life. For howe much the more, honeſt
lawes & good ordinaunces are daily broken, by the miſdemeanor
of fooles & diſorderly perſons, ſo much the more ought their
boldneſſe to be reſiſted, & the publike eſtate by wiſedom preſerued:
ſince according to the ſaying of Plato, that Kingdome, that
Empire, or y• 
                  Citie, may then be counted moſt of al happy, when it
is gouerned and ruled by the authoritie of wiſeman. If then this
wiſemen of whome we entreate, will haue a deſire to perfourme

the duty, whervnto he was purpoſely created, though daily he
behold a thouſand offences, wilfully committed no leſſe againſt
god, than againſt his neighbor, yea although to his great grief
and ſorrowe, he ſée Vertue it ſelf of moſt men oppreſſed and troden
vnder foote: yet by no means ought he therfore to withdraw
him vnto Solitarineſſe, but the rather ought he then to ſtay in y•
Citie, and there to endeuour as well as hée maye to doe that
which is good: neither ought there any peril to be ſo great, whiche
he, in the mayntenance of Truth ought not boldly to aduenture,
ſaying, with Attalus the Stoike:

                     I rather had in warlike tentes,
of Fortune for to dwel:
                     Than in hir wanton pallace, where,
in pleaſure to excel.
                     I torments beare, but force them not,
eache griefe his ende wil finde:
                     My death the falling axe doth threate,
yet naught appalles my minde.
                  
               
               And in this point alſo, he ought to followe the iudgemente
of Cicero: It is (ſaieth he) more agréeble vnto Nature, and
more for the ſafegarde and aide of al nations, to bring vp their
people in continuall trauaile and hardneſſe of labour, folowing
therin the ſteppes of Hercules, whom popular report, mindefull
of his deſerts, hath placed among the Goddes: than to ſuffer thē
ydlely to lyue in ſolitarineſſe, not onely without exerciſe or trouble
of body, but nouriſhed withall in Tenderneſſe and Pleaſure,
to the ende that therby they may excell all others, in the onely

ſhadowe and ſhew of their beautie. Wherfore I conclude, that
all ſuche as fynde in themſelues, the force of any noble or valyant
diſpoſition, oughte rather to miſlyke of Solitarineſſe, than of ſocietie.
               
            
            
               EV DOXVS.
               This truly Liſippus I maye not deny, but
that hée, in the iudgement of all men is to bée accounted moſte
worthy, who remaining amidde ſuche infection of vice, preſerueth
himſelfe not only from that, which is thought to be euill,
but ſheweth alſo the way vnto others, howe from the wicked
behauior of the multitude, they maye wythdrawe themſelues
vnto that whiche is good. Beſides, I am likewiſe perſwaded,
that it is the parte of a noble mynde, to ſéeke to profite as many
as he may, and that not ſlenderly, but effectually: earneſtly aduiſing
them, to fynd out the meane and meaſure of euery thing,
wherein Vertue, according to the ſaying of the Poet, doth hold
hir abiding.
               
                  Middewaye tweene Vice,
dothe Vertue rest,
                  Founde out by him,
that ſeekes hir best.
               
               Which thing, by the iudgement of Seneca, is alſo approued:
Al vertue (ſaith he) ſtandeth in a meane, and this meane is a certain
meaſure. And laſtly I conſider, that if this wyſeman, of whome
you ſpeake, labouring to withdrawe vs from thoſe falſe opinions
wherewith we are infected, happen by chaunce to lighte
vppon one that is couetous of Money, he maye well perſwade
him, that there is nothyng more commendable in hym that is
poore, than to contemne riches, nor in him that is riche, than to
be liberall of his wealth, and that if he liue to contente Nature,
he ſhall neuer be poore, if to content his fantaſie, hée ſhall neuer
be riche. For in this poynt oughte the meaſure of our riches to
conſiſt, Firſt to haue that whiche is neceſſarye, and lastly no more than
is needfull. All whiche maye bée had without any trouble, ſince

that which is ſufficiēt may be alwais at hād: wherby it apereth
that our greateſt labor, is alwais beſtowed in ſuperfluities. But
the true deſire of riches, is always to be meaſured by a mynde
well diſpoſed, according as Cicero in ſome ſorte preſcribeth: If
a man (ſaith hée) haue a daughter, hée hathe néede of money to
marry hir, if ſo he haue two, hée hath néede of the more, if farther
he haue thrée or foure daughters, his neceſſitie ſtill encreaſeth,
but if he haue fiftie, as the reporte is of Danaus, ſo manye
daughters, require a greate maſſe to their dowrie: ſo as, to the
néedefulneſſe of eche man, is the meaſure of his riches to bée referred.
Wherin, our Poet Horace ſéemeth likewiſe, to haue very
well ſpoken, ſaying:

                     Who ſo that muche, deſireth to obtaine:
                     With wāt of much, muſt be contēt again.
                     He well whom God, in mony, rent, or land:
                     Allows inough, thogh with a ſparing hād.
                  
               
               For wante of due conſideration whereof, it commeth ſo
to paſſe, that the couetous man ſtandeth ſtill in néede, as well of
that which he hath, as of that whiche he wanteth, and he always
wāteth leaſt, that coueteth leaſt. Epicurus
                   therefore writing to Idomeneus,
is reported to perſuade him, that if he woulde enriche
his friende Pitoclea, hée ſhoulde not adde to his wealth, but rather
abate, from hys ambitious deſire. But nowe on the other
ſyde, if ſo he happen to light vppon ſome other, that thirſteth
after honour, hée maye lykewiſe alledge, that the deſyre of gouerment,
althoughe it appeare more honeſte than of mony, yet
is it in déede, a verye hard, a tickle, and diſdainefull miſtreſſe:
for hope of ſoueraintie, refuſeth no condition, of what ſeruice ſoeuer.
Yet hée whome Fortune, will néedes enforce to become a
gouernour, ſhall then moſte rightly deſerue the honour and eſtimation
of his name, when firſt in himſelfe (as Cicero ſaith)

hée ſhall bridle luſte, contemne pleaſure, ſuppreſſe anger, auoyde
couetouſneſſe, and finally remoue from out his breaſte, all enormities
of the minde: ſince he onely knoweth beſte, how to rule
and gouerne others, that hath the power and ſkill to gou
                     •
                  rne
hymſelfe. For thys is certaine, that neither meate nor drink,
nor watche, nor ſleepe, all whyche are neceſſarye for the bodye,
are at all times holſome, except they be vſed with meaſure
and diſcretion. So likewiſe, the giftes and caſualties of
Fortune, are then accompted bothe profytable and pleaſaunte,
when wée temper and vſe them wyth ſuche aduiſed moderation,
that they rather depend vpon vs, than we vpon them. The
nature whereof is ſuche, that if we couet them without meaſure,
we ſhall no more be able to ſatiſfy, that vnſatiable deſire
of the mynde, than his droughte maye be quenched, whoſe deſire
to drinke procéedeth not of thirſte, but rather of ſome burning
inflamation of hys entrayles, for that is properly no naturall
thirſte, but an vnnaturall diſeaſe. To conclude, if this wiſe
man (I ſaye) by theſe and lyke reaſons, can heale in this ſorte
the affections of the multitude, and bring them in the ende to
that temperate meane, wherein Vertue, is ſayde to abyde: So
that moderatly they may learne, to deſire riches without couetouſneſſe,
Honour wythoute ambition, Pleaſure wythoute Licentiouſneſſe,
(if ſo it bée lawfull ſuche, thynges maye bée deſired)
ſuche one I confeſſe, is to be reuerenced of all men, as an excellente
member for a Commonwealth. But, to come to that,
whiche I haue hitherto pretended, who is he (I pray you) that
can thus bryng to paſſe theſe notable effectes, ſince for the
moſte parte wée are all ſo nouſled in lewdneſſe, and the ſubſtance
of our bodies ſo compounded of iniquitie, that the one
may not poſſibly be ſeparated from the other: For no ſooner are
we borne and brought into the worlde, but wée are foorthewith
infected with all kinde of wickedneſſe, ſo as wée may ſéeme to
haue ſucked this errour, with the milke of our nurſes. Nowe,
when herevnto is annexed alſo, the euill example of oure Elders,
and the licentious diſpoſitiō of the multitude, a great and

forcible inſtructer of lewdneſſe, and that the whole worlde, is generally
made ſubiect vnto vice: From hence I ſay it procedeth,
that our myndes are ſo peruerted with ſuch varietie of opinions,
and ſo farre remoued from the goodneſſe of nature, that preſently
we ſéeme to enuie in our ſelues hir good inclination, and are
therewithall ſo blinded that fondly we eſtéeme, nothyng more
worthy, nothing more commendable, nor nothing more neceſſary
to be ſought for on the earth, than wealth, than honour, yea
than the vayn commendation of the people. And therfore, though
ſome perchance do liſten to the truth, and ſéeme to conſēt a while
to the ſame, yet afterwards, perceyuing the multitude to be of
an other opinion, than they are of themſelues, forthwith theyr
reaſon is caried away with affection, as with a violent ſtreame,
and ſo they chooſe rather with many to erre, than wyth fewe to
iudge aright. Thus by this meanes wée are daylye rooted and
 confirmed in our euill, and the rather by thrée occaſions. The
firſte, through the faulte of ſuch ignorant gouernours, as beſtow
their offices and titles of honour, not vpon the vertuous and wel
diſpoſed, as of right they ought, but rather vpon flatterers, and
ſuche as are contente, to humble and ſubmit themſelues vnto
their flauery: to the manifeſt hindrāce and decay of ſuch other,
as are rarely endued with moſt towardly wits, who with honor
might be noriſhed, and with glorie enflamed, to the delighte of
 ſome good and profitable ſtudy. The ſecond, through the colorable
diſſimulation of thoſe, who bearing openly a face of honeſtie,
as pretending, as thoughe they were frée fro the faultes
of others, yet priuily bluſhe not by right or by wrong, to procure
vnto themſelues, eyther honour, riches, or what elſe ſoeuer,
they ſéeme vnto the worlde moſt of all to neglect: yea and that,
whiche not long before they condemned in others, to the ende
that therby, they might ſéeme leſſe carefull therof themſelues.
But foraſmuche as all fained and counterfaite things, do ſoone
fade away, the Truth, which theſe men go about by cunning to
oppreſſe, could not ſo long haue bin concealed from them, if diligently
they woulde haue beſtowed anye tyme at all, to haue

ſought for the ſame. Who ſo long, as they may be held vp with
a little Proſperitie, the credite of their eſtimation doth ſhadowe
for a while, all their euil demeanour. But if any miſaduenture,
which thereby diſcouereth & detecteth their hipocreſie, doe chance
to betyde them, foorthwith it then appereth, howe great deceyte
there laye ſecretly hid, vnder that their pretended ſhew of honeſtie.
For true glorie taketh déepe roote, and ſpreadeth hirſelf very
mightily abroade: where things that are counterfeyt can take
no continuance, bycauſe they are daily ſubiecte to decay. And
therfore Socrates very notably declared, that he that is deſirous
to finde out the néereſt and gaineſt way to glorie, ought firſt to
endeuour to be the ſame in déede, that he woulde be accounted.
But, through ignorance of the Truth, and default of thoſe that
ſéeke after Vertue without diſcretion, wée are I ſaye ſo hardened
in oure naughtineſſe, that by the rude and vnciuile behauiour
of ſuch counterfeat teachers, we are brought in contempt
of that which is good: Which thing, is far contrary to the aduice
of Seneca, who counſelleth a wiſeman, that hée trouble not
himſelfe with varietie of faſhions, nor ſéek, to make the people
to wonder, at his ſtrange kinde of liuing: but rather, to behaue
himſelfe ſo, that all men may learne to follow him in his goodneſſe,
or at the leaſt wyſe, that he auoide the company of ſuche,
who though they know nothing, yet thinke they know all thinges,
and had rather ſéeme to be teachers of others, though rawly
they perfourme it, than to be learners themſelues, though
greatly they néede it: Which kinde of people, while arrogantlye
they ſtriue to bée accompted moſte wyſe, they proue themſelues
thereby moſte ignorant fooles. For in this behalfe, wée
reade that Socrates by the Oracle of Apollo, was adiudged
the wyſeſt, bycauſe, hée acknowledged himſelfe to bée ſure of
this on thing, that he ſurely knewe nothing. But to procéede,
the third occaſion therfore to confirm vs in our euil, is the wickedneſſe
of thoſe that flatter vs in our naughtineſſe, for to this
inticement the eares of moſte men be open, the glory wherof
in ſo graffed in our heartes, that we all deſyre to be praiſed, yea

and then moſt of al, when leaſt we deſerue it. In which kind of
madneſſe wée are ſo far euergrowen, that we account him for
enuious that flattereth but a little: Whereby it hapneth, that
there is nothyng ſo ſtrong, that flatterye may not vtterly corrupte
and ouerthrowe. From hence the multitude of prating
Paraſites, that daily abuſe the pliant wittes, and gentle natures
of well diſpoſed perſons, doe take their beginning: by whyche
name we call them al, that ſpeake and do eche thing to the contentation
of thoſe, by whom they do liue, reprouing them in nothing,
for the loue of their belly chere, from whence their name
out of Greke is deriued. From hence alſo, that ſaying of Terence
may well bée taken, That Flatterie gaineth friends, where plainneſſe
reapes reproche. For Truth is gréeuous, bycauſe, thereof ryſeth
hatred, whiche is the poyſon of friendſhip, but Flattery of the
twaine, ought rather to be more gréeuous, which giuing libertie
vnto vice, ſuffereth a friende to runne headlong into Follie.
Wherin, the greateſt faulte vndoubtedly procéedeth, from the
party himſelfe, who deſpiſing the Truth, will ſuffer his eares to
be abuſed by Flattery. And herevppon I remember, the ſaying
of Demetrius to a verye riche libertine, that the ende of hys honesty
was the beginning of his wealth, meaning, that when hée
fell into Flattery, hée began to waxe riche. Yet Cicero ſéemeth to
be of opinion, that Flatterie is not daungerous, althoughe it bée
hatefull, bycauſe it can procure, the hurte of no man but of him,
that is contēt to ſéeme delighted therwith: which cōmonly hapneth
to none but to fooles, for that they of al others are ſooneſt
ouertaken, with the immoderat affection, & loue of themſelues.
Whervpon, being blinded with ignorance, they neither knowe
whē they offend, nor take any care to amend their offences, bicauſe
they eſtéeme no leſſe of their vices, thā as though they wer
vertues. neither is it at all as I take it any maruaile, for whatſoeuer
is in Loue is blind (ſaith Plato) in reſpect of y• which it loueth.
Notwithſtanding, ſuppoſe as you wold haue it, that we be
friendly admoniſhed to entertaine into your companye, ſome ſo
wiſe and ſo faithfull a friend, as may both perceiue our faults▪
                  
and alſo giue remedie to the ſame: yet who I beſéeche you, is
there to be found, that taketh any care to accept of this profer,
or if by chaunce he hap to méete with ſuch an acquaintaunce,
who I pray you; doth fauourably heare him tell plainely the
trouth, that in ſhort ſpace after becommeth not his enimie?
Since therfore it cōmeth ſo to paſſe, that among the creatures
of this troubleſome worlde, there is daily to be founde ſuch varietie
of maners, what then ſhoulde a wiſeman doe? Woulde
you wiſhe him to ſpende his time in talking to deafe men? or
is it not more reaſon, conſidering, he can but little benefite the
common wealth, nor doe good vnto ſuch, as will neyther take
warning, nor can away to be controlled: that in this caſe I
ſay, he withdrawe him from the companie of ſuch lewde diſpoſed
perſons, retiring from thence into ſome ſolitarie corner, that
ſo, being out of the daunger of that infectiue company, he may
yet at the leaſtwiſe liue honeſtly himſelfe? For what auayleth
it a man, to haue purged himſelfe of his owne offences, if
notwithſtanding he be alwayes abiding, 
                     〈◊〉
                   the ſauour and
infection of others? But let vs admit for the purpoſe, that a
wiſe man with all his might, doe dailye endeuour himſelfe to
correct, y• vnciuil behauiour of ſuch wilful offenders: yet what
benefite I praye you maye thereof ariſe, when not onely, all
goodneſſe and honeſtie is generally contemned, but alſo al loue,
and affection to heare & vnderſtande the ſame, is from out our
hearts moſt vtterly baniſhed: in ſteade whereof, naught elſe I
may ſay doth there abide, but the inordinate loue of wickedneſſe
and vice. The difference whereof may partly appeare, by
thoſe two kyndes of Venus, which Plato there feigneth, in hys
Dialogue named Simpoſium▪
                   Of which, the firſt was more
auncient, brought forth by the heauens, whome vertuous men
doe followe: the ſeconde much yonger, begotten betwéene Jupiter
and Dione, whome wicked men d
                     •
                  e ſerue. A wiſe man
therefore as I meane it, ſhall rather couet to make choice of
a place, very pleaſant and wholſome, not onely for his bodie,
but alſo for his mind. For, whereas 
                     〈◊〉
                   is always 
                     〈◊〉
                   lining

vnto euill, and wi
                     •
                  h eche allurement is draw
                     •
                   vnto Follie, and
where alſo the pleaſure and delectation of our ſenſes, is alwayes
ready to ſet the matter forward: for this occaſion me
thinketh it were greatlye néedefull, that he depart from the
multitude, as one deſirous to liue 
                     〈◊〉
                   ther in peace, thā in war.
Remembring alſo, that the rage of the people ſo vexed Socrates,

                        〈◊〉
                     
                   and 
                     
                        ••
                     lius, that therewith they were brought in maner
beſide themſelues: of whome, he that laboured moſt to
bring into frame, the maners of ſuche as were altogither amiſſe,
could ſcarcely haue the power to reſiſt the temptation of
their manifold vices, when iointly in a heape they came 
                     ••
                  rō
                  ging
ſo togither. For many times it happeneth, that a Phiſition
himſelfe may die of the diſeaſe, of the which he hath cured many
others before. This wiſeman therfore ſhal patiently ſuffer,
all aduerſities and miſchaūces that ſhal ha
                     •
                   to betide him, but
he ſhall neyther ſéeke for them, nor willingly put forward him
ſelfe among them: Beſides, as neare as he may he ſhall caſt
off al troubles, a
                     ••
                  lettes and hinderances, that thereby he may
the rather enioy a well ſettled minde, which no man here maye
poſſibly attayne, ſo long as he is vexed and occupied in the
worlde. For this is agréed vpon, that no one thing maye be
well performed by him, that is troubled with many things:
Wherein, we reade of Democritus that he pulled out his owne
eyes, leaſt that a beholding the vanities of the world, he ſhuld
thereby become more vnable to beholde, the moſt excellent
light of eternall veritie. And Cicero himſelfe, after he had
well compared theſe matters togither, although, for the benefite
of the common welth, 
                     •
                  e preferred the lyfe actiue to be
more commodious and auaileable for man: yet therewithall
he confeſſeth, that the contemplat
                        •••
                     
                   life, is more ſafe and eaſie,
both for the ſoule and bodie, leſſe 
                     •
                  urthe
                     ••
                  us to our ſelues, and
leſſe gréeuous vnto others. The which he ſéemeth after to haue
greatly deſired, when ſo 
                     •
                  ore he was appalled with the death of
his daughter: whereof writing to 
                     
                        •••
                     icus his friende, he ſayth.
Now I refuſe 
                     〈…〉
                   of al things, neither, doth any thing

content me better than ſolitarineſſe, and ſetting thy ſelfe aſide,
nothing on the earth deliteth me ſo much: for thereby I haue
leyſure, to vſe the aduantage of this my vnwonted libertie, in
the onely conference and exerciſe of learning. Whereby you
may plainly ſée, howe farre this great and daily haunter of the
Citie, of the ſenate, and of all other the moſt frequented places
of the people, did after waxe lothſome of that, which before he
ſo greatly liked, and nowe eſtéemed ſolitarineſſe to be the onely
pleaſure and delectation of the worlde.
            
            
               LYSIPP.
               This verily
Eudoxus ſéemeth contrarie vnto nature, for that it baniſheth
from the world all humanitie and friendſhip, without the which,
the life of man (as I account it) is vtterly maymed, cōſidering,
that there is nothing more conuenient and neceſſarie for mankinde,
eyther in aduerſitie or proſperitie, than the mutuall familiaritie
and good will of a friende: who by partaking of our
felicitie doth encreaſe our happineſſe, and by ſupporting of our
miſerïe, dothe 
                     〈◊〉
                   oure aduerſitie, not ſufferyng our myndes
to be daun
                     •
                  ed with ſorowe. For the auoyding whereof, as
there is nothing more helping than the comfortable loue, that
from ſuch friendſhippe doth vnfainedlye procéede: ſo what
thing in this worlde, than the fruition thereof, maye be wiſſhed
for better: From the which, ſince your ſolitarie life will
vtterly depriue vs, I thynke nothing on the earth (my friend)
to be more hurtfull. For (as Cicero ſayeth) they ſéeme to 
                     •
                  ake
the Sunne from the worlde, that ſéeke to bereaue vs of this
comfortable friendſhippe, for that there is nothing by the fauour
of the Goddes, beſtowed vpon vs more neceſſarie than
the ſame. Take this away, and what I pray you ſhal become
of the ſicke, whom nothing comforteth ſo much, as the heartie
loue & affection of a friende? What recreation for the healthfull?
What liuing for them that lacke? and finally what difference
betwene vs & beaſtes? Truly, if herein we regard but
the ordinary courſe and handie works of nature, we ſhal therby
finde, that ſhe hath framed eche peculiar perſon, to liue to the

ayde of the whole multitude, and the whole multitude, to 
                     〈◊〉
                  
to the ayde of eche peculiar perſon. If then, for eche miſaduenture
and trifling diſcommoditie, that daily may happen in the
affaires of the worlde, this wiſeman ſhall flie into his ſolitarie
corners, I ſée not in this ſort, what triall at all there may be
made of his Vertue. For this is much like as if a bragging ſouldiour,
woulde be gladly accounted a couragious champion, and
yet will ſéeke to flée, eche profered occaſion and chalenge of
warfare, wherein he might haue cauſe to ſhew forth his manlyneſſe.
Demetrius therefore was wont to ſay, that he thought
no man more vnperfect, than he that in his life time, had neuer
taſted of aduerſitie: For that the man, to whom al things hath
happened to his owne deſire, coulde neuer haue cauſe to make
triall of himſelfe. The which alſo that it is true, I haue experience
on my ſide to approue the ſame: For howe coulde the
faythfulneſſe of Marcus Regulus, the abſtinence of Caius Fabritius,
or the patience of Quintus Mutius, ſo well haue bene
knowne, if their calamities, had not giuen occaſion to the publiſhing
of their vertues? Surceaſe, therefore I pray you, to ſet
forth any further your ſolitarie liuing, wherewith in my opinion
you are ouer farre in loue: for this is certaine, that nature
hath not onely allotted the ſame as peculiar vnto beaſtes, but
on the contrarie, hath delighted mankinde with the building
of Cities for their abode vpon the earth, that thereby the people
in all kinde of matters as well Ciuile as Diuine, might bée
brought by degrées to a perfect vnanimitie and agréement among
themſelues, and finally to ioyne in one perfect loue and
affection togither. But if this notwithſtanding, you thinke it
ſtill more ſafe and conuenient, both for auoyding the infection
of the multitude, and for better contentment of our vncontented
mindes, that we liue abroade in the deſolate wilderneſſe among
vntamed beaſtes: yet conſider againe, that it is farre
more famous and glorious to abide in the ciuile company and
fellowſhip of men, and there, by perſuaſion of our words, and

example of our workes, to benefite (if not all) yet as many as
we may. And remember withall, that Attalus the Stoicke was
wont to compare, a careleſſe life vnto a dead ſea, which except
it be ſpent in ſtudie or prayer, it induceth vs directly to the
way of all miſchiefe.The condition of ſolitarines. For ſolitarineſſe is ſayde to be of this propertie,
that it is eyther indued with ſingular Vertue if it be wel
vſed, or elſe it is infected with moſt deteſtable vice, if it be yll
applied. Which opinion is alſo confirmed by Seneca, who
ſayth, that naughtie counſels are there intended, wicked deſires
kindled, boldneſſe ſet forwarde, luſt prouoked, and wrath
inflamed, and therefore as a pernicious euill, it ought with
all our power to be vtterly eſchewed, and our bodies to be kept
in exerciſe of labour, that thereby we may ſo driue awaye the
humor of ſlothfulneſſe, which is onely nouriſhed and maintayned
by ſolitarineſſe: by occaſion whereof, we are made ſo tender
and delicate of body, that we may poſſibly endure no hardneſſe
of trauaile. And therefore they that firſt eſtabliſhed the
Common wealthes of Greece, well vnderſtanding that by labour
and diligence, men were onely to be made couragious
and hardie, ſo prouided by their lawes, that the bodies of their
ſubiectes ſhoulde be hardened in the ſame. Among whome,
the Lacedemonians eſpecially aboue the reſt, brought vp their
youth in continuall trauayle, as in hunting, running, hunger,
thirſt, colde, and heate: to the which they alſo enioyned their
women, that where in other Cities they kept them at home, in
their coſtly apparell, both out of the heate and daunger of the
Sunne, in this noble Citie it was nothing ſo, but while they
were yong, they were accuſtomed to labour, to runne, and to
be conuerſant in warre, without reſpect, eyther of heate or of
duſt to hinder their beauties, rather than to liue ſo deliciouſly
at home, as was the maner and guiſe of other laborous nations.
By this occaſion, the race of the Amazones became ſo famous:
To this intent, the Romanes alſo brought vp their
people in the vſuall exerciſe of warfare, learning, and huſbandrie:
For nothing is there more certaine, than that the faults

of this ydle ſolitarineſſe, are to be auoyded by labour. Wherin,
if I were diſpoſed to vtter, the diuers examples of manye notable
men, what a number might I recite, of thoſe that haue
rather made choyce to liue, not in the wildernes, but in moſte
famous and flouriſhing Cities, that ſo they might therby employ
their time, to the benefite firſt of the Common wealth,
next of their parents, and laſtly of their friends and countrie:
thinking this, to be farre more commendable and prayſeworthie
to the worlde, than beaſt like to liue, in the ſecret and vnfrequented
places of the earth, to the onely pleaſure and contentation
of themſelues. Which thing, we firſt and principally
doe reade of Pythagoras, who by his preſence and doctrine
(the eſtimation whereof being diuerſly ſpred abroade) is ſaide
to be the firſt that gaue light vnto Italie. The like we reade
alſo of Socrates for Greece, who as he was a painefull and diligent
learner, ſo was he a bountifull and liberall teacher, practiſing
that in y• trade of his life, which he profeſſed in his doctrine,
and perſwading himſelfe, that no man was rightly to be
reckned wiſe, that ſought not to imprint that in his hart, whiche
he learned in his bookes. Hym ſucceded Plato and Ariſtotle,
well knowen to be men of moſte excellent learning, who making
chiefly their abode in Athens, beautified that Citie wyth
ciuile behauiour, honeſte lawes, and reuerent inſtitutions of
diuine knowledge. What ſhall I néede to na
                     •
                  e, either Minos,
who made the lawes for the people of Creta? or Philolaus the
Corinthian, who framed the common wealth of the 
                     〈◊〉
                   or
Solon and Lycurgus, of whome the firſt gaue lawes to the Athenians,
the ſeconde to the Lacedemonians? or the like done by the
Gymnoſophiſtes to the Indians, or the Magi to the Perſians? All
theſe I pray you, did they not liue among mē, and by ſo liuing,
did they not ende 
                     ••
                  ur to amend, the vntamed natures and diſpoſitions
of the people, by their good and politique Inſtitutions?
Eyther why ſhoulde I relate, the infinite number of
Orators, Poets, and Philoſophers, who altogyther refuſing thys

                  Solitary liuing, made wholy their abode for the moſte parte in
Cities, thereby the rather to kindle among men, eyther by perſwaſion
of their Eloquence, or by allurement of their verſes, or
by their argumentes and ſillogiſmes of reaſon, a perfecte loue and
affection vnto Vertue: as the two noble Catos, are reported among
the Romaines, who were ſo honoured for their gra
                     •
                  itie
at home, and ſo renoumed for their vertues abroade, that well
neare all the worlde ſtoode in admiration of their excellency.
The example of whome, many notable men of Rome, but eſpecially
Tully, that greate Prince of Eloquence, did after imitate:
who although at ſometimes he ſéemed to commend the Solitary
life, and alſo vſed the ſame himſelfe, yet did not that humour of
his proceade from his voluntary liking, but rather from neceſſity,
for that with others he was thē enforced to forſake the
Citie, which he eſtéemed more pretious than any golde, and to
remaine for a while in baniſhement, bicauſe in priuate conference,
he rather preferred the cauſe of Deiotarius, than of Julius
Caeſar: who therein writeth of himſelfe as followeth. Being
put by force, and by occaſion of the war, from all my dealings
in the common welth, I now haue here great ſtore of leyſure,
and therefore I walke and take my pleaſure of the Countrey,
and am many tymes alone. Or to what ende ſhoulde I repeate,
the manyfolde examples of Emperours, Kyngs and
Captaynes, who while they lyued ſoughte nothyng more,
than to defende theyr Countreys, and to enlarge theyr dominions,
by theyr valyaunte enterpriſes and noble déedes
of armes? As of Alexander the greate, of whome we reade,
that hée ſubdued the greateſt parte of the worlde, that he enlarged
his Empire as far as the Occean ſea, and that by his valor
he purchaſed to himſelfe ſuch eſtimation and renowne, as
the remembrance of hys name will always endure? Or if Antiochus
the great king of Syria, of whom it is alſo reported, that
he added to his auntient dominions, bothe Babilon, Aegipt, and
I
                        •
                     rie. Or of Hanniball, who ioyned ſo many battels, & obtayned

ſo many victories againſt the Romanes? Or of Mithridates▪
                  
who ſo greatly augmented the Parthian Empire? Or of Epaminondas
Prince of the Thebans? Or of Pyrrhus the good king
of Epirus? Or of diuers others, who preſſing downe their
griſe
                     •
                  ed heares, with their warrelike helmets, put their enimies
to flight in ſundrie famous battels? As for the purpoſe
of Scipio ſurnamed Affricanus, who made Carthage tributarie
vnto Rome? Or of Scipio Emilianus, who ouerthrewe Numantia,
and vtterly raced vp the foundations of Carthage? Or finally
of Caius Marius▪
                   who ledde 
                     
                        ••
                     gurth as a captiue in his triumphe,
vanquiſhed the people called Cimbri in France, the Germanes
in 
                     
                        •
                     talie, and ſolemnelye triumphed vpon them both?
What may we thinke of theſe? may we imagin they thought
any other thing, worthie in this life to be eſtéemed of, ſaue only
that which was good and laudable? But if to the authoritie
of theſe you will not yet ſéeme to yéelde, conſider then I beſech
you, in what places, the bodie of Chriſt our ſauiour was commonly
remayning, whome we knowe, came downe into the
worlde for none other occaſion, than that in liuing among vs
here, he might by his ſecret power heale all our infirmities,
and ſo againe reconcile vs to the fauour of our heauenlye father.
And weigh with your ſelfe, whether his holye Apoſtles
gaue vs any example to lurke in ſuch ſolitarie corners, thoſe I
ſay, that being inſpired with the holy ghoſt, and filled with vertue
from aboue, trauayled throughout the greateſt part of the
earth, bringing ſo many barbarous and heathen nations, vnder
the yoke and obeyſance of Chriſt Among whome, remember
onely that choſen veſſell S. Paule, where he I ſay beſtowed
his time, he that in countries ſo farre diſtant a 
                     〈◊〉
                   planted
the Goſpell, and he that for the ſafegarde of his brethren, wiſhed
himſelfe to be curſed before the face of God. And forget
not I pray you, where the manifolde numbers of Martyrs and
Biſhop that are alredy deade, did ſpende their dayes, thoſe that
cared for nothing but to conuert the people to the holy faith,
thoſe that onely ſought to increaſe the flocke of Chriſt, and

thoſe that when occaſion was offered, refuſed not to ſurrender
vp their owne liues, for the ſafegarde of others. All whiche
being ſo, be no whit now aſhamed to yéelde, if not to the
reaſons and examples profane of thoſe that went before, yet at
leaſt wiſe, to the vndoubted authoritie of thoſe that came after,
and diſdame not my friende, after ſuche plaine and ſo manifeſt
proofes, to make (as we terme it) a recantation of your
error.
               
            
            
               EVD.
               All thys notwythſtandyng I can not confeſſe
Lyſippus, that eyther by theſe reaſons or theſe aucthorities, I
am yet ſubdued: foraſmuch, as the contrary proofes that make
for Solitarineſſe are both the ſtronger, and y• ſtore of examples
to proue the ſame, by many degrées the greter, wherby to fortifie
if nede ſhould ſo require, by y• 
                  aucthoritie of moſt approued
perſons a matter ſo apparant, as otherwiſe of it ſelfe is cléere
ynough. And therefore to procéede, where firſt you alledge the
Solitarie life, to be bothe odious and contrarye vnto nature, for
this occaſiō chiefly, that it ſéemeth vtterly to aboliſh al friendſhip,
which you ſay, is principally to be preferred, before all other
earthly commodities: my meanyng is to make you vnderſtand,
that your opinion in this behalfe doth greatly deceiue
you. For, if throughly you conſider wheron conſiſteth, the very
life and nature of friendſhip, you ſhall then perceiue, that as
all things elſe, ſo alſo this holy knot of ours, is by Solitarineſſe
augmented rather than decreaſed. For if vertue, according to
the true diſpoſition of loue, be a thyng that procureth the fauour
of all men, and draweth their affections to ioyne friendſhip
with him in whome ſhée abideth: How then may it poſſibly
happen, that he that ſhunneth the cōcourſe of the people,
to the ende he may auoide all occaſion of vice, and thereby the
rather followe Vertue more earneſtly, ſhoulde not friendely
loue and fauour thoſe, that beare like affection vnto vertue as
himſelfe. And the rather when he knoweth, that the true foundation
of loue and friendſhip, is Honeſty, whervppon alſo all other
things depende, and is not ignorant, that if the vniting of
good wil were taken from the world, neyther men, nor houſes,

nor Cities woulde endure, but that tillage, and all thing elſe,
woulde ſhortly run to ruine and decay: ſince there is no houſe
ſo well eſtabliſhed, nor Citie ſo well fortified, but that by hatred
and diſcorde it may ſoone be deſtroyed. So that a wiſeman,
oughte by no meanes to banyſhe thys comfortable friendſhippe
from his Solitarie dwelling, neither may he if he woulde, for
friendſhip créepeth I know not by what meane, into the ſecrete
dealings of all kinde of people, and ſuffereth no trade of liuing
to be voide of hir comfort: for, though ſome man may be found
of nature ſo ſauage, that he abhorreth all company, as at Athens
one Timon was ſo reported, yet can he not endure to be
ſtill alone, but that, either one or another he muſt néedly haue,
to whome he may vtter the crookedneſſe of his nature. A wiſeman
therefore be he neuer ſo Solitarie, wil for his recreation (I
ſay finde out) ſome ſuch honeſt and faithfull friende, as both in
manners and nature maye reſemble hymſelfe, ſuche one, as is
pleaſaunt, learned, faithfull, eloquent, not tedious, not complayning,
not grudging, not enuious, nor crafty, and ſuch one
as he maye loue and maye loue him agayne, not for profit, but
for vertue, which onely bréedeth and continueth true friendſhip.
For ſuch friendes as are choſen but for profit only, do no longer
content vs than they are profitable vnto vs: which as Seneca
reporteth is the cauſe, why thoſe that are founde to be very
wealthy, are vſually haunted for the moſt part with company,
and why ſuch as are néedy, are lefte to liue pining in their miſery
alone. And thoughe it maye peraduenture be ſaide, that a
wiſeman hath no néede of acquaintaunce, for that he may ſéeme
ſufficiently contented with his owne company, yet of neceſſitye
he muſte ſéeke to procure himſelfe friendes, althoughe for
no other occaſion, than that thereby hée maye haue ſome one,
vppon whome he may practiſe his friendſhip, leaſt otherwiſe ſo
rare and excellent a vertue, ſhoulde wholy lye hidde in him, and
his hap ſo harde, that he ſhoulde not haue one ſo ſpecially beloued,
as for whome at the leaſte hée myght be willing to endure
the loſſe of his libertie, for whom to ſuffer baniſhmēt, and

for the ſafegarde of whoſe life, he might readily aduenture the
loſſe of his own life. For the mutual loue of theſe and ſuch like,
this wiſeman therefore without cauſe of offence, maye vſe the
pleaſure of moderat feaſting, allowing in this behalfe the ſaying
of Epicurus, that to eate without cōpany, is to liue like a wolfe.
Wherin, though many times it may happen, that by the vrgēt
occaſion of his peculiar affaires, he may not ſtil be abiding in
the preſence of his friend, yet this in his abſēce he ſhal not forget
that a friend is rather to be poſſeſſed in mind, than in body: in whiche
degrée he may alſo at his pleaſure, either viſite him, confer
with him, helpe him, & togyther enioy ſuche other pleaſures as
from friendſhip may procede. For preſēt familiaritie may wel
be ſaid to eſtabliſhe true friendſhip, but not to begin or to creat
the ſame, for that is onely to be procured by vertue, as before
we haue declared. In proofe wherof we may find a nūber, who
though they haue liued a long time togither, yet therby growe
not at all into friendſhip, bicauſe, of the diuerſity of their manners,
and the greate varietie of their repugnant natures: other
ſome again, who almoſt ſo ſoone as one beholdeth the other become
preſently friendes, bicauſe, nothing is more amiable thā
                  Vertue, nor nothyng, that ſooner prouoketh a man to beneuolence.
Therefore then ſynce of all Societies, there is none ſo
good, nor none ſo firme, as when good men of lyke condicion
are truely lynked, in honeſt loue and acquaintance togyther:
From hence I ſay it procedeth, that a Wiſeman wherſoeuer he
abideth, wil always ſéeke to ioyne frendſhip with ſuche, as are
likeſt to hymſelf, ſuch as with whom he may as boldly confer
as with himſelf, and ſuch as for like loue, mutual zeale, and vnfayned
good wyll, are but one and the ſame togither with him
ſelfe: for ſo is the precept of Pythagoras, that in friendſhip there
ſhould be made but one of many. But to procéede, ſince of common
wealthes there are two ſorts, wherof the one greate, and vniuerſally
Common, that is to ſaye the world, the other more
peculiar, wherevnto by birth we are priuately allotted: this
man of whome wée talke, ſhall alwayes thyncke it more

commendable to preferre, the benefite of the greater before
the leſſe: for, if ſo it be weldone to helpe one or two, it is reckned
muche better to helpe a whole multitude. But the ſame
this wiſeman may not well performe, ſo long, as he is conuerſaunt
abroade in any publike aſſembly, bycauſe in ſuch places
he can neuer be at quiet, but ſhall ſtill be tormented and beaten
with trouble, as a rocke, with the tempeſtuous waues of
the Sea. For when the people ſhall ſée him, to be any thing repugnant
vnto them in their manners, foorthwith they all conſpire
againſte him, and wyth the ſting of their malice neuer
leaue to torment him, vntill they perceiue him, to conſent with
them in their wickedneſſe, or to yéelde vnto them in their follie.
To the ende therefore that a wiſeman may performe, this his
chiefe and principall duety, it is neceſſary firſt that he remoue
himſelfe, from the daily throng of the people, and that he withdraw
his delight, from the troubleſom concourſe of the multitude,
retiring hymſelfe, into ſome ſuche priuate and ſolitarie
place, as may be thought apteſt for his owne ſecuritie, and for
the furtherance of hys knowledge in philoſophie: that there remaynyng
among hys comfortable bookes of dyuers ſortes, vſing
them as his friendly companions, ready to goe out wyth
him when he pleaſeth, and to retourne into hys cloſet agayne
when he willeth, yea ready at all times, either to ſpeake, or to
be ſilent, to kepe home, or to impart their ſecretes abroade in
the woddes: he may at his pleaſure, either walke and take the
ayre, or exerciſe tillage, or vſe ſome other honeſt and commendable
paſtime, as to conferre, to exhorte, to comforte, to warne,
to reproue, to counſell, or to teach the hidden ſtories of things
that are paſte: Where alſo to be ſhorte, he may by his owne laboure,
preſcribe vnto the worlde ſuche a methode of life, as
may perſwade the people, to haue death in contempt, to vſe moderation
in proſperitie, ſtoutneſſe in aduerſitie, and to kepe a quiet
contentation of minde in all their actions. You ſée therefore,
how I admit into this ſolitarineſſe of ours, not onely this wiſeman
alone, but alſo wyth hym hys like addicted friendes, and

therwithall beſides a general care to benefit the whole world:
For no man doubteth, but that thoſe who in their ſolitarineſſe
are altogither ydle, ſlouthfull, and full of dumpiſhneſſe, are of
all men moſt miſerable. My meaning therfore is not, that this
Solitarineſſe ſhuld be without company, nor that this quietneſſe,
ſhould become either ſluggiſh, or fruitleſſe, but ſuch, as like vnto
the Solitarineſſe of Scipio Africanus, maye benefite manye: in
which I woulde haue handled no trifling matters, tending to
vnprofitable toyes, but cauſes, of ſuch importance and weight,
as may not yéelde in the ende, either vnprofitable labour, vnhoneſt
gaine, or any fowle or ſhamefull reproch, all whiche I
exclude from this manner of doctrine: but on the contrary, encreaſe
of honeſty, reputation of vertue, and rewarde of eternall
glory. Furthermore, for that as reſt vnto lande, ſo recreation
vnto wit is ſometyme neceſſarye: I thinke it not amiſſe, if for
the maintenaunce of his health, which nothing as the Phiſitions
alledge, doth more preſerue than moderate exerciſe, thys
wiſeman therefore acquainte himſelfe in the trade of huſbandry:
for of all things, whereof any gaine may be made, there is nothyng
better, nothyng more profytable, nor anye thyng more
conuenient for the reputation of a man. Which was the cauſe
why the Senators of Rome, didde in olde time dwell vpon their
farms themſelues, as witneſſeth Cicero, who ſaith: that newes
was brought to L. Quintus Cincinatus being then at the ploughe,
that he was choſen Dictator of the Empire: and further reporteth,
that bothe Curius, and dyuers others were called from
their Countrey houſes, to the office of Senators. For huſbandrie
among our Elders was had in ſuche price, that if they
called a man by the name of a good huſbandman, they didde
hym (as they thought) very greatee honour. But ſée alſo,
howe farre foorthe Horace commendeth this manner of exerciſe,
ſaying.
               
                  
                  Full happie maye that man accompted be▪
                  
                  Whoſe quiet mind from worldly care is free:
                  And frames himſelfe, as erſt it hath bin taught,
                  To weld the plough, ne owes the vſer aught.
               
               What thinke you nowe my friende, ſeing that Solitarineſſe
is thus with ſuche a number, both of pleaſant and honourable
cares accompanyed, will you therfore ſéeme to flée and to
condemne the ſame? eſpecially, when alſo you ſhall ſée that it
hath alwayes bene adorned, with the preſence of moſt notable
perſons: of whome, thoughe the number bée infinite, yet
I hope withoute tediouſneſſe I maye repeate a fewe. As for
example, what ſaye we firſt of the Philoſophers and Poets? did
not they, for the moſte parte ſhunne to dwell in Cities, and
wholy ſought, to withdrawe them ſelues vnto their Solitarye
manſions? If of Plotinus, a ſecond prince of Philoſophers vnto
Plato, this queſtion wer aſked, he wold doubtleſſe anſwer, that
this kind of quietneſſe wold rather content him, than the whole
world beſides. If of Pythagoras the ſame were demaunded, he
would not onely cōmend this trade of lyfe, but would further
declare, himſelf that he trauailed throughout diuers waſt and
ſolitarie places, and that alſo he ſtayed long tyme in the wilderneſſe,
therby the rather, to acquaynt himſelfe with truth: by
the example of whome, all his ſort of followers named Pythagoriās,
ſéeking to auoyde the dayly ſtormes that happen by cō
                  panie,
are ſayd, to haue alwayes dwelt in places Solitarie. And
that Democritus, no leſſe for his part perfourmed the lyke, we
alſo vnderſtand. As concerning the which, if of Parmenides and
Atlas we further enquire, we ſhal likewiſe finde, that the hilles
are yet called by their names, vpon which they dwelled. Neyther
if the truth were known, would Prometheus himſelf deny,
but y• from hēce was miniſtred y• occaſiō of that myſtical tale,

that he on mount Caucaſus was ſtretched abrode to be deuoured
of a vulture, meaning that there, he employed himſelf with
ſuch earneſt attention, to the ſerching out of diuers ſecret miſteries,
that therby his fleſhe was greatly abated, whiche nothing
empaireth ſo muche as ſtudy. What maye we leſſe coniecture,
either of Socrates, Plato, or Aristotle, but that they all
delighted in Solitarineſſe, though happely at ſome time, eyther
the care and regarde of their ſchollers, or the neceſſitie of the
common wealth, or elſe ſome other like vrgent occaſion, withſtoode
their priuate deſires. Further, what ſay we of Anaxagoras,
who was alſo of the ſame opinion? What of Xenocrates,
of all the philoſophers the ſeuereſt, and for his constan
                        •
                     ie and continencie,
of all other moſte renoumed? What of Xeno the father
of Stoickes? or of Carneades amongſt them the painfulleſt? or of
Criſippus or Diogenes, whereof the one was offended with the
ſalutation of his friends, the other, wyth the very ſhadowe of
Alexander the greate? Is it not I praye you to be thoughte
that all theſe, purpoſely ſhunning the ſocietie of the worlde,
picked them out ſuch places as ſéemed, moſte conuenient and
frée for themſelues to reſt in, that ſo, they might the rather employ
their vnbourthened mindes, to be alwayes conuerſaunt
in matters of knowledge, whiche otherwiſe the people, wyth
their infinite varietie of toyes and vanities, woulde haue vtterly
oppreſſed: knowing right well, that their time of abode in
the worlde was but ſhorte, and that death hath a thouſand paſſages
to enter into vs, by the dores and windowes as I maye
terme it of our ſenſes. To procede, what ſay we to Virgill? who
fléeing from Rome (a place where greatly he flouriſhed, aſwell
for his witte, as for the affection borne vnto hym by the 
                     
                        •
                     mperour
then Lorde of the worlde) meanyng thereby to wythdrawe
hymſelfe vnto perpetuall Solitarineſſe, was by vntymely
death preuented of hys purpoſe, and ſo diſcharged from
the burthen of all his cares: notwithſtanding, thus much by the
ſame he declared vnto others, that Solitarineſſe was the thing
he chiefly deſired, to the end therby to accompliſh that rare and

excellent worke, whiche alreadie he had then begon. What of
Horace, who writeth of himſelfe, that princely Rome did not ſo
muche delite him, as vnfrequented Tiber, or peaceable Tarent,
for as it is ſayde:

                     The muſes moſt, the pleſantwods imbrace,
                     For townes are foes, vnfit for Poets place.
                  
               
               Next, who is able at large to declare, the laudable diſpoſition
of Cicero, or the excellencie of his glorious quietneſſe? where
inuented he his lawes? Where furniſhed he his Oratour? where
deſcribed he the dueties of lyfe? where painted he out the formes
and natures of the Goddes? Where refelled he the opinion of
Soothſayers, the roote of all errour? where ſet he downe the limittes
of good and euill? or where exhorted he men to the ſtudie
of Philoſophie, but in his Solitarie places of reſt? Wherin,
to the ende his tyme might not vainely be ſpente, he applyed
both his wit and induſtrie (as himſelfe reporteth) to the exerciſe
of writing. Farther, marke alſo what Quintilian reporteth
of Demoſthenes, the greateſt Orator among the Grecians: That
feruente louer of Solitarineſſe, vſed to walke (ſayeth he) along
the coaſt of the ſea, that ſo he might acquainte his eares with
the roaring of the water, to the ende therby to embolden him
ſelfe, the better to endure the daily noyſe and murmure of hys
auditorie: this alſo (ſaith he) is that Demoſthenes, well knowen
to the world to haue painefully lerned, and that in the deſerts,
that excellent arte of oratorie, which after elſe where he practiſed
abroade in diuers notable Cities. If theſe may not ſuffiſe,
what ſay we then of Seneca? who from a towns man of Corduba.
becomming after a Citizen and famous ſenator of Rome,
wyth no ſmall ioye of minde, remembreth notwithſtanding
his Solitarie liuing in Corſica, and preferreth the baſe eſtimation
of that his quiet exile, before this the courtlike eſtate of
his troubleſome glory: for albeit, in another place he ſéeme to
ſpeake againſt Solitarineſſe, where he ſaith, that euill counſells

are there deuiſed, and ſo foorth as you haue before repeated,
yet if you marke well his words, you ſhall plainely find that
he ſpeaketh the ſame of none but of fooles, and of ſuche, as are
ouer muche ruled by their owne affections: for ſo, we are alwayes
wont (ſaith he) to directe the fearefull and dumpiſhe
perſon in his Solitarie liuing, that thereby vnaduiſedly he hurt
not himſelfe: whereby it appeareth that he permitteth not only
this life vnto others, but farther perſwadeth his friend Lucilius
to eſtéeme of the ſame, to whom he ſaieth: flée my friend
from the multitude, flée from a ſmall number, yea flée from euery
one, for I know him not in whoſe company I wold haue
thée to remaine: ſée therfore how well I iudge of thée, that I
dare aduenture to commit thée to thy ſelfe, and to the ſway of
thine owne direction. What of Scipio, he that firſt by his noble
actes and approued valor, deſerued the ſurname of Africanus?
was not he I praye you ſo greate a fauourer of this kinde of
life, that of himſelfe he was wont to ſay, that he was neuer more
leyſurleſſe than when he was full of leyſure, nor neuer leſſe alone than
when he was all alone? for, when thus he was alone, his vertue
did not reſte and languiſh in ydleneſſe, but was rather accompanied
wyth moſte commendable cares: And thoſe twoo
things, that is to ſay Reſte and want of Company, whiche vnto
others were occaſion of ſlouthfulneſſe, to this man were helps
to prouoke him vnto goodneſſe. What of Scipio hys nephew,
called alſo by the name of Affricanus, was not he likewiſe ſo
deſirous of reſt, that ofte times with Lelius he would play the
huſbandman, ofte times conferre with him abroade, and many
times wander himſelfe alone along the ſea coaſte of Italy,
where to kepe him from ydleneſſe, he would not ſticke to embaſe
that victorious hand of his, which earſt ouerthrew bothe
Carthage and Numantia, to the gathering vp of cockle ſhells and
ſtones. What of Epaminondas, with whome the whole glorye
of the Thebans was borne, and wyth whome alſo it dyed: did
not hée (who ſang very well to his inſtrument) commende and
ſette forth his Solitarie leyſure, with muſicall harmony? What

of Achilles? who thoughte the interchaungeable refreſhyng
of quietneſſe, a thing very neceſſary to eaſe hym ſometyme, from
daungerous toyle of his labourſome warfare. What of Hercules,
who in the middeſt of a deſert is ſayd to haue taken (as it
is reported in Tullie) that holeſome counſell for the direction of
his lyfe, when by fortune being brought vnto a place deuided
into two ſeuerall wayes, the one of pleaſure the other of vertue,
at length after much deliberation, deſpiſing that of pleaſure, hée
entred the way that ledde vnto vertue, whiche brought hym in
the end not onely to the toppe of humaine glory, but alſo to the
number and felowſhip of the Gods. What of Numa Pompilius?
who from a ſtraunger being called (beyond all expectation) to
the regiment of the Romaine Empire, when he bent hymſelfe to
the making of any lawes, for the better ſtay and gouernment
of his people, he woulde vſually then departe from all company,
and wythdrawe hym for a tyme vnto a deſert woode, that
was fiftéene miles diſtant or thereabouts from the Citie.
What of Auguſtus Caeſar, who alwayes wiſhed to attaine vnto
this reſt? for whatſoeuer hée thoughte of, or whatſoeuer hée
ſpake of, it was alwayes directed to this onely end: this was
the eaſe of his preſent turmoyle, this was the rewarde of hys
labours forepaſſed, and this only was his comfort in time for
to come. Yea what of Solon himſelfe, who though of hys common
wealth, he were the firſt law maker, gouernor and director,
yet in his latter age he gaue himſelfe (as we reade in Plato
his dialogue called Timeus) to a contrary ſtudy, and is alſo,
to be reckned among the number of our Solitarie perſons. But
I make I perceiue too muche haſte, I muſte therefore tourne
backe a little, for that I haue ouerſlipped the Quintians, the
Curians, the Fabricians, and many other beſides, that haue ſpente
the greateſt parte of their liues in the Countrey. If now to the
example of thoſe you wil not ſéeme to giue credite, call then to
your remembraunce our olde father Adam, the firſt of al mankinde,
and you ſhall finde, that ſo long as he liued alone, no
creature was euer more happie, and when he was decompanied,
no man was after more vnfortunate and miſerable: for alone he

ſtoode ſtedfaſt, and with company he fell headlong to deſtruction.
After whome, conſider I pray you the generall ſtate, of all
the Prophetes and Patriarches, and by them it wyll appeare,
that they neyther dwelled in Citie nor Pallace, but ſhrowded
themſelues in their homely cabines, amid the wide and open
fieldes: in whiche places, they were thought moſte worthy to
talke with God, and to receiue from him thoſe promiſes, whiche
ſince we haue ſéene fulfilled. And forget not withall, howe
ofte the ſauiour of mankinde himſelfe, went both to the mountaines,
and to the Solitarie deſertes, yea at the very tyme of hys
paſſion, when he prayed for vs ſo earneſtly to his father: by the
manner wherof he lefte vnto vs, a perfect rule and example of
life, expreſſing thereby the way that leadeth to eternall bliſſe.
Neither let this be vnknowen vnto you, that his greate forerunner
(Iohn) he I meane that with his finger pointed, at the
diuine perſon of Christe our ſauiour, made alſo his abode in the
Wilderneſſe. Laſte of all, it ſhall not be amiſſe if I put you in
minde, howe the Solitarie wooddes of Aegipt, at the imitation
of Anthonius, Hilarion, and Macarius, were after repleniſhed
with the daily reſort of moſt reuerent fathers, ſuch as thought
nothing more carefully to be ſhunned, than the troubleſome recourſe
of cōpany, to the end, that with more ſecurity they might
beſtow their time, in the only worſhip and ſeruice of God: which
maner of liuing, though many men after with great zeale purſued,
yet among the reſt, we reade the ſame to haue eſpecially
bin performed, by that wel diſpoſed father Benedictus, he whom
S. Gregory the great ſo greatly commendeth, that frō his infā
                  cy
he was a louer of vertue, & an open contemner & enimy vnto
vice: wherby, although he had already wel entred (as it may be
thought) ye right way to heauen, yet to the end, he might thereto
more ſafely attaine, he hath forſooke Rome & Nurſia, of y• which,
in the one he was brought vp, in the other borne, ſo y• by by cuſtome
& nature, he had good occaſion to loue thē both, & wholy be
took himſelf to end y• reſt of his life, amid y• ſacred & Solitary caues:
where, how vertuouſly he liued, I néed not I hope at al to
relate, foraſmuch as diuers wel approued writers, togither wt 
                  
generall good reporte, haue ſufficiently from time to time declared
the ſame: with the remembraunce of whome, I thinke
beſt at this tyme to leaue, for that, it wold be too long I ſée to
repeate, the multitude of thoſe that from that time hither haue
followed his ſteps, and haue bene earneſtly perſwaded, partly
by example, partely by nature, and partly by diuine inſpiration,
to withdrawe themſelues from the daily troubles and vexation
of the worlde. Nowe therefore, as touching the farther
commendation of Solitarineſſe, which hathe already bene confirmed,
firſt by argumentes and after by examples, I haue
my friendes no more to ſaye, but onely that it ſéemeth a verye
heauenly matter, and therefore, not without greate cauſe, may
it well be named a ſingular life: the whiche, that it is in truthe
the very ſole and onely lyfe vnto all other liues, the wordes of
Cicero may very well teſtifye. This our life (ſayth he) whiche
is called life, is indéede death, but that other is the only life that
is apte for all goodneſſe, a life that amendeth our manners, ſubdueth
our affections, purgeth our offences, abateth oure vices,
and encreaſeth oure Vertues: A life that is the mother of
Philoſophie, the helper of Poetrie, the reueler of Propheſie, yea
the onely mainteiner of all deuotion and holineſſe: And a life to
make ſhorte, that of all other liues is moſt Angelicall, and nigh
                  
                     •
                  ſt
reſembling to that ioyfull and heauenly life, to the whyche
we all deſire to attaine. But what ſay you 
                     〈◊〉
                   the laſte to this
matter O Tales, for I well perceyue that Lyſippus, notwythſtanding
all theſe arguments alledged, is no whit yet remoued
from his former opinion.
            
            
               TALES.
               Full well in good ſooth you
haue both (my friendes) defended your opinions, and full learnedly
and liberally haue you diſputed of that whiche was firſte
propoſed, in ſuch ſorte, as for my own part I know not where
any thing may be added to that whiche to ſpoken. Wherein,
for that you both diſagrée in opinion (according to the manner
of all diſputers) to the ende, we may therefore finiſh this
doubtfull controuerſie, regard is to be had both of the time and
the nature of eche man. For in truth, there are thrée kindes of

                  Solitarineſſe.
                  Three kyndes
of Solitarineſſe. The firſte of Time, as the quietneſſe of the night,
whiche nature hath equally allotted all creatures, to the ende
thereby, to refreſhe themſelues after their former labour: the
ſeconde of Place, and the third of the Minde. To the laſte recited,
whereof ought all men doubtleſſe to be perſwaded, the
meaning of whyche is no more in effect, but that they dwell
with themſelues, and conuerſe but with fewe, and thoſe alſo
that are good: for nothing more doth comforte the minde, than
the faithfull familiaritie and agrement of good men. The Solitarineſſe
of place, is to be commended only vnto thoſe, that haue
the knowledge howe to vſe the ſame: for it is vnpoſſible, althoughe
we haue all one certaine and preſcribed ende of oure
liues, yet that all men ſhoulde therefore followe, one and the
ſame very trade of liuing. In the choice whereof, eche man
ought firſt to be well aduiſed, both howe nature hathe framed
him, and how after he hath diſpoſed himſelfe: For ſome there
are to whom the Solitarie life is more painfull than death, and
to whome it will alſo be occaſion of death, which only hapneth
to thoſe that are vnſkilfull, chiefly, if they want a companion
wyth whome they may chatte, bycauſe, they can neither talke
with themſelues, nor conferre wyth their bookes, but as fruitleſſe
blockes, remayne altogyther dumbe and vnprofitable.
Neyther is it at all any maruayle, for Solitarineſſe wythoute
learning is a very baniſhment, or rather a priſon: but, if ſo thou
haue learning, then will it ſéeme as pleaſaunt vnto thée as thy
natiue ſoile, ioyned with abundaunce of libertie and delight.
This is the reſt that by the ſentence of Cicero is ſo plainly verified,
where he aſketh, What is ſweter than learned reſt? And to
the ſame ende I take it this ſaying of Seneca may be alſo applyed:
That reſt without learning is as ill as death, and the very ſepulture
of a liue man. This Solitarineſſe of place, is therefore I
ſay to be preferred vnto ſtudents, & to ſuch only as are thought
to be wiſe: and yet no otherwyſe, but that when néede ſhall
require, they may againe come abroade, refuſing no peril, either
for the ſafetie of their countrey, or for the ſau
                     •
                  ga
                     •••
                   of

their friendes. For, it were a thing vniuſt, that any man ſhuld
preſerue his life, giuen him firſt by nature for the only vſe and
behoofe of his countrey, ſo long till ſhe enforce him againe for to
leaue it: and ſhould not as willingly be content to beſtowe it in
the defence of his countrey, when by vrgent occaſion ſhée requireth
the ſame, and when with honour he may gloriouſly loſe it,
but ſhall rather chooſe to liue in ſhame and reproche, than to dye
with fame and euerlaſting renowne. A wiſe man therfore ought
chieflye to knowe, howe beſte to applye bothe time and place,
aſwell vnto Solitarineſſe as to Societie, following therin as nere
as he may, the example of ſuche as in former time, haue to his
knowledge performed the like.
            
            
               LYSIPPVS,
               you haue ſa
                     •
                  de
herein (my friend) bothe well and truely, for we ſéemed I perceiue
to contend, of the diuerſity of time and alſo of place, and
yet wée haue thereof, made all this while no mention at all:
whiche deſtinction wel noted, woulde ſoone haue ended our former
controuerſie.
            
            
               EVDOXVS.
               True it is Lyſippus, and therfore,
let vs now make an end, for the night draweth on apace,
warning vs therby to leaue our boate, and to depart eche one
to his lodging till to morrowe: at what time, and daily hereafter,
ſo long as by occaſion we ſhall continue togither, we will
againe beginne to deale in theſe cauſes, eſpecially ſuche, as
ſhall be thought to containe anye pointe of inſtruction,
tending either to the ſtaye of our affections, of our
feare or deſire, and whereby alſo we maye
gather beſte fruite, out of the holeſome
rules add prece
                     •
                  tes of
Philoſophye.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   