
      
         
            
            THE
MASQVE
OF THE INNER
TEMPLE AND GRAYES
INNE: GRAYES INNE AND THE INNER
TEMPLE, PRESENTED BEFORE
his Maiestie, the Queenes Maiestie, the Prince, Count
Palatine and the Lady Elizabeth their Highnesses, in
the Banquetting house at White-hall on Saturday
the twentieth day of Februarie,
1612.
            By FRANCIS BEAMONT, Gent.
            
               AT LONDON,
Imprinted by F. K. for George Norton, and are to be sold
at his shoppe neere Temple-bar.
         
         
            
            THE
MASQVE
OF THE INNER
TEMPLE AND GRAYES
INNE: GRAYES INNE AND THE INNER
TEMPLE, PRESENTED BEFORE
his Maiestie, the Queenes Maiestie, the Prince, Count
Palatine and the Lady Elizabeth their Highnesses, in
the Banquetting house at White-hall on Saturday
the twentieth day of Februarie,
1612.
            
               AT LONDON,
Imprinted by F. K. for George Norton, and are to be sold
at his shoppe neere Temple-bar.
         
         
            
            
            THE MASKE OF
THE INNER TEMPLE AND
GRAYES INNE, GRAYES INNE
and the Inner Temple, presented before his
Maiestie, the Queenes, &c.
            
               THis Maske was appointed
to haue beene presented
the Shroue-tuesday before,
at which time the Maskers
with their attendants
and diuers others gallant
young Gentlemen of both houses, as their
conuoy, set forth from Winchester house
which was the Rende vous towards the
Court, about seuen of the clocke at night.
            This voyage by water was performed in
great Triumph. The gentlemen Maskers being
placed by themselues in the Kings royall
barge with the rich furniture of state, and adorned
with a great number of lights placed

in such order as might make best shew.
            They were attended with a multitude of
barges and gallies, with all variety of lowde
Musicke, and seuerall peales, of Ordnance.
And led by two Admiralls.
            Of this shew his Maiesty was gratiously
pleased to take view, with the Prince, the
Count Palatine, and the Lady Elizabeth:
their highnesses at the windowes of his priuy
gallerie vpon the water, till their landing,
which was at the priuy staires; where they
were most honorablie receiued by the Lord
Chamberlaine, and so conducted to the
Vestry.
            The Hall was by that time filled with company
of very good fashion, but yet so as a very
great number of principall Ladies, and other
noble persons were not yet come in,
wherby it was foreseen that the roome would
be so scanted as might haue been inconuenient.
And there vpon his Maiesty was most
gratiously pleased with the consent of the
gentlemen Maskers, to put off the night vntil
Saturday following with this special fauour
and priuiledge, that there should bee no let,

as to the outward ceremony of magnificence
vntill that time.
            At the day that it was presented, there was
a choice roome reserued for the gentlemen,
of both their houses, who comming in
troope about seuen of the clocke, receiued
that speciall honor and noble fauour, as to
be brought to their places, by the
Right Honourable the Earle of
Northampton, Lord Priuie
Seale.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE WORTHIE
SIR FRANCIS BACON, HIS MAIESTIES
SOLLICITOR GENErall,
and the graue and learned Bench of
the anciently allied houses of Grayes
Inne, and the Inner Temple, the Inner
Temple, and Grayes Inne.
            
               YEe that spared no time nor trauell, in the
setting forth, ordering, & furnishing of
this Masque, being the first fruits of honor
in this kinde, which these two societies
haue offered to his Maiestie: VVill not thinke
much now to looke backe vpon the effects of your
owne care and worke: for that whereof the successe
was then doubtfull, is now happily performed and
gratiously accepted. And that which you were then
to thinke of in straites of time, you may now peruse
at leysure: And you Sir Francis Bacon especially,
as you did then by your countenance, and louing
affection aduance it, so let your good word grace it,
and defend it, which is able to adde value to the
greatest, and least matters.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE DEVISE OR
ARGVMENT OF THE
MASQVE.
            
               
                  IVpiter and Iuno willing to doe
honour to the Mariage of the
two famous Riuers Thamesis
and Rhone, imploy their Messengers
seuerally, Mercurie and
Iris for that purpose. They meete and contend:
then Mercurie for his part brings forth
an Anti-masque all of Spirits or diuine Natures;
but yet not of one kinde or liuerie (because
that had been so much in vse heretofore)
but as it were in consort like to broken
Musicke: And preseruing the proprietie of
the deuise; for that Riuers in nature are
maintained either by Springs from beneath,
or Shewers from aboue: He raiseth foure of
the Naiades out of the Fountaines, and bringeth

downe fiue of the Hyades out of the
Cloudes to daunce
                  •
                hereupon Iris scoffes at
Mercurie for that hee had deuised a daunce
but of one Sexe, which could haue no life: but
Mercurie who was prouided for that exception,
and in token that the Match should be
blessed both with Loue and Riches calleth
forth out of the Groues foure Cupids, and
brings downe from Iupiters Altar foure
Statuaes of gold and siluer to daunce with the
Nymphes and Starres: in which daunce the
Cupids being blinde, and the Statuaes hauing
but halfe life put into them, and retaining still
somewhat of their old nature, giueth fit occasion
to new and strange varieties both in
the Musick and paces. This was the first Anti-masque.
            Then Iris for her part in scorne of this
high-flying deuise, and in token that the
Match shall likewise be blessed with the loue
of the Common People, calles to Flora her
confederate (for that the Moneths of flowers
are likewise the Moneths of sweete shewers,
and Raine bowes) to bring in a May daunce
or Rurall daunce, consisting likewise not of

any suted persons, but of a confusion or commixture
of all such persons as are naturall
and proper for Countrey sports. This is the
second Anti-masque.
            Then Mercurie and Iris after this vying
one vpon the other, seeme to leaue their contention;
and Mercurie by the consent of Iris
brings downe the Olympian Knights, intimating
that Iupiter hauing after a long discontinuance
reuiued the Olympian games, and
summoned thereunto from all parts the liueliest
& actiuest persons that were had enioyned
them before they fell to their games to
doe honour to these Nuptials. The Olympian
games portend to the Match, Celebritie,
Victorie, and Felicitie. This was the maine
Masque.
            The Fabricke was a Mountaine with two
descents, and seuered with two Trauesses.
            
               At the entrance of the King.
               THe first Trauers was drawne, and the
lower descent of the Mountaine discouered,
which was the Pendant of a hill to

life, with diuers boscages and Grouets vpon
the steepe or hanging grounds thereof; and
at the foote of the Hill, foure delicate Fountaines
running with water and bordered with
sedges and water flowers.
               
                  Iris first appeared; and presently after
Mercurie striuing to ouertake her.
               
                  Iris apparelled in a robe of discoulored
Taffita figured in variable colours, like the
Raine-bowe, a cloudie wreath on her head,
and Tresses.
               
                  Mercurie in doublet and hose of white
Taffita, a white hat, wings on his shoulders
and feet, his Caduceus in his hand, speaking
to Iris as followeth:
               
                  MERCVRIE.
                  STay, Stay.
                  Stay light foot Iris, for thou striuest in vaine,
                  My wings are nimbler then thy feete.
               
               
                  IRIS.
                  Away,
                  Dissembling Mercury; my messages
                  Aske honest haste, not like those wanton ones
                  Your thundring father sends.
               
               
                  
                  MERCVRIE.
                  Stay foolish Maid,
                  Or I will take my rise vpon a hill,
                  When I perceiue thee seated in a cloud,
                  In all the painted glorie that thou hast,
                  And neuer cease to clap my willing wings,
                  Till I catch hold of thy discolour'd Bow,
                  And shiuer it beyond the angry power
                  Of your curst Mistresse, to make vp againe.
               
               
                  IRIS.
                  
                     Hermes forbeare, Iuno will chide and strike;
                  Is great Ioue iealous that I am imploy'd
                  On her loue errands? she did neuer yet
                  Claspe weake mortalitie in her white armes,
                  As he hath often done: I onely come
                  To celebrate the long wisht Nuptials,
                  Heere in Olympia, which are now perform'd
                  Betwixt two goodly Riuers, which haue mixt
                  Their gentle rising waues, and are to grow
                  Into a thousand streames, great as themselues;
                  I need not name them, for the sound is lowde
                  In heauen and earth, and I am sent from her
                  The Queene of Mariage, that was present heere,
                  And smil'd to see them ioyne, and hath not chid
                  Since it was done: good Hermes let me go.
               
               
                  
                  MERCVRIE.
                  Nay you must stay, Ioues message is the same,
                  Whose eies are lightning, and whose voice is thunder,
                  Whose breath is any winde, he will, who knowes
                  How to be first on earth as well as heauen.
               
               
                  IRIS.
                  But what hath he to doe with Nuptiall rights?
                  Let him keepe state vpon his starry throne,
                  And fright poore mortals with his thunderbolts,
                  Leauing to vs the mutuall darts of eyes.
               
               
                  MERCVRIE.
                  Alas, when euer offer'd he t'abridge
                  Your Ladies power, but onely now in these,
                  Whose match concernes his generall gouernment?
                  Hath not each god a part in these high ioyes?
                  And shall not he the King of gods presume
                  Without proud Iunoes licence? let her know
                  That when enamor'd Ioue first gaue her power
                  To linke soft hearts in Vndissolued bonds,
                  He then foresaw, and to himselfe reseru'd
                  The honor of this Mariage: thou shalt stand
                  Still as a Rocke, while I to blesse this feast
                  Will summon vp with my all charming rod,
                  The Nymphes of fountains, from whose watry locks
                  Hung with the dew of blessing and encrease,
                  The greedie Riuers take their nourishment.
                  
                     You Nymphes, who bathing in your loued springs,
                  Beheld these Riuers in their infancie,
                  And ioy'd to see them, when their circled heads
                  Refresht' the aire, and spread the ground with flowers:
                  Rise from your Wells, and with your nimble feete
                  Performe that office to this happie paire;
                  Which in these plaines, you to Alpheus did;
                  When passing hence through many seas vnmixt,
                  He gain'd the fauour of his Arethuse.
                  
               
               Immediatlie vpon which speech, foure
Naiades arise gentlie out of their seuerall
Fountaines, and present themselues
vpon the Stage, attired in long
habits of sea-greene Taffita, with bubbles
of Christall intermixt with powdering
of siluer resembling drops of
water
                     •
                   blewish Tresses on their heads,
garlands of Water-Lillies. They fall
into a Measure, daunce a little, then
make a stand.
               
                  IRIS.
                  IS Hermes growne a louer, by what power
                  Vnknowne to vs, calls he the Naiades?
                  
               
               
                  
                  MERCVRIE.
                  Presumptuous Iris, I could make thee daunce
                  Till thou forgott'st thy Ladies messages,
                  And rann'st backe crying to her, thou shalt know
                  My power is more, onely my breath, and this
                  Shall moue fix'd starres, and force the firmament
                  To yeeld the Hyades, who gouerne showers,
                  And dewic clouds, in whose dispersed drops
                  Thou form'st the shape of thy deceitfull Bow.
                  You maids, who yearely at appointed times,
                  Aduance with kindly teares, the gentle flouds,
                  Descend, and powre your blessing on these streames,
                  Which rolling downe from heauen aspiring hils,
                  And now vnited in the fruitfull vales;
                  Beare all before them rauisht with their ioy,
                  And swell in glorie till they know no bounds.
               
               Fiue Hyades descend softly in a cloud from
the firmament, to the middle part of
the hill, apparelled in skie-coloured
Taffita robes, spangled like the Heauens,
golden Tresses, and each a faire
Starre on their head; from thence descend
to the Stage, at whose sight the
Naiades seeming to reioyce, meete
and ioyne in a dance.
               
                  
                  IRIS.
                  GReat witte and power hath Hermes to contriue
                  A liuelesse dance, which of one sexe consists.
               
               
                  MERCVRIE.
                  Alas poore Iris, Venus hath in store
                  A secret Ambush of her winged boyes,
                  Who lurking long within these pleasant groues;
                  First strucke these Louers with their equall darts,
                  Those Cupids shall come forth, and ioyne with these,
                  To honor that which they themselues begun.
               
               Enter foure Cupids from each side of the
Boscage, attired in flame coloured Taffita
close to their bodie, like naked
Boyes, with Bowes, Arrowes, and wings
of gold; Chaplets of flowers on their
heads, hoodwinckt with Tiffiny scarfs,
who ioyne with the Nymphes and the
Hyades in another daunce. That ended,
Iris speakes.
               
                  IRIS.
                  BEhold the Statuaes which wise Vulcan plac'd
                  Vnder the Altar of Olympian Ioue,
                  
                  
                     Shall daunce for ioy of these great Nuptialls:
                  And gaue to them an Artificiall life,
                  See how they moue, drawne by this heauenly ioy,
                  Like the wilde trees, which follow'd Orpheus Harpe.
               
               The Statuaes enter, supposed to be before
descended from Ioues Altar, and to
haue been prepared in the couert with
the Cupids, attending their call.
               These Statuaes were attired in cases of
gold and siluer close to their bodie, faces,
hands and feete, nothing seene but gold and
siluer, as if they had been solid Images of
mettall, Tresses of haire as they had been of
mettall imbossed, girdles and small aprons
of oaken leaues, as if they likewise had been
carued or molded out of the mettall: at their
comming, the Musicke changed from Violins
to Hoboyes, Cornets, &c. And the ayre
of the Musicke was vtterly turned into a soft
time, with drawing notes, excellently expressing
their natures, and the Measure likewise
was fitted vnto the same, and the Statuaes placed
in such seuerall postures, sometimes all
together in the Center of the daunce, and

sometimes in the foure vtmost Angles, as was
very gracefull, besides the noueltie and so
concluded the first Anti-masque.
               
                  MERCVRIE.
                  ANd what will Iunoes Iris do for her?
               
               
                  IRIS.
                  Iust match this shew; or my Inuention failes,
                  Had it beene worthier, I would haue inuok'd
                  The blazing Comets, Clouds and falling Starres,
                  And all my kindred Meteors of the Ayre
                  To haue excell'd it, but I now must striue
                  To imitate Confusion, therefore thou
                  Delightfull Flora, if thou euer felt'st
                  Encrease of sweetnesse in those blooming plants,
                  On which the hornes of my faire bow decline;
                  Send hither all the Rurall company,
                  Which decke the May-games with their Countrey sports;
                  
                     Iuno will haue it so.
               
               The second Anti-masque rush in, daunce
their Measure, and as rudely depart;
consisting of a Pedant May Lord, May Lady, Seruingman, Chambermaide, A Countrey Clowne, or Shepheard, Countrey Wench, An Host, Hostesse, A Hee Baboone, Shee Baboone, A Hee Foole, Shee Foole vshering
them in.
               All these persons apparelled to the life, the
Men issuing out of one side of the Boscage,
and the Woemen from the other:
the Musicke was extremely well fitted,
hauing such a spirit of Countrey iolitie
                     •
                  
as can hardly be imagined; but the
perpetuall laughter and applause was
aboue the Musicke.
               The dance likewise was of the same strain;
and the Dancers, or rather Actors expressed
euery one their part so naturally and aptly, as
when a Mans eye was caught with the one,
and then past on to the other, hee could not
satisfie himselfe which did best. It pleased his
Maiestie to call for it againe at the end, as he
did likewise for the first Anti-masque; but
one of the Statuaes by that time was vndressed.
               
                  
                  MERCVRIE.
                  
                     IRis we striue,
                  Like windes at libertie, who should do worst
                  Ere we returne. If Iuno be the Queene
                  Of Mariage, let her giue happie way
                  To what is done, in honor of the State
                  She gouernes.
               
               
                  IRIS.
                  
                     Hermes, so it may be done
                  Meerely in honor of the State, and these
                  That now haue prou'd it, not to satisfie
                  The lust of Iupiter, in hauing thankes
                  More then his Iuno, if thy snakie rod
                  Haue power to search the heauens, or found the sea,
                  Or call together all the ends of earth,
                  To bring in any thing that may do grace
                  To vs, and these; do it, we shall be pleas'd.
               
               
                  MERCVRY.
                  Then know that from the mouth of Ioue himselfe,
                  Whose words haue wings, and need not to be borne;
                  I tooke a message, and I bare it through
                  A thousand yeelding clouds, and neuer stai'd
                  Till his high will was done: the Olympian games
                  Which long haue slept, at these wish'd Nuptials,
                  He pleas'd to haue renew'd and all his Knights
                  Are gathered hither, who within their tents
                  
                     Rest on this hill, vpon whose rising head.
                  Behold Ioues Altar, and his blessed Priests
                  Mouing about it: come you holy men,
                  And with your voices draw these youthes along,
                  That till Ioues musicke call them to their games,
                  Their actiue sports may giue a blest content
                  To those, for whom they are againe begun.
               
            
            
               The Maine Masque.
               THe second Trauers is drawne, and the
higher ascent of the Mountaine is discouered;
wherein vpon a leuell after a great
rise of the Hill, were placed two Pauilions:
open in the front of them, the Pauilions were
to sight as of cloth of gold, and they were
trimmed on the inside with rich Armour and
Militarie furniture hanged vp as vpon the
walles; and behind the Tents there were represented
in prospectiue, the tops of diuers
other Tents, as if it had been a Campe. In
these Pauilions were placed fifteene Olympian
Knights, vpon seates a little imbowed neere
the forme of a Croisant, and the Knights appeared
first, as consecrated persons all in
vailes, like to Coapes, of siluer Tiffinie, gathered,

and falling a large compasse about
them, and ouer their heads high Miters with
long pendants behind falling from them; the
Miters were so high, that they receiued their
hats and feathers, that nothing was seene but
vaile: in the midst betweene both the Tents
vpon the very top of the hill, being a higher
leuell then that of the Tents, was placed Iupiters
Altar gilt, with three great Tapers vpon
golden Candlesticks burning vpon it: and
the foure Statuaes, two of gold, and two of
siluer, as supporters, and Iupiters Priests in
white robes about it.
               Vpon the sight of the King, the vailes of
the Knights did fall easilie from them, and
they appeared in their owne habit.
            
            
               The Knight's attire.
               ARming doublets of Carnation satten
embrodered with Blazing Starres of siluer
plate, with powderings of smaller Starres
betwixt; gorgets of siluer maile; long hose of
the same, with the doublets laide with siluer

lace spangled, and enricht with embroderie
betweene the lace; Carnation like stockins
imbrodered all ouer; garters and roses sutable;
Pumpes of Carnation satten imbrodered
as the doublets; hats of the same stuffe
and embroderie cut like a helmet before, the
hinder part cut into Scallops, answering the
skirts of their doublets; the bands of the hats
were wreathes of siluer in forme of garlands
of wilde Oliues, white feathers with one fall
of Carnation; Belts of the same stuffe and embrodered
with the doublet; Siluer swords;
little Italian bands and cuffes embrodered
with siluer faire long Tresses of haire.
            
            
               The Priests habits.
               LOng roabes of white Taffita; long white
heads of haire: The high-Priest a cap of
white silke shagge close to his head, with two
labels at the eares, the midst rising in forme
of a Pyramis, in the top thereof a branch of
siluer, euery Priest playing vpon a Lute:
twelue in number.
               
                  The Priests descend and sing this song
following; after whom the Knights likewise
descend
                     •
                   first laying aside their
vailes
                     •
                   belts, and swords.
               
                  The first Song.
                  SHake off your heauy traunce,
                  And leape into a daunce,
                  Such as no mortals vse to treade,
                  Fit only for Apollo
                  
                  To play to, for the Moone to lead,
                  And all the Starres to follow.
               
               The Knighs by this time are all descended
and fallen into their place, and then
daunce their first Measure.
               
                  The second Song.
                  ON blessed youthes, for loue doth pause
                  Laying aside his grauer lawes
                  For this deuice,
                  And at the wedding such a paire,
                  Each daunce is taken for a praier,
                  Each song a sacrifice.
               
               
                  The Knights daunce their second Measure.
               
                  The third Song.
                  Single.
                  MOre pleasing were these sweet delights,
                  If Ladies mou'd as well as Knights;
                  Runne eu'ry one of you and catch
                  A Nymph in honor of this match;
                  And whisper boldly in her eare,
                  Ioue will but laugh, if you forsweare.
               
               
                  All.
                  And this daye's sinnes he doth resolue
                  That we his Priests should all absolue.
               
               The Knights take their Ladies to daunce
with them Galliards, Durets, Corantoes,
&c. and leade them to their places.
Then loude Musicke sound's, supposed
to call them to their Olympian
games.
               
                  The fourth Song.
                  YE should stay longer if we durst,
                  Away, alas that he that first
                  
                     Gaue Time wilde wings to fly away,
                  Hath now no power to make him stay.
                  But though these games must needs be plaid,
                  I would this Paire, when they are laid,
                  And not a creature nie them,
                  Could catch his scythe, as he doth passe,
                  And cut his wings, and breake his glasse,
                  And keepe him euer by them.
               
               The Knights daunce their parting Measure
and ascend, put on their Swords and
Belts; during which time, the Priests
sing the fifth and last Song.
               
                  PEace and silence be the guide
                  To the Man, and to the Bride,
                  If there be a ioy yet new
                  In mariage, let it fall on you,
                  That all the world may wonder.
                  If we should stay, we should doe worse,
                  And turne our blessing to a curse,
                  By keeping you asunder.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   