
      
         
            
            
            THE IVBILE OF BRITANE.
            By Lodowik Lloid Esquier.
            
               LONDON Printed by Thomas Purfoot. 1607.
         
         
            
            
            To the most Noble Prince Henrie by the grace of God, Prince of Great Britaine.
            
            
               
                  ROscius the Romane Tragedian (most noble Prince) contending with Cicero the Orator, which of them both should perswade most people, either Roscius with his motions, and gestures of his body; or Cicero with varietie, and copy of his tongue. This hath been in exercise in Greece much vsed; and now in Rome more: but of such motions and gestures of men, that can speake with their hands, with their eies, with their shoulders, and with their feet, Salomon bids vs to take heed, that will speake like Aristippus to Dionisius heeles.
            Such were they that held their heads on the left side, like King Philip of Macedon, while Philip liued: such were they after Philip, that like Alexander his Sonne with their bushes and standing haires, would be called Opisthocomae, because Alexander was so, & now too many such, like the Courtiers of Meroe in Ethiope, where if their King halt, they will also halt, in such sort, that Cirses and Calipso could not make such a Metamorphosis of Vlisses men, as men make of themselues.
            There was then in Rome but one bird that was taught to say, Aue Caesar Imperator: one bird in Carthage to say, Deus est hanno: and one bird in all Greece, that was taught to say, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               : but not onely these flattering fowles fledde from Rome, from Carthage, and from Greece, to Great Britane; of whom we may now say, as Cicero said then of the like, Quibus credamus, nescimus.
            
            
               But also of late such Rauens and Vultures, that salute vs with their tongues, and say, Aue; and with their hearts, Caue, which if their bodies were opened, as the Athenians did Aristomenes, or as the Lacedemonians did Hermogenes, their hearts should bee found, as their hearts were, pilosa & hispida, full of haires and thornes.
            In the time of Torquine the proud, there was in Rome but one Serpent that could bark like a dogge, and one dogge that could speake like a man, but now so many barking Serpents in Rome, & so many speaking dogs out of Rome, that, Quos fugiamus, ignoramus.
            
            But such are the fruits of some religion, that as then in Egypt, they had their Sphinxes in their temples, to expound their darke and obscure Diuinitie full of Oracles: so now they haue in Rome, not onely Egyptian Sphinxes in their temples, but also Corinthian Sphinxes in their studies, such as Cicero charged Hortensius to haue in his house to plead his causes.
            But as then many Philosophers went from Greece to India, and to Ethiope, to see Sacerdotes solis, and the most famous table of the Son, in Sabulo, and to heare Hiarchas lectures of the nature and motions of the starres, and of Tantalus well. So also many now goe from Great Britane to Rome, not as Appollonius the Philosopher went from Greece to India, to heare the Gymnosophists: but as Saul went from Hierusalem to Damasco, for commission and authoritie to kill and murther Christians, and to persecute Kingdomes, and Countreys.
            
               One of your Maiesties most humble Britanes, LODOVVIK LLOID.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The Iubile of Brittane.
            
               
                  Coelum coeli domino &c. The Heauens is the Lord; and the Earth he gaue to the children of men; to the land of Chanaan was giuen to Abraham and to his seed,Deut. 2. from the Iebusites, Heathites, Amalekites and others; the land of the Gyaunts to the children of Lot,
               
                  The Lord giueth lands and habitations to men.
                to Moab, and to Ammon; and the Lord gaue Mount Seir to the children of Esau, with a strict commaundement to Moses and Ioshua, not to trouble or vexe them.
            Gyauntes dwelt in Mount Seir before the Edomites time, whome the Edomites called Horims, whom the children of Esau destroyed,
                  Gyaunts dwelt in the land of Seir, of Moab, and of Ammon. and dwelt after them in Mount Seir; and so the land of Moab was inhabited first by Gyaunts named Emims, engendred of the monstrous brood of Enachims, as it seemed by Og King of Basan, whose bed was

nyne Cubites long.
            And againe, Gyaunts whome the Ammonites called Zomines, dewlt in the land of Ammon before the Ammonites, and all the land of Basan was called terra Gygantum vntill Lots time, to whome, and to his children the land of Gyaunts was giuen.
            
               
                  One language continued in the Patriarchs time vntill Nymrod.
               Domini est terra, the earth is the Lord, and he gaue it (as in the tenth of Genesis, by Moses is set downe) to the children of Noah, for from Adam to Nimrod 1800. yeares was but one Nation, and one language, which was at the building of the Tower of Babilon confounded, and deuided at that time vnto 72. languages, so many were the builders of the Tower;Gen. 11. hence comes the antiquities of all Nations and people.
            
               
                  The Schithians and the Athenians brag of their antiquitie. Iustine 2. Hist.
               Notwithstanding the Scithians bragge, that they are as auncient as the Scithian oakes, and therefore the old Scithians doe were Akornes in their caps, for a iust remembrance of the same.
            The Athenians saye, that they bee Terriginae borne ex attica terra, and therefore weare Grashoppers in the haires of their heads, in token of the same.
            The Argiues as old as the Moone, and weare the likenes of the Moone vpon their shooes, in memorie of that; and so the Egiptians with the old Phrigians contend about their antiquity.Herodot. 2
            
            But this little treatise is not to entreate of antiquitie, which is full of errours, but of the Iubile

               Brittane, which ought to bee full of ioyes, with thanksgiuing.
            A yeare of Iubile with the Iewes,
                  A yeare of Iubile among the Iewes.
                was a yeare of liberty, free from all bondage and seruice, a yeare full of ioyes and myrth, and to make feasts in remembrance of God his goodnes and loue towards his people, which was euery fifty yeare.
            Our great Iubile in England was iust vpon the fifty yeare,
                  The Iubile in great Brittane.
                which was between Edward the sixt, and Iames the sixt now our King, at his first arriuall vnto England.
            No greater Iubile could be in Iudah, than in the time of young Iosias, who purified Hierusalem and all his Kingdomes from jmages and jdols,Oliuet called the Mount of corruption.
                from groues and supersticious alters in Mount Olyuet, burned, brake them, and threw their ashes into the riuer Cedron.
            
            Neither can there be a greater Iubile now in great Brittane, thē to haue such a godly religious King after so good and so religious a Queene, whose fame shall neuer die in Europe,
               
                  Wicked people.
                let the wicked speake what they list, whose lust is alwaies to speake euill of good and godly Princes.
            They haue also their Iubile like the Egiptians,
               
                  The Iubile of Egipt. whose Iubile was in drowning the children of Israel in Nilus, like the Romanes, whose Iubileis were to persecute the Christians with fire: for as God reuenged the Hebrewes vpon the Egiptians with ten such plagues that were neuer heard, nor read the like;
                  The Iubile of Rome. so the Romans reuenged the Egiptians

vpon the Christians with tenne such terrible persecutions of tenne Tyrants, as could be most horribly inuented.
            
               
                  Great controuersie between fire and water.
               Great controuersie was euer betweene the Egiptians and the Romanes about fire and water; in Egipt they are most merrie, when the whole Land of Egipt is couered ouer with the water of Nilus, that is, the great Iubile in Egipt.
            
            The great Iubile in Rome, is of such fire as they haue in Scythia;Herod. lib. 4. where wood is scant, they take the skin from the flesh of their beasts, & take the flesh from the bones, and with the bones of their beasts, they boyle their meat: such fire was long vsed in Rome, that with bones and flesh▪ they burned as godly and learned men, as were in Europe.
            
            But this quarrell betweene Fire and Water was fully ended by a Persian Priest,
                  Heidfeld: de diis ca. 2. and an Egiptian Priest, about their countrey Gods. The Priest of Persia sayd, that his God would deuoure and consume all other Gods. The Egiptian Priest denied that, so Ad certamen veniunt: The one came with fire the God of Persia; the other came with a vessell of water, and hanged it on the fire, and boared diuers holes through the Vessell, and stopt the holes with waxe: the Persian Priest expected when the Fire would burne the Vessell, and the Egiptian Priest expected when the waxe would melt, and the water would runne out and quench the fire; thus both expecting the triall of

their Gods, the waxe melted, and the water flusht out through diuers and sundry holes, and so presently quenched the fire, so that the iudgement was giuen, Vicit Deus Egiptius: but if it had been a Romane Fire, neither the Riuer Nilus, nor the Ocean Sea could quench it.
            Certaine people saith Pomp. Mela,
               
                  De situ orbis. ca. 10. 
               quibus ignis ignotus fuit, who when they came where fire was, they thought it was sweet and pleasant, and would often embrace it in their armes, vntill the flame scortcht them, for that this people knewe not what fire was; and therefore one of these, or one like them, asked Aristotle if Fire in his owne nature were hot. I doe not thinke (sayth Aristotle) that Carneades,
               
                  Carneades.
                which doubteth of euerie thing, doubteth not of that, & if you doubt of it (saith hee) put your finger into the fire, and try it.
            Surely some had the feeling of Romane fire in England, in Germanie, and in other places a long time; and of late their fire was so close kept, that it was couered ouer with the ashes of Iuniper, which as some write, keepes fire vnquenched a whole veere They sell these ashes verie deere, and to none but to their fellowes in Religion, but as Alexander Seueru spake of Thurinus, Fumo pereat, qui fumum vendit.
            
            The Monkes say, that Saint Dominicks mother, the first Frier of that Fraternity, dreamed being

with childe, that shee brought forth a great mastiue Dogge with a great fire brand in his mouth,
                  Legen. aurea.
                with the which she thought, that this Dog burned euerie Citie, Towne, or place where hee came, this dreame prooued too true in England, and in Germanie.
            
            A merrie pleasant fellow was in place, where three great learned men were, and asked them a merry question, where was the best, and deerest water sold.
            The Philosopher first, told him his opinion and sayd in Omopolio, in the wine tauerne, where water is equally mingled with wine, and equally sould with wine.
            The Phisition thought that water dearest and best,
                  Tranquil. in vespas.
                the vrine of the sicke, as Lotium vespatiani, whose filthy gaine was such, that vespasianus was called Mastix Iudeorum.
            
            The diuine sayd, that the water of repentance Lachrimae piorum was the best water, Magdelens teares in washing Christs feete vnder the table, and Peters teares of repentance; if a Iesuite had been present, he had sayd holy water, the coniured water of Rome, aqua benedicta, quae tollit omnia delicta.
            
            'The like question of the like merry fellow, who were the three greatest Conquerours in the world after they were dead.
            Some sayd, that it was the great Emperor Ziscaes skinne, who being asked at his death, how he

should be buried; after I am dead (said Zisca) pull my skinne off, and make of it a drum, that my enemies that feared my sight aliue, might feare the sound of my skinne, being dead. Aen. Syluius lib. 3. de gestis Alphon.
            
            Some sayd it was the ensigne of Alexander the Great, which was put ouer his Pauillion after Alexanders death to feare the enemie, the Images of two Lions sitting in a chaire.
            Some said, that it was the statue of the Serpent Sphinx vpon Augustus signet; and some sayd, that it was Seleucus Anchor, for all Anchors belong to all Admirals on the Seas, and therefore much feared
            Thus some said it was one thing,
                  Plini: lib: 2. cap: 9. some another, like Aristotle musing how the Riuer Euripus flowed seuen times, and eb'd seuen times in one day, and so much in the night, and yet neuer flowed nor ebbed in three dayes euerie moneth; and because Aristotle could not find out the cause therof, threw himselfe headlong into Euripus, saying, Quia te non capio, tu me capies.
            
            The like is written of Homer,
               
                  Herodot: 
                        〈◊〉
                      vita homeri Heidfield de animal. cap. 9. for that he could not satisfie himselfe of a ridiculous probleme obiected to him by poore Fisher-men, wearied his head▪ and so died; and I beleeue this probleme would haue wearied 20. Aristotles, and so many Homers, before they would finde out these three terrible dead Conquerours, to be the skinne of a sheepe, the Quill of a Goose, and the waxe of a

little Bee, Haec tria verum potiuntur, the penne, the parchment, and a little waxe.
            Many study such vaine riddles, and think themselues well learned, when they are furnished with these trifling problemes, and seeke with the Iewish Cabalists, Ex apice literarum, to make an Art, as the Iesuites and Romane Seminaries hunt after secret signification of letters, as the Bookes of the Romane Sibills, were full of mysticall Letters, and of secret significations; as three F. to signifie that Rome should bee destroyed ferro, flamma, & fame, with fire, sword, and famine.
            
               
                  August: lib: de Gram.
               Also they had three C. to note the cruell peruersnesse of Cor. Silla, Cor. Cinna, and Co
                     •
                  . Lentulus, with the which Rome should he plagued.
            We let passe the Bookes of the Sibils, and their letters, and we will speake some thing of such misterie as they put in seuerall Letters, which are more dark and obscure, than the riddle of Sphinx to Oedipus.
            
            
               
                  Heidfield de Griphis Gram: cap: 2.6.First they say, that three Letters make all bondmen free; and the same three Letters againe, make all free men bond men, which is Aue, and by conuersion of the word Aue, is Eua; and so by these two women came blessing and cursing.
            Amonge the Greekes two C. were the worst Letters,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               Caca.
            
            Amonge the Romanes two P. were the best, Papa: in the praise of which two P. many Books haue been written, and as many against him.
            
               Y Is a misticall letter Sect a bicorni,
               
                  Cic. lib. 1. offic.
                this is Phytagoras letter to note the strict & difficult way vnto vertue, and the broad and easie way vnto vi
                  •
               e; this letter Hercules and all the noble, godly, and valiant Captaines much imbraced.
            T. Is Tertullians letter,
                  Lact. Hom. 33. contra martion.
                comparing it to the Crosse, of which Ezechiell speaketh of, cap: 9. shalbe infrontibus nostris apud vera
                     •
                   Hierusalem; many of our Iesuites and Seminaries make much of this letter, with worshipping, knocking on breasts, and kneeling on knees.
            S. Litera Serpentis,
               Iud. 12. Schibboleth
                an vnhappy letter to the counterfeit Giliadites, that 42000. of them were slaine by Ieptha at the riuer Iordan, because they could not well pronounce this letter.
            Of this letter Messala Coruinas wrote a whole volume, and yet this S. litera Serpentis was not halfe so ill as double P. Papalis litera.
            
            
               Dionisius the Tyrant,
                  Plut. apoph.
                would needs among the rest, according to the custome of Siracusa, put to the lotterie per elementa literarum, and drewe out the letter M, the Siracusans laught and said it signified Morologos, no sayd Dionisius, it is Monarcha.
            
            This ambitious Tyrant sought to be a King by a letter,Dionisius sought to be a King by a letter.
                but he was banished from Syracusa, and forced to keepe schoole in Corinth, such schoolemasters are many, as Appion in Alexandria, another in Phaliscus.
            
            A. Is a complaining letter, of all the male Infants

vpon Adam, for taking the Apple at Eues hand.
            And E. is a letter exclaiming of the female infants vpon Eue,
               
                  Sapien: 7. for taking the Apple at the Serpents hand.
            And so is sayd, plorant adhuc proles, quod commisere parentes, and they haue another old verse of the same nature: A genitor dat Adam, E dedit Eua prior.
            
            R. Is canina litera, and the only letter which Demosthenes could not fully pronounce, wherein Isocrates had some aduantage of him, and yet at Rhodes Isocrates reciting an Oration of Demosthenes, the people so liked it, cried out, ô quid si illam belluam &c.
            
            But these Roman Cabalists after they had commentaried vpon letters, they goe forwarde with ioyning of letters and some number of words, as vpon the fiue vowels they make aposie to the 'mperor Maximilian, for euery vowell a word and so it makes his posie to be Aquila electa iustè, omnia vincit, a Roman poesie.
            
               Exod. 15.They willing to imitate the latter Iewes, who made the like poesie for Machabeus out of Moses poesie, quis sicut tu in dijs Iehouah, which poesie both Ioshua and Iudah vsed after Moses time.
            But what these Roman Cabalists would bring to passe, by their number of fiue I know not, as they make much of these fiue words of the virgin Mary, answering, the Angell of God sent to her

               fiat mihi secundum verbum tuum.
            
            And againe they stand much more vpon the number of the words which were but fiue, then vpon him which was Christ Iesus our sauiour, that spake these words, hoc enim est corpus meum.
            
            
               Quintilian saith,
                  Quintil: lib: 1. institut: cap: 3. that Chrisippus brought the first rodde to whippe children in schoole, trulie it might seeme so, for he makes more toyle and studie about Oracles and letters, then the great Turke did to subdue Rhodes: these childish studies are not fit for men of riper yeares.
            These be they that contend with Chrisippus to ouercome their owne shaddows, for there is not a letter in all the Alphabet, but they make such commentaries as will fill the Turks Alchoran.
            
            We will conclude and say as Plato sayd of a Cyraenian Cochman,
                  Rhodig: 9: cap: 5.6. who shewing Plato all his cunning and skill to the most he could, one asked Plato, how he liked the Cyraenyan Coachman? it cannot bee sayd Plato, that this fellow that hath such pleasures in such trifling toyes, can euer learne any great thing.
            Euen so these fellowes contend cum griphis Grāmaticis that bestow their time with such toile and trauaile about Oracles and letters, to make an art of it, it cannot bee as Plato sayd, that they will giue themselus to any great things or learne greater matters.
            A certaine country Coridon a young youth, went to Athens to learne Phylosophy, who after

hee came home, with great welcome to his friends, and kinsmen, and beeing in company where a Graecian was, his friends would haue him to speak some Greeke to the Graecian, he answered he would, and tooke a cuppe of drinke in his hand & sayd boldly to the Graecian,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               Alpha, Beta, Gamma, whereat the Graecian blusht with silence; then his countrimen & friends took this youth with clapping of hands for the victorie.
            Many went to Athens to learne Philosophye and returned to their country fooles; many went with the prodigall Sonne to trauile and see countries, but such should not be receiued into Sparta by the Law of Licurgus, lest they were in other countries taught to harme their owne countrie at home.
            A fit fable for this place, between the Nightingale and the Cuckoe, contending which of them had the sweeter voyce, they put their contention to arbitrament; the Cuckoe would haue but an Asse for his great long eares, to bee the iudge, and so by this iudge the Cuckoe had the mastery, many haue long Asses eares in giuing of iudgment for want of knowledge.
            And for that I toucht strifes and contentions which the world is full of, I thought good for mirth sake to speake of some merrie strang contention, not such contention as was betweene Cicero the Orator, and Roscius the Tragedian, which contended, whether Cicero could excell

               Roscius in coppie and variety of eloquence or Roscius exceed Cicero in motions and gestures of pronunciations.
                  Arist. lib: 7 polit. ca. 7 But a farre greater contention was between three brethren, grauia fratrum bella, soone proued between Iacob and Esau,
               Gen. 4. who contended in their mothers wombe; and between Caine & Abell, the first two brethren borne in the world.
            These three brethren contended about their Fathers testament, whose will was, that hee that prooued himselfe most beneficiall and profitable to his countrey, should be heire to his Father.
            The first was an Orator, next in nature and proportion of studie to a Lawyer, and sayd, that no Common-wealth could stand without law.
            The second brother was a Philosopher next to Diuines,
                  Heidfield
                        •
                      lib: de discordiis: cap: 22. and sayd that soules were more precious than any Common-wealth, and therefore sayd that he was the heire.
            The third brother was a Phisition, and sayd, that neither common-wealth, nor soules, vnlesse they had found & holesome bodies to liue in the Common-wealth, and to enioy cleere soules; and therefore claymed his fathers heritage. The Iudges made a demurre in law, in iudgement, and stayd to consider of so difficult a Will betweene brethren, of which Augustine saith, is most hard to iudge of.
            Yet Archidamus king of the Lacedemonians, being made an Arbitrator between two great men, and

great in fauour with the King in the like contention; doubting that hee could not please them both, but one of thē would be offended, brought them vnto a temple, and lockt the dore vpon them, charging them not to come out of the temple before they would become friends.
            Kings may commaund, but judges must iudge iustly, or else stay the matter by a demurre, as you haue heard of the three brethren or else dismisse the matter out of the court, as you shall heare of another three more difficult contention.
            A man made his Will among three Sonnes he had, and made him his heire that prooued most vngratious & wicked of the three, the one was a drunkard, the other an Adulterer, the third a Gamster and a Dicer.
            The Drunkard would haue his Fathers heritage, because he was a beast, and and not a man.
            The Adulterer would haue his fathers heritage, for that he was both man and beast.
            The third sonne claymed his Fathers patrimonie by swearing, and by blaspheming: saying, he was neither man nor beast, but a Diuell.
            There is nothing that can be more aptly compared to men, than trees: So was Nebuchadnezar, named a great tree: so Kings and Potentates of the earth to the Cedars of Libanon, the iust man to the Palme tree; the good and godly man to the Oliue tree; and the children of the godly like Oliue buds; and Christ himselfe to the Vine:

and it is also writtē, that Christ died vpon a crosse made of three kinds of trees, of the Pine-tree, the Cypresse tree, and the Cedar tree; in these trees no mothes, no vermines will breede, and that was the cause why Nu: Pompilius lawes endured 
                  •
               30. yeares written on a Cypresse table, and Platoes lawes written on Cedar.
            But Abimelechs tree was a drie gorse and a low shrub, he delighted in such trees that wold soon burn, for Abimelech was that gorse that destroyed the Sichemites, and burned Sichem their City, and sowed salt to make it for euer barren.
            
               Themistocles was wont to compare himselfe to a Plantane tree, to whom the Athenians ranne at any storme or tempest of warres, to shadow and defend them from the Persians.
            This Plantane tree was called Xerxes tree; for his broad braunches, and large bowghes, because Xerxes was wont with his armie at any hot weather to vse this tree, to defend him from the 
                  •
               on, but this Plantane might bee better called the Popes tree, than either Xerxes or Themistocles, whose bowghes and braunches shadowes more Rebels, and to whome more traytors ran for succor and help, than ran to Themistocles in 
                  〈◊〉
               .
            This tree is called in Plinie,
               
                  Plin. lib 1
                     •
                  . cap. 9. 
               Arbor, 
                     〈◊〉
                  , because L. Mutianus would often vse this 
                  ••••
               sant tree, with some Gentlemen and Roman
                  •
                Ladies feasting and banqueting vnder this tree.
            And after it was called Arbor religiosa, when

               
                  〈…〉
               ,
                  Alex: ab Alex: lib: 6: cap. 12. with the Priests of Iupiter 
               
                  〈…〉
               , and with the Vestall Virgines, 
                  〈…〉
                appointed to come 
                  〈…〉
                called, Adip
                     •
                  lis caena.
            
            This custome contin
                  •
               ed long in Rome, though the names were altered, yet the ceremonies endured, the 
                  〈…〉
                altered to a Pope, Rex sacro
                  
                     •
                  um which was chiefe Sacrificer, altered to slaughterfice
                  •
               :
                  Iupiters priests.
                Iupit
                  ••
               s preists called Flamines altered to Franciscan Friers, and the vestall virgins to lecherous Nunnes.
            And now of la
                  •
               e the names altered againe, from a Pope to a Scorpion, from Franciscan Fri
               
                  •
               rs to S
                  •
               rpen
                  ••
               , and from Nunnes to Vipers, but we shall shak
                  •
                
               
                  •
               hese Scorpions, these Serpents, and these Vipers off, as Paul did the Viper that hanged aboue his finger, this is the custome in Rome. Adipalis caena is their feast, the plantan tree i
                  •
                their temple, and the Calfe in Or
                     •
                  b is their Idoll to whome they make sacrifice, and by whose Oracles they first deceiue themselues, & then others.
            
               
                  Nisephor: lib; 12: cap. 2.
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               Al
                     •
                  xandria in Egipt, when the tēple of Sera
                  
                     •••
                  
                was destroyed, all the images were made hol
               
                  ••••
                and fast to the wall, tha
                  •
                the priests might 
                  〈◊〉
                and goe to feed the people, with such 
                  〈…〉
                speache
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                themselues,Ioseph: lib: 18. thus the priests at Delph
                     ••
                  
                in 
                  〈…〉
                of Appollo, and in the temple of Iupiter 
               
                  〈…〉
               , they haue such

drifts to make their jmages to weepe & to sweat, & the priestes themselues to speake within the hollownes of the jmages; these flattering priests be these Serpents like Lazarus doggs, soothing the Pope their master in all jdolatry, worse then Actaeons doggs in deuouring their master.
            I may not omit in this place a fit history, of a certaine Spaniard, that bragged much before Maximilian the'mperor, of 3. such strange things that the King of Spaine his master had, that all the world had not the like, a great Mountaine of Salt, a bridge that fed yearely tenne thousand of cattell, and a Citie walled about with fire.
            
               Albertus Duke of Saxonie, hearing this bragge of the Spaniard, sayd before Maximilian, that hee had in one of his Cities three greater wonders, three Monasteries, the first of Friars praedicators whose barnes were full of all kind of Corne and had no ground to tillage.
            The second Monasterie was of Franciscan Friers, whose Coffers were full of mony, without any reuenewes comming in.
            And the third of blacke Muncks, who had multitudes of children hauing no maried wiues, this is not strange in Spaine, in Rome, or in any other countries where monasteries be.
            
               Fauorinus the Philosopher wondred more of three greater wonders, than the Spaniard did of his Mountaine, of his bridge, and of his citie; or the Germane of his three Monasteries: that he

being a naturall French man should be thought a Graecian, & being an Eunuch, shuld be accounted an Adulterer, and Fauorinus being an enemie to Adrian the Emperour should liue. Heidfield de Arith. Cap. 31.
            
            But Augustine brag'd not like the Spaniard, nor like Albertus the Germane to see his three Monasteries, he agreed with both in the number of three, for Augustine wished to haue seene Paul in the face, Christ in his bodie, and the Citie of Rome in her chiefe flourishing time: but Beda wished but one, to haue seene Christ in suo decore, as Moses and Elias sawe him in Mount Tabor.
            
            We will leaue to speak further of these things and proceede forward in our Iubilies in the maner & forme of election of Kings, with their Diadems, Crownes, Scepters, and all other Regalia belonging to the inawguration of Princes: and first of the Election of Kings.
            
               
                  Sectio. 2.
               
                  HOwsoeuer Kings were elected among the Heathen, either by flying of soules, as Numa Pomp. was in Rome; or by neighing of horses, as Darius in Persia was; or otherwise by lot, as Saul was amonge the Iewes.
               
                  1. Ro. ca. 10So Saul first by casting of the 12. Tribes, and after by casting lots vpon the men, was elected the first King of Israel. And so in the new Testament

by lot, was Matthias chosen into the towme of Iudas.
               
               For God had his secret elections of Kings before they were of the people elected.
                     Secret elections.
                   So was Saul annoynted the first king of Israel by Samuel; So was Dauid secretly in the time of Saul annointed also of Samuel king of Israel; So was Ieroboam Solomons seruant, secretly in the time of Salomon annointed king of Israel by Ahias the Shunamite. And so was Iehu secretly in the time of King Ioram, annointed king of Israel by Elizeus.
               
               
                  Saul a Heard-man, seeking his Fathers Asses, found a kingdome.
               
                  Dauid a Shepheard,2. Reg. cap. 2. the least and the youngest of his Brethren, was elected king in the middest of his brethren
               
                  Ieroboam a seruant of Salomon, tooke the kingdome of Israel from Salomons sonne. And Iehu a Captaine besieging Ramah vnder the king his Maister, became king to sit in his Maisters seat.
               These kindes of election are proper to God.
               So was the election of God, of his Priests, of his Iudges, & of his Gouernors. For he called Moses a Heard-man from Madian vnto Egipt, saying, Mittam te ad Pharaonem.
               
               
                  Gedeon,
                  
                     Iudg. ca. 6. he elected from the barne a Thresher, saing, Tu liberabis Israel de manu Madian. In like manner he called Ieptha from the land of Tob.
                  
                     Iudg. ca. 11
               
               But as before is sayd howsoeuer kings are elected, the honor, dignitie, and reuerence of kings

were such, that after Iehu was annointed king sitting among other captaines, his fellow captaines, did put off their mantels, cloakes, and gownes to make him a seat like a throne for a king to sit with sounding of trumpets, and saying, God saue King Iehu. such is the Maiestie of the name of a King, that God called them, Dij terrae.
               
               
                  
                     Darius horse.
                  As soone as Darius horse neighed, the other sixe Princes which were in election with him, lighted on foote prostrating themselues vpon the ground after the Persian manner, hauing the sacred fire, and the Image of the sunne carried before him.
               What wonder is it for the Persians, Armenians, to whom it is peculiar to worship their kings as Gods, sithence king Dauid so honored his sonne Salomon being a king annointed, and sitting on his Fathers seat, in such humble sort, that being sicke and old in his bed,Iosep. lib. 7. cap. 2. bowed his head downe, in token of his submission to the King his sonne; and as Iosephus saith, Tanquam Deum coluit.
               
               
                  
                     Diador. lib. 4. cap. 1.We read, that the Kings of Aethyopia being elected by their priests, are lifted vp with such triumphes vpon their shoulders, and carried so to be seen among the people, Bacchantium more, flexis genubus vt Deum honorant..
               
               The late Emperours of Rome being elected, were hoysed vpon mens shoulders, and carried with ioyes and triumphes, the people crying out, Viuat Imperator.
               
               
                  They vsed no other ceremony in ancient time with the Kings of Fraunce, but to lift the new elected King vpon a shield to bee carried about the campe, saging, Viuele Roy. So was Clodoneus the first christian French King.
               The souldiors of Pharnaces vpon a tumult made in the campe,
                     Pharnaces King of Pontus.
                   sodenly they put a Reed into Pharnaces hand for a scepter, and proclaimed him King of Pontus. So the Iewes put a Reed into our Sauiours hand for a scepter, in most contemptuous and ridiculous manner, and kneeling sayd, Aue Rex Iudaeorum, hayle King of the Iewes.
               The souldiers of Amasis vpon a sodaine shift to make him King of Egipt,
                  
                     Amasis King of Egipt. they clapt vppon his head in stead of a crowne, a Helmet; and so proclaimed him King of Egipt.
               
               So the Iewes clapped a crowne of thornes vpon christs head; a more precious Crowne than the Amphictions of Greece sent to Alexander, or the Arabians, and Armenians sent to the Romanes.
               In diuers other countreys,
                     Diodor. lib. 4. cap. 1. they make choice of their Kings diuersly. In some place of shepheards, supposing them that haue such care of their sheepe, should haue more care ouer men. In Homer Kings are called Pastores populi,
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . as you heard of the Kings of Israel, and others.
               In other places they made choyse of them that were most rich, thinking that a rich King was best able to helpe his subiects, and defend them from

their enemies. These kinds of elections of Kings and of priests which gouerned cheefely amonge the Ethyopians and Egiptians.
               
               In Libia he onely should bee elected king, qui citissimo cursu valeret.
                  
                     In Lybia.
                   He that was most swift in running.
               In other Prouinces and countreys towards Arabia, he that excelled in strength and courage of his bodie, supposing him to be most fit and able to gouerne them. These Nations knew not God in their elections, & yet they seemed to imitate the Israelites in outward fourme.
               
                  
                     Alexi: ab. Alex. lib. 9. cap. 4.The people called Cathaei in India, made choice of him to be their King, that was most tall of stature and of goodly personage; like Xerxes King of Persia, who among so many hundred thousands, was the only goodliest and tallest man.
               
                  Saul.Or like Saul King of Israell, who was higher by the shoulders vpward, than any one man within the whole Kingdome of Israell, (for God would please the people with such a King.)
               
                  
                     In Mero Diod. lib. 4 cap. 1.In Mero the King should be of sound limmes; for the Law was that if the King should be lame, or halt, all his friends and houshold seruants should also halt and be lame. And with good iudgement should they looke of such a King, which should not limpe or be lame.
               The custome was also in Meroe, that the priests of greatest authority among the people, should come and tell the King he must needs die, so the

Gods commaunded, all the Kings obaied this Law, per responsa Deorum.
               
               Among the Sidomites they did elect no King ouer them, vnlesse he were of the Kings stocke, or haue his birth from the Kings familie; quite contrarie to the people called Taprobani in India, which suffered none to bee King among them, that were of the Kings stocke, especially if they had any children, least they should claime to be the King by heritage.
               
                  Sabaei,
                  
                     Alex: Neap lib. 4. cap. 23. a Nation in Arabia, after they had made choyse of their King, they had a Law that it was not lawfull for the King to goe out of the Metropolitan Citie Saba according to the Law, which if hee were so found,
                     Diodor. lib. 4 cap. 1. he should bee stonied to death, or should be deposed from his kingdome.
               Such was the supersticiousnes of the heathens towards their Preists, that Sabbachus King of Egipt though hee was warned in his dreame,
                     Diodor. lib. 2. cap. 2. by the God of Heliopolis, saying Nec faelix, nec diuturnum Aegipti regnum fore, vnlesse all the Priests of Egipt were slaine, and that the King withall his army should marche ouer their dead bodies.
               Thus being often troubled with this dreame,
                     Diod. lib. 4. cap. 2. the King called all the Priests of Egipt before him, and told them how hee was warned either to kill them, or else ouerthrow himselfe and his kingdome.
               This supersticious King yeilded the kingdome vnto the Priests of Egipts hands, and went to Ethiop,
                  
& by such meanes Priests grew in as much credit in Egipt, as then the prophets were in Israell. Many such Kings were either so cursed and banned in their kingdome, or else driuen out of their kingdome, and others put in by the Preist of Rome.
               Such supersticious Lawes and customes in Ethiop continued vntill one Ergamenes was elected King in the time of Pto. Philadelphus the second of that name in Egipt: this King expected the like end by the preists of Ethiop, as his predecessors had,
                     Ergamenes.
                   and therefore Ergamenes did that which Sabbachus should haue done. And as Iehu, Daniel at Babilon, and Elias did at the brooke Kison, with the slaughter of all the Prophets and priests of Baal.
               
               Now hauing somthing spoken of the Election of Kings, so likewise of the Election of the Iudges, how they were chosen and elected. God elected Moses, after he had fled from Pharo in Egipt, to lethro in Madian, from a shepheard to bee such a Prince and gouernor of such an army, as neither Cyrus led vnto Scythia,
                  
                     Cyrus. Xerxes.
                   or Xerxes vnto Greece, or Tamberlaine vnto Asia, and that in a wildernes, where neither City, Towne, or prouision could be made. Deut. 2.
               
               But the manner and forme of this Election of Moses was, by a voyce spoken vnto him out of a flame of fier, burning in a bush, and yet the bush not consumed, the voyce was, veni, mittam te ad

Pharaonem, I will send to Pharaoh, to bring my people Israel out of Egipt, that was his charge.
               And the election of Paul, who was likewise in manner and fourme chosen as Moses was.
               The election of Ioshua was like Moses, to whom the Lord sayd, Surge, transi Iordanem. Be stronge and valiant to fight against the Hethites, I will be with thee as I haue beene with Moses. This was Ioshuaes charge.
               The election which Israel made of Gedeon was after the Lord had sayd to him,Iudg. 8. The election of the Iudges of Israel.
                   
                  Tu liberabis Israel de manu Madian, and after his victories ouer the Madianites, then they came and sayd, Dominare nostrum tu, & filius tuus.
               
               The like election was of Ieptha after hee was called from the land of Tob by the Lord,Iudg. 11. Ieptha.
                   yet hee was elected, and chosen by the Giliadites, saying, Veni & esto Princeps noster, Come and bee our Captaine to fight against the Amonites.
               
               These were the Iudges elected to fight the Lords battels against these Nations.
               This was the manner of the election of the Iudges and Gouernors of Israel,
                  
                     Gedeon.
                   yet God had chosen Gedeon out of the barne, and called Iepthe out of the land of Tob to be Gouernors ouer his people, before they were by the people elected.
               The election of Ioshua,
                  Num. 17. Ioshua.
                   was by laying of Moses hands vpon him, to vanquish the Cananites, saying, transi Iordanem, esto robustus, bee stronge and

valiant to fight against the Hethits, and to vāquish the Chananites.
               
                  
                     Iudg ca 1.The election of Iuda was by Vrim and Thummim, to ouerthrow the Amonites.
            
            
               Sectio. 3.
               
                  NOw hauing spoken something of diuers and sundry elections of kings and Iudges; wee are to entreat of sundrie kindes of Scepters and Diadems among heathen Kings
               
                  
                     The first Kings of Rome.
                  The first Kings in the world had long guilded speares carried before them. For the old Romanes, and the first Kings of Rome vsed for their first Scepters, the Augurall staffe of Romulus, called Lituus, vntill Tarquiniu
                        •
                      Pris
                        •
                     us the fift King after Romulus, who vsed to haue for his scepter white Iuorie.
               But after Tarqu
                        •
                     nius time, the Romanes contemned Scepters, Kings, and crownes.
               
                  
                     The Kinges of India.
                  The Kings of India had their scepters onely of Ebony, for it was not lawfull for them to haue any other scepter, but of Ebony.
               In Egipt though they excelled, all other Kingdomes in greatnesse and maiestie of Diadems, yet the Kings of Egipt had for their scepter, but the likenesse of a plough, in forma aratri, saith Diodorus,
                  
to maintaine tillage in husbandrie, of which I spake in another place.
               For as Egipt was diuided vnto sixe Tribes, India vnto 7. Tribes, Athens vnto 10, and Rome vnto 35. Tribes that was the chiefest, they had care vnto tillage.
               The Persians next for all that they had fire caried in christall, the Image of the Sunne carried vpon the horse of Mars, yet the Kings of Persia had for their Scepters,
                     Diodor. lib. 2. the likenesse of a Spade, called in Diodorus, Pala, which the Kings held in their hands, for none might speak with the great kings of Persia, vnlesse the King would mooue his scepter, so had Ester accesse to the King Ashuerus.
               
               The king of Babilon vsed diuers kinds of scepters with sundry kind of figures, as Lions, Eagles, and sometime the likenesse of a golden Apple, which signified for his roundnes the whole world.
               The Kings of Sicilia vsed a siluer staffe,
                     The Kings of Sicilia.
                   for their scepter carried before them.
               The Kings of Lidia had carried before them great Axes for their Scepters.
                     The Kings of Lydia.
                  
               
               Many Kings had vpon the top of their Scepters the figure of a Storke, to signifie Iustice and pietie, and on the other end of that scepter, they had the figure of Hippotamus,
                  
                     Hyppotamus.
                   a fierce, and a violent beast, that Kings thereby should subdue their outragious lust and tyrannie
               Kings had need to haue their Scepters full of eyes: such a Scepter had ould Osiris with the

likenesse of a mans eye written about it, Oculus iustitiae. For those Prince
                     •
                   that beare the Scepters of iustice in hand, must not haue eyes of affections in their heads; Neither must those Iudges that sit on the seat of Iustice, haue long reaching hands to receiue bribes like Molochs Image, whose priests were called Chemarims. And therefore were Kings painted in Egipt in the Citie of Thebes blinde without eyes,
                     Diodor. 4. and Iudges without hands; and Iustice it selfe without a head; so that Iustice hath neither eyes, hands, nor head.
            
            
               
                  Sectio. 4.
               
                  NOw after Scepters, the sundry fashion and manners of crownes and Diadems. For among all heathen Kinges, fewe or none were crowned as our christian Kinges were but with such Ornaments about their heads, as most Kings then vsed, and with such Idolatrous ceremonies, sacrifices, and feasts, as were belonging to their Idols, and such robes and garments, as were kept in their Temples, for their inawguration, tanquam regalia.
               
               
                  
                     Mythridates.
                  For it seemed that Mithridates King of Pontus, the great Roman enemie, and Tigranes King of Armenia, ware such attires and ornaments on their heads, as some kinde of fine silke set with

rich stones and pearles. For that which king Mithridates wife,
                     Monima.
                   Queene Monima ware vppon her head for a diadem, with that she hanged her selfe, least shee should bee taken captiue by Lucullus or Pompey the Roman consuls, and by them led as a prisoner vnto Rome for their triumphes.
               It might also seeme,
                     Darius.
                   that Darius the great King of Persia had on his head in his last battell which he had with Alexander at Arbela, such a diademe as Mythridates the king of Pontus had; for Alexander, after the ouerthrow of Darius, hauing Darius diademe brought vnto him, with the which he bound vp Lysimachus wound.
               Such a Diademe did Tigranes king of Armenia yeeld at the feet of Pompey the great,
                     Tygranes.
                   after that Pompey had subdued Armenia, and other kingdomes thereabouts, with which Diademe Pompey bound vp his sore legge, for the which hee was suspected of some of the Senators, to haue affected the kingdome of Armenia.
               
               All Kingdomes being subdued by the Romanes,
                     Crownes not esteemed of the Romans.
                   sent their Imperiall Crownes to Rome. So did Areta King of Arabia send to Augustus. So did Hircanus send from Ierusalem a Crowne of gould to Marcus Antonius. For after that the Romanes had subdued Asia, Africa, and the most part of Europe, all Kinges held their Kingdoms vnder the Roman Empire: & therfore sent Crownes for dutie and homage to the Romanes.
               The old Romans esteemed more Militares coronas,
                  
militarie Crownes to animate souldiers to remooue siege; to win townes, or forts, or strong holds, they should haue gramineā Coronam; for scaling of walles, they had muralē Coronam, made in forme like the walles of a City; and for entring to a shippe, Corona naualis made like a shippe.
               The Emperour Caligula inuented certaine Crownes made in forma solis,
                  
                     Suet. in vita calig. 7. 
                  lunae, & syderum, like the Sun,
                     Plut. in Coriol.
                   the Moone, & some like Stars, which Caligula called exploratorias Coronas, with these they rewarded souldiers according to their expoytes and deserts, and yet the Citizens, saith vigetius quod magis miremur, had Coronas aureas Crownes of Gold
               Also it seemed that in Asia, during the time of the great Alexander,
                  
                     Amphictions.
                   to whome the Amphictions sent a massy Crowne of Gold, when Alexander was elected generall gouernor ouer Asia and Greece, against the Persians, Crownes were sent to those mighty and great Kings, which held the Monarchy ouer other Nations in submission and loyalty, not daring themselues to were Crownes.
               The Kings of Egipt differed farre from all other Kings for their Diadems, excelled all Princes in Maiesty and royalty,
                     Kings of Egipt. for they ware the Image of a Lyon, sometime of a Draggon, and sometime of a Bull; because they would be knowen the greatest and most auncient Kings of the world; they would carry vpon their Diadems the likenes of

Fier, sometime of a Tree, and sometime of a Serpent, as though the Kingdome of Egipt should farre exceed all kingdomes, for the Maiesty thereof, the Kings of Egipt were chiefly set out, by the regality of their Diadems.
               The Romans and other heathen Kings, in their Temples had sundry kinds of Crownes, consecrated to their Idols,
                     Sundrie Crownes.
                   and dedicated to their Gods, and they dedicate Crownes made of the rinde of Cynamon, pollished and trimmed about with Gold.
               So religious were the heathē in their Atheisme, that not only they crowned their Idols with all kind of Flowers, but also trimmed and garnished the Altars of their Idoll Iupiter,
                  
                     Heathen altars▪
                     
                   with Crownes and oken leaues; the Alter of Appollo with Lawrell Crownes: the Altar of Pluto with Cypresse, the Altars of Hercules with Poplar; the Alters of Bacchus with Iuie. The prophet crieth out vpon the children of Israel, that they obay not their God as the heathens did their Idols.
            
            
               
                  Sectio. 5.
               
                  THe regall ornaments ef Persia, at the inauguration of their Kings, by Cyrus in the time of Tarq: Priscus the fift King of Rome, was a Diadem called Cydaris, the sacred fire, and the figure of the Sun,

carried by the horse of Mars, and 12. seuerall garments, which Cyrus instituted and by a decree confirmed that they should remaine tanquam regalia, to the posterity of Cyrus in Persia at Persepolis, and to be vsed according to the law of Induendarum & exuendarum vestium.
               
               
                  Cyrus.These regall ornaments of Cyrus were vsed with the Kings of Armenia, Pontus, and the most part of Asia, for that they held their kingdomes vnder the Scepter of Persia.
               
               
                  
                     Of Aegipt.
                  The regall ornaments of Egipt by Sheshac in the time of Salomon, were such ornaments as the Priests of Vulcan in Memphis first inuented, from the first to the last, which was the sacred garment and rich robe of Isis,
                  
                     Regall Ornaments.
                   which the Queenes of Egipt vsed to weare at triumphs or feasts, according to the custome of Egipt, were reserued and kept in Sacrario Isidis for the posterity of Sheshac, and the Kings of Egipt.
               
               
                  
                     Of Rome.
                  The regall ornaments of Rome by Romulus in the time of Ezechias King of Iudah, was no more but a coate of a purple coulor, called Tunica Iouis, and a long purple robe, which Romulus himselfe the first King first inuented, to set forth the Maiesty of a King.
               
                  
                     Of Cerinthia.
                  The regall ornaments of the Prince of Cerinthia, seemed most strange either for that they were reserued so long, or that it was not lawfull by the law in Cerinthia to alter them,
                     Pantal. lib. 6. they were so worne and consumed (as Pantalion saith) that the

new elected Prince came to be inuested in such old garments, that were so worne as he seemed more like a shepheard, than a King; And yet were these old garments so reserued and kept, as diligently as King Cyrus robes at Persepolis in Persia, or King Sheshacks garment at Memphis in Egipt.
               
               The regall ornaments of Macedonia by Alexander in the time of their King,
                     Macedonia.
                   was a rich Hat full of pearles called Chausia, a rich slipper or pantofle called Crepida, and a rich long robe which the Macedonians call Clamydem, which Alexander the great vsed during his time; And after him when the monarchy was brought to Rome, Pompey the great vsed Alexanders robe rather for that he was likened to Alexander and for his sake, rather then for credit that any Roman should seeme to haue by wearing a Macedonian garment.
               I will omit to write of these christian Kings, but only of their time of reuolting from the Romans.
               The Longobardes,
                  
                     The Longobards.
                   the Goathes, the Vandolles, and Hunnes, by reason of ciuill warres betweene themselues, were made prouinces vnder the Romanes vntill the Empire decayed; and after they had reuolted from the Romans, they elected Kings to gouerne them.
               Among the Longobardes, Agelmundus their first King after their reuolting from the Romans 394.
               Among the Gothes after their reuolting, Alaricus was their King. 404.
               
                  So was Gundericus ouer the Vandolles after their reuolting. 413.
               And Attila King of the Hunnes, after they had reuolted from the Romans. 430.
               And after these Kings 1600. began the kingdome of Polonia, where their first Crowned King was Miezlaus. 963.
               In Hungaria, the first crowned King was as Pantalion calleth him, Beatus Stephanus. 1003.
               And lastly in Bohemia, the first crowned King was called Vladislaus, 1080. of whose inauguration he hath set their Regalia aside, omitting their ceremonies and inaugurations which they had from Charles the great.
            
            
               
                  Sectio. 6.
               
                  OF the manner and order of the Inauguration of Romulus,
                  
                     The inauguration of the first King of Rome.
                   the first King of Rome.
               It was not lawfull by the Lawe of Romulus, to Elect any King in Rome without diuination, which during the first Kings of Rome continued in the selfe same honor, as Magicke did in Persia, where no Kings might be elected, or sit without Magj in place, as in Rome without south-sayers.
               In Rome the South sayers did goe vp to the

toppe of a hill, where the south-sayer sat vpon a stone with his face towards the south, with his auguring staffe called Lituus, in his left hand, with the which he deuided & marked out the quarters of the Heauens: the foure coasts the of south vpon the right hand, & the North vpon the left. Hauing done sacrifice, and offered oblations with sacred vowes made to Iupiter and Mars, hee layd his hand vpon the new elected Kings head, heauing vp the other hand vnto Heauen, saying, Iupiter Pater si fas est, N. Pomp: &c. Then looking for lightning, or thundring, or some flying of byrds, or some strange motion of the starres, at the sight of which things, the south-sayer openly pronounce him to bee King elected by Iupiter and Mars.
               
               
                  Selostris in Herodotus,
                  
                     The inauguration of the Kings of Egipt. and Iosephus named Susacus, and in the Bible Sheshac, at his first cōming to his kingdome, was brought by the priests of Vulcan into Memphis, to the temple of Isis, where the sacred booke wherein the law and secret ceremonies were written, which none might read in, but the priests of Vulcan, and the King at his first entrance into his kingdome after the reading of the laws and ceremonies of Isis.
               
               The priests brought the King a standing cuppe full of liquor, Rosen or gumme gathered frō the barke of a firre tree, a bole of milke, with a few dry figgs, (not much differing from the ceremonies of Persia) after the King had tasted a little of

euery one, he was brought by the Priests vnto the doore of Isis temple,
                     Diodor.
                   where the priests did giue to the King the kaye to open the doore: frō thence the King was brought by the priests vnto the secret chauncell of Isis, and after sacrifice the King did wash himselfe with the same water which is kept in Sacrario Isidis, to wash the goddesse Isis.
               
               After this to the Kings are brought by the priests of Vulcan some regall garments which the King tooke from the priests, and so vnto the last robe which is the sacred robe of the Idoll Isis, according to the Law, Induendarum & exeundarum sacrarum vestium.
               
               
                  
                     The inauguration of the King of Persia.The seauen Princes and gouernors of the 127. prouinces of Persia assembled together in Persepolis, the chiefest City in Persia, to elect them a King after Cyrus and his son Cambises, for Cyrus had no son but Cambises, and Cambises had no son at all to succeed him in the kingdome.
               The ceremonies of the Kings of Persia shall serue for the inauguration of the Kings of Armenia, of the Kings of Pontus, and for the most part of the Kings of Asia, for that the Diadem which was called in Persia, Cydaris, in Armenia called Tiara, and in Pontus called Candis, differed only in manner, and therefore all inauguration of the Kings of Asia shalbe contained in the solemnities and ceremonies of Persia, for both their ceremonies and fourme of their Diadems were alike, for

that all these Kings held vnder the Persians while the monarchy was there.
               In Persia the ceremony was, that they should sit in Cyrus chayre, they put on these twelue garments that Cyrus first ware, which were kept as monuments and reliques for the Kings of Persia in Persepolis.
               
               The new King sitting so in Cyrus chayre, three of the greatest Peeres in Persia, brought vnto him three dishes, in the one were fine dryed figs, in the second a little turpentyne, and in the third mylke.
               After that the new King had eaten of the drye figs,
                     Alex: genial: lib: 1. cap: 29. and had tasted of the turpentyne, and drunke of the mylke, hee rose from Cyrus chayre, and thence was brought vnto the next hill. For the Persians had no temple nor altars in their countryes.
               
                  The Funerals of the Thracians.
                  
                  
                     THE Thracians Funerals are full of mirth and melody with their Thracian wounds gotten in warres, painted in order round about the Hearse, which was the greatest glorie of the Thracians. For when they bring their friends to the graue, they vse to singe Thracian songes with all sweete Musicke. Onely this ceremonie they reserued,

that when any man of great calling died,
                        The Funerals of the Thracians.
                      his wife is brought on the same day to the graue of her husband in her richest Ornaments, and best apparell, accompanied with her parents and next in blood, with great solemnitie, which after sacrifice vpon her husbands graue, she must make sacrifice of her selfe.
                  So was Polixena sacrificed and slaine vpon the graue of Achilles in Troy. So was Iphiginea Agamemnons daughter slaine, and sacrificed at Aulis in Greece, the one to satisfie Neptune; the other to pacifie Diana. In great funerall feasts called Lemuria, after the annointing of their crownes, and trimming of their tombes, with sweet hearbs and funerall flowers, after sacrifice done, and diuers ceremonies, they fitte round about a long flint stone, the parents, the kinsmen, the brethren of the dead soulesome with beanes; some with waffers; some with dry figs; and euerie guest bring some thinges to this feast, where they drinke to their Gods first, and after to the soule of the dead, with great myrth & sundry ceremonies, they rise vp frō the Tombe, all crowned with crownes & Garlands made of sweete flowers, and funerall hearbes in great solemnitie, daunce about the Tombe, being braue garnished, as is before said.
                  So did Alexander the great with diuers Macedonian Peeres, and Nobles crowned with garlands, daunced about Achilles graue.
                  So did Traiane the emperour solemnize the funerall

feast of Alexander, at Alexandria in Egipt.
                  
                  So did Cleopatra solemnize the funerall of Marcus Antonius. Ceramicus in Athens was a buriall place appointed for Generals, Captaines, and for marshall Magistrates slaine in the field, as Martius field in Rome was both a burial place for some Consuls and Dictators, so it was a place of exercise for the Romane gallants vpon the graues of these Noble Captaines in memorie of Chiualrie.
                  So did Achilles solemnize the funerall of his friend Patroclus, cutting the fore-lockes of his haire, to set it amonge many other of Patroclus friends vpon his Hearse or Tombe in Troy.
                  
               
               
                  The manner of the funerall Feasts and Ceremonies of the Macedonians.
                  IN Macedonia they vsed more solemne and mournefull ceremonies,
                        The Funerals of the Macedonians.
                      at the funerall of their Kinges and Princes; for they tooke downe their Bulwarkes and Fortresses of warres, they vntiled their temples, they subuerted their altars, they reiected and deposed their Idols, they put out their fire, and the men shaued both their heads and beards, and they clipped their horses and left nothing vndone that belonged to mourning
                  So Alexander the great solemnized the funerall of Hephestion.
                  
                  
                     So King Archelaus did at the funerall of Euripides, shaue his beard, and his head. So did Achilles &c.
                  Lawes decreed for triumphes, are written in the fift Booke of Alexander. Cap. 9. called Leges funerales.
                  
                  Lawes funerall for the dead, written in the sixt Booke, Cap. 13.
                  
               
               
                  Of the funerall Feasts of the Romane Emperours.
                  THe Romanes vsed to haue their commendations recited in the pulpit,
                        The funerall of the Romanes.
                      of which Val. Pub. made the first funerall Oration in Rome at the death of Brutus his fellow Consull.
                  The Romanes vsed to carrie before the dead Emperour his statues and Images, and after that the Statues and Images of his predecessors, to set forth the dignitie of his stocke, as Ca: Caesar did at the funerall of his Aunt, mother vnto Marius; whose Statues Caesar caused to be carried with all the ensignes, crownes, rich spoyles and trophees which Marius had gotten in his victorie.
                  In such manner Tiberius Caesar the third Emperour of Rome, caused at the Funerall of his Father Drusus, that the Statue of Aeneas, and all statues of the Kings of Alba, vntill Romulus time the 17.

King after Aeneas, and the statue of Romulus, and the whole familie of Gens Iulia, from Romulus time vnto Iulius Caesar lineally.
               
               
                  Of the funerals of the Egiptians.
                  THe Kings of Egipt were most sumptuously reserued, in this order: their bodies were opened, and were in such sort vsed, as the Egiptians vse with Myrrhe, Aloes, Honie, Salt, Waxe, and many other sweet odors, being seared vp and annoynted with all precious oyles.
                        The Funerall of the Egiptians.
                  
                  So the Kings of Egipt reserued the bodies of their Kings in high buildings made for that purpose, farre from the ground, as in their Pyramides and Laberinths, in such sort that the sonnes should see their fathers, and so many fathers before his father, buried in such sort, reserued and kept with odors and sweetnes, as though they were aliue.
                  They mourned seauenty two dayes, abstained from wine or any other meate, sauing bread and the water of Nilus.
                     
                        Abel, Mizraim.
                      So did they lament the death of Ioseph.
                  
                  Yet the Kings of Egipt before they should be buried, his fame, his great actions and marshall exployts were rehearsed, publishing his whole life from the beginning. If they had been vicious

drunken, slothfull, or had not done iustice, or done any great crime, he should not haue that honor of buriall, which other Kings had, which was the greatest infamy to any King in Egipt that might be; which Kings of Egipt had more care to be well buried, than to liue well.
               
               
                  The manner of the Scythian Funerals.
                  THe Scythians do in this manner; when one dieth in Scythia of any great state, his frends and his neighbors do carry all his beasts and kill them, for a feast to solempnize the funerall of the dead. As the Romans and Graecians do celebrate a feast for the honor of the Emperors and Princes birth, which feast they call Hecatonbeon.
                  
                  
                     
                        The Scythian funerals.
                     The sonne of this dead Scythian causeth his fathers head (being filled with all sweet odors) to be gilded ouer, and to be set vp as a monument of his father, where once euery yeare vpon the very day that his father dyed, he keepeth a solempne feast, where his friends and his neighbors do yearely at this feast offer sacrifice with ceremonies, and drinke out of this gilded head; where not only his fathers skull, but his Graundfathers,

and diuerse of his Graund-fathers predecessors, (as Boles and Cupps on the table at funerall feasts,) were made of so many great fore-graundfathers skulls: for they abhorred the rites and sacrifices of any countryes besides their owne.
                  So did the people called Sordisci in all poynts imitate the Scythians in their funerals, in the selfe same ceremonies before recited.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   