
      
         
            
            
            AN
Alarum against Vsurers.
Containing tryed experiences
against worldly
abuses. WHEREIN GENTLEMEN
may finde good counsells to confirme them
and pleasant Histories to delight them:
and euery thing so interlaced with varietie: as the curious may be satisfied
with rarenesse, and 
                  〈◊〉
               
curteous with pleasure. HEEREUNTO AKE ANnexed
the delectable historie of Forbonius
and Prisceria: with the lamentable
Complaint of Truth ouer
England. Written by Thomas
Lodge, of Lincolnes
Inne, Gentleman.
            
               O Vita! misere longa, foelice breuis.
            
            ¶Imprinted at London by
T. Este, for Sampson Clarke, and are
to be sold at his shop by Guyld Hall.
1584.
         
         
            
            
            ¶To The Right worshipfull, Sir Philip
Sidney Knight, indued with all
perfections of learning, and titles of Nobilitie:
Thomas Lodge Gen. wisheth continuance of
honour, and the benefits of happie
Studie.
            
               IT is not (noble Gentleman) the titles of
Honour that allureth me, nor the nobilitie
of your Parents that induceth me, but the
admiration of your vertues that perswadeth
me, to publish my pore trauailes vnder
your vndoubted protection. Whom I
most humbly intreate, not onely in so iust a cause to protect
me, but also in these Primordia of my studies, after
the accustomed prudence of the Philosophers, to confirme
with fauourable acceptaunce, and continuaunce as
the equitie of the cause requireth. I haue set downe in
these fewe lines in my opinion (Right Worshipfull) the
image of a licentious Vsurer, and the collusions of diuelish
incrochers, and herevnto was I led by two reasons:
First, that the offender seeing his owne counterfaite in
this Mirrour; might amend it, and those who are like
by ouerlauish profusenesse, to become meate for their
mouths, might be warned by this caueat to shunne the
Scorpion ere she deuoureth.
            
               May it please your Worshippe, to fauour my
trauailes, and to accept my good will: who incouraged
by the successe of this my firstlings will heereafter in
most humble signe of humanitie continue the purpose
I haue begunne, commending the cause
and my seruice to your good liking: who
no doubt compassed with incomperable
vertues, will commend
when you see occasion, &
not condemne without
a cause.
            
               Your VVorships in all
dutie to commaund,
Thomas Lodge.
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶To The Right worshipfull, my cu
                  •
               
               teous
friends, the Gentlemen of the Innes of Court,
Thomas Lodge of Lincolnes
                  •
                Inne Gentleman,
wisheth prosperous successe in
their studies, and happie euent in
their trauailes.
            
               CUrteous Gentlemen, let it not séeme
straunge vnto you, that hée which hath
long time slept in silence, now beginneth
publikely to salute you, since no
doubt, my reasons that induce me herevnto
be such, as both you may allowe
of them, since they be well meant, and account of them
since they tend to your profit. I haue published héere of
set purpose a tried experience of worldly abuses, describing
héerein not onely those monsters which were banished
Athens, I meane Usurers, but also such de
                  •
               ouring
caterpillers, who not onely haue fatted their fingers
with many rich forfaitures, but also spread their
venim among some priuate Gentlemen of your profession,
which considered, I thought good in opening the
wound▪ to preuent an vlcer, and by counselling before
escape, forewarn before the mischiefe. Led then by these
perswasions, I doubt not, but as I haue alwayes found
you fauourable, so now you will not cease to be friendly,
both in protecting of this iust cause, from vniust slander,
and my person from that reproch, which, about two
yeares since, an iniurious cauiller obiected against me:
You that knowe me Gentlemen, can testifie that neyther
my life hath bene so lewd, as y• my companie was
edious, nor my behauiour so light, as that it shuld passe
the limits of modestie: this notwithstanding a licentious

               Hipponax, neither regarding the asperitie of the
lawes touching slaunderous Libellers, nor the offyring
from whence I came, which is not contemptible, attemted,
not only in publike & reprochfull terms to condemn
me in his writings, but also so to slander me, as neither
iustice shuld wink at so hainous an offēce, nor I pretermit
a commodious reply. About thrée yeres ago one Stephen
Gosson published a booke, intituled, The schoole of
Abuse, in which hauing escaped in many & sundry cōclusions,
I as the occasion thē fitted me, shapt him such an
answere as beséemed his discourse, which by reason of the
slendernes of y• subiect (because it was in defēce of plaies
& play makers) y• godly & reuerent y• had to deale in the
cause, misliking it, forbad y• publishing, notwithstanding
he comming by a priuate vnperfect coppye, about two
yeres since, made a reply, diuiding it into fiue sectiōs, &
in his Epistle dedicatory, to y• right honorable, sir Frances
Walsingham, he impugneth me with these reproches,
y• I am become a vagarāt person, visited by y• heuy hand
of God, lighter then libertie, & looser thē vanitie. At such
time as I first came to y• sight héerof (iudge you gentlemen
how hardly I could disgest it) I bethought my selfe
to frame an answere, but considering y• the labour was
but lost, I gaue way to my misfortune, contenting my
selfe to wait y• opportunitie wherein I might, not according
to the impertinacie of the iniurye, but as equitye
might countenance mée, cast a raine ouer the vntamed
curtailes chaps, & wiping out the suspition of this slander
from the remebrance of those y• knew me, not counsell
this iniurious Asinius to become more conformable
in his reportes: and now Gentlemen hauing occasion
to passe my trauailes in publike, I thought it not amisse
somewhat to touch the slaunder, & prouing it to be most
wicked & discommendable, leaue the rest to the discretion
of those in authoritie, who if the Gentleman had not
plaid bo péep thus long, would haue taught him to haue
counted his cards a little better: and now Stephen Gosson
               
let me but familiarly reason with thée thus▪ Thinkest
thou y• in handling a good cause it is requisite to induce
a fals propositiō, although thou wilt say it is a part
of Rethorike to argue A Persona, yet is it a practise of
small honestie to conclude without occasion: if thy cause
wer good, I doubt not but in so large & ample a discourse
as thou hadst to handle, thou mightest had left the honor
of a gentleman inuiolate. But thy base degrée, subiect to
seruile attempts, measureth all things according to cauelling
capacitie, thinking because nature hath bestowed
vpō
thee a plausible discourse, thou maist in thy swéet
termes present the sowrest & falsest reports y• canst imagine:
but it may be, y• as it fortuned to y• noble man of Italy,
it now fareth wt me, who as Petarch reported, giuē
greatly to y• intertainmēt of strangers, & pleasure of the
chase, respected not the braue & gorgious garments of a
courtier, but delighted in such clothing as seemed y• place
where he soiourned, this noble gentleman returning on
a time frō his game, found all his house furnished with
strangers, on whō bestowing his accustomed welcome,
he bent himself to y• ouerseeing of his domestical preparatiō,
& cōming to y• stable among the hors kéepers of his
new come guests, & reprehending one of th
                  •
                for faulting
in his office, y• felow impatient of reproofe, & measuring
y• gentleman by his plaine coat, stroke him on the fa
                  •
               e, &
turned him out of y• stable, but afterward attending on
his master, & perceiuing him whom he had stroken to be
y• Lord of y• house, he humbly craued pardō: y• gentleman
as patient as pleasant, not only forgaue him ye escape, but
pretely answered thus, I blame not thée good fellow for
thy outrage, but this companion, pointing to his coate,
which hath made thée mistake my person. So at this instant
estéeme I M. Gosson hath dealt with me, who not
mesuring me by my birth, but by ye subiect I hādled like
Will Summer striking him y• stood next him, hath vpbraided
me in person, whē he had no quarrell, but to my
cause, & therein pleaded his owne indiscretiō, & loded me

with intollerable iniurie. But if with Zoylus hée might
kisse the gibet, or with Patacion hop headlesse, the world
shoulde bee ridde of an iniurious slaunderer, and that
tongue laboured in suppositions, might be nailed vp
as Tullies was for his Philipicall declamations. But
good Stephen, in like sorte will I deale with thée, as
Phillip of Macedon with Nicanor, who not respecting
the maiestie of the king, but giuing himselfe ouer to the
petulancie of his tongue vainly inueighed against him,
whom notwithstanding Philip so cunningly handeled,
that not onely he ceased the rumor of his report, but also
made him as lauish in commending, as once he was
profuse in discommending: his attempt was thus performed,
he séeing Nicanor sorely pressed with pouerty, reléeued
him to his content. Wherevpon altering his coppie,
and breaking out into singular commendation of
Philip, the king concluded thus: Loe, curtesie can make
of bad good, and of Nicanor an enimie, Nicanor a friend.
Whose actions my reprouer, I will now fit to thée, who
hauing slaundered me without cause, I will no otherwise
reuenge it, but by this meanes, that now in publike
I confesse thou hast a good pen, and if thou kéepe thy
Methode in discourse, and leaue thy slandering without
cause, there is no doubt but thou shalt bée commended
for thy coppie, and praised for thy stile. And thus desiring
thée to measure thy reportes with iustice, and you
good Gentlemen to answere in my behalfe if you
heare me reproched. I leaue you to your
pleasures, and for my selfe I will
studie your profit.
            
               Your louing friend,
Thomas Lodge.
               
            
         
         
            
            BARNABE RICH
Gentleman Souldier, in
praise of the Author.
            
               IF that which warnes the young beware of vice,
               And schooles the olde to shunne vnlawfull gaine,
               If pleasant stile and method may suffice,
               I thinke thy trauaile merits thanks for paine,
               My simple doome is thus in tearmes as plaine:
               That both the subiect and thy stile is good,
               Thou needs not feare the scoffes of M
                     ••
                  mus brood.
            
            
               If thus it be, good Lodge continue still,
               Thou needst not feare Goose sonne or Ganders hisse,
               Whose rude reportes past from a slaundrous quill,
               Will be determind but in reading this,
               Of whom the wiser sort will thinke amis,
               To slaunder him whose birth and life is such,
               As 
                     •
                  alse report his fame can neuer tuch.
            
         
         
            ¶IOHN IONES GENtleman,
in praise of the
AVTHOR.
            
               THough not my praise, yet let my wish preuaile,
               Who so thou be that list to read this booke,
               I neuer yet by flatterie did assaile,
               To count that good that most did please my looke.
               
                  But alwaies wisht my friends such stile to vse,
               As wise might like, though foolish would refuse.
            
            
               In opening vice my friend who spends his time,
               May count by priuate good no profit lost,
               What errors scape in young and lustie prime,
               Experience (badge of truth) may quickly cost.
               Who sets the marke, that makes men shunne the sand,
               Deserues good words, his proofes for profit stand.
            
            
               For common good to crosse a few mens vaines,
               Who like to Midas would that all were golde,
               I count not misse, since there vnlawfull gaines
               Makes some men sink, whom birth might well vphold.
               I know the sore, the scarre is seene to plaine,
               A blessed state where no such wils doo raine.
            
            
               In briefe, I praise this booke for pretie stile,
               For pithie matter, Gentle be thou iudge,
               O would my wish some fancies might beguile,
               Then faire reuenewes should not fit a snudge.
               A world to see how Asses daunce in golde,
               By wanton wils, when Gentles starue for colde.
            
            
               Whose errors if it please succeeding age,
               To see with sighs, and shun with sad aduice,
               Let him beholde this booke, within whose page,
               Experience leaues her chiefest proofes of price,
               And thanke the youth that suffered all these toiles,
               To warne thee shun that rocke which many spoiles.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            GEntlemen, since the presse cannot passe without escape,
and some things are so mistaken, as without
co
                  •
               rrection they will be very grose. May it please you
when you read to correct, especially, such principall errours
as these that followe.
            
               Folio. 30. b. Line. 4. For woed, Read wonne.
               
               Folio. eod. Line. 8. For colde, Read cloudes.
               
               Folio. eod. Line. 15. For showde, Read shoard.
               
               Folio. eod. Line. 30. For concluding. Read concluded.
               
               
                  Foli. 31. a. Lin. 34. For presents a secrets méete, Read
wth séemly secret gréete.
            
            For the rest I referre them to your discretion, who
can distnguish coulours, and either better, or
fit words to your fantasies.
            
               Your friend:
Thomas Lodge.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            AN ALARVM
against Vsurers.
            
               NO maruell though the wise man accompted
all things vnder the sun vain,
since the chéefest creatures be mortall:
and no wonder though the world runne
at randon, since iniquitie in these later
dayes hath the vpper hand. The alteration
of states if they be look into, and the ouerthrow of
houses, if they be but easely laid in open viewe, what
eye would not shed teares to sée things so transitorie?
and what wisedome woulde not indeauour to dissolue
the inconuenience?
            There is a state within this our Common wealth,
which though it necessarily stand as a piller of defence
in this royall Realme, yet such are the abuses that
are growen in it, that not onely the name is become odious
by somes errour, but also if the thing be not narrowly
lookt into, the whole lande by that meanes will
grow into great inconuenience: I meane the state of
Merchants, who though to publyke commoditie they
bring in store of wealth from forein Nations, yet such
are their domesticall practises, that not only they inrich
themselues mightelye by others misfortunes, but also
eate our English Gentrie out of house and hame. The
generall facultie in it selfe, is both auncient and lawdable,
the professours honest and vertuous, their actions
full of daunger, and therefore worthy gaine, and so necessarye

this sorte of men be, as no well gouerned stat
                  •
               
may be without them.
            But as among a trée of fruite there bée some withered
fallings, and as among wholesome hearbes there
growes some bitter Colloquintida: so it cannot be, but
among such a number of Marchaunts, there shoulde bee
some, that degenerate from the true name and nature
of Marchaunts. Of these men I write, and of none other,
my inuectiue is priuate, I will not write generall:
and were it not I respected the publyque commoditie
more then my priuate prayse, this matter
shoulde haue slepte in hugger mugger. Of these vngracious
men I write, who hauing nothing of themselues,
yet greedelye graspe all things into their owne
handes.
            These be they that finde out collusions of Statutes,
and compasse lande with commoditie, these bée
the boulsterers of vngracious pettie Brokers: and by
these men (the more is the pittie) the prisons are replenished
with young Gentlemen: These bee they, that
make the Father carefull, the mother sorowfull, the
Sonne desperate: These bée they that make crooked
straight, and straight crooked, that can close with a
young youth, while they cousen him, and féede his humoures,
till they frée him of his Farmes. In briefe,
such they bée that glose most fayre then, when they imagine
the worst, and vnlesse they bee quicklye knowen,
they easelye will make bare some of the best of our
young Heires that are not yet stayed, whome zealouslye
I be
                  •
               eech to ouer-looke this my writing: for what
is sette downe héere, eyther as an eye witnesse I
will auowe, or informed euen by those Gentlemen,
who haue swallowed the Gudgen, and haue bene
intangeled in the hooke, I haue approouedlye sette
downe.
            
               Such bée those sorte of men, that their beginning
is of naught, sette by the deuotion of some honest
Marchauntes, of whome taking vp their refuse commoditie,
they imploye it to this vngodly and vnhonest
purpose.
            They finde out (according to theyr owne vayne)
some olde soaking vndermininig Solicitour, whom
they both furnish with money and expence, to sette
him foorth and gette him more creditte: This good
fellowe must haunte Ordinaryes, canuasse vp and
downe Powles, and as the Catte watcheth the praye
of the Mouse, so dilygentlye intendes hee to the compassing
of some young Nouice, whome by Fortune
eyther hée findeth in melancholyke passions at the
Ordinarye, or at pennilesse deuotion in Powles, or
perhappes is brought acquaynted with him by some
of his owne brotherhoode. Him he handeleth in these
or such lyke tearmes, both nothing place and circumstaunce.
            GEntleman, why bée you so melancholye? Howe
falleth it out, that you are not more lyghtsome?
Your young yeares mée thinkes shoulde loathe such
sollome aspectes. I maye not anye waye imagine a
cause why you shoulde bee pensiue: you haue good
Parents, you want no friendes, and more, you
haue lyuelyhoodes, which considered, trulye you
committe meere follye to bée so meruaylouslye sadde
and wonderfullye sorrowfull, where you haue no occasion.
            If you want money, you haue creditte, (a gift
which who so euer inioyeth nowe a dayes, hee is
able to compasse anye thing: and for that I see so
good a nature in you, (if proferred seruice stinke
not) I will verye willynglye (if so bée you will open

your estate to me) further you in what I may, and perhaps
you shall finde your selfe fortunate, in falling into
my companie.
            The young Gentleman, vnacquainted with
such like discourses, counting all golde that glysters,
and him a faithfull frend that hath a flattering tongue,
opens all his minde to this subtill vnderminer, who so
wringeth him at last, that there is no secrete corner in
the poore Gentlemans heart, but he knoweth it: after
that, framing his behauiour to the nature of the youth,
if he be sad, sober: if youthly, riotous: if lasciuious,
wanton: he laboureth so much, that at last the birde is
caught in the pit-fall, and perceiuing the vaine of the
youth, he promiseth him some reliefe by his meanes:
the Gentleman thinking he hath God almightie by the
héele, holdes the Diuell by the toe, and by this meanes,
is brought to vtter wracke and ruine. The Broker
furnished of his purpose, hauing learned the Gentlemans
name, lodging, want, & welth: & finding all things
correspondent to his purpose, hies him to his setter vp,
who reioyceth greatly at his good happe, and rewards
this wicked seducer with a péece of gold. To be briefe,
at first issue on the Gentlemans bonde, this broking
knaue receiues fortie or fiftie poundes of course commoditie,
making him beleeue, that by other meanes monie
maye not be had, and swearing to him, that there will
be great losse, and that he could wish the Gentleman
would rather refuse then take. But the youth not esteeming
the losse, so hee supplye his lacke, sets him forwarde,
and giues the willing Iade the spurre, who finding
all things meate in the mouth, makes sale of this
Marchaundize to some one of his greatest fraternitie,
and if it be fortie, the youth hath a good peniworth if in
ready money he receiue twentie pound, and yet the money
repayable at thrée moneths ende. The Broker in
this matter, getteth double fée of the Gentleman,

treble gaine in the sale of the commoditie, and more, a
thousand thankes of this diuellish Usurer. Truly Gentlemen,
it is wonderfull to conceiue, (yet are there some
of you can tell if I lie) how this Sicophant that helpt
our youth to get, now learneth him to spend: What
saith he? my young master, what make you with this
olde Satten doublet? it is soilde, it is vnfit for a Gentlemans
wearing, apparell your selfe as you shoulde
bée, and ere fewe dayes passe, I will acquaint you with
as braue a dame a friend of mine, as euer you knew.
Oh how sweete a face hath she, and thus dilating it
with rethoricall praises, to make the Gentleman more
passionate, it falleth out that the mand Fawlcon stoops
to lure, and all things are fulfilled according to his
Brokers direction. Promises are kept on both partes,
and my youth is brought acquainted with Mustres
Minxe: this harlot is an old beaten dogge, and a maintainer
of the brothell house brotherhoode, a stale for
young nouises, and a limme of Sathan himselfe, whose
behauiours and iestures are such, as the world cannot
imagine better, if the Gentleman wéepe, she wil waile:
if he sorrow, she will sigh: if he be merrie, she will not
be modest. To conclude, her lesson is so taught her, as
she can recken without booke: Lorde what riotousnesse
passeth in apparell, what lauishnesse in banketting,
what loosenesse in liuing, and in verie short space, our
youth which was fligge, is nowe at leake, his purse
                  •
               is
emptie, and his mistres begins to lowre, which he perceiuing,
& earnestly bent to continue his credit with his
Curtisan, comes to his vngratious Broker, whom with
faire tearmes he desireth, and with humble suites more
earnestlye beséecheth to further his credite in what hée
may. Who séeing which way the Hare windeth, begins
to blame him of his liberalitie, and yet only is the cause
of his spending, and after a few priuie nippes, bearing
shew of good meaning, but yet indéed his way is to trie

conclusions, hée hasteth to the principall his good maste
                  •
               
Merchant, whom he findeth altogether prompt & redy at
a becke, to send abroad his refuse commoditye for crackt
angels: what conclusiō is betwéene thē both may easily
be imagined, but y• end is this, y• Broker returns to my
solitarie youth, & recountes vnto him, first to make him
feareful, how many places he hath ben at, when he hath
not visited one, how many he hath desired, yet how few
are redie to plesure, at last he breketh out, & telleth him
y• whole, assuring him y• he is to think wel of his master
scrape-penie y• vsurer, who is willing in hope of his wel
dooing to let him haue once more of his incōmodious cō
               modity,
vpon resonable assurāce. To be briefe, y• bargain
is quickly beaten on, y• broker laieth y• losse, y• gentlemā
es
                  •
               eemeth not so his néed be serued, y• Merchaunt laughs
at his folly in his sléeue, & to conclude, y• bonds are deliuered,
ye cursed cōmoditie receiued,&
at this second mart,
how spéeds our yoncker think you, perhaps of 50. pounds
in ware, he receiueth 30. pounds in ready money, & yet y•
money repayable at three months end. O incredible &
iniurious dealings, O more then Iudaicall cousonage,
truely Gentlemen this that I write is true, I my selfe
knowe the paymaster, naie more, I my selfe know certainly,
that by name I can recken among you some, that
haue ben bitten, who left good portiōs by their parents,
& faire landes by their auncestors, are desolate now, not
hauing friends to reléeue them, or money to affray their
charges. A miserable and wretched state is this, full of
inconuenience, when such eie sores are not seene in a cō
               mon
weale, when such abuses are winked at, when such
desolation is not perceiued, & wonderfull it is, y• among
so many godly lawes, made for y• administration of iustice,
ther be none found out: for these couetous malefactors,
purchase armes now, possesse y• place of ancient progenitors,
& men made rich by yoūg youths miss
                  •
               idings,
doe feast in y• halls of our riotous young spend thrifts.

It will be answered, it is y• gentlemens owne folly, & I
graunt it, yet of their folly who should beare the blame,
truely the bier, who hauing experience to cousin, might
haue also conscience to forbeare thē: nay among ye rabblemēt
of such as we find to haue falne in their youth, how
many experienced men find we at yeares of discretion?
who hauing only y• name of gentrie left thē to promote
them to honor, & finding no reléefe any way, are inforced
either in forren coūtries to end their liues miserably or
desperatly, some more vngratious, are a pray for y• gallous,
choosing rather to die with infamie, then to liue to
beg in miserie. But to leaue this to his place, & to returne
frō whence we haue digressed: Our gentlemā hauing
got new supplie, is pricked on to new sinne, & the
minister of y• diuel seruing, at his elbow, perswades him
to new change, for varietie saith he, is meruelously to be
admitted of, especially in such causes, & withall bringes
him to a new gamester a wittie worldling, who more
cunningly can handle him thē y• first, & hath more shifts
of descant for his plain song, (but this by y• way is to be
noted, y• the broker hath his part of y• gaines with y• curtisan,
& she cosins for them both,) this miniō so traineth
our seduced youth in folly, as not only himselfe is at hir
cōmand, but also his substance remaineth to her vse, this
high prised cōmoditie is imploied to y• curtisans brauery,
& she which makes him brutish in behauior, doth emty
his replenished purse: thus y• eie of reson is closed vp
by sensualitie, & the gifts of nature are diminished, by y•
disordinate vsage of bestly venery. Spuplies are sought
for euery way, by his wicked broker, to bring him to ruine,
& to work his vtter confusiō. Thus, thus, alas, y• father
before his eies, & in his elder yeres, beholdeth as in
a mirror, y• desolation of his owne house, and hearing
of the profusenesse of his vngratious sonne, calleth him
home, rebuketh him of his error, and requesteth account
of his money misspended: Hee (taught and instructed

sufficiently to coulour his follie by his vngodly mistres,
and cursed mis
                  •
               eader) at his returne to his father,
maketh shewe of all honestie, so that the olde man lead
by naturall affection, is almost perswaded that y• truth
is vntruth: yet remembring the priuie conueiaunce of
his youthly yeares, & déeming thē incident to his young
sonne, he discourseth with him thus.
            O my sonne, if thou knewest thy Fathers care, and
wouldest aunswere it with thy well dooing, I might
haue hope of the continuaunce of my progeny, & thou be
a ioy to my aged yeres. But I feare me the eyes of thy
reason are blinded, so y• neither thy fathers teares maye
perswade thée, nor thine owne follies laide open before
thine eyes, reduce thée, but that my name shall cease in
thée, and other couetous vnderminers shall inioye the
fruites of my long labours. How tenderly good boye in
thy mothers lyfe wast thou cherished? How déerely beloued?
How well instructed? Did I euer entice thée to
vice? Nay rather enforced I thée not to loue vertue?
And whence commeth it that all these good instructions
are swallowed vp by one sea of thy follie? In the
Uniuersities thy wit was praised, for that it was pregnant,
thy preferment great, for that thou deseruedst it,
so that before God I did imagine, that my honour shuld
haue beginning in thée alone, and be continued by thy
ofspring, but béeing by mée brought to the Innes of
Court, a place of abode for our English Gentri
                  •
               , and the
onely nurserie of true lerning, I finde thy nature quite
altered, and where thou first shuldest haue learnt law,
thou art become lawlesse: Thy modest attire is become
immodest brauerie, thy shamefast séemelynes, to shamelesse
impudencie: thy desire of lerning, to loitering loue:
and from a sworne souldier of the Muses, thou art become
a master in the vniuersitie of loue, & where thou
knowest not anie waie to get, yet fearest thou not outragiously
to spend. Report, nay true report, hath made

me pri
                  •
               i
                  •
                to many of thy escapes, which as a Father
though I couer, yet as a good father, tenderly I will rebuke.
Thy portion by yeare from me, is standing fortie
pounds, which of it selfe is sufficient both to maintaine
you honestly and cleanly: besides this, you are growne
in Arrerages within this two yeares no lesse then 100.
pound, which if thou wilt looke into, is sufficiēt for thrée
whole yeres to maintaine an honest familie. Now how
hast thou spent this, forsooth in apparell, and that is the
aptest excuse: and lauishnesse in that, is as discommendable
as in anie other, if in apparell thou passe thy
boundes, what make men of thee? A prodigall proude
foole, and as many fashions as they sée in thée, so manie
frumpes will they afford thée, counting thée to carrye
more bombast about thy belly, then wit in thy head.
Naye my sonne, muse not vppon the worlde, for that
will but flatter thée, but weigh the iudgement of God,
and let that terrefie thée, and let not that which is the
cause of pride, nussell thée vp as an instrument of
Gods wrathfull indignation. What account reapes a
young man by braue attire? Of the wise he is counted
riotous, of the flatterer, a man easily to be seduced, 
                  〈◊〉
               
where one will afford thée praise, a thousand will call
thée proud, the gretest reward of thy brauerie is thi
                  ••
                sée
yonder goes a gallant Gentleman: and count you this
praise worth ten score pounds? Truely sonne, it is better
to be accounted wittie, then wealthy, and righteous,
then rich, praise lasteth for a moment that is 
                  ••
               ounded
on shewes, and fame remaineth after death, that procéedeth
of good substaunce: choose whether thou wilt bée infamous
with Erostratus, or renowmed with Aristides,
by one thou shalt beare the name of a Sacriledge, by
the other, the title of Iust, the first maye flatter thee
with similitude, the last will honour thée indéede, and
more, when thou art dead. Sonne, sonne, giue eare to
thy Fathers instructions, and grounde them in thy

heart, so shalt thou bée blessed among the elders, and be
an eye sore vnto thy enimies. A second griefe, nay more,
a coras
                  •
               ue to my heart (young man) is this, you are both
prodigall in apparell, and in life, and vngratious and
vngodly curtisans, (as I vnderstand) are become the mistresses
of your mastership: & thinkest thou this report
could come to thy Fathers eare, and not grieue him?
Sonne, I had rather thou shouldest bée accounted foolish
then amorous, for the one may be borne withall, the
other is most odious. Incontinencie (yoūg man) is ye root
of all inconuenience, it dulleth the memorie, decayeth
the bodie, and perisheth the bones, it makethstedfast fickle,
beautifull deformed, and vertuous vicious: it impayreth
mans credit, it detracteth from his honour, and
shortneth his daies, a harlots house is the gate of hell,
into the which whosoeuer entereth, his vertues doe become
vices, his agilitie is growne to slouthfulnesse, and
from the child of grace, he is made the bondslaue of perdition.
The wisest by lewde loue are made foolish, the
mightiest by lust are become effeminate, the stoutest
Monarkes to miserable mecockes. I wot well (my child)
that chast loue is necessarie, but I know (my sonne) that
lecherie is horrible. A harlots wanton eie is the lure of
the diuell, her faire spéeches, the snares of sin, & the more
thou delightest in her companie, ye more hepest thou the
wrath of God against thy selfe: Let Lais looke neuer
so dem
                  •
               rely, yet Lais is Lais, measure not thy liking by
lookes, for there be some holy diuells: to bée briefe, the
end is this, he is best at ease that least meddeleth with
anie of them. Demosthenes will not buie repentaunce
so déere, as with high summes to purchase transitorie
pleasures. and I had rather thou shouldest learne of a
Philosopher, then bée instructed by thy owne fancie,
marke this axiome, there is no vertue which is odious
after it is attained to, but the pleasures of loue are then
most loathsome, when they are determined: and therefore

no vertues: and to conclude, not to be sought after.
It is idlenesse my sonne, that seduceth thée: for the
minde that is well occupyed, neuer sinneth. When thou
enterprisest anie thinges, measure thine owne fortune
by other mens successe: as thou considerest of theyr
ends, so imagine of thine owne. Thinke with thy selfe
the wisest haue fallen by loue, as Salomon, the richest,
as Anthonie, the proudest, as Cleopatra, the strongest,
as Sampson, and by how many degrées they did excéede
thée, by so many circumstaunces preuent thy ruine. It
is inough for sillie Birdes to be lead by the call of the
Fowler, and for men it is most conuenient to flye apparaunt
goods, & sticke to that which is indéede. Though
thine eie perswade thée the woman is beautifull, yet let
thy experience teach thée, shée is a Curtisan, and wilt
thou estéeme of painted Sepulchres, when thou knowest
certaine and determined substaunces? Doe we buie
ought for the fairenesse or goodnesse? Spangled Hobbie
horses are for children, but men must respecte
things which be of value indéede. I imploie my money
vppon thée, not to the vse thou shouldest be lewde, but
for that I woulde haue thée learned. It gréeueth mee
to heare reportes of thy companie kéeping, for where
thou offendest in the two formost, thou art altogether
nusled in this, and truelye I can not but meruayle
at thée, that béeing borne reasonable, to make election,
thou art so vntoward in picking out thy choice: Agrée
light and darkenesse? Or the I
                     •
                  knewmon with the
Aspis? Doeth the Wéesell loue the Cockatrice? Or
gentle borne, such as bee vngratious? No my Sonne,
broking bugges are not companions for continent
Courtyers: for who so eyther accompanyeth them, is
eyther accounted a spende thrifte, or one that is Sir
Iohn Lacke lande, eyther of their fraternitie, or else a
verie foole.
            
               Finde me out anie one of them, that in thy aduersiti
                  •
               
will helpe thée, or in thy misdemeanor aduise thée. Nay.
such they are, as will rather binde thée prentice with
Sathan, then exhort thée to eschew sinne. They bée the
Caterpillers of a Common weale, the sting of the Adder,
nay, the priuie foes of all Gentrie, and such they be,
that if they get, they care not how vngodly, and if they
cousen, they care not how commonly: So that thrée vices
haue nowe taken hold of thée, first prodigalitie, the
enimie to continencie, next lasciuiousnesse, the enimie
of sobrietie, and thirdly ill company, the decayers of thy
honestie. The meanes to auoyde these euills are manifest,
but they must be followed: it is not sufficient to
knowe a fault, but it is wisedome to amend it: Humble
thy heart (my sonne) to the highest, and the more thou
considerest of him, the lesse wilt thou care for this flesh:
For what is the body better by the gay rayment? truly
no more then ye soule is by superfluous zeale, for as the
one is foolish, so is the other franticke. Leaue lust, least
it lose thée, vse chast delights for they will comfort thée;
it is better driuing a toye out of memorie by reading a
good lesson, then by idlenesse to commit an errour, which
is sawed with repentaunce. Of néedlesse euills make
no accompt, y• lesse you accompany ye worst, the more wil
you be sought to by the best. Easie is it to say well, but
the vertue is to doo well: O my déere childe, as thy frend
I exhort thée, and as thy louing father I command thée,
to consider of the tender care I haue of thée, and to imploy
all thy indeouours now to my comfort: if thou hast
runne awry, call thy selfe home, and waye within thy
heart the reward both of vertue, and the discredite by
vice, so the honour of the one will incite thée, the infamy
of the other will deterre thee. For those debts that haue
ouerpast thee, in hope of amendement I will sée them
satisfied, and if heereafter thou fall into the lyke lurch, I
promise thée this, that as now I deale with thée as a father,

so then will I accompt of thée as a reprobate. Thou
séest fire and water before thée, chuse to thy liking: in
dooing well, I will reioyce in thée, in dealing otherwise,
I will nothing account of thée.
            The, father with teares hauing ended this his exhortarie,
is aunswered in humble sort of his dissembling
sonne, thus.
            Whatsoeuer (good father) hath passed, is irreuocable,
but what is to come may be considered of: it is naturall
in me to fall, and vertuous to recouer my selfe. I
confesse good sir, I am guiltie of errour, and haue faulted
highlye, yet not so greatlye as you intimate: the
world now a dayes is rather bent to aggrauate then to
couer escapes. Wherefore, as the first step to amendement
is repentance, so (deare father) I am sorrie for that
is past, and most earnestly request you to continue your
fauour, and no doubt but your sonne shall behaue himselfe
héerafter to your comfort.
            The father delighted with his sonnes discréete and
humble aunswere, conceiueth hope of amendment, and
returneth him to the Innes of the Court againe, and
setting him on free foote, exhorteth him to follow vertue,
and intentiuely to long after learning. But he, whose
heart was pliable to receiue all impressions, no sooner is
out of the view of his fathers house, but began to forget
his olde promises, and renewes the remembrance of
his mistresse, deuising by the way how to delight her,
and what sutes to prouide that may satisfie her. To bee
briefe, being returned to London, and quit of his fathers
seruants, (y• newes of his arriuall being blazed abroad)
his Broker in post hast comes and salutes him, his mistresse
by tokens and swéete letters greetes him, hée
maketh his marchant ioyfull in the receipt of the money,
and mistresse Minxe merrie for the returne of her
young copesmate.
            To be briefe, in post hast he▪ posteth to her chamber,

where Lo
                  •
               d what friendly gréetings passe, what amorous
regardes, how she blameth him of his delaye, and
with fained teares watereth his youthly sace, howe shée
sweares that she is constant, and yet a curtisan: howe
she vowes she is continent, and yet common: truly it
were a matter to make a Comedie on, to sée both their
actions, and to note their discourses: there needes not
many or long sermons on this, master Brokers help in
short space is sought for: for the money my youths 
                  •
               ather
gaue him, hath bought his mistresse a sute of the
new fashion. The Broker readie at a becke, without
delay furnisheth him with money: it is lamentable to
report euery losse, and sith in another place I meane to
set them downe, I will not motion them héere. In short
space, our Marchant beginneth to looke after more assuraunce,
and where to fore he was content with obligation,
he now hunteth after statutes. (This kind of bond
Gentlemen is well knowen among you, the vsurers by
this time haue built mannor houses vpon some of your
lyuelihoods: and you haue lost that for little, which
will not be recouered with much.) The force whereof
our youth considering not, so he haue foyson of money:
the world to be short, at the last falleth out thus, both
land, mony, & all possibilities, either by father or friends,
are incroched vpon, by this gentle master Scrape-peny,
so that now our youth finding neither suretie nor similitude,
by his flattering vsurer is laid vp close for escaping.
Let him write to his huswife Mistresse Minxe,
she disdaineth him: let him intreate the Broker he refuseth
him, let him make sute to the vsurer, he saith hée
shall not cousen him: thus (this Gentleman that neyther
by his fathers counsell woulde refuse, nor by his
owne experience be perswaded, to auoyde the eminent
daunger that hanged ouer his head, is brought to confusion,
and those friends that fawned on him before in
prosperitie, now frowne at him in his aduersitie: those

that depended with flattering words in time of wealth
on his finding, now altogether disdaine him that cannot
finde himselfe. Loe Gentlemen what it is to winke at
good counsell, and to preferre young attempts before old
experience: sée héere the fruites of contempt, and lette
these lessons serue you to looke into: had this Gentleman
regarded aduice, had he considered of his estate,
himselfe had bene at libertie, his friends in quiet. But
(alas the while) our heires new a dayes haue running
heads, which makes their parents abounde in teares:
some are led with nouelties in forreine Nations, some
with prodigalitie in their owne Countrey: some with
pride, the first fruites of all impietie: some by loue, the
ladie of loosenesse. If one hunteth after vertue, how many
hundreds doo dayly practise vice? Let the experience
of this young Nouice (my youthly countrey men) make
you warie, and sée but into this one parcell of his lyfe,
and giue your iudgement of his misfortune: his wit
was sufficient to conceiue vertue, yet knowing (with
Medea) the best, he headlong runne to the worst. Natures
giftes are to be vsed by direction: he had learning,
but hée applied it ill: he hadde knowledge, but hée
blinded it with selfe opinion. All graces whatsoeuer,
all ornaments what so they be, either giuen vs by our
fore-parent, or grafted in vs by experience, are in themselues
as nothing: vnlesse they be ordered by the power
of the most highest. What care conceiue you, may be
comperable to this young Gentlemans fathers sorrow?
who séeth his house pluckte ouer his head: his sonne
imprisoned to his great discredite, and the vsurer the
onely gainer, and yet the most vilest person.
            Nowe, what becommeth of our youth thinke
you? his Father refuseth him, dispossessing the ryghte
heyre of what hée maye, and poore hee is lefte desolate
and afflicted in prison. And in these dayes how many
are infected with this desperate disease, Gentlemen

iudge you, I my selfe with teares haue heard some priuie
complaints, and lamented my friends misfortunes,
falne so sodainly. My good friends y• are héerafter to enter
into this world, looké on this glasse: it wil shew you
no counterfait, but the true image of a rebellious sonne,
and the rewarde of contempt▪ of parents; account your
selues happie to learne by others experience, and not to
be pertakers of the actuall sorrowe: Obey your parents,
for they loue you, trust not to straungers, for they
will vpbraide you of their benefite; it is better to haue
the stripes of a friend, then the kisses of a flatterer. Plato
would haue young men to looke in the glasse, for two
causes, the one, that if they founde themselues beautyfull
in visage, and of exquisite stature, they might indeuor
to make the vertues of their minde, answerable to
the liniaments of the bodie: the other, that if they found
themselues of deformed shape, they should séeke to beautifie
the same by the inward perfections of the minde; &
for two causes my good friends, woulde I wish you to
consider of this mans fall, and read his misfortune: the
one, that not being yet nipped, you may preuent: the other,
that being but yet a little galled, you would holde
backe.
            Est virtus placidis abstinuisse bonis.
            As the Loadstone draweth yron, so let good counsaile
conquere your affections, as the Theamides of Aegypt
driueth awaie yron, so let the feare of God dispell all
worldly plesures: If a simple man fall to decay, it may
be borne withall, if a man of wisdome grow in arrerages,
may we not blame his follie? It is better to bée
enuied then pittyed, for thou art pittied alwaies in misfortune,
but en
                  •
               ied at time of thy prosperitie. To bée
briefe (Gentlemen) ouerlooke this aduisedly, & you shall
finde many things worthy the noting, and no few matters
written for your cōmoditie. This miserable young
man, ouerwhelmed thus on euerie side with manifolde

and sundry cares, beholding his most vnfortunate state,
in wofull termes in the prison house breketh into these
complaints.
            Alas vnhappie wretch that I am, that hauing a good
father that did cherish me, a tried mother that tenderly
nourished me, many friends to accompanie me, faire reuenewes
to inrich me: haue heaped sorrowe on my
owne head by my Fathers displeasure, refused of my
friends for my misdemeanour, & dispossessed of my land
by my prodigalitie. O incestpous lust that enterest the
hart, & consumest the bones, why followed I thée? & O
vngodly pleasure why didst thou flatter me? O wicked
and vngracious man that hast vndone me, and woe be
vnto thée (vile wretch) that in my miserie doest thus
leaue me. What shall become of me poore wretch? faine
now would I begge that bread, which vainlye I haue
spent: now too too late doo I sée, that fainednesse is no
faith, and he that trusts to this world, cleaues to a broken
staffe. Alas, how should I attaine to libertie? or by
what meanes may I escape my confusion? My Father
hath accepted of another sonne, and all by reason of my
lewdnesse: O that I had respected his vnfained teares,
O that I had accepted his good aduice, O that I had reiected
my flattering friends. But I sée no hope is lefte
me, my creditour is too cruell, yet hath he co
                  •
               soned me:
and faine would I be his bond slaue, woulde he release
me: but since no hope is lefte me of recouerie of my Estate,
I referre my cause to God, who as he will remit
my offence, so will he redresse my miserie and griefe.
            Whilest in these or such like tearmes, the poore
young man bewayles his heauie happe, sodainly enters
his cousoning creditour, and in outwarde shew bewailyng
his misfortune, yet in very truth the onely originall
cause of his destruction, comforteth him in these
or such like termes.
            Gentleman, the exigent and extremitie that you are

now at, though it be most tedious vnto you, it is most
lamentable in my opinion. These young yéeres to taste
of sorrowe so soone, is straunge, considering all circumstaunces:
but since the cause procéedes of your owne
lewd misspending, mine be the losse in part, but the greter
must your affliction be. I hoping of your well dooing,
neither denied your pleasure nor profite, yet in liew
and recompence of all, I finde iust nothing: a few subscribed
papers I haue, and some money I haue receyued,
but nothing to my principall, and yet notwithstanding
so fauourable wil I be vnto you, as if you procure
me any one suretie I will release you. To léese my money
I were loath, and to kéepe you héere it were more
loathsome. I wold doo all for the best, not hindering my
selfe, so you would straine your selfe to satisfie me somewhat.
            The Gentleman knowing in himselfe his vnability,
beginneth in truth to open his state, protesting, that neither
of himselfe, nor by any one at the present he is to
doo any thing, no not so much as if he released him to
pay his charges, such is his miserie, in that all his frends
had giuen him ouer, wherevpon most humbly he beséecheth
him, to way his cause, promising any seruice what
so euer may be: if so be it will please him to set him frée.
Mas vsurer smelling out the disposition of the youth,
beginnes to bring him to his bowe after this sort.
            The world at these dayes is such (my friende) as
there is small respect had of those which haue nought,
and great honour attributed vnto them, that will most
neerly looke to themselues: which I perceiuing, haue giuen
my selfe (as naturally men are inclined to séeke
after glory) to the hoording vp of riches, to the end that
my posteritie might be raised vp, and my fathers name
(which as yet is of no accompt) might by my meanes
become worshipfull. To perfourmaunce of this, trulye

I haue neither ben idle nor euill occupied: my thoughts
haue wholly bene set of gettings, and who so nowe a
dayes hath not the like meaning, his purpose will grow
to small effect. And though of my selfe, I doo what I
may, yet (as it is necessary) I must haue ministers, wher
by that which I looke for may be brought to my hands:
otherwise, my stocke might lye without vsaunce to my
vtter vndooing. Wherevpon, if thou wilt followe my
direction and be ruled by my counsell, I will release
thée of prison, and set thée at libertie: restore thée to thy
wonted credite, and countenaunce thée with my coyne,
so that in shorte space thou maist haue money in thy
pursse, and other necessaries to set thée vp againe. Thou
seest that now thou art miserable, but I will make thée
fortunate: thou now art almost foodlesse, by me thou
shalt be satisfied with the best: thy friends now disdain
thée, the day shall come that they shall séeke to thée: now
art thou without apparell, through me thou shalte bée
costlye attired: naye, what pleasure soeuer thou shalt
either imagine for thy preferment, or wish for to doo
thée good, thou shalt both finde me ready to performe it,
and friendly to continue it.
            The Gentleman surprised with this sodaine ioye,
and vnacquainted good speaches (not dreading that the
Serpent laye hidden in the grasse) most willinglye assented,
promising to the aduenture of his lyfe, (so his
creditour woulde be his wordes master,) to doo his indeauour
to perfourme his will, as hée ought to doo.
The Usurer séeing the minde of his prisoner, preciselye
bent to doo his commaunde, openeth his heart vnto
him thus.
            Gentleman, for that I haue an opinion of your
honestye, and truste in your secrecye: I will open
vnto you my minde, and according as I finde your
aunswere, I will shape your deliueraunce. Such time

as you were at libertie, you know you had acquaintaunce
with manye Gentlemen, and they not of the
meanest: who at sometimes as well as your selfe were
destitute of siluer: such as those be you must finde out
for me, I will delyuer you presentlye: apparayle you
in print, giue you money in your pursse, and at suche
an Ordinarye shall you lye, where the greatest resorte
is: your behauiour and vsage towardes all men must
be verye honest, especiallye in all causes looke into the
natures of men. If you spie out any one Gentleman
pensiue, enter into discourse with him, if you maye
perceiue, that either by parentage or possession, hée is
worthie credite, laye holde on him, feede him with money
if he want, and (as though it procéeded of your own
good nature) profer him to be bound for him: if he accept
your offer, come to me, I will furnish him: nowe
you may deuide the commoditie or the money betwéen
you, and out of your part (considering me after the bignesse
of the summe) take the rest for your owne fée:
which if you looke into, in a yeare will growe vnto no
small summe. This is the Load-stone must lead you:
and by all meanes you must fashion your selfe to féede
humours: this is an honest meanes to lyue by, this is
a way to libertie, by this you may pleasure your selfe:
and to conclude in dooing this, you maye mightelye in
short space inrich me. When you haue found out one fit
to your vaine, remember this lesson, that what so euer
vauntage you get of him, either for me, or for your self,
care not how little paper and inke he can shewe of
yours, kéepe still your owne stake cléere. In these matters
you must be verie circumspect, for there be now a
daies such vnderminers start vp, that scarce a man can
imagine his owne profit but they preach it a broad, and
laye it open. Thus doo you sée whereto you must
trust: howe saye you nowe, will you be content to doo
this.
            
               The young man aunswereth, Good sir, there is nothing
that you haue sayde that by mée shall anie wayes
be forgotten, I am readie and willing to put in practise
what you haue taught, and no doubt you shall finde me
so diligent, y• your selfe shal say, you were happie in putting
me in trust. In briefe the conclusion is this, the vsurer
glad of this new Gentleman broker, dischargeth
him, sets him a floate: now who so braue as our late prisoner,
or who so frolicke? The olde sorrowes are forgotten,
and new inuentions to cousin▪ possesse the receptacle
of his reason. His olde acquaintaunce flocke about
him, some reioycing at his recouered libertie, some wō
               dering
at his sodaine brauerie, yet fewe suspecting his
pretended and hidden knauerie. Of them some he saluteth
humblye, some ordinarilye, he was not so well instructed,
but it is as well performed. Now who but our
Gentleman is a companion for the best, and a cousiner
of the most, he staies not long before he be-prouided of a
praie, whom he so ordereth, as himselfe is pertaker of y•
halfe, though the other be paymaster of the whole, and
as those that are in the heate and extremitie of an ague,
desire drink to satisfie their drought: so this young gentleman
that is brought into bondes by one cousining
spend thrift, hauing once entered foote in the high waie
of prodigalitie, continueth headlong his course to his
owne confusion. But by the way it is to be noted, that
this Gentleman which is brought into the laps by our
late prisoner, hath his possession & portion alotted him, so
that our vsurer & his mate worke vpon sure groundes.
Two or thrée Obligations and commodities receiued,
our vsurer grows to new deuises, and sets his schollers
to practise them, saith he, I must now haue you learne,
to bring in this your friend to paie your debtes, and by
this meanes you shall bring it about, you shall when
next time he shall demaund your helpe, tell him that of
me there will be had no money before your olde bondes

be canceled, so that vnlesse he deale with me, by some
meanes to acquit that, it is vnpossible to attaine vnto
anie farther supplie. You may alleadge vnto him howe
in such like extremities you haue stucke, and will sticke
vnto him, and desire him in so easie a request he wil not
leaue you destitute, by this meanes shall you be rid of
your olde debts, and be as frée from inconuenience as euer
you wer. No sooner hath our seducer learnt this lesson,
but forth he trudgeth to find out this young master,
if possible may be, if so be he as yet be stored, he doth either
make him spend it or lend it, & vpō his new request
of supply, openeth vnto him all the circumstance which
before he had learned, & so cunningly handleth him, that
the Gentleman desirous of money is easilye content.
Wherevpon the matter is handeled thus betwixt the
Merchaunt and this Gentleman broker to preuent inconuenience,
if the brokers bond be an hundreth pounds,
the Merchant will lend fiftie more, and maketh y• young
man to seale an absolute bond as his owne debt, so that
the desperate debte of the decayed co
                  •
               soned, by his
meanes is brought to be the true debt of this silly Gentleman.
Naie when they haue fatted both their fingers,
they leaue not thus, but from money shoote at land, for
if the Gentleman haue 500. pound in stocke payable at
24. or 25. yeares, they will so worke as all that shall
be their proper goods which they will recouer out of the
executors hands, either by attachment or otherwise, and
besides that, so cunningly will they deale, that although
they haue sufficient assuraunce in hand alreadie, yet wil
they not leaue till they get an other more sure string to
their bowe, therby to compasse the poore Gentlemans
lands, at his want they will deale thus. This Gentleman
and the broker must bée inuited by the Merchant,
when amongst other table talke, M. Scrape-penie féeles
my youth if his monie be gone, & offring spéeches of willingnes
to prouide him alwaies at his néed, sets on by a

beck his cousoning mate, to procure y• gentlemā to craue
more mony, which he doth, ye merchant cunningly coulering
his craft, answereth him thus. Gentlemā you sée I

                  •
               m far out already, & vpon your single bond I haue disburst
a round sum of money, no lesse then 500. poundes,
which in a poore mans purse as I am, is no small quantitie,
neuertheles if you wil affoord me farther assurāce,
I wil not stick in redie mony once more to lend you 30.
pounds. The gentleman neuer tofore vsed to receiue redy
mony at y• first hāds, begins to yéeld him harty thāks
& humbly to pray him to demand & he will performe, for
saith he, considering your honest dealing, I cannot think
you may imagine any resonable assurance which I wil
not seale to. Why the quoth y• merchant, y• matter standeth
thus, if so be you will seale me an estatute for my
mony, no sooner shal you haue done it, but you shal haue
y• mony, all your bonds in, & a desesance, to this y• I offer
is reasonable, & to morrow if you will I will doe it. Agreed
quoth y• Gentleman, & so takes his leaue, the next
morrowe according to promise, the Gentleman sealeth
the assurance, acknowledging an estatute, before some
one Iustice of the bench, and comming to his Merchants
house for his money, is delaied for that daie of, & in fine,
his absolute answere is this, that without a suretie he
promised him none: he takes witnesse of his friend (as
he tearmeth him) a prety péece of witnesse, when he séeth
no remedie, he demaundeth his bondes, & he witholdeth
thē, he craues his deceasance, & cannot haue it. Thus is
ye poore Gentlemā brought into a notable mischiefe; first
in being co
                  •
               soned of his mony; next deluded by his estatute
wtout deceasance (for if y• deceasāce be not deliuered
y• same time or daie, y• statute is yet nothing auailable)
thirdly by his bonds detaining, which may be recouered
against him, & continue in full force; and the vsurer that
playes all this rie, will yet be counted an honest and
well dealing man. But flatter them who so list for me,

I rather wish their soules health, then their good countenances,
though I knowe they will storme at me for opening
their secrets, yet truth shall countenaunce mée
since I séeke my countries cōmoditie. Héere you see two
houses destroied manifestly, y• one of them, from a Gentleman
made a craftie cousoner; the other of them from a
landed man, a silly poore wretch. And wonderfull it is
to sée, considering the asperitie of the Penall statutes set
downe by her Maiestie, and her honourables Péeres in
the Parliament. How pretie collusions these cunning
merchants can 
                  •
               ind to infringe them. One priuate practise
they haue in deliuerie of ye commoditie, to make the
condition of the Obligation thus. The condition, &c. is
this, that if the within bound. T. C. his heires, executors
or assignes, doe well and truely pay or cause to be paide
to y• aboue named M. S. the sum of 40. pounds of lawful
mony of England, at his own dwelling house, scituated
& being in Colman stréet, which he y• sayd T. C. standeth
indebted vnto him for, if so be that he the sayd M. S. or S.
his wife be in life, y• then. Otherwise, &c. Now in this cō
               ditiō,
y• casual mart bringeth it out of cōpasse of statute,
thus by collusions M. Scrape-penie gathers vp his money.
Others worke by statute and recognisaunce, making
their debter to discharge in their bookes of account
the receit of so much money, where indéede they
had nothing but dead commoditie. Other worke by
liues, as if such a one liue thus long, you shall giue mée
during his or her life 10. pounds a yeare, for 30. pounds,
and be bound to the performaunce of that by statute. Other
some deale in this sorte, they will picke out among
the refuse commoditie some pretie quantitie of ware,
which they will deliuer out with some money, this sum
may be 40. pound, of which he will haue you receiue
10. pound readie money, and 30. pounds in commoditie,
and all this for a yeare: your bonde must be recognisaunce,
now what thinke you by all computation your

commoditie will ar
                  •
               se vnto, truely I my s
                  •
               lfe knew
him that receiued the like, and may holdly auouch this,
that of that thirtie pounds commoditie, there coulde▪ by
no broker be more made then foure nobles: the commoditie
was Lute stringes, and was not this thinke you
more then abhominable vsurie? Naie common losses, &
y• reasonablest is, for 36. pound for thrée months, accounted
a good penie worth, if there be made in redie mony,
20. pounds, naye passing good if they make 25. poundes,
I haue knowen of fortie, but sixtéene pound, and tenne
shillings. These be general payments, and receits, incident
to the most part of the young Gentlemen that I
knewe deale that wayes: and truely I my selfe knowe
within my time, no few number of Gentlemen, which
are vtterly vndone by this meanes, and vnlesse this euill
be preuented, and Gentlemen take not more héede,
more will followe after. But if the punishment of these
men were. In discretione Iudicis, notwithstanding the
lawe were couloured with all by them, yet the conscience
of the iudge woulde cut such ill members off. In
former ages these things being knowen, were lookt vnto,
and now when most punishment is meanaced, vsurie
is most practised. Well may we now sée that the craftie
haue as many cautiles, as the discréet cautions. If
we had as seuere lawes in England, as once in Athens
Solon set downe, wée shoulde then cast a rayne ouer
the head strong vnrulynesse of these Caterpillers: there
it was not lawfull, the Father béeing liuing, that anye
money shoulde bée lent vnto the sonne: who béeing
vnder his Fathers gouernement, was not to bée
ordered according to his owne lyking: and there whosoeuer
did transgresse this lawe, it was ordayned that
hée might haue no recouerye, nor bée reléeued anye
waye by iustice, for that it was doubted, that the sonne
hauing no wayes to aunswere that hée did owe, should
eyther be inforced by practising coniurations in the Citie,

or exercising priuye thefte in his Fathers house,
to ridde and discharge himselfe of the burthen of his
debte.
            The Aegygtians and Athenians séeing the errour
of couetous vsurie to take footing in their prouinces, by
approued iudgement concluded, that by no instrument,
plea, execution, or other meanes in lawe, a bodie
might bée detained: the originall béeing for corrupt
gaines.
            The Romanes, who not onelye inuented, but
imitated those Lawes which confounded errour, by
decrée of Senate, with the Athenians, in the verye
same tearmes as they didde sette downe, that no
money should bee lent to young heyres vppon interest,
neyther allowing the detinue pleadable, nor the vsurie
aunswerable, hauing a priuate eye into the vnmeasurable
and gréedie intents of those couetous carles, who
compasse the Fathers landes before the Sonne come
to it.
            In the Lawe of the twelue Tables, orders in this
cause were prescribed, and directions set downe by
the Tribunes: among whome, a man of rare vertue,
Lucius Gomatius instituted and made a law, where
in he enacted, that no vsurie, nor vsurers shoulde bée
allowed.
            
               Lucius Lucullus séeing this errour alreadye creapt
thorough all Asia, and (lyke a wise gouernour) wylling
to preuent, not onelye made a Law to auoyde
all occasion of vnlawfull games, but also appoynted
punishmentes to those that were subiect to the
errour.
            
               Tiberius Caesar as curious as the rest for common
good, didde with as greate circumspection as
might bée, take awaye the cause, and displace the effecte
of this mischiefe: not suf
                  •
               ering that to take

heade in his gouernement, that was the capytall
enimie of a well ordered State: Claudius Caesar
not yéelding to his Auncestours in honourable actions,
renewed these Lawes: Vespatian continued
them: and Marcus Antonius Pius, with Alexander
Seuerus established them with publike instrumentes:
who to the fore-passed erroures by farther
insight ioyned this, That by this vnlawfull getting,
manye of the best and most auncient houses
in all Italy, were brought to vtter ruyne, and confusion.
            The Indians disdayning such seruile attemptes, not
onely mislikie of lending, but also forbad borrowing,
neither is it lawfull for an Indian to proffer, nor agreeable
for one of the Nation to suffer iniuryes: disdayning
among them both the vse of oblygations, and the
abuse of pawning.
            Hatefull was this errour in Licurgus Common
weale of Sparta, whereas not onely the name was odious,
but also the thing it selfe was asperlye punished.
            
               Agis King of the same Citie, séeing the practises of
the couetous to work so wōderfully as they séemed, not
onely punished the attemters of vnlawfull profite,
but also in the open market place, hée burnt all the
bondes and Oblygations of the rich Bankers in the
Citie.
            In Thebes it was by statute 
                  •
               orbidden, that anye
man should be put in office, that within tenne yeares
before the election had practised any vnlawfull chaffering.
            The Germanes in theyr tarations of antiquitie:
whereas they bounde the Théefe to restore double
the thing he stole, they ordeyned that the vsurer shuld
make recompence foure folde▪ for his iniurie. And in

borrowing the felicitie of all these Countries, wée ar
                  •
               
not so happie, as to abridge those errours that they
most mislykt off: But héere perhappes some curyous
maintainer of vnnecessarie members will conclude,
that the state cannot anie wayes bée hindered by ani
                  •
               
these actions, inferring that the dissolution of one familie,
is the setting vp of another: which in as many
vertues maye match, and with as greate value imploie
it selfe in the state, as the other that is decayed.
            Héerevnto I shape this aunswere, that if it bée
true, that the nobilitie of the Father worketh in the
childe, I cannot sée howe these vpstartes maye anie
waies employe themselues in honourable Actions,
when as neither their auncestours euer knewe more
then their Beads, or their Fathers other then vnlawfull
gaines: and howe canne it bée that where the
minde onely worketh in seruile subiects, it should anie
waies be eleuated to attempt honourable exploits? But
be it these sorte of men are necessarie both in thēselues,
& for their Countrie, which cannot be concluded, in that
they be broken members: yet must they conclude by the
(touchstone of truth) the Scriptures, that their necessarinesse
in this world, makes them vnnecessary for God: by
whose presidents if they should leuell their lawes, I am
afraid the graft wold be so stiffe in the bending, that it
would be rather thought more necessarie for the fewell,
then worthy the correction. In the most happiest man y•
euer was, whether philosopher or otherwise, I find this,
y• one onely blemish in his actions hath made them ben
noted for an error: now if these men shuld in their enterprises
be ga
                  •
               de into, I feare me y• as in the black Iet
is séene no white: in the deadlye poison is founde no
preseruatiue: in the sprouting iuie, no fruite: on the
vnnecessarie thistle no grapes: so in these men the mischiefe

woulde be so manifest, that the shew of vertue
would be extinguished. So that I can necessarily conclude
this, that both these sorte of men are vnnessarye
for themselues, vnméete for their countrey, vnfit for a
family, yea conuenient for nothing, but to present the
painter with the true image of couetousnes. For themselues
how can they be profitable, in destroying theyr
soules, and martering their bodies? in consuming themselues
with thought, in deuising of newe attemptes to
delude. If they compare but their hearts sorrow, with
their excesse gain, they shall finde this most certain, that
the encombrances of the minde are so peysant, that they
doo by oddes weigh downe their commoditie in the ballaunce.
What is it to get good, and to loose happinesse?
to enioye much riches, and little rest? to haue manye
Lordships, and much hart-breake? Alas, what are the
goods of fortune, that they should entice? or the plesures
of the flesh, that they should allure? If our stately pallaices
were to continue permanent, if our worldly riches
were to make our after yeares renowmed, if euery
thousand of our ducates, were to benefit vs but with
a hundred good precepts: I wold beare with couetousnes
with the best, & practise it with the most: but since we sée
that much hording cannot be without sinne, much getting
without griefe, much profite without paine, much
increase of goods, without decrease of vertues, I cannot
but conclude with the philosophers, that the hoording vp
of riches maketh many impressions of vices. And that
those that are no wayes profitable for themselues, are
not worthy the names of citizens in a state: whereas,
when all things should be limitted by vertue, how can
vsury be winkt at, when it is no way legitimate. Our
lawes in this state, although they suffer a commoditie,
yet confirme not they taking: concluding heerein, a
meruaylous pollicye: to those haue in sight, which is,

that leauing it euident, that where neither Lawe of
God can limit them, nor disposing of right suffer them,
nor preuention of errours withdrawe them from punishing
this error, and not letting it slip, they as willyng
to pul away by péece-meales, as to confound altogether:
like wise Surgions eate out the dead flesh, by sundrye
plaisters, and no sodaine corosiue, thereby wisely warning
the wise to pull back by curtesie, and the indurate
by beholding their forbearance, to feare the scourge when
it shal come.
            Yet some will héere adde and inferre, (though
vnnecessarily,) that those whom I héere so asperlye reprehend,
are as religious as the best, haunt the Church
with the most, at their buriall be as bountifull as the
godliest, and therefore it may not be thought, that séeing
so many goods, they should follow the bad. To whom I
aunswere, If they heare correction of sin by often haunting
of sermons, yet continue their wickednesse, when
they know what it worketh, their actions are wicked,
their liues dissolute, their endes desperate. For theyr
bountie at their burialls, that is but their last action, &
their best attempt: but if we looke into the considerations
of their benificence, I doubt not but we shall finde
whereas their shooe wringeth them. If they are liberall
to leaue them a memorie when they are gone, alas they
striue against the streame: for this it will fall out, perhaps
they shal haue a few poore womēs praicrs for their
blacke gownes, but a thousande decayed Gentlemens
curses for their high exactions. If they be bounteous in
hope to recompence y• which is past, alas it is as much,
as to cast water to stop a gappe, or gather brambles to
builde mannor houses. If they be lookt into in this their
penie doale, we shall finde a kinde of impulsion in all
thinges: Truely, truely, I feare mée, if Mas vsurer

knewe he shoulde liue, hée had rother haue a fayre
pawne for his foure nobles, then a thousand prayers
of a poore woman: and the forfaiture of a Lease for his
xx. poundes, then the funerall Epitaph of the vniuersities
for his last willes liberalitie. Since therefore impulsion
forceth them to be bounteous, not frée will, liberall,
we must accompt of them thus, that both they
are both vnworthie praise, being vnwilling to be bountifull,
and little to bée estéemed of, though their pretence
bée neuer so perfect. What praise deserueth he that will
proffer medicines to a whole bodie? or the spur to a willing
horse, or the raine to an vnwildie colt, or honor to a
peruerse man: shall we conclude, because ye vsurer is rich,
he is righteous? Because wealthie? Wise: because sul
of golde, therefore godly? I feare me it wil fall out that
some of our scrape penies, are as worthie to be deliuered
to perdition, as Sauanarota of Rome, of whom Marubus
maketh mētion) who not satisfied with excessiue gain in
his life time, at his death became a praie to diuells: It
gréeueth me to consider of y• vnhappie state of some, who
like fine cloth are deuoured with these moths, like white
rambricke are stained with this yron moulde: & silly
birds, are deceiued with the call of this Fowler. O vnhappy
state, staind with so vnprofitable members, whose
féete tread the wayes of errours, mindes imagine mischiefe,
heartes are indurate, confounding the fatherlesse,
oppressing the widow, making all poore, and themselues
onely rich.
            A lamentable case it is, to sée howe true simplicitie,
the maintainer of peace, is almost altogether
exiled out our common weale: and that worldlye
wit doeth wade so farre, as heauenlye wise are
brought into admiration of their mischiefe. In other
notable Gouernementes and common weales,
this one vice hath hadde a fall, and héere where it

should be most detested, it is most vsed. Great hath ben
                  •
               
our wisdomes in repression of cōspiracies, great our policies
in maintaining of peace, circumspect our preuētions
to eschew mutinies: and yet the long time we haue
laboured in this, yet dayly more and more it groweth
to head: and whereas the other vices haue bene exterminated
by good looking to, this (though altogether loathed)
is most lookt after. And in this case I must appeale
to you (right Honorable) whose wisedome is continually
imployed, to the maintenaunce of our state: & craue
you cast your eye aside, and but looke into the worlde a
lyttle, lette your Herauldes Bookes be spied into, consider
the state that hath bene, and now is: and I feare
me there will some teares fall, and more care be conceiued.
Alas I know it well, that many auncient coates
will be found there vncountenaunced, and it is to bee
found out, that some sléepe on their beddes of downe,
in those mannor houses, which were builded for the
staye of some of our best noble seigniors. Nay, is it not
true, that more are eaten out with vsury, then anye other
abuse whatsoeuer? And although Commissions are
graciously graunted from her Maiestie, as a most mercifull
Prince, and from your Honors, as most sage, fatherly,
and prudent tenderers of gentry, grown into pouerti
                  •
               :
yet such is the contempt of some men, as they
neither measure commaund, nor haue respect to conseience.
The reuerend Fathers and eyes of Religion in
this Common weale, how exclaime they on this vice,
and pronouce the wrathfull threates of the Almightie
against these vngracious gatherers? yet how slenderly
they regard them, their manifest & notorious mischiefes
beare record. So that it is to be feared, that when neither
honourable command may controll them, nor diuine admonition
reclaime them, they are growen into a reprobate
sense, and hane forsaken the Law of the Lord, and
hunted after the whore, and are dronken with the lycour

of her abhominations.
            
               Principijs obsta sero medicina paratur,
               Cum mala per longas inualuere moras.
            
            Noble Lords, may it please you yet a little more to
giue me leaue, that as I haue manifested the mischeife,
so (to my slender conceit) I may imagine a salue. The
Nobilitie, Gentrie, and other heires whatsoeuer, either
by reason of their Fathers tenour are wardes vnto her
Maiestie, or else by the tender prouision of their Parents,
they are lefte to the discretion of their kinsfolke.
For those that by her Maiesties prerogatiue, by y• death
of their Fathers, fall into her protection: the most part
of them are begged by Gentlemen, and committed to
their tuition: among whome, as there be some prouident
and carefull to consider of the childes commoditie,
so (I feare me) other some are selfe minded, and gréedie
of their owne gaine: which if so be it fall out. I feare
me the childe that is vnder this gouernment will happely
miscarrie, for if maintenance come from the protector
slenderly, the nature of the youth béeing noble,
will couet after supplie, and so through the couetousnes
of the one, growes the confusion of the other, and by this
meanes growes ye Gentleman into y• Merchants booke
in arrerages, when his warden furnisheth him not according
his degrée and calling: but it may be, that there
bée purposes imagined by the gouernour, and practised
by the Merchaunt, so that the one will not bée pertaker
of the shame, yet will he not sticke to beare part of the
gaine. But to let further matters wittingly ouerslip,
for that I finde it good to winke at somewhat: returne
we to the other sortes of heires, lefte to the tuition of
friendes: among whome there growe lyke inconueniences,
as in the former: for nowe a dayes kinsfolkes
are as couetous as others, and as craftye as
the best, whose priuate conueyaunces the young heires
knowe, and seuerallye when they be sought into, will

open. But for the ordering of all these thinges, and
the recouering of this state, it were conuenient that
the Warden of the Wardes vnder her Maiesties protection,
should at the receit of the Gentleman, be bound
according to the value, to the honourable, that
haue authoritie in that case, for the vsage of the Gentleman,
and that certaine stipend might be set downe annuallye
for his prouision, rather with the most then
least, so that then it will fall out, that hauing sufficient
of his owne, he will not depend on the supplie of an
other. The like annimaduertion if it bée had in respect
of the other, and the care of taking the bonds, and prefiring
the portion set downe by the direction of certaine
Iustices of peace in euerie shéere, we shoulde haue lesse
complaints to trouble your honours, and merchauntes
should want young ministers to ridde them of their resuse
cōmoditie. I haue glaunced into a matter (my good
Lord) which if wisdome consideratly looke into, there
will growe an exquisite platforme. These causes right
honourable are necessarie, and néedfull to be noted, and
such they be, that no doubt they will be as beneficiall to
the state, as anie other whatsoeuer. For by this meanes
your honours shall be praised, the wardens wel thought
of, the Gentlemen kept in good state, and the Merchant
abridgde of his craftie dealings. I haue heard this cause
lamented of among the most part of that profession, who
loth their title should be attributed to so outragious
dealers. If they will desire the name, let them vse the
nature, & let not all the whole order bée blemished, by
a few disordered dealers blame: but to leaue this to your
honourable and graue consideration, and to returne to
your curteous Gentlemen, to whome this matter most
pertaineth, & for whose onely cause this pain is taken: I
most earnestly beseech you looke into your owne states,
& consider with your selues, the misery & mischiefe that
groweth by these follies: consider y• end of all these practises

which the vsurers doe put in vre, forsooth it is to
make you beggers, where now your supplies be plentifull,
& to emptie your purses, where now they are replenished:
consider of their mercy either it is imprisonment,
or else libertie with more shame: weygh of their ends
agréeing to theyr life: it was a pretie and wittie saying
which was written.
            Auaro quid mali optes ni vt viuat diu.
            Wish a couetous man no more mischiefe, then that
he may liue long. For he dieth daily in care, and consumeth
in thought: refraine prodigalitie, so shall you
haue no need of thē: bée continent, so shall you be sought
to of them: leaue them to their owne lusts, they are not
of y• Lord: let your garments be comely, & not costly: sor
a comly continent man is more estéemed of, then a costly
spende thrifte accompted of. It is the vertues of
your mindes, the perfections of your vnderstandinge,
your intellectuall contemplacions, that makes you accounted
of among the wise, and beloued among the
learned: In your professions be studious, for y• brings
profit: an houre well spent, is better then a dayes pleasure:
eschew those things that may decay your memory,
& in euery good action cōtinue to the end: trust not to
apparant goodes, beléeue not credulously y• faire spoken,
be as prouident to eschew trouble, as the enuious is
prudent to procure your discomsort: looke on nothing
that may altar you from a man, thinke on nothing that
may mislead you, if you promise, performe it, but in promising
vse discreation: these be the fruites of experyence,
learnt by some in sorrowe, and lette them bée
practised by you in securitie Let not the garish shew of
a present pleasure, the sillie shadowe of an earthly
delyght, a transitorie similitude of a momentanye
glorye, make you followe that which wyll coste
you manye sighes and sundrye sorrowes (when
you looke into your state, and see howe you are

compassed of friendes, smilde vpon by fortune, beautified
by nature, pefectd by art, when you perceiue care
hath not yet forrowed your forhead: labour euen then
to continue friendes, to make peace with fortune, to
mainetaine nature, to studye arte, and béeing fréed
as yet from trouble, fence your actions so strong, as they
may neuer become troublesome. Aurelius in his Court
seeing certaine Philosophers vsing vnséemely iestures,
wagging their heads, toying with theyr garments, and
stamping with their féete, gathering by their exteriour
behauiour, how vnapt their actions were in respect of
their precepts, exprlsed them the court, as vnméete to be
preferred to honours. Although not Marcus Aurelius,
but wise Saba now gouerning, think you that gracious
Elizabeth cannot as well finde out a vain head vnder a
wauing feather, a dissolute minde vnder a codpeece dublet,
a wanton thought vnder a straunge habite, as the
Emperour vnder a lyght iesture? Yes truely (Gentlemen):
no doubt but that eie y• winketh at most things,
séeth many, and that wonderfull capacitie that comprehendeth
so much discipline, cannot ouerslip the mislyke
of masking brauerie. If one errour were as much banished
England, as it was Rome, neither should idlenesse
offer the couetous opportunitie, neither the idle
be cousened by the couetous. It is idlenesse that maketh
amorous, it is idlenesse that maketh fascionatine,
it is idlenesse that bréedes excesse, it is idlenesse that
destroyeth all humane happinesse the eye fixed on
heauenlye contemplations, gazeth not on earthlye
beautie, the thought occupyed on remembrance of moral
preceptes, neuer vouchsafe the misdéemings of the fantasie:
y• bodie subdued by assidious trauaile, is neuer altered
by the motions of the flesh: the hope grounded on
immortality, hath not reference to an houres pleasures.
So that man is neuer altered in himself, enimie of himselfe,
procurer of his parents troubles: but euen the
                  •
               
               
chiefly, whē idlenes is predominant, follypreferred, & fashions
to féed fantasies allowed of. The meanes then to
auoyd the Usurers booke, is to be continent: the way to
be continent, is not to be idle: the reward of not béeing
idle, is the daily increase of more knowledge: and the
increase of more knowledge maketh a man happie. The
sting of the Aspe confoundeth in slumbers, the venonie
of idlenesse, waiteth carelesse opportumities: truly gentlemen,
the first step to auoyd expence, is to grow in contempt
of brauerie, which if our noble younge youthes
wold practise for a while, it wold so fall out, y• not onely
vaine fantasies should cease, fonde fashions finde no fauourers,
and the vsurer hauing his odde refuse commodities
dead i
                  •
                his hand, would either afforde better peniworths,
or séeke for forreine traffique. But to leaue
you Gentlemen to your good counsailes, and returne to
you good master vsurers, whose eares glowe at the rehearsall
of these enormities, I must pray you giue mée
leaue to make vp a conclusion, and to finish these fewe
lines with an admonition for your cause; and though
the corrections I vse be bitter, account of them the better,
for why they be more cordiall. A gréedie desire of
gayne, is the disease that infecteth you, some termes it
thriftinesse, some néernesse, but in plaine tearmes, it is
vsurie: and that is nought els but a gréedie desire of other
mens goods, and this by the commandement is forbidden
to be followed, and therefore irreligious are they
that vse it. The man that coueteth gold, conceiueth not
goodnesse, his appetite is of the earth, and those that are
earthly minded, sauour not the things that are of God.
What though you cloath your selues in simplicitie of
Doues, and your inwarde habite be worse then the voracite
of Wolues; he that made you knoweth you, and
he whom you offend can (and will) punish you; you wil
say you were naturally borne, (as Tully witnesseth) to
take care for your selues, and to prouide Victum & vestitum,
               
meate and clothing: and I graunt it, but wher
                  •
               
find you, either Ethinke, prophane, or sacred sentence, to
confirme your extreame hoording vp of golde, yea then
most earnestly, when you are most rich? The laboursome
Ant gathereth not in excesse, but sufficient prouision for
the Winter, yet without reason: and you which are reasonably
borne, hoorde vp more, then orderly (at first
sight) you well knowe howe to imploy. You long after
Nabals vineyard with Iesabel, but the dogs shall deuour
you in the gate: you heape house vpon house, land vpon
land, Quasi numquam sit periturum soeculum, as though
this world would last euer, but sodainly shal the wrath
and curse of the Lord fall vpon you, and (without spéedie
repenta
                  •
               nce) he will consume you in a moment. O
turne spéedely vnto the Lord, and put not off from daie
to daie, least his wrath be hot against you, and he make
you pertakers of the plagues of Chore and Abiram. Remember
your olde escapes that haue past you, consider of
their falls that are decayed by you, and your selues if
you haue anie contrition, and compunction of heart, wil
lament the generall misfortune with me. Did you arise
of nothing? Were you calde from base degrée to high estate?
From poore seruants wer you made rich masters?
Why, your goods make answere, saying, you haue more
then you can well spend, and I deeme the greater your
talent is, the more you haue to answere for: but weigh
in your selues, howe this greate masse of money grew
vnto you: you must count that this Farme came to
your handes by the forfayture of such a Lease: this
money became yours, by the vertue of such an Obligation:
you haue scrapte vp this ready coyne, by making
Centum pro cento: nay, you haue vndone these manye
poore Gentlemen, onely by iuriching your selfe. Too
true it is, (alas) (and wisedome priuately bewaileth it,
to looke into your crueltie, and Gentlemenes folly) that

many houses are decayed by your meanes, and that
you are Lords of that, which should be the portion of
more profitable subiects: whose miserie driueth them to
trie conclusions in all places: and both to forsake their
Countrey, I pray God not to alter their conscience.
            Nay in these extremities that they are driuen into,
which of you either reléeueth them? or comforteth them
in their sorrowes? so farre are you (you worldlings) frō
lessening their miseries, as that (Perillus like) you inuent
new tortures, to driue them from your doores, calling
them varabonds, and bride well birdes who in
very truth were your best Masters and setters vp? but
your selues with Perillus shall tast of the engines you
haue prouided for others, and the Lorde shall pittie the
fatherlesse, and comfort the afflict
                  •
               d, when that dreadfull
daye shall come, in which the heauens shall be opened,
and the Sonne of man shall come to iudgement:
how will the case then stand with you? shall your welth
then acquite you? No, no; the Iudge is not partiall, he
is iust in all his dooings, and true in all his sayings.
In that day the horrour of your conscience shall condemne
you; Sathan whom you haue serued shall accuse
you; the poore afflicted members of Christ shall beare
witnesse agaynst you; so that in this horror and confusion,
you shall desire the mountaines to fall vpon you,
and the hils to couer you from the fearfull indignation
of the Lord of hostes, and the dredfull condemnation of
the Lambe Iesus. When it shalbe found out, that you
wer rich, yet reléeued none: that you were of wealth, yet
comforted none: that you rather replenished the prisons,
then released the prisoner: that your life be sound sawced
with crueltie, and no one action sauoring of mercie:
the Lord shal place you among the goates, & pronounce
his Ve against you, he shall thunder out this sentence,
Goe you cursed into euerlasting fire, prepared for the

diuell and his angeles. This is the reward of wickednesse,
this is the punishment of crueltie: look vpon this
therefore (you worldly minded men,) and consider of
these sayings: harden not your hearts, but be you conuerted,
reléeue the poore, be harboursome, restore to the
owner that you haue wrested from him, and turne,
turne, turne vnto the Lord (I beséech you) least you perish
in your owne abhominations: and to conclude, accompt
of me as your wel wisher, who for publike commoditie
haue opened your inconueniencs, and for brotherly
amitie, counsailed you to call your selues home:
and I beséech yo as spéedely reclaime you from your
errors, as I doo brotherly admonish you of your escapes.
How happie were I that hauing lesse cause, might haue
lesse matter to write on? And haplesse are you, if not
won with these warnings, you giue more occasion to be
written on: now stay you where you are, & alter your
natures, and where you were accustomed to doo ill, now
acquaint your selues to follow goodnes; and then it will
thus fal out, that I which exclaimed vpon you for your
vices, will then honour you for your vertues: & where
in common assemblies your name growes odious, in
publike audience, you maye be praised for your good
life. The Lord send our Gentlemen more wit,
our vsurers more conscience, and vngodlinesse
a fall: so Nobilitie shall not decay,
but the sinner shal be reclaimed,
and wickednes confounded.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            ¶THE DELECTABLE
Historie of Forbonius and
Prisceria.
            
               IN Memphis (the chiefest citie of Aegypt)
a place most renowmed by reason of the
opulencie of the princes that haue gouerned
that Monarchie: at such time as Sisimithres
was head Priest of the same,
& Hidaspes gouernour of the Prouince, a
noble Gentleman called Forbonius (highly accounted of
for his vnreprouable prowesse, and among the best sort
allowed of for his vnspekable vertues) made his abode,
whose tender yeares not yet subiect to the experience of
more riper iudgement (as the winding Iuie about the
stately Oke) entangled it selfe with many amorous obiects,
now allowing this choice, now approuing y• person,
straight admitting a third. But the fates hauing
registred his last opiniō in euerlasting & permanent destinie,
made his manifolde aspectes (as yet not stayed) to
light vpon one séemely impression, and to allow of but
one onely paragon: yet so sealed they his opinion, as (if it
be true that the gods euer were lasciuious) I thinke the
chiefest commaunder of the Heauens might vouchsafe
of such dalliance, and be onely amorous in this, that
knowing heauenly perfections to be resident in earthly
substance, he would either borrow fire of Venus to make
the creature pliable, or carrie fire into the heauens from
whēce Promotheus first did steale lightning. Fauorable

was the climate, that allowing vniuersally to all the
creatures it compassed onely, blacknesse, vouchsafed
Prisceria (Forbonius mistres) such swéet fauor, who borne
of noble parents within the citie, (as of Solduuius, vizeroie
of that Prouince adioyning to the citie, and Valduuia,
daughter and heire of Theagines of Greece, the
copartener of sorrowe with Caricleala, the straunge
borne childe of the Aegyptian king:) not onely match
al titles of honour with exquisitenesse of proportion, but
also so coupled the perfections of the minde, with the
proportion of the bodie, as rather nature might disdaine
her industrye, not art repent her of the dowrie she had
granted her: this sweet fixed Comet coasted Forbonius
affectiōs, who like the careful Marriner, hauing (amidst
the frostie night) sought for his Loade starre, and at
breake of morning (his eies almost dazled with looking)
found it out: so our noble young Gentleman, hauing
past ouer many personages wt a slight ouer looke, at last
finding out his mistres alotted him by fate, yéelded willinglye
vnto importunitie of the Destinies, and
wonne altogether to bée subiect, béeing captiued with
fancie, hée applyed himselfe wholye to the accomplishment
of his desires, and the attainment of his mistresse
fauour: and for that the Goddesse of loue is plyable to
all benignitie, as not suffering a true seruitour to bée
long vnrewarded: it so fortuned, that she prosperously
furthered our noble Aegyptian in his purpose, preferring
him by opportunitie to the sight of his desired pleasures:
for the propinquitie of their abode was such, as
that Priscerias chamber windowe, had a prospect into
Forbonius garden, by which meanes, the Gentleman in
his meditations might beholde his mistres, and Priscer
                     ••
                  
               
(beeing by the equitie of the destinies prefigurated to
straunge misfortune) might haue occasion to looke, and
séeing, might loue: but as this conueniencie was fauourable
one waie, so was the frowarde disposition of

the parents, vntoward on the other parte. for Solduuius,
(whether lead thereto by appointment, or driuen to the
exigent, by some former mallice borne by the progenitors
of Forbonius) had neither a lyking to the youth, nor
a longing to haue his daughter marryed: eyther lead
by couetousnesse, for that he woulde not stresse his coffers,
or by enuie, for that he contemned Forbonius: yet
what is concluded secretly amidst the heauens, cannot
be circumuented with mans circumspection: for Forbonius
as one which depended onely on the fauour of
Prisceria, though fortune had hereft him of occasion to inioy,
yet would not he be seuered from the benefite to beholde
her whom he loued: who warmed with the same
fire, in increasing his flame, kindled her owne fancie, &
being as willing as the other to procure remedie to her
passion, with manye chaunge of coulours, and sundrye
swéete aspects, opened that to her seruant, which he wished
for in his mistres: who (with like sorrowes requiting
euerie circumstance) as one willing and borne to
attempt: at such time as Prisceria solitarily solaced her
selfe at her windowe: in mournefull melodye (making
his Lute tunable to the straine of his voice) he recorded
this Sonet.
            
               THE Turtle pleased with his she compeare,
               With sweet aspects, and many a turning lure,
               Describes the zeale in tearmes should well appeare,
               If nature were so gratious to assure
               The silly bird with speech as well as I:
               Who stopt of speech by turnes my woes descrie.
            
            
               And though perhaps my tearmes by distance be,
               Seaioynd from thee: I wis my mou
                     •
                  nfull mone,
               Doth pearce thine eares, and Eccho tells for me,
               In sowre reports: would she and I were one.
               
                  For whom I liue, and whom I onely loue,
               Whose sweet aspects my dying fancies moue.
            
            
               And if the aire by yeelding calme consent.
               Make sweet Prisceria priuie to my suite,
               Vouchasafe deere sweet, that beautie may relent,
               And graunt him grace, whom distance maketh 
                     •
                  uter
               So either hope shall make me climbe the skie,
               Or rude repulse enforce my fancies flie.
            
            
               Prisceria not altogether priuie to the report, yet concluding
all purposes to hir owne fantasie, conceyuing
by his manifolde sighes, aspectes, and motions, wherevnto
he applyed his actions, with a solempne sighe, as
wishing him present, and a séemely bent, as requiting
his curtesie, betooke hir selfe to hir pillowe, where comparing
euerye accident together, both of the zeale shée
bare to Forbonius, and of the profer he proffered to her,
she brake out into these spéeches.
            Alasse (vnhappie Prisceria) what vntoward destinie
hath befallen thée? That in thy flowring yeares and
prime of beautie, thou art become a thrall to vncertaine
pleasure, neyther knowing from whence the errour
first sprong, nor by what Treacles it may at last bée
expelled. If it bée that nature enuying my perfections
hath allotted mée this purgatorie, that hauing
at free becke all the benefites of Fortune, yet I
should with inwarde bondes bée inchained with the
holdefast of fancie. Alasse that in prefixing the torment,
shée hath not proffered a remedye, or in bestowing
an vlcer, hath not vouchsafed a corrasiue. Howe
straungely am I martyred, sillye maide that I am?
That by one onelye looke haue conceyued such an impression,
as neyther arte can alter with medicine, nor
time eate out with continuaunce.
            Woe is mee that I loue, yet fortunate am I

that I hate not, for by the one, I am depriued of lybertie:
by the other, I shall onerpasse the sorrow by surenesse.
Yet are thy thoughts more fauorable to thée Prisceria,
then the successe in thy loue will be fortunate.
Thou louest Forbonius, and why? for his vertue: yet thy
father hateth him vpon olde grudges, with whom when
rancour preuayleth, what may be more lookt for, then
contempt and denyall? But Forbonius séeketh Priscerias
fauor, not Solduuius friendship: but Prisceria cannot enioy
Forbonius, without Solduuius fauor. But Forbonius
will by happie marriage conclude all mallice, but thy
father hauing an enuious mind, will haue a suspitious
eare. Alas why imagine I wonders in my fancy, hoping
that those destenies (which inthralled my affection) wil
subiect my fathers resolutions: since neither reason alloweth
me any probablitie to worke vpon, neither hath
Forbonius any motion as I sée to compasse ought: well,
to the satisfaction of my freend, and to the contentment
of my sorrowing hart: my freend shall know my zeale,
and I will continue my affection, which being begun
with so wonderfull causes, must néedes finish with a
miraculous effect.
            With these conclusions she fell a sléepe, leauing me
to returne to Forbonius, who being tormented with the
same furie, and troubled with equall fancie, séeing his
light to be eclipsed, I meane his Mistresse vanished, began
heauely to complaine himselfe in these or such lyke
termes.
            Alas you destinies, whose courses are ineuitable:
how fortuneth it, that in bestowing casualities in mās
life, you prescribe not meanes to preuent misfortunes?
and onelye beginning to fester the heart, prefixe no presidents,
whereby the humours may be expelled. If all
things are to be referred vnto an ende, what may I wel
imagine of my estate? who intercepted by all occasions,
must either finish my misfortunes miserably, or desperately.

O loue, iustly maist thou be counted licentious,
whereas thou neither prescribest limites to thy selfe, to
inthrall: nor meanes to thy subiects to attain libertie.
But why exclaime I on him, that hath blest me with a
benefit? as though the fate that made Forbonius happie
in louing, cannot establish his successe, as that it shall
not be measured by misfortune. I glorie in the benefit
of my martirdome, since a certain inward hope assureth
me, that diuine beautie cannot be sequested from iust
pittie, nor a tried seruice in loue, requited with a disdainfull
hate. But foolish man that I am, how maye it
be, that in séeking beautie, I labour not to attaine it? &
desiring to enioy a benefit, I attempt not to make triall
of my Mistresse bountie? Why, by last nights becke she
vouchsafed some shew of acceptaunce: and that may as
well be of reproofe as lyking. (O Forbonius,) it is a silly
hope that is conceiued by signes, either attempt further,
or perswade thy selfe of no sauour. Her father (silly
wretch) enuieth thée, and thinkest thou to compasse
his daughter? alas, faint hope is this when as those that
should build vp, doo destroy: when such as shoulde perswade,
doo diss wade: when as he that dooth commaund
most earnestly, dooth forbid. But loue hath no respect of
consanguinitie, but hauing onely relation to him which
he fauoureth, delighteth onely in the possession of his
choyce, yet is not Forbonius, sure she loueth: well, I sée
he that will be fortunate, must hazard, and that man
that will be gracious in his Mistresse eye, must by outward
attempts and vnaccustoured purposes, séeke to confirme
his happinesse.
            Wherevpon (vpon sundry conclusions) he inserred
thus, that the next day, by certaine rare attemptes, hée
would either finish that he had so long sought for, or perish
in the perfourmance of his enterprise: and the day
seruing to attempt that which he imagined by night,
he bethought himselfe of the Cymnosophists of y• countrey,

among whom remembring one of singular experience,
and notable lerning, he resorted vnto him, opening
first, how he was inthralled by fancie, how precluded by
all occasions especially by the fathers disdaine, next, how
some opportunitie serued him, lastly how the agony tormented
him, desiring the Philosopher, whose wisedome
coulde sée into all causes, to search out the fatall Exigent
of his loue. Appollonius (for so the Gymnosophist
was called) hauing calculated the Gentlemans natiuitie,
and séeing some planets retrogate: couering the asperitie
of the destenies, with the hidden secrecie of an
Artist, discoursed thus.
            O Forbonius, if as Socrates did his golde, thou drown
thy affections, it would follow that with him thou shuldest
enioy frée libertie of thy selfe, and not suffer thy affects
to rule thy reason. Art thou bewtiched by Circes?
of a humane shape hast thou gotten a beastly forme? of
a man borne to reasonable actions, wilt thou now swallow
an vnreasonable misfortune? If many cares be the
decayers of the minde, if many sorrowes the consumers
of the body, better were it by day to studie the lyberall
Sciences, then at such time as we shoulde imploye our
selues to honourable attempts, to become vnhonourably
licentious. Alas Forbonius considering what a louer is,
what a louer suffereth, what a louer séeketh, I finde the
person idle minded, I finde his patience an insupportable
sorrow, I finde himselfe not himselfe, in y• he is vnreasonable.
The daily actions of a louer are discommendable,
the night exclamations so odious, as that they in
this cōuert nature, who shadowing y• world with darknes,
limitting each creature his rest, yet they euen in y•
time labor in out-cries, in which they shuld take conuenient
rest. My good friend, y• gretest wisdome is to measure
euery attēpt wt his casualties, & if ought happen y•
may séeme impossible, to cast off the rayne, and suffer
it to passe in that sorme it was concluded in.
            
               Thou louest (Forbonius,) better wer it thou didst loath:
for by loathing thou canst but be comp
                  •
               ed vnnaturall,
but by louing thou mayst fortune to be vnfortunate.
If all thinges be ordered by the higher powers, it is
vayne you must conclude to infringe what is concluded
on, if the destenies haue appoynted, that Forbonius
shall not be happie in inioying Prisceria, Forbonius is
not reasonable in suing for Prisceria. Unhappie Paris in
Helen, though fortunate in inioying her beautie: but
when loue begins with a fading benefit, it endeth with
an euerlasting sorrow. The conclusion of a wise man
must be, to yéelde to the necessitie of Fate, and to
continue contented with that which cannot be altered
by succession. Tell me by the immortall Gods, my good
friend I beséech thée, what happines conceiuest thou possible
to follow, either in enioying thy Lady, or finishing
thy loue? Alas, the greatest swéete is a continuall sower,
and after many vnfortunate repulses, a sodain misfortune
makes an ende of many a yeares courting. I
speake all this to this ende (my Forbonius,) because I
would preuent that by counsell in thée, which otherwise
(if thou follow thine owne lure) will be a confusion
to thy selfe. Thou comest to me for counsell to compasse
loue, and I would confirme thée, that thou shouldest
auoyd the occasions of following loue. Thou wouldest
by my meanes strayne arte to subdue nature, yet
I labour both to direct by arte, and to suppresse by nature.
Truly (my good friend) looking but to the hidden
secretes of nature, I finde thée subiect to manye misfortunes,
and no way to be remedied but by one only vertue.
Thou shalt (after long toyles) compasse that thou
hopest for, yet when thy greatest plesures begin to take
the originall: euen then shall they finde their exigent.
Since therfore the reuolutions of the heuens conclude,
that by onely continent forbearaunce, thou shalt be disburdened
of many misfortunes, I beséech thée lette this

transitorie pleasure be accompted off as it is, and finish
vp thy loue with my counsell: so shalt thou be fortunate
in preuenting destenie, and continue in happines, wher
too much loue may make thee vnluckie.
            
               Forbonius lead by the inconstant opinion of his young
yeares, not waying the graue and fatherly councell of
Appollonius, aunswered him thus.
            O Father, when the wound is giuen, it is ill counsayling
how to auoyd the stripe, and when the heart is
captiuated, there can be but small recouery by counsell:
how wer it possible for me to restrain that in my selfe,
which the Gods could not limit in their Deities? Easie
it is for the whole Phisition to counsell the sick patient,
but when y• extremitie wringeth excessiuely, none
bideth the martirdome but the afflicted. O Appollonius
my minde measureth not the iniquitie of fate, neyther
doo I séeke limits for that, which by no direction can
be exterminated from out my heart. So that good father
rather respect my present sute, then my future discommoditie,
and by your counsell make ende to my sorrowes:
whereby it will thus come to passe, that enioying
the pleasure I long wish for, I may more boldlye
beare the assault of froward fortune when it commeth.
If it be onely death, that my enemie Fate threteneth
me with, let me enioye this benefit, as for Fortune, I
will be friende to her enemie, the which is the graue,
and acquaynting my soule but with the onely Idea of
my Mistresse, thinke my selfe as happie, as they that
haue walkt the Elisian fieldes, a long space to their content.
            
               Appollonius willing to doo him good, yet sorrie hée
could not preuaile with his counsaile, at length began
thus.
            Since my Forbonius thou wilt be ruled by no counsayle,
thou must be pertaker of thine owne sorrowe. As
for thy request, I will so satisfie thée, as not onely thou

shalt at thy pleasure conceiue thy Mistresse minde, but
also open vnto her the secrettes of thy heart, by which
meanes thou shalt héerein haue accomplishment of thy
wish, though in so dooing thou shewe but lyttle wisedome.
Wherevpon, resorting to his studdie, he brought
foorth a mirrour of notable operation, a practicke in
prospectiue, which deliuering to Forbonius, he commended
it thus.
            O my friend, I deliuer thée that héere to féede thy humour,
which was composed to comprehend Arte. In this
myrrour thou maist after thou hast written thy minde:
taking the Sunne beame, send the reflection to thy mistresse
eye, wherby she may as legeably read thy letters,
as if they were in her handes, and by thy instructions
made priuie to the secrets of thy glasse, retourne thine
aunswere in that very forme in which thou sendest.
For the rest, I leaue it to your discretions, and good fortune,
wishing all things to fall out as prosperouslye in
your loue, as you would, and as I wish.
            Our noble youth (In amours) hauing furnished
himselfe of that he sought for, repayred vnto his studie,
where deuising in what tearmes he might sollicite his
Mistres, at last he cyphered out his sorrowes in this sequell.
            
               
                  THat fancie that hath made me thrall to thy beautie
(sweete Prisceria) commendeth my submission
to thy good grace: beséeching thee to be as fauourable in
ministring a remedie, as thy beautie was readie to procure
my thraldome. I make no resist in this my louing
torment, but onely yéeld my self subiect to y• impression.
Maye it therefore please thée (swéete Prisceria) to be as
beneficial in this, as the Gods are in their bounty, who
for euery faithfull interatie, returne a gratefull satisfaction.
And heerein maist thou sée my faith to be stedfast,

since Arte it selfe serueth opportunities, and ministreth
me both a meanes to open my hidden sorrowes,
and thée a messenger to bewray thy silent secrets. I beséech
thée (by the swéete statues that are builded for the
Goddesse that is honoured in Paphos,) to be as iust in
returning fauour, as I am forwarde in bewraying my
fancie: so shalt thou haue the possession of him, that is
by destinies appoynted thy assured beads-man, and I
enioy those plesures, in which I may be only fortunate.
Till then I must write my self as I am, The most vnhappiest
louer that liueth.
                  
                     Forbonius.
                  
               
            
            This cyphered out in faire charecters, and disposed in
such termes as his fancie then prefixed him, he tooke his
way into his garden, waiting some necessarye opportunitie,
to put his purposed attempts in practise, and to
bewray his woes to Prisceria: who woūded with the remembraunce
of Forbonius perfections, and séeing no
waye but his presence a meane to expell sorrowe, betooke
her selfe to her accustomed prospecte, and with
longing lookes she leuelled at his loue, which was alredie
stroken with her beautie.
            The Gentleman fitted by these conuenient occasions
beganne his Philosophicall demonstration, and
taking his aspecte as necessarilye as hée might, hée
presented Prisceria with his pensiue submission: who
confirmed by so conuenient opportunitie, betaking
her selfe with all spéede possible to her studie, and by
a becke charging him with no lesse dispatch to giue attendaunce: she gaue annswere to his amorous intreaties
with this gracious affabilitie.
            
               
                  
                     THe Climate Forboniurs where vnder I was 
                        〈◊〉
                     ,
(beléeue me) either hath pre
                        ••
                     gured me the deste
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     
to be inamoured by thée, or thée the subiect that shoulde
besot me: and truly héerein the working of the Gods
are secret, who imploy such thoughts in me, as now by
thy letters I finde wrought in thée, making a vnitie
in both those hearts, wh
                        •
                      by reason of parents enui
                        •
                     s,
are like to finde fatall conclusions. And whereas by necessitie
of fate I finde my selfe wholly captiuated to thy
pleasures, I doubt not but that God whome wée honour
for his brightnesse, and who by his lightening ministreth
to our misfortunes, will be fauourable in our
procéedings. For me, if thy constancie be such as my true
zeale is, I beséech thée by the same Godddesse to succour
me, by whome I found my selfe first inthralled and
made subiect to thée: meane while I will write as thy
selfe, and rest as I am. The most vnhappiest louer
that lyueth.
                  
                     Prisceria.
                  
               
            
            These conclusions being ministered with the same
aspectes they were profered, the two poore couple had
no other meanes to noate the effecte of their priuate
ioyes, but onely by silent smiles, gracious regardes, and
trickelyng teares, and such lyke amorous actions, each
one wishing the other, either happie in possessing their
delyght, or fortunate, if by death they were reléeued
of their sorrowe: and being intercepted by the closure
of the euening, they betooke themselues both of them
to their restlesse pillowes, concluding vpon many purposes,
how to finish their languishing and tormenting
martirdome.
            
               
               Forbonius as one born to attempt, concluded with himselfe,
considering how fauourably all occasions fawned
vpon him) to attempt y• stealing awaie of Prisceria: who
poore soule in carefull dreames imagining of her dayes
fancies, was forestaled of all fauour by the vnhappie
approch of her father, who furnished with all worldlye
policies to preuent what he mislyked, and compasse that
he suspected: perceiuing by his daughters solome aspects,
some secret sorrow y• troubled her, hauing remembred
that axiome of the Philosophers, that dreames
are the prefigurations of dayes sorrowe, watched his
time so néerely, that euen at that verie instant he entered
the chamber of his daughter, when drowned in her
swéet delightfull dreames, she begā at his entrie to cry

                  〈◊〉
                thus. O fortunate Forbonius! which her father marking
verie precisely, and concluding wherevpon the sigh
tooke his holde fast, awaking his daughter on a sodaine,
verie cunningly compassed her thus.
            O my Prisceria, let it not seeme straunge vnto thee,
to beholde thine aged Fathers vnaccustomable accesse,
since he is now perplexed with vnacquainted feares. Alasse
my daughter, thy father séeing thée beautifull, is
not carelesse of thy comfort, neither can he that laboured
to bring thée to lyght, suffer shée to passe thy dayes
in loathsome mislyke. At this instaunt when I entered
thy chamber, in thy dreame (as me séemed) thy soule betokening
(as it shuld séeme) some daies sorow or plesure,
exclaimed thus: O fortunate Forbonius, thou knowest
how hatefull the person thou diddest name is to thy father,
who if he be fortunate in thy dowrie, I loue him:
I shal estéeme him vnfortunate in the fauour thou wilt
assure him: who béeing a collop of my 
                  •
               lesh, wilt not allowe
of that, which is loathsome to thy father: O Prisceria
Solduuius séeth, and thy secrete dreames bewraie
that the fortunacie of Forbonius, is eyther vnfortunate
for thy selfe, or not allowable by thy Fa
                  •
               hers opinion.

Thy chaunge of constitution, thy hidden sorrowe, my
swéet child made me suspitions, but now the verie true
messenger of thy minde confirming me, I must without
circumstance conclude, that Prisceria loueth her fathers
enimie, that Prisceria desireth Forbonius fauour, and detesteth
her fathers choice, which if it be so; O my daughter,
I feare me thy loue will not be so fauourable, as my
disdaine bitter, wherefore if thou art intangled, since
thou knowest my opinion, forbeare, or if no wisedome
will conclude thée within limites, my displeasure shall
exclude thée from out all benefit of my fauour. Choose
now Prisceria, whether with calme perswasions thou
wilt yéeld to my bent, or by vnaccustomed displeasure
bée pertaker of thy Fathers wrath.
            Upon these conclusions, Prisceria all abashed, shaking
of the drowsinesse of her dreaming, made aunswere to
Solduuius in these tearmes.
            These straunge suppositions, my good Father, argue
the slender opinion of your self, who by the vncertainest
signs y• may be, confirme your opinion as you please. In
my dreames you said I called Forbonius fortunate, and
may it not bée, that as my tongue vttered y• it thought
not, your minde immagineth that which is not? counting
euerye lyght shadowe a substaunce, and euery little
similitude of truth, an vndoubted demonstration.
Did I call thine enimie fortunate? Truely Father I
feare me I might iustly conclude it, for he poore Gentleman
little dreameth on displeasures, when at such time
as rest should occupie your sences, you most trauaile in
your rancour: by certaine tokens as you saie, you conclude,
that I am affectionate, and by this silly conclusion
of a dreame, you inferre an vndoubted trueth,
that I am enamoured with Forbonius, and if perhaps
the necessitie of the fates be such, Prisceria shall finde
her selfe happie in louing Forbonius, by whose meanes

her Father may cease rancour, and take rest, and his
daughter satisfied with that she séeketh for, be no farther
troubled with dreaming fantasies.
            
               Solduuius perceyuing by these spéeches the certaintie
of his daughters affection, as one altogether enraged,
calling vp his wise, and raising his seruaunts, left
the 
                  •
               illye maide all amased at his sodaine departure,
whereas the olde man exclaiming vppon the disobedience
of his daughter, and thundering out many reuenges
against poore Prisceria, caused his horses to be saddeled,
and perforce (contrarie to her expectation) made her
bée conuayed to Farnusium, a mannor house of his
owne, a place for the solytarinesse more fit for a Tymon,
then conuenient for a beautifull Ladie, the onely
companie there being shepheards, who vpon the Vast
mountaines recorded the praise of the Countrie fauourer
Pan, and the rurall amitie betwéene them, and their
Countrie lasses. Thus from stately Court, from the regards
of her swéet friend, from the plesures that follow
the Citie, her companions were rurall maidens, her retinue
forlicke shepheardes: whose slight rapacitie not
yéelding anie comfort to allaie the Gentlewomans sorrowings,
made her (to her more hart griefe) continue her
pensiuenesse, and sup vp her conceiued sorrow in silence.
But to repeat the moane on the other side that amorous
Forbonius made, when hy certain report he had notice of
his mistres departure, were wonderfull, who béeing in
himselfe altogether confounded, not knowing where
to finde her out which was the onely mistres of his fantasie,
Lord with how many sighes breathed he forth his
sorrowe, and compassed on euerie side with dispairing
ioyes, in the verie same garden where tosore hee repeated
his pleasures, hée in these waylefull tearmes recounted
his miseries.
            Alas vnfortunate Aegyptian, whose faithful affectiōs
ar
                  •
                so immutable, as thy naturall all colour is vnstainable.

How iniurious are the destinies? that graunting thée
life, they dayly hasten thy destruction, that vouchsafing
thée plesure, they sus
                  •
               er it not to be permanent: that admitting
thée the benefit of beauties good grace, they depriue
thée of the possession and blessing of that thou desirest.
Alasse what shall befall mée? when the glorie of
my eyes are dimmed? when the pleasures of my heart
are determined? whē she whom I loue néerest, is farther
off frō my presēce? whē y• iniurious repulses of y• father,
makes euery attempt of Forbonius vnfortunate. Wo is
me, what way may I imagin to make an end of my miserie?
Should I with dispairing rashnesse finish vp the
Catastrophe of my troubles? Should I béeing bereft of
her by whom I liue, dispossesse my selfe of that she most
doth like? Should I in making my selfe onelye fortunate
by y• alaie of my sorrows, leaue Prisceria to her daily
mournings, both to lament my deceasure, & her frow
               
                  •
               rd
destinie? no Forbonius, it is but vaine quiet that is
to her discontentment, who béeing equally inthralled wt 
thy selfe, will as willingly be pertaker of thy torment
as thy self. But why waile I thus in feminine sorow,
when my happinesse is to be accomplished by manly attempt?
Solduuius rigour hath caused Priscerias absence,
yet cannot the fathers displeasure determine the daughters
loue, she liueth to thy wish Forbonius, she loueth to
thy weale Forbonius, she wilbe cōstant til death Forbonius,
why shouldest thou then leaue her vnsought for,
Forbonius? Attempt vain man, to seke out thine assured,
let not the distance of place disanull thy good hap? Solduuius
banishment is concluded within the limites of
Aegypt, and since it is so, either Forbonius will attaine
her he desireth, or reuenge the vniust rigour of an iniurious
Father.
            Upon this resolution, as a man quite dispossessed of
himselfe, he hasted to Apollonius, recounting vnto
him how all things haw fortuned, beséeching him (not

without foison of t
                  •
               ares) to séeke but by art where Prisceria
was conuersant, and to direct him by counsell, who
altogether was confounded with dispaire. Apollonius
by exteriour 
                  ••
               gnes conceiuing the interiour heartesgriefe,
and séeing the poore young Gentleman martyred
so miraculously, comparing times and reuolutions, attained
to the knowledge of her aboad, and concluding
in himselfe to comfort him, which almost dispaired, hee
spake thus to Forbonius.
            
            My good friend, whence groweth it, that neyther the
nobilitie of thy auncestors? nor thy forepassed attempts?
neither the benefit of thy mistres fauour can confirme
thée, but that thou wilt be carefull for that which thou
hast alreadie almost compassed. Pluck vp your heart my
swéete Forbonius, for thy Prisceria is not farre from 
                  •
               hée.
Farnusium a mannor house of her Fathers, seated East
out of this Citie, whereas she is so circumspectly lookt
into, that by anie meanes, vnlesse by secret and conuenient
pollicie, thou canst come to the accomplishment of
thy desire. Thou must therefore attyred altogether
like a shepheard, depart this citie, and by some conuenient
meanes procure the kéeping of some one Farmers
shéepe, which is resident among those mountaines, by
whose meanes thou shalt fall in acquaintance with the
garden of thy mistres, called Sotto, and hauing conuenient
occasion to satisfie thy affection, possesse thy selfe of y•
thou hast long desired.
            
               Forbonius concluding his replie with hartie thanks,
sodainly departed, & remembring himselfe of one Corbo,
a tenaunt of his, which had his mantion house verie
conueniently, seated hard by the mannor house of Soldunius,
he hastely shaped his iourney vnto him, & making
him priue to y• he desired, & swearing him to be constant
& continue secret, he betooke himselfe to y• kéeping of his
tenants shéepe, & not forgetting to driue his flocke néere
vnto the lawnd wheras Solduuius seruants grased their

shéepe, he so demean
                  •
               ed himselfe, that not onely he attayned
the fauor of Sotto which he sought for, but also for
his curteous affabilitie was accoūted of amōg y• whol
                  •
               
troup of heards men for y• best singer, & y• tunablest Musition.
His Aeglogs were so delectable, & the deliuery of
them so delicate. Whervpon by good fortune it so fel out,
y• 
               Forbonius vnder the coulourable name of Arualio,
was desired by Sotto, to resort vnto y• mānor house, who
informed him of all y• hapned, telling him of the careful
demeanour of his sorowing young mistres, who pleased
with nothing but with solitarie musicke, pined her selfe
awaie wt melancholy, & not without cause, (said he,) for
my old master hath forbiddē me y• admitting of any one
to her presence, not suffering her to passe the limits of
my warie eie: nor allowing her to walke wtout y• castel
walles for her recreation. For my sake therfore chaunt
her some melodie, & resort with me to a conuenieet arbour
within our garden, whereas shée walking for her
recreation, may perhaps take some delight in thy sorowfull
mournings, in y• they most fit her fantasie. Forbonius
as willing to wend, as he desirous to perswade, accompanied
Sotto to Farnusium, wher hauing a place appointed
him to apply his Aeglogs, and the Goddesse before
him whom he should deuine vpon, hee vnder these
secrets described his passions.
            AMidst these Mountaines on a time did dwell,
            A louely shepheard who did beare the bell.
            For swéete reports and many louing layes:
            Whom while he fed his flocke in desart wayes,
            A netheards daughter deckt with louely white,
            Behelde and loude the lasse Corinna hight.
            Him sought she oft with many a sweete regard,
            With sundrie tokens she her sutes preferd,
            Her care to kéepe his féeding flocke from stray,
            Whilst carelesse he amidst the lawnes did play.
            
               Her swéete regards she spent vpon his face,
            Her Countrie cates she sent to gaine his grace,
            Her garlands gaie to decke his temples faire,
            Her doubled sighs bestowd on gliding aire,
            Her pleasant kisse where she might steale a touch,
            
               Corinnas zeales to Corulus was such.
            He wanton shepheard glorying in her sute,
            These signes of zeale to folly did impute:
            Not waying of her many louing sightes,
            Her watrie eyes, her secret moane by nights:
            Her carelesse comfort in her fruitfull ewes,
            Her monefull Aeglogs full of carefull shewes,
            But scorning that, (which might that Godhead moue,
            Who in a shepheards forme, for Ioues behoue,
            Did charme the watchman of the heifer faire,
            For whose behoofe the thunder left the aire.)
            He left the place wher
                  •
                she did loue to bide,
            And draue his flocke another way beside.
            Whose dire disdaine (the God that kindles loue,
            And makes impressions straungly from aboue
            Misliking) strake with fancie at that stower,
            The silly shepheard wounded by his power.
            Now sought for that which he tofore did shun,
            And now the heat of fancie first begun,
            To straine a yéelding in his restlesse minde:
            Such are the wounds that passe from fancie blinde,
            That Corulus will now Corinna wee,
            Though earst he loathd and scorned so to dooe.
            Now she that sought with many a swéete aspect,
            Is sude to now by him that did neglect.
            Now bountifull is swéete Corinnas grace,
            Now like the Sunne in welkin shines her face,
            Her eyes like Gemini attend on 
                  
                     •
                  oue,
            
            Her stately front was figured from aboue,
            Her daintie nose of Iuorie faire and shéene,
            Bepurfurate with ruddie roses béene.
            
               Her cherie lip
                  •
                doth daunt the morning hiew,
            From whence a breath so pleasant did insew,
            As that which laide faire Psiches in the vayle,
            Whome Cupide woode and wo
                  •
               d to his auayle.
            Within the compasse of which hollowe swéete,
            Those orient ranks of siluer pearles doe méete,
            Prefixing lyke perfection to the eie,
            As siluer colde amidst the summers skie:
            For whence such wordes in wisdome couched be,
            As Gods from thence fetch their Philosophie:
            Her dimpled chin of Alablaster white,
            Her stately necke where nature did acquite
            Her selfe so well, as that at sodaine sight,
            She wisht the worke were spent vpon her selfe,
            Her cunning thus was showde vpon the shelfe:
            For in this pile was fancie painted faire,
            In either hand an asure pipe she bare:
            By one repeating many a swéete consent,
            By other comfort to the heart she sent.
            From which a seemely passage there doth show,
            To strangers pleasures that are plast alow,
            Like to the forrowe Phaeton did leue,
            Amidst the welkin when he did receiue,
            His Fathers charge, and set the world on fire:
            In this faire path oft paced sweete desire,
            At euerie turne beholding with delight,
            That Marble mount that did affect the sight.
            Of virgins waxe the swéet impression was,
            The cunning compasse thereof did surpasse,
            For art concluding all perfections there,
            Wrote this report, All graces bideth here.
            Which Cupide spying built his mansion so,
            As scorning those swéete graces to bestoe
            O
                  •
                mortall man, with bowe ibent doth waite,
            Least Ioue should steale impressions by deceit.
            
               And wondring at the 
                  〈◊〉
                come
                  ••
                
               
                  •
               ake,
            In thought concludes it m
                  ••
               ter for the aire
            Then mortall mould: next which the stately thies,
            Like two faire compast marble pillers rise,
            Whose white dooth staine the daintie driuen snow:
            Next which the knées with lustie bent below
            Conioynd with nerues and cords of Amber swéete,
            This stately pyles with gladsome honour gréete,
            Such stately knées as when they bend a lite,
            All knées doo bend and boow with strange delyght.
            Her calues with stranger compasse doo succéed,
            In which the asures streames a wonder bréede,
            Both art and nature therein laboured haue,
            To paint perfection in her coulours braue,
            Next which, the pretie ground worke of the pile,
            Doth shew it selfe and wonder doth beguile,
            The ioyntes whereof combind of Amber swéete,
            With corall cords, yéeld bent to seemely féete.
            From which, whose li
                  •
               t to lift his gasing eye,
            Shall greater cause of wonder soone espie.
            When on the backe he bends his wauering looke,
            In which the worke and taske Diana tooke,
            When with Arachne for the prise she straue,
            Both art and nature there excelled haue.
            Where from Pigmalions image séemely white,
            Where close conueiaunce passing Gordians plight,
            Where louely Nectar drinke for all the Gods,
            Where euerie grace is stained there by ods.
            Will not content with gasing looke for more,
            And spie those armes that stand his sight before,
            Which for their mould the Aegyptian wonders passe,
            Which for their beautie staine the Christall glasse,
            Which in their motion maister natures swéete,
            Where bl
                  •
               shing streames present a secrets meete,
            Will now amazde, conclude at last of this,
            That in the hands all grace concluded is.
            
               Where Nature limits euer fatall time,
            Where Fortune figures pleasure in her prime,
            Whence spred those fingers tipt with Iuorie,
            Whose touch Medusas turne may well supplie,
            Where to conclude as now the shepheard déemes
            All grace all beautie, all perfections séemes.
            Thus Corulus with many secret thoughts,
            D
                  •
               aines on her whom erst he set at naughts:
            And forst by scorch of inward shrowded fire,
            He séekes for her his fancie did require.
            Who fraught with woes in secret shrewdes renude,
            Her silent griefe vnsure of that insude.
            Her Corulus with warie search at last
            At sodaine found: and as a man agast
            At that he saw, drew backe with feare, and than
            Remembring of his lwoes his sute began:
            Of wéete Corinna blessed be the soyle
            That yéelds thée rest amidst thy dayly toyle,
            And happie ground whereon thou sa
                  •
               est so:
            Blest be thy flocke, which in these lawnes doo go,
            And happie I, but hauing leaue to looke:
            Which said, with feare he pawsd, and bloud forsooke
            His 
                  〈◊〉
                face, till she that wrought the fire,
            Restorde the red, and kindled swéete desire.
            And with a bashfull looke beholding him,
            Which many months her pleasant foe had bin:
            She cast her armes about his drooping neck
                  •
               ,
            And with her daintie fingers dawde him vp.
            And kissing of his palie coloured face,
            (Like as the Gods) by touch did soone displace
            The sowre, that alterd the poore shepheards swéete,
            When thus she gan her Corulus to gréete:
            O louely shepheard happie be the hower,
            In which (I know not by what secret power)
            
               The Gods haue sent thée hether to thy frend,
            Alas what griefe should Corulus offend?
            Whom fairest Nimph might well a liking lend.
            Thy grasing Ewes with vdders full of milke,
            With fruitfull 
                  •
               leece and wooll as softe as silke,
            Take glory in the fatnesse of this soyle
            And praise theyr Mastres care and busie toyle:
            And now accuse thée of thy drooping mone,
            Tis but enough for me to wayle alone
            For why Corinna onely haplesse is.
            Poore Corulus at last reuiude by this,
            Gan sighing silence now to interrupt
            And banish feare which did his hope corrupt.
            And thus he said: O Nimph of beauties traine,
            The onely cause and easer of my paine:
            Tis not the want of any worldly ioy,
            Nor fruitlesse bréed of Lambes procures my noy,
            Ne sigh I thus for any such mishap:
            For these vaine goods I lull in fortunes lap.
            But other gréefes and greater cause of care,
            As now Corinna my tormenters are.
            Thy beautie Goddesse is the onely good,
            Thy beautie makes mine eyes to streame a flood,
            Thy beautie breakes my woonted pleasant sleepe,
            Thy beautie causeth Corulus to wéepe:
            For other ioyes they now but shadowes be,
            No ioye but sweete Corinnas loue for me.
            Whereon I now beséech thée, by that white
            Which staines the lilly, and affects my sight,
            By those faire locks whereas the graces rest,
            By those swéete eyes whereas all pleasures nest:
            Doo yéelde me loue, or leaue me for to die.
            
               Corinna studious for to yeeld reply,
            With many teares bedewd the shepheards face,
            And thus at last she spake: O happie place.
            
            
               The which the Gods appoynted for my good.
            What blessed Nimph within this sacred wood
            Hath pleaded poore Corinias lawfull cause▪
            
            Or be they dreames that now my fancie drawes?
            O Corulus ne reads
                  •
                thou sue to me,
            Nor spend the teares for to accepted be,
            Since long ore this I would haue bent to bow,
            If modest feare could well haue taught me how.
            In happie bonds of Himen I am thine:
            Ne plead thou grace to her that dooth incline.
            Thus with a kisse she sealed vp the deed:
            When as the shepheard glad of happie spéed
            Embracing her he had desired long,
            Gan call for grace to her he so did wrong.
            Confirmed thus with mutuall glad consent,
            They finisht vp the marriage that they ment.
            Great was the day, and euery field compéere
            Delighted in the pleasure of his déer
                  •
               .
            Poore I alone in sad lamenting layes,
            Depriued of the pleasure of my dayes,
            In carefull tunes in briefe concluding thus:
            O happie times and planets gracious.
            When in a mirrour beautie did behold
            The hidden woes, my muse could wel vnfold
                  •
               
            
            And with a liking looke shape some replie.
            But woe is me, since fathers crueltie
            In changed formes hath altred termes of sute,
            And altering place hath made my Goddesse mut
                  •
               .
            Who honouring Pan, may hap the person sée,
            Whom habit strange perswades it should be me.
            THis delectable Aeglogue finished by the amorous
Forbonius gaue occasions to Prisceria to satisfie
the thoughts that then troubled her fantasie. For confounded
in her selfe, not knowing what to conclude of

that she shepheard Arualio had reported, yet welnigh
perswades that the reporter was he she liked off, with a
séemely grace, not minding to incurre the lightest suspition,
turning toward Forbonius, whose hand was on
his half-pe
                  •
               ie, shée say thus.
            Gentle shepheard, that Nimph thou louest shuld alter
from womanhood, that considering thy true zeale, &
exquisite proportions, would not requite thy loyaltie,
with the benefit of her loue. Truly Madame (aunswered
the imagined Arualio, and I thinke my selfe gracious
in this, that for her whom I loue I am enioyned
this torment, wherevpon t
                  •
               rning himselfe a side, and
drying vp the teares which should bewray his fancie, he
was at last knowen by Priscoria, who altogether amazed
at the presence of Forbonius, forgerting weln
                  •
               e the
infortunacie she was intangled in, cast her armes about
his necke, yet colouring with a séemly disdain to shadow
her opinion, and blindfold subtill 
                  
                     •
                  otto, shée sayde
thus. Truly shepheard, if I may preuaile with thy mistres,
thou shalt not be vnrewarded for this curtesie: &
Madame (said Forbonius) might I counsell your Ladiship,
you should not sorrow for that maye be compassed
at your pleasure.
            This said, Sotto taking Arualio by the hand, tooke
his leaue of his young Mistresse thus: My young Ladie,
I as studious of your pleasure as maye 
                  〈◊〉
                haue
brought you this young shepheard to laugh at, & if his
musick like you, you shall haue euery day at the least a
lay or two. And héerin shalt thou doo me no small pleasure
said Prisceria? & so with a séemly regard shaping a
loth departure, y• two shepherds resorted to their flocks,
Arualio altogether amazed at his mistres beautie, and
Sotto very iocond he had fitted his young Ladies fancy
so well: whervpon y• old shepheard, turning to our solitarie
& distressed Arualio, said thus, What maks thee
thus sollom my youthly compéere? cease to gréeue thy

selfe about those thinges that may be compassed, if thou
loue, time shal eate out that which Treacle cannot, and
thou shalt either be fortunate in possessing hir thou desirest,
or in ouerpassing thy passions with good gouernment,
leaue loue to those that like her. Arualio not to
séeke of curteous humanitie, gaue him this aunswere.
O Sotto, it is not the loue that greeueth me, but the
meanes to compasse loue: I labour not to attain loue,
but to possesse the profits of my long seruice in loue: as
for time, it may worke wonders in them that are repulsed:
but when Cupid is gracious, and occasions vnfortunate,
thinke you y• this is not a bitter sowre? Yea,
but answered Sotto, & if it be so Arualio plucke vp thy
sprights, and doubt thou not, but if thou prooue dilygent
in pleasing my young mistresse, I meane not to
be idle, if I may know whom thou likest of. As for that
doubt not, said our disguised Forbonius, for since I know
by thy onely meanes my loue is to be compassed, I wil
not stick in so slight a pleasure to profit, when as by thy
meanes I may onely succour my selfe. In such lyke
termes passing ouer their werisome walke: At last they
betooke themselues each of them to the folding of their
sheep, for it was welnie night, and the Sunne was stéeped
in the Ocean: whervpon Arualio the shepheard, becomming
now Forbonius indéede, hasted him home vnto
his Tenaunts house, making him both priuie of his
happie 
                  •
               ortune, and concluding with himselfe howe to
performe that he wished for, and for that long trauayle
requireth some quiet, he betooke himselfe to rest: where
recompencing al his nights wakings, with a quiet sleep:
At dawne of day he returned in his counterfeit habite
vnto the field, and vnfolding his flocke, he draue them
into those pastures, that wer adioyning to Sottos walk:
who no sooner spied Arualio, but saluting him very curteously,
he earnestly intreated him, (setting all excuses

apart) to go to Farnusium, and in the best sort that hée
might to solace the vnfortunate Prisceria▪
                who onely
wayting that occasion, commending his flocke to the
ouer-flight of the old man, & accompanied with Saracca
the daughter of olde Sotto, he was presented to his desired,
within the castle, who by the absence of Sotto, finding
all occasions to serue her turne, hauing sent sillye
Sarraca about some sléeuelesse arrant, she taking the occasion
profered, said thus to Forbonius: Blest be that
sweete conceipt of thine (O my friend) which to the vnfortunate
rigour of my father, hath adapted so conuenient
an end. Now maist thou with as great pleasures
enioye thy desired, as with déepe perplexities thou hast
sorrowed in her absence. Now neither distaunce can seuer
vs from imbracing, nor the watchfull eye of my fether,
intercept thée of thy wish. Sée héere thy Prisceria,
who though the Fates worke neuer so contrarie, will
liue to Forbonius, and onely loue Forbonius.
            
            This said, with many kisses com
                  •
               orting him which
was almost ouercome with pleasaunt imaginations,
she was returned this aunswere by her most assured
fauourer.
            O Prisceria, if ouerpressed with manye suspitious
thoughts, if made pertaker of the infernall tortures in
Phlegeton, if subiect to the punishment of the Daughters
of Danaus, or affixed to the torture 
                  〈◊〉
                martereth
Titius, I should be confirmed by this onely benefit
in opinion, and made constant in all misfortunes, yea,
euen to ouercome the insupportable trauailes of the sisters,
and be enabled with constancie to subdue all torments
what so euer, by remembraunce onely of one
gratious regard. It is neither thy fathers rancor swéet
Prisceria, nor distance of place, nor any one occasiō what
soeuer, can either sequester me of my hope, nor thee of
the possession of thy wished: cast off therefore all doubt

of after dole, & assure your self, that as this plesure hath
his originall this present instant, so by my meanes ere
long it shalbe continu
                  •
               d for euerlasting mamory. Passing
the time in such like pleasures, and ministering a
remedie vnto each others torments, I cannot tell, whether
by the iniquitie of destenie, or otherwise: Solduuius
learning out Forbonius departure, and suspitious of
his forward attempts, at that very instant arriued at
Farnusium, when the two amorous couple, little doubting
his sodaine approch, were coasted with this sower,
in midst of all their sweete, that the enemie of their plesures
euen then entred the Castle, when as it séemed
the fates had prefixed them that conueniencie & opportunitie
to allaye their long sorrowing. The brute of
whose aduent brought to the eares of Prisceria, Lorde
how she was confounded in her self, how dismaid was
Forbonius at that instant, how at y• very time were they
both astonied, when most circumspection should be had:
so that scarce they had 
                  •
               en dried vp their teares, when
as Solduuius entring the chamber, quicklye discouered
the whole counterfaite (for iealous eyes inflamed with
rancour pretermit nothing) wherevpon the olde man
at first, nothing at all deluded by the straunge habite,
spying out their procéedings, laying violent hands on
Forbonius caused him forcibly to be conueyed to the
stronge 
                  ••
               ower in the Castle, and tourning himselfe
to Prisceria, he began thus.
            O thou wicked and vngracious mayd, degenerating
from the Nobilitie of thy auncestours, and led by vnseemly
affections, not directed by the likings of thy tender
parents, in what tearmes shuld I accuse thee? or bewray
my sorrowes? Woe is me, that am inforced to be
an eie witnesse of mine owne sorow, & to behold y• with
mine eyes, that I hate in my heart: Is this the reward
of bréeding children? Is this the benefite that is reapt
by issue? Are these the pleasures that befall Parentes?

O Solduuius, happie hadst thou bene, if either Prisceria
had béene vnborne, or thou vnmarried, by the one thou
shouldest haue escaped this present miserie, by the other
preuented the vntoward sorrow that now confoundeth
thée. Is thy loue to be fixed there where I hate? or shuldest
thou be amorous of him who is odious to thy Father?
O vile wretch borne among the Hirean Tygres,
which respecting not thy Fathers felicitie, ouerburthenest
his olde yeares with vnlooked for calamitie: but if
euer iust Gods pittied a lawfull complaint, I doubt
not but they that minister iustice to all men, wil wreak
the iniuries thou hast done to me.
            Thus sayd, he sate down altogether confounded with
melancholie. When as Prisceria finding occasion to
speake for her selfe, began thus.
            Who seeketh O father, to preuent the destinies, laboreth
in vaine, and who indeauoureth to alter nature, as
he striueth against the streame, so must he perish in his
owne ouerwéening: the Gods haue concluded our loue,
and will you being a creature séeke to infringe it? Alasse
my father, why should my pleasure be your discomfort?
or that by which I liue, proue that which most you
hate? Doe not you héerein breake nature? who laie violent
hands on your owne flesh, and séeke to alter that
by rigor, that was ordained by diuine instinct? O lette
your rancor ouerslip (my good father) and 
                  〈◊〉
                humble
sute preuailed with an honourable minde, cease to
hate him whom I loue: and couple vs both together,
whom the Gods hauing ioyned in an assured league of
friendship, it cannot be but iniustice to alter their proceedings.
            
               Soldu
                     •
                  tius not able to digest the furie of his passion,
nor willing to weigh of the submissiue request of his
daughter, interrupted her thus: And is it not sufficient
or thee (vaine wench as thou art) to passe the limites of
nature? but to continue thy error too? Thinkest thou to

compasse me with teares, who without sighes cannot
call to memorie thy escape? no Prisceria, both thou shalt
sée, and that varlet shall knowe, that my displeasure
wil not be finished but wt bloud, nor my anger satisfied,
till I haue confounded him, who hath discomforted me.
Whervpon flinging ont of the chamber in a great rage,
and fastening both boltes and lockes he with his frame
resorted to the imprisonned poore shepheard, his capitall
enimie Forbonius, whom after he had taunted with
these vniust tearmes, he procéeded further to this vniust
reuenge: Thou cursed and abhominable caitife, is it
not sufficient by the iniuries of thy Father Clunamos,
to moue my patience, but that thou in person must violate
my daughter? Thinkest thou that the Gods detest
not these iniuryes? when as with wicked attemptes
thou be witchest the daughter, and massacrest the Father?
naie nether in iustice will they pretermit the offence,
nor will nature suffer me to beare with thine
errour: prepare thy selfe therefore to make him recompēce
with thy bloud, whom thou hast troubled with thy
attempt.
            
               Forbonius confounded with sorrowe, and amazed at
this austere iudgement, yet remembring the nobilitie
that was alwayes accounted in him, aunswered him
thus.
            Alth
                  ••
               gh enraged rancour hath made thée passe the
limits o
                  •
                honour. (O Solduuius) yet passe not so farre in
thy resolutions, as to staine the dignitie of thy person,
with the martyrdome of a guitlesse Gentleman. If I
did hate thy daughter, that lyttle enuye that grewe by
my Fathers displeasure, might by reason grow to deepe
and rooted mallice, but when I loue Prisceria, why
shoulde I bée contempned of Solduuius? It should seeme
that loue was not accompted lothsome among the gods,
when as prefixing a punishment to all escapes, they
prescribe an honour to this: chiefly concluding it to be

a vertue: wherevppon thou must conclude, that eyther
thou contemnest the decrees of the Gods, or measurest
all thinges by thine owne mallice. Thou threatnest me
with death (vaine man) and I weigh not the dissolution
of my bodie: for this I assure thée, as long as I may
liue, I will honour Prisceria, and béeing dead, my ghost
shall persecute thée with reuenge, and prosecute my affections
towarde my best beloued. So Prisceria lyue,
Forbonius careth not to dye, the onely memorie of
whome shall make mée constaunt in misfortunes, and
willing to withstande the brunt of thy crueltie: wherevpon
my conclusiō is, that if Solduuius for faithful assurance
wil become a friendlye allower of Forbonius, he
which by reason of the mallice of his Father had once
cause to hate him, will now honour him, and that strife
which separated two so noble families, shal now be finished
in our happy marryage: if this like not, procéede as
thou pleasest. In granting mée fauour, thou shalt finde
honour, in bereauing mée of lyfe, thou shalt finish all
my misfortunes.
            The discourse of Forbonius thus ended, Solduuius began
thus, after y• he had somewhat digested his cholar:
Although Forbonius the iniuryes thou hast offered me,
together with former displeasures, be sufficient to continue
my resolution, yet weyghing with my selfe that
it is vaine to alter that which is prefixed by destinye,
wonne by reason which directeth all men, and by the
tender loue I beare my Daughter, which shoulde
preuayle with a Father: I yéelde thée thy loue to inioye
in chast wedlocke, and wheres thou lookedst I
shoulde bée thy tormentour, loe I am nowe contented
to be thy vnlooked for Father. Wherevppon taking
Forbonius by the hande, and conueying him to
Priscerias chamber, hée confirmed the Gentleman in his
former purpose, and his daughter of his assured sauour,

vsing these kind of his intention:
My daughter, that father that euen now hainously mislikt
of thy louer, now gloryeth in thy lyking, & he which
whilome hated Forbonius, now vouchsafeth him his son
in lawe: wherevpon comfort your selues with mutuall
solace, & to morrow we will to the Citie to finish vp
y• ceremonies. The two louers compassed with incredible
pleasures, & not able to suppresse the affections that
possessed thē, but by breaking out into spéech: they both
humbled thēselues to aged Solduuius, returning him by
y• mouth of Forbonius these thanks. O noble gentleman,
it may not be expressed by tongue, what I imagine in
heart, who by your meanes, of the most vnfortunatest
man that liueth, am become the only happie man of the
world: notwithstanding this in lew of all fauour I wil
returne you, that both by that meanes all priuate quarrells
shall cease betwéene our two families, and you registred
in our Aegyptian Records, for the onely peacemaker
of Memphis. In these I swéete spea
                  •
               hes ouer passing
the daie & night, the next morrow the whole traine
po
                  ••
               ed to Memphis, whereas by the high Priest of the
Sun they were solempnly espowsed, and after many sorowes
were recompensed with nuptiall pleasure. Now
Ladies and Gentlewomen, I must leaue this to your
consideration, whether the louers for their constancie
are more to be commended, or the olde man for his patience
more to be wondered at: I leaue you to fit that conclusion,
till you haue read what is written, promising
you that if my rude discourse haue wrought you anye
pleasure, I will both labor, heer after to serue all occasions,
and so fixo my studies as they shall not farre differ
from your fantasies: and thus crauing you to winde at
an errour, and commend as the cause requireth, I take
my leaue: willing to be made priuie if I haue anye
wayes trauayled to your contentment.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            TRVTHS COMplaint
ouer England.
            
               MY mournfull Muse Melpomine drawe néere,
               Thou saddest Ladie of the sisters thrée,
               And let her plaints in paper now appéere:
               Whose teares lyke Occean billowes séeme to bée:
               And should I note the plaintiffes name to thée?
               Men call her Truth, once had in great request,
               But banisht now of late for crafts behest.
            
            
               Amidst the rest that set their pen to booke,
               She pickt me out to tell this wofull tale,
               A simple Poet, on whose workes to looke,
               The finest heads would thinke it verie stale:
               Yet though vnworthie, to my friends auaile
               I take the toile, and praie my Muses aide:
               To blazon out the tale of Truth dismaide.
            
            
               Such time as Phoebus from the couloured skie,
               Did headlong driue his horses t'ord the West,
               To suffer horned Luna for to prie,
               Amidst the duskie darke, new raisde from rest,
               As I in fragrant fields with woes opprest:
               Gan walke to driue out melancholy griefe,
               Which in my heart at that time had the cheefe.
            
            
               It was my hap fast by a riuers side,
               To heare a rufull voice lamenting thus,
               You 
                     ••
                  lling str
                     •
                  ames, euen as your waues diuide:
               So breakes my heart with passions perillous,
               Which faine I would vnto the world discusse,
               Were anie héere for to recount my moane,
               Whose wofull heart for inward griefe doth grone.
            
            
               
               Which sayd, the cast her dewed eyes as kance,
               And spying me, gan rowse her héauie head,
               And praide me pen her sad and heauie chance,
               And she recounted it that present sted,
               I did agrée, and graunting Truth me fed:
               With these reportes which I set downe in vearse,
               Which gréeues my Muse for sorowes to rehearse.
            
            
               Whilome (déere friend) it was my chaunce to dwell,
               Within an Iland compast with the waue,
               A safe defence a forren foe to quell.
               Once Albion cald, next Britaine Brutus gaue,
               Now England hight, a plot of beautie braue,
               Which onely soyle, should séeme the seate bée,
               Of Paradise, if it from sinne were frée.
            
            
               Within this place, within this sacred plot,
               I first did frame, my first contented bower,
               There found I peace and plentie for to float,
               There iustice rulde, and shinde in euerie stowre,
               There was I loude and sought too euerie howre,
               Their Prince content with plainnesse loued Trutli,
               
               And pride by abstinence was kept from youth.
            
            
               Then fl
                     •
                  w not fashions euerie daie from Fraunce,
               
               Then sought not Nobles nouells from a farre,
               Then land was kept, not hazarded by chaunce,
               Then quiet minde preserud the soile from iarre,
               Cloth kept out colde, the poore reléeued werre.
               This was the state, this was the luckie stowre,
               While Truth in England kept her stately bowre.
            
            
               Iustice did neuer looke with partiall eyes,
               
                  Demosthenes was neuer dum for golde,
               
                  The Princes eares were ope to pesants cries,
               And false suspect was charely kept in holde,
               Religion flourisht, liuings were not solde
               For lucre then, but giuen by desart,
               And each receiud, & preacht with zealous hart.
            
            
               Then learning was the Loadstone of the land,
               Then husbandman was frée from shiftes of lawe,
               Then faithfull promise stoode in stéed of band,
               The Drones from busie Bée no Mel could drawe,
               Then loue, not feare, did kéepe the state in awe:
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   then did flourish that renowmed time,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   earth and ashes thrusted not to clime.
            
            
               Foras the horse well mand abides the bit,
               And 
                     〈◊〉
                   his stop by raine in riders hand,
               Where mountain calt that was not sadled yet,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   headlong on amidst the fallowed land,
               Whose fierce resist scarce bends with anie band:
               So men reclainide by vertue, tread aright,
               Where led by follies mischiefes on them light.
            
            
               Use masters all, vse nurtereth mortall wayes,
               Use, vse of good, continues happie state,
               Use, vse of mée, made England then haue praise,
               But since abuse hath banisht me of late.
               Alasse the while, there runnes another rate,
               Which while by sad insight I looke into,
               I sée the want of those that haue to doe.
            
            
               And yet I sée not Sodome: some are good,
               Whose inward bowels dayly melt in mone,
               To see how Britane now is raging wood,
               Hard hearted, flintie minded, all in one,
               Bent to abuse, and leauing me alone.

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
               
               
                  Alonely lead with carelesse shew of peace,
               Whereas secure regard doth sinne increase.
            
            
               Some, some there be whom zeale hath swallowed vp,
               First, blessed Prince, of whom I finde reléefe,
               Some noble péeres that tast errors cup,
               Some godly Prelates in the Church are chéefe,
               Same Lawiers lead by zeale, lament my gréefe.
               Some Merchants follow God, not swallow golde,
               Some countrie Swains loue truth you may be bolde.
            
            
               Yet as great store of Darnell marres the séed,
               Which else would spring within a fertile field:
               And as the fruitfull bud is choakt by wéede:
               Which otherwise a gladsome grape would yéeld,
               So sometimes wicked men doe ouerwéeld,
               And keepe in couert those who would direct,
               The common state, which error doth infect.
            
            
               Yet Truth must neuer alter from his name,
               Good Prince sayd I. ye good: what of her selfe?
               And that is good, for Princes that doe frame.
               Themselues to priuate good, doo subiects good,
               Yet that's not that same goodnesse I would name:
               Good Prince, good people, that's the good I craue,
               Of Princes goods, that goodnesse would I haue.
            
            
               For as the great commaunder of the tides,
               God Neptune can allay the 
                     〈…〉
                  ,
               And make the billowes mount on either sides:
               When wandering kéeles his cholar would displease:
               So Princes may starre vp and some appease,
               The commons heart to doe: and to destroy
               That which is god, 
                     〈◊〉
                   this▪ which threates anoy.
            
            
               
               For common state can neuer sway amisse
               When Princes liues doo leuell all a right,
               Be it for Prince that England happie is,
               Yet haplesse England if the fortune light:
               That with the Prince, the subiects sée
                     ••
                   not right,
               Unhappie state, vnluckie times they bée,
               When Princes liues and subiects disagrée.
            
            
               I know not I whence come these wayward woes,
               Whóse sodaine showes portend this sodain change,
               Yet dooth mis doubt such sodaine feares disclose,
               As Truth this present doubts the sequell strange:
               When stable head, lets stailesse members range,
               I feare me: as the buildings trust to sand,
               So euery blast will stroy with turne of hand,
            
            
               When as in Court by proud contempt I sée,
               A fashion feedes the fancies now a dayes,
               When as in Court promotions passed be
               By selfe opinion: oft the wise man sayes,
               The turnes are strange, and fauour soone decayes:
               And those whom fortune windeth now a floate,
               By change of fauour, soone may change their coate.
            
            
               When as election dooth but passe by sence,
               Then must I deeme the world is fed by showes:
               When garish beautie causeth vaine expence,
               It 
                     〈◊〉
                   the man should sée, but little knowes,
               Repentaunce is the fruite by louing growes:
               So when in Court nought but such pleasures be,
               Repentaunce must ensue we well may sée.
            
            
               But leauing Court, where though the bramble groes,
               Yet zealous care there sēts her selfe I see,
               
                  I doo in Court but now complaine of those,
               Who practise that that sits not their degrée:
               Whose vaines by powre full oft corrected be:
               But now such colours cloake each bad pretence,
               That showes doo hold the wise in some suspence.
            
            
               But I poore I though gréeud at courtlike scapes,
               Lamenting there the lauish vaine expence,
               Haue farther cause abroad to note escapes,
               Where craft dooth kéepe true meaning in suspence:
               And wily worldlings couer their pretence:
               With holy shapes, and in a holy coate,
               Dooth flattry praise those men that swim a floate:
            
            
               In Nobles traines, who sées not strange mis déemes,
               Where each dooth gape and catch at priuate gaine,
               And fleece the Lord, who though he blindfold séemes,
               By oft attempts dooth barre them of their vaines,
               The painfull wretch who toiles with often paines,
               He hath faire words, when flattrie sucks the sweete.
               Thus showes take place, and Troth's trod vnder féete.
            
            
               In England gistes can compasse each reproofe,
               The bad for gold may soone be counted good,
               The wicked gainer for the states behoofe,
               The blindest buzzard to giue hea
                     •
                  enly food,
               The faintest heart in warlikst place hath stood:
               And who giues most, hath now most store of farmes,
               Rackt rents, the Lord with golden fuell warmes.
            
            
               And Iustice so I feare by power is led,
               The poore may crie, and gladly créepe to crosse,
               The rich with wealth, the wealthie now are fed,
               The simple man now onely be
                     •••
                  s the losse,
               The Lawier he the golden crownes doth tosse,
               
                  And now hath fées at will with cap and knée,
               And each man cries, good sir come plead for me.
            
            
               O swéete the time, when neither folly might
               Mislead your hopes, nor alter olde decrées.
               O happie Truth when as with swéete delight,
               She laboured still for conscience not for fees.
               O blessed time, when zeale with bended knées,
               Gan blesse the heauens, that bent their powres diuine,
               The English hearts to wisedome to encline.
            
            
               But now refusd, disdaind, and set at naught,
               Inforst to séeke for rest in place vnknowne,
               I wayle poore wretch, that no redresse is sought:
               But well I wot, my gréefes are not mine owne,
               Some beare a part and helpe to waite my mone,
               But all in vaine: such colours now are made,
               That those would mend the misse, doo daunce in shade.
            
            
               This said, be wetting all the place with teares,
               And from her eyes expelling flouds of mone,
               Her louely lockes bespred about her eares,
               She waude her wings as willing to be gone:
               And after pause, she soard away anone,
               And thus she said: You Ilanders adieu,
               You banisht me, before I fled from you.
               
                  Lenuoy. Beléeue me Countrimen this thing is true.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   