
      
         
            
            
            THE
CHOYCE
OF
IEVVELS. By Lodowik Lloid Esquier.
            
               LONDON
Printed by Thomas Purfoot.
1607.
         
         
            
            
            
               
                  T Te
                        •
                     psichore comes with Clio in hand, to iudge with graces three,
               
                  O Of one such like Lucina sayd, the Sunne did seldome see.
            
            
               
                  A As she that suckt Mellissaes milke, fed on Sibillas brest,
               
                  N Nurst with sweet Ambrosias meat, with heuenly Nectar drest.
               
                  N Now comes Vrania on message sent, from states of greatest fame,
               
                  A Aurora like descends from skie to enrowle on earth her name.
            
            
               
                  Q Queene Pallas sayd, her name in Court should be Pan
                        ••
                     ophia stal'd,
               
                  V Venus smiling wisht her name, might be Panphila cal'd.
               
                  E Euer Iuno sadly sayd, her name must Pandora be,
               
                  E Each Nymph, each Muse, each grace agreed, Pandora should be she.
               
                  N Now sits shee on Mynerua seat, where all Cytherides gree,
               
                  E Euterpe shold to Cynthia say, crowne this Queen with Crownes three.
            
            
               
                  O On forth Eudora said, and send Medeas golden fleece,
               
                  F Fates all agreed Palladium should, to Britane come from Greece.
               
            
            
               
                  G Great thrice gracious grac't shee is, where graces three do tend,
               
                  R Right happie thrice & thrice Queen, where kingdom
                     •
                   three do bend.
               
                  E Erato charged Iris streight▪ on knee to Euri
                        •
                     ia bend,
               
                  T That soone Euribia from Samos should, her crowne and scepter send.
            
            
               
                  B Bellona arm'd with sword and shield: Eumenides stands in place,
               
                  R Rhamnusia shall reuenge on those, that seeks this Queenes disgrace▪
               
               
                  I In strength from Delos Diana comes with bowe and quiuer bend.
               
                  T The Troiane Ladies from Ida did, the goulden apple send.
               
                  A Amarusia comes with Peplon on, her chore Calliope 
                  
                     •
                  als,
               
                  N Now Daphnes comes with lawrell crownes to crowne her Ladies all.
            
            
               
                  H Her bowers the Dryads build vp braue, and these the Oreads decke,
               
                  E Each Nymph with flowers & poesies sweet attend Pandoras check.
               
                  A Arabi
                        •
                     n Ladies with Saba came, with myrth and Cassia sweet,
               
                  L Like Libanon all these Ladies smell, which comes our Queen to greet.
               
                  T Triton sound the Trumpet out, make worlds her fam
                     •
                   to know,
               
                  H Heauens haue their starres of states, some such on earth be so.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE MOST NOble
and vertuous Queene Anne, by
the grace of God, Queene of Great Britaine,
Fraunce, and Ireland, &c.
            
               
                  LEa and Rachel, (most Noble
Queene) left and forsooke
their Countrey Mesopotamia,
to come to Israell, to bee the
mother of the twelue Tribes
of Israell▪ Ruth the Moabite,
came from Moab to Iudah, to
be the mother of many great
and godly Kings in Iudah. Your Maiestie descending
from many Kings and Princes, came from Denmarke
to Scotland, from Scotland to England, to be the
mother of many Kings and Princes, in great Britane.
            
            Thus wee are bound to the prouidence of God,
by whom Kings do raigne, and Kingdomes are supported,
and that by Gods good and gracious means
in women, as by Thermu
                     ••
                  s Pharoes daughter to saue
Moses in Nylus; to bring the Children of Israell out
of Egipt, by King Tharbus daughter of Ethiop; to yeild
the Citie Saba, and thereby the victorie to the Hebrew
Armie; thus heathen women by God are appointed
to serue Israell at neede.
            How much more is Es
                     •
                  her famous for her great victory
ouer the Persians. Iudith by cutting off Holofernus
head was in Bethulia both for euer famous: noble
stratagems of women. But your Maiestie by putting

your Highnes helping hand to pare their feet lesser,
their eares shorter, their eyes out, and their monstrous
heads off, that can come and goe, that can see
and heare from Rome, from Rhemes, from Spaine to
Great Britaine, such victories shold haue double tryumphes,
the one in earth, the other in heauen.
            Whē 
               Rachels Image was buried by Sychē, Israel began
to flourish; then Debora a woman within a while
after became a Iudge in Israel for 40 yeres in mount
Ephraim: when Maachas idoll Priapus, was buried and
ashes throwne to Caedron, then Iudah prospered, and
Hulda a woman dwelling in Hierusalem, to whome
Iosias sent to know how to serue the Lord, and to be
instructed by a woman, to purifie Iudah from Images
and Idols.
            God raised wise, godly▪ and vertuous women in all
countreys to feare him, & to feed his seruants; a woman
in Sarepta to feed Elias, a Sanamite woman to
lodge Elizeus, to a woman of Samaria Christ asked
drinke, & confessed himselfe to be the Messias.
            Since Christ was so conuersant with womē, that to
women Christ spake his last speach before his death,
& after his death he first appeared to women, I wish
some women should haue Christ in their hearts in
Great Britane, as Anna had in her armes in Hierusalem,
to pray to him and not to Saints, to worship
Christ in the Church, and not Idols and Images in
Closets and Galleries: then did Iudah prosper, then
did Israell florish, and then shall Great Britane bee
happie.
            
               Your Maiesties most bounden and dutifull seruant.
LODOVVIK LLOID.
               
            
         
         
            
            To the most noble and vertuous
Prince Christianus King of Denmarke, &c. Lodowik
Lloids most humble Gratulation at his
comming to great Britane.
            
               WHo can passe in silence (most noble Prince)
the ioyes and triumphes of these Halcyons
dayes, wherein Christianus King of Denmarke,
leauing his Kingdome, his Queen,
his Court, forsaking his imperiall Sceptor
and his Subiects, renouncing all princely
dignities, as a Prince that had his soule diuided betweene
Great Britane and Denmarke, esteeming more the one
halfe in Britane, than the whole in Denmarke.
            
            O loue! excelling all loue, and that in a King, which the
heauens cannot subdue, the earth forget, nor fortune ouerthrowe;
of whose eternall fame, fame dare not lye.
            Let Maro cease to commend his Troiane Aeneas: let
Homer blush to aduance the greatnesse of Achilles, which
disguised himselfe like a woman, lest hee should goe from
Greece to Phrygia. Let Greece not name Vlisses to faine
madnesse, lest he should depart from Ithaca, and his wife
Penelope to Ilion.
            But Christianus King of Denmarke, whom neither mother,
Queen, Crownes, or Kingdome, could keepe him from
great Britan: where his Maiestie may of right more reioyce
of his princely Progenie, than King Philip of Hercules
stocke in Macedonia, or Augustus Caesar of gens Iulia in
Rome, sith the line of Hercules expired in Alexander,
and the stemme of Aeneas in the Emperour Nero, so that
Romanes now may say, Fuimus Troes; and Macedonians
say, Fuimus Herculani.
            
            But Great Britane was then neuer so great vnder
Brutus the first King, as nowe vnder Iames the second

King, whose continuance well nye three thousand yeres,
is now againe like the Eagle renewed and reuiued, to be by
Gods goodnesse continued as long by the second Brutus,
that babes in cradles may say, Iubilate Britanni.
            
            Much beholden we are to God, if we forget not God, and
great cause haue we to loue, and to honour his Highnesse in
great Britane: if we looke but vnto the greatnesse of his
loue to England in Queen Elizabeths time, and now with
greater at this present to King Iames, if we shuld be deafe,
and not heare of it, or be dumbe, and not speak of it, heauen
and earth would accuse vs of too much ingratitude, wood
and stones should condemne vs of too much forgetfulnesse.
            Sith neither Syracusa, with their conuoyes and prouision
to the Romanes at Thrasymenum, neither Tyre
nor Sydon, with their Caedars of Lybanon to Ierusalem,
were so forward as Denmark was of late to England; but
as Masinissa sayd of the Romanes, that there was one kind
of people vpon the earth, the people of Rome, and among
that one people one Scipio, to whom he fully deuoted himselfe,
as one whose soule rested in Scipioes bodie: the like
sayd Hyra King of Tyre, of Salomon King of Israel.
            
            But neither Hyra with his Sydonians, was more grateful
to Salomon King of Israel, nor Masinissa with his Numidians
more louing to Scipio the Romane Consul, than
Christianus King of Denmarke, was to Iames King of
great Britane, whom neither heauens, earth, nor seas, neither
Kingdomes nor Court, could keepe that louing King
from his loue, to come from Denmark as a crowned starre
of the North, to shine in England, and to come to celebrate
and to renew the name of great Britane, to see the Queene
his Sister, his Nephew, and the rest of the Kings children,
the sound and sacred anchor of three Kingdomes.
            
               
O loue immortall! not to be wayed in ballance, not with
measure to be measured, not knitted with Gordius knot to
be cut by Alexanders sword, neither with Hercules knot to be vnknitted by Phoebus, sith all prophane Histories
cannot allow but eight onely of the like loue, but not eight
Kings, most seldome two. For to see a King out of his kingdome,
is as strange, as to see the Sunne out of the skie.
            Let England bee of equall loue with Denmarke, sith
loue is recompensed with loue, iustly weyed in equall ballance,
not with Philips siluer swords in Greece, not with
Artaxerxes golden Archers in Persia, but with Pythagoras
weapons, one minde, one heart, and one soule, perpetuall
weapons, the triumphes thereof haue their euerlasting
tropheis.
            Among such, what needs such leagues, and couenants
to dippe our weapons in blood, as the Scythians did? or die
our clothes in blood, as the Armenians did? or to drinke
blood out of our armes, as the Medians and Lydians did?
            Sith the league between great Britane and Denmarke
is consecrated with inward blood of mutuall hearts, and
confirmed with the entrals and bowels of naturall Parents,
that two Sunnes may be sooner found to agree in the skie,
than these two Kings to disagree on earth.
            This God hath appointed, nature confirmed, fates allowed,
and fortune thereto agreed.
            Hence grow the cause of our publicke Iubilies, and crowned
feasts, our dayly tropheis, and perpetuall triumphes;
that as the Romans loued and agreed with the Sabins, yeelding
thanks to their God in the Feast Consualia: so the
Britanes with the Danes, yeelding thanks to their
God Iehouah in their Feasts Scaenopegia.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The Choyse of Iewels.
            
               THE Empire of Women,
and Courts of Queenes,
euen frō 
               Semiramis time,
haue gouerned countries
and kingdomes, subdued
Realmes ruled States, and
brought vnder their obeysance
both Kings and
kingdomes;
                  Asia builded by a woman of that name. as also before Semiramis time it may

                  •
               ee
                  •
               e probable, for that Asia the greatest part
of the world was named Asia by a Queene of
that name which then dwelt in Asi
                     •
                  , whose fame
continued vntill Semiramis the second Empresse,Semira
                     •
                  is the second Empresse of Asia.
whose martiall exploytes and gouernment▪ hath
been such (if authorities may serue) as neither
Alexander the great could exceede in magnanimitie,
nor Cyrus in victories, nor Xerxes in multitude
of souldiers.
            
               
Wee leaue the Court of Sardanapalus King of
Assiria, who during his life, exceeded in all effeminate
wantōnesse, hauing his Court full of such
Iewels, as he was wont to 
                  •
               it amongst them in
womans apparell, among such light and shamelesse
women where women were in mens apparell,
and men in womens apparell, of which I will
omit to speake; But I will begin with those women
that were speciall Iewels appointed not only
to saue his people, but to saue kingdomes and
countryes, not only among christi
                  •
               ns, but among
Heathens and Pagans.
            DEBORA,DEBORA a Iudge in Isarell. a woman which dwelt in Mount
Ephraim, and iudged Israel fourty yeares, vanquished
the Chananites, and slue Sisera.
            
            HVLDAH,HVLDAH a Prophetesse in Ierusalem, a Prophetesse which dwelt in Ierusalem,
to whome king I
                     •
                  sia
                     •
                  
                after the law booke
was found, sent for Councell to know how and
what way God might be pleased with Israell.
            
            Who knoweth not, but Rebecca by God appoynted,
councelled her sonne Iacob to flee from
his brother Esau to M
                     •
                  sopotamia, where God appoynted
such two Iewels for him, as made him
the father of the 12 Tribes of Israell, in whome
he and his posteritie was blessed by the seede of
LEA, a woman?
            IOSEPH,IOSEPH 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to Egipt by his brethren.
                a man sent by God to Egipt, (though
sold by his brethren) where the like Iewell was
appoynted him, to weete Assanetha an Egiptian,
the mother of Manasses and Ephraim, two adopted

Tribes in Israell, by whome (during Iosephs
life) the Hebrews were Lords of the land of
Goshen, and free from their bondage in Egipt.
            
            Was not THERMVTIS the Kings daughter
of Egipt,
               THERMVTIS the daughter of Pharo K. of Egipt. a Iewell appointed to saue Moses from
drowning in Nilus, to name him Moses, to bring
him vpp as her sonne adoptiue to possesse the
Crowne in spight of their Priests of Memphis?
            
            ESTHER an Hebrew maide,ESTER rare and zeale for the Iewes.
                maried to A
                     •
                  ashuerosh
the great King of Persia, a Iewell of God
not only appointed to saue M
                     •
                  rdocheus her vnckle,
but all the Iewes her country-men within an
hundred seauen and twenty Prouinces, with the
daunger of her owne life, and the destruction of
Seauenty and fiue thousand Persi
                     •
                  ns, and the hanging
of H
                     •
                  man, and his ten sonnes.
            In Bethulia a woman widdow ventured more
then any man,The bold and rare attempt of Iudith a woman. either Cyrus, Alexander, Or Caesar
in their owne persons, as shee did▪ who brought
Holofer
                     •••
                  
                head in a bagge through the Assirian
campe to 
                  〈◊〉
               , whereby the whole Assirian
army was ouerthrowne. A famous victorie for
a woman to be recorded for the fame of women.
            Obserue therefore, how God chiefly by women,
in all countries saued and defended his people:
In Mesopotamia, by Labans daughters, Lea &
Rachell. In Egipt, by THERMVTIS King Pharoes
daughter. In Ethiopia, by Tharbis the King of Ethiops
daughter, whom Moses maried and made
her a christian, whome Pharaoh and the Priests of

               Egipt gaue him to th' end to slay him; as Saul sent
Dauid to the Philistians for the like purpose. In
Persia by ESTHER King Ahashuerosh wife. In Bethulia
by Iudith a widdow, these were peculier
women by God appoynted.
            What should wee seeke proofes far off, when
we haue examples at home. Had we not in England,
               England, Scotland, & Fraunce, combined by women.
                such a Iewell as combined Fraunce vnto England?
And another Iewell that brought Scotland
vnto England, being two women?
            Had we not such a Iewell of a woman in England,
after tenne terrible battels wherein there
were a Hundred Knights and Barons slayne,
tenne Princes and Dukes destroyed, and one
Hundred thousand Englishmen slayne in the
field between the houses of Lancaster and Yorke,
a woman being the onely cause of a perpetuall
League betweene both houses? And euen at
this present wee enioye such a Iewell, that will
blesse Brittane, both with Tribes and Kings, as
Lea and Ruth did Israell.
            
            This onely shall suffice,Kingdomes & Realmes, combined in a League by women. that kingdomes and
Realmes are combined and ioyned together in
perpetuall League of amity by women generally.
And sithence in the seed of a woman all the
people of God are blessed, I neede not to name
the virgin Mary, whose wombe was blessed that
bare him, and her paps that gaue him sucke; Nor
make mencion of such women long before Mary,
of whome lineally Christ descended. as Lea,
               
and Racheli the wiues of Iacob, the mother of the
Tribes of Israell, of whome the Lyon of ludah,
and the starre of Iacob descended,Ruth the Moabite.
                
               Ruth the Moabite
the wife of Booz, the mother of Obed, the father
of 
                  
                     •
                  sai, the father of Dauid, of whome came
the Kng of Kings.
            How much more then were godly and vertuous
women blessed by Angells, by Prophets
magnified, and by Kings and Princes reuerēced?
Iae
                     ••
                  
                the wife of Aber the Kenite shalbe blessed
sayd the Angell,Ia
                     •
                  l that slue Sisera. for shee slue Sisera King Iabins
Generall; And the victory of Israell was obtained
by a woman, as DEBORA sayd to the fame
of women: Did not Osias the Gouernor of Bethulia
and of the army of Israell,
               The prayse of Iudith.
                blesse Iudith? And
so Achior blessed her, saying blessed art thou of
thy God in all the Tabernacles of Iacob.
            
            Tugloria lerusalem, Tulaetitia Israell.
            Asmuch and more might be spoken of Queene
Est
                     •
                  er.
            
            But to speake in particular of women, it were
infinite. I shoud but weary the Reader to runne
throughout the old and new Testament, with
the due prayse and commendacions of such Iewels
as are fit to attend in Courts of Princes: As
of the woman of Bahurim by hiding Dauids seruants,The woman of Bahurim cōmended. shee saued their liues from Absalon, who
made search to destroy the King his father; shee
onely thereby saued her selfe, the Citie, and all
the Citizens.
            
               
So RAHAB in Iericho hid the Messengers of
Ioshua,
               
                  RAHAB the like woman in Iericho.
                whereby she saued not onely them, but also
her selfe, her family, and all the friends that s
                  ••
                called
to her house, at the destruction of Iericho.
            
            The Sunamites wife for her pitie & compassi
                  ••
               
of the Prophet Elizeus, to make him a cham
                  ••
               
in the house, to feed him being the man of Go
                  •
               
            
            The Widdow of Sarepta entertained 
                  〈◊〉
               
with all the wealth she had,The widdow of Sarepta.
                which was a handfull
of flowre, a little cruise full of Oyle. See a woman
was appointed to feed Elias; & a woman to
make a chamber to welcome Elizeus in.
            Such Iewels are to be entertained in Courts of
Kings who are alwaies readie for good and godly
suits; and not with Moloch his reaching hand,Moloch.
and his Caemorims Priests; nor with Iudas with open
hands to take what they will.
            Againe to speake of wise and discreet women,The praise of wise women.
who could be wiser than ABIGAIL Nabals
wife, who by her wisedome so intreated Dauid,
that she saued her husbands life, and after became
Queene in Israell, euen king Dauids wife?
            The woman of Abella, who with her wisedome
councelled with the chiefe Magistrates of
Abella,
               
                  Sebaes head the Traytor. and brought Sebaes head the Traitor, and
threw it ouer the wall to Ioab; when neither Ioab
offered peace, nor the Magistrates of Abella
sought peace, yet she saued the Towne, and the
Armie of Israel from much slaughter.
            I will therefore conclude with an Epilogue of

the new Testament, of women that farre excelled
men in faith, in constancie, and in seruice of
the Lord.Women more zealous than men. I will omit to speake of Marie Magdalen,
Ioanna the wife of Chusa, Herods Steward, of
Susanna, with many other such women, which
ministred to the Lord, as he trauailed to preach.
I need not make mention of Anna, who prophesied
of Christ to the people, receiuing Christ in
her armes at Ierusalem, confessed (as Simeon did)
the redemption of Israel; but euen of Pilates wife,
whē all men cried,Pilates wife
                
               Crucifige, to crucifie Christ, yet
this only womā endeuored to perswade her husband
Pilate, to wash his hands frō such a wicked
fact, affirming he was a just and a godly man.
            I sieldome read of such faith in a man, as of
the woman, who desired but to touch the hem
of Christs garment, and to be healed thereby, as
she confessed, to whom Christ said, her faith had
made her whole.
            Now hauing heard, that as women ministred
vnto Christ in his preaching, so women followed
him to his death, and also attended him to his
graue;More women followed Christ, than men. and more women were at Christs death,
than men; and as it seemed wept more bitterly,
than those fewe men that were there.
            No doubt Iohn the Euangelist wept, Ioseph
of Arymathia, and Nichodemus wept and a few others
wept, of whose weeping Christ took no notice;
but to the women who were many & wept
much, the Lord spake, saying, why weepe ye for me,

yee daughters of Syon? with much compassion he
pittied the women, who much lamented his
death;Christ first appeared to women after his resurrect on. and after his death, Christ first appeared to
women, when the Apostles fled, forsooke, and
denyed him.
            I know most men doubted of Christ his resurrection,
yea the Apostles, whome the Lord reprehended
for their incredulity, because they
would not beleeue Mary Magdalen to whome
the Lord first appeared;The Apostles 
                     ••
                  redulous of the resurrection of Christ. neither would the Apostles
beleeue the other women, whome the Angell
sent to tell them that the Lord was risen, and
went before them into Gal
                     •
                  lie.
            
            Marke how the Lord spake to women his last
words at his death,Christ appeared twise to women after his death, before he appeared to his Apostles. and likewise appeared twice
to women after his death, before he appeared to
his Apostles.
            If you reade prophane histories, you shall find
Asia first christened by a woman so named. And
Europe by the name of a woman called Europe
Agenors daughter King of Phaenicia. Scithia of
a woman that sprang out of the earth, and named
her sonne Scytha.
               The Romans brag of Rhea.
                The Romans might better
brag of Rhea a woman, a vestall virgin well knowen,
(the Mother of Romulus) than of Rom
                     ••••
                  
               
whose Father was not knowen; or of a farr
                  ••
               
more ancient woman named Roma.
            
            The Greeks might better bragge of Helena 
               
                  〈◊〉
               
woman,The Greeks named of Helena a woman, rarather than of Hellas a man▪
                and not as they would haue it of Hellas 
               
                  〈◊〉
               
man; Helena made Greeks then vnknowen, to be

knowne; she was the woman that was the whetstone
of Greece, by this woman the Greekes became
first famous. But we leaue Asia, Europe, Phrygia,
Greece, Scythia, and Rome; if we omit the fame
of women in these, what should I recite Prouinces
and Isles, Cities and Townes named after the
name of women? as Rhodes, Corcyra, Salamina, Aegina,
               Many Isles named after the name women.
& of many more which Diodorus writes of,
to whome I referre you.
            And as the most part of the earth is Christened
and named by women, so also the most part of the
starres are constellated with women, not onely
with the names of women, but with the forme,
shape, and figure of women, of which I wish
you conferre with that Astronomer Astratus,
who filled the starres of women:The most part of the starres are figured by the names of women. considering
there be but a thousand and twenty starres names
knowne, I thinke the most part are figured and
named after the names of women.
            I would haue a good Scholler to answere me,
that neuer loued a woman, That is not true, sith
the forme and jmage of Iustice is formed like a
woman with a sword in her hand; Prudence with
a glasse in her hand; Temperance with a dyall in
her hand; Fortitude with a great huge Colossus on
her shoulder, that Hercules could not stirre her.
And all these are wrought in gold, in siluer, in Arras,
and in all kinde of Tapestrie.
            The Queens of the Amazones courts were
onely of women, without men, where men by

Law and decrees made, might not gouerne or
beare rule, but were exercised in seruile works,The queens of Amazons, and their exployts.
hauing their legges and armes made so weake by
their Nurces, that they could not beare armor,
as Diodorus writes, Quoinutiles fierent bello. This
was a pollicy of the Amazones, to be carefull to
keepe the anncient Lawe of Scithia, that men
should not gouerne them; who vsed to cut off
the right pappe of euery female kinde, because
it should not hinder them in their shot and military
seruice.
            An example of two or three; Myrina one of
their Queens with thirty thousand foot women,
                  Myrinaes marshall acts & vic
                  
                     ••
                  ries.
and two thousand horse, being armed with skins
of great Serpents, after that shee had subdued
many Regions and confines, euen vnto Libia,
marched vnto Egipt, at what time Orus, Isis sonne
reigned King there (so auncient a History it is)
with whom shee cōsented to a 
                  •
               eague of peace.
            Thence she marched into 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , whome she
much was
                  •
               ed and spoyled; from thence to Syria,
whome shee conquered with much slaughter.
Thence shee marched to Mount 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                and ouer
came the nations there about, so that Queen
Myr
                     ••
                  a was as famous in S
                  •
               ythia, as was Semiranus
in Asia; and both were as famous as Alexander
or Cyrus.
            
            In like sort may it be spoken of Queene Medusa,
               Queene Medusaes warlike acts
and of her Court, as we did of Queene Myrina,
that shee likewise gouerned a Nation of warlike

women named Gorgons, who feared not to
encounter with great King Perseus, the most famous
and warlike King of his time amongst the
Graecians, and kept him long and hard in twoo
great battles.
            The fame of these Queens grew so great,
                  Hercules was amazed at the fame of those Queenes. that
Hercules hearing the fame of them, and of their
courts, & of their womē, was much abashed, that
so many Nations should be subdued by womē.
            
               Hercules, after Perseus, in great furie began
his warre against these Queenes, (after Myrina
and Medusaes time, with whome Perseus fought)
and slue so many (I meane of the Gorgans and Amazones)
that Queene Myrina buried so many of
her Ladies, that to this day their graue is called
Tumuli Amazonum: which is in Greece, and
not in Scythia.
            
            Among other Nations and Kingdomes the
Court of the Queenes of Saca, ought iustly for
their misitary discipline, their victories and gouernment
to bee remembred.The queene of Saca.
                Among many
Queenes that ruled there, I will onely speake of
one Queene, named Tarina, who after shee had
subdued the Nations about her,Queene Tarinaes victory.
and brought in
subiection many countries vnder the Saceans, after
peace and quietnesse, had made such Lawes
to her Subiects that the Queenes which succeeded
her, altered nothing therof, but one Queene
after another confirmed Tarinas Lawes in Saca.
            
            Such was the loue & commendations of this

Queene, of her Subiects in her Court, for her
pollicy, wisedome, counsell, and benefits done
to her countrey, that such a Sepulcher was made
for her after her death, that the Pyramides of Egipt,
and the Labyrinth of Creete might well giue
place vnto it. Neither might Mauseolum it selfe,
which Queene Artimesia made for King Mausolus
her husbands Tombe, be preferred, though
that Tombe was numbred one of the seauen
wonders of the world.
            The Queenes of Scythia
               The Queens of Scythia.
                their Court, a known
History; whose antiquitie is such that Diodorus,
Cetesi
                     •
                  s and others 
                  〈◊〉
                of. But the Queenes
of Scythia, howsoeuer they were first named, enlarged
their kingdomes so greatly, that some were
called 
                  〈…〉
               , and some Arimaspi;
all warlike Queenes, which subdued
much of Asia, and of Europe, so that many of the
Queenes of the Amazones
               The Queens of Amazones 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   with the most famous conquerors of the world. are most renowned
for the watres which they had with the greatest
Conquerors of the world.
            As Queen 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                with Hercules, Queen Tarina
with Pers
                     •••
                  , Queene 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                with Achilles,
Queen 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                with Cyrus, whom she slue in battell,
with 200000. Persians with him. And after
Cyrus was slayne in Scythia, King Darius thought
to reueng that shame, that the great King of Persea
with his army should be slayne by a woman,
but Darius was glad to leaue Scythia vnto womē,
and to returne vnto Persia.
            
            
               
And also of Camilla, who came armed against
Aeneas and his Troian army;Camilla. with so many Kings
as well of Asia, as of Europe, who felt the courage
of the Queenes of Scythia, that Kings payde Tribute
to Queenes in Asia.
            
            The women Laxamathae were Marshall women
on horse backe, the men of that country on

                  •
               oote;The women Laxamathae marshallwomen. In the field the woman fought on horsebacke
with halters and short strong ropes, and
the men with speares and 
                  •
               argats.
            The women of Sparta, are preferred before
men.The women of Sparta pr
                     •
                  ferred for councell and courage before men. All care and busines of Sparta are layde
vpon the women. For they sit in Councell, they
Iudge in causes, and make such Lawes and decrees
as to them seemed good; which being obiected
against by a certaine Gentleman, that only
the women of Sparta ruled ouer men; And
well worthy, answered Leonidas wife, wee women
only of Sparta beare men only. True it is, as
women bring their infants vp in their youth, so
are they found in their age.
            The women in Persia, were so much honored,The women of Persia.
               
that they might not be seene, but couered secret
in Coaches▪ So Themis
                     •
                  ocles being sought for by
the 
                  〈◊〉
                and Lu
                  •
               d
                  •
               monians, escaped by fauoure,
and was caried among the Persian Ladies
secretly. For none but the Persian Ladies might
haue accesse to their Coaches, or presume to
speake to them. So much in Persia were women
esteemed, that in all secret Councells of States

they were sent for.
            Moreouer the Persians would haue their
wiues present in place to see them fight in battells,The women would be pres
                     ••
                  t in eue
                     •
                  y battell where their husbands fought as whe
                     •
                  stones.
that they might at the sight of their wiues▪
be made more couragious to fight.
            What can be sayd of men, but as much may bet
sayd of women, or rather more? Might Hercul
                  •
               s
any way haue subdued Cerberus or led him in triumph,
but by the helpe and councell of Proserp
                     •
                  
                  na
a woman? Neither Iason could possibly winne
the golden fleece, and carry it away from 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
vnto Greece, without the helpe of Medea a woman.
            Who taught Theseus the way to the Laby
                     ••••
                  
               
at Creete to kill the monster Mino-taurus, but 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
a woman? Who taught the way to wer
                  •
               
ouer so many daungerous gulfes, fiery 
                  〈◊〉
               
frosty riuers, vnto hell it selfe? but 
                  〈…〉
               
woman.
            Therefore the Lawe was, that they that 
                  〈◊〉
               
to Carras into the Temple of Luna,
               The Lawe in Courts of women. and offered
sacrifice to the Moone, such women should haue
the rule & gouernment of their husbands with
good reason, and their husbands should be ruled
by them. And they which made supplycation
& offered sacrifice to god Lunus, such men had
the dominion and gouernm
                  •
               t ouer their wiues.
            The people called Sauromatae in Sarmatia, aWomen ruled all Sarmatia.
               
very large country in Scythia, reaching from the
riuer Vistul
                     •
                  
                vnto the end of Germanie, euen vnto

the confines of Hyrcania in Scythia, and yet as
large as Sarmatia was, women ruled their coun
               
                  •
               rey;
for when all women rule their husbands,
they must needs rule the countreys.
            These be the scoffes of Cato against the Roman
women,Scoffes of Cato in Rome against women. that the valiant Romanes, that conquered
all Nations abroad, were conquered at home by
women.
            It is most strange, that women should so loue
men for children sake, and yet the Male-kinde
should neither beare rule nor gouerne amongst
them.
            THALESTRES Queene of Scythia,
               
                  Thalestres Queene of Scythia went to see Alexander the Great. hearing
of the fame and report of Alexander to be such
for his martiall prowesse and great conquest, she
came with three hundred Scythian Ladies, not
onely for the sight of Alexander, but also to get
children by him and his Macedonian Lords, that
should be like their Parents.
            And though Alexander had not so many queens
as Salomon, yet had he (after the Persian manner)
as many Queenes as there be dayes in the yeare;
Notwithstanding his sonnes should beare no rule
in Scythia, though they were gotten of the queen
Thalestres, and of Alexander the great.
            So it is historied of Ne
                     •
                  aule queene of Ethiopia,
               Queene Saba went to heare Salomon.
               
that she came to Ierusalem to heare Salomons wisdome,
and to propose vnto him hard questions,
and darke problemes, being as willing to haue as
many wise Salomons in Ethiopia, as Thalestres was

to haue valiant Alexanders in Scythia.
            
            The Romane women, hearing such repor
                  •
               
and fame of the women of Sparta,
               The Roman courage to fight with wilde beasts on Theaters. of the Saceans,
Sarmatians, Scythians, and of sundry other
Countreys, (hauing no men to fight with for tha
                  •
               
the Romans had conquered al Nations) came armed
vpon the Theators to fight with diuers and
sundrie wilde beasts, as Lions, Elephants, Beares
and such like: and when they were not permitted
to fight vpon the Theators with beasts; yet would
they ouercome (as Cato sayd) the Conquerour
                  •
               
and Champions at home, which ouercame Tygers
and Lions vpon the Theators.
            The Ladies of ROOME perceiuing tha
                  •
               
all the gold and siluer which was in the treasurie
of Rome,
               Due commendacions of the Roman Ladies. to be consumed and spent in the warres
against the Gaules, in the time of that noble captaine
Camillus▪
                the women brought all their gold,
siluer, chaines, earings, and all their Iewels vnto
the Senators, whereby the Gaules were satisfied,
and Rome againe deliuered▪ At which time the
Matrons of Rome were so advanced and honoured
by carrying in Coaches to their temples, and
to their Theators. So that now it was also decreed
in the Senate house, that women being
dead, their commendations and prayses should
bee recited in the pulpits at their Funerals, in as
large manner as men.
            So was Popilia by her sonne Crassus. So Iulius

Caesar did commend his wife Pomp
                     •
                  ia, and Ner
                     •
                  
               
his friend Poppea.
            
            Againe in the second Affrican warres, when
Rome was so afflicted by Hanniball, that both men
and money were S
                  •
               ant, but chiefly all the money
in the treasurie was spent, the chiefe Roman Matrons
(as before) brought all their rich treasures,
(which of long time they had kept) vnto the Senate
house, being ready to be armed, whereby
the Romanes were so animated against Hanniball
again, that he was inforced after his great Victories
in Italy, to forsake Italy, and flye to Affrica.
            
            True it is, that Rome by women was twise recouered,
and deliuered from the enemies, that
the Gaules fledde from Rome, and Haniball from
Italy.
            
            What praise had Veturia and Volumnia,
               
                  Veturia & Volumnia two women much commended. two
Roman Ladies worthy their commendations in
the pulpit; the one intreating her husband, the
other her sonne, at that time that Rome was in
Corolianus hand, either to spill, or to spare?
            How should I passe in 
                  〈◊〉
                
               Cloaelia, that scaped
King 
                  〈…〉
               , and swimmed ouer the Riuer
Tiber, and opened the secrets of Porsenna to
the Roman Senators?
            What great benefites had the Hebrewes by
the midwiues of Egipt, being by Pharoh the King
commaunded to 
                  〈◊〉
                the Male-children,The Midwiues of Egipt 
                     〈◊〉
                   many thousands of the Hebrewes children from Nilus.
                and to
drowne them in 
                  〈◊〉
                yet did they rather hazard
their liues in breaking the Kings commaundement,

than to offend God in so foule a fact;
whereby they are had in perpetuall remēbrance
in the booke of God, to saue so many thousand
mens liues, with the hazard of their owne, as it is
recorded in Exodus.
            These examples should mooue our Englishwomen
to do good to their country, & not seeke
the ouerthrow thereof.
            The Sabine virgins,The Sab
                        •
                     ne virgins saued both the Roman and Sabine army. after they were rauished
by the Romans at the feast Cons
                     •
                  alia, and married
vnto the Romans, so that warres grew thereby,
they came in their smocks betweene the two armies,
the one part their husbands, the other their
fathers; So by the meanes of the Sabin virgins,
peace grew between the Romans & the Sabees.
            
            When the Cartha
                     ••
                  n
                     •••
                  
                in their warres against
the Romans wanted for their matches,The women of Rome & of Rhod.
                the Matrons
of Cartha
                  •
               e cause themselves & all the women
to shaue the hayres of their heads.
            So did the women of Rhodes.
            Many graue and wise women, haue stood
much in stead aswell in publike councell, as al
                  •
               o
in priuate pollicies, to their countryes, who
                  •
               e
deuises and sentences being set downe, were imitated
and found 
                  •
               it to be followed and therefore
in diuerse great kingdomes and countryes,
women beare such rule, that they had the whole
gouernment of the common weale.
            It neuer repented August
                     •
                  us,
               Liuia. to follow the
councell of Liuia.
            
            
               
It much profited Ferdinandus, to heare what
Isabella
               Isabella. sayd, and to effect only what shee sayd.
            
               Xerxes the great King, among all his wise coū
               cellors
in Persia, would not sit in councell without
Artimesias aduice.Artimesia
                     •
                   
                  queene of Caria. 
               Ninus King of the Assirians,
would effect nothing without Semiramis
councell; And after his death you may reade
how shee gouerned the Assirians for fortie two
yeares together, as stout as Alexander ruled the
Macedonians.
            
            Therefore the Lacedemonians admitted their
wise-women,The women of Lacedemonia admitted to 
                     •
                  it in councell. not only to come to heare councell,
but also to be hearde and to set downe their
opinions, touching aswell Ciuill as Marshall causes.
            Among the old Germans, vpon any great affairs,
touching the state of their country, the women
which were wise and discreete, did sit in councell
and giue their sentence and aduice, & among
the Germans were cheifly accepted, and at this
time more trust and confidence is giuen to women
in Germany, than to men. For women bee
there sober when men are drunken
            The selfe same authoritie and credit had the
women aswell in that part of Spaine called Celtiberia,
               Women in Celtiberia.
                as also in Fraunce; in which countries women
were not only accepted in counsell, but in
any strife or controuersy it was determyned and
adiuged by verdit and Arbitrement of women.
            In the time of Hanibal, in certaine debates betweene

               
                  〈…〉
               
            
            
               
                  〈1 paragraph〉
               
            
            
               
                  〈1 paragraph〉
               
            
            
               
                  〈…〉
               , and other Countreys, where Queenes gouerned
and ruled as kings, were admitted as Iudges,
and fat as Councellors, to determine of right
and wronge, as you have heard betweene the
Gaules, and the Carthag
                     •
                  mans.
            
            Yea among the inuincible Romans, by degrees

were wise women admitted to haue accesse
to the Senate, and their counsell heard by

                  •
               he Senators.Wise women in Rome had accesse to the Senate.
            
            So was M
                     •
                  tia, Agrippina, Cornelia, and others,
that it came to passe in Rome, that the women amonge
the Romans were as much authorized as
the women of Sparta.
            
            So Candaces Queene of Et
                     •
                  iopia, was so singu
               
                  •
               er
                  ••
               
wi
                  •
               e,The praise of Queene Candaces.
                that she ruled and gouerned her sub
               
                  •
               ects
in such sort, that she was so much honoured
and beloued amonge the Ethiopians (as Asarces
among the Parthians) that all the Queenes that
succeeded her in Ethiopia, were called Candac
                     •
                  s
after her name.
            Amonge the Li
                     •
                  ian people that dwelt in Asia
the lesse, the women children were named after
their Mothers names, and not after their Fathers,
and they by the lawe and custome of that
countrey, are heires to their Mothers, and not to
their Fathers.
            As amonge the Hebrew women, who gaue
such names to their children as pleased the mothers,The Hebrew women gaue names to their children without the consent of husbands.
without the consent of their Fathers.
            
               Sitones, people not far from the Sucu
                     ••
                  ns, had a
Law that none might gouerne ouer them, but
a woman. The name of a King was to them odious,
as it was of long time odious both to the
Romans and the Graecians.
            Among the old Danes, if any soldier should not
follow his Captaine, and fight valiantly for his

Country,The Law among the old 
                     〈◊〉
                  . the law was their wiues should master
                  •
               
and gouerne them as their seruants, and their
husbands should lye with their heads downward
toward their wiues feete, as a marke fo infamy, to
be knowen cowards.
            The woman in Sparta, did meete their husbands
& sonnes,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                using scoffing & flouting words
saying; whether creepe yee, yee cowards into
your Mothers and wiues bellies againe?
            That made the 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪
               
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                that theiy would haue
their wiues and concubines to see them how
                  •
               
manfully they 
                  •
               ought, to auoyd the name of cowards.
For in Persia to be called a coward, an
                  •
               
Acion might be had against him in Law.
            If you read Phylo
                     •
                  ophy, you shall find Aristipp
                     •
                  
               
daughter 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , in the schoole of Athens, a reade
                  •
               
and a Teacher of Phylosophy in her fathers place.
            
               Corynna was set forth and garnished with 
                  〈◊〉
               
seuerall garlands of Laurell, which shee wanne o
                  •
               
               Pyndarus (the only Poet of his time) for that she
                  •
               
excelled him in verses and poems.
            
               Eustochium and Blessilla, for Hebrew, Greeke
and Latine,A catalogue of rare women. were equall to a great number of the
best learned in those times, in zeale of true Religion,
and in following of Saint Hyerom, for th
                  •
               
further i
                  •
               structions of their faith. Of these

                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Hyerom made mention in his Prologues of Ioshua,
of Esay, and of Daniell.
            
            
               Aspasia, a Greeke woman, red Rhetorick in
Miletum,
               Aspasia. is to be praysed.
            
               
               Sappho red Poetry in Lesbos; both taught schollers
with much commendations.Sappho.
            
            
               Leontinum a Graecian woman, wrote a whole
volume against Theophrastus, the great Philosopher,
and as Cicero saith,Leontinū
                
               Aiticosermone.
            
            
               Hortensia in Rome, nothing inferior to her father,
was as eloquent as her father; For as many
came to see Hortensias comely gesture and sweet
pronunciacion, as came to heare her eloquence.Hortensia.
            
            
               Amesia pleaded her owne causes before Q.
               Amesia.
               Titu
                     •
                  
                the Roman Pretor, with such manly courage,
that shee was called Androgune. 
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
            
            And Sara, Raguels daughter, To
                     •
                  ies wife, for
her zeale and earnest prayers was deliuered from
the spirit Asmod
                  •
               us.Sara.
            
            And Mary Magdalen for her inward loue and
faith to the Lord was deliuered from seauen
Asmod
                     •
                  u
                     •
                  
                seauen diuells.Mary Magdalen. And many such women,
which to speake of in perticuler it were infinite,
as before is said.
            The Romans made lawes demaritandis ordinibus
First by Q. Metellus, after by Iulius Caesar,
and after him by Augustus, with giftes and rewards
to intice young men and maides to mariage,
and to make choyse of such as should alwaies
continue.
            So much was mariage esteemed for multiplication,
                  Licurgus lawes in Sparta. Solon laws in Athens▪
                  
               
that Licurgus made lawes in Sparta, and
Solon in Athens, that men might chaunge their
wiues that were barren for others, to make triall

in whome the cause of sterility was, whether in
the maner wom
                  •
               n. And this was so common
a cou
                  ••
               e among the Romans and the graecians▪
that Ca
                     •
                  o himselfe 
                  〈…〉
                
               Marcia in Rome

                  〈…〉
                his 
                  〈…〉
               .
            It was the opinion
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                Philosophers, yea
                  •
               
the 
                  〈◊〉
                that men might marry for childrens 
                  〈◊〉
               
               ▪
as many wiues as they would. Other for religion

                  ••
               rried where they lift, for 
                  •
               o was the law
of 
                  〈◊〉
               ,Chrysippus lawes. whose writing was full of Oracles.
            Among the Hebrewes the wiues would bring
their 
                  〈◊〉
                vnto their husbands.
            Among the Graecians,
               The custom in Greece at mariages. the custome was the
mothers of the married persons should haue 
                  〈◊〉
               
torches ready to light, and their friends 
                  〈◊〉
               
Hymnes and longs called 
                  〈…〉
               
foure presidents of marriages, 
                  〈…〉
               
Diana, and Suad
                     •
                  la, that these Goddesses and
Queenes would vouchsafe to blesse these 
                  〈…〉
               ,
that 
                  〈◊〉
                would make them parents
of children; that Venus would encrease their
loue; Diana their courage and chastity; and that
Suadela would make them delectable and louing
to her husbands.
            And the next day after their marriage,The ceremonies in Greece vppon the next day after the mariage. the father
of the bride should bring her 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   munus,
a faire cloured boy in a white coloured
gowne, carying a burning torch in his hand, after
him a fellow that brings the new Bride her attires
and then they which bringe a summe of

gold and siluer, and after them they which bring
houshold vessels & houshold stuffe, against whose
comming the gates & dores of the house wherein
these new married couples are come to dwell,
are opened.
            In Sparta, they were appointed by Licurgus law,
                  Licurgus Law of the orders and ma
                     •
                  ners in any mariage in Sparta. that the young mayds which should be maried,
should shaue off their haire, & be clothed in mans
apparell, and bee brought at night into a darke
chamber without light, and the Bridegrome then
should loose the Brides girdle, which betokened
that both were but one. Yet in the Isle of Coos,
the men must bee clothed in womens garments
contrarie to thē of Sparta, & yet signified but one.
            The Lacedemonian maydes that should be married,The manner of the Lacedemonians in their mariages.
do trusse their haires vp with a kind of speare
called Celibaris, to signifie that they should bring
forth such martiall children, as would vse both
speares and swords.
            The Athenians also vsed to dresse the head of
the Bridegrome with palmes and Oliues,Of the order of the Athenians in marriage. to signifie
victorie and conquest.
            These Ceremonies were onely to all
                  •
               re and
to entice young people to mariage, for multiplication▪
and therefore the old Germans had his
custome that the young men should send to their
Loues that should be their wiues, 
                  〈…〉
               ,
a sword,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                a shield and armour, in
& pledges of loue, with a garland 
                  〈…〉
                Veruine
called Verb
                     •
                  na.
            
            
               
In Booetia,
               Of Boaetia. they vsed to put a garland of Sparage
vpon the head of the new married mayd. In other
parts of Greece made of Balsamet, called Sysimbrium.
            
            The Locrians made crownes of diuers flowers
gathered by the Matrons,Of the Locrians.
                and brought the day
of marriage to the married mayd.
            The Macedonians vsed to cut a loafe of bread
with a sword, and both parties to eat of the same,Of the Macedonians.
               
was a full consent and decree of marriage.
            The Latines in their mariage ware white garments,Of the order of the latins. and their ceremonie was, that the newe
married couple should stand together vnder a
yoake of Oxen, in token they should liue and loue
one with another, without offending the lawe
of marriage.
            So the other Goddesse of mariage is called Iuno
iugalis, signifying concord and agreement, and
be yoaked together during life.
            The Lusitanians,
               Of the marriage in Lusitania.
                which are Portugales; the women
must be drawne and forced out of dores before
they came to be married, to shew how vnwilling
they were to forsake their Parents, their
friends, and their Countreys, and now must follow
a stranger, hauing before her a Musitian, and
one that 
                  •
               inges a songe of Hymaeneus, carrying
with her a Distaffe, a spindle, and flaxe.
            The people about mount Taurus had this custome,The people about mount Taurus.
                that the women should gird them before
they were maried, with a woollen girdle full of

               Hercules knots vppon it, which should bee loosed
by the Bridegroome the first night, in token
hee should be the Father of so many children as
Hercules had,
                  Herotinu
                        •
                     
                   had 600. sonnes. who left behind him when he died
70. sonnes; and yet not so many as Herotinus king
of Arabia, who had 600 sonnes.
            
               Solon made a law, that the man might not come
vnto his newe married wiues companie before
hee had eaten Ex malo Cydonio, which was a
notable Towne in Candie.
            
            And so the custome among the Babilonians was,The Babilonians rule and order in marriage.
that the young married folkes might not lye together,
before both had tasted of a secret gum called
Storiae. Such customes of these Countreys
were carefully obserued and kept.
            In Greece they had these Ceremonies (as Pausanius affirmeth) that the Bride should bee carried
from her Parents and Friends in a Coach, and the
Axeltree of this Coach should bee burned at the
dore of the house, before the Bride would enter
into the house,Certaine ceremonies in Greece.
                signifying that there shee should
stay and tarrie, and thence neuer to depart.
            But if they were not carried in a coach, but
went on foot, her husband should euer be called
Chamoepus, being a word of great reproach,The first miracle of Christ in a marriage. for
that he made mariage honorable of no account,
considering that the first miracle that Christ did,
was at a mariage in Chanaan, and so honored mariage
with his owne presence.
            It was lawfull in Persia for the young married

man to lye with his newe married wife before he
had eaten 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  ,
               The lawes of the Persians
for mariage. the marrow of a Camell:
neither any thing else, but an Apple, and
the marrow of a Camell.
            The 
                  •
               ewes at their marriages, the glasse that
they drink in that day they are maried, the Bride
and Bridegrome both ioyntly at night, breake
that glasse, to sign
                  •
               fie the frailtie of life.
            A young woman not married, might neither
amonge the Lacedemonions,
               The l
                     •
                  w of the Lacedemonians,
& of the Romanes. or amonge the Romanes
come amonge married women, or to the
sacrifice and feasts of C
                     •
                  rus & Venus, but the 
                  ••
               rier
should openly charge and command all vncleane
women▪ 
               
                  •
               uch as had the Leprosie, or any breaking
out of their bodies, or 
                  
                     •
                  ens
                     •
                  rium, should avoide
the 
                  •
               acred and secret s
                  •
               ruice, and after all
this hee commaunded, & sayd to the woman vnmarried▪
               
                  〈…〉
               , that the maides
vnmarried should goe out of the 
                  •
               emple, as an
enemie to mankinde.
            And therefore the 
                  •
               awe of Moses, was, that if
a man should strike a woman with child, the child
being quicke and thereby borne abortiue, the
man should die for it. The law was that he should
yeeld,The lawe of Moses.
                
               Animam pro anima. And if the childe
had life, the man should bee punished, Pecunia
mulctetur, as much as the womans husband
would.
            This condemneth the absurd opinion of the

               Pithagorians, of their transanimation which they
call Metempsuchosis, that the soule should passe
from one body to another, and withall so grosse,The absurd opinions of the Pythagorians. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
that it should bee transported from a man to a
beast.
            Hence grew the forbidding of eating of flesh
among many, of whome Tertullian spake merri
               
                  ••
               
               ▪
               Ne quisp
                     •
                  am bubulam de aliquo proauo obsonet;
l
                  •
               ast some should eate of their old parents flesh.
            
               Mose
                     •
                  
                law was, that the young men should be
married to maides, and such as was of honest parentage,
                  Moses law of marriage. vertuous and godly education. Moses
thought it not fit that young women of ripe
yeares, should be vnmarried.
            That was the cause why Lycurgus made such
sharpe laws in Sparta, that the yong men which
were not,Licurgus lawe.
                not would not be married in Sparta,
they should goe naked in the winter time roundabout
the market place, vpon the market day▪
neither might these vnmarried ba
                  •
               che
                  •
               lors come
to see the games and playes among the 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  .
            
            The like lawe made Plato,
               Plafoes
                     •••
                  
                that if any young
man in Greece should be vnmarried at 35, yeares,
he should be so little esteemed, that he should
not be preferred before any man▪ but be last man
either going into any company, or cōming from
them, without any countenance or credit giuen
him.
            This was the cause that the Lacedemonians had

such Laws and customes, that the parents which
had three children, should be freed from watch
and warde; But those parents which had foure,
ab omni onere immunis foret, he should be discharged
from all taskes and Subsidies.
            And this was the cause why the Persians preferred
the parents of children before others, and
that the King of Persia by the Persian law, was
bound to giue a peece of Gold to euery woman
with childe in any town the King came through,
and this was the only cause why those Hebrew
womē which were barren, brought their maids
vnto their own husbands chambers for childrēs

                  •
               ake. As you heard of Abrahams wife, and of Iacobs
wiues.
            Such was the affection and loue in Martiall
countries, to haue young men married to young
women.
            The warlike Romans would hardly suffer any
Patrician that was not father of many children,Patricians that were not parents of children, not esteemed in Rome.
to be any Magistrate in Rome, either Questor,
Praetor, or Consull. And if any should faine to
be parents of children, & not so found, he should
be depriued from his office and place per Senatus
consultum.
            
            And therefore Furius Camillus, and after him
Posthumius,
               
                  Furius, Camillus lawe of bachelors vnmaried. at what time they were made Censors
in Rome, made such decrees, that old bachelers
which were found vnmarried in Rome,
should pay such fine to the Treasury as were imposed

vpon them by their Censors.
            
               Sectio. 2.
               SEe how much all heathen lawes doe esteeme
honour,The loue of the mother more then the loue of the father. and make much of marriage: And
how much we owe to our mothers that nourish
vs in their wombes, and our wiues that bring
vs children. And therfore the mothers are (as
the Philosopher saith) Philosturge, of the great
loue and affection shee beareth more then the father,
and wee are or ought to be more affected
to our mothers. Plus paulo à matre, quam à patre
suscipit faetus. For nothing can be more repugnant
to nature,The loue of the mother prooued by Gallen and Hippocrates.
                   then a mother to hate and forget
her owne children, which is brought for an example
by the Euangelist of Rachell, whose complaint,
wailing and weeping was such for her
children, that shee would not, nor could not be
comforted, which is easily to bee beleeued, sithence
women feede vs and nourish vs with the
substance of their own bodies, as both Hippocrates
and Gallen sayd, Ex Sanguine Materno faetum ali.
First for ninetie dayes women beare vs dead in
their bellies, the other ninetie dayes women
beare vs quicke in their bodies with greater care
and feare for our liues, then for their owne; so
that from the very day of conception vnto the
very houre of our birth, they liue in great danger▪
               
               
                  
That made Alexander the great to answere
Antipaters letter,Examples of Alexander the great. in the which hee much complained
of his mother Olympias, charging her with
great crimes; to the which complainte, Alexander
smiling, sayd, Vna materna lachryma, multas
hujusmodi d
                        ••
                     ebi
                        •
                     l
                        ••
                     era. Doth not Antipater (sayd
Alexander) know that one small teare of a Mother▪
will blot out many such complaints?
               And therefore the Matrons of Rome,The Matrons of Rome much reuerenced. were
so much reuerenced, that it was decreed by the
Law Senatus-consultum, 
                  
                     •
                  et down by the Senators
and Consulls, that if any man should meete with
any Matron of Rome vpon any path-way, they
should as it were of a duty to be done, discedered
semitis, stand off and giue the path-way. Neither
might any officer or Magistrate call a Matron
of Rome into Law.
               Among the very heathen, young vertuous
virgins and young maids well brought vp,Poore yong 
                        ••
                     gins sin Athens and in Sparta, prouided for their marriage. both
by the Law of Licurgus in Sparta, and the Law
of Solon in Athens, were prouided for, and carefully
looked vnto for their marriages, out of their
common Treasure. So were Aristides daughte
                     •
                  s
in Athens, and Lysanders daughters in Sparta.
Among the Romans with no lesse care were the
daughters of 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Fabri
                        •
                     ius, & Man: Curius prouided
for; which was the only cause that many
Noble women and Matrons in diuers countries
bestowed Dowries, for the marriage of poore
virgins.
               
                  
                  Sampsons mother was taught by the Angel how
her son should bee brought vp,
                     Samsons mother wa
                        •
                      taught how 
                        •
                     o bring her sonne vp. after the Angell
had appeared twice vnto her, saying: Behold
thou art barren, thou shalt conceaue and beare a Son,
and thou shalt bring him vp and be his nurse. Here
the mother was charged to bee the nurse to her
son, and to bring him vp, and not the father.
               The Hebrew women not only nourished their
children,The Hebrew women. but also named their children without
consent of their father. So did Iochabed nurse Moses
her sonne.
               Among the Lacedemonians, the mothers were
nurses to their Children,
                     The Lacedemonians. least by education
and sucking of strange nurses, the infants should
degenerate from the nature of their parents.
               The old Germans thought it not fit nor lawfull
to haue their children brought vp or nourished
by any woman,The old Germans. but by the mother.
               The Romans were warned and had councell,
that their children should be lulled vpon their
mothers laps, & suck vpon their mothers breasts.
               So the blessed virgin Mary nourished her only
son with her milk:The virgin Mary nursed her own sonne. And so Sarah nourished Isaack
her sonne.
               The Angell of the Lord appeared vnto Agar
the mother of Ismaell, and spake vnto her in the
wildernes o
                     •
                   
                  Berseba, and comforted her & said,
Arise and take 
                        •
                     e lad by the hand, for I will make of
him a great people.
               
               
                  Hannah
                  Hannah the wife of Elcanah▪
                     
                   the wife of Elcanah, made continuall

                  
                     •
                  ute vnto the Lord for a sonne, and neuer went
out of the temple, but still prayed vntill the Angell
of the lord 
                     •
                  old▪ her that shee should haue a
sonne which was Samuell.
               
               The woman of Chanaan neuer left Christ vntill
uhee had obtained her sute of the lord,The woman of Chana
                        •
                     n. to heale
her daughter beeing sicke.
               And the lord would haue vs earnest for our
sinnes,Sampsons mother. as Sampsons mother was for her son, and
as the woman of Chana
                        •
                     n was for her daughter,
continually praying vnto God for his goodnesse,
and blessing towards vs.
               
                  Sara,
                  Sara. at 80. yeares was desirous to haue a son,
and had Isaac.
               
               
                  Anna▪
                  
                  Elizabeth. solicited God vntill she had Samuel. And
so Elizabeth by praying got Iohn Baptist in her latter
yeares. These godly women sought children
at Gods hands.
               Though Rachell made much means to her husband
for children,Rachell. saying▪ vnlesse she might haue
children, shee should die; yet farre better then
such women are,Balphaegor P
                        •
                     iapus. that goe to Bal-phaegor to the image
of Priapus to seeke children by vnlawfull
meanes (as the Prophet saith,) Auolabit gloria
eorum à conceptu, & à partu. They shall not be mothers
of Children, they shall haue barren wombs,
Et arentia vbera, and drie brests.
               So God did threaten superstitious women,
Plangentes Adonidem.
               
               Now that women are so set forth for their

wisedome, learning, ver
                     •
                  ue, and for their magnanimitie,
courage and gouernment, and after their
marriages had as great care to bring vp their
children, as they had to please their husbands, I
thought good with some examples of diuers
countries to confirme the same.
               The Iacobites people in the East baptised,The Iacobites. and
vsed Moses lawe of circumsiciō, they burne their
Infants vpon the forehead, or the brest, with the
signe of the crosse.
               The custome among the old Romans was this,The custome of the Romans at the birth of Infants.
first the midwife would lay the childe new borne
vpon the ground, and after sa
                     •
                  crifice done to E
                        •
                     d
                        •
                     sa,
it should be presented to Nundina, by whom
the Romans were warned, that their infants
should be carefully brought vp by their mothers.
               Among the Graecians it was brought by the
midwife,
                     Of the Graecians. and the women him associate at the
birth before La
                     •
                  es their houshold Gods, where
the neighbors sacrificed for the health of their
infants, and after deliuered them to the mother.
               The Ethiopians ab ipso natali die,
                  Of the Ethiopians.
                   the first day of
their infants birth, haue such care of their children,
that they do murere frontes in fantium, that
they should 
                     •
                  uffer paine, & be knowne euer after
by that marke as the Iacobites were: so that the Ethiopians
would pro
                     •
                  e what spirit their children
were of, by ryding vpon Elephants and by fl
                     •
                  ing
on fowles backs, wherby they might know & see
whether they were coragious and bold, or timorous
& fearfull.
               
                  
But wee haue children brought vp from their
cradle, taught to ride vpon Lyons & Vnicornes,
and to fly ouer Seas vpon Eagles, the cheifest Roman
ensignes of the Papists.
               It is sayd,The Isl
                        •
                     s Baleares. that the women of the two Isles named
Baleares in Spaine, neuer minister any meate
to their yong infants, nisia baculo & funda, but frō
a sling or from a staffe, to signify they should auoide
idlenes and get their liuing by laboure and
paine.
               The women of Sparta according to Licurgus
law,The women of Sparta.
                   vsed to wash their yonge infants with cold
water mingled with salt, to make them acquainted
euen from their cradle with paine and travell.
Insomuch that it came to a prouerbe, Solas
Lacenas vtros parere, that the Lacedemonian
women only brought vp children to be men
               So it is written by the same author,
                     The women of Creet and of Germany. that the women
of Creet, and the old Germans would bring
vp their children from their birth day, to endure
paine of cold and heat, and to suffer hunger and
thirst.
               And so it is written, that the ancient women in
Iberia,
                  
                     In Iberia. being brought vp euer to see such slaughter
in their Countrey of their husbands and children,
that the Infants being new borne, haue their
first feeding from the point of a sword, or of a
Dart.
               In India their Philosophers called Gymnosophystoe
within 2. or 3. yeeres after they were borne,

would examine what kind of trade they should
professe.
               And the same Gymnosophists thought Diem mortis
esse diem natalem;
                  Gymnosophistae. for the same Nation in Thracia
weepe and lament the birth of their children,
and at their death, reioyce and triumph.
               The Persians had such care of their Infants,The Persians.
that they prouided such Nurses as should bring
them vnder in such seuere discipline, that they
might not spit nor clense their noses in publicke
presence, neither might they sit in sight of their
Elders, they might drinke no wine, they might
see no naked persons; for such faults by the law
of Persia, were capitall crimes: which was as
strict a lawe as the Nazarites had.
               
                  Saba
                  Saba. in Iosephus, called Nicaule, for her wise
propositions to Salomon, called Arabica Sybilla,
and of whome Christ maketh mention in the
gospell.
               
                  Hydra
                  Hydra. also, whome Plato much commends for
her probleame and darke questions, that it grew
to a prouerbe, capita Hydrae conficere.
               
               And Dama
                  Dama. 
                  Pythagoras daughter in expounding
her fathers darke and obscure questions, might
worthily claime to be Pythagoras daughter.
               
                  Caelius
                  Caelius. writes of some women named Mantinea,
Lasthenia, and Axiothea, which came in apparell
like men, to heare Plato reade Philosophy
in schooles.
               Were not the Fathers happy to bring vp such

daughters, and were not their husbands more
happy to marry such wiues?
               To be short and to verify a french prouerbe,
non est faelix natus, qui non est faelix maritatus, so Aristotle
saith, that he which is not well married,
hath lost the one halfe of his ioyes in this life: and
so Pharoneus
                  Phoroneus a wise man and a law maker in his
country told his brother at his death, that he had
wanted no felicity in this world, if he had not maried
such a wife.
               Yet such sharpe dames are sometimes necessarie
to Philosophers,Sharpe dames necessary. to Phisitions, and to Preachers,
to reprehend them of their faultes and to
cure them of their maladyes at home, as they reprehend
and find faultes in others abrode.
               
                  Socrates so confest, that Zantippe his wife did
him as much good at home by chiding,Socrates saying.
                   to learne
him patience; as he did in Schoole to learne his
schollers Phylosophy.
               I wanted more time, than matter to write of
such Iewels as our mothers, our wiues, our sisters,
our kinswomen; and finally, of such Iewels as
the world would be no world, without women
the Mothers of the world.
               But to be briefe, let Semiramis be commend
                     ••
                  
in Babylon; let Atlanta with her marshall women
in feats of Armes bee praysed in Ar
                        ••
                     dia;
let Camilla be spoken of among the Volskans; Tomyris
amonge the Scythians; Queen 
                     〈◊〉
                   in
Aethyopia; and all other renowned Ladies, & of

worthy women, that with foeminine feats merited
manly fame, be eternized; and let them worthily
sit in the triumphant chaires of fame crowned
with Garlands of Lawrell, with braunches
of Palmes in their hands, as Victors ouer conquerours,
and Conquerours of Kings and Kingdomes.
To these valiant exploits of women,
Hercules must yeeld; or else Omphale Queene of
Lydia will make Hercules to yeeld. To these ex-exployts
of women, wise Salomon must yeeld; or
else Pharaohs Daughter will make Salomon to
yeeld: So must Achilles to Polyxena:
So must Caesar to Cleopatra: and
so in fine, all men must
yeeld to women.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
   