
      
         
            
            
            A
briefe diſcourſe
of the moſt renowned
actes and right valiant
conqueſts of thoſe puiſant
Princes, called the Nine
worthies:
WHEREIN IS DECLARED
their ſeuerall proportions and diſpoſitions,
and what Armes euerie one gaue, as
alſo in what time ech of them liued,
and how at the length they ended
their liues.
            Compiled by RICHARD LLOYD
Gentleman.
            ¶Imprinted at London by R. Warde,
dwelling at the ſigne of the Talbot
neere vnto Holburne
Conduit. 1584.
         
         
            
            
            THOMAS BROMLE.
            
               To God giue honour due, feare him aboue all things:
            
               He is the Lord of Lords, and onelie King of Kings.
            
               Obey the Princes lawes, the poore do not denie:
            
               Make peace where diſcord is, remember you must die.
            
               Auoyde vnruled wrath, iudge iuſtlie to ech wight:
            
               Set naught by worldly pelfe, in the reſpect of right.
            
               
            
            
               Be ſtout vnto the proud, and gentle to the meeke:
            
               Reproue the wicked ſorte, reuengement do not ſeeke.
            
               Of flattering toongs beware, let none your ſecrets kno:
            
               Manie ſeeme a freend, yet proue a verie fo.
            
               Looke you attempt nothing, but wey the end before:
            
               Eſchue ech vice, and loue ech vertue euermore.
         
         
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE
AND MY GOOD LORD
and Maiſter Sir Thomas Bromley
Knight, Lord Chauncellour of
England, and one of hir highnes
priuie counſell.
            
               PEruſing ouer ſundry bookes of volumes large and great,
            Which of the worthy feates of Fame, & Martial actes intreat,
            Of mightie Princes of the world, accompliſhed of yore,
            In diuers kingdomes vpon earth, and countreis heretofore.
            I finde in auncient Hiſtories, by learned men laid downe
            The conqueſtes of the Worthies nyne to be of moſt renowne:
            Who are by famous Regiſter enrowled in record
            The greateſt and mightieſt conquerers, and Worthies of the world:
            As well for their couragiouſnes, as magnanimities,
            Their valiantnes, their wiſdomes rare, and Princely pollicies:
            As for the wonders maruelous, and miracles alſo
            In their exploytes, and their affaires, which God for them did ſhow.
            How God exalted them on hie, to earthly dignitie,
            And gaue them Kings and kingdomes by tryumphant victorie:
            Appointing them to be his ſcourge, the wicked to confound,
            And their vnrighteous ſeede vnroote, with ſword from of the ground.
            How God remained to the end, with them that godly weare,
            And proſpered all their attempts, which him did loue and feare.
            How other were amid their pryde, in higheſt roome of all,
            For that they had forgotten God, brought to a ſodaine fall.
            As for example: Ioſua the Iudge of Iſraell,
            
            The firſt of all theſe conquerers, in vertue did excell.
            And doughtie Dauid in like ſort, in whom God did delight,
            From ſhepheard being made a King, was righteous in Gods ſight.
            And noble Iudas Machabeus, theſe three Iewes by byrth,
            And feared God continually, while they did liue on earth.
            Wherfore the Lord wrought miracles vpon their enemies,
            As ſhalbe afterwardes diſcuſt heere in theſe Hiſtories.
            
               
Then Hector fearce the Phrigian Prince, and Alexander great,
            And Iulius Caeſar painyms all, their God they did forgeat:
            For which, amid their moſt eſtate, when they were higheſt of all,
            Ambicion, Pride, and Auarice, gaue each of them a fall.
            Then Arthur, Charle-mayne and Guy, were chriſtians as I geſſe,
            The one was plagde in his moſt pompe, for his laſciuiouſneſſe:
            The other two were godly men, wherfore they dyed well,
            As in their ſeuerall Hiſtories the Sequell plaine doth tell.
            A briefe of all whoſe liues, I haue in meeter with my pen
            Compiled out of ſundry bookes of famous learned men.
            And as I read of them alſo, according to my skill,
            I haue all their proportions depainted with my quill:
            And drawne the armes and cogniſaunce in euery ſeuerall ſhield,
            Which when they liued vpon the earth they bare vnto the field:
            The yeare & time where they did raigne, and when & where they died,
            And what they were enclined too, I haue herein diſcried:
            Beſeeching that your honour wil accept in gentle part
            This litle booke which I preſent, to ſhew my faithfull hart.
            And when your leaſure ſo ſhall ſerue, vouchſafe I humbly craue,
            To read it ouer once or twiſe, and where I erred haue,
            That crime or fault committed ſo, let ignorance excuſe,
            Blame not the man that meaneth well, but blame his ſimple Muſe.
            Record the matter in your minde, although this ſtyle be baſe,
            Then ſhall your Lordſhip plainly ſee before your preſent face,
            A myrror of mans mortall life, by them compared right,
            Which well may be a looking glaſſe, to euery liuing wight:
            And chiefly to the higher ſort, whom God ſhall pleaſe t'aduance,
            In any wiſe here vpon earth to rule or gouernaunce:
            To learne therby to know the Lord, who liues eternally,
            Not to forget their owne eſtates, through pride nor ſurquedry:
            To abandon wicked vice away, and vertue to embrace,
            That to their latter end they may run out a happy race.
            Thus humbly I do take my leaue, and hartily do pray,
            That God will graunt you Neſtors yeares, in vertues honour ay.
            
               Your humble Seruant,
Richard Lloyd.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ A deſcription of the bodily proportion
of the Nine worthies, with what
Armes euerie one of them gaue.
            
               
                  IOſua was of good ſtature, ſtrong and hardy to endure,
               In iudgement iuſt, godly, and wiſe, and cruell to his enemies:
               Right fortunate and happy in fight, in vertue was his whole delight,
               He bare ſables into fielde, a Batte displayed in his ſhield.
            
            
               
                  HEctor was indifferent tall, well compact and ſtrong withall,
               Courteous, quicke, and deliuere of might, in armes a very goodly Knight:
               His head was white and curld I finde, his beard was white, he was ſandblinde,
               And ſomewhat he did liſpe alſo, a gentler wight no man might know:
               He bare two Lyons combatand, or in aſure (I vnderstand.)
            
            
               
                  DAuid was but little of bone, in courage ſtout as any one,
               Of his complexion browne was he, addicted vnto venerie:
               With goodly eyes the ſcripture tell, this man in wiſedome did excell,
               And was both godly and fortunate, and courteous to euery estate:
               He bare a harpe for his enſine, or in aſure as bookes define.
            
            
               
                  ALexander (as I reade) of perſon was not tall in deed,
               But made after the middle ſort, and of a very princely port:
               Quicke and nimble ſwift and light, valiant fearce, and happy in fight.
               Of his complexion white and redde, on the left ſide bowing his head:
               Very proud and liberall, and giuen much to wine withall:
               This puiſant prince and conqueror bare in his ſhield a Lyon or,
               Which ſitting in a chaire hent a battel axe in his paw argent.
            
            
               
                  IVdas Machabeus was ſtrong, bigge of limbes, ſquare and long,
               Of noble courage, godly and wiſe, forward againſt his enemies,
               Fortunate and happie in fight, meeke and gentle to each wight:
               In field two Rauens he did beare, in pale proper which ſables were.
            
            
               
               
                  IVlius Caeſar sklender was, and leane likewiſe of body and face,
               Pale and megre to beholde, wiſe and learned, ſtout and bolde:
               Ambitious and hauty of minde, of nature courteous and kinde:
               Displayed an Eagle he did beare, ſables in or as may appeare:
            
            
               
                  ARthur was of body ſquare, of viſage grim, and full of haire:
               Strong and bold, and liberall, of nature gentle ouer all,
               And ſtout vnto his enemy, but giuen to adultery:
               In martiall acts he did delight, and loued euery noble Knight:
               He thirteene crownes did beare alſo, or in aſure againſt his foe.
            
            
               
                  CHarles was well proportioned, ſtrong and wiſe, and doughtie of deed:
               Of learnings lore a fauourer, and very pollitike in warre:
               Mercifull and fortunate, and gentle vnto euery estate:
               This king bare the Ieruſalem ſhield, paid with the imperiall coat in field.
            
            
               
                  GVI was tall and large of limbe, none in his dayes were like to him:
               Of good complexion, ſeemely of face, and liberall in euery place:
               Valiant, ſtrong, and venterous, godly, kind, and courteous:
               He or and aſure bookes diſcrie, a cheueron ermine bare checkie.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  VTERE
IVSTITIA
SI
VIR
VIS
IVSTVS
HA
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            THE HISTORIE OF THE
conqueſts of the noble and vertuous Duke
IOSVA.
            
               I Am the worthie conquerour Duke Ioſua the great,
            Whom God did ordeine and appoint to raigne in Moiſes ſeate:
            To lead his people Iſrael to the land of beheſt,
            Which God to Moiſes promiſed, as ſcriptures haue expreſt.
            When he dwelt in the wilderneſſe, and had miraculouſlie
            Eſcaped through the great red ſea, from Pharaos tyrannie.
            Two thouſand and two hundreth yéeres, with fiue and thirtie more:
            After God had made the world I raigned: and before
            The daie that Ieſus Chriſt was borne, in bookes as plaine appeeres.
            One thouſand and ſeauen hundreth and ſeuen and twentie yeeres.
            A Iewe I am by due diſcent, of ſuch exceeding fame:
            As through the world ſhall floriſh ay the honor of my name.
            Much fauour with the Lord I found, whoſe thundering voice full oft,
            Appeared vnto me on earth from ſcarlet ſkies aloft:
            Commanding me nothing to dread, but boldlie on to fight:
            Aſſuring me the vpper hand of euerie liuing wight.
            And not to part form me, where ſo I did my armie lead:
            Yea, and to giue me all the lands whereon my feete ſhould tread.
            The great floud Iordan he dried vp for me and all my power:
            And brought vs ſafelie through the ſame, and all within an hower.
            Diuiding with his mightie arme the waues moſt woonderfullie:
            On either ſide as we did paſſe, like hils or mountains hie.
            The loftie walles of Ierico fell at my praiers downe:
            Through which I entred valiantly, and quite deſtroid the towne.
            I put ech woman, man, and child, therein vnto the ſword:
            As I had incommandement by Gods moſt holie word.
            No liuing ſoule eſcapt awaie out of that bloodie ſtrife:
            But Rahab and hir familie, to whom I graunted life.
            For that ſhe in hir houſe did hide the men I ſent to view
            
               
The Citie: and did them conuey from thoſe that did purſue.
            I ſackt the citie of Ay eke, Bethoron and Bethell:
            
            And manie mightie cities more: which now were long to tell.
            I ſlew there people more and leſſe, with famine, ſword, and fire:
            For God appointed me his ſcourge, to accompliſh his iuſt ire.
            The Lord at my requeſt did ſtay the ſun amid the ſkie:
            While I cauſd manie hundereths and thouſands for to die.
            Whoſe numbers were ſo infinite, that God did alſo raine
            Great ſtones from heauen on their heads, and ſlue them on the plaine,
            As they did flie before my face euen from Bethoron,
            
            Vntill they to Eſaka came, that few eſcapt or none.
            I chaſed great and mightie kings to hide them on the earth
            In caues: and there to curſe the time of their vnhappie birth.
            And burnt their cities, townes, and towers vnto the verie ground:
            And they themſelues I hangd on trées, in place where I them found.
            And after threw their carcaſes into the caues againe:
            And rouled thereunto great ſtones, where yet their bones remaine.
            And at the water of Merom I killed with my hands,
            Thouſands of mine enimies, whoſe number as the ſands
            Were gathered againſt Iſraell: but God the Lord of might,
            Deliuered them all vnto me, not one but died in fight.
            Their horſes and their chariots eke I burned and deſtroide:
            Their countries, townes, and cities all, which latelie they enioide.
            Wherein were one and thirtie kings, all which with one accord,
            Were enimies to the liuing Lord, and his precepts abhord.
            Whoſe names, in the old teſtament the ſcripture plaine doth ſho
            In order written: the firſt was the King of Ierico.
            
            The kings of Ay and Ierimoth, of Lachis and Hebron:
            
            The kings of Ieruſalem, of Gaſer and Eglon.
            
            The kings of Dabir and of Cred, of Gader and Horma,
            
            Of Magedo and Makeda and the King of Libna.
            
            The kings of Hepher and Bethell, the kings of Adolam:
            
            The kings of Apheck and Thaphnah, the King of Iackanam.
            
            The kings of Laſeron and Madam and the King of Gilgall:
            
            The King of Simron Merom eke Ibrought to vtter thrall.
            The kings of Haſor and of Dot, of Cades and Tenach:
            
            The kings which raigned in Aſcaph, and the kings of Therſach.
            
            The Enakites I ouercame which in the mountaines dwelled:
            I put them all to cruell death, bicauſe they then rebelled.
            
               
Neither did I ceaſe continually ech liuing wight to kill,
            Till all the land of Canaan was ſubiect to my will.
            The confines of which coaſt doth reach, from the wide wilderneſſe
            And deſert waſts of Libanon, to the floud of Euphrates.
            
            And alſo vnto the gréeke ſea whereas the ſun goeth downe:
            Theſe countries all I conquered vnto my high renowne.
            And plaſt my people in the ſame, who did the land poſſeſſe:
            And liued ioifully therein with reſt and quietneſſe.
            Where I long raigned ouer them by the Lords onely grace,
            In vertue, honour, and much fame, and led a happie race:
            Inſtructing them in God his lawes, and offering ſacrifice
            Vnto the Lord of thankeſgiuing, for his gifts manie wiſe.
            At laſt vnweldie age approcht, and dreadfull death béeing preſt,
            Did bring my carcaſſe to my graue, where yet my bodie reſts,
            In mine owne Citie which I built, that Thamnath Sereh hight:
            Béeing fiue ſcore yéeres and ten of age, my ſoule with Angels bright.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               ❧An Example of this
former Hiſtorie.
            
               BY this renowned prince we ſee, and by his life we vnderſtand,
               How vertuous men continuallie proſper in that they take in hand:
               And how the godlie floriſh ſtill, poſſeſſing all things at their will.
            
            
               For in the ſcripture is diſcride the vertues like the planted tree,
               Which groweth by the riuer ſide ſhall floriſh in proſperitie:
               And God his Lord ſhall him defend in all his dooings to the end.
            
            
               The lord the righteous ſhal vphold, for why: his waies to him are known
               God ſhall him bleſſe a thouſand fold, he ſhall be neuer ouerthrowne:
               He ſhall for ay the land poſſeſſe, and liue therein in quietneſſe.
            
            
               His ſeede for euer ſhall endure, and their inheritance enioy,
               What ſo the wicked do procure, ſhall worke the righteous no annoy:
               For in ech perill God will ſee that he ſhall not confounded be.
            
            
               And by theſe heathen kings alſo, whom he did conquer and deſtroie,
               We find, as ſcriptures plainly ſho, of wicked men the fading ioie:
               Who like a floure, ſhall withered be, and blowen quite out of memorie.
            
            
               And as the ſmoke conſumes awaie, or as the fat of lambes do melt,
               So the vngodlie ſhall decay, and all the places where they dwelt:
               The ſword ſhall pearce through their owne harts, which they prepared to others ſmarts.
            
            
               And their vnrighteous ſeede likewiſe ſhall be vnrooted and out worne
               From of the earth before mens eies, as though they neuer had bene born:
               And all that they poſſeſse or ought, like chaffe with wind ſhall weare to nought.
            
            
               Wherefore, from euerie euill flie, abandon vice and wickedneſſe,
               Do that is good, liue vertuouſlie, and ſo thou ſhalt the land poſſeſſe
               In happie ſtate: and after thee thy children continually.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               
                  AGREDIARE
NIHIL
SVBITO
SED
PROSPICE
FINEM
               
            
         
         
            
            THE HISTORIE OF THE
conqueſts of the mightie Prince and conquerour
HECTOR.
            
               I Am Hector the peereleſſe prince king Priamus eldeſt ſonne:
            Manie a land through force of armes and proweſſe, I haue wonne.
            In Paponie my puiſſance great I haue approoud in fight:
            In Greece and Phrigia I haue ſlaine, and conquerd many a knight.
            I am that martiall knight of fame, which ſlew ſo many a Greeke,
            
            When they were preſt for Helens rape to Troie reuenge to ſeeke.
            Being furniſhed with eleuen ſcore ſailes and fortie for the warre:
            All full of armed ſoldiours, aſſembled from a farre.
            And threeſcore noble kings and nine, which landed before Troie:
            
            With minds conſpired all in one, the Troians to deſtroie.
            At whoſe arriuall firſt on ſhore I met them in the field:
            Where, at one time with my owne hand, a thouſand men I kild.
            Beſide the great and mightie King, which Prothefilaus hight:
            Whom I did cleaue vnto the chinne, in all the armies ſight.
            And ſix and twentie princes mo, during that ten yéeres ſtrife:
            When I did méete them daie by daie, I reaud them of their life:
            As Patroclus of Phithia King, on Galathee my ſtéed:
            With deadlie ſpeare through plate and maile, his hart bloud I did ſhéed.
            And Lufor, and Boetes kings, and King Archilogus:
            
            And Merion the King of Creete, and King Epiſtrophus.
            
            And Prothenor of Boece King, and King Lepedemon:
            
            
               Deipeynor and Phidippus fearce, the King of Calcedon.
            
            
               Dorius and Polixenus, and King Zantippus éeke:
            And Serpedon the famous prince, and much renowned Gréeke.
            
               Leonteus of Lariſſa King, and Polybetes ſtout:
            And Alphinor a valiant wight, amongſt the gréekiſh rout.
            Philete and Letabonis, Iſideus and Menon:
            
               Humerus and Maymentus eke, with péereleſſe Palamon.
            
            
               Schedius King of Phocis land, in open field I ſlew:
            Whoſe ſuddaine death full manie a Gréeke with bléeding hart did rew.
            King Phillis and King Octamen, I ſtrake ſo mortallie:
            
               
With deadlie ſpeare, that therewithall they died preſentlie.
            The mightie Agamemnon king I threw vnto the ground:
            And ſtrong Achilles felled oft with manie a mortall wound.
            Proud Diomed and Aiax fierce, I met oft in this broile:
            With manie Gréekiſh captaines more, and gaue them all the foile.
            And ſo continued ſix yéeres ſpace amongſt my mortall foes,
            Moſt like a valiant conquerour, ſtill dealing deadlie bloes:
            And chaſing them with bloodie blade vnto the verie ſtrand:
            Where, ſome did leape into the ſeas, to ſhun my heauie hand.
            And there were drenched in the waues moſt miſerablie:
            Wherefore the Gréeks among themſelues complained ſecretlie,
            What ſlaughter and occiſion I made vpon their men:
            And for redreſſe thereof, they held a priuie counſell then.
            Wherein they did conſpire my death in this vnknightly wiſe:
            That when I came into the field againſt mine enimies,
            
               Achilles ſhould with manie knights awaite me to oppreſſe:
            When I were occupied in fight to bring me to diſtreſſe.
            Affirming otherwiſe, while I in Troie aliue did raigne,
            Vnpoſſible it were for them the victorie to attaine.
            Yet ſerud their treaſon, for a while to ſmall effect or none:
            I did diſtreſſe them (as before) and killed manie a one:
            Till caſually vpon a day I marched to the field
            In former wonted guiſe: to proue my force with ſpeare and ſhield:
            Although forewarned by my wife, who by a dreame did ſée,
            That if I that day went to field, my life ſhould ended be:
            Where I like mightie Mars himſelfe ſlew downe on euerie ſide,
            And brake their raies and renges all where I did go or ride:
            And kild anone two mightie kings before Achilles face,
            Who: ſéeking to reuenge their death, I wounded in that place:
            And forced him to withdraw himſelfe to bind his mortall ſore:
            By this the fight with fierce aſſault increaſed more and more.
            At laſt by chaunce I flew a King, whoſe armour for the nones
            Was richly en brodred and ſet foorth with pearls and pretious ſtones.
            The ſight whereof did ſo inflame my hart with couetouſneſſe,
            That for to ſpoile him of the ſame my ſelfe I did addreſſe:
            Forecaſting naught what might befall, nor hauing no regard
            To ſhun the traine of my miſchaunce, which was for me prepard:
            Nor fearing thouſands of my foes, nor waying anie frend,
            Although the ſtate of their welfare on me did all depend.
            
               
But hent him vp vpon my ſtéede, and rode out of the throng:
            And for my better eaſe my ſhield vpon my backe I flong,
            While I did ſpoile him of his wéedes, careleſſe of anie wight,
            My naked breſt diſarmed then, Achilles had a ſight
            How I was buſied: and therefore from couert where he laie,
            Towards me him to reuenge he tooke the readie waie:
            And ſodainlie with fatall ſpeare or that I might aduert,
            He came vnwares behind my backe, and ſtroke me to the hart.
            Thus died I through auarice, whom thouſands could not kill,
            Till mine owne onelie wilfulneſſe my ſelfe did fondlie ſpill.
            Whereby (alas) it came to paſſe, my countrie did it rue:
            For ſhortlie after to them all deſtruction did enſue.
            My bodie was brought into Troie with wofull ſhowts and cries,
            With piteous plaints & gréeuous grones, whoſe eccho pearſt the ſkies.
            And in Apollos temple enterd and cloſed déepe in claie
            After the Paynims rites, beeing a Paynim in my laie.
            Two thouſand and ſeuen hundreth yéeres, adioining fifteene mo,
            Since the creation of the world I raignd, as bookes do ſho.
            And before Chriſt Ieſus birth one thouſand full compleat,
            Two hundreth fortie yeeres and ſeuen, this hapt in Troie the great.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               ❧An Example of this
former Hiſtorie.
            
               THis hiſtorie doth plaine expreſſe, and witneſſe vnto euerie wight
               The wofull end of couetouſneſſe, and ſuch as haue therein delight:
               And ſheweth both the harme & ſcath, which wicked auarice brings and hath.
            
            
               And ſcriptures truly do record, who ſo at leaſure them will ſcan,
               Nothing to be more deeply abhord, nor yet worſe than a couetous man:
               Nothing ſo wicked, no vice ſuch, as to loue money ouer much.
            
            
               For he that loueth gold ſo well, in Eccleſiaſticus I find,
               For money hath his ſoule to ſell, ſo auarice the hart doth blind:
               Record of Diues, who denied, poore Lazarus what time he died.
            
            
               Saint Paule writing to Timothie in his epiſtles, doth expreſſe
               The wofull end and miſerie of ſuch as dwell in couetouſneſſe:
               Which ſaith, he drowneth manie a one, in ſorrow and deſtruction.
            
            
               How manie vices do proceed from couetouſneſſe that wicked crime?
               What Kings and kingdoms do we read to be deſtroid from time to time?
               What bloody murther, what diſtreſſe, what enuie comes through couetouſneſſe?
            
            
               What rigor, wrong, and periurie, what rauine, and what mortall ſtrife,
               What malice, and what crueltie, and finallie, what loſſe of life
               Breeds couetouſnes to euerie ſuch, as loue this worldly mucke too much?
            
            
               This noble prince and conquerour a good example well may be,
               Whom couetouſnes did quite deuoure, beeing drowned in this miſerie:
               But Gods iuſt iudgement hath prepard, for euerie ſinne a due reward.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               
                  NON
IN
                        〈…〉
                     
                     
                        •
                     VSTVM
NEC
SEMEN
EGENVM
               
            
         
         
            
            THE HISTORIE OF THE
conqueſts of the vertuous and valiant King
DAVID.
            
               I Am Dauid moſt doughtie of déede, the King of Iſraell:
            
            By Samuel the prophet great annointed there to dwell.
            A Iew I am in Bethlehem borne, and by Gods onelie grace
            Promoted vp to regall rowme, though come but of meane race.
            Next to Saule I ware the crowne, I had continually
            Seuen and thirtie mightie men as captaines vnder me.
            Whoſe names in the old teſtament in the bookes of the Kings
            At large are written, and ſet foorth with manie other things.
            Peruſe well the old teſtament, and marke the text aright:
            Then thou ſhalt find that I am he in whom God did delight:
            Of whom in pleaſed him to ſay, Behold in euerie part,
            At laſt I haue found out a man according to my hart.
            No prophet euer raignd on earth more greater than was I,
            To whom the Lord did deigne to giue ſuch ſpirit of propheſie:
            Nor vnto whom my God vouchſafd ſo largelie to behight
            Such ioifull promiſes: nor found more fauour in Gods ſight.
            Firſt, in my childiſh yéeres when I a ſhepheard was,
            I ſlew a Lion with my hands, as he my ſhéepe did chaſe:
            And kild a great and vglie Beare, which came in rauenous wiſe
            Out of the wilderneſſe to ſpoile my flocke before mine eies.
            And béeing by my father ſent my brothers food to bring,
            Who ſerued then as ſoldiours in field with Saule the King,
            I ſlew the Giant Goliath, moſt lothlie to behold,
            Who was from the Philiſtines ſent on Iſraelites to ſcold:
            And proudlie ſtood betweene the hoſts truſting vnto his might,
            And called vpon Iſrael to ſend him one to fight.
            This man was captaine of their hoſt, which then in Socohe lay,
            He ware a coat of maile, which did fiue thouſand ſiccles way:
            And was ſix cubits large in length, and on his legges did weare
            Boots of braſſe: and on his breſt a braſen ſhield did beare.
            
               
And in his hand a ſpeare he held, whoſe braſen head alſo
            Did wey (as ſcriptures do declare) ſix hundred ſiccles mo.
            Which thing, when Saule the King beheld, he highlie eſtéemed me:
            And brought me home vnto his houſe his ſeruant for to be:
            And gaue me his daughter to wife, for whom I paid in fight
            Two hundred foreſkins of my foes, whom I ſlew through my might:
            With manie a thouſand mo beſide, whereby my fame ſo ſprung
            Throughout the land of Iſrael, that women on me ſung
            In all the cities where I paſt, dauncing moſt ioifullie,
            With fiddles and timbrels well tund to aduaunce my victorie,
            Saieng: Dauid hath ten thouſand kild, and Saule one thouſand ſlaine:
            Wherefore, the King was woonderous wroth, that I did ſo attaine
            To worthie honour and renowne: and for this did conſpire
            My death, by all the meanes he could in his outragious ire:
            And often times he did attempt, when he tormented was
            And vexed with the euill ſpirit, to ſlay me in the place:
            But then I plaid vpon my harpe, and ſo I did expell
            The wicked ſpirit, by Gods grace which in King Saule did dwell.
            And yet, as ſoone as I did ceaſe, the ſpirit would him torment,
            And then, to ſlay me as before againe he would attempt.
            At laſt, to ſhun his wicked hand, by helpe of Ionathas,
            
            I fled vnto the wilderneſſe, where I in ſorrow was
            And déepe diſtreſſe for manie a day, oppreſt with hungers rage,
            Vntill Ahimelech the prieſt my hunger did aſſwage:
            And after fled to Achis King, thence to the deſert caue
            Of Odolam: to Mazphah thence my ſelfe from Saule to ſaue.
            To Engedi and Keilah, thence to the wilderneſſe
            Of Phran: thence to Zikelege, where I brought to diſtreſſe
            Thouſands of Philiſtiens: at laſt King Saule was ſlaine:
            And then, ouer all Iſrael I was elect to raigne:
            And ruled as their ſoueraigne King with famous victorie,
            Subduing great and mightie Kings, and nations vnder me.
            As the peruerſe Amalakites, which Zikelege did burne:
            Whom I purſued ſo narrowlie, that few did backe returne:
            The Syrians, and the Edomites, the Iebuſites likewiſe,
            The Ieſurites, and Gerſites that did againſt me riſe:
            The Philiſtines and Moabites, the tower of Sion éeke,
            And Iſboſeth the ſonne of Saule, who did the kingdome ſéeke.
            I ouercame Ieſby of Nob, a Giant fierce and fell,
            
               
Who had ſix fingers on ech hand, as ſcriptures truely tell.
            And Saphon ſtrong, whoſe fearefull lookes all Iſrael did dreed,
            The ghaſtlie Giant I ſubdued, and cauſd his men to bleed.
            
               Adadaſor the mightie King as priſoner I did hold,
            Bereauing him in battell ſtrong of manie a ſhield of gold.
            Vnhappie Abſalon my ſonne, who thought ambitiouſlie
            To conquer me (although his ſire) was brought to miſerie:
            Yea vnto ſuch a wofull end, that others iuſtlie may
            Example take: and learne by him their parents to obay.
            For as he through the woods did flie my ſoldiours force to ſhun,
            Who fierſly him purſued behind the field when they had wun,
            His locks béeing long, the trées being low, the boughs crauld in his haire,
            And pluckt him from his foming ſtéed, and hangd him in the aire:
            Where finally Ioab him found, and piteouſlie him ſlew
            With manie of his confederates, whoſe death I much did rue.
            This wofull ſlaughter brought to end, I raigned quietly
            Amongſt my people manie a day, and found no enemie:
            For God my Lord was on my ſide, whoſe force than ſhould I feare?
            Thus raigned I in Iſrael, and Hebron fortie yeare.
            And in my crooked extreme age my bodie fell on ſleepe,
            And in the citie of Dauid lieth in earth incloſed deepe:
            After the framing of the world two thouſand and fiftéene,
            Adding ſeuen hundreth yeres and ninetie, as I weene:
            And one thouſand yeeres alſo ere Ieſus Chriſt was borne,
            One hundreth fiftie yeeres and ſeuen expired out and worne.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               ❧An Example of this
former Hiſtorie.
            
               LO here behold a mirrour bright, wherein the reader well may find
               Expreſſed, and ſet forth aright the vertues of a pacient mind:
               And learne alſo himſelfe thereby, both meekenes and humilitie.
            
            
               Which vertues being duely waide, ech liuing wight ought to imbrace:
               For in the ſcriptures it is ſaide, and writ at large in manie a place
               By the old prophets long time ſince, what vertue is in patience.
            
            
               By patience (ſaith Salomon) a prince may ſoone be pacified,
               And patience is a iuſt token whereby mans wiſedome is diſcried:
               The patient man alſo (ſaith he) ſhall gouerne in proſperitie.
            
            
               And Dauid this moſt vertuous King ſaith in his Pſalms: The patient
               Out of his troubles God ſhall bring, he will not ſuffer him be ſhent:
               For patience commeth of the Lord, euen as the prophet doth record.
            
            
               In Eccleſiaſticus alſo the firſt chapter, the text doth ſay,
               The patient will endure ech wo vntill the verie appointed day:
               And then for him ſhall be prepard, for his meekenes, a due reward.
            
            
               Saint Paule in his epiſtles writes of patience and humilitie,
               And Iames thereof likewiſe endites in manie a text apparantlie:
               Our ſauiour Chriſt did patience teach, when he himſelfe on earth did preach.
            
            
               Saieng (in Matthew as I find) Learne ye of me humilitie,
               Bicauſe I humble am of mind, and ſuffer ech thing patientlie:
               Againe he ſaith, The humble wight, ſhal be exalted to much might.
            
            
               And in Saint Luke is written eeke, He hath plucked the mightie low,
               And exalted the humble and meeke, what neede I more hereof to ſhow,
               Since Chriſt himſelfe hath left behind, examples of a patient mind.
            
            
               Whoſe patience and humilitie ech chriſtian ought to imitate,
               For patience bringeth victorie, as proofe doth tell to euerie eſtate:
               Record of this worthie of fame, whoſe patience declares the ſame.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               
                  NEMO
BEATVS
SEMPER
ERIT
FRAGILI
FORTVNA
               
            
         
         
            
            THE HISTORIE OF THE
great and famous conquerour King
ALEXANDER.
            
               I Am the great and worthie King, the prince of péereleſſe might,
            The wide renowned conquerour which Alexander hight:
            Sonne to the prince of Macedon, a man of noble fame,
            Whom famous Phillip men did call, Olympias was my dame.
            I was but twentie yéeres of age when firſt I ware the crowne,
            And conquered the Athenians vnto my high renowne:
            The Getes and Lacedemonians, the Argeans ſterne and ſtout,
            The Thaulants and Anterians ſtrong on manie a hideous rout.
            The Tribals I compeld to yéeld, all Greece I did ſubdew,
            And thence I went to Helleſpont, beginning warres of new
            In Aſia, where I did preuaile, and at one time did ſlay
            Of Perſians twentie thouſand and two hundreth in one day:
            There got I cities manie a one, as Sardes and Lydia,
            
            Magneſia, Phrygia, Ephylos, Pamphylia and Caria,
            Pyſidia, Lycia, and Gordyn, Helicarnaſus to,
            
            
               Melyton and Celenas eke, with manie cities mo:
            
               As Ancyre and Paphlagony, Solos and Malon,
            Lyrneſus, Iſlon, Cebeſtus, with ſtrong Caſtabulon.
            Thence paſt I to Cilicia, a countrie large and wide,
            Where I ſubdued Darius King for all his pompe and pride,
            Tooke both his mother and his wife, put him to ſhamefull flight,
            A hundreth thouſand Perſians and mo, I ſlew in fight.
            
               Strato King of Arade I forſt on bewed knée
            With all the Kings of Syria to yéeld themſelues to me.
            The citie of Tyre I put to ſacke, the ſtrongeſt vnder ſunne,
            Which neuer to this day was got ſince firſt the world begunne.
            Then into Egypt forth I ſaild, from Egypt ouer Nyle:
            
            From Nyle to Affricke, where I wan by conqueſt manie a mile.
            I marched then to Araby a fertill ſoile in ſight,
            Where great Darius tooke his death with manie a worthie Knight:
            So paſſing ouer Euphrates and Tiger ſpéedilie,
            I came at length to Babylon, which yéelden was to me.
            
               
Vnto Armenia thence I marcht, and thence to Atrapene,
            
            And ſo vnto Perſepolis, thence to Paralecene:
            
            From thence into the Mardons land I entred: where at length
            That monſterous nation I ſubdude, & conquered through ſtrength
            The Medes: the Partthians and Spartans, the Thracians I ſubdude,
            The Achaians and Boetians, the Cannians nothing rude
            
               Beſyra, Niſa, Pyſides, and manie mo with theſe
            I conquered through force of armes, quite to the Caſpian ſeas.
            And when at length I had atchieud Lyrcanias furtheſt band,
            I paſſed then to Amaſon, and wan it with my hand.
            From thence to Dranga foorth I went, which countrie I deſtroid,
            Compelling ſtrong Nabarzanes to India thence to void.
            The land of Aracoſia I cauſd to yéeld to me,
            Rude Acadera and Bactria I ſacked valiantly
            The citie of Cyropoſis, all Scithia and Bub acen,
            
            
               Baſarians: Dahanes and Maurians, all theſe became my men.
            To India then I tooke the waie, which erſt was woon by none,
            Nor entred in by any: but by Hercules alone.
            Thence went I to mount Meroe, and thence to Dedala,
            
            Which countries all I brought to wracke, with rich Amzaga.
            
            Mount Arum I beſieged long, and wan it with much fame,
            Yet Hercules aſſaulted it, and could not ſacke the ſame.
            King Omphis, Abiaſares, and Gamaxus kings of Inde
            
            Did humbly yéeld themſelues and theirs to do what I aſſignde.
            Then paſſed I Hydaſpis ſtreames, where Porus king did raigne,
            Who through my force was ouercome, and all his power ſlaine.
            From thence: through deſarts foorth I went vnto the Sobians land,
            To Sugdrians and Mallians: whom I conquerd with my hand.
            And thence vnto the Oxidricans, where: at a ſiege alone
            My ſelfe the citie entred in, and ſlue there manie one.
            From thence vnto the Muſicanes, and thence to Preſtia coſt:
            From thence vnto Pathalia I did conuay mine hoſt.
            Thus when I had the furtheſt bonds in all the Orient kend,
            And ſawe my ſelfe a conquerer vnto the worlds end,
            I ſailed on the Ocean ſea, where no man erſt had béene:
            There manie ſtrange & wonderous things by me were heard & ſéene.
            Some countries ſtrange there I did find, with nations rude to ſée,
            All which I forſt through dent of ſword, to yéeld themſelues to mée.
            And when at laſt the raging ſea, my paſſage did denie:
            Right as a worthy conquerour againe returned I.
            
               
And marched backe to Babylon, triumphing as a God,
            Where all the princes of the eaſt for me made their abod.
            There did I hold a paleament, almoſt of all the world:
            For ouer all the orient I was the ſoueraigne Lord.
            Wherefore I was ſo proud in hart, ſo pompous and elate,
            That I did vtterlie forget my ſelfe, and my eſtate,
            Onely attributing the fame of all my good ſucceſſe,
            And conqueſts in ſo ſhort a ſpace, to mine owne worthineſſe,
            And not contented yet therewith, did take preſumptuouſlie
            Vpon my ſelfe the ſonne of mightie Ioue to be.
            But in my moſt proſperitie I had a ſoddaine fall,
            I was by them betraied, whom I truſted beſt of all.
            
               Caſander, Phillip, and Iolla, theſe thrée did worke my fine
            In Theſalus Medius houſe, with poiſon mixt in wine.
            Thus died I through treaſons traine of thoſe I loued moſt:
            Thus were my conqueſts latelie wonne within a moment loſt.
            Thus ſpiteful enuie threw me downe from fortunes ſtatelie ſtage
            Bereft of life, béeing but two and thirtie yéeres of age:
            My bodie was from Babylon to Memphis forth conuaide,
            And thence to Alexandria by Ptolomeus aide:
            Euen in the yéere of the world foure thouſand, ſaue eight ſcore,
            And before that Chriſt was borne, one hundreth and two more:
            A Paynim I am in beléefe, a Paynim eke by birth,
            Accounted ſonne to Iupiter, and now conſumd to earth.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
               ❧An Example of this
former Hiſtorie.
            
               WHere pride infected hath the hart of anie wight what ſo he be,
               All vertue in him is laid apart, ſo great is prides peruerſitie,
               As witneſſeth this worthie King, whoſe pride vntimely death did bring.
            
            
               
               For pride through falſe preſumption made him ſo loftie and elate,
               Beeing puffed with promotion, that he knew not his owne eſtate:
               Nor tooke regard to anie wight, but truſted onelie in his might.
            
            
               The honour due to God on hie he attributed to his owne name,
               And in his ſwelling ſurquedrie the Lord he robbed of the ſame:
               Wherefore amid his moſt renowne, God for his folly threw him downe.
            
            
               For by the prophet Ieremie the Lord himſelfe euen thus doth ſay,
               I will to none giue my glorie: and eke by the prophet Eſay,
               The haughtie I will pull downe low, and cauſe the meeke harted to bow.
            
            
               To Moiſes eke in Exodus, A ielous God ſaith he, am I:
               The prophet Sophony writeth thus, I will viſite ech arrogancie:
               In Eccleſiaſticus I reede, Thy ſelfe exalt not in thy deede.
            
            
               The eight of Iohn doth beare record, No man can anie thing receiue
               But it proceedeth from the Lord, who euerie perfect gift doth giue:
               And if ech gift from him proceed, to glorie than what haue we need?
            
            
               All fleſh is hay, and as a flower his glorie all away ſhall paſſe,
               The prophet ſaith, and in one houre (as Iob doth tell) conſume to graſſe:
               All pride (as Salomon doth write) is abhominable in Gods ſight.
            
            
               Lucifer once an angell bright, for pride was throwen downe to hell:
               Antiochus for all his might, Herod who did in pride excell,
               Through pride with plagues moſt miſerably, tormented were or they did sdie.
            
            
               Nabuchodonozar the King God plucked downe from regall ſeate,
               And for his pride in euerie thing became a beaſt, and graſſe did eate:
               And manie mightie Kings beſide, the Lord hath plagued for their pride.
            
            
               Abandon then this wicked pride which God himſelfe doth ſo abhorre,
               Or els it cannot be denide but God will plague vs heeretofore:
               For euerie gift giue God the fame, and honor ſtill his holie name.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               
                  NON
HOMINVM
CONSTAT
TVRBA
SED
NVMINE
PALMA
               
            
         
         
            
            THE HISTORIE OF THE
conqueſts of the vertuous conquerour
IVDAS MACHABEVS.
            
               I Am Iudas Machabeus, in might ſurpaſſing all,
            I found not yet in Iſraell for ſtrength my peregall:
            A Lion fierce I was in field, as holie ſcriptures ſay,
            And as a raging Lions whelpe that roreth at his pray:
            An enimie to wicked men, a frend vnto the good:
            A plague and ſcourge to euerie ſuch as ſhed the guiltleſſe bloud.
            A Iew I am of noble birth, I ſaw the liuing God,
            For feare of me the heathen fled as children from the rod:
            I am the ſame which did redeeme all Iſraell from thrall,
            Euen he whom God the Lord did raiſe, Antiochus pride to appall:
            Who had the land of Iſraell moſt cruellie oppreſt,
            The citie of Ieruſalem both ſacked and diſtreſt:
            The temples robbed and deſtroide, and thouſands piteouſlie
            Murthered, and led away into captiuitie:
            And placed wicked officers throughout the land likewiſe,
            His heatheniſh lawes to maintaine, and Gods lawes to deſpiſe:
            As Phillip in Ieruſalem a cruell man of mind,
            
               Andromichus, and Menelaus at garriſon aſſignd:
            And Apollonius a prince of Syria alſo,
            With two and twentie thouſand men, who wrought the Iewes much wo,
            And murthered them in wilfull wiſe without deſert or cauſe,
            Compelling ſuch as did remaine to obey his wicked lawes:
            Whoſe bloodie hand to euitate, I was conſtraind to flie
            Vnto the woods and wilderneſſe, in deſart caues to lie,
            With manie of my brethren mo, where we conſulted long
            Amongſt our ſelues what we ſhould do for to redreſſe this wrong:
            At laſt, with one conſent we agréed couragiouſlie to ſtand
            Againſt the wicked heathen ſort, who then poſſeſt the land:
            And béeing about six thouſand men I tooke the charge on me,
            By one accord choſe and elect their captaine chiefe to be,
            To fight it out with manlie hart, and after praiers made
            
               
I marched forward with my folke the heathen to inuade:
            And met with Apolonius, and ſlew him with my hand,
            And all his people more and leſſe, which then with me did ſtand:
            His ſword I tooke amid the ſtrife perforce from him away,
            And therewith fought during my life in manie a bloodie fray.
            The citie of Ieruſalem I wan from them againe,
            And ſlew the heathen vpon heaps which did therein remaine.
            I tooke the temple, and did clenſe and purifie the ſame,
            I did deſtroy the altars which they builded there with ſhame:
            And ſince erected altars new, as they had béene of yore,
            And offered thereon ſacrifice, and incenſe, as before.
            I ouercame Seron in fight, with thouſands of his traine,
            By me eight hundreth of his men were in one battell ſlaine.
            
               Gorgias the captaine great I put to ſhamefull flight,
            And ſlew there thouſands with the ſword, and by Gods onely might,
            Who ſent his angels from aboue armed in gliſtering gold
            On horſebacke with a ſpeare in hand, moſt terrible to behold.
            The valiant captaine Lyſias of King Antiochus,
            
            With thréeſcore thouſand in one troupe, though it be woonderous,
            I conquered, and put to flight, and ſlew fiue thouſand tho,
            Yet had I to encounter them ten thouſand and no mo.
            In Idumea I did kill of heathens manie a man:
            At Arabathan in like ſort great ſlaughter I began.
            
               Gazer, Maſpha and Caſbon I did deſtroy with fire,
            
               Mageth, Boſor: for they did gainſt Iſrael conſpire.
            The gate of Iamnia I did burne, and manie a ſhip therein,
            And all that dwelt in Ioppa I plagued for their ſin.
            
               Timotheus with his Aſia troupe I met, and through Gods aide
            Which he from heauen ſent to me, my foes were ſo diſmaide
            And confounded with ſuch darkeneſſe of lightning on them throwen,
            And fierie darts of preſent death, that therewith they fell downe
            For feare: where twentie thouſand men and fiue hundreth were ſlaine
            Of footemen and of horſemen more ſix hundreth on the plaine:
            And Timotheus béeing fled, and in a corner found,
            With Cereas his brother hid, I ſlew with manie a wound.
            
               Ephron and Carnaym eke ſtrong cities I did ſacke,
            And euerie male therein with ſword did bring to vtter wracke:
            Yea, ſo great a multitude, that euerie ſtréet therein
            Was couerd with dead carcaſes, ſo God did plague their ſin.
            
               
The citie Hebron in like ſort and Azot I did burne,
            With altars, idols, images, which heathen did adorne.
            The puiſant King Antiochus I met with all his traine,
            And ſlew ſix hundreth of his men (as ſcripture telleth plaine:)
            His captaine Nican or alſo I kild at Bethoron,
            
            And all his ſoldiours in one day, there ſcaped neuer a one:
            His head and hand I did cut off, béeing of the Iewes abhord,
            His toong I caſt vnto the fowles, which did blaſpheme the Lord.
            Thus ruled I in Iſrael with honor and renowne,
            And wan the palme of victorie in countrie, field, and towne.
            At laſt it was my fatall lot amid my foes to die,
            Euen as the Lord decréeed had vpon my deſtinie
            For ſecret cauſes to him knowen, which muſt be accompliſhed:
            My death was this, as you may 
                  •
               nd in ſcripture if you reed.
            When King Demetrius vnderſtood how Nicanor was ſlaine,
            He ſent his captaine Bachydes to Iuda land againe
            With two and twentie thouſand men well furniſhed to fight,
            With whom, my countrie to defend, I met as it was right,
            Accompanied but with a few, thrée thouſand and no mo,
            Whereof the moſt part ſtole away or I to fight did go,
            And left me there all deſolate, but with eight hundreth men:
            For which, my doubtfull mind was toſt with extreme trouble then:
            Yet chuſing rather loſſe of life than cowardlie to flie,
            I gaue the onſet on my foes, and fought it valiantlie
            From morning vntill it was night, where I ſlew manie a one,
            But what againſt ſo great an hoſt could I preuaile alone?
            There was I killed in the field, yet to my laſting fame:
            Far better is to die renownd, than for to liue in ſhame.
            Thus in defence of God his lawes I ſhed my vitall blood,
            Wherein (I truſt) I pleaſd the Lord, and did my countrie good.
            My mangled corps conueied was, out of the bloodie field,
            And to the citie of Modin brought his due to earth to yéeld:
            Whereas the ſame enterred was after the world was made
            Foure thouſand ſaue one hundreth yéeres (in authors as I reade:)
            And before Chriſts birth alſo about two and threeſcore,
            When I was dead all Iſrael was in a great vprore.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               ❧An Example of this
former Hiſtorie.
            
               THe wiſedome, wit, nor pollicy, the courage, ſtrength, nor worthines,
               The might, nor magnanimitie, the manlie force, nor valiantnes
               Of anie wight, but litle may
               Preuaile, if God be not his ſtay.
            
            
               A vaine thing is a horſe (god wot) to ſaue mans life, the ſpeare nor ſhield,
               Nor thundering cracks of cannon ſhot rare or neuer winnes the field,
               Except the Lord God preſent be,
               Who giueth euerie victorie.
            
            
               What doth preuaile the Elephant, ſo fierce and terrible in ſight,
               Or numbers great of men to daunt the enimy through their own might,
               Since victorie ſcripture concludes,
               Confiſteth not in multitudes?
            
            
               But in the Lord the God of hoſts, who made the earth and heauen hie,
               And onely ruleth in all coſts, and giueth euerie victorie:
               As by examples permanent
               Vnto this day is euident.
            
            
               Senacharib of Aſſyria King, manie thouſands in one rout
               Of the Aſſyrians did bring, King Hezekiah to roote out:
               But for that he blaſphemed God,
               He ſharpelie felt his heauie rod.
            
            
               For in one night the Lord did ſlay an hundreth foureſcore fiue thouſand
               Of the Aſſyrians, which then lay of purpoſe to inuade the land,
               And draue Senacharib againe
               To Niniueh where he was ſlaine.
            
            
               King Pharao with a mightie hoſt the Iſraelits purſued apace,
               But in the ſeas his life he loſt, and all his people in the chaſe:
               
                  
Yet Iſrael through it did paſſe,
               For God the Lord their leader was.
            
            
               The great Antiochus alſo (as plaine this hiſtorie doth expreſſe)
               With thouſands and with millions mo, this worthie Iudas did diſtreſſe:
               And onely with ſix thouſand men,
               For why, the Lord fought for him then.
            
            
               Bicauſe his onely quarrell was in the defence of God his lawes,
               For which, it after came to paſſe that God did helpe them in ech cauſe:
               And gaue him victorie with fame,
               Which purchaſt him a laſting name.
            
            
               Wherefore you worthie warriors all, no quarrell take but it be right:
               Learne warilie by others fall, to ſerue the conquerour of might,
               Who doth reward moſt liberallie
               His ſoldiours with victorie.
            
            
               Fight valiantly in the defence of his pure lawes and ordinance:
               The kingdome ſhall not be long hence, whereto the Lord ſhall you aduance.
               For euermore in bliſſe to dwell,
               The ioies whereof no toong can tell.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               
                  MORI
QVAM
VITAM
DEGRE
PBRO
PR
                        〈…〉
                     
                     
                        〈…〉
                     E
               
            
         
         
            
            THE HISTORIE OF THE
conqueſts of the famous conquerour
IVLIVS CAESAR.
            
               I Am the worthie conquerour, the prince of high renowne:
            Who firſt by name of Emperour, did weare the Roman crowne:
            And Iulius Caeſar is my name, well knowne both farre and néere:
            A Painim I am in beléefe, I reigned in the yéere
            Since the creation of the world, foure thouſand fully told,
            Deducting foureſcore yéeres and two by count of writers old,
            And fortie yéeres before Chriſts birth. I am the verie ſame,
            Which wan great victories in Spaine to my perpetuall fame:
            And conquered moſt valiantly the people all and ſumme
            Where I did paſſe: euen vnto the ſea Oceanum,
            
            And marched into Gallia, which now is called France:
            
            And into Germanie alſo mine henor to aduance.
            And conquered the Heluetians and Latobrigians,
            
            
               Tulingians and Rauratians, with warlike Boyans:
            
            And ouercame the Marcomans, the ſtrong Seducians,
            
            The Haruds, Tribocks, Vangians and the Sueuians:
            
            The Nemets, Sedunes, Veragrines: the Ambiliats and Venets:
            
            The Diablinters, Digerons: the Tarbels and Naunets:
            
            The Oſiſenes and Tarruſats: the Vocats and Pretians:
            
            The Fluſtrats, Garites, and Garumnes, the famous Anſians,
            
            The Sibuzſates and Cocoſats, the Aulerks fierce in field:
            And did compell Viridouix, their captaine ſtout to yéeld,
            And ſlue in numbers infinite, the Morines, and Treuires,
            
            
               Menapians and Lexobians, and burnt their townes with fires.
            And ſtrong Induciomarus kild the captaine with my hand,
            The Belgies, Neruians, Aduaticks, and chaſed them from their land.
            And Acco prince of the Senons, did kill in knightlie wiſe
            
               Condroſies, Segnies, Eburons, which did againſt me riſe.
            And ouercame the Brittons fierce, to my perpetuall fame:
            And cauſd Caſlibelan their King pay tribute for the ſame.
            
               
And forced Catiuulcus king, for feare, with poiſons force
            By drinke to worke his fatall fine to worke his trembling corſe:
            And vanquiſhed Lytauicus, a valiant man in fight:
            The citie of Genabum eke did ſacke through my great might.
            The citie Valaundunum, and Nouiodunum too
            I cauſd to yéeld vp vnto me, my will with them to doo:
            And battered Auaricum vnto the verie ground,
            And fortie thouſand ſlew therein with manie a mortall wound.
            King Theutomatus I ſubdued Camalogenus kild
            
               Eporidorix, Cotus, Canarill, tooke priſoners in the field,
            
               Sedulius prince of Lemouix, I at Alexia ſlew,
            
               Vergaſsilaunus tooke aliue, and cauſd thouſands to rew:
            Thréeſcore banners and fourtéene at one conflict I wan
            With twentie thouſand priſoners, and manie a noble man,
            The captaine of Bellouocans a man of worthy fame:
            In marſhall wiſe I conquered which Corbey had to name:
            
               Drapes, Surus, Suturuate, renowmed captaines all,
            With bloody ſword I ouercame, and made their men to thrall.
            
               Luctarius a valiant prince, I chaſt ſo narrowlie,
            That he through famine was conſtraind for want to food to die.
            And verſing Etorix alſo a great and famous king:
            His owne ſoldiers, I forſt to me as priſoners to bring.
            And Pompei proud the Romane prince in manie a bloodie broile:
            I chaſt abroad from place to place and gaue him manie a foile.
            And at Pharſalia in fight I killed in one daie
            Manie thouſandes of his men where he in poore aray
            Out of the campe conueyed him ſelfe in Egypt finally
            Through treaſons traine, his life he loſt moſt miſerably.
            The King of Aegypt I ſubdued, and in his ſeate did place
            His ſiſter Cleopatra Quéene, who in my fauour was
            And Pharnaſes of Pontus King I chaſed from his land,
            And Iuba King of Africa I conquered with my hand.
            And tooke ſtrong cities in the ſame, whoſe names at large appeare,
            Where diuerſe of mine enemies did kill themſelues for feare.
            The ſonnes of Pompei with their power I ouercame in field,
            Séeking to venge their fathers death with many a ſpeare and ſhield.
            I came vnto the gates of Rome, which were ſhut me againe
            And for I ſhould not enter in I made my paſſage playne:
            And battered them vnto the ground, and made the townes men thrall,
            
               
Who yéelded them on trembling knées, to be my liege men all,
            Whereas I gouerned in peace, and ruled as I would,
            Of Europe all, as ſoueraigne Lord, as Mars in battell bould.
            Hauing ſubdued with my might, in Gaule and Germanie
            
            Eight hundred ſtatelie townes at leaſt, and conquered valiantlie
            Thrée hundred ſeuerall nations, in leſſe than ten yéeres ſpace,
            So highlie I eſtéemed was, in fawning fortunes grace.
            But lo, whom millions could not match, nor all Europa ſtaine:
            Not Mars himſelfe, were he aliue the ſame hath enuie ſlaine,
            Whoſe ſecret traines, and hidden traps, vnwares preuented mée
            With ſodaine death, by foes conſpird amid my iolitée.
            For as I in the Senate ſat, with many other mo,
            By Caſsius and Brutus hands, there I was murthered tho,
            With bodkins, kniues, and daggers ſharpe, when I did déeme no ill
            They fell vpon me ſodainlie, and thus they did me kill,
            My carcaſe after Painims rites, in Rome enterred was:
            Lo, thus the glorie of the world doth were awaie, and paſſe.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               ❧An Example of this
former Hiſtorie.
            
               THe hautie and ambitious mind deſireth daily to aſpire:
               Vaine glorie doth his eies ſo blind, and ſet his hart on ſuch a fire,
               Till enuie come and plucke him downe, and rifle him of his renowne.
            
            
               As by example may appeere of this moſt puiſſant conquerer,
               Who for his conqueſts far and neere was in his daies the onlie flower:
               Yet ſuch was his ambition, to clime vp to promotion.
            
            
               That he enuied at other men, who were in rule and dignitie:
               Seeking to ſuppreſſe them then, for feare of coequalitie.
               For hautineſſe doth euer hate, the fellowſhip of any mate.
            
            
               And onlie this procured the iar of mortall war, and deadlie ſtrife
               Betweene Pompeius and Caeſar, which was the loſſe of manie a life.
               And brought to ruine vtterlie, the ſtate of the whole monarchie.
            
            
               For Pompei died moſt miſerablie, as you haue heard declared before:
               Caeſar for all his victorie through enuie alſo was forlore.
               The meaſure he to others gaue, the ſame did ſhape his fatall graue.
            
            
               Thus may you ſee where enuie is what mortall plagues therwith enſue:
               How fickle is the vading bliſſe of enuious men appeereth true.
               And how vnhappie is the land, where enuie hath the vpper hand.
            
            
               Through enuie Herod long ago did manie a harmeleſſe infant kill.
               Enuie procured Saule alſo to ſeeke king Dauid for to ſpill.
               Through enuie eeke was Abel ſlaine, and murdered by wicked Caine.
            
            
               Through enuie Chriſt our ſauior accuſed was, and put to death.
               Through enuie Satan did procure, to mortall man the loſſe of breath.
               What plague on earth is greater then, where enuie reigneth amongſt men.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               
                  HONORE
MORI
QVAM
VITAM
DEFERE
PBRO
PRESTAT
               
            
         
         
            
            THE HISTORIE OF THE
conqueſts of the noble conquerour
ARTHVR.
            OF Brutus blood in Brittaine borne I Arthur am by name:
            Through chriſtendome & heathenes well knowne is my fame.
            In Ieſus Chriſt I do beléeue, I am a Chriſtian borne:
            The father, ſonne, and holie ghoſt, one God, I do adorne.
            In the foure hundreth ninetie yéere ouer Brittaine I did raigne,
            After Chriſt my ſauiours birth, what time I did maintaine
            The fellowſhip of the table round, ſo famous in thoſe daies,
            Whereat a hundreth noble knights and fiftie ſate alwaies:
            Who for their fame in martiall feats (as yet bookes do record)
            Amongſt all kind of nations were feared through the world.
            In the caſtell of Tintagill King Vter me begate
            On Igrayne the beautifull, a Ladie of high eſtate.
            And when I was fiftéene yéeres old, then was I crowned King,
            All Brittaine béeing in vprore I did to quiet bring,
            And draue the Saxons from the realme, who did vſurpe the land,
            And conquered through manly mart all Scotland with my hand.
            The Orcades eke I ouercame, and Ilands all about,
            Which on the Ocean ſeas do lie, with manie nations ſtout:
            
               Ireland, Norway, and Denmarke, theſe countries wan I all:
            
               Gutland, and Iſland alſo, and made their Kings my thrall.
            King Bladulfe, and King Collegrine, both two I ſlew in fight:
            And forſt Cheldrike of Almayne King to take his death by flight:
            And Lot the King of Orkeney I brought to déepe diſtreſſe,
            With manie a valiant knight with him, which came me to ſuppreſſe.
            I conquered all Gallia, which now is called Fraunce,
            
            And ſlew the hardie Froll in field my honour to aduaunce.
            The ouglie Giant Dinabus ſo horrible to vew,
            Which in Saint Bernards mount did lie, through force of arms I ſlew.
            And Lucius the Emperour great of Rome, I brought to wracke,
            With thouſands mo, whom feare of death had forſt to turne their backe
            
               
Fiue Kings of Painims I did kill amid that bloodie ſtrife,
            Beſide the Emperour himſelfe, who alſo loſt his life:
            Whoſe carcaſe I did ſend to Rome, clad poorelie in a béere,
            And after I did paſſe Mount loy: the next approching yéere
            I came to Rome, where I was met right as a conquerour,
            By all the Senate ſolemnlie, and crowned Emperour.
            One winter there I made abode, then word to me was brought,
            How Mordred had vſurpt the crowne, what treaſon he had wrought
            At home in Brittaine with my Quéene, wherefore, I came with ſpéed
            To Brittaine backe with all my power, to quite that traiterous déed:
            And as at Sandwich I did land, there Mordred me withſtood,
            Yet landed I at length, but with effuſion of much blood:
            For there my nephew Gawin died, béeing wounded on that ſore,
            Which Launcelot du lake in fight had giuen him before.
            Thence chaſed I Mordred away, he fled to London right:
            From London to Wincheſter: thence, to Cornewal tooke his flight.
            And ſtill I did purſue with ſpéed, till at the laſt we met,
            Where by accord the day of fight appointed was, and ſet
            Betwene vs both, and at the time we encountred in the field
            With manie a noble knight to trie it out, with ſpeare and ſhield:
            Where we did fight ſo mortallie of life ech to depriue,
            That of an hundreth thouſand men ſcarce one was left on liue.
            There all the traitors men were ſlaine, not one eſcapt away,
            There died all my valiant knights (alas the dolefull day:)
            There all the noble chiualrie of Brittaine tooke their end:
            Sée how vncertaine is their ſtate, which do on fate depend.
            There ſlew I Mordred with my hands, the cauſer of this ſtrife,
            And there my ſelfe receiud the wound which tooke away my life:
            But yet I went from thence aliue to be cured againe,
            To the vale of Auillion (as Chronicles write plaine.)
            And afterwards was neuer ſéene, nor what became of mét
            Was neuer knowen vnto this day, for anie certaintée.
            I raigned two and twentie yéeres in honour and much fame,
            And thus by death am ſodainlie depriued of the ſame.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               ❧An Example of this
former Hiſtorie.
            
               THe liking of vnlawfull luſt, whereto this worthie was inclind,
               Depriued him by iudgment iuſt, from life and kingdome (as I find)
               And threw him downe moſt ſodainlie, amid his fame and victorie.
            
            
               Whereby Gods plague and puniſhment vpon adulterers is ſeene,
               Whom ſodainly he doth preuent with ſharpe correction in his teene:
               The proofe thereof no leſſe doth tell, of his inceſt, beeing wayed well.
            
            
               For Mordred his fatall fo, he did beget inceſtuouſly,
               Vnto his vtter ouerthrow, on his owne ſiſter wickedly:
               And thus the father was forlorne, through his ſons force in inceſt borne.
            
            
               A good example to bewray the due reward of euerie vice,
               Thy ſinnes (the ſcriptures plainly ſay) ſhal thee condemne before thine eies:
               And likewiſe he the death ſhal die, who doth commit adulterie.
            
            
               Was not the world once ouerflowen for this offence of lauiſh luſt?
               Sodom and Gomor ouerthrowen with fire and brimſtone vnto duſt?
               Was not Sichem through luſt deſtroide, and all his cittie ſore annoide?
            
            
               Died not Ammon through his inceſt? and was not Abſalon eke ſpilt
               Through lecherie, (as is expreſt?) and died not Abner through this gilt?
               And what inceſtuous ſeed by Lot, vpon his daughters was begot?
            
            
               Lewd luſt did Hollofernes kil, through luſt the Iudges loſt their life,
               Bicauſe they might not haue their wil accompliſht on Ioakims wife:
               What plagues did fal on Beniamin, onely through luſt that filthie ſin?
            
            
               Thus may you ſee, of lecherie the puniſhment and due reward,
               Then flie far from ſuch miſerie, and therevnto take no regard:
               Gods plague is ſore if he begin, and death is the reward of ſin.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               
                  SPLINDIDA
CRVDELEM
POST
MORTEM
FAMA
MANEBIT
               
            
         
         
            
            THE HISTORIE OF THE
conqueſts of the mightie conquerour
CHARLES the great.
            
               I Am the Emperour Charlemaine, ſurnamed Charles the great.
            I reigned ſix and fortie yéeres as King in roiall ſeat.
            Both King and Emperour alſo of kingdoms manie one:
            I am a Chriſtian, and beléeue in Ieſus Chriſt alone.
            The Father and the holie Ghoſt, one God in Trinitie,
            Which made both heauen and the earth, and liueth eternallie.
            My fathers name Pipinus was, in Inglehem alſo,
            In the countie of Palatine my mother bare me tho,
            But little from the citie Meutz, My fame and woorthineſſe
            Is knowne well through Chriſtendome, and alſo heatheneſſe.
            I warred againſt the Sarracens in Gaſcoine manie a daie,
            And cauſed them to yéeld and turne vnto the Chriſtian laie.
            The Saxons fierce I did purſue for thirtie winters ſpace,
            And at the laſt conſtrained them on knées to ſue for grace:
            And to my Empire to obey, and chriſtian faith to take,
            And eke their Painims falſe beleefe, for euer to forſake.
            King Deſiderius I ſubdued, with many a Lumbard mo,
            As he was marching towards Rome, to worke Italians wo,
            And ſaued Rome and Italy, from danger of the fire:
            Whoſe ſpoile, this king of Lumbards did malitiouſlie conſpire.
            And laid him, his children, and his wife in priſon ſtrong,
            At Liege the citie great, whereas they all remained long.
            I tooke all Lumbardie by force with famous victorée,
            And placed officers therein to gouerne vnder mée.
            
               Taſsilo, Duke of Baiarland, I conquered in fight,
            His men of wars I ouerthrew: his ſonne (a noble knight)
            Renowmed through his manlie acts, and feats of chiualrie,
            I ouercame with mine owne hands in battell valiantlie.
            The biſhop Leo I reſtord vnto the dignitée,
            Whom Romans had exiled Rome, when he fled vnto mée.
            All Italie I brought perforce to my obeiſiance,
            
               
Where I ſlew manie doughtie knights, with dent of deadlie launce.
            Eight yéeres I warred in Hungarie againſt thoſe nations ſtout,
            And ceaſed not till finallie I rooted them all out.
            From whence I brought abundance great of gold and ſiluer bright:
            And therewith highlie did aduance and prefer manie a knight,
            
               Lecho king of Behemie, I vanquiſhed in field
            Both he, and all his ſubiects did to my ſubiection yéeld.
            All France I had vnder my power, all Germanie was myne:
            And all the countries that doelie vpon the riuer Rhyne.
            
            In France I held long wars and great againſt foure kings of fame,
            Who were the Duke of Dordons ſonnes, at laſt I did them tame.
            In Rome I was crownd Emperour, whereby the monarchie
            Tranſlated was from Rome vnto my countrey Germanie.
            
            I was both King and Emperour of all the weſt empire,
            And brought the ſame to quiet ſtate, what ſhould I more deſire?
            All the kings through Chriſtendome I might command at will:
            It laie in me as ſouereigne Lord to pardon or to ſpill.
            When I had thus triumphantlie obtained what I would:
            I was content to liue at reſt, bicauſe I waxed old.
            And then I led in quietneſſe the laſt part of my life,
            Redreſſing wrong, maintaining peace, ſuppreſſing euerie ſtrife.
            In which time I did build and found thrée Vniuerſities
            Of fame, in Italie and France, whoſe ſeuerall names be theſe:
            
               Bononie and Padua, which lie in Italie,
            
            And Paris the chiefe towne of France, theſe founded were by me.
            In fine as euerie mortall wight to death muſt yéeld his due,
            At Aken ſo I changed life, I could it not eſchue.
            When I had liued ſeuentéene yeres and two accounted iuſt:
            My bodie was enterd in earth, where it conſumes to duſt:
            In the yéere after Chriſt his birth eight hundered and mo
            By true account of authors old, full ſeuentie and two.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               ❧An Example of this
former Hiſtorie.
            
               THe bliſſe and long felicitie, which here this worthie did enioie
               Through palme of famous victory raining moſt like a princely boy,
               Foreſheweth vnto euery wight, the vertues of this noble knight.
            
            
               The zeale he bare to learnings lore, his life alſo declares the ſame,
               And God aduanced him therefore, with much increaſe of daily fame,
               And held him vp in his renown, that no foes forſe could pluck him down
            
            
               For God will alwaies his defend, and them direct in euery cauſe:
               He giues long life and happie end to ſuch as doe obſerue his lawes:
               In whom he doth good workes begin, he wil continue them therein.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               
                  QVI
FAMAM
QVERIT
VIGILET

                        〈…〉
                     
IVVENILIBVS
ANNIS
               
            
         
         
            
            THE HISTORIE OF THE
conqueſts of the puiſſant conquerour
GVY.
            
               I Am Guy the Barron bold, of déede the doughtieſt knight
            That in my daies in England was, with ſhield or ſpeare in fight.
            An Engliſh man I am by birth, in faith a Chriſtian true:
            The wicked lawes of Infidels I vtterlie eſchue.
            Nine hundreth twentie yéeres and one after Chriſt his birth,
            When King Athelſtone ware the crowne, I liued vpon earth.
            Sometime I was of Warwicke Earle, and (for to ſay the truth)
            A Ladies loue did me conſtraine to trauell in my youth
            To win me fame in feats of armes, in ſtrange and ſundrie lands,
            Where I atchieued for hir ſake great conqueſts with my hands.
            Firſt I ſaid to Normandie, and there I wan in fight
            The Emperours daughter of Almaine from manie a worthie knight.
            Alſo in Lumbardie my ſelfe, with thrée knights and no more,
            Slew ſixtéene Lumbards beeing ambuſht to murder me before,
            Through falſe Duke Ottons trecherie, who bare me mortall hate,
            Cauſe of the wound I gaue to him in Normandie of late.
            Then paſſed I the ſeas to Greece, to helpe the Emperour right
            Againſt the mightie Souldans hoſt of Perſia to fight:
            Where I did kill of Sarracens and Painims manie a man,
            And ſlew the Souldans couſin eke, who had to name Coldran.
            
            And Eſkeldart a famous knight to death I did purſew:
            And Elman King of Tire alſo, moſt horrible to vew.
            I went vnto the Souldans hoſt, vpon ambaſſage ſent,
            And brought his head away with me, hauing kild him in his tent.
            There was a Dragon in that land, which alſo I did ſlay,
            As he a Lion did purſue moſt fiercely by the way.
            To Almaine thence I did retire, and thence to Loraine right,
            Where I the Duke of Painie kild, his treaſon to requight.
            Then into England I did ſaile to wed Phelis the bright,
            For loue of whom I trauelled ſo far, to trie my might.
            And when I had eſpouſed hir, I ſtaide but fortie daies,
            
               
Vntill I left the Ladie faire, and went from hir my waies,
            Vnto the ſeas in pilgrime ſort my voyage for to take,
            Euen vnto the holie land for Ieſus Chriſt his ſake.
            Where I Earle Ionas did redéeme, and all his ſonnes fiftéene:
            Who with the cruell Sariſins in priſon long had béene.
            I ſlew the Giant Amerant, in battell hand to hand:
            And doughtie Barnard killed eke, and Duke of Painie land.
            And ſithens came into England, and there with Colbrand fought:
            An vglie Giant whom the Danes, had for their champion ſought,
            And ouercame him in the field, and ſiue him valiantlie:
            And thereby did releaſe the land from tribute vtterlie.
            And afterwards did offer vp the weapon ſolemnlie
            In Wincheſter, wherewith I fought in ſight of manie an eie.
            In Windſor forreſt I did kill a Bore of paſſing ſtrength,
            Whoſe like in England neuer was for highnes, breadth, and length.
            Some of his bones in Warwicke yet, within the caſtle lie:
            One of his ſhields vnto this daie doth hang in Couentrie.
            
            I ſlew alſo in Dunſmore heath a monſterous wild beaſt,
            Cald the Dun cow of Dunſmore, which manie men oppreſt:
            Hir bones alſo in Warwicke lie yet, for a monument,
            Which vnto euerie looker on a woonder may preſent.
            And in Northumberland I did a Dragon fell deſtroie,
            Which did both men and beaſts oppreſſe and countrey ſore annoie.
            And then to Warwicke came againe, but there I was not knowne:
            Wherefore I led an Hermits life, a mile out of the towne.
            Where with my hands I hewed a houſe, out of a rocke of ſtone,
            And liued as a Palmer poore within that caue alone:
            And dailie came to ſeeke my food vnto my caſtell gate,
            Not knowne of my louing wife, which mourned for hir mate,
            Till at the laſt I fell ſore ſicke, and found that I muſt die,
            I ſent to hir a ring, by which ſhe knew me preſentlie:
            And ſo repairing to the caue, before I gaue the ghoſt,
            She cloſed vp my dieng eies, whom once I loued moſt.
            Thus dreadfull death did me arreſt, and laid my corps in graue,
            Thus as a Pilgrime died I, and all my ſoule to ſaue.
            My bodie in Warwicke lieth yet, though now conſumed to mould:
            My ſtature there engrand in ſtone this day you may behould.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               ❧An Example of this
former Hiſtorie.
            
               THe affection of impatient loue procurd this knight to take
               His manlie forſe, & might to proue, in many a ſtrang & forren land:
               Whereby it came to paſſe that he, aduanced was exceedinglie.
            
            
               For through his warlike feates of fame, and marſhall magnanimitie,
               He wan to wife a paſſing dame, being borne of high nobilitie.
               With Earledoms two which by hir right, deſcended to this noble knight.
            
            
               But ſee in him example rare, when he the ladie wedded had:
               With hir the ſtorie doth declare, but fortie daies his life he lad,
               Till leauing all in poore araie, on pilgrimage he tooke the waie
            
            
               Towards Ieruſalem to obtaine remiſſion for his ſinfull life,
               Bicauſe he had ſo manie ſlaine, for loue of hir which was his wife,
               And not for Ieſus Chriſt his ſake, for which he thoght amends to make.
            
            
               With puniſhing his bodie ſo, as then it was the wonted vſe,
               Which of repentance plain doth ſho a token, thogh through great abuſe,
               For want of knowledge of the truth, of holie ſcriptures: the more ruth.
            
            
               And afterwards at his returne, all worldly pleaſures he defied,
               In pouertie he did bemourne his youthfull daies, and ſo he died:
               All theſe declare a contrite hart, which God accepted in good part.
            
            Finis huius libri.
         
      
   