
      
         
            
            
            CERTAINE ENGLISHE Verses, presented vnto the Queenes most excellent Maiestie, by a Courtier: In ioy of the most happie disclosing, of the most dangerous conspiracies pretended by the late executed Traitours, against her royall person, and the whole Estate.
            AT LONDON Printed by Henrie Haslop, and are to bee sold in Paules Church-yard at the signe of the Bible. 1586.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE TRIVMPHS OF TROPHES, In Saphie verse of Iubiles.
            
            
               
                  IF DAVID daunst for ioy before
                     Exul
                           ••
                        tes cantate Domino, & inbilate Deo Iacob. Psal. 80. the Arke being a king
               If Barac sang when Israels foes were foild,
               Then victors wee that Deboras song may sing
               Our Iudith stout Holosernes Mates hath spoild.
            
            
               If Rome of Romane Triumphes earst was oft so glad
                     Psallite Domino in Cithara in
                           •
                         unda & voce carminis. Psal. 98.
               
               and likewise Greece of Grecians Trophes ioyed:
               If Iewes of Iubilees their onlie mirth haue had
               then England leap, and laugh aloud for Queene enioyd.
            
            
               Now Baal and Bell, now Titanes sonnes are slaine,
                     Clangite iubam, sumite psalmii, & dat
                           •
                         tympa
                           ••
                        m cum nablo. Psal. 80.
               
               their Prophets false their wicked Priests are kild
               Their Pluto howles that Babels brood are taen,
               their Tower did fall that Nimrods Imps did build.
            
            
               Sith Nessus brood and Cassius crue are knowen
                     Tu deus dissipa
                        
                           〈…〉
                         & cos
                           •
                        egisli capita, draconū in aquie ps.
                  
               
               like Siluane Centaures conspirde your Realme to quaile,
               Take courage Queene, for Sinon sleights abroad are blowen,
               the Traitours found, and yet the treasons faile.
            
            
               These Cicloppes seede which at your crowne doe kicke
                     Demersae sunt gentes in foue
                           ••
                         quam fecerunt.
                  
               
               and frame a forme to make your kingdome bleed,
               Like Giants seeke with stones the starres to strike
               but mist the marke and wound themselues in deed:
            
            
               They vowd Zopirus vowes, to please Darius beck
                     Sepul
                           •
                        rum patens guttur corum. Psal. 5
               
               they sought a new deuise which Sphinx of Rome thē taught,
               They faine would finde, that England had one neck,
               that by a stroke the head might off they sought-
            
            
               
               
                  
                     Gladiū strinxerunt▪ & arcū tetēderunt impij, vt iugulent cor qui recto sunt corde.
                  Their match was made, their wager was not wonne,
               their snares were laid, but yet their purpose mist,
               Their day decreed, and yet the deed not done,
               a will they had you see, that wanted what they wist.
            
            
               
                  
                     Vt 
                           •
                        arent cada
                        
                           •
                        era 
                           •
                        uorū in cibum a
                           •
                        abu
                           •
                         coeli. Psal▪
                      93.What thought Pyragmons sprats to doe, we know,
               their Romish Iesabell Naboths vineyard sought,
               Who like Medusa bends her cursed Bow
               the onlie Circes, which hath this mischief wrought.
            
            
               
                  
                     Deus vltionom est Dominus. Psal. 94.These vipers tend with Briareus hundred hands,
               with hundred Argus eies these Scorpions wait,
               These busie Basilisks and brood of Cocatrice stands
               like Nilus Crocodiles hungrie for their bait.
            
            
               
                  
                     Callidū excogitarunt consiliū contra dominii. Psal 93.These sucking serpents, these monstrous snakish crewe,
               these blooddie Dragons like spitefull Asps are set,
               With Hidras heads which erst Alcides slue
               are now of late with our Bellona meete.
            
            
               
                  
                     Vt Ierusalem poncrēt in acernos ruinar
                           •
                        m. Psal. 79.Of Canaan faine▪ they would a Chaos make,
               and bring Palladium in, our Ilion to deface,
               A spoile for Hispaine, a feat for Fraunce in hand they take
               and quite to make an end of Brutus race.
            
            
               
                  
                     Via impiorum tenebrosa, nesciunt vbi corruant. Prou. 4.Thus these climing mates Euceladus like attempt,
               in armes seeke Ioue from skies by force to take,
               They seeke the Sun, the Moone, the Starres in great contempt
               to obscure their light a deadlie Eclips to make.
            
            
               
                  
                     Sepè expugnauerūt me a iuuē tute mea nunc dicat Israel. Psal. 129.They seeke with Phaaeton Phoebus charge to rest,
               
                  Vulcans net, Gordions knot they would vnknit
               And breake their blooddie blades on Pallas breast,
               thus they couet much in Moses chaire to sit.
            
            
               To wrest from Hercules hand his Club, who can?
               who may from Ioue, his lightning take by force?
               
                  Homers verse, who can disgrace? I say no man,
               who then can touch a sacred Princes coarse.
            
            
               
               Though Ca
                        •
                     sar was in Senate slaine by Brute his friend,
               Though Cirus head was bathd in blood luke warme,
                     Sanguis 
                           •
                        anguinis merces Deut
                  
               
               No maruaile though, for blood requireth blood at thend
               but mercie too much thine, I feare doth harme,
            
            
               For if Laban was for Iacob sake so blest,
               and Putiphars hap,
                     Genes. 30 39. by Iosephs meane no lesse
               Our hap, our blisse, our ioyes wherein we rest▪
               
               For whom it is, we must of force confesse.
            
            
               Who with Ionas gurth hath sau'de vs from the Sunne,
                     Tegmen a turbine & vmbraculum ab aestu dominus. Deut. 33.
               
               Who with Aser shoes, hath kept vs from the mire?
               Who hath with Dauids sling Golias mates vndone.
               our Cynthia, she who hath appeas'd Iehouas ire.
            
            
               These on Bellerophons horse doe ride in skie,
                     Quaerunt animā meā & moditati sunt tota di
                           •
                         dolos Ps. 38.
               
               with Icarus wings to clime in cloudes is their drift,
               These would make Architas woodden Doue to flie,
               What blinde Teresias doth not see their shift.
            
            
               In Phaetonissa schoole,
                     Pone cos domine vt clibanum ignis, in tempore irae tuae. Psal. 21 at Endor they were taught,
               with Dracos inke to write, with Creons seale to signe,
               With Iudas kisse to kill, with Hamons haue they sought,
               both Iudaes spoyle, and Sions fall in fine.
            
            
               These seceet Satires, these cruell Catelins wait,
               these dogs of Moabs house greadie of their pray.
               Like Eumenides whelpes tending on their bait,
               
                  Vultures for Prometheus guts readie set in ray.
            
            
               They ventured Acherontas depth to wade,
                     Apericulis persequentium & a conuentu malignant
                           ••
                        on tu salus mea.
                  
               
               they striued through Stigtas streame to saile,
               Mauger of Megeras head away they made,
               by Carons help, Elisius field to assaile.
            
            
               To make spotted Ewes with Iacobs stick they sought,
                     Eijce fulmen & dissipe eos
                           •
                        mitta sagittas tuas & disturba illos. Psal.
                  
               
               to walke vnseene, with Giges ring faine they would
               Of Simon Magus these men would faine be taught,
               like Curres by Circes charm'd to be with Liones bold.
            
            
               
               
                  
                     Leuate sign
                           ••
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                         est 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                  
                  Circes cup is falne, Calipsos sauce is shed
               
                  Balims brood is b
                     ••
                  d, their Harpies are descried,
               
                  Cerberus soppes are found, Cirens songs are red
               thus is Accaron knowen, and Romane Idoll tried.
            
            
               
                  
                     Car 
                           〈…〉
                         Psal. 25Their drinke is blood, their bread is humane flesh,
               Consuls heads with Preachers tongues their food, & what
               Is their daintiest dish▪ Princes harts I gesse,
               Thus like Basan Bulles, they feed their Pope with fat.
            
            
               
                  
                     Conati sunt pri
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         an
                           •
                        na mea. Psal. 25.But time decreed, how long should Assur liue,
               and God foretolde, when Pharaoes life should end,
               To take thy life the man of sinne doth striue,
               in vaine O Queene, when Angels thee defend.
            
            
               
                  
                     Non ob
                           •
                        eniet ti bi malii, nec appropinquabit plaga tabernaculo tuo. Psa. 62▪
                  Could Ionas in the raging Seas be drownd?
               could Lions Daniel in their Dennes deuoure?
               Might Misael burne in fi
                     •
                  ie furnace bound?
               durst Traitours blade attempt our sacred Princes bowre?
            
            
               
                  
                     Non est consiliū nec prudentia contra Dominū.
                  A blast of winde made Th'assirians hoast to flie,
               Earthen pots made Madianites to take their flight,
               Hornes threw Ierichoes wall flat on ground to be,
               God, makes Flies, Frogs, Rats and Lice, for him to fight.
            
            
               
                  
                     Pone co
                           •
                        s
                           •
                        cut rotam, & sicut stipulamanto ve
                           ••
                        tum.
                   
                  Cains curse, Herods death, I wish on them to fall,
               that seeke a sacred Prince with secret sword to kill,
               
                  Iudas death to good for Iudas mates I call,
               who bathes in blood, and drinke of blood their fill.
            
            
               
                  
                     Ia
                           •
                        vet gladius cor
                           ••
                        n in cor cor
                           ••
                        . Psal. 37.But Serpents neuer build in Boxe, nor breede
               in Cipres tree, no Canker can the Emerald touch,
               Euen so these hellish Heliottes cannot feed,
               on her whose vertues rare amaseth such.
            
            
               
                  
                     Profer lanceā, apprehēde clyp
                           •
                         & singe in auxil
                           •••
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . Psal. 36. These Minotaurus brood from Rome, from Creete,
               
               with sword and fire, in Albion swarme like Bees
               Like Sampsons Foxes with fi
                     •
                  ed tailes and feete,
               they dread no death to winne a Popish fees.
            
            
               
               In Rhodes was neuer seen, they say, an Eagles nest
               some hold it so, tha Creete can breed no Owle,
               And Crowes in Athens were neuer seen at least
               that England breedes no wolues, an error foule.
            
            
               
                  Cymerians blinde, that haunts Troponius Caue,
               could neuer bide the shining Sunne in sight,
                     Qui ambula
                           •
                         in tenebais odi
                           •
                         lucem.
                  
               
               Who still in darknesse dwell, the light doe neuer craue,
               but like Cacus Captiues shrouded a
                     •
                  e with night.
            
            
               A simple Goat could asswage god Faunus ire,
               a grunting hog could Neptunes rage appease,
                     Dij Gentū vani sunt. Deus noster coelos fecit.
                  
               
               A seelie Cocke could coole Asculapius fi
                     •
                  e,
               but Lions 
                     •
                  round, the bull of Rome must please.
            
            
               His Dan and Bethell, sacred Pantheon cald,
               his sinagoge esteemes no Oxe, no Calfe,
                     miserunt in Ignem sancta tua & polluerūt tabernaculum nominis tui. Ps. 74 no Bull,
               But blood of kings in Royall seates enstald,
               wherein Perillus part he plaies at full.
            
            
               No fire in Rome could Romulus staffe consume,
               no meanes might make king Pyrrhus toes to burne
               But Pope with Naeuius knife euer durst presume,
               with Briers and Brambles make Caedar trees to mourn.
            
            
               But might these mates haue had but Aarons rod in hand
               or could haue borrowed Elias cloke no doubt,
                     Anima nostrasicut passer ereptae est ex laqueo venantium. Psal.
                  
               
               They had made the Seas, on both sides for to stand,
               that Fraunce and Spaine might make the slaughter out.
            
            
               Their Dagon fell,
                     Quis deus praeter Dominum? quis 
                           •
                        ortis? sicut Deus noster Sam: 22 our sacred Arke stood vp,
               their Pharao myst, our Moses did preuaile,
               Their crosse was downe, our crowne did neuer stoupe,
               Their Barge did sinke, our Ship top gallant saile,
            
            
               Noughtie Nabals curse on Dauid neuer fell?
                     Cadant a consilij
                           •
                         suis quoniā r
                           •
                        belles sunt tibi. Psal.
                  
               
               
                  Achitophels cruel counsai
                     •
                  e did no good
               to Absalon, when Absalon did rebell?
               
                  Semei could doe no harme, when Semei God withstood.
            
            
               
               
                  Elizeus bones could raise the Dead from graue,
               
                  Peter's shadowe passing by,
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                         Act
                           •
                         
                        
                           •
                        ap 5 Act. cap. 
                     
                        •
                     9. made sicke men hole.
               
                  Paules handkercher from death, did many saue,
               thus vertue deales to vertuous men her dole
            
            
               But Balles of Rome and Beares of Hispaine did more,
               they murther whom they will, and pardon whom they list,
               Kings from crownes depriue,
                     Spiritus procellarum e
                           •
                        it pa
                           •
                        s callicis corum. Psalr
                   and kings to crownes restore,
               thus to shadow Caesar states, the Pope hath euer wisht.
            
            
               If Dathan and Abiron sanke for treason wrought,
               if Assur,
                  
                     Pluet super impios laqueos, ignem & sulphur.
                   
                  Pharo so enuied Dauids seat,
               If Greekes Iewes and Gentiles Iacobs starre haue sought,
               these Gorgons would Eliza faine from Crowne defeat.
            
            
               When Perseus sword shall snatch of Medusas head,
               when Mercuries whistle lulls Argos eies to sleep,
               When Phaebus faulchon kils monstrous Python dead.
                     Inueniet manus tua ini
                           ••
                        ico
                           •
                         tuos. Psal. 
                     
                        •
                     
                  
               
               then shall Eliza make Romane Cerberus creepe:
            
            
               Though still you beare, the Oliue branch in breast.
               yet some wish you Hermes Harpen in your hand,
               Though you the Lambe imbrace, the Lion is your beast,
               for mercie must with iustice ioine to rule a land.
            
            
               Cleanse Angeus hall, destroy Stymphalides seede,
               your souldiers readie preast,
                     Dispelle eos sicu
                           •
                         pale a a facie venti. Psal. 1. do stand in aray,
               Thunders, hailstones, brimstone, fier, your foes shal speede
               Angels armd, hosts from hie, God himself will say.
            
            
               
                  
                     S
                           •
                        ent & saluē
                        
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         augures coeli qui contemplā
                        
                           •
                        ur sydera: Esa 47.To Curria trudge, of Sibill knowe your fates,
               to Ammons priests, at Ammons temple scrape.
               To Delphos post, call and knock at Phaebus gates,
               to knowe of Phaebus how traitors best may scape.
            
            
               
                  
                     Dux foemina factum.
                  No Iewell, Gemme, no goulde to giue I had,
               no Indian stones, no Persean gaze in hand
               No pearles from Pactolus to a Prince, yet glad,
               these happie Halcions daies to see in Britaine land.
            
            FINIS. L. L.
            
         
      
   