
      
         
            
            
            VOX
clamantis.
MARK. 1. 3.
            A
STIL VOICE,
TO THE THREE
Thrice-honourable Estates
OF
PARLIAMENT:
And in them, to all the Soules
of this our Nation, of what state or
condition soeuer they be.
            By William Loe, Doctor of Diuinitie,
and Chaplaine to the Kings
most excellent Maiestie.
            
            Printed by T. S. for Iohn Teage, and are
to be sold at the Signe of the Golden-Ball
in Pauls Church-yard, 1621.
         
         
            
            
            TO
THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE
GEORGE,
Marquesse of Buckingham, Lord
high Admirall, Viscount Villiers, Baron of
Whaddon, Maister of his MAIESTIES Horse, Knight
of the most noble Order of the Garter, Gentleman of
his Highnesse Bed-Chamber, one of his most honourable
Priuy-Councell, a Patron of good Letters, and a
Patterne of true Nobility. Grace and fauour
be from Heauen by
CHRIST.
            
               MOST Noble, and most worthily
honoured LORD.
The true, and hearty Zeale,
which I owe vnto my God,
King, Church, and Country,
hath moued, and made me to
prostrate before the Three
thrice honourable Estates of
PARLIAMENT, assembled,
And in them to all the Cleriques, Courtiers, and
Commons within our Nation, euen from Sea to Sea, and

from the Riuer to the Lands end, (being ledde hereunto
by the words of the Prophet prefixed) the still passages
of this small Voyce, which hath laine suppressed
some yeares, by meanes of a certaine Great-one, (who
not long sithence was great, but now is not, so mutable
and nutable is the state of things on earth) taking offence
at some passages herein. Whose ouer-weening greatnesse,
and wilfulnesse, had then at the least shut me vp, if
not sent me (as there was great cause to suspect and feare)
not the way of all flesh in respect of the manner, but of
mortalitie) if some reuerend Fathers of the Church, the
blessed Beaue-Peeres of Diuinitie, had not stayed that enraged
fury against mee: But not long after, the hand of
Almightie God surprized that greatnes, clipped it, restrained
it, that it might doe no more harme, & so it remaines to
this day. Happy had it beene for that man, that hee had
then hearkened to that Voyce from God, deliuered by the
weake ministry of him, who neuer saw his face to this day,
that if it had pleased the Almightie, his soule might thereby
haue beene awakened out of that fearefull slumber,
wherein hee then lay, bewitched with the Circean Cups
of Ambition, Wantonnesse, and sensuall securitie. Then
had not his fingers, nor the hands of others, his Agents in
euill, dropped with the cruell bloud-guiltinesse, neyther
had their consciences beene tortured, and tormented with
the Hellish horrour of heart-bleeding wickednesse. What
I then spake in the accent, and action of a liuing man, to the
greatest Auditorie of this Land, I now present to publique
view, in the lesse effectual elements of a dead Letter: To no
other purpose (God is my record) but intending and endeuouring
hereby the aduancement of Gods glory, some
good of his Church, and in all Estates a remembrance vnto
these present times, a manifestation of our happinesse

vnder so Christian a King, whose heart detesteth all vniustice,
the maintenance of the truth then deliuered, and
that these palpable and pisculent imputations and aspersions
of Faction, and Sedition, might in some sort be spunged
out, which it pleased that Great-one mentioned to cast
vpon me at that time in an honourable Assembly, and since
that time some others (strangely alienated both from our
Church and State) who haue endeuoured to be-sprinkle
me with the like, for that I vndertooke, and did reconcile,
and compose, by directions from his Maiesties owne mouth,
some differences in Ecclesiasticall discipline, happened into
a famous Fellowship, (to which I am much obliged) resident
in part beyond the Seas, whither I was not long sithence
sent by authority, allowance, and Recommendation
of his sacred Maiesty, and the most Reuerend Archbishop
of Canterbury. Which imployment and seruice, albeit it hath
in some part impayred, yea almost impouerished mee in my
poore personall eflate, and lost me some friends, whom I
thought had beene better minded, and may (in Gods good
time) bethinke themselues better: Yet, were either the one
abroad, or this seruice at home to be done againe; for the
vnfained loue I beare vnto the free passage of Gods glorious
Gospel, and to the present setled subsistants of the discipline
of our Church, I would not onely (as a Merchant
Aduenturer) hazard my weake body, poore estate, and
liuelihood; but also would willingly (as a free Minister of
the Gospell) expose my selfe to all the Snibbes, Quippes,
Taunts, Reproaches, Disgraces, and Punishments, that any
wicked, and vngodly Great-one (little, or not at all affected
to God) should preuaile against mee in, that (at the least)
I might herein manifest to the World, my Willingnesse and
Indeauour to maintaine and make good (quantum in me)
the sacred freedome of the one, and the Christian Discipline

of the other; both which, our Nation most comfortably
enioyeth vnder God, by the blessing of so Christian a
King as is our most gracious Soueraigne, vnder Christ
Iesus, the breath of all our nosthrils, my most dread Liege-Lord
and Master. Desiring all true honest English
hearts, which are not poysoned with preiudicate opinion of,
exotique niceties, and imitation of strangers, to iudge, if
there be any passage herein, that deserueth either manicles,
or menaces, or ought; but what becommeth a sober and a
true English-hearted Diuine. But be this little Hin of
mine either accepted or reiected (by such as care not how
the World goes, so they may atchieue their owne ends) I
passe not, so it may please your most noble Worth, that it
may shelter it selfe vnder your honourable protecting fauour.
When I went ouer to that seruice mentioned beyond
the Seas, I made bold to present his Highnesse with a Tract
entit
                  •
               led, The Mystery of Mankind; and vpon my returne,
I vowed This, to your Honour. It is the poore Mite
of him, that will euer remaine a Votary to God for you;
That the magnificence of Gods fauors, and the munificence
of his mercies may euer be multiplied vpon you, and vpon
all your godly endeuors; That so both you, and all you take
in hand, in discharge of your eminent places, may be sanctified,
to the good of Gods Church, his Mai
                  •
               stie, and the State,
to your owne soules safetie, and that you may be great in
the Kingdome of your heauenly Master, through the sauing
mercies and fauour of Iesus Christ.
            
               Your Lordships to be commanded
in the seruice of
IESVS CHRIST,
William Loe.
               
            
            
         
         
            
            
            To the well-disposed Readers.
             
               IN the worlds birth God spake to
our first Parents by a still voyce
in the coole of the day;Genesis 3. in the
worlds middle age to Elyah after
the winde,1 Reg. 19. earthquake, and
fire, in a still small voyce, and in
this last age of the world, by a didirecting
voyce from Heauen,Matth. 17.
concerning Christ Iesus his Sonne our Lord, saying, Heare
him. In the beginning was the word, yet that word was before all
beginning, but the world knew not that Word, but by the
voice of men and Angels. And albeit the Word, be in itselfe
before the Voyce, yet to the sonnes of men the Voyce goeth
before the Word: Therefore is the Fore-runner Iohn Baptist
called, The voyce of a Cryer in the Wildernesse.
            
             That is most true: For Christ is the Cryer,
               Musc. & Maldonat. in Mat. 3 the Baptist
is the Voyce; and as in his Fore-runner, so also in his Apostles
that followed, and in all other Preachers of his Gospell,
Christ saith, and speaketh by the mouthes of all his holy
seruants since the world beganne, euen to this day.Iansen Conco. 13. 
               Voyce
and Crying must goe together, the Voyce to feed with faith,
the Cry to call to Repentance; the Voyce to com
                  •
               ort, the
Cry to controle; the Voyce to tune the musicke of Mercy,
               Diez: con. 1. Dom. 3. Aduen. Aquin. Caten. Matth. 3.
and the Cry to sound the Trumpet to Iudgement. The
word of God in writing is the Proclamation, and Gods Ministers
are the Voyces of the Criers, to giue notice to all the
People, that the Proclamation concernes them, and euery
one of them.
             
               Church men then are crying Voyces; they shall neuer
be shent in sober zeale for the cause of God, to cry out with
Dauid in generall against all the wicked.Psal. 139. 21. Acts 8. Acts 13. 
               Doe not I hate them
that hate thee, and am not I grieued with them that rise vp

gainst thee? That in particular cry against a Simon Magus:
That he is in the gall of bitternesse, and in the bond of Iniquity. Against
an Elimas: That he is full of mischiefe, the childe of the
Diuell, and an enemy of all Righteousnesse. Against an hereticall
Marcion, that he is the Diuells Darling.
               Iren. lib. 6 cap. 3 For as to some meeke
and modest spirits, Preachers must be Barnabasses, the sons
of Consolation: So to others, whose sinnes are of a deeper
dye, they must be like Iames and Iohn (Bonarges) sonnes of
Thunder.
             
               If wee will neither heare Voyce, nor Cry, nor the
voyce of the Cryer; How doe wee thinke God should lend
an eare to our voyce when we cry vnto him? Is it not iust
with God to say vnto vs,
               Prouerbs 1. Because I haue called, and yee haue
refused; I haue stretched out mine hand, and none will regard:
Therefore you shall call vpon me, but I will not answer; you shall
seeke me earely, but you shall not finde me. Thinke on this, ye that
forget God, yee that suffer Christ to call and cry vnto you, by his
Preachers, and ye regard not. Consider this ye great ones, lest
God lay your honour in the dust: yee mighty, lest the Almighty
throw you downe, and there be none to helpe you vp, lest he tumble
you from your seate, and set in your places the humble and
meeke.
             Doe yee refuse to heare the still voyce of the Cryer, take
heede lest the shrill Cryer himselfe cry against you with his great
Voyce, which is Powerfull,Psal. 29. full of Maiesty, breaking the Cedars,
yea the Cedars of Lebanon, euen the great ones,4. diuiding the
flames of fire,5. euen his Ministers whom he maketh flames of fire,
shaking the wildernes,7. 8. 9. yea the wildernes of Kadesh, euen the vast,
wilde, and wide wickednes of the People. Beware that the Multitude
thinke not themselues too many, nor the Cleriques too classicall,
nor the mighty too maiesticall to attend the voyce of the Lord.
For if they doe so, and will not heare them cry, that wish them
to take heede of future wee, then this wildernesse of the world, a
Desert of Beasts, rauening Wolues, couetous Foxes, roaring Lyo
                  •
               s,
and the like, shall cast them out into the Land of Obliuion,
where they themselues shall doe nothing but howle and crie in woe
eternally.
             If the Voyce and Cri
                  •
                be to exasp
                  •
               rate (as you thinke) for

the lowdnesse thereof: Know ye, it calleth to them that are gone
as farre off from God, as the Prodigall was into a farre Countrey,
and these haue need of a Trumpet to recall them. If it be too
plaine for Clearenesse, know yee, it is the euidence of the spirit of
God that you might distinctly discerne what is spoken, proclamed
and sounded, that so you might prepare your selues vnto the battell.
A lamentable woe would it be vnto you all, if the voyce of
all such as cry vnto you from the Lord, should be the vncertaine
and hoarse voyces of Hereticall, Schysmaticall, Atheisticall, Papisticall,
prophane, vaine deceiuers.
             For you know, that if the sonnes of men, who are ordayned,
and set apart for this businesse of the Lord, doe not lift vp their
voyces like Trumpets, and tell Iacob their sinnes, and Israel their
transgressions, God will open the mouth of an Asse to reproue
them, yea God will cause things without life, the stone in the
wall, and the beame in the house, to cry out against them.
Farewell.
            
               Yours in the Lord, William Loe.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            A
VOICE,
RECORDED BY
the Ministrie of the Prophet
Hoshea, and made remarkeable to
our times, both by Explication,
and Application.
            
               HOSHEA. 5. 1. 2.
               
                  
                     verse 1 Heare yee this, O Priests, and hearken yee
house of Israel; and giue yee eare, O house
of the King, for iudgement is toward you,
because yee haue been a snare on Mizpah,
and a net spread vpon Tabor.
               
               
                  
                     verse 2 And the Reuolters are profound to make
Slaughter, although I haue beene a Rebuker
of them all.
            
         
         
            
            A view of the seuerall passages
sounded by this
Voyce.
            The
voyce
contayneth
a

                  1. Proclamation summoning all Estates.

                        1. Priests.
                        2. People.
                        3. Princes.

                              O yee Priests.
                              O yee house of Israel.
                              O House of the King.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  2. An Iniunction
commaunding.

                        1. Attention.
                        2. Intention.
                        3. Action.

                              Heare this.
                              Hearken.
                              Giue eare.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  3. An Accusation,
or Declaration,
pourtraying the
sins of that time,
in foure straines.

                        1. The quality of
them, by Nets and
Snares spred, wher
in is couched the

                              1. Subtilty
                              2. Irregularity
                              3. Vtility
                              4. Captiuity

                                    of their sinnes.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        2. The height
of them, by
mountaines.

                              Mizpah and Tabor.
                           
                        
                        3. The horror of
them, by words
of degrees.

                              1. Reuolting.
                              2. Profoundnesse.
                              3. Slaughter.
                           
                        
                        4. The insolencie of them, in that they
were become incorrigible, albeit. God
had beene a Rebuker of them all.
                     
                  
                  4. Commination, or Commonition
in an arrest of
Iudgement.

                        For Iudgement
is
towards you.
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            A Reuiew of the seuerall Collections
resounded by this voyce
to our time, in the particular
passages thereof.
             
               THE Spirit of God (by summoning all
Estates, and exempting none) preuenteth
that wretched preuarication of all
rankes, and conditions of man-kind, now
adayes, whereby they vse so frequently,
and so foolishly to cast, translate, and bandy the sinnes of the
time from one to another.
             Iudgement begins at Gods owne House, and Church-men
if they offend but as others, yet shall they be punished
(euen because they are Church-men) more then others, vnlesse
they repent.
             In a religious Common-wealth, the common people are
encompassed with blessings from God on euery side, from the
Church, and from the Court, both set vp by God for blessings
to their soules, bodies, goods, and good names.
             No dignity of person, nor preheminence of place, is
exempted, or excepted from Gods iustice, but euen the mighty
ones that offend, are often more euidently, more exemplarily,
and more seuerely punished then others of inferiour
ranke and condition.
             It dearely and nearely concernes all degrees in Court,
Church, and Common-wealth, that they attend as well to

the ripping vp of their sinnes, and to the Denuntiation of
Gods Iudgements for the same, as to the Promulgation of
Gods mercies, that all Estates hauing a sence, and sight of
their iniquities, may breake them off by repentance, and obtaine
pardon by Iesus Christ our Lord.
             No voyce, nor rebuke of God, or good men laying
forth the hideousnesse, and horror of sinnes neuer so often
to the view of the conscience, can preuaile with the mighty
hunting Nimrods of this World, to restraine their rage,
and furious madnesse, but still they make their greatnesse
in Church, Court, and Common-wealth, baties, and guiles for
their gaine and glory.
             God of his endlesse, boundlesse, and bottomelesse pity,
compassion, and mercy, for Christ his sake, doth fauourably
and fatherly premonish before he punish.
         
      
      
         
            
            A
STILL VOYCE,
TO
The Three ESTATES
of Parliament.
            
               O ye Priests, O ye House of Israel, O House
of the King.
            
            
               
                  IVdgement meant, and menaced
to all the Estates of
Israel, (not yet sent out,
and inflicted;) is the
maine of this Propheticall
WATCH-VVORD. The
Vials of Gods Wrath prepared
for them, but not
yet poured out; the bow
of Gods Indignation bent, the arrowes of his Anger
made ready, the sword of his Displeasure sharpened,
the Axe laid to the roote of the Trees, and the

Fanne of his Fury taken into his hand; yea, all the Instruments
of his Iustice on the string against the faces
of all conditions, and rankes of men, how many, how
mighty, how high, or how holy soeuer they be, that
will not returne vnto God, and breake off their sinnes
by Repentance. Iudgement awarded from the Throne
of God, not from Popular Discontent, or from intermedling
busie-bodies, or giddy-headed Statizers. It is
Gods voyce by the Ministery of his Prophet vnto
Priests, Peeres, and People. It is no Anabaptisticall Enthusiasme,
no singular spirit of Prophecie. It is a cleare,
and plaine denuntiation of Gods Iudgements intended,
and menaced; It is no sottish fanaticall fancy, like
that of Iohn the Taylor of Leyden, Nipper-doling, or
the rest madde men of Munster, no damned dreame
like that of Dauid George the Basilian Monster, no cursed
phrensie,
                  Dauid George cald himselfe Gods Nephew, and said he was sent to shew who were wheate, who chaff
                     •
                  , and for this phrensie was burnt at Basile. like that of English Hacket the Northamptonshire
Maulster, nor yet any perplexed prediction
of Pererius that Hieroglyphicall principall of the Ignatian
frie, but this is the euident voyce of God which
discouereth these miscreants, and the like, to be Verè
ignes fatui, Commets, Meteors, and Monsters, in Church,
Court, and Common-wealth, and the dizzy conceits that
proceede from them to be most apparant fopperies,
most palpable, and pisculent vntruths.
             In the feare of God therefore (Men and Mortals)
set before your eyes a paralell of times pourtrayed in
this Text, and feare the menaces of Gods Iudgements,
knowing that if Gods right hand lay once hold of
Execution, and strike, who shall escape the blow? Let
not the blessed peace we enioy in our Israel, marre our
manners, corrupt our bloud, or settle vs vpon our lees,

as many were in the time of this Prophet. Iebusitzs, Edomites,
Ismaelites, and such like, make themselues merrie
with God, and sleight his Iudgements; yet wee see
disconsolate Saul when hee felt God to depart from
him, desires Samuels prayers: Heathenish Foelix trembled
at Pauls Sermon, which treated of iudgement to
come, and foolish Ahab being terrified with the Prophets
words of Iudgement, walkes softly, and makes
outward semblance, as if hee had truly, and inwardly
repented. If the worst natures shuddered at Gods
Iudgements, menaced onely, shall not the best bloud
truly feare God, and tremble? Shall not the Beasts of
the Forrest quake, when the Lyon doth roare? In this
Watchword God threatneth his owne people, yea, all
estates of his owne people by an old Prophet, not by
a young Schollar; (as Paul speakes to Timothy) but
euen by one that had beene threescore and ten yeeres
a Prophet, during the raignes of fiue Kings.
             The forme of speech vsed in this Watchword is
iuridicall by way of Proclamation, Declaration, and
Commination. The Proclamation is a generall Summons
set out by Exclamation, and Iniunction. The Exclamation
citeth the parties, O ye Priests, O ye house of Israel,
O house of the King. The Iniunction enioynes them
what they must doe, that is, Heare this, Hearken, and giue
eare. The Declaration sets forth the cause of their summons,
which was their sinnes. It also further discouereth
the quality of their sinnes, by Nets, and snares,
the height of their wickednesse by the altitudes of
Mizpah, and Tabor, and the horror of their enormities
by the aggrauation of these words, Reuolting, Sacrificing,
and Profundity. The imperious insolency of
their preuarications appeared, in that they were incorrigible;
for they not onely sleighted the Ministery of
the Prophet sent from God, but despised euen God
himselfe, who as the Context saith, had beene a Rebuker
of them all. Lastly, the Commination is a Commonition,
or Watchword, that Iudgement was toward them
all, for their great and grieuous enormities. See the
summe of all this in a view. It seemeth that great was
the Cataclysme of the exorbitant sinnes and transcendent
transgressions of those times: For all the Estates
are summoned, none excepted, none exempted. Their
sinnes haughty, haynous, and heauy to the whole
Land, growne in sublimity like vnto Mountaines, deeper
then hell in their profound subtilty, and the actors
of them growne incorrigible. Hereupon is Iudgement
awarded toward them all, that as there was a parity in
their preuarications; so there should be also paralels in
their punishments.
             But I had rather you should heare an Explication
of the particular sinnes of that time, from the Prophets
owne mouth, in his owne words. The sinnes of
the Church-men of that time were as the Prophet saith.
That they refused knowledge,
               Chap. 4. 
               they forsooke the Law, and
did eate vp the sinnes of the people.
               Chap. 6. Whereupon grew
the Prouerbe vsual in that time.Chap. 8. 
               Like people, like Priests.
The Commons had no truth in them, but swearing,
and lying,
               Chap. 4. 
               and killing, and stealing, and whoring, they broke
out,
               Ibid. 
               and bloud touched bloud. The Courtiers had lost
their hearts with wine, women, and wantons; they were couetous,
and cryed,8 Bring, Bring; they did oppresse the Comminalty,
they flattered others,7 and suffered themselues to
be abused by flattery. Thus you see in the very words

of the Prophet, to what a height of presumption the
sinnes of all Estates were growne, how they all were
become Nets, and Snares one to another in these enormities;
heare now the menaces of Gods Iudgements toward
them all in the words of the same Prophet. Iudgement
was toward the Church-men; They should weepe for
want,
               Chap. 10. 
               Thornes and thistles should grow vpon their Altars,
and in the end should be so confounded,
               Ibid. 
               that they should call,
and crie to the hilles and mountaines to fall on them,
               Ibid. 
               and
couer them. Iudgement was also towards the Commons,
God should poure his wrath on them like water,
               Chap. 5. 
               and his displeasure
should be as moathes, and rottennesse vnto them,
               Ibid.
               their young lings should be dashed in pieces,14 and their women
great with childe should be ripped vp. The Courtiers
Iudgements were, That God would be as a Lyon vnto them,
and as a Lyons whelpe he would teare them in pieces,
               Chap. 5. 
               and
there should be none to deliuer.
               Ibid. 
               He would destroy the King
as the foame vpon the water;13 and bind vp all their iniquities
for their greater plague. In a word, Gods voyce to
all Estates by the Prophet, is this; O ye Church-men,
Commons, and Courtiers, Iudgement is toward you all, and
vnlesse you all repent, you shall all of you be as the morning
cloud, and as the early deaw that passeth away, as the
chaffe which is driuen with a whirle-wind out of the floore,
and as the smoake out of a chimney; but he that is wise among
you, will vnderstand these things, and he that is prudent,
will know that the wayes of the Lord are right, and
the iust shall walke in them, but the transgressors shall fall
therein. Thus haue you the summe, and substance of
the Text, euen in the words of the Prophet; now let
vs see what we may learne from the parcels and pieces
thereof. Forasmuch as that wee heare all the estates

summoned, none excepted, none exempted, we may
see hereby, that
            
               The Spirit of God (by summoning all Estates,1. Position. and
exempting none) preuenteth that wretched preuarications
of all rancks,All Estates summoned. and conditions of mankinde
now a dayes, whereby they vse so frequently
and foolishly, to cast, transferre, and
bandy the sinnes of the time from one to another.
               
                  IT could heartily be wished, that this mutuall,
and vsuall fault of translating our
sinnes from one to another were so superannate,
that it were vtterly abrogated, and
antiquated, but alas it hath beene, and is too fresh, and
too frequent in all ages, and too triuial, both in Courts,
Churches, and Common-wealthes. In the Court, Hypocriticall
Saul,
                  1 Sam. 14. the King casts the fault vpon the Prince
Ionathan his sonne.2 Sam. 15. Trayterous Absolon the Prince
puts it vpon Dauid his Father the King. Ill guided
Rehoboam the King obtrudes it vpon the people.1 Reg. 12.
Shamelesse Shemi the Subiect shifts it vpon Dauid the
King.2 Sam. 16. In the Church,Ioh. 7. 
                  Caiphas the Caitiffe giues out
that one must die for the sinnes of the people, as if the
Churchmen had beene sinlesse, and not of the people.
The piert Pharises say: The common people know nothing,
and are accursed.
                  Ioh. 11. The prating people put it as
fast vpon the Priests. The mis-perswaded Iewes say
to Ieremie:
                  Ier. 7. 
                  It was well with vs, and we had peace, and
plenty in our Land, when wee offered spiced cakes to the
Queene of Heauen, but since thou hast prophesied amongst

vs, we see no good. In the Common-wealth: The giddy-headed
Multitude sometime retort it vpon their
King, as appeares in the reuolt from Rehoboam, sometime
vpon the Magistrates, as did the murmuring Israelites
in the Conspiracie against Moses, sometime
vpon the whole Nation, as if they were not Conterranei,
or Indigenae, but Inquilini; especially in an eminent
calamitie, how quickly Iobs exulcerating friends
can obtrude the cause of his calamities to his sinfulnesse,
growne (as they say) out of measure sinnefull▪
The Galilaeans, whose bloud Pilate mingled with their
sacrifices; and the eighteene Labourers, vpon whom
the Tower of Siloam fell,Luke 13. by the Pharisaicall fry are
taxed and censured, as the most grieuous and most
hainous sinners in all Ierusalem.
               
                All which passages shew to what a strange outre
                     
                        •
                     udance
our corrupted nature is enhaunsed. For euery
one almost becomes a Pharisie proudly, and piertly
insulting ouer others, and soothing himselfe in his
sleeue, with I am not as other men are, I am a none-Parell;
I haue no Paralell, I was borne at None-such, and
the like: All which ariseth from that bitter roote of
that originall guilt in the Worlds birth.Gen. 3. 
                  God askes
Adam of his transgression, and he bands it to Euah;
Euah (being questioned) shifts it to the Serpent.
So that vpon the poynt, euery one would very faine
bandie and father their euill (what euer it be) vpon
their God. This is too true, euen in our times. For it
is almost growne our very English Idiome. Many
great ones disdaine, and grudge at Inferiours, the cart
casts dyrt at the Court, like dyrtie thornes, which
both pricke and defile. The Peeres, as if they were

peerelesse, censure the people; The people, sparing
none, taxe both Peeres and Prelates: Insomuch that
it is come to this passe, that the discontented cast the
fault any where, and the rude multitude (like Diogenes)
trample vpon Platoes pride, with prouder disdaine.
Some (like Dictators) conceit all others to be
borne for their greatnesse; and they for no mans
good: yea, albeit euen in our times, Ephraim be against
Manasses, and Manasses against Ephraim, and both against
Iuda, (as Euangelicall Esay spake in his time)
yet this noyse will not cease amongst vs: The Scripture
therefore concludes the poynt with this; Like
people, like Priests; like Princes, like people; I am sumus
ergo pares. We haue seene the veritie, the vanitie, and
antiquitie of this mutuall broyle; now let vs examine
the causes thereof.
                The prime and principall causes hereof are three,
to wit, Ambition, Couetousnesse, and an euill Conscience.
Ambition, that grieuous gangrene of the
minde, causeth the sonnes and daughters of men for
to be extreame in pursuit of all their purposed designes:
The Church-men will be more then Reason,
and Religion permitteth; the Pope will be aboue all
that is called God, and to maintaine that his transcendent
conceit, vpon whom will hee not endeuour
to bruse the beane? The bu
                     •
                  ie-headed Lawyer will be
more then Law, and bigger then the Bench, to pry
and intermeddle with State affaires, and to rush vpon
Princes prerogatiues, and that he may seeme some
body, what stone will he leaue vnturned, or what letter
of the Law ouer-curiously vndiscussed? In a word,Omnes apices 
                        •
                     uris excutiet.
all sorts striuing and strugling to be more then they

are, and bigger they can be, basely, and ambitiously
stoope to their owne wilfull and head-strong
desires, not caring whom they smite, and wound, by
base Detraction and censure, so they may seeme to
cast it from themselues, and fasten imputation of euill
vpon their betters.
                Couetousnesse, that driry dropsie, the more it
hath the more it would haue, and whom will not
this Canker 
                     •
                  ret, both in Church, Court, and Common-wealth,
if any doe but touch its Purse-strings?
Hence the very set Courts of Law, and Conscience censure
and taxe each other most dangerously, and all to bring the
Water to their owne Mills. And an euill conscience, like
the Iliaca passio is alwaies querulous, and greeuously
griping, feeding on no other viands, but on Mischiefe,
Discontent, Detraction, Censure; and vniust imputation
of euill vnto others, yea, this froward, and wayward
Xantippe will murmure against the highest, and
will not spare to implead the holy Magnificat.
               
               The secondary, or accessory causes of this ouerspreading
euill, are two. The first is an houen imagination,
and foolish leuitie of minde, which hath
caused diuers men (to the end that they might make
good their owne fancies) not to spare the sacred
Booke of God, but to abuse it to their owne Destruction,
both by cogging, wresting, and patching, (as holy
Hilary once said) that it may seeme to patronise their
licentious tongues,Hilarius de Synodis, acut
                        •
                     . Eph. 4. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      . and to such men who in Church
or Court, that thwarts their Cassandrian conceits,
is not a foole, Racha,
                  2. Pet. 3. 16. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      . Mat. 9. or Rake-hel, or I know not what.
The other, is a wicked Desire which some haue to
be-smut others, and to lay the blame of common

calamities vpon persons of great and eminent place,
whereby they seeke nothing else, but by debasing
and vilifying others, to magnifie themselues, that they
with Diotrephes, may haue the preheminence, and
with Simon the Magitian, be accounted the onely
Statizing Polititians.
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      . The foundations whereon
these frothie, dizzie, exotique, and barmie humours
doe build, are nothing, but (as the Apostle saith)
Vaine deceits, proud mens conceits, and the worlds beggarly
Rudiments, whiles euery man will be a Suffenu
                        •
                     
                  
to himselfe, conceiting that he is either too high,
or too holy, to be equall, much lesse inferior to any.
                The swarme of mischiefes in Church, Court, and
Common-wealth, that issue from this invndant euill,
who seeth not? Hence comes Flatterie, that ayerie
Chamaelion, learning no other Lesson, but Vti foro
scenae, & tempori inseruire, palbably and grosely besmearing
with the smoothing truell of an Oyly
tongue, the facile and meane humors of those▪ whom
it desires to abuse for the accomplishment of some
intended proiect. Infamous Libels spring hence,
those Vipers of States, that sow seditious, treacherous,
and treasonable thoughts, purposes, and plots,
in the baser mindes: Secret and suspitious whisperings,
those Scorpions that dread not to strike with
the virulencie, and violence of an hellish tongue, both
Princes, Prelates, and People: Bold brasen-faced
Insolency: that like an armed Dragon hath no other
imployment, but to speake euill of all them that are
in authoritie: Base Detraction that fretteth like a canker,
and blacke-mouthed Obliquie, that like a Cuttle
                  
                     •
                  ish
staines all about it.
               
                  
Hence proceeds Home-bred Garbviles in an house,
betweene man and wife, male-contents in a State, betweene
King and Subiect, priuate iudging of others,
publique grudging at most, strayning of Gnats, swallowing
of Camels, and Selfe-loue in all, making Relatiues
Dis
                        •
                     unctiues, whereby we admire our selues, and
despise others, as if the whole World had none like
vs, and that others, whom we neglect and sleight, (be
their place, paines, and incomparable excellencie
what it will) are not worthie (forsooth) to be named
that day, wherein we are spoken of.
                The consideration of which premisses, lessons vs
(if we will be lessoned by God) to leaue this Tennise-play
of bandying our sinnes from one to another.
The King is thy dread Soueraigne, and Gods Annointed,
how darst thou (traiterous wretch) touch
to hurt him, either with thy hand, tongue, or thought?
The Church-men are Gods Angels by office, how
darest thou offer them any harme, seeing God saith
Doe my Prophets no harme? The inferiour Magistrates
are the Kings Delegates, thou owest them honour;
How dare our tongues cast imputations on such
Principals? or how dare wee smite with the tongue,
those persons whose places and faces ought euer to
be of pretious esteeme with vs? The Prophet counsels
vs,Hag. 1. 5. 
                  That euery man consider his owne waies, not anothers.
Shall the King, because hee cannot giue content
to euery priuate mans occurrence within his territories,
be censured, and taxed in his gouernement?
Who knowes not, that the present State, be it neuer
so gracious, sweet, and amiable, is euer greeuous to
some, whose nature is alwaies querulous, and troublesome?

Shal the Churchman, because he cannot preach
to euery palate, bee censured in his ministration?
Who knowes not that Manna is worse then Mummi
to some? Yea, God himselfe shall no longer be God,
if he please not some sort of men,Si Deus homini non placurit, Deus non erit. as Saint Augustine
noteth vpon the Booke of Exodus, in the case of the
male-contented Israelites.
                It was the cursed madnesse of the persecuting
times, when either Sword, Famine, or Tempest was
vpon the State, to cry, To the Lyons with the Christians;
casting the imputation of all euills vpon them, as if
they had bin the only garbage & filth of those times.
It was the Pharasaicall phrensie of the great Iewish
Rabbies, to despise and lode others with all foule obloquies,
when they (forsooth) must not be touched
with the least finger, like the Iesuiticall fry, whom
none of theirs must once mutter at; yea, the Iesuits
are the now new vpstart Pharisees, for Nazianzens
rule is true, Non genus sed genius, non gens but
Mens make a Pharisie. It were therefore good for vs
all, of all sorts and conditions, if we haue not the principals
of Prudencie, to become Secondaries in the
formes of Modestie, and so to leaue this selfe-louing ouerweening

                     •
                  urquedry:Gal. 5. 1
                        •
                     . For if wee continue to bite
and deuoure one another, take heed lest wee be consumed
one of another.
                It were good for all rankes and conditions to
remember that part of the Wallet that hangeth on
our owne backes behind. It were good for the King
to begin, and to knocke his owne breast with Dauid,
and say, I haue sinned,
                  2▪ Sam. 24. 
                  what haue these poore Sheepe
done? The Peeres and Courtiers must follow, and

with good Nehemiah bewaile their owne sinnes.Nehem. 1. It
were good for the Prelates and Preachers to acknowledge
with Paul, that Christ came to saue sinners,
                  1. Tim. 1. 
                  whereof
they are chiefe. The Commons of euery ranke and
condition to crie out as people truly touched with a
sight and sence of their owne guilt,Acts 2. as the honester
Iewes did; Men and Brethren, what shall we doe to be saued?
It will be good for all rankes, both Church-men,
Commons and Courtiers, to say and practise with
blessed Bernard,
                  Bernard. in Cant. Volo vultui ir
                        •
                     e diuinae praesentari iudicatus, non iudicandus 
                  We will be presented before Gods Tribunall
already iudged, not to be iudged: for if we would
iudge our owne selues, wee should not be iudged of the
Lord. So would this Panicall noise cease,1 Cor. 11. in clamoring
one against another, and we should more diligently
attend, what God saith to euery state in particular, as
followeth.
            
            
               O yee Priests.
               Iudgement begins at Gods owne house,2. Position. and Church-m
                     •
                  n
if they offend but as others;The Cleriques summoned. yet shall they be
punished (euen because they are Church-men)
more then others, vnlesse they repent.
               
                  THE Church-men first summoned in
tearmes of displeasure, for God by his
Prophet calles them Priests simply without
any modificatiō, as Priests of the Lord,
or the like, but in terms of Indignation. O ye Priests. And
for this there was great reason in Gods iustice. The
Church-men being Gentinells for the Lord, should
not onely haue spent their voyces, and best endeuors,
but their bloud also (if need had required) that they

might haue rectified (as much as was in them, and as
much as their places required of them) the grieuous
disorders both in Court and Countrey.Chap. 4. But they as
the Prophet sheweth had Reiected the sounder knowledge
that their brethren held in Iuda,6 
                  they had forsaken the sincerity
of the Law▪ and had made a medley of Gods will and
humane traditions.
                  8 Yea, they were contented because
they were fat, and fed plentifully, euen to soothe, and
say as the people did, without rebuking them, and to
swallow vp their grosse and grieuous sinnes. Therefore
they are summoned first, as being first in blame,
and are set foremost in the battell, after the Heluetian
manner, whose Parochi alwayes leade forth their armies;
hereupon wee reade that Huldricus Zwinglius
died in the fore-front of a set encounter. In which
orderly proceeding of Gods iustice we learne that
               Iudgement begins at Gods owne house; and Church-men
if they offend but as others, yet shall they be
punished (euen because they are Church-men)
more then others, vnlesse they repent.
                
                  Ely a Priest of the Lord had exemplarie punishment
shewed vpon him,1. Sam. 4. in breaking his necke as hee
fell out of his Chaire, for not better guiding his sons;
I reade no such seuerity shewed vpon the Priests of
Midian. The Priests sonnes, Nadab and Abihu, Aarons
darlings,Leuit. 10. for offering strange fire, are burnt vp sodainly
with fire, that came out from God; I reade no such
sodaine plague to befall Adramelech and Sharazer, that
slew Senacherib their owne father.Leuit. 21. The Priests daughter
that played the whore was to be burnt; I reade

not the like sore punishment appoynted to other
mens daughters.
               What shall we say? Apostles, not Apostates; Euangelists,
not Extrauagants, Prophets, not Poets; holy Virgins,
not impudent Harlots, haue beene the Spectacles of
persecution, and gazing-stockes of disgrace, despight,
and cruelty both to men and Angels. Yea, no matricide
as Nero, no fratricide as Cayn, no Regicide as
Rauillac, no sulphureous gun-pouder Traytor euer
indured such exquisite tortures and torments, wherewith
it hath pleased God to afflict▪ trie, and exercise
his owne Church by the hands of cursed Persecutors.
               
                Prelates therefore and Preachers, must tremble
vnder the mightie hand of God; for albeit the Scripture
entitles them Angels, yet they are not so by nature,
but by office. Diuels may appeare in the shape
of Angels of Light, and take part with the spirits of
Darkenesse against Christ, yea, they may be bad Angels
in all kinde of badnesse. Angels of Sathan by discord,
as were Iannes and Iambres. Angels of Apostacie
through Pride, as was proude Diotrephes; who loued
the preheminence. Angels of In
                        •
                     ubus by wantonnesse,
as were the Priests of Priapus, and Beelphegor▪ Angels
of the bottomlesse pit, through base Couetousnesse,
who spend all their time in seeking basely to haue. All
these, and the like,Apoc. 9. are the Locusts of the bottomlesse
pit, and their destruction is therein for euermore.
Prelates and Preachers are Starres, but if they become
wandering starres,Apoc. 
                        •
                     . or bitter starres of Wormewood, or
falling starres, or starres placed in the Dragons tayle;Apoc. 6.
their portion is to be cast downe, and to be reserued
to the blackenesse of darknesse for euer. Our Sauiour

saith, If the light of the world lose its brightnesse, how
great will that darkenesse be? and if the Salt lo
                     ••
                   its
sauour, wherewith shall it be seasoned? It is good for
nothing, but to be cast forth to the dunghill. Prelates and
Preachers therefore (being the light of the world▪ and
Salt of the earth) must tremble vnder the mightie
hand of God.Eus. li. 3. cap. 11. For if they be vnsauourie salt, like Ecebolius,
they shall be trode vnder the peoples feete: If
negligent seruants, their woe is at hand. And if the
Doctours of the Church become Seducers, the Prelates
proue Pilates,
                  Bern. lib. 4. de Consid. the Pastours become Impostors,
and the Disposers of Gods truth turne Dissipators,
and destroyers, Gods iudgement wil be toward them,
and that in more grieuous manner then toward others.Ezech. 33. 1.
For Centinels in neglect of their watch or ward,
are more to be punished then the other ordinary souldiers;
Commissioners beare blame,
                     
                        •
                     . Corinth. 5. if their embassage
be not carefully deliuered, and the seruant that knoweth
his Maisters will, and doth it not, shall be beaten
with many stripes.
                Thus wee see Iudgement begins at the house of
God, but the Scripture doth not say it ends there. If
the Lord search Ierusalem with Lights, what will become
(thinke you) of Babylon?
                  Zephon. 1. 12. If the top of Carmel
doe wither, what will become of the valley of the
children of Hinnon?
                  Amos 1. 2. If woe be denounced against
Capernaum, Bethsaida, Corazin, what belongs to Damascus,
Azzah, Edom, and the like? If the righteous
scarce be saued, where shall the wicked and sinners appeare?
The title of Priest being formerly glorious, in
this worst age of the world, is by dis-vsage and abuse
growne into miserable contempt, and disgrace; but

howsoeuer the worldlings esteeme of Church-men,
(disgrace them how they will) yet it hath pleased
God to vse those weake and feeble instruments to the
aduancement of his glory, and the saluation of man.
Not by their owne woorths, but by Gods owne power
and vertue, who when hee taketh the meanest
things into his hands, workes powerfully by them,
whatsoeuer pleaseth him. By Salt taken into Gods
hand, God maketh the bitter waters of Iericho to become
sweete, by ordinary water of a common riuer,
cureth the Leprosie of Naaman.
                  2 Reg. 2. By dreames reuealeth
the certaintie of future occurrences to Pharaoh,
Gideon and Nebuchadnezzar.
                  2 Reg. 5. By Clay maketh the
blinde to see. By Touch cureth the palsey, restoreth
sight, and raiseth vp to life againe.Iohn 9. By his word casteth
out vncleane spirits; and by the shadow of a man,Acts 5.
cureth diuers diseases. Say then if Prelates and Preachers,
in the worlds estimation, be but as ordinary
water, salt, clay, and as the hemme of a garment; yet
we see, if God take them into his hand (as in his hand
al his Prelates and Preachers are) he worketh by them
both great and marueilous effects.Apoc. 1. If the world esteem
Church-men but as ordinary Iordan; God may vse
them to cleanse your Leprosies; but as salt, by Gods
grace they may make you taste goodnes; but as durt
trampled vnder your feet, yet through God they may
make you see your selues, and sinnes; and if they be
but shadowes, yet they may haunt you like ghosts,
vntill you returne vnto the Lord your God. Yea say
you, But many Church-men run before they be sent. True,
But euery plant that our heauenly Father hath not planted,
shall be rooted vp. Againe you vrge, If Church-men
                  
were in the hand of God (as you say) there would no
doubt be a plentifull haruest by their hands. Well;
was not Peter and Paul in the hand of God (for I speak
to Christians) why was one of them esteemed a drunkard
while he preached, and the other a mad man by
miscreāts? Is not the seed al one that is sowed, whence
then is the difference of thirty, sixty, and an hundred
fold, and some-where no encrease? No, no,Actus actiuorū sunt in patient
                        •
                      disposito. the actions
of agents are in the Patients rightly disposed.
                Therfore to the children of Wisdome the very feet
of Church-men are beautifull, they pray for them, and
count them worthy of double honor. Yea say ye, so
they are, if they be good Church-men. Who art thou
that iudgest an other mans seruant? And what wiseman
careth to be iudged of the world? Who knowes
not that thousands haue bin condemned in the world
for euill doers, that are Angells in heauen? and who
knowes not that Traitors, Emissaries, and Assasinates
of villanie haue beene canonized by the Popelings for
Saints, that haue beene on earth, the organs of Sathan,
and firebrands of matchlesse mischiefe?
                Neuer was any people more blessed then this
our Nation with painefull maisters of the Assemblies,
preaching Prelates and carefull Church-men, whose
names are famous in transmarine parts, yea thousands
there are of Church-men of little account in England,
that are able (God be blessed) to cope, and encounter
with the proudest Cardinall in the Conclaue at
Rome. Yet I am perswaded, and it is easie to demonstrate,
that the Seminaries of the Romish Church that
are imprisoned in London, and else-where, liue in better
content, then some worthy conformable Church-men
                  
in England. For, what betweene the Seminaries and
Iesuites without, and those that are auerse to the present
gouernment within, together with the prophane
on euery side, griping Patrons, peeuish Parishioners,
and the like, the poore Conformalist so liues, that hee
may neuer feare a Purgatory heereafter, he shall be
throughly purged, I warrant him, before hee dies, to
cause his passage easie, if need be. Insomuch that in the
day of Iudgement God may call out some of the heathen
to condemne this generation, which despiseth the
Priesthood. Out of the Graecians Alexander the Great,
who kneeled downe to Iaddo the High-priest. Out of
the Barbarians, furious Attilas, who was appeased with
the Oration of Leo Bishop of Rome. The ancient Persians
condemne our neglect of Church-men, who honoured
their Magi. The olde Romans, who dignified
their Vestall Virgins; the auncient Gaules, who magnified
their Druides, and the Indies, who deified their
Gymnosophistes; yea, among Christians the ignorant
Moscouites, or Russites, who trauelling vp to Mosco
from Boristhenes, and other remote places, carrying
thither their children to be baptized, bring also with
them their rich Felles and Furres, to lay vnder the
Priests feete in the extreamitie of colde, that they
may take no harme in the time they baptize their
children: and our ignorant fore-fathers will rise to
condemne vs (who pretend to haue all the knowledge;)
for if they could haue got but a sottish Masse-priest
in a corner, Oh how would they crouch, and
cap, yea kneele to him, as if he had beene some deitie,
and we their posterity sleight the Euangelicall ministers
of Iesus Christ?
               
                  
But what thinke you hardens the hearts of prophane
persons against Churchmen? Surely this, for
that they see Gods owne deare Children as much punished,
yea, often more then others. The Arke of
God is taken by the Philistimes, and Israel flies; good
Iosiah is slaine by wicked Pharoh Neco in the field of
Megiddo; Turkes subdue Christians; Dauid, Gods darling
doth but number the people, and is plagued; Augustus
Caesar taxeth the whole World, and is secure.
Therefore they resolue, that surely it is better to serue
Mammon, then the Mediator. But let all Worldlings
take heed of such reasoning, and let all despiser stand
amazed,2 Pet. 3. and wonder; For God is not slacke concerning
his promise (as some men account flacknesse) but is long-suffering
to vs-ward, not willing that any should perish, but
that all should come to repentance, let them answere God
in this.Rom. 2. 4. 
                  Doest thou despise the riches of Gods goodnesse,
forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodnesse
of God leadeth thee to repentance? Saint Augustine
will tell the worldlings, that in the world to come so
good things shall be giuen to the good, that the wicked
shall not so much as haue either a sight or taste of
them, and so euill things shall befall the cursed, that
the good shall not once touch them; for if in this life
all wickednesses, and all euils were punished, there
would be nothing to be iudged in the other life, and
yet if nothing at all were here exemplarily punished
by God, the worldlings would take no notice of his
prouidence.
                In conclusion therefore Church-men must learne
rather to reason with Saint Peter, If God spared not the
Angels that sinned,
                  
                     
                        •
                      Pet. 
                        •
                     . 
                  but cast them downe to hell, and deliuered

them into the chaines of darkenesse to be reserued
vnto iudgement, will he spare them that are either wandering
starres, or starres of worme-wood? The bigbon'd
Nimrods of the World, that put far from them
the euill day, must lesson themselues from Saint Peter,
If the iust and righteous be scarcely saued, where shall the
vngodly and sinner appeare? What then remaines,1 Pet. 4. but
that earnest prayers be poured out for my selfe, and
my brethren the Ministers of Christ? O Iehouah Eloim
grant to our Prelates, that whiles they are here, the
zeale of thy house may ea
                     •
                  e them vp, that they may
guide thy people with the sincerity of their hearts, and
with the discretion of their hands; and when they are
gone hence, that they may shine with thee as the
starres of Heauen in glory. Grant to all Preachers
that their hearts may be cloathed with thy righteousnesse,
their mindes rectified with thy sauing knowledge,
and their mouthes filled with thy most holy
Word. Grant Lord that both the life, and learning
of Prelates, and Preachers, both in saying well, and doing
well, may be to thy people by the power of thy
Word, the Water of life, the Bread of Heauen, a Touchstone
for discerning of heresies, a Sword for decision of
Controuersies, the Keyes to open Heauen, the Harpe
of Dauid to comfort the distressed, and that all thy
people may esteeme of Church
                        •
                     men, as the co
                     •
                  uoyes of
thy grace, of thy most sacred treasure, and of the most
holy reliques of Iesus Christ. Grant Lord to Prince,
Priests, and People, such grace, that they make vp their
accounts with diligence against thy Iudgement, and
great audite day. O let the faithfull witnesse in Heauen
say hereunto, Amen.
               
            
            
               
               O ye House of Israel.
               In a religious Common-wealth,1. Position. the common people
are incompassed with blessings from God on euery
side,The Laiques summoned. from the Church, and from the Court,
both set vp by God for blessings to their soules,
bodies, goods, and good names.
               
                  THE Church-men hath beene summoned
in the first place, the Common-wealthes
men follow in the second, with these termes
of Summons: Hearken O ye House of Israel. That they
are an House is a speciall fauour, but that they are an
House of Israel, is a supereminent blessing. Whence
I obserue that forasmuch as the people are ranged betweene
the Priests, and the Princes, and tearmed, The
House of Israel; it sheweth, that
               In a religious Common-wealth, the common people are
encompassed with blessings from God on euery side, from
the Church, and from the Court, both set vp by God for
blessings to their soules, bodies, goods, and good names.
                This appeares out of the very words of the Text:
For these people not long before were the House of
bondage, and slauery, but now are setled in an estate
of freedome, and liberty. Heretofore they had beene
the House of limping Iacob, but now a preuailing Israel;
heretofore the House of Hadadrimmon, of woe
and weeping, but now a place of ioy and gladnesse:
heretofore a Beth hauen, but now a Bethel. In a word,
when I see Israel to become a King, yea, to become
two Kings, and to haue two Kingdomes, I say the

World is well amended with Iacob since the time hee
went ouer Iordan with his staffe, since he made a stone
his pillow, since hee serued twice seauen yeeres with
his churlish Vncle Laban, and since he knew not where
to lay his head. I admire therefore that euer any of
his generation should offend so gracious a God. But
that of the Apostle is most apposite to this purpose;
All are not Israel, that are in Israel,Rom. 9. or of Israel.
               
                This further appeares how the common people
are blessed on euery side. First, from the State politique,
both in generall, and in particular. In generall
the Apostle saith;Rom. 13. 
                  That the Magistrate is a Minister of
God to thee for good, but if thou doe that which is euill, be
affraid, for he beareth not the Sword in vaine: For he is
the Minister of God, a reuenger to execute wrath vpon him
that doth euill. By the blessing of the higher power euerie
man liueth in quiet vnder his owne Vine, and vnder
his owne Fig-tree, and the reason is, Because God hath
set vp the King for a blessing to the people, that the weaker
should not be oppressed by the stronger.Psalme 2
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   What else
would become of the helpelesse multitude? if they
had not one set vp by God to order many? Surely if
God had not taken care of mankinde euen in this case,
the wicked nature of man would daily breake forth into
shamelesse and bloudy shambles of thefts, butcheries,
murthers, adulteries, rapines, incests, treasons, and
what not? And vnlesse Christian policy had found out
dayes, times, places, and persons to redresse wrongs,
and to distribute right to euery man, no man should
haue enioyed the comfort of one day, nor knowne
the blessed state or condition of any pleasing time, or
place.
               
                  Secondly, in particular this blessing of God appeareth,
both especially and indiuidually for body,
goods, and good name; for the body, Cannibals must
not liue among Christians. For the state-politique
taketh care that the hand of violence shall not touch
any subiect, and if any man shed the bloud of another,
by the man of authoritie his bloud shall be shed.
Yea, the tender hearts of true Christian Princes haue
prouided against the hot-spirited duels, that the image
of God may not be destroyed by sudden enraged
passions, nor Subiects wound their owne soules by
bringing in the price of bloud vpon their owne Families,
as a Noble Lady once said to her brother in
the like case. For Goods, the State-Politique prouides,
that euery man eate his owne bread: No Platonicall
community, no Anabaptisticall Anarchy,
nor yet Plutonicall villany is heard of in a Christian
Common-wealth: For he that doth not labour, must
not eate. Ideots say, that which is mine is thine, and
that which is thine is mine, yet Indians and Tartarians
speake not so. Vngodly persons say, that which
is thine is mine, and that which is mine is mine owne.
Indeed so speakes the violent theefe; that is, the robber
by the high-way; and the slie theefe, which is the
Vsurer. Mediocrity, and Pietie, speake otherwise in
a Christian Common-wealth. Mediocrity saith, that
which is mine, is mine, & that which is thine is thine,
so speaketh the morall Christian. But Pieties parlee
is, that which is mine is thine to pleasure and profit
thee, and that which is thine is thine owne. Yea, the
politique State taketh care, not onely against out-rage
and violence, but also that no man be cosoned, or

abused by forged cauilations. Otherwise, there were
no voyaging by Sea for Pyrats, no trauelling by
Land for Robbers, no sleeping in an house for Burglaries,
no commerce for violence, cosenage, deceipt,
and fraud, did not the wholsome Lawes of the State-politique
preuent these miserable mischeeuances.
Blessing comes vpon our good names, which is as a
pretious oyntment, for our Reputations would be
tainted by the stinking Flies of Aegypt, if the State-politique
did not prouide Antidotes against so Epidemicall
a poyson. Yea, heauen and earth would be
infected with Libels of blacke obloquie, and the sons
of men would fat themselues with infamings and reprochings
of others. Euery mans braine would be a
forge of choller, and passion, euery mans studie a
dung-hil of vntruths, & all things would be carried by
passion, & not by iudgement, yea the giddy multitude
of the sonnes of men, would become a rabble of blasphemous
Goliahs against God, the Lord of hosts, a
rout of rayling Rabshekahs against their betters, a
skull of scoffing Ismalites against their brethren, a
fry of scorning Iebusites against those that are in authority,
and euery man would giue liberty to that
vnruly euill of the tongue (which the Apostle saith)
is enraged by hell fire.
                Thus are the people blest by the State-politique,
in body, goods, and good name. Blessed they are
also vnder the politique State, by the State-Ecclesiasticall,
both in their soules and consciences: Blessed
in their Initiation and reception into the Church,
for when they are children, they are brought into the
Church by Baptisme, afterwards confirmed in the

grace receiued, which is as Palmes to their hands,
Crownes to their heads, Wreaths to their browes,
Triumphs and Trophies to their whole life: Blessed
they are by the ministeriall function, in restrayning
the sonnes and daughters of men from their exorbitant
and extrauagant courses, by all meanes possible
that can be. Sometime, by the menaces of Gods
Desertion; for Church-men tell them, if they forsake
God, God will forsake them: Sometime, by threatning
them with Gods fearefull traditions, that hee
will deliuer them that forsake him, into a three-fold
misery; that is, vnto vile affections, vnto their owne
hearts lusts,Rom. 1. and into a Reprobate sence. Sometime
with menacing of iudgement to come, which hath
caused the very Heathen to tremble, as is apparent
in the case of Faelix. Blessed they are (when they are
ready to fall) by the effectuall assistances of ministeriall
supportations, both Externally, Internally,
and Eternally. Externally, by the preaching of the
Word, that heauenly Manna to feed their soules, by
prayer, and sollicitation to God for them, and also
by application of the Word, which is as the balme of
Gilead to the seuerall cases of their distressed consciences.
Internally, blessed they are by the meanes of
the outward ministery, which worketh the illumination
of grace inwardly by the motion of the spirit, and
in the communion of Saints, by the prayers of the
whole Church, both of the triumphant Church in
generall, and of the militant in particular. Moses
prayeth, and Iosua ouer-commeth; Peter is imprisoned,
the Church prayeth, and he is deliuered. Eternally
are they blessed, by the meanes of Gods Church

in the reception of the blessed body and bloud of
Christ sacramentally, which if they receaue worthily,
they goe on in the world, breathing out breath, fearefull
to the very Deuill himselfe, and to all the powers
of darknesse (as golden-mouthed Chrisostome) vsed
to speake vnto his Antiochians, yea, wherewith wee
goe confidently on in the spirit of Dauid, that albeit
we walke through the valley of the shadow of death,
yet feare wee none ill, for euery Christian in that
case is as it were another Christ. So doth Saint Ambrose
reade that place in the Galathians.
                  Qui sunt Christi in nominatiu
                        •
                      plurali.
               
                In a word, the people are blessed by the State
Ecclesiasticall, through the ministration of the Word,
by which God remoueth all impediments that hinder
the course of their Saluation: For Christ thereby
powreth on them Ezechiels pure water to purge their
impurities, pruneth off the wilde branches, cutteth off
all superfluities, & at last vtterly abolisheth the houres
and powers of darkenesse, drowneth Pharaoh in the
red Sea of his bloud, and beateth downe Satan vnder
their feete. Thus are they blessed on euery side,
by Moses, by Aaron, by the Pillar of a cloud of witnesses
in spirituall affaires, by the Pillar of fire in secular
negotiations, by the Church, by the Court in their
all;Psalm. 3. so that I may conclude with the Psalmist, Saluation
belongeth onely to the Lord, and his blessing is vpon his
people, both from the State politique, and from the
State Ecclesiasticall.
                The vse of this concernes both the Kingdome
in generall, the Chamber of the Kingdome in particular,
and euery mans conscience indiuidually. Doth
not the people of this Land (the house of England)

see, and consider how God hath made our State his
owne deare darling, which the Iesuites, and other emissaries
of Rome spite at. Hath not God chosen it as
his Lilly among the flowers of the field? as the Doue
among the Fowles of Heauen? as the Cedar among
the Trees of the Forrest? as his Iudea among the Nations?
and as his Syon amongst the mountains? Is not
this our Iland the house of preuailing Israel? a Sanctuary
for his Elect? an Oracle for his Word? and an
habitation for himselfe? Is not our Republique to
Rome as Aegina to Athens, not onely an eye-sore, but
an heart-sore. The State-politique whereof doth
right euery man both in iudgement and iustice. The
principall agent of Iustice vnder the King, is called in
the abstract the Chiefe-Iustice. The King himselfe is
the fountaine of all Iustice, and doth delegate his
power of administration vnto seuerall Iustices Itinerant,
who in their set circuits for the benefit and ease
of the subiect, doe expedite the lesser causes. Yea, the
whole Land being diuided into Shires, or Shares,
Hundreds, Wapentakes, and Tithings, that euery
man, to the number of tenne, may answere for each
other, and may be liable to Law, if they doe any
harme, and also may receiue right to that number in
euery particular place, and Parish. The inferiour
Courts are erected for the good of the subiect in smaller
causes, and the Parliament in supreame causes is
conueened, wherein the King himselfe (albeit he hath
royall assent in all) yet by Law, Reason, and Religion,
he is legally limited, and concluded. So that vncontrolled
no wicked Nimrod can offend by strong
hunting, no cursed Macheuillian, by damnable Statizing,

nor any griping Zacheus by forged cauillations.
Our Christian King hath so prouided, that this
his house of England may be indeed the house of
preuailing Israel. That God may generally be honoured,
hee hath ordained (as the King of Babel in
his Prouinces) that all his subiects within the foure
seas may truly worship the God of Israel. That God
may be pleased with our prayers and fastings, he hath
ordained a Lent, as the King of Niniue a fast. That
God may be glorified with a Festiuity, hee hath consecrated
the fift of Nouember to his diuine worship,
in thankes-giuing for the States wonderfull deliuerance
from the hellish Gun-pouder Treason, as
Queene Hester ordained the Feast of Purim, for the
Iewes deliuerance from wicked Hamans cruelty. Hee
hath set an order to things indifferent, as did good
King Ioas, that there may be no confusion, no schisme
in his Land. He hath restrayned foolish, vaine, and
idle questions, both priuate and publique, with all
fruitlesse opposition, lest that carpet-Preachers
should through a singular spirit, broach the Lees of
Anabaptisme, Brownisme, Vorstianisme, and other fanaticall
delusions, and lest they should sow schismes,
heresies, and seditious murmurings amongst his Christian
subiects. In a word, our King hath taken course
that the hand of violence may in no wise touch the
bodies of his subiects, to which purpose Coroners are
appointed in all shires, and corporate Townes, to enquire
by secret inquest vpon such as come to violent
or vntimely deaths, that the Kings Delegates may be
certified how his Subiects come to their ends.
                He hath also most Christianly prouided, that your

goods may be kept from rapine, fraud, and cousenage.
To which purpose are ordained Clerkes of Markets
to looke to weights, and measures, and Iudges and Iustices
for theeues, robbers, and all other oppressors.
And also for your reputation, and good name, he hath
ordained that no black-mouthed Curre, with a tongue
enflamed by hell fire, shall besmut the same, but he is
lyable to censure.
                Is not therefore the blessing of God vpon the
people from the state Politique? Neither are the people
lesse blessed by the state Ecclesiasticall. Neuer more
preaching Prelates in our Israel, neuer more able Ministers
ouer the Land, applying themselues in euery
case of conscience, as godly Casuists vnto all the distressed
in minde. To which purpose some haue Moses
Rod for miracles, Aarons Belles for comfort, Dauids
Harpe for the howlings of hell, Salomons Sword
for decision of controuersies; others haue Ieremies
Hammer to breake the hard-hearted, Esayes Trumpet
to awaken the drowsie, Peters Keyes to open the
ioyes of Heauen to such as are weary of this life; becomming
the sons of solace to the tender conscience,
and the sonnes of thunder to a boysterous and bigboned
Nimrod: In a word, becomming all to all, that
they may winne some. Say then, if the blessing of God
be not also on the people from the state Ecclesiastique?
Descend wee from the state of the Kingdome, to the
Chamber of the Kingdome, the great City of London.
What blessings hath not that City from the state Politique,
in their bodies, goods, and good name, which if
any man impeach, hee is lyable to Law? How are
the soules and consciences of the Citizens blessed by

that sacred Company of many able Preachers, to
whom God hath giuen the Word? Insomuch that I
may truly say, that no City in the World on which
the Sunne shineth, hath more cause to magnifie God,
and to multiply their thankefulnesse. Oh how many,
and how manifold are Gods blessings vpon that City?
Oh how many are the wayes, that God hath reuealed
for the saluation of chose Citizens? Insomuch that a
man may take vp the words which Saint Chrisostome
vsed to his Antiochians: Is it possible that a people fed
with such holy viands, bred with such dainty fare,
should be guilty of such grosse, and so grieuous sinnes,
eating sacramentally of the holy Lambe of GOD,
should become Wolues and Tygers one to another?
For all in that great and populous City are not pure
wheate, some are tares; all are not wise Virgines, some
are foolish sleepers; all are not sheepe, some are goates.
Discontent is the foode of the wretched, to whom the
present state is alwayes grieuous, and imitation of
strangers is a bane to others, whereby diuers are alienated
both from nature, and Nation, from Church,
and Common-wealth: All which proceeds from the
want of comparing the State of other Nations with
their owne present blessed condition, which causeth
them not to see their owne felicity, & others misery. O
foolish people, do you thus reward the Lord? O England,
destruction is of thy self for thy vnthankfulnesse.
                Wherefore let all the people in Church, City,
and Common-wealth, take hold of the Lord, that their
Houses may be as Sanctuaries which God doth blesse,
that they may be built vpon the Rocke Christ Iesus,
to abide the tempest, that God may not be angry

with them for their ingratitude, and turne our House
of England, which is, and hath beene for many yeeres
an House of Israel, preuailing with God for peace,
plenty, and liberty, into an House of warre, bondage,
and infamy. And see that you all looke to this, before
that God doth send you all to the House of death, designed
for all. God perswade Iapheth to dwell in the tents
of Shem.
               
            
            
               O House of the King.
               No dignity of person,4. Position. no preheminence of place is
exempted, or excepted from Gods iustice, but euen
the mighty ones that offend,The great ones summ
                        •
                     
                     ned. are often more euidently,
more exemplarily, and more seuerely punished,
then others of inferiour ranke, and condition.
                
                  THE Court is summoned last, in these
words: And giue eare O House of the
King. By which tearme of House of the
King, is not onely meant the King himselfe,
which was Ieroboam the sonne of Ioas, the foundation
of the House, but also the Kings Children, the
sides of that House; the Kings Counsell, the Pillars;
the Nobles, Peeres, Dukes, and Captaines, the beames
and rafters; the Iudges and Fathers of the Law, the
Standards; and the Courtiers, Attendants, and Officers,
the Hangings and Vtensils of that House. In that
the Prophet summoning the Court, saith; O House of
the King: it seemeth that the Kings Houshold, and

they that were about the King, were not as they
should be, but were as much, yea, more in blame then
the King himselfe: For oftentimes it falles out, that
a sound Tenant dwelles in a rotten House, and a godly
soule in a lustfull body. Nam ex quolibet ligno non
fit Mercurius: Euery man is not fit to be about a King. Almighty
God therefore cryeth by the Ministery of his
Prophet; O Ieroboam thou sonne of Ioas, I haue loued
the glory of thine House, and the place where thine honour
dwelleth: How is it that thou doest not loue the glory of
mine House, and the place where mine honour dwelleth?
For thy Courtiers haue lost their hearts with wine and
women, thy Iudges loue bribes, and say; Bring, bring,
thy Rulers oppresse, and thine attendants flatter, and suffer
themselues to be flattered; and therefore iudgement is toward
thee, and thine House. Whereby we learne, that
               No dignity of person, nor preheminence of place is
exempted or excepted from Gods iustice, but euen
the mighty ones that offend, are often more euidently,
more exemplarily, and more seuerely punished,
then other of inferiour ranke, and condition.
                The Worlds Monarches, and their delegates,
may assuredly know this to be so from the Prophet
Esay, who saith,Esay 4. 11. that The Lord shall punish the Host of
the high ones, that are on high: There is Gods supreamacie
aboue all high ones.Psal. 82. 1. 
                  He standeth in the assembly of
Princes (saith the Psalmist;) There is his prefidence,
and presence in their conueenings.Psal. 149. 1. 
                  He shall binde the
Kings in chaines, and the Nobles with fetters of Iron, as

the same Psalmist saith in another place. There is Gods
restraint for extrauagant great ones. Tophet is prepared
for the King (saith Esay.)Esay 30. 33. There is Gods dungeon
for the incorrigible, refractary, and impenitent great
ones. Furthermore, the Psalmist will tell you in what
order God doth this;Psal. 59. 
                  God will breake their teeth, that is,
God will take away from them all meanes, and occasions
of doing euill any more. He will make them passe
away like water, if they boast what, and how great
things they will doe. He will cause them to vanish like
a snayle, and to be like the vntimely fruite of a woman, if
they shall perseuere in euill doing; and if for all this
they shall continue stubborne, and rebellious, He will
wash his feete in their bloud, yea, all this shall be so euident,
and exemplary, that the very common people
shall see it, and say, Assuredly there is a God that ruleth
in the World. The dearest of his Children (be they
neuer so great) God will not spare in this kinde. King
Iosias, good King Iosias causelesly fighting with Pharoah
Neco King of Aegypt in Charcamis,
                  2 Chron. 35. and not consulting
with the Lord, was slaine in the field of Megiddo
neere Euphrates. King Dauid, good King Dauid, was
exemplarily punished for numbring the people, to the
price of therefore and ten thousand subiects, who
died of the plague of pestilence. Now what other
thing meaneth this strict, and seuere superintendency
of God ouer the great ones, but to visit the mighty,
that they grow not carelesse like, Gallio the Proconsull
of Achaia, to watch ouer them, that they become not
irregular like Ananias, to restraine them lest they grow
exorbitant like Manasses, and to shew his power in
plaguing them, if they be rebellious, as he did shew

it vpon Pharaoh, and vpon all his seruants.
                But stay, is not Maiestie and Soueraigntie Gods
peculiar? Doubtlesse: and he is accursed that doth
not conceiue so. Why then doth God deale so seuerely
with them, as oft-times so euidently, and so exemplarily
to punish them more then others for their offences?
There are important reasons for it. First, because
great ones sinne with greater impunity, and immunity
then others. If inferiours offend, they are
lyable to the censures of great ones; but great ones
may play the Pike in a Pond, and who dares controule
them?Psal. 21. 
                  I will vp therefore saith the Lord, and reuenge.
Secondly, great ones taxe others, and none
dare touch them. Is not a Iohn Baptist a blacke Swan?
Who dares tell a great one, Non licet tibi? Is not an
Elias as rare? What is hee, and who is hee that hath
an heart to tell a Cassandrian great one what Elias told
Ahab? Therefore God will speake to them himselfe.
Thirdly, none are more bitter then great ones to
those that tell them their faults. For a carelesse great
one will scoffe, and scorne at a sincere dealing Iohn
Baptist. A wanton reputes admonition as an olde
wiues tale, albeit it come from graue Zacharias. A
sterne great one will presently enioyne you silence, as
Amazia did Amos, and an vnbeleeuer will neuer leaue
till he haue quite banished you. Fourthly, there is no
appeale from great ones, as in the case of Naboth, no
Citizen of Samaria durst open his mouth for that
poore Innocent,
                  Psal. 119. and therefore God said, I will arise and
reuenge his wrong, for it is high time that the Lord set to
his hand, when the great ones who haue the Law in
their hands doe destroy it. Fiftly, God dealeth thus

seuerely with great ones to appease the blasphemies
of the enraged multitude: For what will Atheists and
wretches say, when they see great ones outrageously
offending? What say they,Ioh. 21. where is Gods prouidence?
What care hath hee of vs to set a woolfe to gouerne
sheepe? a tyrant to rule ouer innocents? Is God silent?
Is he at leisure? For these and the like blasphemies,
occasioned by the vniust dealings and wicked guidance
of great ones, God being iealous of his owne
glory, will rise vp, and reuenge, as it is most plaine
in the message that God put into the mouth of Nathan,
to speake vnto King Dauid,
                  2 Sam. 12. in the case of Vria
                        •
                     s
wrongs.
                Great ones (if they haue grace) may make good
vse of this: First, of Caution, to beware how they abuse
their greatnesse to ill example: For superiors like
starres are potent by their influence vpon inferior bodies.
If the head be crasie, the whole body cannot be
haile: If the aire be infected with an Epidemical quality,
they that dwel therein cannot be very sound. And
if the Pilot be peeuish, the passengers may be in great
hazard. Besides, inferiours are mutable: If the Abbot
dance, the Monke will shake his heeles; and if Dyonisius
study philosophy, his Courtiers will philosophize,
if he but intermit his study, they will altogether omit
all studie.
               Now the reason of this facile inclination, which
causeth inferiours to be like yron drawne with these
Loadstones, and to be like straw drawne with these
jeats and ambers, is because great ones haue eminencie
of place, therefore the poore inferiours conceiue,
as therein is nothing but greatnes, so there is nothing

but goodnesse. Secondly, because inferiours haue an
opinion of infallibility, like the Pythagorians, and Papists,
that the great ones are too bigge to be deceiued.
Thirdly, the very imitation of great ones hath hope
of impunity. For, with what face can he that is in place
of authority punish an inferiour, when the great one
is as grosely obnoxious, and as peccant in the same
sinne as the inferiour? Fourthly, inferiours haue a desire
to please great ones, insomuch, that to creepe into
the fauor of great ones, some haue made no bones,
not onely to imitate their gestures, and voyces, but
their vices also; yea, to stammer, to lispe, to limpe, to
weare long haire, yellow bands, and what not? such
Camelions, Apes, fawning Dogges, and questing
Puppies are the giddie multitude to please great ones.
As therefore great ones (if they be good ones) are as
eminent and apparent Land-markes at Sea for safe direction
into the hauen: so in euill they are like Eur
                        •
                     
                     clidons
to hurry many vpon the Sands, Shelfes, and
Rockes of ineuitable destruction.
                In the second place, great ones may learne to
practise humilitie, lest they should be proude and forget
their God. For it is neither Pharaohs greatnesse,
nor Nebuchadnezzars imperiousnesse, nor Iehues furiousnes,
nor Herods craftinesse, nor Saules goodlines,
nor Rehoboams lustinesse, nor any thing else that can
exempt them from the mighty hand of God, if they
grow exorbitant. For if Zenacherib be extrauagant,
God hath a hooke to put into his nostrils, and a bridle
to put into his lippes. If Baasha will become a Behemoth,
of the flesh of his progeny what the Dogges in
the City leaue,2 Reg. 19. the fowles of the field shall eate vp. If

                  Zimri be treacherous,1 Reg. 16. fire shall deuoure him, and the
pallace ouer his head. And if foolish Ahab become
hellish,1 Reg. 22. and sell himselfe to doe euill, an Arrow shall
pierce through the riuets of his briggandine, and strike
him to the very heart: yea for all great ones (whosoeuer
they be) that abuse their potencie, and opulencie,
God hath prepared instruments of his iudgements,
euen for all strong hunting Nimrods, prophane
Esaus, threatning Rehoboams, and Machauilian Achitophels,
albeit either to vphold, or aduance their greatnesse,
they temper exotique poysons, consult Wisards,
vse whores, hire bauds, and practise a thousand wickednesses,
yet Gods iudgements shall come like water
into their bowells, and like oyle into their bones,
and some man of God shall discouer the very secrets
that such Arams do in their very bed-chamber, be the
Curtaines drawne neuer so close, whisper they neuer
so secretly. And then shall they curse the day, and the
houre (when the hand of the Lord is vpon them) that
euer they were borne, or that they did enioy the light
of the Sunne. Then shall they know that the feare
of the Lord in goodnesse, is better then all the greatnesse
in the world.
                In the third place is practize of Obedience for
the Subiects, that they submit themselues to euerie
ordinance of God, whether it be to a Monarchie,
wherein is one Soueraigne, as the head, or vnto Aristochracie
wherein is an assembly of the best, or vnto
Demochracie, or Plebeian gouernement. For there is
no power, but of God, whether it be like the confederation
of the Heluetian, or the state of the Grisons,
Venetians, Ragusa, or other mixt gouernements, or the

Monarchies of England, Spaine, France, and the like.
Let not a Iacobine, or Rauillack be once named amongst
vs, but 
                     •
                  et a traitour, and a rebell be accursed
on all hands, yea, not onely the hand, that commits
the treason, but the heart that consents thereunto,
and the head that conceiues it. Let that hand dry
vp, as Ieroboams hand, and that heart tremble, as Balshazars,
and the head be like the heads of the Assiri
                     
                        •
                     ns,
that heard the clamour, and disconsolately fled.
Let the blacke Rauen of the Valley, feed vpon the
eyes of a Traytor for its cates; Let his flesh be carnage
to the Fowles of the ayre, and his bowels be giuen
ouer to the mercilesse hangman.
                In the fourth place is practise of vision, that great
ones also may see that they dispise not little ones. For
what is more frequent in the Scripture, then for euill
great ones to be vanquished with little ones. Ieroboam,
the Colonel of the horse, vanquisheth his foolish
Master Rehoboam the King. Mordocheus, the Kings
Porter, putteth downe Haman the fauorite, by the
meanes of Hester a poore captiue Hebrew Girle. And
the reason is, because God doth not only work his will
by weake, and vile meanes, as the world oft reputeth
them, to the end that no flesh should boast it selfe against
God, but also oft-times God armeth in his
iudgement little wicked ones to subuert great wicked
ones, as it is most plaine in Baasha, Zimri, Omri, Asa,
Ahab, Iehu, and others.Psalme 52. 
                  Boast not thou thy selfe therefore,
(O great one,) that thou canst doe mischiefe, for
Gods iudgement is greater then thou. And let not
great ones forget by whom they raigne: For what
was more excellent in Heauen then an Angell? yet

for his pride hee was cast downe to Hell. What on
earth more glorious then an Emperour? yet Charles
the fift, being a most fortunate Prince in many enterprises,
yet when hee set himselfe against God in warring
with the Duke of Saxony, the Lant-Graue of Hessen,
and others of the Religion, hee was put to the
worst by Mauritius a meane Duke. What more imperious
in the Sea then a Whale? yet in his pride
when he endeuoureth to swallow vp all the little Fishes
that come neare him; in the end, with a herring
fry, and scull that comes on so fast he is cleane choaked.
The Spaniard in eightie eight, that brought to
Sea that inuincible Atalantado (as the Nunne of Portugall
called it) for power and number, was scattered
in the pride of the imaginations of his owne heart.
And most memorable is that of Henry the fourth, the
last King of France, hauing two of his teeth strucken
out by Iohn Chastell, a Iesuites Scholer; one of the
Religion standing by (perceiuing the wound not to
be mortall) be-spake the King on this fashion, O
King, thou hast denyed God with thy mouth, meaning
the Kings outward reuolt to Popery, but when thou
shalt deny God with thine heart, God will stabb thee through
the heart, which fell out diuers yeares after in the
bloudy blow that Rauillac gaue him, which was both
fatall, and finall, for the Knife was found through his
heart.
                The last practise is of thankes-giuing, which belongeth
vnto the house of our Israel, to yeeld vnto
Almightie God for the house of the King: For God
hath loued the glory of our kings house, and the place
where his honour dwelleth, in giuing vs our King

the foundation of this house, as another Z
                        •
                     roba
                        •
                     ell.
The Kings children to be as Cedars in the sides of
this house; his prudent Counsell, as a most prouident
Sanadrim; his Peeres, and Nobles, the beames
and rafters, to be as the worthies of Dauid, and the valiants
of Iehu; his Iudges, the standards, to be as
Vshai the Archite; his Courtiers, attendants, and officers,
the hangings of this house, to be as faithfull
Mordocheus. Let vs not forget therefore, seeing it hath
pleased God that wee liue in a Common-wealth vnder
a Monarchy which is the most absolute forme of
gouernement: Wherein the King is the Vnite from
whence all numbers are deriued; hee is the Father of
the Families, vpon whom the whole houshold depends;
he is the Pilote that stands at the helme; he is
one in the Common-wealth, as one Sunne in the Firment,
as one heart in the bodie, and as one God in
Heauen.
                And seeing in the high Court of the State, which
wee call a PARLIAMENT, which consists of a threefold
State, and all of God, the King as the Monarchy,
the Vpper-house the Aristocracy, and the Lower-house
as the Democracy, which nathlesse hath
freedome and libertie, both of suffrage, voice, and
vote. Let vs not, (I say) forget to begge of our God,
that of his infinite goodnesse and mercie, hee would
remoue from about the Kings sacred person, and
from all his, all treacherous flatterers, and time-seruing
whisperers, from his Councell, all Matchauelian
practisers, from his Peeres, and Nobles, all base
Oppressors, and hard-hearted Land-Lords, who by
Iesuited improuements, grinde the faces of the poore

Husbandman to make the most of their owne, from
his Iudges, and Iustices all corrupted, base, bribed,
partiall, basket-Iudges, chicking-Iustices, and the like,
who will transgresse for a crust of bread, as the wiseman
saith in the Prouerbes, and from his Court all
contemners of his Gospel, and despisers of the Word
of Exhortation, such as were Pharaoh, Ahab, Herod,
and the like miscreants. And that I may moue you
hereunto, let the great ones of the World know that
if they be scandalous, a woe belongeth vnto them;
for Christ saith: Woe vnto the World, because of offences.
If woe to the whole World, then vnto England▪
It were better that a great one which giueth publique
scandall had a great mil-stone hanged about his neck;
and be cast into the Sea, then that hee should lay a
stumbling blocke before Gods children, or that his
wickednesse should cause the whole land to mourne,
and bring in the sword of the enemie, by Gods iust
iudgement, to be sheathed into our owne bowels. Let
not the greatnesse of other Kingdomes and States deterre
you: For as long as God is with your King and
you, feare not at all. God vanquished the imperious
Romans, by the Herulians, Gothes, Vandales, Visigothes,
and Ostrogothes; pulled downe the Metropolis of the
Assirians, Tyre, and Sydon, aegypt, and Persia, Palestina,
and Constantinople, by despicable and poo
                     ••
                   means.
So also know yee, that you through God shall vanquish
the pride of the Spaniard, and the fury of the
French, or what Nation so euer shall band it selfe against
you. At all times therefore it is our dutie according
to the Apostles Councell:1 Tim. 2. 
                  Let prayers, and
supplications be made for all men, but especially for Kings,

and such as are in authority, that vnder them wee may
liue a peaceable life in all godlinesse and honesty. Thus
haue you heard the summons, and now heare the
charge.
            
            
               Heare this; Hearken and giue eare.5. Position.
               
               It deerely and neerely concernes all degrees in Court,
Church,The charge to all Estates and Common-wealth, that they attend
as well to the ripping vp of their sinnes, and to
the denunciation of Gods iudgements for the same,
as to the promulgation of Gods mercies, in fauour
of the penitent, that all estates hauing a sence and
sight of their iniquities, may breake them off by
repentance, and obtaine pardon by Iesus Christ
our Lord.
                
                  THE charge to all is in these tearmes;
Heare, Hearken, and giue eare. This
three-fold repetition, Heare, Hearken,
and giue eare, is no Battologie, no Tautologie,
but an elegant elocution of the spirit of God, vsuall
in the Scriptures. He that hath eares to heare, let
him heare (saith Luke:
                  Luk. 8.) And he that hath eares to heare,
let him heare what the spirit saith to the Churches,
                  Apoc. 2. & 3. saith
the spirit of God in the Reuelation to the seauen Churches
of Lesser Asia. Saint Augustine expounds
it to our hands. Heare all yee Estates, that by the same
Gate through which sinne first entered, Grace may
now enter. Hearken, that is to say, attend with your
mindes to vnderstand what God saith, and Giue eare,
                  
that is to say, intend with your hearts to doe and practise
what you heare and conceiue. The reason why
the Scripture vseth this earnest elocution, as to say,
He that hath eares to heare, let him heare, (as if men did
any thing else with their eares, but heare) is this. Many
men see with their eares, as they doe who but hearing
ought of their neighbours (especially if it be of
euill report) beleeue it to be true, as if verily they
had seene it with their eyes, and these kinde of people
indeed see with their eares. The goutie haue two feet
and cannot goe: the goggle-eyed, bleare-eyed, and
pur-blinde, haue two eyes to see, and yet cannot perfectly
discerne: euen so, many haue both eares, who
either with the Adder stop both, and so heare nothing,
or being of the generation of Malchus, they haue
neuer a right-eare, rightly to heare, hearken, and conceiue
as they should. In this place therefore, obaudire
is obedire: so Christ himselfe saith in a double paralell
of the Gospel.Luke 8. In Saint Luke, Christ saith, concerning
his Apostles; Hee that heareth you, heareth mee, and in
Saint Matthew;
                  Matth. 18. 
                  If thy brother heare thee, thou hast woone
him: In both which places, hearing is obeying.
                But what is it, that these parties summoned must
heare? Euen a plaine Demonstration of their sinnes,
and a iust Iudgement awarded against them for the
same. Whereby we learne that.
               It deerely and neerely concernes all degrees in Court,
Church, and Common-wealth, that they attend
as well to the ripping vp of their sinnes, and to
the denunciations of Gods iudgements for the
same; as to the Promulgation of Gods mercies,
in fauour to the Penitent, that all estates hauing a
sence and sight of their iniquities, may breake them
off by repentance, and obtaine pardon by Iesus
Christ our Lord.
               
                  What doth all preaching auaile else? if it hath
not this concurrence, & relation? For they that heare,
and doe not vnderstand, all Preaching to them is a
dreame. They that haue eares, and heare not, all Preaching
to them is as a fearefull slumber. They that haue
eares to see, are they not monsters? and they that haue
eares to attend vaine and vile things, are they not contemners
of God, and all godlinesse? But here you see
is enioyned, as the elegancy and efficacy of this phrase
requireth, that wee not onely beleeue what we heare
from God, but assent also thereunto, and submit our
selues by the obedience of faith to be taught by the
Spirit of God, as a Childe submits himselfe to his
Tutor.
                They that thus heare, whether they be sceptered,
mytred, or inferiors, come with graue modesty, and
great reuerence to heare God speake vnto them: So
came Elias casting his mantle before his face,1 Reg. 19. when he
heares the voyce of God. So came Abraham with submission
and much modesty,Gen. 18. when he makes suite for
Sodome.
                  Ezech. 1. So came Ezechiel prostrating himselfe vpon
the ground, and made the earth his vayle. So came
Peter crying out, Depart from me, for I am a sinnefull
man. So came the Syrophenician trembling, standing
behind, and desiring but to touch the hem of Christs
garment. So affected come all blessed, faithfull, and
deuoute soules, whom doubtlesse the Lord doth heare,

and in his good time will grant their godly requests.
To this purpose you see also that Preachers are in
Scripture called, Trumpeters, Proclaymers, Embassadors,
to whom all audience euen from the greatest is vsually
giuen.
                Moreouer, is it not the House of God where we
come to heare Gods voyce? shall we there offer the
sacrifice of fooles? Come wee thither to make a Tabernacle
for God, or a golden Calfe for the Diuell?
Earings and Iewel
                     •
                   were giuen to the making of both,
but by diuersly affected people. But some happily
may say; What need all this Vociferation? The World
was neuer more attentiue to preaching. True it is (blessed,
and beloued) as long as Placentia are preached,
but to some giddy kinde of people Zidkeiah is more
welcome with his deceiptfull falshoods then Michaiah
the sonne of Iimlah with the glorious sunne-shine of
Gods truth. Others as long as Preachers please them,
they are pleased; but if Amos tell the rich that they sell
the poore for shooes, and the miserable for a graine of
salt: If Hoseah tell Ephraim that he is like a cake on the
harth not turned, and Iames cry out, Woe to the rich,
and Esayas tell the Daughters of Syon that they are
proud, and goe mincing, and so forth: Tell me then
what entertainment, respect, and audience Church-men
shall haue, that speake in Gods voyce vnto such kinde
of people?
                
                  God speakes out of a Whirle-winde, that is, either
by outward affliction, as he spake to Iob, or else by the
inward sting of conscience: and so we reade the Iewes
were pricked to the heart by Peters preaching, as is
extant in the Acts. It is the property of the voyce of

the Lord to breake the Cedars, as the Psalmist saith,
and to diuide the flames of fire; that is, to rebuke them
that are of a high spirit, and to subdue the proud hearted:
For God had rather haue one Publica
                        •
                     , that doth
despise and abhorre himselfe, then a thousand Pharises
that doe iustifie and boast themselues. The sonnes of
follie indeede reiect the words of Exhortation, but the
sonnes of Wisedome say; Let the iust smite me, for the
wounds of a friend are farre better then the balmes
of a flatterer. Tell me who loueth vs more then God?
and yet hee doth afflict the godly Patriarkes with famine,
and his owne deare Israel, growing rebellious,
with sundry punishments.
                The vse of this is manifold. First of Enquiry for
the Lord Iesus.
                  Inquirator pro Domino Iesu. We reade in Iob that in an holy Assembly
of the Children of God, the Diuell being not called,
came thither also. So in diuers Christian Congregations
(according to the old English Prouerbe)
Where God hath his Church, the Diuell hath his Chappell,
Whence it is that many in Christian Assemblies, when
they should heare Gods voyce, behaue themselues as
if they were Gothes, Vandales, Guelphes, and Gibelline
                        •
                     .
For while other well-affected Christians attend, reade,
lift vp their hands to Heauen, pray, sing, sigh, fit still
vnto the end; these ill-affected ones sleepe, prare, put
out the foole-finger, curse, grinne, scoffe, and hasten away
as vnworthy of the peace of God. Maruell not
therefore why so many come so often to Church, and
are neuer the better: For their hearts are waxen grosse,
and their eares and eyes, and all are stupified by the
Diuell. Hence is it that they come without heart to
God, and are but halfe Christians at the best, like Agrippa,
                  
or like Hagar, who sate right euer against the
waters and did not see them. Nothing likes these
kinde of people, but a hunting Masse (as Henry of
France was wont to say) and a straw-berry Sermon.
                But happily you will say: The Pulpits ought to
be mercy-seates, and Chaires of consolation, but they
are become Tribunals, where the Auditory is arraigned,
accused, and condemned. I answere. Behold I
shew you a Paradoxe. It is a plague vnto you when you
are not plagued, and you are vndone, when you are not vndone.
It was neuer worse with the Israelites, then when
their mouthes and stomakes were full of Quailes. The
dolors of Synai, to some, are more wholsome then the
songs of Syon. Indeede he that endeauoureth to teach
a foole, gleweth a potshard together; and he that speaketh
vnto a heart that doth not attend, is as if he should
speake to one newly raised from sleepe. Weepe therefore
ouer the dead but seauen dayes, because they are
depriued of the light, but weepe ouer such fooles euery
day, because they are destitute of vnderstanding:
Their heart is like a broken pitcher, it will hold no wisdome,
and if it doe hold any thing, it is like a syue that
retaines the chaffe onely, and lets the good grain passe
through.
                Saint Augustine in his time was at a non-plus what
he should preach: So may the Church-men be of our
time; for saith Saint Augufline, When I did behold the
louers of this World, I knew not how to preach to them:
For the rich disdained at what I said, and the poore had
rather haue bread, then the Manna that I brought; yea, and
the miserable would oft times murmur that it fared better

with the Preacher then with them. Yet for all this the
true humble soule that comes to God, puts on confusion,
comes trembling, quaking, sighing, and sorrowing,
and putteth on Elias mantle, which is verecundious
modesty, that Princely Robe so pleasing to Almighty
God. The true Christian soule, though afflicted
in it selfe, comes yet well affected to be cured. If
it hath retters, it is well content to haue inke and gall
to be sprinkled vpon it; if it hath a perilous pleuresie,
it is contented to haue it launced, lest the cure grow
by delatory shifts incurable. Knowing that it is against
the Law of Armes, Nature, and Nations, that Herolds
and Embassadors should be euilly entreated. The blessed
soules that breathe and long for Heauen, will heare
what the Lord will say; for at the last he will speake peace
vnto their soules, that they returne not againe to folly. They
will hearken vnto Gods voyce, that he may hearken
vnto their voyce, when they call vnto him in the euill
day; and they will attend and waite his pleasure: For
in a still voyce he will speake comfort vnto them, and
with his powerfull hand in his owne good time hee
will take them vnto himselfe for euer; yea, albeit God
tell them of their sinnes in plaine termes, and lay them
open to the view of the World, yet will they assure
themselues that God doth it, to make their iniquities
appeare in their right colours, (as they are) exceeding
and out of measure sinnefull, that so the godly hauing
a sight of the vglinesse, filth, and horror of their obliquities,
may the sooner lothe them to the death, abhor
themselues in a godly hatred, and sue for pardon in
the meritorious sufferings of their all-sufficient Sauiour
Iesus Christ, Assuring themselues that Gods word,

which they heare, is not spoken in vaine, but in them
that are saued, worketh that good effect wherefore it
is sent, that as the Snowe and Raine, which descend
downe from Heauen returne not in vaine, but water
the earth, that it may bring forth fruit vnto him
that laboureth, and seede vnto the sower; so the
word that we heare from God (if our hearts be not
heathy and sandy ground) worketh that which it
was sent out for, to Gods glorie and mans saluation
for euer.
            
            
               You haue beene a Snare on Mizpah, and
a Net spread vpon Tabor, And the
Reuolters are profound to make
slaughter, albeit I haue beene a rebuker
of them all.
               No voyce,6. Position. nor rebuke of God, or good men, laying
forth the hideousnesse and horror of sinnes neuer
so open to the view of the conscience can preuaile
with the mighty hunting Nimrods of this world,All Estates accused.
to restrayne their rage and furious madnesse, but
still rather make their greatnes in Church, Court,
and Common-wealth, baites, and guiles for their
gaine and glory.
                
                  YOu haue heard the generall Summons,
the particular parties summoned, and
the Charge vnto them all. Now ensueth
what they all must attend vnto,
which is the Declaration, setting out their sinnes, and

the Commination of iudgement, which is the sequell of
their sinnes: The Declaration sets out the sinnes of all
estates to be subtile sinnes, high, heauie, and heinous
sinnes. All this appeares by the Declaration in
these tearmes: For you haue beene a snare on Mizpah,
and a net spread vpon Tabor, And the Reuolters are profound
to make slaughter, albeit I haue beene a rebuker of
them all. These words shew foure things. First, the
qualitie of their sins, that they were Nets and Snares.
In which resemblance of Nets and Snares, other foure
things are couched. First the subtilty, and slyenesse
of their sinnes: For their trickes and deuices, like
Nets and Snares, were so cunningly set, that few or
none could perceiue them. Secondly, the cursed gaine
which they intended by their sinnes, Nets and Snares
are not set for nifles, they intend not vaga indiuidua.
Thirdly, the irregularity of their sins, Quo warranto?
What Law or what Warrant had they to deuise such
trickes and proiects of hauing? Fourthly, the stength
of their Iniquities, for the seely soules whom they
caught being free before, but now captiuated, and
ensnared in their trammells, were brought into great
bondage, and extreame misery, as seely Birds and
harmelesse Beasts are caught in trammels.
                Secondly, in the Declaration is set downe the
height of their sinnes, by the two Mountains Mizpah,
and Tabor, wherein I will not either out of Saint Ierome,
or Martine Luther, Corographically describe
their scites. It is most plaine in the booke of Iosuah,
that Mizpah was a famous hil, by the victory that Iosuah
obtained neere vnto it: It was a mountaine, because
they went vp to it, and vpon it was an Altar,

because it is said, they went vp to the Lord in Mizpah.
Mount Tabor is famous in the Gospel,Matth. 17. by Christs
transfiguration thereon.
                The litterall sence is this: The manner of these
Reuolters was to intercept by Ambuscados, the poore
soules that fled out of Israell to Iuda (where the purer
worship of God was) and to bring them backe againe
to Bethel, or Dan, as the manner of the Romanists
haue beene, who haue surprised vpon the Alpes those
deuoute soules, that hasted out of reuolted Italie to
Geneuah, and other reformed parts, and to reduce
them backe againe to their cruell Inquisition. The
mysticall sence is: These Reuolters did ensnare Gods
people by foolish and fond traditions, enioyning the
obseruation of them, as if they had beene the true doctrines
of God. The Metaphoricall sence is: As on
these mountaines the fowlers, and hunters, did catch
birds and beasts with nets and trammells; so these in
Church, Court, and Countrey ensnared poore weake
soules with thousand mischieuances. The Synecdochicall
sence is: They did not onely ensnare Gods
people, at Dan, and Bethel, but also extended their
reuolt to the toppes of Mizpah, and Tabor, and where
not?
                Thirdly, this Declaration shewes the horrour of
their sins by words of degrees. For these estates had
not onely internally reuolted, but euen to the view of
the world externally also, hauing no respect, either to
time, place, or person: The set place of Gods worship
at that time was Ierusalem. They would worship at
Dan, Bethel, Mizpah, Tabor, any where. The times, and
holie festiuities appointed by the Law, they regarded

not. The persons designed for the Priesthoode they
fleighted. Moreouer, they had multiplied their Prauarications,
by enhaunsing their Sacrifices, which the
Spirit of God laugheth to scorne, by terming a Coniugatis,
their Sacrifices, slaughters, their Temples,
shambles, and their Priests, Butchers. Yea, and that
which is more, all the estates, as it seemes, had subiected
themselues in their reuolt to the base vulgar, desiring
to giue them content for aduantage, in what
straine or depth of impietie so euer.
               Fourthly, in this Declaration also is shewed the
insolencie of their sinnes: For they were growne to
that impudencie and height of sinning, albeit God
himselfe, both by immediate, and mediate means had
beene a rebuker of them all. Wherein they endeuored
to preuent the obiection that is ordinarily made
in the Prophets, whereby they might haue said to
God, If we are deceiued, thou hast deceiued vs. But
the Text meetes with that, and saith, God himselfe
had beene a rebuker of them all. O how great is the subtilty,
deepenesse, and slienesse of sinne, that hath all
these foule and fearefull ingrediences? Learne hence
therefore, that.
               No voyce nor rebuke of God or good men, laying forth
the hideousnesse and horror of sinnes, neuer so open
to the view of the conscience, can preuaile with
the mighty hunting Nimrods of this world, to
restraine their rage and furious madnes, but still
they make their greatnesse in Church, Court, and
Common-wealth, baites and guiles for their gaine
and glorie.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  This appeareth in the very termes and passages
of the context: For from the Court to the Cart, they
would be Nets and Snares to one another, albeit the
Lord God himselfe had beene a rebuker of them all
for it. This is Patriarchall truth; for righteous Noah,
holy Lot, and meeke Moses preuaile not with some in
their times. It is Propheticall truth; for all the Prophets
grieuously complaine hereof. It is Euangelicall
truth; for, Christ himselfe preuailes not with Herod,
and other miscreants. And it is also Apostolicall verity;
for the Apostles preuaile not with such as Symon
Magus was, and others of that stampe, nor all the ministration
of the glorious Gospell of Christ, (sithence
that time) doth preuaile with those that are miscreants,
and none of Gods eternall Election.
                The reason hereof is plaine: for these wicked
ones are enwrapped in the snares of the diuell.2 Tim. 2. They
are the Diuells slaues, bound to doe his will. They are
vniust, and will be vniust still.Ibidem. They are filthy and
will be filthy still.Apoc. 22. They are plunged into the deepnesse
of Sathan,Apoc. 2. and they are mis-perswaded, and
mis-led,2 Thes. 2. by the mystery of Iniquity. This will further
appeare out of the Declaration, both in Israel alreadie
reuolted, and in Iuda that yet staggered. Israel reuolted,
is a Paralell of the Papacie, and staggering Iuda is
a type of Cassandrian Protestancie. See this in both:
first in Popery.Ierem. 51. 9. Is not that of the Prophet true? We
would haue cured Babel, but she could not be healed. For,
albeit God himselfe hath rebuked the Popish vassalls
at sundry times, and in diuers manner, not onely by
the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God (by
which their Babylon is fallen;) but also by his immediate

hand, in bringing to nought their cursed, & damnable
designements, and in shewing the very ruine of
their rotten cause (as diuers and sundry instances may
be giuen, both auncient, and moderne, at home, and
abroad, especially of those two in our owne Nation,
namely, the difference betwixt the Seminaries and the
Iesuites in Wisbich Castle, and the hellish gun-pouder
treason) yet that great Romish Archimandrites of the
world, and his reuolted 
                     •
                  ry, continue Nets and Snares
vpon Mizpah, and Tabor, that is, Church, and Commonwealth,
not onely litterally in their ambuscadoes vpon
the Alpes, but also Metaphorically at Rome, at
Remes, Loretto, Compostella, Hallas, Sichem, and where
not? All their doings and dealings being semblable
vnto Nets and Snares. In pretence of Sanctifie craking
of nothing but of Religion, Mother-Church, infallibility
of See, authority of Fathers, and Counsels,
and such like boastings. Nets and Snares for profit,
witnesse their Bulles, Indulgences, the holie Exercise
(as they call it) of the vnholy fathers the Iesuites. Nets
and Snares for lawlesse warranty, as appeareth in their
Decretalls, in their Brutum fulmen of Excommunication,
in their captiuating seely soules that thirst after
Christ, with Masses, Dirges, Trentalls, Pilgrimages,
Reall-presence, and many such like incumbrances.
                For you must know, that these Shop-keepers open
not their Shops for nothing: For all their trickes
tend either to profit, or to pleasure, or to both. For
their profit, they haue their seuerall wares; namely,
the yeare of Iubile, Archiepiscopall, and Episcopall palls,
Anniuersary-Masses, priuate-Masses, priuiledged Altars,
Taxations Apostolicall (as they call them) for vnlawfull

faculties, dispensations against Scripture, absolutions, reuocations,
legitimations, and for what not? To instance
would be teadious. Yea, to keepe this profit, they are
no lesse cunning,Non minor est virtus, quam quaere
                        •
                     a, parta tueri. in their vowes of single life, in keeping
the Election of the Pope amongst the Cardinals
onely, in winning the fauour of the Nobility by making
their debauched sonnes Abbots, and Priors, and
by making their collapsed daughters Abesses and
Nunnes. As also, in be-fooling the Kings of the earth
with a Prime-rose, blessed by the Popes nowne mouth,
a holy Sword, a military Belt, a waxen Agnus Dei, and
the like trumperies.
                Moreouer, they haue nets and snares for their
pleasure also, in keeping the common people ignorant
of the Word of God, in traducing the phrases of
the holy Scripture, and in preparing their baites for
all palates. For the pompous, they haue the bait of
the Papacie; for the sordid, the order of the Capuchini,
and Sfoliani; for the delicious, the Abacies; for
the melancholy, the Hermites, and Anachorites; for
the wanton and lasciuious, they haue those daies of
priuiledge at Rome, before euery Carniuall, wherein
they haue liberty and licence to doe what lustfull
wickednesse they lift. Surely a man cannot chuse but
wonder to obserue their mixt compositure, (which
doubtlesse, they themselues smile at in their sleeues;)
as namely, that the Popes should wash the feete of the
poore, and yet suffer the Kings of the Earth to kisse
their feete. That they should depose and set vp the
Kings of the Earth, with one and the selfe-same Bull.
That they should take vpon them to remit sinnes,
vent the strange conceits of Transubstantiation, auricular

Confession, workes of superrerogation, and the like
fopperies. Insomuch, that a man may truely take vp
a complaint, and say; What soule doth not bleed to
see the spirit of God thus grieued? to see the hearts of
the sonnes of men so obdurate? and what faithfull
soule doth not cry out earnestly to the Lord in the
word of Dauid: It is high time for Thee, Lord, to set
to thy helping hand, for they (the Papists) haue destroyed
thy Law?
               
                But that which is most maruailous of all, is to
see, that these Romanists should in all Commonwealths,
where euer they liue, be nets and snares, as
appeareth most plainely in our State, wherein these
Flies of Aegypt cannot content themselues to liue
within the limits of the loyalty, and alleageance of
good subiects; (for I meane hereby such Cleriques,
and Laiques amongst vs as are poysoned with the
Cup of the Whore of Babylon) albeit they receiue
great immunities, both of life, limbe, and liberty,
from our dread Soueraigne King, but they must attempt
both by open violence, and sulphurious Gunpowder,
and by what not, to ensnare the whole frame
and fabrique of our common-wealth, euen to the vtter
ruine thereof, and for no other cause, (if the most
intelligent amongst them be consulted) but for that
our dread Soueragine King, will not admit a tolleration
of Religion (as they tearme it) a hodge-pot of
Gods seruice; as if his Maiesties owne wisdome, his
prudent Sanedrim, and the experience of our State,
could not ascertaine his Maiestie that it is impossible
for this entire Nation of ours to beare a Lipsicum Interim,
a Sphinx Augustana, a Pandora Francofordiana,
                  
a Cothurnus Neoburgicue, or the like, in all which
there must needes be a fearefull Amnesty of the integrity
of Gods true and reall worship.
                But leauing reuolted Israel, let vs returne to
staggering Iuda, for GOD will search euen his
owne Ierusalem with lights; And if Iuda become
hypocriticall in her selfe, and critically looke onely
vpon reuolted Israel, and taxing it, forget their
owne obliquities, then these Iudaites will bee like
those witches called Lamiae, that see onely Extramittendo:
For it seemes by this accusation, that both
Court, Church, and Common-wealth were all in
one predicament. They were all become Birders,
and Fowlers, Hunters and hauers, and therefore
they had deuised Nets and Snares, trammels and
trickes, to effect their proiects and purposes. I haue
alwaies hated Chams vnnaturall and cursed disposition,
to make bare pudenda parentum: But it is lamentable,
and a thousand pitties, that in high places,
which are as the Sunne-risings of a State, there
should be any such persons, like Nets and Snares,
that for Quid dabitis, will bring Ideots and Asses into
the Church of God: That there should be temporizing,
and Cassandrian great ones, which bend their
wits to nothing else, but like Iesuites to seduce the
simple, and like Machauillians to supplant the
great, that oppose them: That there should be such
great ones, in Church or Court, that should thinke
that all the World was borne for them, and they for
no body; such Iudges that should be basely and scandalously
obnoxious, and such Lawyers that should
be dishonest, and insatiable.
               
                  But blessed be God, our good Iosiah the King
hath reasonably well purged his house, Church, and
Common-wealth of such dangerous nets and snares.
Time would faile me, and my senses would be stupified
with teadiousnesse, if I should take vpon mee to
enumerate all the nets and snares in Church and
Common-wealth, notwithstanding all his sacred Maiesties
care to purge them, all the wholesome Lawes
ordained by Parliament to restraine them, all prudent
and pious courses endeuour to reforme them, yet that
there should be chicken-Iustices, Knights that like
Kites feede on the garbage of their Countrey, Iudges
who like Druggists, and Apothecaries, giue Quid pro
quo, Hab for Nab, this for that: Or to number the
time-seruers, time-sellers, the false-ballancers, the Simoniakes,
and such like: All which enormities proceed
of nothing else but from a Conscience morgaged to
the World, which beeing like to a ship-mans hose,
or a large bowling-alley, a Franciscan sleeue-hand,
resolued with the Neopolitane, that if euer a man will
be rich, he must turne his backe vpon God, or with
the Florentine, who was wont to say, that three things
bred him all his wealth, an Iron arme to take any
paines, an Ants belly to liue pinching, & basely, and
a dogges soule, to make no conscience of any thing.
Whereupon, as the Prophet saith,Hab. 1. 16. 
                  These worldings sacrifice
to their owne net, and burne incense to their drag:
because by them their portion is fat, & their meatplenteous.
               
                What heart, vnlesse it bee a heart of flint,
doth not relent to heare the grieunaces in streets, and
high-waies, that brother makes against brother, and
neighbour against neighbour, the summe whereof
I may instance in the words of the Psalmist, who

complaineth,Psalm. 35. 7. 
                  That there was priuily laid a snare for him,
and without cause, they hid their Net in a pit, yea without
cause had digged for his soule. And what say the wicked
in all this: The Lord hath forgotten it, he hideth away his
face, and will not see it. These are the deepenesse of
Sathan, and the bellowings of hell. Yet in all this,
these madde fooles doe lye, for I haue heard the
prayers, and prayses of the godly: Draw mee (saith
one) out of the Net which they haue laid for my soule. Our
soule (saith another) is escaped as a bird out of the snare
of the Fowler, the snare is broken and wee are deliuered.
And doe we thinke that God doth not heare the cries
of his children? Yes assuredly, GOD saith to the
fooles, Deale not so madly, and to the vngodly, Set not
vp your horne; you shall he slaine all the sort of you, yea
as a tottering wall shall yee be, and as a broken hedge. Woe
vnto thee that spoylest, and thou wast not spoyled, and dealest
treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously with
thee:
                  Esay 33. 1. 
                  When thou shalt cease to spoyle, thou shalt be spoyled;
and when thou shalt make an end to deale treacherously,
they shall deale treacherously with thee. Yea, God hath
his nets also for such Fowlers and Hunters; I will
spread my net vpon him,
                  Ez. 12. 13. 
                  and he shall be taken in my snare,
and I will bring him to Babylon, to the Land of the Caldeans,
yet shall be not see it.
                  Hos. 7. 12. 
                  I will spread my net vpon them,
I will bring them downe, as the Fowles of the Heauen, I
will chastise them, as their Congregations hath heard. He
will raine vpon the wicked snares,
                  Psalm. 11. 6. 
                  fire and brimstone, and
an horrible tempest; this shall be the portion of their cuppe.
Yet after all this, (if they doe deferre to turne vnto
God) God hath his great draw-net in the end of the
world: For as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell
on the face of the Earth:
                  Luke 21. 35. 
                  And this draw-net is already

cast into the Sea of the World, and shall gather of euery
kinde, which when it is full, the Angels shall draw it to
shore, and shall sit downe, and gather the good into vessels,
but cast the bad away.
                  Math. 13. 49. 
                  Euen so shall it be at the end of the
World; the Angels shall come forth, and seuer the wicked
from among the iust.
               
                In that day, what wil become of those that haue
beene snares in the Church? abusing their knowledge
to filthie lucre, that studie Bodines Commentaries,
Lipsius Pollitiques, and Machiuells Prince, and
such like Quod-libets, more then the holy Scriptures?
What will become of them that haue beene nets and
snares in the Court? by scraping Monopolies, proling
proiects, and cruell cursed stratagems? What
will become of all the fry and rabble in the Commonwealth,
who become nets and snares vnto one another
vpon all occasions. In base couetousnesse, becomming
Apes, Lyons, fawning Dogges, and Deuils,
and all for money; in Malice, becomming Romish
Butchers, neuer satisfied but with bloud, making
all their life a Corban of cousenage, and a Mammon
of wicked guiles and gaines, as if these mammonists
did purpose to make no other profession, but like
Montebankes, that professe the frauds of Italy, like
the Scofiotti of Ferara, that fasten vpon nothing but
vpon gaines, like the Banditi that are lawlesse, and like
the Free-booters of Germany, imagining all to be
Fish that commeth to their nets?
                But there are some names in our Nation (as
in Sardis) that are Gods, who would not for all the
World, with the Echronits, forsake God, and goe to
Beelzebub, or with the Ammonites goe to Melchom,
or with Demas goe to Mammon, knowing that it is

impossible that the sonnes of men should wallow in
such ill-got wealth, and swim in such aboundance of
cursed gaines, but that the deceitfulnesse of the Flesh,
and of the World, doth beare them vp by the armeholes,
and the Deuill holds them vp by the chinne,
vntill they are plunged into the deepenesse of Sathan,
who teacheth them all these cunning sleights, vntill
hee hath brought them to the fearefull downefall of
death, and then when they expect comfort, hee saith
vnto them (as the Priests said to Iudas, See thou to it,)
shift for your selues. This is the fearefull, fatall, and
finall doome, this is all the comfort and consolation
that the mightie hunting Nimrods of the World shall
receiue, as a guerdon for their misse-led and mis-perswaded
wicked courses.
                Pray we therefore the great Maiestie of heauen
to inflame with zeale his Maiesties heart on earth, as he
hath begun, euen so to continue vntill he hath vtterly
purged both Court, Church, and Common-wealth
of all such wicked miscreants, & cursed caytiffes, who
remaine incorrigible, whatsoeuer either God or good
men from God shall say, or endeuour to reforme, and
rectifie them in. And seeing the word of God, which
is the sword of the spirit, doth not preuaile with them,
that the Sword of Magistracy may be vnsheathed against
their faces, that the secular power may put
down & punish all wicked practisers both in Church
and Common-wealth, and that such as the Church
hath iustly cast out by excommunication, may be deliuered
to the secular power for Execution; that so (if
it be possible) they may be brought to Repentance,
and their soules saued in the day of the Lord. God effect
this for his glory sake.
               
            
            
               
               Iudgement is toward you.
               God of his endlesse bounty and bottomelesse pitty, com.7. Position.
passion, and mercy, for Christ his sake, doth fauourably
and fatherly premonish before he punish.All Estates menaced with Iudgement.
               
                
                  IN the last place, after the Declaration
of the sinnes of that time, is the Commination,
or Commonition of punishments
due for the same, and that towards
all rankes, and conditions, indefinitely.
For as all the Estates were Paralels in their
sinnes, so are they all lyable to like punishments. It
seemes all Estates were become Nets and Snares to one
another. All therefore haue Iudgement awarded against
them. Iudgement in Scripture signifieth three things.
First, euery action of God, the cause whereof is to
vs vnknowne. This is that great deepe which Dauid
could not sound: It is that profundity which caused
Paul to cry out, O altitudo; and taught Saint Ambrose
to say, Non est argumentum disputationis, sed stuporis.
I am no Eagle to flie so high a pitch: I desire to know
nothing but Iesus Christ, and him crucified. Secondly,
Iudgement signifieth discrimination, or difference, and
that must be left vntill the generall audit. I will not
take vpon me to iudge before the time, who are sheepe
who are goates, who are wheate, who are the chaffe;
for God hath appointed a day wherein hee will iudge
the men of the World, by that God-man Iesus Christ.
               
                In a word, vnderstand by Iudgement in this place,
that which Paul meaneth in his Epistle to the Romans.
Indignation, and wrath, tribulation and anguish vpon euery
soule of man that doth euill. So then the Iudgement here
meant, is that Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and

                  Anguish, shall be poured out of the vyals of Gods
wrath vpon all exorbitant Estates. But behold the
exuberant goodnesse of God, which thus speaketh:
Iudgement is toward you; Iudgement instant, but not
yet extant; Iudgement toward you, but not vpon you.
Whereby we learne, that
               God of his endlesse, boundlesse, and bottomelesse pitty,
compassion, and mercy, for Christ his sake, doth
fauourably and fatherly pre-monish before hee
punish.
                The Psalmist tells vs so. If a man will not returne.Psalme 7. 12.
God will whet his Sword, bend his Bow, and prepare the instruments
of death. Here is onely Preparation of Iudgement,
                  Ionas 3.
not Execution. Ionas comes with an (Adhuc)
yet forty dayes, and Niniue shall be destroyed. The Psalmist
with a day; To day if ye will heare his voyce. The
Diuine with a moment, Christ stands at the doore, and
knockes. This further appeareth in sundry Iudgements
that God hath shewed in the World, from the beginning,
God himselfe preacheth to the Protoplast before
the fall. If thou eate thereof,Genesis 3. thou shalt die the death. Before
the deluge, Noah the Preacher of righteousnesse,
an hundred and twenty yeeres forewarned the olde
World. Before that sulphure showred downe vpon
Sodome, how often was righeous Lot vexed with their
vncleannesse? Moses and Aaron shew signes and wonders,
and bring plagues vpon Aegypt, before Pharoah
was drowned in the Red Sea. How many times, and
manifo'd wayes did God speake to his owne people
before they were carried into captiuity? Seauen seuerall
portentous progedies God shewed vnto the Cizens

of Ierusalem before their vtter destruction by
Vespatian.
               
                The Iewes famous antiquary relates in his BookeIos
                        •
                     phus de bello Iudaico, lib. 7. cap. 12.
of the warres of the lewes, that before the vtter destruction
of Ierusalem, a fiery Sword was seene in the
firmament ouer that City, a light about the Temple,
and the Altar in the night season did affright them
that waited, a Cow led in for sacrifice brought forth
a Lambe in the middest of the Temple, the brasen gate
of the Temple opened of its owne accord, an hoast of
Horsemen and Spearemen was seene ouer the City in
the firmament, a shrill voyce heard in the night season
from vnder the Altar, crying, Get you hence, get you
hence; and one Iesus the sonne of Ananus not long before
the siege went vp & downe the streetes, and could
not by any meanes be silenced, but still hee lamented,
saying, Woe to this place, Temple, and City: and at the time
of the siege he standing on the wall, cryed, Woe to my
selfe; at which words he was slaine with an engine by
the enemy that beleagured the City.
                I list not to wade into the shallow brookes of the
Heathen; yet if a man would but cast his eye into the
tract of Suetonius, concerning the liues of the twelue
Caesars, a man may see that God hath not left himselfe
without witnesse in this kinde, no, not among those
Paganish miscreants. But you will say, what is all this
to vs? I will tell you. I am no Prophet, nor yet the
sonne of a Prophet, but without any challenge of Enthusiasme,
or any such dizzy dreame; Tell me if Gods
iudgements haue not beene towards vs in our Nation
both in Court, Church, and Common-wealth? In the Court
was not Iudgement toward vs in the death of our late
dread Soueraigne Queene Elizabeth, when the eyes of
the Iesuites were ready to drop out with expectation

of our ruine, and their braines aked with plotting villanies,
and perillous prophesies? When as at the approach
of our dread Soueraigne Iames, this our state
being in an Earth-quake, was shaken and setled in a
moment. Was not Iudgement toward vs in that hateful
and hellish gun-powder treason, which had it been
effected, the very frame of the Court, Church, and
Common-wealth had beene ouerthrowne in a moment?
Was not Iudgement towards vs when GOD
tooke away from vs that hopefull, peerlesse, and valiant
young Prince, Henry? Was not Iudgement toward the
Church, when a Praemunire was endeauoured to ensnare
our Cleriques, but that God diuerted it by
affecting the Kings heart toward our reuerend Beaue-Peeres
of Diuinity? Was not Iudgement toward the
Church, when a nullity was intended, and endeuoured
to be brought vpon all proceedings of Episcopall
iurisdiction, in our Ecclesiastical discipline? Was not
Iudgement toward the Church, in the decease of our
rarest Diuines and greatest Schollars, who were as the
Chariots and Horsemen of our Israel, Champion-like
casting foorth their gauntlets of defiance against the
proudest Prelate, and most carnall Cardinall in the
Conclaue of Rome?
               
                If in these things the Iudgements of God had
beene vpon vs, as they were toward both Court and
Church, the Comminalty had certainely had a share
therein, and vndoubtedly had tasted of the same bitter
Cup. Were not these things the fore-warnings of future
sorrowes? That many other Iudgements were not
continued vpon this our Nation, as the vniuersall
plague of pesti'ence (which extended it selfe euen to
the mountaines of Wales) the inundation which ouerflowed
some part of our Land: (What time the waters

saw thee O God, the waters saw thee, were affraid, and returned
into their streame-race againe) the inflamation of
the Element, which not many dayes before the Gun-powder
treason, in the West-part of this Land seemed
all on fire: some foureteene yeeres sithence the first
great frost, and this later, that made not onely the
poore of the Land to mourne, but the very beasts of
the field to roare, and the Birds of Heauen to droope;
was it not I say, the wonderfull riches of Gods great
mercy? If now in the blessednesse of peace, soundnesse
of health, quietnesse of state, plentifulnesse of feasts,
and fulnesse of bread, the people of this our Nation
shall runne to excesse of ryot, and great ones become
Nets and Snares in their high places, Mizpah and Tabor,
to their poore brethren, sing Requtems to their
owne soules, and contemne heauenly admonitions;
take heede lest this Iudgement which is said to be but
towards vs, be not very neere vnto vs, yea, euen at the
doore.
                The case is otherwise with vs in England (God
be blessed) then it was in Israel, at the time of this
prophecie; For in our state, neither Prelates nor
Preachers become Nets or Snares vnto our people.
They make no merchandizing of the word of God,
as doe the Italian Montebanks of Rome. Our Church-men
ensnare vs not, (as the Romanists doe theirs) with
conceited Saints, as salues for all sores, or with rotten
Romish Reliques, such as are Martines bootes, George
his Sword, Crispines cutting Knife, Iosephs breeches,
Thomas his Shooe, the swadling Clowts of Christ, the
Milke and Haire of the Virgin Mary, and the like sopperies.
Neither doe they tell vs that the Breath of
Christ is in that boxe, as some hideous blasphemous
impostors of the Latian-Lateran-monster haue made

the seelie multitude beleeue. The Church men of
England preach vnto vs nothing, but Iesus Christ crucified,
the great Angel of the Lord, presenting to our
God the vialls of odours, which are the prayers of
the Saints. They preach vnto vs the pure Word, and
administer the blessed Sacraments, (without blending
or mixture) as the reliques of Iesus Christ. In the
ministration whereof, albeit they are by some sort of
miscreants meanly handled, and coursly entertained,
yet they haue resolued with Gideons souldiers to lap
colde water, before they would for filthie lucre or
vaine-glorie become Nets and Snares to entangle the
consciences of any the least of Gods deare ones with
mis-leading vntruths, or mis-perswading traditions.
Let vs not therefore become a by-word to forraine
Nations, but let vs shew our selues to be Gods true
Israel, as a people beleeuing that God hath appoynted
a day, wherein he will iudge all orders and conditions
of all things that they haue done, either on Mizpah,
or Tabor, in Church, or Common-wealth.
                In which day of Iudgement, he will iudge our
fins, that in this life haue beene precedent, present, or
to come: In which day the omnipotent, omni-scient
Iudge will appeare, the Assessors will be innumerable,
and all men, of all sorts, shall there be presented
naked; Where Christ shall be the Law-giuer, the Impleader,
the Witnesse, Aduocate, and Iudge; Where
many Orators shall impleade one, the Angels whom
we haue grieued by our impenitencie, the poore and
helplesse, whom wee haue wrongfully vexed. Vriah
shall vrge Dauid, and Naboth shall impleade Ahab
for their blouds. Those that haue beene corrupted
by our perswasion, example, meanes, or money, shall
cry out against vs. In which iudgement there shall

be no cuasion, no appeale: For if we deny any thing,
heauen and earth shall witnesse it against vs: If we
translate our crimes, we shall be pointed at with this,
Thou art the man: If wee pleade ignorance, the long
time of Gods sufferings, and the many yeares of the
preaching of the Gospell shall be vrged against vs: If
we pretend necessity of sinning, it will be answered,
it was not of co-action, but of our owne corruption:
If wee aplogize for our selues in a Panegyricall commemoration,
what good deedes we haue done, and
how many Sermons wee haue heard, the voyce will
come forth from God, I know you not that worke iniquity:
And if we become Suppliants, it will not serue
our turne, for the maister of Requests will then bee
come out of heauen: If we appeale, it will be told vs,
that God hath delegated all the iudgement to his
Sonne. Listen therefore vnto the voyce of Iehouahs
fatherly Admonitions, so shall you stand in that
Iudgement. Lift vp your heads, and reioyce to heare
Christ say, Come yee blessed. But if you will not heare
his Commonition, Confusion shall couer you, as a
Cloake, you shall roare for dolour, and that great
Anathema Maranatha shall plunge you into hell, with
Goe ye cursed. There remayneth onely an Exhortation,
Deprecation, and Supplication, wherewith I will conclude.
                
                  First, I exhort therefore, That Prayers and Supplications1 Tim. 2.
be made for all Estates of this Land, Especially
for the house of the King: That the King as the foundation
of his house, may euer loue the glory of Gods house, and
the place where Gods honour dwelleth. That the Prince
and the rest of the Kings regall posterity, may learne to
execute true iudgement and iustice. That his Counsell may
be loyall, and religious in the simplicity of their hearts, and

in the dexterity of their hands. That the Peeers and Iudges
may be as prudent Patrons, Fathers, & guides to the whole
State. That vniust Monopolies which are but as the baites
of these Nets, vnnecessary taxations, which are but the
lead of these Nets, to make them sinke, and faire pretences,
which are but the corke, to make them floate aloft, may
neuer be once named amongst the Courtiers of this kingdome.
Let vs euer pray that God would alwayes keepe
three things in the Kings Court, that were reserued in the
Arke of the Couenant, that is, The Law of God, and the
lawes of our kingdome consonant thereunto, whereby the
policy of the State may be ordered, both piousty and prudently:
The Manna, which is the maintenance of the State,
may be aduanced: And Aarons Rod, the Ecclesiasticall
Doctrine and Discipline, which may bud and blossome, and
bring forth Almonds of Peace and Piety, so long as the
Sunne and Moone endure. So shall the House of our King,
and Kingdome, be an Administration of a most blessed Magistracy
and a most sacred Ministery, wherein shall dwest
true Christian piety, and policy, vntill the second comming
of Iesus Christ. I exhort you also, that Prayers and Supplications
be made for all the Prelates and Preachers of this
house of England, that the eminent in the Church vaunt
not themselues in their Domination aboue their brethren,
for that is but the baite of these Nets, nor that they exenterate
their Clergy, for that is but the lead of these Nets
to make them vnseene in the great waters, nor pretend
their greatnesse and superintendency onely, for that is but
the Corke to make them floate aboue. But let vs euer pray,
that those that doe rule in the Church, may doe it with singlenesse
of heart, and those that are subordinate, and are
to be ruled, may be obedient vnto them with all chearefulnesse,
that all, as Gods good seruants, may feare the Lord,
may goe when hee bids them goe, and come when hee bids

them come, and neuer leaue off their Euangelicall negotiations,
but doe it with all diligence vntill Christ come. So
shall our Church-men be as precious Diamonds (like Zorobabel
the sonne of Shealtiel) vpon Gods right hand,
they shall be the Iewells of the State, and by their constant
preaching shall saue themselues, and others. And I exhort
you, that Prayers and Supplications be made for the whole
people of this Land, that they may be obedient to their God
in all goodnesse, subiect, and seruiceable to their King in
body, goods, and life, and ayding, and assisting one to another
in all Christian charity: so shall all of euery order
be a people of Gods owne acquisition, election, sanctification,
glorification, and as Gods blessed Israel. This God grant
vnto the Court, Church, and Common-wealth, for his vnspeakeable
loues sake, for his promise sake, which hee hath
ratified with the bloud of his Sonne, and for the glory of
his great Name.
                For mine owne part, I shall euer poure out my soule
to God, that he would for euer diuert from the house of the
King, the iudgement of Proscription, that the King may euer
be safe vnder Gods wings, and secure vnder his feathers,
that no Iesuited Chastell, Baltazar Gerard, nor
Iacobine, Clement, Rauilack, nor Pouder-plotter, nor
any such wicked villaine, be able once to looke vpon him
with an eye, heart, or hand, to hurt him. That God would
turne from our noble Peeres, the iudgement of Desertion,
that their hopefull sonnes may grow vp as Plants, and their
noble daughters become, as the polished angles of the temple.
That God would diuert from the Gentry the iudgement
of fearefull slumber, lest they forget their God that
made them. From the Iudges the iudgement of Reprobation,
but that they may put on Iustice, as a Robe, Honour
as a Crowne, and vnanimous consent for the good of the
King and kingdome, as the linkes of their collars of S S.

From the Prelates and Preachers the iudgement of Dissention,
Faction, and singular opinion, lest the seamelesse coat
of Iesus Christ be rent asunder. Clothe (O Lord) all the
hearts of our Church-men with thy righteousnesse, their
liues with thy grace, and their learning with thy praise.
And turne (O Lord) from the whole people of this Nation,
the iudgement of Contempt of thy Word and Sacraments,
lest deuouring fire burne vp their houses to the ground, lest
the ayre infect their breaths with the plague of pestilence,
to the death, lest the sword of the enemy be sheathed in their
owne bowells, and lest euery man become a Lion, A Wolfe, a
Tigar, and a Fox, to hunt his brother with Nets & Snares.
                Yea, I shall euer remaine, during breath, an humble
Suppliant before the Throne of Almighty God, that the
house of the King may alwayes be as Gods Silo, the Bishoprickes
as Seats, and Sees, for the principall wel-deseruing
masters of the Assemblies, the Deanries as the Apostolicall
Presbyteries, the godly Magistracy of our Land, as Mount
Gerazim, filled with blessings, and the sacred Ministery, as
mount Tabor, wherein the Church-men may continually
conferre with the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles learnings.
Yea, that the whole people may be Gods beloued Israel,
the cities as Bethel, the Townes and Villages as Bethphage,
and Bethany, and the citie of LONDON the
chamber of the kingdome (whither the prudent Tribes are
now come vp to be Assessors, and assistants in Parliament,
may be as a closet of all precious things. Make, Lord, the
Citizens Saints, their houses Sanctuaries, and the three
Estates now assembled in PARLIAMENT, the most pious,
and most prudent Sanedrim, that euer the Sun shined on.
God perswade Iaphet to dwell in the Tents of Shem:
And let the faithfull witnesse in Heauen
say to all this

                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
            
         
      
   