
      
         
            
            
            HILARIA: OR THE TRIVMPHANT Feast for the fift of August.
            Imprinted at London by Simon Stafford, dwelling neere the Red Lyon, in the Cloth-Fayre. 1607.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAIESTIE.
            
            
               
                  THE great Kings of Persia, (most noble Prince) before they would sit at any Feast, they would talke of Temperance; before they would doe any sacrific: to their Gods, they would speake of Iustice; and before they would commence any warre with the enemies, they would discourse of Fortitude; three principall great vertues, proceeding all frō
                Prudence: without which, Temperance is slothfulnesse; Fortitude is rashnesse; and Iustice meere iniury: for Vnica & sola virtus Principis, prudentia.
            
               I haue presumed therefore (vnder your Maiesties fauour) to write these fewe Verses, to honour this our Tryumphant and sacred Feast, Hilaria, the fift of August: not as the Greekes, in their Feast Taurilia; nor as the Romanes,

               in their Feast Hecatombaeon: but as Israel, with Musike, mirth and Feastes, and to sing Hymnes & Psalmes for our Triumphs, Feasts, and often victories: so did Israel for the victories of Moses ouer the Egyptians; of Saul ouer the Philistims; and of Dauid ouer the Chananites, with their feast Phase, at Ierusalem; and their Feast Phurim, in Persia.
            
               And sith Angels feasted with men, ministred vnto men, and commanded Feastes to be kept of men, to put vs in remembrance of Gods benefits to men, we should not omit to giue thanks for it. For the old Lacedemonians, in their Feast Phiditia, where was more musicke and mirth, then meat or drinke, had their militarie dancing, and their Songs, Scholia; to commend the renowmed worthines of such famous men, as defended and saued their Cities and Countrey, from the Persians and Macedonians.
            
               So the Athenians, in their Feast Sisisia, where they obserued such Temperance, that they would not exceed fiue Dishes (by Platoes lawes) in priuate Feastes; called, Bellaria Attica: with such care, that they allowed but fiue Ghests. Yet Homer allowed the whole number of Pithagoras, which was ten: but in publike victorious Feasts,
               
Plato allowed 28. which was called Symposium Platonis: but when Greece began their first draught to Iupiter, and their last draught to Mercurius, then their lawe was, Aut biberent, aut abirent.
            
               Among the ancient Romans, in priuate Feasts, it was decreed, there should not be aboue seuen: for it was a common speach with the Romans, Septem conuiuium, nouem conuicium facere, then Rome by Temperance, being inferior to Spaine, in number; to the Africanes in subtiltie; to the Grecians, in wit and Stratagems: yet the, Victrix & Domina gentium. But when the late Emperours contended, who should excel in ryotous Feastes, Geta would haue as many dishes in his Feasts, as could be found vpon the name of euery Letter in the Alphabet. Lucullus would haue so many dishes in his Feast, as were Gods in Rome worshipped. Heliogabulus, so many dishes in his Feast, as could bee found in Summer colours out of the earth, and vpon the earth; that they sought to exceed Vitellius feast: which was such (for the number of his dishes) that his became a By-word (for a long time) in Rome, Vitellianae patinae. This Feast, Vitellius himself named, Clypeum Mineruae; which might haue bin better called, Praeludium Veneris.
            
               
               But God grant vs, that wee in great Britaine may, in perpetuall memorie of so great a blessing, giue thankes to God, for this our Tryumphant, Regall, and Crowned Feast.
            
            
               Your Maiesties most humble and dutifull Seruant,
Lod: Lloyd.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               THE TRYVMPHANT FEAST for the fift of August.
            
               I. Temperancia
               
               
                  NO Gemme, no Iewell, no gold I giue,
               No pearles from Pactolus, so:
               No Persian, Gaze, no Indian 
               
               Nor Tagus sands I show.
               Farre greater gifts, I giue, O King,
               if Poets may credite beare;
               Foure Vertues great, all link'd in chaine,
               a chaine for Kings to weare.
               If Poets of force or feare be dumbe,
               
                  Dodoaean trees must speake:
               If Angerona still be mute, Angerona, the Goddesse of silence.
               
               then stones will silence breake.
               If men may vertue not aduance,
               
                  Memnos Image shall:
               And the Oliue on Corebus graue,
               these Halcyon dayes shall call. Halcyōs dayes, daies of solace & mirth.
               
               Let Thracians bragge of Mars his sword:
               let Greece, of Phaebus shield:
               Let Romans boast Quirinus speare:
               to Ione great thankes we yeeld.
               For Trophees iust and Triumphs due,
               for Feast to King of Kings:
               
                  Osanna in skie, Alleluiabs on earth,
               both men and Angels sings.
               
                  
In Mambre, Abrahams Feast was best, The Oke of Mambre, wber Abraham dwelt.
               
               where Angels three were Ghests:
               The like did Lot in Sodom keepe,
               where Angels two did feast.
               With Musicke, mirth, with Hebrue songs,
               the Iewes kept Phases Feast,
               And Iewes in Persia Phurim kept,
               but not for Persian ghests.
               The Indians feast at Ganges crown'd,
               the Greekes with Crownets on:
               In Persian feast with Tyra on, Tiara, or Sydaris which the kings of Persia wore on their beads. Due cō
                     mendation of some Noblemen in Court. Curtius, & Decius same.
               
               Their kings to tend vpon.
               Of all such crownes as Kings were crownd,
               who best should crowned be:
               They that conquered Kingdomes sixe,
               or saued Kingdomes three?
               Whose names and fame ought famous be,
               e'ne from the Iles of Orchades:
               
               Through lands, through seas; and Kingdomes great,
               to the furthest part of Gades.
               
               The cause why Curtius should be in steele,
               or Decius wrought in brasse:
               Or both Phileny in Iuorie set,
               to saue their countrey, it was.
               Were Dion, Hermodius in siluer set,
               who sau'd two Cities free:
               Their names should sure be in siluer set,
               that saued Kingdoms three.
               For Iustice yelds, and Countreys claime
               a Lawrell Crowne for such,
               Before such bloody Conquerours Crownes,
               like Scythian Tamberlaine much.
               
                  
Shake Morpheus off, take Moroes pen,
               in Homers verse indite:
               Of Fame, of Vertue and vertuous men,
               a second Illiad write.
               Not of Antonius lust in Rome,
               
                  Cleopatras loue to please,
               Nor Tarquins fame with fancies fond,
               on Lucres▪
                   haste to seaze.
               Though valiant Greekes for Priams Towne, Priams Towne was Troy.
               
               haue fil'd the world with fame:
               Yet Helens rape, by Priams sonne,
               did Priams Towne defame.
               The fault vnchaste Aeneas did,
               made Didoes brood rebell:
               That Hanibals more for Dido dide,
               then Rome could Scipios tell.
               The bowre which stoute Bellona holds,
               the Fort where Vesta breeds:
               
                  Mars could neuer shake that Fort,
               where Temperance chaste doth feede.
               
                  Xerxes, that could eat vp Greece, 
                  Temperance much commended.
               
               and drinke the Grecian seas:
               E'ne Xerxes, that would be Tytan cal'd,
               could not Dame Temperance please.
               Had strong Alcides conquered lust,
               that conquered what he would.
               By conquering lust, he had conquer'd more,
               then strong Alcides could.
               Could be that gain'd the world with fame,
               gaine greater fame in life;
               Then Sysigambis honor saue,
               great King Darius wife?
               
                  
For Champions chaste more guerdon gain'd, Chastitie commended.
               
               than gain'd Achilles force,
               By slaughter great of Phrigian Knights,
               of spoile of Hectors corse.
               One Phineas chaste staid Iudas plague:
               one Ioseph to Aegypt sold,
               By Temperance chaste, in Aegypt did,
               what he in Aegypt would.
               Let Scipio serue Saturnus Tombe,
               let Silla Apollo tend;
               Let Numa waite the Egerian Nimph.
               To Ioue our knees we bend.
               Shall Temperance drinke of Cyrses Cup,
               by Syrens thereto train'd?
               Shall Mars in Phaebus Chariot sit,
               through Vulcanes Forge being stain'd? By Vulcans Forge is meant, the adulterie of Mars with Venus.
               
               Vertues then thus coupled fast,
               and link't like Homers chaine:
               On Iacobs Ladder scale the Skies,
               and Crownes of glory gaine.
            
            
               II. Fortitudo.
               MIght Romans of Camillus bragge?
               might Greece of Theseus boast?
               Might Perseus vaunt of Perseus Fame,
               had Perseus Fame been lost?
               Had Kingdomes heard of Cyrus Name?
               Had worlds knowne Caesars Fame?
               Had Fame it selfe beene spoken of,
               had Pen not writ the same?
               
                  
                  Milciades Fame and Tryumphs great, Milicades fame▪
                  
               
               
                  Themistocles moou'd so much:
               
                  Themistocles said, he could not sleep,
               
                  Milciades Fame was such.
               So Caesar said of Philips sonne:
               so Philips sonne dismaid,
               To heare what fame Achilles had,
               Oh happie Achilles, said.
               But Enuie still on Vertue tends,
               euen hard at Phocions heele,
               And faine would clippe Timoleons wings,
               
                  Timoleons wings being steele.
               Could Caesar brooke great Pompeyes fame,
               whose fame the world embrac'd?
               Or could Octauius well disgest,
               
                  Antonius name so grac'd?
               But who can square the winde with Line,
               or fire in Ballance wey?
               Who backe can call the day that's past,
               or can mans minde display?
               
                  Apelles thought no colours could
               paint shining Phaebus face:
               
                  Pithagoras, for Mercurius shape,
               all Timber iudg'd too base.
               Not one might play on Hermes Pipe,
               saue onely Orpheus could:
               Neither one might ride Bucephalus on, Bucephalus, Alexanders horse.
               
               but onely one might bold.
               What need I name the Prince that can,
               if Iustice doe him right:
               Or seeke another Caesar out,
               sith Fame hath nam'd the Knight?
               
                  
The knot which Gordius knit so fast,
               that could Philippides breake:
               The net which Vulcan made so strong,
               it was for Mars too weake.
               On, noble Prince, to Martius field,
               among the Romane Crue:
               Make challenge in Olimpian games,
               
                  Pentatlon claime for due.
               Sound Trumpets for Clitoneus out, Pentatlon the fiue Exercises in Greece, in the Games of Olympia.
               
               
                  Eurialus call to field:
               C
                     ••••
                  e combate for Theagenes crownes,
               else he his Crownes must yeeld.
               Saile thence, and seeke Palladium out,
               bring Peplon proud from Greece;
               
               From Greece to Colchos, saile on, Prince,
               attempt the Golden Fleece,
               
               With Aiax claime, and challenge make
               to Achilles Armour braue:
               Let Paris seeke for Giges ring,
               
                  Menelaus Harpe to haue.
               Seeke Myrmidons out; seeke Pirrhus Mates, Mermidons. Achilles souldiers▪ Knights of Dolops, Pirrhus Soldiers. The liuely Image of Fortitude.
               
               the Knights of Dolops Land:
               Lead on your Knights, and claime the field,
               from Argiraspides band.
               Sit on Romane Scipios seate,
               seeke out some Carthage new:
               Let India be the vp-shot marke,
               claime Affricke for thy due.
               One Scipio made Numantia smoke;
               One Brennus, Rome could shake:
               One Noble Britayne may aswell,
               make great Toledo quake.
               
                  
A branch of Noble Brutus brood,
               on Caesars fame to feede:
               A bough of ancient Dardan stocke,
               to honor Hectors seede.
               
                  Marcellus for his prowesse great,
               The sword of Rome was cal'd:
               All Rome haue said, old Fabius was,
               the Romane Target stal'd.
               
                  Thebes made Pelopidas for their wals, Pelopidas. Lisanders praise. Pericles.
               
               
                  Pericles Athens hand:
               Still was Lisander, Spartas legges,
               for Sparta on to stand.
               One Lion thought Leonidas best,
               before three handred Deeres:
               Then one poore fearefull Deere, before
               three hundred Lions peeres.
               We haue Leonidas on before,
               with Marcellus sword in hand;
               In him we haue Lisanders legges,
               For Britaines on to stand.
               The Load-stone of great Brittaine soyle,
               the Lampe that shines so bright:
               The Fort where Fame and Man-hood lodge,
               and Conntreyes Candle-light.
               The Persian Knights, Mellophori cal'd, The kings of Persias old soldiers. Calasiries, the king of Egypts chiese band.
               
               on whom did Persia rest:
               They ware but Cyrus name on sleeue:
               Yours weare the George on brest.
               The noble Bands of Aegypt Kings,
               
                  Calasiries sometime cal'd:
               They had but Pharaohs Colours on:
               Yours are with Garters stal'd.
               
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
                  
These Scorpions like Altenian Snakes,
               whose natures strange are such:
               That they do sting their neighbours by,
               but strangers neuer touch.
               They seeke with Pharton, Phaebus charge,
               with Pharton downe they shall:
               They thinke to flye with Icarus wings,
               they must with Icarus fall.
               Their Magike Ring their Salomons Key, Superstitious Papistrie.
               
               their starre of Rempha fail'd:
               Their Figure mist, their Dagon sell,
               Their Planets quite are quaii'd.
               No fire can hurt the Diamond pure,
               no rust the Emerauld touch:
               No dung hill can infect the Sunne,
               their vertues rare are such.
               Could hungry Lyons on Daniel prey?
               could fire on Sidrach seaze:
               Might fish in Sea on Ionas feed,
               when these their God did please?
               This King hath Eclus at command,
               this, Neptune great can checke:
               This hath the Sunne, the Moone, the Stars,
               and heauens all at a becke.
               Could Pharaos force on Moses fall?
               could Saul worke Dauids woe?
               Could Esaus wrath on Iacob feede,
               when Iacobs God said, No?
               Shall Spanish bragges, or Romish pride,
               whom Gothes so conquer could:
               Whom Vandales brood, and Agars seede,
               as seruile slaues haue sold,
               
                  
Such Scythian tokens send to Rome, 
                  The Scythians Embassage to Darius king of Persia.
               
               as was to Persia sent?
               A Mouse, a Frogge, a Sparrow, a Shaft,
               whereby the Scythians meant;
               They should run like Mise, or swimme like Frogs,
               or Sparrowes like should flee:
               Else Scythians shafts should Persians daunt,
               which Persians straight should see.
            
            
               IIII. Prudentia.
               
               NOW Atlas heauy loaden comes,
               with world of Globes on backe,
               Saith, Fortitude is that famous King,
               which Kingdomes keeps from wracke.
               
                  Simandius comes with Iustice in,
               and Iustice most commends,
               And saith that Iustice is that King,
               which Kingdomes all defends.
               More force, saith Temperance, in Samgars goade,
               then in Philistian swordes:
               More strength in little Dauids sling,
               then great Golias words.
               Then Prudence said, and Sentence gaue;
               
                  Be wise as Serpents be:
               
               For wisedome binds such Serpents fast,
               lest Serpents such go free.
               As fire in Flint is found by sleight,
               and oyle in Iette by heate:
               So wisedome most, by vertue sought,
               and not by forces great.
               
                  
In midst of Peace, and quiet rest,
               in Armes would Cecrops hee:
               Th'euents of warre, in time of Peace, Cecrops.
               
               great Ianus would forsee. Ianus double faced.
               
               When Sun doth shine most bright in skie,
               the Crab the Oysters snatch.
               When Cyrces sang most sweet to sence,
               then was Vlisses catcht.
               Thinke how the Olinthians towne was tane,
               by trust to Lasthenes leares.
               Forget not Babel great was wonne,
               by false Sopyrus teares.
               Thinke on Troy, and Troian horse,
               by Synon bought and sold. The Troian horse.
               
               Thinke none might yeeld Troy-nouant vp:
               but false Androgeus could.
               Since secret cankers hidden lie
               in Damask Rose vnknowne,
               Till stormes do come, and Tempests rise,
               and Rose it selfe be blowne.
               Had Croesus thought on Solons saying,
               who iudgde himselfe so strong,
               Then nothing could king Croesus harme,
               nor do king Croesus wrong.
               One that lurkt in Egypt long,
               whom Apres trusted most,
               Such treason Apres found in trust, Treason often found on trust.
               
               that Apres Egypt lost.
               The swords, the shields, the hands, the eyes,
               the legges that Kings stand on,
               
                  Antigonus said, were faithfull friends,
               for Kings to stand vpon.
               
                  
The Starres keepe ranke, the Pole about,
               some march, some watch, some ward:
               Some range abroad, some turne about,
               Some tends the Pole to gard.
               Haue hands abroad, haue eyes at home,
               Search where these Serpentsbe, Iesuits & Seminaries.
               
               Who faine would build, and make their nests,
               in some sacred Cedar Tree.
               These Serpents sought this famous Ile,
               the Ile of Bryttaine cal'd:
               Should now the Ile of Serpents be,
               or the Ile of Satyres stal'd?
               So many Aiax fit for warre,
               to please a Prince at list,
               As were Vlisses like for peace,
               a Theban Captaine wisht.
               In Rome grew many Captaines great,
               fewe Captaines Rome did good:
               And Greece had many valiant Greekes,
               
               fewe Greekes with Greece long stood.
               When Enuie grew in Greece so great, Enuie the enemie of great States.
               
               could Greece on Grecians looke?
               When Rome with Romans fought in Rome,
               
               could Rome a Romane brooke?
               Oh happie Athens, had Athens more
               
                  Aristides like in store:
               And twise happie Rome had been,
               had Rome Fabritius more. Darius wish.
               
               
                  Darius wisht so many friends,
               
                  Zopirus like in store;
               As one Pomegranat curnels had,
               
                  Darius wisht no more.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  
Ten Nestor-like Agamemnon wisht,
               
                  Agamemnon wisht but so:
               Ten like Aeacida in field with Prince:
               what neede a Prince haue mo?
               By such we sleepe in quiet peace,
               and liue full safe at rest:
               And craue of God, which Chaanan kept,
               that Brittaine so be blest:
               Where second Brutus sits on Throne;
               Where Brutus third excell:
               And Bryttaine Great, reuiu'd againe,
               which world farre off can tell.
            
            
               Most liberall gifts I gaue, O King,
               If King will credit Penne:
               My Heart, my Life, my Loue, my selfe,
               my Bookes and children tenne.
               But Caesar may, if Caesar will,
               on me like Caesar looke,
               Make me to sing more sweeter Notes,
               then Swanne, in Seuerne Brooke.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   