
      
         
            
            
            THE
Famous, true and historicall
life of Robert second Duke
of Normandy, surnamed for
his monstrous birth and behauiour,
Robin the Diuell.
            VVherein is contained his dissolute life in his youth,
his deuout reconcilement and vertues in his age:
Interlaced with many straunge and miraculous
aduentures. Wherein are
both causes of profite, and
manie conceits of
pleasure.
            By T. L. G.
            
            Imprinted at London for N. L. and Iohn Bushie, and are to be
sold at the West dore of Paules. 1591.
         
         
            
            
            To the worshipfull and true Moecenas
of learning, M. Thomas Smith, T. L. G. wisheth
all aboundance of worldly fortunes in this life,
and the benefites of heauenly felicitie in the
life to come.
            
               SEeing in these our days, men rather seeke the increase
of transitorie wealth, than the knowledge of deuine
wisedome, preferring stuffed baggs, before studious
bookes, their pounds, before precepts, loosing the true
ritches of the minde, to leuell at the transitorie allurements
of this world, feeding fooles with siggs, and philosophers with
floutes; I haue among the multitudes of these men, made choice of
your Worship for my Patron and Moecenas, who of a farre more
happy nature with Theodosius, honour Appian, and seeing learning
almost suppressed with contempt, or discountenanced with neglect,
haue in this famous Citie (like a vertuous member of the same)
begun to exile ignorance, to reuiue artes: knowing Ladislaus reasons
to be of force, that Citizens who are vnlettered, are lesse than men,
or rather (as Frederick the Emperour was wont to say) manlike
beastes. Which vertuous indeuor of yours (worthie both your name
and fortune) shall in time to come more aduance you, than they who
tooth and nayle labour to purchase lands, which ordinarily perish
through their heires lauishnes. It is true fame which is gotten by
vertue, & perfect vertue to maintaine learning; which is so kinde to
those that seeke after it, that in all changes of fortune, in all miseries
of this life, and casualties whatsoeuer, it prepareth the mind, & preuenteth
mishaps. And least I among the poore Tirones of learning,
who desire the increase therof with the most, though deserue therein
with the least, should seeme to forget this especially and ingrafted
vertue so admirably bestowed vpō your worship, I haue thought good
to present you with a rude and homely written history, which if with
like regard you shall accept, as Alphonsus did the silly Satires of
Philelphus, I doubt not but in short time to publish that vnder your
name, which shall not only merit and deserue your acceptance, but
also mightely profit all such as are studious in all sorts of learning.
Till when, I most humbly commend me, desiring your Worship most
earnestly to prosecute your vertuous enterprises, beseeching God to
prosper you in them and all other, to the aduancement of Letters.
From my Chamber 2. Maij. 1591.
            
               Your Worships to commaund,
T. L. G.
               
            
         
         
            
            To the curteous Reader whatsoeuer.
            
               GEntlemen, I haue vppon the earnest request of
some my good friends, drawne out of the old
and ancient antiquaries, the true li
                  •
               e of R
                     •
                  bert
second Duke of Normandie, (surnamed for his
youthfull imperfections, Robin the Diuell) wherein I
stand not so much on the termes, as the trueth, publishing
as much as I haue read, and not so much as they haue
written. The Loadstarres that directed me in my course,
if they haue colours and no counterfeit, doo me right to
say they set down coulors without counterfeit: yet many
things haue happened in times past, incredible in our age,
and in our age such things haue falne out, as had our fathers
knowne they had meruailed: It onely behoueth vs
to applie all things that tend to good, to their end, which
is vertue, and esteeme them; to intend all things that are
bad, to their end, which is vice, and eschue them. So shall
we in reading reape that fruit, that impossible things shall
be referred to God, and possible ordered to our amends.
Farewell.
            
               T. L. G.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The famous, true, and historicall life
of Robert, second Duke of
Normandie.
            
               
                  IN the populous and plentifull
Dukedome of Normandie, (in
times past called Neustria) at such
time as Pepin the Father of the
great King Charlemaigne gouerned
the flourishing Kingdome of
Fraunce, Aubert
                the first Duke of
that Countrey, by some supposed to
be Ron of Denmarke, began to signorize in the same about the
yeare of our Lord 750. a Prince by nature affable, in nurture
fortunate, as glorious for his Conquests, as gratious in
his curtesies, enterprising his attempts with Metellus constancie,
and finishing the same with Alexanders fortune: who
being in yeares youthfull, in person comlie, in discourse pleasant,
in ritches mightie, was sought vnto by diuers Princ
                  •
               s,
who intended by inserting him into their linage, the better to
assure themselues in their liuelyhoodes. Among the rest, the
worthie Duke of Burgundie wrought so earnestly, and perswaded
so effectually, that Aubert at last accepted his faire
sister Y
                     •
                  da or Editha for his wife, a Princesse in whome nature
planted as much excellence, as amiablenesse, tempering
the gifts of fortune and y• mind with such equabilitie, that her
goods seemed great in respect of her goodnes, and her goodnes
more great, in that she had goods: for as the mightie inundatiōns

of Nilus make the riuer more famous, so abilitie vnited
with bountie, and a liberall hand with a mercifull hart, do
greatly assist in causes of honor. These two princely cooples
ordained by desteny to high desasters, though their affluence
of riches promised them felicitie, yet the influence of the heauens
intimated their aduersitie; for hauing great signories to
bequeath, they had no heires to enioy, accompting this for
their only crosse, that they were without children: many were
their vowes, but to no auayle; many their prayers, but to
little purpose; if phisick might haue made fruitfull, Editha
had been a Mother; if great summs could haue purchast yong
sonnes, Aubert had been a Father. Seuen yeares and more
liued they in this sort, the one carelesse of loues delight, the
other comfortlesse in that she was barraine, till on a prefixed
Saterday, when Nature had powred all her treasures on the
earth, Flora powdered all the medowes with flowres, when
the louesick Zephirus softly breathed, and the tender leaues
sweetly bowed, when the sunne played with the waue, & the
waue dallyed with the sunne, both enioying an equal simpathy
of solace, Duke Aubert (who from his youth vpwarde was
meruailously delighted in ye chase) accompanyed with his faire
Duchesse, departed out of his Capitall Citie of Roan, to take
his pastance in the Forrest. Editha (by deuine ordinance)
was that day attired, as if she intended to wooe Lucina to
graunt a Sonne, and winne the Norman Duke to get a
Sonne. Her hayre, in stead of gould to grace it, was goulden
exceeding gould, more finer than the thrid wherewith
Arachne wrought her loombe, more softer than the bed of
Roses, wherein ye Morning playd with Cephalus. Bound it
was after a carelesse manner, as if disdayning that so rare
beauties should be imprisoned, but pleyted in such sort, as if
Nature should make a laborinth for Loue, Loue could not
wish a sweeter laborinth. Midst euery pleight were certayne
spheares of Pearles and Diamonds, which with the excellencie
of their purenesse, gaue no little grace to her hayres
perfection: her browes not so hard as Iuorie, but more whiter,

intermedled with some delicate vermilion, her eyes in
puritie like the Carbunckle, lightning y• darkest thoughts in
effect like the Leadstone, drawing the most indurate harts,
concluding all passions in themselues, in that they were the
rootes of passions: her cheekes like two orbes of rubies participating
the whitenes of the Lillie, her lips resembling the
Roses, being limits of more wonder than either toong can expresse,
or eye behold. Oh how may men that surfet in conceit,
expresse in pen! Suppose the attire answerable to the
person, the person excéeding report, and in a word imagine
Auberts happines, who might behold so faire, and enioy so
faire, and looking on the outward perfections, boldly auer

                  •
               his:

                  Quae latent meliora puto.
               
            
            In this sort both these Princes rode together, till such time
as their traine had rowsed a mightie Hart, and vncoopled
their howndes, when each one intentiuely followed the game,
inforcing himselfe either to shewe his good horsemanship, or
woodmanship, the rocks resounded with the cryes, the woods
ecchoed at their clamours. In this sort spent they the morning,
till about Noonesteede, when the Sunne was in the
South, at that time shining in his greatest mightines, Aubert
being attainted with heate, entered the thickest of the
wood, hoping to obtaine some cold shelter, where he might
rest himselfe for a while, and rid himselfe of his wearynes.
But the further he walked, the more was his wonder, for 
                  •
               n
euery side Nature had been so prodigall of hir power, that the
eye could not behold too much, nor the thought imagin so
much. Heere saw he a faire delicious brooke, recording musick
in his course, being christall in cleerenes, enuironed with
faire Ceders so orderly aranged, as Arte could not in more
excellence exemplifie the effects of perfection. On that side
a closed Arbor beawtifyed with Roses, paued with Uiolets,
on the top whereof, the byrds with melodious musick animated
the flowres, and the flowres assisted by the Westerne

coole wyndes, seemed to daunce for delight, and to florish.
Heere within for the selfe same occasion of refection, Editha
had withdrawne her selfe, who in her solitarinesse, bethinking
her selfe of her fortunes, her decaying beawtie,
her detested barrainnesse, the lost labor of her husband, the
last limmit of her happinesse, her imperfection the period
of hys pleasure, hys pensiuenesse the onely fruite of her
imperfection, in these tearmes bitterly bemoned her selfe,
whilst Aubert little suspecting her presence, yet willing to
heare the sequell of her feminine complaint, closely shrowded
himselfe neere the Arbor, whilst in this sort she desperatly
complayned. O Nature, too naturall vnto same,
but too negligent on my behalfe, who yeelding the basest
tree his blossome, the tallest pine his apple, the weakest
stalke his flowre, the wasted fielde his spring, hast bequeathed
increase to all things, and bereaued me of increase: thou
hast made mee faire, but vnfortunate, a Princesse, but impregnant,
making me in desire as ritch as any, in defect as
wretched as the most. Oh, hadst thou been as fauourable
to mee as to the Lionesse, in bequeathing me one princely
sonne, I might then haue exclaimed on Destenie, if I had
lost him, and not haue disclaimed delight, in that I euer
lack him. But thou art like the veruen (Nature) poyson
one wayes, and pleasure an other, feeding me with grapes
in shewe lyke to Darius Uine, but not in substance, lyke
those of Vermandois. Thou art a partiall mistresse, pleased
in thy secrecie, peremptorie in thy seueritie. But why
blame I Nature, and accuse not Fortune? she is the mistresse
of tyme, and the minister of tiranny, supplanting
Nature in some things, and desert in all things. But why
blame I Fortune, who is only actiue in 
                  •
               utabilities of estate,
not in hidden causes of Nature. You are they
(O Destenies) whome neyther teares may attaint, prayers
perswade, vowes preuent, or sighes prouoke: you haue made
Nature a stepdame, ordayned Fortune my foe, and by your
secret influence, haue preuented my desired fauours.

Alas poore vnhappie Ladie, borne to neglect, be witched
with necessities, why liue I to bée a byword of the world
for my b
                  ••
               rainesse? O my Soule, were Death as partiall,
as thou impatient, he could not be so forward to destroy, as
thou to dye. In this sort with many bitter sighes, she abruptlie
finished, washing her louely visage with luke warme
teares, beating her amiable breasts with bitter strokes, till
finally shee burst out into this finall outrage. Well you
heauens, since you neglect me, I respect you not, if God
vouchsafe me no some, the Deuill send me one, so though
my woomb be wretched in beating, yet happely I shall escape
the scandale of vnfruitfulnes.
            
               Aubert not able to endure any longer to heare her lament,
brake off her impious discourse by his vnexpected
presence, where beholding his beloued Editha hathed in
teares, subdued with sighes, and blushing for that she was
bewrayed, he thus began to comfort
                  •••
               .
            Ah my Editha, the Creature must not warre with the
Creator, nor expostulate vnkindnesse with God, who bestoweth
mercies for good deserts, and miseries for neglect
of duetie, he is not tyed to our will, but we ordered by his
power, sooner fauouring those by whome hee is feared,
than such who would force Destenie, which will not be defrauded.
What though my Princesse thou art Childlesse, yet
art thou not comfortlesse? What though as yet dispossessed of
a Sonne, yet not disappointed of thy hope? The Trees
that are longest in growth, are fastest in roote, where as
Flowres haue but their morning's flourish, and their euenings
funerall. Thou art yet yong, and meete for increase,
faire and fit for fancie, ordained before thou be a Matron, to
become a Mother. Frullick Editha, me thincks I see a
Babe sucking at these breastes, an Infant dallying in
this bosome, and a Sonne, who shall pay thée with as
many smiles, as thou hast been pained with millions of
sighes: so saying, he sweetlie embraced her, and finding a fit
oportunitie wherein both he and she might communicate their

fancies, he dried vp the tears from her eyes with his kisses,
and foulding his armes about her necke, left such a pledge
with her of her most desired pleasure, that as the most Historiographers
auerre, hee in that place begat her with childe,
After many their delicious encounteries, and interchaunge of
affections, they both of them arose and went to horse, and were
no sooner issued frō the thicket, but they met with their whole
traine, who presented the Duke and Dutches with the pray
they had taken, which kind couple in returning homewards
with priuie smiles discouered their pleasant pastimes. The
Duke reioycing to see his Princesses merrie, Editha ioyfull in
that she hoped to be a mother.
            
               How Aubert by the commaundement of Pepin King of
Fraunce, was vpon his returne sent to warre in the ayde
of the Loraynes against the Vermandois, and how at his
returne from the warre, Robert his sonne was borne, who
for his villanies was surnamed the Diuell.
               NO sooner was Aubert returned to his Court, but certaine
messengers saluted him with letters of credence
from King Pepin, crauing his ayde in the behalfe of
the Loraynes against the Vermandoies. The noble Duke being
naturally inclined to famous exploites, not effeminate
pleasures, reioyced at this occasion, and taking kinde leaue of
his Dutchesse, he leuied his men at armes, marching by long
iornies so speedilie, till at last he arriued where both the battailes
were pitched in fight of one another, his present assistance
encreased the hope of the Loraynes, and ruinated the
hearts of the Vermandoies, who that night dislodged themselues
in secret, seeking all occasions of delay, whereby they
might either weaken their enemie, or strengthen their armie.
Fiue moneths and more dallied they the time with light skirmishes,
wherein Fortune now smiled on the one part, now
laughed on the other, but Aubert who detested delaies, and
by their protraction suspected their policie, so incessantly incensed

the armie of the Loraynes, that finally they disolued either
to decide the controuersie in fight, or die in the enterprise:
so that following y• 
                  Vermandoies in to what place soeuer they
withdrewe themselues, at last they inclosed the Eneme in a
faire plaine encompassed with high hills, where was neither
hope of flight nor expectation of delay, whereupon both the
aduersarie hoasts vpon a prefixed day encountered, where the
Loraynes had the victorie, losing onely sixe hundred men in the
battaile, and the Vermandoies, beside those that were taken
prisoners, lost the flower of their Nobilitie, beside nine thousand
Commoners who fell in that fight. But Auberts courage
was of no small expectation in this encounterie, for with
his owne hand he slewe the Generall on the aduerse partie,
and renting the Colours from the staffe, trampled it vnder the
feete of his horse in contempt of his maligners. The Loraines
in this sort being Lords, after they had raunsomed their prisoners,
and concluded their peace, returned to their countries,
and Aubert no lesse inriched than honoured, returned to his
Citie of Roan, where discharging his traine of Souldiers, hée
intended his accustomed pleasures.
               But Editha during the absente of her husband, was so fortunate
and fruitfull after their last intercourse; that she increased
daylie, and at last the quickning babe in her wombe, depriued
her of all her wonted suspect: but at such time as y• Duke
was returned, and the appoynted time of her deliuerie expected,
the heauens intimating some prodigious sequell, were afflicted
with continuall thunders; the earth shooke as if amazed
at Nature, the lightnings flashed with great furie, and midst
all these Commotions Editha was brought a bed of a sonne,
who by his fathers ordinance was in great pompe carried
to the Church of S. Owens in Roan, and christened by the
name of Robert. This infant in his swathing cloutes, gaue
certaine testimonie of his future outrages, for being borne
beyond the custome of nature with all his teeth, according to
the opinion of the Historiographers, was inchaunted, for in
stead of drawing nutriment from his Nurse, hee bit off her

nipples, and being kissed in the cradle by the Ladie of Sanserres,
hee bit off her nose: in his foode he was rauenous; in his
fashions & behauiour rigorous; in stead of his infantly cries,
vsed seuere smiles, planting in his parents more occasion of
suspition, than ca
                     •
                  se of hope. At seauen yeares of age his mother
diligently intending his amendes, sought out a man of
good life and great learning, who might instruct him in the
feare of GOD, and resolue him in the secrets of Arts, she accompanied
him with his equalles in birth, his companions in
studie, leauing no meanes vnsought to reclaime him, nor perswasions
vnapplied to reforme him: but as the Oke sooner
breaketh than boweth, and the Sallowe being bowed in the
twig is crooked in the tree: so Robert by nature inclined to
vice, coulde in no wise bee induced by aduice; hee was in wit
pregnant, but applied the same to loosenes, reioycing as much
at diuelishnes as other in their doctrine; in reading the Poets
he despised the precepts of worth, and delighted in the poems
of wantounes; hee was eloquent, but in impietie; diligent,
but in mischiefe, hauing nothing in more estimate than murther,
flying nothing more earnestly than modestie: and in regard
of this his intemperance, it was by some supposed that
his mother at such time as he was begotten, was inchaunted;
each one seeing his inclination fled him as a Serpent, his equals
he banished from him with buffetings, his elders with
reuilings, hauing neither feare of God nor regarde of godlines.
If his mother went to see his wretchednesse, he became
more wicked: if Aubert sought to reconcile him with good
counsailes, he laboures the more to defile himselfe with larcenies
and cruelties, yea such and so many were his mischiefes,
that it was wondered at, y• the earth did not sink vnder him in
respect of his vngratiousnesse, no one of his fellowes escaped
from him vnwounded. Hearing his Tutor one day discoursing
vpon the nature of C
                        •
                     euta, he gaue diligent attention to
his doctrine, and finding out the simple, he prepared the same
according as hee was instructed, and presented it to his masters
sonne a childe of rare towardnesse, who no sooner tasted

thereof, but with vehement and bitter agonies gaue vp the
ghost: the father wonderfully astonished at this action, and
inquiring the cause of him with many pitifull bemouings, he
receaued this answer.
               Master (sayd he) I haue but put in practise that which you
haue taught me in precept, and since I find you a man of such
credite, I will boldly write vnder your lesson probatum est: he
was naturally inclined to intort all good principles of Philosophy,
and to apply the earnest secrets of antiquitie to notable
insolencie; hee dissembled most holines when hee was irreligious,
supposing it vertue to inuent sinne, and shame to be ignorant
in sinne: his prouident Tutor knowing (as the Prouerbe
runneth) the Tree by his fruite, the Lyon by his naile,
and the Crocadile by his teare, knowing by daylie experience
that too much impunitie is the cause of too much impietie, that
it is easier to stop the riuer in the spring, than withstand it in
the streame, that the Lyon restrayned being a whelpe, is tractable
in his greatest yeares; that Custome was a meane, if
not to subdue, yet to alter Nature, thought good by crueltie
to correct that, which by le
                     •••
                  ie hee could not confound: for
which cause seeing that gentle admonition preuailed nothing,
he exchanged his strict perswasions to sterne lookes, his sound
rudiments to sharp rigor, hoping to recouer that by displing,
which he could not reforme by discipline. But as their labour
is frustrate who seeke to bring Cancasus into a plaine, to bereaue
India of gems, Candia of oyles, Cochim of pepper, or
Hibla of honey; so where the vnreformable worke of Nature
is grounded in peremptorie wickednesse, it is impossible
either to destroy or disanull the effects thereof, according to
the opinion of the Poet:

                     Naturam expellas furca licet vs
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         recurrit.
                  
For, giuing him ordinarie correction at one time for an erronious
offence which he had committed, in stead of submission
and acknowledgement of his misdéedes, he intentiuely imployed
himselfe to murther, and finding his Maister one day
asléepe, he priuily tooke his penknife and cut his throate,

smilingly concluding his impietie in this sort.

                     Ille mihi feriendus aper.
                  
               
               But as they that paint the Image of Venus shadowe her
excellence, by depicturing her backe parts, pretending either a
secret insinuation of their owne admiration, or her mightines;
so in laying these loose colours of Robins misgouernance,
I rather inforce wounder in my selfe to write them,
than credite with those that shall reade them, who conuersing
and daylie reading the Norman antiquaries, shall finde farre
more of his youthly insolence, than is here set downe, euery
way beyond beleefe, yet no way differing from the trueth.
            
            
               How Duke Aubert and Editha called Robert their sonne to
the Court, where by his mothers perswasion he was admitted
to the Order of Knighthood.
               THe rumour of the yong Princes outrages were no sooner
spred throughout the Court, but Aubert heauelie
agréed at his sonnes misdeedes, and Editha becomming
wel
                     •
                  y desperate of his amends, with heauie hearts called
the yong man to their presence, where the olde man shewing
the seueritie of a Prince in his lookes, but the sinceritie of
a father in his laments, began in this manner to schoole his
sonne, whilst Editha was wholly giuen ouer to sorrow. Ungracious
and vngodly yong man (sayd he) who in thy cradle
porteudest thy future indiscretion, and in the ripenes of thine
age shewest the rashness of thy nature, that makest my title of
signorie, thy priuiledge of sinne, and my lawe, the occasion of
thy loosenes: Is this thy reward for thy mothers care? thy
care for thy fathers comfort, to exempt thy selfe of all grace,
to exemplifie in mee all griefe. Ahlas haples Prince that I
am, reduced to al extreames, should I punish thee according
to thy sinne, I should depriue my selfe of mine onely solace,
and in not punishing thy murthers, I am as it were agent in
thy massacres. Oh vaine youth, if thy studies were answerable
to thy estate, and thy wisedome equall to thy wit, thou

migh
                     •
                  st perceaue that thy desaster is the desolation of this Estate,
and the more my people hope of succession, so much
they feare thy fatall confusion. The Cockatrice killed in the
shell, quelleth not being a Serpent: the Tyger tamed bring
a whelpe, teareth not being growne great; and were there
hope to restraine thee beeing young, there were some better
hope of regarde in thine age. But as Semyramis miraculous
birth, shewed her meruailous buriall; so thy vnreuerent
behauiours in these yeares, are very Oracles of thy tyrannies
in time to come, so that reason councelleth me rather to cut
thee off in the twig, than indure thee in the tree. Oh cursed
youth, I see by thy carelesse smiles, the contempt of my counsailes,
and woe bée to the time that I begat thee, since wilfull
ignorance doth so much beguile thee: but stay thy hand, or
loose thy head, trouble me no more with such complaints, least
I cut thee short in thy complots; and since thou art negligent
of my rudiments, assure thy selfe I will be vnnaturall in my
reuenge. After he had expostulated with him in this manner,
he sodainly departed, and entered his priuie Closet, where as
he sat so amazed with griefe, and amated at his vngraciousnesse,
as had not Editha followed him, and with amiable perswasions,
animated him with hope, he had surely in that extasie
miserably ended his old yeares. But Robert in stead of repenting
his offences, began to renewe his follies, quarrelling
with his fathers guard, in such maner, that euery man knowing
his natural inclination, fled his companie as being a monster
among men. If any graue olde man came néere him attempting
to counsaile him, after hee pretended some diligent
attention for a while, he sodainly tooke out his knife, and cut
of his beard: satisfying the partie wronged with this Ironicall
reason:

                     Quae superflua sunt, abscindenda sunt.
                  
               
               Whilest in this manner he misgouerned himselfe among
the Courtiers, Editha was not vnbusied in the Closet, but so
laboured her husband by intreaties and teares, that (since Robert
                  
                     •
                  er sonne was about 21 yeares of age, and able to beare

armes) he at last cōsented to grant him the Order of Knighthood,
alleaging these reasons, that honours are the spurres of
vertue, and natures that are forward in wickednesse, by conuersing
with the vertuous are reformed; nought left she vnsought
that might insinuate; nothing vnreported that could
perswade. To bee bréefe, the prefixed day of his Knighthood
was appoynted, & his armes were deliuered him: the Nobles
of the Countrie were assembled, the Ladies were orderly enuited:
neither did Aubert spare any cost to shewe his magnificence,
or Editha any counsailes to reforme Roberts mind, but
calling him apart into her priuie Chamber, she began in this
manner to aduise him.
               If my secret complaints (thou sinfull yong man) had not
more effect to mittigate the heauens, than to mooue thee, I
would drie them vp and defie thee, but since they are pitious
and respect prayers, I will weepe for thee to winne them to
thee, in hope they will be as fauourable in mercie, as I am forward
in moane: Oh more obstinate than the Northern wind,
more indurate than y• hard Marble, more cruell than y• 
                  Libian
Lyonesse, more peruerse than y• 
                  Lidian tyrant; thou hast open
eares to conceaue mischiefe, but a dull heart to consider of modestie,
I see thy repyning lookes, thy reprouable leudnes, thou
despisest to heare my prayers, or harbor my precepts. Ah Robin,
hath the care of obedience no force, the credite of a mother
no fauour, or art thou proude to see me wofull, or pleased to
seeke out my wretchednesse? Thou knowest that by nature
thou art néere me, that thy follie is my fall, thy vaine deedes,
my very vndoing: if then thou haue care of my life, yéeld some
respect vnto my lessons; thou art now stept in yeares, & hast
iudgement to discerne errors, now call thy selfe home, and record
thine olde wickednesse, amende thy life, meditate on thy
loosenes, cast a reyne on thy nature, conceit the reason of
nurture, better is a meane life in vertue, than an high estate in
vice: Hast thou offended in thy youth? the misdeede is ordinarie:
Wilt thou amend in age? oh the action is honorable:
I coniure thee my sonne by these deuout teares, by these deuote

intreates, by the name of thy mother, by the necessitie of
obedience, to exchange thy excesse to mediocritie; thy murther
to modestie; thy vntowardnesse to staiednesse, and prepare thy
selfe to accept the Order of Knighthood which thy father will
bestowe on thee on to morrowe day, being the feast of the natiuitie
of S. Iohn Baptist, for armes I will furnish thee, for
attendants I will send them thee, onely prepare thy selfe presently
to watch in the Abbey of S. Peters, (at this day called
S. Owens in Roan) and bethinke thée so re behaue thy selfe,
that thy father may haue comfort and I content.
               
                  Robert by some naturall instinct being attainted by these
feminine complaints, and friendly perswasions, seemed in
some sort to relent, and suffered his mother to arme him, and
with some attendants departed to the Abbey to performe his
vigill. But when all were departed, and he left alone, and Lucina
cléerelie smiling on the candles of the night, gan beautifie
with her sparkling brightnesse the diffused darkenesse of the
Center, Robert more vigilant in vilanie, than valiant in vertue,
sodainly issued out of the Church, and secretly stealing into
the Suburbes, trauailed a whole league into the fields, séeking
some subiect whereon to execute his pretēded iniurie: at
last he arriued at a Nunnerie distant one league from Roan,
at this day called Le salle de damoiselles, where he entered, and
calling the Lady Abbesse before him, he commanded and coniured
her in such sort by threatnings, that she brought all her
yong Nunnes before him, and those that were bed ridden hée
made them bee brought, then immodestly stripping them naked,
he made choyce of the fairest, a virgin of mightie constancie,
who being wholy addicted to Chastitie, and seeing his naturall
churlishnesse, by all meanes possible sought to diuert
that by humble suite, which he had contriued to effect in horrible
secrecie: But hée whose heart was rather hardened
than mollified by perswasions, in steade of tendering her
complayntes toare off her attyre, and dragged her by
the heare of the head into a shady Wood néere adioyning.
It would haue made a flintie hart to flow with teares to see

the miserable mayden, hee comely locks shadowing her naked
limmes, how lifting vp her delicate hands to the heauens, and
powring foorth delicious teares on her beating bosome, she
implored helpe, she complayned her harmes, how she resisted
euen in conquest, & séemed loth to suffer that she must néedly
suffer. But the cruell caitiffe, carelesse of God, forgetfull of
goodnes, giuen ouer to sinne, made subiect to shame, neyther
moued by intreaties, nor allured to truce, wretchedly deflowred
her, and hearing how incessantly she called for mercie
at his hands, and expostulated for reuenge with the heauens,
he cut off both her papps, through the agonie whereof,
the gentle religious Lady gaue vp the ghost.
               The bloudsucking wretch hauing in this sort satisfied his
lewd lu
                     •
                  t, embrued in the purple drops of the murthered Lady,
hastely returned to the Citie, imploying all his labours
and studie, how to inuent new lamentable stratagems: no
sooner did the mornings roseate coatch beawtifie the East
with vermelion rednesse, and the faire breathing Steeds of
the Sunne mount aboue the bosome of Oceanus, but each
noble peere apparrailed in ritch attire, his horsse trapped with
costly caparisons, attended before the Pallace gate, till the
Duke shuld issue to seruice, great was the solemnitie that
day throughout the Citie. The Ladyes were glorious in
their attires, the louers gorgeous in their trayne, there wanted
nothing that might delight the eye, or content the eare.
Among the rest, Robert by his Mothers appointmēt was armed,
& ritchly apparrayled anew, & after his Father, with the
rest of his Nobilitie, had heard Masse in the Minster, by generall
appointment he was sent for by the best Nobles of the
land, who certifying him of his Fathers pleasure, and how he
attended his comming, he answered, that he was a hungry,
and wanted his breakfast, & that he would not loose the same
for tenne of the best Knightwoods in all Normandy. Long
trauaile, and much perswasion vsed these princely Nobles to
perswade him thence, till at last bringing him into the presence
of his Father, he had with all solemnitie the accolade,

and was commanded to knéele downe to receiue the order of
Knighthoode, at such time as his Father lifted vp the sword
to performe the rest of the Ceremonie, he ioyfully rose vp,
and drew his weapons, and had not some more aduised stayed
his hand, he had assuredly flayne his Father. I certaine noble
man offering the Spurre, he answered him ridiculously in
this sort.

                     Non sum t
                           •
                        ntus cessator vt calcaribus indigeam.
                  
               
               In these vndecent and disorderly de
                     ••
                  tanors, this vnhappy
yong man spent the florishing time of his yeares, hauing neyther
regard of person, nor respect of place. At the Triumph,
his desire was rather to driue his horse into the throng, whereby
he might tread men downe, than breake his launce against
his aduersarie in the open liftes, such is y• corruption of mans
nature without the especiall assistance of the almighty. But
least through tediousnesse I detayne you in reporting his Fathers
perswasions, his Mothers precepts, the Nobles counsayles,
the Ladyes curtesies, I will heare leaue off to speake
of the Triumphs, returning to speake of his manner of life,
after he had receiued the honor of Knighthoode.
            
            
               How Robert the Deuil tooke the strong Castel of Turnigue
which his Father had builded in defence of his estate,
and of certayne of his riots he made against some of
the inhabitants of the Countrey.
               THe strong Castell of Tornid
                        •
                     , (that very Turnigue that
flourisheth at this day) not only for the serenitie of the
aire, and the amenitie of the countrey: among all the
especiall houlds of Normandy as held in most accompt, but
also is best defenced. This strong Castell and Fort was first
builded by Aubert against the inuasions of the Brittons, where
he reposed his greatest warlike prouitions, and the most part
of his Treasurie, and was afterward ceased vpon by this vnhappy
Robert his sonne, who gathering together the most
part of all the dissolute persons of the countrey, kept this

strong place for many yeares, spoyling the inhabitants round
about, burning their houses, rauishing their wiues, and committing
such murthers, as it was imagined, that Nature had
ordayned him and his wicked crew, for the only monsters of
his time: and as a little brooke assisted by land waters, and
low grounded, extendeth it selfe at last to a huge Riuer, so
this riotous company at the first excéeding not the number of
30. grew at last to a multitude of murtherers, theeues, patricides,
& fratricides, so that he who had committed any capitall
offence in the countrey, inserted himselfe into the number
of Roberts followers, who becomming about 4000.
strong, made all the neighbours round about them amazed
at their mischiefes: neither had they regard of age, or religion,
or respect of nation or alliaunce, but what so best pleased
their appetite, or most appeased their auarice, all that was
sacred in their censure, and lawfull in their lewdnesse. Many
were the cries of haplesse Mothers, whose babes were murthered
in their bosomes: many the teares of tender Damsailes,
inforced in their floure of youth: many the poore, whose
small possessions were rauished by the iniuries of the mightie,
whilst Robert sitting aloft as the head of Confusion, su
                     •
                  
                  fetting
in his excesse, accompted riot for righteousnesse, his
dronkards for his diuines, his murtherers for his mates, his
blasphemers for his boord companions. Oh the horror and
confusion of those times, where iniquitie was held for equitie,
and diuelishnes accompted desert. In religious houses
this Deuill of a man, and diuelish man, in stead of reuerencing
the learned, rid them of their liues; for at Ambois he
entered a Monastery of Minorites, and cutting off the fattest
Friers heads, he pitched them vpon powles, causing the
veriest knaue to carrie the crosse, and the rest apparrelled in
Coapes, to tune a diuelish Dirge of impietie. From others
he tooke away by violence their ritches, saying as Iulian the
Apostata did after him, that ritches did hinder them from the
enterance into the Kingdome of Heauen. Those of his trayne
who were most tirannous, he most highly rewarded, and such

as did sweare most, might spend most. Great were the clamours
of the poore, the cryes of the oppressed, the complaints
of the fatherlesse, the wéepings of the widdowes, the father
for his child, the child for his father, the mother for her sonne,
the sonne for his mother.

                     Nec quicquam nisi vulnus 
                           •
                        rat, cruor vndi
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         manat.
                  
               
               In an Abbey néere to Lisseux he entered and slew all the
Monks, in that they would not shew their treasures, and finding
foure Pilgrimes knéeling at a Crosse, he cut off their
heads, saying, they could neuer dye in better mindes. Meeting
with the Bishop of Caen ritchly mounted vpon a Moyle,
attired in his ri
                     •
                  chest furniture, he dismounted him, saying,
he reserued that beast to a better vse than that a beast should
bestride it. Such and so many were his vnworthy attempts,
without all expectation of amendment.
            
            
               Of the horrible murther which Robert the Deuill committed
vppon the Lord of Beaumount.
               
                  There dwelled at that time, wherein Robin surnamed
the Deuill accustomed to exercise these
his detestable iniuries, a noble Norman Gentleman,
surnamed for his fayre Castell sake the
Lorde of Beaumount, neere to Turingue.
This Gentleman had taken to Wife the daughter of the
Countie Gourdon, a Gentle woman of inestimable beawtie,
who after her espousals, being conducted with great solemnitie
to her husbands Castell, was by Robins espialls surprised
in the way, and being bound both her selfe and her
husband, was brought to the haplesse mansion of this wretched
murtherer, where the disordinate tyrant beholding the
beawtie of the Ladie, her yong yeares, her faire face, he first
imprisoned her husband in the dungeon of the Castell, and
burning in disordinate desire, sought all meanes possible to
perswade her vnto lewdnes: but she neyther respecting life,
or expecting libertie, and carelesse of her harmes, in regard

of her honor, in stead of dalliance, accused him of diuelishnes,
and tempering her sweete lookes with a blushing seueritie,
she reproued him in this sort.
               Whereat aimest thou so much thou vngracious tirant?
if to bereaue me of mine honour, thou art impious: if to rid
me of my life, I am pleased: for one of these extreames must
I expect of one so insolent. The Crane and Rite agree not,
and yet Birds: the Swordfish, and Whale, are at enmitie,
and yet Fishes: Saturne, and Venus, accord not, and yet
Planets: neyther may the vicious agree with the vertuous,
although both be reasonable creatures. Oh Prince, I detest
thy course, I lament thy inconstancie, to see the hope of Normandy,
the ruine of Normandy: if libertie haue so great prerogatiue
with thee, to murther at thy pleasure, to rauish as
thou likest, go rid thy Father of his right, who may better
suffer, in that he brought vp such a plague, and leaue vs poore
innocents, who deserue no punishment. My Lord and I are
coupled by loue, counited by vertue, allyed by holie Matrimonie,
and wilt thou seuer those whome God hath coupled?
no cruell man, though thou presume to separate bodies, thou
hast no portion of our Soules: though thou tyrannize ouer
our liues, thou art no maister of our loues: come, practise thy
crueltie: I see thine eyes swolne with sensualitie: I see thy
hands trembling to attempt: I marke each lineament of nature,
combating in it selfe, till thou hast exercised thy tirannie:
but flay not, if I must be exe
                     •
                  utiate, marti
                     •
                   me: if thou wilt
surfet on blood, glut thy selfe, for my body (vngratious man)
whilst these hands serue to wraffle, and limmes vouchsafe to
resist thee, thou shalt not defile it; and if inhumanitie exceedes
so farre in thee, as thou intendest lust to the vtteraunce,
assure thy selfe, my incessant complaints shall so sollicite
the heauens, that sooner shall they dissolue to nothing,
before I differre to cursse thee. But (partiall and peruerse
young Prince) this maketh thine iniustice more manifest,
in that thou punishest my husband, who haue deserued no
daunger, and differrest to reuenge thee on her, whose too

fayre lookes haue bereft thee of thy senses: oh suffer him to
depart in peace, and detaine me in pe
                     •
                  urie: let not the innocent
he helde for nocent, nor such as haue not wronged
thee, suffer wrong by thee: Lo, I assist this last prayer with
pittifull teares, thys humble suite with bitter sighes: oh
be thou pliant in this, though peremptorie in all other
things.
               These her lamentations accompanyed she with such mauing
passions, as if her soule intended whatsoeuer her bodie
had ena
                     ••
                  ed, and lyke a weake Champion, entering
the Listes with a cruell warriour, seemeth forward to resist,
though feeble to reuenge: so this noble daughter of the
Countie Gourdon, though she sawe no meanes to ouerpresse
her enemye, yet in what she might, she indeuoured to
resist him, but Robert lyke an vnmeasurable rock, grounded
in the Ocean with inremouable power, resisted all the
showers of her teares, and stormes of her sighes, seeming
rather more seueare after her complaints, than before he
was resolute; and calling her husband, in the presence
of his new espoused Bride (who beeing bound, could no
wayes assist hym but with her couragious comforts) hee
caused his limmes peecemeale to bee chopped off, and
twixt euery torment, continually laboured eyther to perswade
the Ladie to loue, or her husband to commaund her
to lust. But the young Gentleman feeling the torments
insufferable, and fearing his toongs default, bit off the
same, depriuing the cruell rauisher the meanes of further
hope, and his Wife occasion of hazarding her honour.
Which when the tyrannous Prince perceyued, he increased
his cruelties: in midst of which extremitie fayre Emine
(for so was the Ladie called) cryed out in this sort to her
husband: Ah Beomond, the Conquest is welny finished,
and 
                     •••
                  sing thy lyfe, thou hast purchased thy immortalitie.
Be bolde noble young man, the deuine spirit shall
florish, when this earthy drosse shall vanish: and though
wee are separated on earth, we shall be vnited in the heauen.

Oh condigne merit of thine? oh kinde token of thy
loue? thou hast supplyed my weakenesse by thy constancie,
and hauing attayned the goale of griefe, thou art euen
now entering the gates of glory. Oh blessed Soule, if deuine
eyes may brooke impieties, stay and behold my stayednesse;
whose tormentes, were they farre more then my
Beamonds, can be nothing, so I preserue my selfe inuiolate.
Robert like an inraged Lion, giuen ouer to rage and murther,
hauing shortned the dayes of the husband, began now
to attempt the wife, and whilst his cursed crew animated
and egged him on, seeing no meanes possible to accomplish
his loose and vnbridled lust, he sheathed his sword in
her entralls, who mildly giuing vp the ghost, suffered her
death with more then manly courage.
            
            
               How Aubert vnderstanding of the rebellious outrages of
his sonne, after some messages, caused free pardon to
be proclaimed for those who should depriue him of
his life.
               The noyse of these notorious cruelties were no sooner
bruited in the eares of Aubert, but he picked out certaine
of his chosen Counsayle, and sent them vnto
Turingue, commaunding them by kinde perswasions or pollicies
to bring him to his presence, who so far foorth indeuored
themselues on the way, thinking to accomplish their Princes
commaund, that they arriued at the Castell, where after
certaine counsailes debated on both parts, Robert vtterly denied
obeisance, saying, that his Father was but the shadow of
gouernance, himselfe the substance, the one more fitter for his
heades, than a battaile, himselfe as nimble at a lasse, as in the
listes: he shewed them his treasuries stored with wealth, his
vaults full of wynes, his 
                     •
                  alles full of cutthroates, his chambers
full of concubines, and in stead of rewards which are
bestowed on the messengers of Princes, he gaue each of them
a halter, swearing vnto them, that whosoeuer hereafter durst
come and trouble him from the do
                     •
                  ard his father should die the

death. With this vngodly answere and grosse intertainment,
the messengers returned to Aubert, who hauing the gates of
his pallace pestered with the troopes of such as were iniured,
cast off the wonted semblance of a deare father, and presented
himselfe like a seuere Iudge, causing it to be proclaimed thorowout
his Dominions, that whosoeuer could bring him the
head of Robert his sonne, should haue pardon for the déede,
and a rewarde for his labour. But see the constant hearts of
faithfull subiects, they rather endured domage, than sought
his death; rather supplied his lackes, than sought his life: It
was lamentable to behold how the Princes Court was exchanged
to the Pallace of care; how in stead of recreation, he
sought desolation, loathing his life, longing for death: Editha
like the picture of dispaire, closed her selfe in her Chamber,
nought was heard but moane in stead of melodie, sorrowe in
lieu of sollace, complaint in place of pompe: but with haples
Robert it fared farre otherwise, for no sooner heard he of his
fathers decrée, but he animated his ministers to more malice;
in stead of quailing, he fell to quaffing; of dread, he followed
delight, leauing no meanes vnattempted whereby he might
glorie in his vngodlines, there was no free passage to any citie,
the Merchants were beaten and their goods taken from
them, the Market wiues spoyled, and their victualls bereft
them, so that this flourishing Dukedome seemed almost decayed.
Among the rest, a braue Courtier, sonne to the Duke
of Constances, hauing a merucilous delight in the Chace, was
ordinarily accustomed to sport himselfe in the Woods néere
adioyning the Castle of Turingue, and one vnfortunate day it
was wherein it befell y• he was busily following his game, at
such time as Robin y• Diuell with his crew of cutthrotes disported
himselfe in that Forrest likewise, the cries of y• hounds
were heard on both sides, y• games were interchangably folowed,
& by vnluckie misfortune it so fell out, y• the Huntsmē on
both parts fell at debate, and so long time fought it out, till
both the Princes incountered one another in the hottest of the
furie: Prince Robert being naturally harebraind, and careles

of equitie, seeing how some of his men were wounded, drewe
his sword whilest the yong toward Gentleman on the other
side rated his seruants, and humbly offered satisfaction for iniuries:
but Robin in steade of requiting him with the like
courtesie, cut his head from his shoulders, and mangling the
same hung it about the necke of the chiefest Huntsman, and
sent it as a present to his father; so returning with his followers
from out the Forrest, he entered his Castle, smiling
pleasantly at his sinfull practise. The yong Princes seruants
gathering vp the mangled members of their dead Master,
layed them vppon his horse, and with many pitifull lamentations
brought the same to their Duke and Master, who lay
not farre thence at the Castle of Constances, who beholding
that dreadfull spectacle, in stead of fatherly cries and fruitlesse
complaints, hee hammered vppon reuenge, and arming himselfe
at assaye, hee gathered together sower thousand men at
armes the most approued and valiant of all his signiorie, and
assembling them together before they were readie to march,
he with stearne visage presented before their eyes the murthered
bodie of his onely sonne, and with a grauitie accompanied
with remorse, he burst out into this vehement exhortation.
               Behold here a spectacle my friends and fellowe Souldiers,
a ruthfull spectacle for the father, a remorsefull despight of
you my subiects, not enterprised by a stranger, who was prouoked
by iniurie, but attempted by our néere neighbour, who
was rather honoured than harmed, and before GOD what
greater wickednesse? what more impietie? If murther bée
vnpunished among our selues; if those who should defend vs
shall offend vs; if the priuiledge of a father shall outcountenance
all faith, why mistrust wee not one another? why murther
wee not one another? why rob we not one another? If
selfe same securitie awaight the disobedient as the obedient,
let vs cast off this communitie, despise soueraigntie, where
neither a man may be Lord of his owne goods, nor the father
assured of his owne sonne, nor the subiect in safetie of his own
life. Among the Persians robberie was repayed with death,

oh my vnhappie Countrie, here murther is wincked at with
remission! In Lacedemon the Prince might be impleaded by
lawe, but in Normandy we are spoiled by our Prince beyond
lawe. But why stand I ripping vp the ruthfull discourse of
many mischiefes? where this one iniurie sufficeth to incense
vs, behold this haples yong mā 
                  
                     •
                  laine in y• prime of his yeres,
murthered in the hart of his Countrie, flaine by the hand of
Robert heire of Normandy, see how his bléeding wounds
stirre vp reuenge, me thinkes I heare his groaning ghost exclayming
on me his father for reuenge, trying out vnto you
my subiects for reuenge, whom I beséech as a father, & commaund
as a Gouernour to take pitie of these old yeares, your
owne Lord liues to partake this common iniurie with me.
Me thinkes I see in your eyes some teares of remorse; but
drie them vp my subiects, it is bloud that must requite bloud,
and reuenge that must repay iniurie. If you leaue me in my
attempt I will prosecute it; if you followe me and dye with
me, you shewe your obedience, you shewe your courage, you
shewe you loue, you shewe your loyaltie, you shall be déere to
your Lord, who will dye for your safeties: let the resolute
therefore sweare reuenge on their swords, wee haue Auberts
warrant for our safetie, wee haue rewardes prefixed for our
warfare, followe me therefore and let vs finde out the miscreant
who hath spoyled vs, and either dye or rid the worlde of
this murtherer. After hee had discoursed in this manner, the
whole assemblie swore to followe him to the death, so that
each one of least expectation inforced himselfe to bee most forward.
The Duke caused the bodie of his sonne to bee borne
out of sight, and entombed with a rich and sumptuous funerall,
and priuilie marching by night, he layd his mē in ambush
in the Wood neere adioyning the Castle of Turingue, waighting
the approach of the morning, at which time he assuredly
hoped to asswage his displeasur
                     •
                  .
            
            
               
               The bloodie and cruell battaile fought betweene the Duke
of Constances and Robert the Diuell and his traine, and
what thereupon insued.
               As soone as the watchfull morning had opened her
purple gates in the East, and discouered her pallaces
full of Roses, and the Sunne adorned with a wreath
of Chrisolites, began to shake his deawie lockes lately washed
in the baine of Eurotas, Robin
                   surnamed the Diuell called
vp his companie of rakehels and commanded them to armes,
where after they had glutted themselues with their mornings
refection
                     •
                  , they marched on with mightie showtings,
astonishing the Woods with their cryes, which when the Espials
of the Duke apperceaued, they gaue their Lord a secret
intelligence, and each one prepared himselfe to the fight.
By this time had Robert with all his traine entered within
the compasse of the Ambush, where sodainly the Duke of
Constance commanded the allarum to bee sounded, and couching
his speare ranne into the thickest of the enemie, seeking
on euery side for the murtherer of his Sonne, if happelie hée
might espie him. Prince Robert apperceauing the pretended
treason, arranged his men, & entering y• thickest throngs, that
each one wondered at his prowesse: he was a man of tall stature,
bigge boned, of a stearne and maiesticall countenance, of
much forwardnesse and courage, and had his brutish nature
béen answerable to his force and valour, assuredly he had béen
a man of high accompt euen at that time. Fatall and bloodie
was the fight on both sides, the one kindled by the iniurie they
had receiued, the other combatting according to the prouerbe,
Pro aris & focis: hope they had none of life but in their valiant
resist, and that which encouraged them the more, was
the valour and holdnesse of their Generall: which the Duke
of Constance apperceauing, he gathered together thirtie of his
most brauest Caualiers, & with them all at one time assa
                     •
                  led
Prince Robert. It was now about euen tide, and the Princes

souldiers were either al of thē sore wasted or wounded, when
the Duke by maine strength dismounted Robert, and gaue
him a great and deepe gash in the thigh; the Catines that followed
him seeing the
                     •
                   master distressed, desperatly sought his
rescue, and were euery one of them put to the sword, onely
Robert of himselfe recouered a horse, and so valiantly continued
in his defence, till the darke night parted the Combattants,
and he found conuenient meanes to auoyd the danger;
the Duke of Constances seeing the Enemie was hotly ouercome,
and that it was impossible to followe the Prince, being
most expert in the secret waies of the Wood, sounded the retreate,
causing the dead bodies of his Souldiers to be buried,
and sending Aubert worde of the bloodie victorie attained against
his sonne.
               Thus in triumph leaue we him, reioycing mightilie in his
reuenge, and resorting with sollace vnto his Castle; and returne
to Robert, who sore trauailed with his wounds, and
hauing his horse tired, posted with all speede he could possible
now this way now that way, searching for some place of securitie
where he might hide himselfe from the enemie: but euill
fortune pursuing him euery way, his horse at last tired vnder
him, so that he was constrained to forsake his armes, and trusting
onely to his sword to walke through the Forrest on foot;
many were his sighes, and bitter curses, many his exclamations
and complaints, whilest desolate Eccho the faithfull
companion of such as be sorrowfull, vouchsafed some pitifull
replie in his pensiuenes; but the great expence of blood, the
long and wearie course of trauell, the cruell and daungerous
pursute of his foes did not sufficiently amaze him, but to the
more increase of his griefe, a hidden affliction of the minde began
with such horror to attaine him, that he euery way grewe
desperate. Oftentimes did he prepare himselfe to complaine,
but knewe scarcely how to complaine, he felt himselfe mortall,
and that he was a man, he examined the changes of fortune,
and bethought him on the causes of his fall, neither knowing
how to amend then they were so infinite, nor reconcile himselfe

he had béen so dissolute: and lifting vp his eyes to heauen,
he beheld the Moone performing her course, the Starres
ministring their dueties, and by their celestiall beautie began
with himselfe to imagine the beautie of their maker, then called
he to remembrance the olde rudiments of his master, as
touching the essence and power of God, the wonderfull workmanship
of the heauens, the beautifull order of the spheares,
the strange creation of man, the influence of the celestiall bodies
in these inferiour parts, and considered that all thinges
were made by a determinate and inuiolable lawe limitted by
prescript of Nature, and that if in the earthly compact of man
the imperfection and griefe of one member afflicted the whole
compact, much more a contrarietie in the powers both of soule
and bodie threatned a confusion: Then called he to mind, that
since there was a Moouer which disposed & ordered al things,
so in due ordinance of gouernment it was requisite too as hée
prescribed rewards for good deserts, so he should also ordaine
punishments for vice. Hereupon began he to meditate on the
nature of sinne, the causes of sinne, and the effects of sinne,
and him thought that a voyce sounded in his eare, the reward
of sinne is death. Oh how great was the horror and confusion
of his soule at this time, his burthen heauier than Aetna, his
affliction more fiercer than may bee imagined, and sodainly a
shower of teares burst from his eyes, his heart was inflamed,
his thoughts troubled, and the eye of reason long time obscured,
at last began to break foorth with inestimable brightnesse,
so that falling downe on his knees, and thumping his wounded
breast, he at last in bitter termes entered into this extasie.
I wonder thou maker of heauen at thy workmanship, & thy
worthines is knowne by thy workes, I see that thou art iust
in dealings, and I desperate through my delayes, I haue had
a portion with the chiefest creatures, but haue imployed it
worse than bruite beasts. Oh how my soule groaneth within
me, and my inward bowells are gréeued in my bodie. Lord
thou hast made me, but I haue martered me; thou hast saued
me, I haue shamed thee; thou hast elected me, I haue reiected

thee; mine impenitence hath wrought thy impatience: oh enter
not into the fulnes of my sinne, least I aduenture the furie
of thy sword, the vale of heauinesse ouercladdeth me, the hope
of heauenlinesse is clowded from me: Oh that the hils would
fall vpon me, or that the depth might deuoure me: oh that I
had neuer been borne, or had euer béen better. Lord it is iustice,
I merite condemnation, I deserue affliction and no fauour,
damnation & no preseruation, commination from thée,
not combination with thee. Oh my soule groane for my sins,
greeue at my shames. Oh happie were my soule if griefe
could suffice: oh my soule, rent at thy vnrighteousnesse, melt
at thy murther, or happie were my soule if remorse would suffice;
but my portion is in the graue, not among the iust; amōg
the defiled ones, and not the reconciled ones; I am heauy my
God; but why call I him mine, whom I haue blasphemed?
I am sorie my God: as if sorrowe would satisfie the excesse of
sinne? Oh, no I am vnworthie to behold heauen, to conceaue
hope, to intreate mercie, to promise amends: but damnation,
oh the bitter wound of damnation that threatneth me, that
killeth me.
               In these desperate and sorrowing tearmes spent hée the
most part of the night, neither receauing sustenance, nor inioying
sleepe, his cléere complexion became pale, his strong
limmes grewe lither, and hée that before time thought himselfe
more woorthie than the King of heauen, now thought
himselfe vnwoorthie to tread vppon the earth. By this time
the memorie of his sinnes assayled him anewe, and a hidden
working from aboue dispersed the clowdie passions of his
thought, in such manner as wée sée a faire and pleasant breath
of winde, which during the extreame heate of the Sunne,
tempereth the furie of the same, in which manner I leaue him
till the morning.
            
            
               
               How a Hermit found Robin the Diuell sore wounded, and
relieued him, confirming him in his repentance with his
wonderfull perswasions, how he dealt with his followers,
and his entended voyage to Roome.
               
                  The day gan no sooner to discouer, dimming the
brightnesse of the Starres with a more radiant
cléerenes, but an old Hermit who had sequestred
himselfe from the world, after hee had sayd his
morrowe Masse, walked abroad to take the aire,
and as he trauailed through many beautifull paths, wherein
he was accustomed in great deuotion to meditate: at last he
arriued where Robert lay, altogether bathed in his bloud,
and so ouercome with dispayre, that he continually languished
till it pleased death to yeeld a finall period to his pensiuenes.
The good old man seeing his personage comely, his apparell
courtly, his wounds déepe, his daunger great, approached
more néere him, and reuiuing him with fountaine water,
which sprong very neere at hand, hée brought him into some
remembraunce of himselfe: at last with much perswasion
he led him to his Hermitage, where after some refection taken,
and his wounds bound vp, Robert began to breake out
into these termes.
               Ah olde man, how fond art thou to foster a viper in thy bosome,
and a villaine in thy bed? why permittest thou not that
I sleepe with death, who am alreadie damned? and may dye
without merrie, who haue liued by nought but murther? The
olde man amazed to beare his cursed melancholie, knowing
that desperate wounds require most of al yrksome medicines,
began thus. Ah my sonne, gather thy spirits together, it is
fondnesse in thée to desire death, and policie in me to protract
life; by the one thou shalt loose occasion of repent; by the other
recouer meanes of amendes: Thou art no viper my
sonne, thy sting is blunted, and these deawes of teares thou
powrest in my bosome, are sinewes and strings to drawe

thée to heauen: thou art not damned, for the knowledge of thy
sinne is a mighty step to thy repentance: thou canst not dye
without mercy, since thou wert borne in mercy, neyther will
he that made thee to shew his power, suffer thee in thy repentance
for to perish. Hast thou bin a murtherer? a great escape
my sonne, a breach of Commandement, a hainous sinne:
but is not God mercifull to forgiue beyond our conceit? He
knew thée in thy Mothers woombe, and ordained thée to an
end: he limited the dayes of thy life, and thine houres were
not vnknowne vnto him, and all this was done by ordinance
of his secret will, and not without the mightie hand of his
mercie. Thou hast caryed vncleane 
                     •
                  ands, borne a corrupt
heart, béen prodigall in disobedience, prone to contempt, these
are the fruites of thy olde man, which shew God what he is,
and his mercy how great it is. Oh my Sonne, God is tempted
as much in suspect of his mercie, as in neglect of his iustice,
for his mercie exceedeth all his works: I will teach
thee, and my words shall sauour vnto righteousnes. The
hand that gouerneth all things, is deuine: the works of God
admit no limits, and his wayes are vnknowne: he ballanceth
not sinnes by our proportion, nor condemneth by worldly
iudgement. Be confident therefore, and serue the Lord in
feare and trembling. Suppose all things wicked that is in
thee, and confesse thy wickednes beyond measure. Detest
that which thou hast pursued: be penitent in that thou hast
defaulted. If the Lord looke vpon thee in mercie, thy soule
shall feele it, yea, thy raynes shall waxe hote, and thy spirit
moued: neyther feare thou if terrour assayle thee beyonde
measure, for the hand is mightie that helpeth thee. Dread
not my sonne, feare not, boldly disburthen thy minde of vncleannes,
and powre out thy soule before thy God, and weepe
with contrition, for in so doing, assure thee thy teares are
lacked vp in his bottle: looke what is betweene the East and
West, so farre will he separate thy sinnes from thee, if thou
repent thee, Robert hearing hereof, began to gather hart,
but calling to minde what he had before time heard of the

learned Clearks of Normandy, how there are some sinnes
which are against the holy Ghost which are neyther forgiuen
in this life, nor in the life to come, he began to beate his
breast, his eyes stared, his heare stoode vpright, and as if he
had Bemboes vision, he began to cast away all hope of mercie,
crying out in this manner, ô etiam in spiritum sanctum peccaui;
nulla remissio, sempiterna condemnatio. The ould man
hearing this extreame allegation, cast himselfe prostrate on
his face, crying out vnto the heauens, O ah occultis criminibus
liberanos domine. Hold back my Sonne, thou art too forward:
deferre to presume on that sinne, which thou canst not define,
neyther obiect that to thy selfe, which dependeth on the Iudge:
thy déedes are written, but to God belongeth mercie. It is
doubted, whether presuming too much on the knowledge of
hidden sinne, be not sinne. But be thou aduised by me,
referre all to the Lorde, detest all meanes that may seduce
thy mind: arme thee with the shield of faith: pray that thy beliefe
may be increased: let all things seeme vile to thee in respect
of true repentance, and thou shalt finde the working of
God beyond conceit: enter not into his iudgements, but
cleaue vnto his mercies: if thou beest tempted, pray vehemently:
what though for a while thy Soule be dull and heauie?
it is my Sonne for no other cause, but to make thy ioy
more fuller. What can be a more certayne proofe of mercie,
than grace to detest sinne? or, how can man better ouercome
sinne, than by imploring mercie? But tell me what thou art,
and thy course of life, that I may further counsell thee.
               
                  Robert hearing this heauenly Hermit in how deuine sort
he sollaced him, began to gather hart, and could him the order
of his birth, the manner of his life, with other matters
too tedious in this place to discourse of. And when the ould
man was fully satisfied, he tould him the waight of sinne, the
reward of sinne, exemplifying to him the fruites of repentance,
and in such manner schooled him, that of a lewd young
man, he reconciled him to a stayed and holie course of life, enioyning
him for pennance to goe baresoote to Rome on Pilgrimage,

wearing at his back a cloth of haire. Robert after his
stay about seuen dayes with the Hermit, was in some sort recouered,
and intending his soules health, besought the company
of the Hermit to his Castell, where finding those his dissolute
mates who were left aliue, he first by earnest perswasions
sought to reconcile them, and finding them no wayes
tractable, he put them all to death, as being vipers in his fathers
common weale; and locking vp the doores, he led the
Hermit into his Treasury, where shewing him the riches
which he had taken from others, he humblie prayed him to
resort vnto his Father and Mother, to present his submission,
and report his contrition, beseeching them to make restitution
to euery one whome he had wronged, and with bitter
compassion hee so washed the poore Hermits head in
teares, that the good olde man reioycing in spirit, cryed out,
Benedictus dominus in omnibus operibus suis, and taking their
leaue the one of the other, the Hermit trauailed to the Court
at Roan, and Robert walked on his iourney towards Rome.
               
            
            
               How Aubert heard of his Sonnes ouerthrow, and did reward
the messengers, and how the Hermit arriued at
the Court, whose ioyfull tidings was great comfort to
the Duke and Duches.
               VVHilst Aubert in deepe melancholie dispended
his dayes, loathing the detested reports of his
Sonnes practises, and consulting with his
Nobles in what sort he might cut off such an improfitable
off-spring, the messengers of the Duke of Constances presented
themselues before him, who after their most humble reuerence
signifyed to the Duke, the whole sequel of their message,
first, the death of their yong Lord, lastly, the discomfiture
of his lewde Sonne, which tidings so wounded him to
the hart, as for a long time he continued as it were in an extasie,
not knowing to what hopes he might aspire, seeing his
succession so desperate: but calling to his remembrance, that

a Princes word was a sufficient warrant, and the losse which
(as he supposed) he had sustained, was rather the occasion to
cut off a continuall griefe, he cleered his distressed lookes
wherein care had planted many furrowes, and turning vnto
them with milde countenance, gaue them this friendly aunswere.
My friends, if my brother of Constances hath reuenged
his sonnes death (as you certified me) he hath performed
the part of a friend, and exemplified my iustice, for which
cause, in that he hath rid our common weale of a Rebell, and
his Father of a wicked sonne: we entertaine you as messengers
from our friend, and deseruers in our estate, and for this
cause we thinke good, that out of our Treasury he receiue such
reward as we appointed, and you for your paine taking, shall
enioy this small reward of two hundreth marks: in this sort
causing his bountie, and the prefixed recompence, to be deliuered
vnto them, he discharged them, falling into deepe
consultation with his Counsell about the affayres of succession:
there was no hart so indurate, that considered on the desperate
estate of Prince Robert, but lamented, some one admyring
his valiancie, some after his supposed losse, arguing
Duke Constances of crueltie, who otherwise hated the yong
Prince most deadly. But the consultation of the Princes was
broken off by the sodaine repayre of the Duches, who hearing
of the desperate estate of her Sonne, and vncertaine of
his safetie and life, filled the whole Pallace with feminine
clamours: an euery side was sorrow seated, neyther was
there eye so partiall in the whole assembly, that shead not some
tears, till sodainly in midst of this garboyle, the olde Hermit
entered the presence, whose sodaine 
                     •
                  xcesse brought them
all, into expectation, so that the olde Duke comforting his
faire Editha, attentiuely gaue eare, expecting some noueltie,
when after most humble reuerence, the reuerent Father
began his discourse after this manner.
               These strange alterations in your lookes you Princes,
perswades me of your ouergreat forwardnesse in passions,
who are castly ouercome with euery light ioy, and sodainely

crossed with the lightest trouble: which fruite of intemperance
(with reuerence, you Nobles may I be bould to tell
you) ariseth through want of equabilitie in minde, and assured
remembrance that you are mortall. If according to your
worldly store, your estates were constant, you should be
so farre from knowing God, as you would quite forget him.
At the entraunce of thy Pallace Aubert I see men weeping,
because the report runneth thou art wretched; thus are
all affections ruled by the affaires of the mightie, and honour
is so sauourie a thing in those mens mindes, who would be
great, that it sootheth, and is soothed by all sorts of them.
In Traians time, all men loued iustice, because he was iust:
in Octauians before him, all hunted after peace, in that he
was peaceable: in Heliogabalus dayes all were wanton, in
that he was wanton: and now, since thy minde is vexed
with doubtfull griefe, thy subiects likewise are attaynted
with doubtfull griefe. But dry vp your teares good Princes,
and reioyce, Prince Robert (supposed dead) is surely
liuing, (yet dead to his olde wickednesse) following better
wayes: for after he escaped from his enemyes, he arriued
in my Hermitage, where after I had cured his woundes,
and counselled him from his wickednesse, hee vndertooke
his voyage and Pilgrimage to Rome, but before resorted
to Thuringue, labouring to disswade the remnant of his followers
from their lewd life, which when he could not effect,
he in my presence slewe them, vnder pretence (as he sayd) to
rid his countrey of caterpillers. And in that, dread Prince and
my liege Lord Aubert, he hath mightely offended you, he
humbly by me beséecheth his pardon, protesting vehemently
a hartie detestation of his sinne; and requesting, that it would
please Editha his Lady Mother and Duchesse, to haue him
in memorie in her most sacred deuotions: and for that he
knoweth that he hath many wayes indamnished poore men,
he humbly intreateth your Mightines, to accept these keyes
of your Castell of Thuringue, where in the Treasurie you
shall finde sufficient to make ample satisfaction for all iniuries:

thus hauing discharged the duetie of a messenger, and
acquited your Grace of suspition, I humbly craue licence to
depart, that I may the better intend my woonted contemplations.
It were hard to imagine with what incomparable
ioy the olde Duke entertayned this aged Herauld of his
happinesse, for his teares of ioy trickling from his eyes as
messengers of his hearts content, aboundantly watered the
Hermits bosome, and beeing vnable to expresse his ioy, he
silent foulded his armes about his aged necke, seeming so
besotted with delight, as before he gaue ouer he cryed out
with the Grecian, O Fortune, pay this most excéeding ioy
with some durable grief, for as now it is at y• fulnesse: Editha
likewise was not carelesse to content her selfe, but drawing
the olde man apart, with often repetitions of his troubles,
his torments, his passions of minde, his patience in affliction,
as the occasion offered it selfe, she became either pleasant,
or pensiue, shewing by her changes of couler, hir contentation,
or discontents: and in this ioy let vs leaue them,
returning to our wearie Pilgrim, meditating in this religious
trauailes: to see how from a gracelesse person, he became
a godly penitenciarie, truely the discourse heereof draweth
me into admiration of Gods mercie, who calleth men home
beyond common beliefe, accomplishing héerein his diuine
promise, who sayd, that he came not to call the righteous,
but sinners to repentaunce.
            
            
               Of the strange trauayles that Robert surnamed the Deuill,
endured on the way, with those accidents that befell
him betwixt Normandy and Rome.
               
                  It was about that time when as the Sunne had
remembred himselfe of his accustomed loues,
and had dispersed the bewties of increase thorough
the bowells of the earth, yeelding euery
stalke his flowre, euery Tree his fruite, and quickning the

decayed beawties of the fielde, which were beforetime wasted
by Winters obscuritie, when this penitent Prince,
beforetime esteemed the very patterne of deformitie, began
to shewe himselfe the paragon of reformation: his haughtie
lookes exchanged he to humble leuitie, his defying of God,
to deifying of God, his gracelesse othes, to godly obseruances,
punishing himselfe by bodely trauell, who before time
was geuen ouer to butcherly tyrannie: in stead of hammering
mischiefes in his head, he humbled himselfe with contemplations:
his soft bed, was turned to sweete grasse: his
Robes of Honor, to the raggs of a Hermite: his pampous
ryot, to poore rootes: his ritch Wines, to springing waters:
and such was his patience in these alterations, that
he preferred them before all pompous Treasures. Three
dayes trauayled hee with restlesse toyle, till at last beeing
ouerburdned with extreame wea
                     •
                  inesse, he sate him downe
by a cleare Fountayne, cooling his thirst in stead of a courtly
Cup, in a homely clapper: and after he had taken such repast,
as the hearbs of the field affoorded him, he sate him
downe vnder a Pine tree, and beholding the barke thereof,
which with smoothnes inuited him to write, and the
coole shade which gaue him shelter against the sunny heate,
with a little pencile he ingraued this his deuout passion in
the thickest thereof.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Roberts Meditation.
                           
                              O Heauenly God that gouernst euery thing,
                              Whose power in heauen and in the earth we know,
                              Thou God from whome the gifts of grace do spring,
                              Respect my suite who am oreprest with woe.
                              O pittie God, sweete God some pittie take,
                              And cleanse my soule for Iesus Christ his sake.
                           
                           
                              I wayle the life that I haue led before,
                              The dayes ill spent that came into my minde
                              
                                 Incense my soule with horror very sore,
                              And threaten death vnlesse I fauor finde.
                              O pittie God, sweete God some pittie take,
                              And cleanse my soule for Iesus Christ his sake.
                           
                           
                              My gracelesse othes now layd before mine eyes,
                              My youth mispent and worne by womens guile,
                              My hidden sinnes my wofull soule surprise,
                              My want of former grace (ay me the while.)
                              Cry mercy Lord that thou wouldst pittie take,
                              To cleanse my soule for Iesus Christ his sake.
                           
                           
                              Away thou world that flatterest earthly man
                              With heauenly ioyes, and bringst him downe to hell,
                              I loath this life doo thou what so thou can,
                              My longing is with God my Lord to dwell,
                              Who will relent and eke some pittie take,
                              To cleanse my soule for Iesus Christ his sake.
                              Anchora Christus.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               These verses were written with a zealous spirit, accompanyed
with feruent sighes, ha
                     •
                  selled with scalding teares,
witnessing his constant contrition, but being troubled in
spirit, and desirous to mitigate his martirdome, he attempted
further, writing this Madrigale in the barke of a Cipris
tree.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Madrigale.
                           
                              My reasons eye had seene my youthly rage,
                              How it had worne my hopes of vertue bare,
                              How carelesse wit was want on bewties page,
                              And headlesse will true iudgement did insnare,
                              How all was wrackt that hope of wisedome gaue,
                              It wep
                                    •
                                  a world of teares my soule to saue.
                           
                           
                              The listning eare of that impartiall guide,
                              That by his beck the earth and man directs,
                              
                                 With sunnie beames of peace the teares vp dride,
                              And will made barraine reckned his neglects:
                              Since when my soule for grace to heauen doth flye,
                              In praysing God and blessing reasons eye.
                              Etiam in naufragio.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               Thus passed he some fewe houres endeuouring to attaine
some rest, and after wearie nature vouchsafed him any concent
to wander, he walked onwarde: The fift day after his mornings
Orisons hee trauailed through a thicke Wood, giuing
scarce any licence to the Sun
                     •
                  e beames to enter those shadie
limits: The soyle was barraine, signifying desolation; the
trees leaueles, the walkes loathsome: in depth of the shadiest
thicket thereof, there sounded a deepe and hollowe voyce calling
intentiuely for helpe, whilest in stead of Ecchoes, the fatall
Scritchowle sounded a dolefull replie. Robert amazed
at this melancholy spectacle, and wondering at the dolefulnes
of the complaint, he boldly entered the desolate shadow, proposing
God for his guide, and his courage for his companion:
he had not long trauailed, but sodainly he beheld a fierce Lio
                     •
                  
which furiously assayled him, renting off the lap of his Palmers
weede, before hee could shape defence: but at last entering
combat with his Palmers staffe, hee so valiantly defended
himselfe, that he slewe the Lyon, and seeing it spraule vppon
the ground, entered into this contemplation. Oh GOD
that hast deliuered this huge Lyon into my hands, defend me
from that roring Lyon which seeketh to deuoure my soule,
and prosper me in those actions which I enterprise for thine
honour and glorie. This sayd, he procéeded further, when lo
                     •
                  
a faire delicious Damosell crowned with a garland of Roses,
apparelled after the manner of a Hamadriade, presented her
selfe before him, where making semblance of an amorous and
distressed Ladie, she fained a pretie shadowe of complaint, and
foulding her armes, as if she had béen Loues forsaken, she tuned
this Elegie, whilest from out the hart of the desert, a
strange sound of melodious musick accorded to her cōplaint.
               
                  
                  Plucke the fruite and tast the pleasure
                  Youthfull Lordings of delight,
                  Whil'st occasion giues you seasure,
                  Feede your fancies and your sight:
                  After death when you are gone,
                  Ioy and pleasure is there none.
               
               
                  Here on earth nothing is stable,
                  Fortunes chaunges well are knowne,
                  Whil'st as youth doth then enable,
                  Let your seedes of ioy besowne:
                  After death when you are gone,
                  Ioy and pleasure is there none.
               
               
                  Feast it freely with your Louers,
                  Blyth and wanton sweetes doo fade,
                  Whil'st that louely Cupid houers
                  Round about this louely shade:
                  Sport it freelie one to one,
                  After death is pleasure none.
               
               
                  Now the pleasant spring allureth,
                  And both place and time inuites:
                  Out alas, what heart endureth
                  To disclaime his sweete delightes?
                  After death when we are gone,
                  Ioy and pleasure is there none.
               
               The finall conclusion of this Canzon, was shut vp with a
pleasant Couranto, in which frō out the groue foure Satyres
antiquely entertained foure Nimphs, and sodainly vanished,
whilest this faire Hamadriade in semblance approached Robert,
wantonly casting her armes about his necke, proffering
dalliance: but he whose loue was planted on heauenly, not on
earthly delights, sodainly cast her from him, and lifting vp his
hands to heauen began thus. O thou maker of the heauen,

tye me to thy loue, intice me to thy lawe, incense me to vertue,
subdue in me vanitie, let not temptation conquer, though it
trie me; nor Sathan compasse, though he tempt me. The
prayer was no sooner finished, but a horrible cracke of thunder
fell from the heauens, the Woods were inflamed with lightnings,
and this wanton vision sodainly vanished, in steade
whereof succéeded horrible Eathquakes, the Curtaines of the
heauen were darkened, the compasse of the world was clowded,
and on the face of the Center there appeared through the
light of lightning, hideous shapes of Giants threatning him,
monstrous Tygers assayling him, but he constantly putting
his trust in GOD, and boldly walking on his way, at last attained
into an open plaine, in the middest whereof there stood
a poore Chappell, with a little Cottage hard beside, and by
that time the dangers were ouerpast, & the dimmy approach
of the euening foretold him that the day was spent; for which
cause he hasted into the Chappell to doo his deuotions, where
he found before the Alter a graue old man performing his deuine
prayers: neither of these two intended worldly salutations,
but solemnely fell to their deuotions, which being performed,
the olde man seeing so goodly a personage cloathed in
a Pilgrims weed, with great reuerence saluted him, deeming
him for no lesse than he was, beseeching his companie in his
Hermitage for that night, in that other lodging was not nere
at hand. Robert easilie condiscended, and entering the homely
Cottage, he was feasted in friendly sort with such dainties,
as his poore estate could affoord. During the time of their repast,
Robert desirous to knowe the secret of the inchaunted
Wood, began to question with the olde man about the same:
who al amazed to heare that Robert had passed it, in manner
of admyration, he answered thus. Truely (my sonne) thou
art happie, that through the mercie of GOD hast ouerpassed
those dangers which thy predecessors could neuer attaine vnto:
for this Wood (my friend) is called Le bois du temptation,
the wood of temptation, where through many holy men haue
attempted to passe, but they haue either béen withdrawne by

delight, or driuen backe by feare, and finally perished through
their owne follies: But since thou hast so constantly perseuered,
procéede in thy deuotion, and let humilitie be thy companion,
and doubtlesse (my sonne) thy ende shall bee farre better
than thy beginning. Robert wondering at his doubtfull conclusion,
replied thus. And why father, doest thou knowe my
beginning? I sonne (sayd he) thou art of the earth as I am,
borne of a Princesse as I was not, sonne to a Duke, yet of detested
life, Robert of Normandy I knowe thee, thy chaunge
was foreshowne mee in vision, now therefore prosecute thy
pretence, followe thy repentance, for in so doing thou shalt
performe mightie things. The sorrowfull Prince hearing
but the repeticion of his former life, wept most bitter teares,
being sore ashamed to behold the graue father. But the olde
man comforted him, and knowing the expedition of his iorney,
so animated him, that hee presently set forward, in that
the louely Moone assisted him with sufficient light: the aged
sire conducted him on his way, in which they had not long trauailed,
but they tooke their leaues the one of the other, & Robert
continually prosecuted his iorney. In trauailing the
Alps diuers Gentlemen offered him their Moyles to ride vppon,
but he refused them. In Italy sundrie Merchants inuited
him, wondering at the maiestie of his countenance; but he
replied that hee was vnworthie, and so with teares forsooke
them. If any his fellowe Pilgrimes fainted on the way, hée
bare him on his backe; if any thirsted, hee sought them water;
he was comfortable to those that were comfortlesse; and
where he sawe the innocent wronged he was agréeued. Trauailing
about Ancona he sawe a villaine, who cruelly handled
a poore countrie maiden, and drawing néere him he so rigorously
reuenged the iniustice, that the poore mayd falling at
his feete was faine to intreate for her persecutor. Such blind
men as he met hee called them happie, assuring them that the
losse of their outward eyes kept them from beholding much
vanitie; seeing a lame man complayning of his imperfection,
make straight thine inward man (sayd he) good friend, for that

shal mount to heauen through thy vertue, when these limm
                     •
                  s
shall dissolue to earth and become the pray of vermine. In all
his trauailes he was constant, patronizing the weake, punishing
the wicked, and in this manner trauailed he till at last hée
arriued at Rome.
               
            
            
               How Robert the Diuell entered Rome, and what there
chanced vnto him.
               TWo moneths was Robert ere he attained his iorneys
end, and at the last entered the Citie on the feast day of
S. Peter, at which time in great solemnitie the Popes
are accustomed to goe to diuine Seruice, and humbling him
with other Hermites, (as it was the custome in those supersticious
daies) hee attended there for his benediction: Great
was the solemnitie on that day, and throughout the streetes
where the Bishop should passe, each one deuoutly humbled
him on his knees to entertaine his blessing: At the enterance
of the Church, among other deuout Hermites, hee behelde
Prince Robert bathed in his teares, humbled on his knees,
and wondering at his manly countenance & tall proportion,
he questioned with himselfe as touching his estate: the penitent
Norman with bitter sighes made him a due relation of
his birth, estate, life, alterations and cause of trauaile, beseeching
his fatherhood of absolution. The Pope amazed at the
name of Robert, whose infamie had béen bruted through the
whole earth, s
                     •
                  ept backe as altogether astonished, yet at last
gathering his spirits together, and reioycing at his reformation,
he sent him to a wholy and deuout Recluse, who was his

                     〈◊〉
                   Confessor, commaunding Robert to be ordered by
him, and so giuing him his benediction hee entered his seate
royall. Robert intentiuely to reconcile himselfe after hée had
performed his vowe, departed out of the Citie towards the
Cell of this Recluse, who was a man of much holinesse; the
place of his 
                     〈◊〉
                   was beautifull, from whence he might beh
                     •
                  ld
the coole streams of Tiber beating vppon the mayden

walls of the world: to be short, be entered the Cell, discouered
himself to the Recluse, who detesting his abommable life, and
not knowing what maner of punishment he might condignly
appoynt him, he commaunded him for that night to continue
in deuout prayers in the Chappell, promising him the next
morning to satisfie him in his doubts. During the time that
darknesse ouerspred the face of the whole earth, and euery bird
beast and fish enioyed the happie benefites of fléepe, the vigilant
religious couple deuoutly applied themselues to contemplation,
when about the third houre of the night the Recluse
was resolued of his penaunce: wherefore vpon the breake of
day, when Robert had arisen from his prayers, he came vnto
him, and carying in his countenance the grauitie of a father,
and in his heart the sinceritie of a Counceller, he began thus.
Yong Prince, if thy contrition for sinne be so compassionate
as thou pretendest, and thy zeale to acknowledge the same so
accomplished as thou presumest, knowe this that thy danger
is lesse and thy benefite the greater, for repentance is a swéete
sacrifice, and desire to amend is the way to end the fault. But
in that thy offences and follies haue béen extraordinarie, thy
punishment must be no lesse, in sufferance whereof thou shalt
throughly perceaue the indignitie of thy former sinne. Herevpon
be prescribed him his penaunce: first that hee should eate
no meate but that hée receaued from a dogge: secondly, that
during seauen yeres he should be dumbe: lastly, for that space
of time he should walke in a fooles habite, in acknowledgmēt
of his accustomed leawdnesse. Robert thankfully accepted
that which was enioyned him, neither repyning at the hard
penance, nor disdayning y• flender pittance, but taking humble
leaue of the Recluse, hasted himselfe vnto the Citie to satisfie
that which was prescribed him, and buying him a fooles habit
he walked vp and downe the streetes, enduring the reuilings
of children, who cast dirt in his face, scoffed and mocked him,
and the more lewd language that they vsed, the more contentment
he receaued, remembring this, that his deserts and presumptions
deserued farre more martyrdome: oftentimes

was he reuiled, but deuotion closed his tongue, considering
this in himselfe, that in refrayning the same be auoyded much
offence. Certaine of his confederate Hermites beholding this
madnesse and idle behauiour, came vnto him to comfort him,
but he crossing his hands and weeping teares, poynted to the
heauens, signifying thereby that hee suffered that crosse for
sinning against thē. In short time he became the by word of
the Citie, some buffeted him, which hee endured patiently;
some others of more charitie offered him foode, which he with
gratulation refused, so that no other noise was published
through Rome but of the strange Idiot that was dumbe; the
people flocked about him, some praysing his person, some lamenting
his ignorance, some greeuing that he was dumbe,
othersome laughing at his dotage: thus euery man gaue his
seuerall iudgement of him
            
            
               How Robert entered the Emperours Court, & how he there
liued.
               AT last he entered the Emperours pallace, at such time
as with his Nobles he solemnized a most solemne and
festiuall day, great was the presse about the table, and
many the attendants, but Robert boldly entered the presence,
demeaning himselfe after such a manner, that the Emperour
and Princes tooke very great delight in him, he was actiue of
bodie, & vaughted excéedingly well, performing such aduenterous
trickes, as the Emperour all amazed inquired what
be might be; he made him signes of dumnes, shadowing vnder
colours of delight his intentiue deuotion. Then presented
they him meate which he refused, accustoming himselfe at euery
such offer to make showe of discontent. The Emperour
at that time had a faire Greyhound, who for his swiftnes in
the chace and seemelines of bodie was highly esteemed, that
beholding Robert fauned vpon him and plaied with him, as
if appointed by some diuine instinct to affect him; the Emperour
seeing he refused meate at his haud, cast some pittance
at his dogge, where Robert sodainly strugled for the same and

greedily fed thereon, which made the lookers on intentiue to
sport, to accustome him to that kinde of feeding. The Emperour
caused him for this cause to be cherished in his own house
and tended with diligent care, taking pastime continually to
haue Robin in his presence. At night when the festiuals were
finished, Robert was brought vnto a good bed well furnished,
but he refused it, & gathering together certaine locks of straw
hee made him a cabbin vnder the staiers of the Emperours
pallace, where for seauen yeres space he cōtinually slept with
ye hound, refusing all other content or delectation. Oftentimes
was he priuilie seene to weep bitterly, & when he could get into
any seuerall place to pray deuoutly on his knees, which being
tolde vnto the Emperour, made him more curious to enquire
his progenie, but by no meanes could he vnderstand it,
for the good Prince had kept it most secret. Thus may we see
that when the minde is withdrawne from worldly delights,
(wherewith for the most part wretched men are detayned) all
things seeme abiect and vile, except such as lift the soule vnto
heauen, and subdue the bodie in his sensualitie. This most famous
and renowmed Romane Emperour, among all other
his high blessings and Fortunes benefites, had a faire Ladie
to his daughter, whose picture if Praxitiles would describe,
or a better Master than Apelles, hee should rather lacke cunning,
than lay colours; as beautiful she was as Nature could
imagine, and as well formed as she was faire, and no lesse exquisite
in learning as in lineaments, her onely imperfection
was that she was borne dumbe. This noble Princesse called
Emine, was sought vnto by all the Monarkes and vnmarried
Potentates of the worlde, so was her fame bruited
abroade, and such was her beautie: among the rest,
the Souldan of Babilon vnderstanding by certaine Italian
Merchants the excéeding and surpassing excellence of her
person, and receauing from them her picture, hée became
woonderfullie surprized in loue, so that neglecting all other
pleasures, hee onely setled his minde towardes the
attainment of her fauour: Oftentimes presented hée rich

presents to ordinarie trauaylers, desiring onely to growe
famous in the Italian Countries, and he that could but in
best words set out Emines prayse, had a princely recompence.
Round about his Pallace was no other posie but Emine:
and in his Oratorie was no other Goddesse but Emine:
if he talked, he talked of Emine: if he longed, he longed
for Emine: if he wept, he wept for Emine: thus were all
his ioyes metamorphosed into Emine. It was woonderous
to sée his disguise in attyre after the Christian manner:
his desire to be holie after the Christian holynesse,
such power hath loue both to alter both the nature and 
                     ••
                  nner
of life and religion. But leaue we him, and returne we
to Robin, who conuersing continually in the Emperours
Court, was at length beheld and fancied by Emine: and although
she had not the libertie of speech to expresse his affections,
yet by the motion of her body, and the cariage of
her eye, she published her fancies. Thus may you see Gentlemen,
certaine grounds layd of strange aduentures, hidden only
in the secret iudgement of God, and certaynely performed
in times past, the sequele whereof followed after this manner:
and first as touching the estate of the Souldan.
            
            
               Of the melancholy and strange life of the Souldan during
his loue, and the euents of the same.
               THe ritch and mighty Souldan of Babylon hauing (as
you haue read) in beholding the picture falne in loue
with the person, for the space of sixe months secretly
concealed his hidden griefe, and communicated it only with
straungers and aliens, gan rather increase than diminish his
dispaire, for knowing the naturall inclination of his subiects
euery way repugnant against the lawes and manners of the
Christians, their dissident religions, their different regimēts,
their mortall hate, and immoueable stiffneckednesse, he began
to giue ouer all thought of contentation, plotting out such a
course of life, as therein he shewed more barbarous constancie
in loue, than iudgement and discretion: for picking out a

solitarie wood farre from the resort of men, he builded him a
place of pleasure, begirt with ritch bulwarks, and inuironed
with sweete springs: the lodgings all of white Marble, the
pillers of Iaspis, and the whole furniture so rich, as neuer
eye of man could behold more wonderfull. In midst whereof,
was placed a daintie and wonderfull Garden, stored with all
the ritches of nature, with sweete shades, cleere springs,
strange flowres, wholesome hearbs: and in the middle of the
same was erected a Temple to Cupide and Emine, wherein
hir stature made of the purest golde, seemed to stayne all the
excellencie of workemanship, for the Paynter had done as
much as might be, to describe beawtifull Emine. Herein he
closed himselfe, and hauing all the battlements of the temple
made of polished Iuorie, he with a true loues knot interlaced
his name with Emines, being of himselfe excellently seene in
portrait. If any one of his Lords resorted vnto him, destrous
to know the name of his Goddesse, he answered Emine: but
how he serued, or of what place she was, he durst not tell, fearing
ye barbarous treasons of his greatest subiects. Thus ceased
that warlike nation their armes, who were beforetime so
famous, and he that was woont to fight for signiorie, was now
foyled and besotted with loue. The Nobles about him not
induring idlenesse, presented themselues before him, seeking
to disswade him from his obscuritie, but all in vayne, till
Behenzar, a chiefe Musulmah in Bagdet or Babylon, humbling
him on his knee, spake in this manner.
               Most royall off-spring of Mahomet, though thy displeasure
be my death, and thy frowne the ruyne of my fortune,
yet knowing my selfe a Subiect, and thy selfe my Soueraigne,
I will labour for thy delight, though it cost me my
death. Why is thy greatnesse that scarse was contented
with the world, now at last contained within a wall, or thy
courage which neuer was vanquished, thus on the sodaine
vayled: Hast thou bin valiant with Haniball, to fall with
Hanib
                        •
                     ll? and wilt thou that wontest to make Uictorie thy
goddesse, now make vanitie thy gods good. Let me speake

with patience, it is not the idlenesse of thy minde, but the idoll
of thy hart; default of eigernes, but the folly of thine eye: I
see loue printed in thy browes, I feare loue is planted in
thy brest. Oh my Prince, if I deserue fauour, discouer thy
fancie, there are remedies for woundes that are knowne,
medicines for apparant maladies, but l
                     •
                  cers that are concealed
in the flesh, are not cured but by sharpe Phisick: It is
loue, I see it working in thine eyes, which infeebled by the
power of thy thoughts, would execute that kindnesse which
thy hart can not consent vnto. And what if loue? art thou not
Lord of Babylon, who may commaund? the brauest befriended
by great Kings, who haue fayre Concubines? let Asia be
sought out: if Asia hold thy loue, Asia shall not keepe her,
if Europe, what may Europe to thy power: As for sandy Aphrica,
the Sunne is too hote to breed any white coulored
Phaenix: howsoeuer thou loue my Soueraigne, if it be loue,
(and that it is loue thy life declareth) certifie thy Princes of
thy fancies, commaund them, employ all, send Embassades,
present benefites: if all fayle, thy Sword is true loues dart,
which shall pierce further with the terror of thine armes,
than all the world that attempteth thy countermaund.
The Nobles admyring the boldnesse of Behenzar, and suspecting
no lesse, cast themselues in generall at his feete, and
sware vnto him by a solemne oth neither to contrary him, nor
forsake him, till he had atchieued the fulnesse of his ioy, if so it
pleased him to discouer the cause of his pensiuenesse. The
Souldan marking their incessant suites, and praysing Behenzars
dutifull obedience, rowsed himselfe from his melancholy
seate, and with a milder countenance began thus.
               I am fortunate in nothing more my noble Péeres, and
beloued Princes, than in this, that I haue valiant men to
follow me in my Conquests, and vigilant men to counsayle
me in my discontents. You require a matter O my companions,
which hath cost me much hartbreake, and may procure
me much happinesse. It is no ordinarie passion that I feele,
or seruile pleasure that I follow. I tye not my thoughts to

limits, nor my limits conclude my thoughts. My troubles
are like the twynnes of Democritus, augmented at once,
counselled by nothing, but by my opinion: I haue the qualitie
of Salmacis, which being tasted, procureth madnesse, and
this qualitie is loue, and this loue in me hath the disposition
of the Hamonian Lake, capable of all formes, but consumed
by one, which forme may not be reformed. Ah Behenzar,
well mayst thou accuse myne eyes, for they by a héedl
                     •
                  sse
glaunce, haue eclipsed my matchles glory. Oh my Princes,
I sweare to you by Mahound whome I honor, by my right
hand that neuer fainted, I blushingly confesse I loue, but
not so basely as Haniball, for Capua contained his, where
Europe admyreth my Mistres. It is fayre Emine I loue, to
whome this Alter is erected, and my vowes are directed.
Princes woonder not, Theagines a Greeke, loued Cariclia
a Moore, & your Souldan a Mahometist, his Emine a Christian.
The ayme of my thoughts is the honor of Rome: oh
sweete Rome that containeth such an honor, which if I attaine
not, it is but your discontents, my death, & if my death, what
though: oh happy death if for her grow my durance. This abrupt
conclusion was followed with such a bitter sigh, as all
men expected no other but his finall ouerthrow, or her consent:
wherevpon his Nobles priuatly, consulted, and by his
consent Behenzar was made Embassalor, and with ritch
presents sent to Rome to craue Emine in Mariage, and if the
repulse should be graunted, the conclusion was, that priuie
intelligence should be giuen, and Ships rigged, to the ende
that on the sodaine the Souldan might inuade Christendome,
and rid himselfe of all the obstacles of his happines.
These conclusions well liking the Souldan, were briefely
debated, the Embassadors dispatched, the Ships rigged, the
souldyours leuyed, and the despaire that the Souldan conceaued,
at the first was turned into a fresh hope, yet the sweet
grounds of his pleasant discontents so alluref him, that in
seeming to hope, he pretended despaire, and in the absence of
his Lords, who intended the furtherance of his affayres, he

traffiqued nought else but fancie, drawing on three Iuorie
colombes, enuironing the statue of Emine, these three succeeding
Sonnets: vppon the first, he placed a Camelion in a
sea of bloud, with this Mot vnderneath it, Mututus ab ill
                        •
                     ,
and vnderneath the same this Sonnet.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           The first Sonnet.
                           
                              IN how contrarious formes haue I conuersed,
                              Since first mine eyes and hart by loue were chained,
                              Now like the Hart my bosome hath been pearsed,
                              Yet no Dictamnum seru'd when I was pained.
                           
                           
                              Now like the babe of Climene inclosed,
                              In piteous barck Electrum haue I stilled,
                              Now like the Nimph of craggie rock composed,
                              The rocks and woods with sorrowes haue I filled.
                           
                           
                              Now to a dying Swan haue I been turned,
                              With dolefull tunes my funeralls waimenting,
                              Now to the Salamander neuer burned.
                              Yet in the fire for euermore frequenting.
                              Oh loathed life on nought but sorrow grounded,
                              Where who so triumphs most, is deepest wounded.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               Uppon the second he placed a Barck perished in a stormy
Sea, a Furie guiding the helme, the Sky ouercast, the Gemini
appearing, vnder which was written Sic perij, and vnder
that this Sonnet.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           The second Sonnet.
                           
                              SAyling the sea of my forepointed greenaunce,
                              My will the helme of my misfortune guiding,
                              Expecting gaine suspecting no mischeeuaunce,
                              With stailesse keele I cut the waters gliding.
                           
                           
                              
                              The faire liurnall lampe whilst that I sayled.
                              With neuer partiall eye my course assisted,
                              But when the lights delightfull bewtie fayled,
                              And wauering cinthia in her course persisted.
                           
                           
                              In siluer 
                                    •
                                 ould two brother Starres appeered,
                              That in the cloudy iorney I attempted,
                              Incenst the Seas, and more my Shop they necred,
                              (Though faire in forme) my Barck from hope exempted,
                              Amidst the storme my will the helme forsaketh,
                              And thus my Ship a lucklesse shipwrack maketh.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               On the third he painted Mens, Fortuna, and Natura, all
striuing to rayse a dead man, who had foure Cupids, two
hanging at his hands, two et his féete, which kept him downe
with this Motto, Hic labor, and vnderneath the same this
Sonnet.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           The third Sonnet.
                           
                              IF all things are ordained to an end,
                              In semblaunce good, or perfect good in deed,
                              What finall bent haue these my teares I spend,
                              Or all the drops my wounded hart doth bleed.
                              Or to what fat all period are you aimd
                              My bitter sighes, that haue my bosome maimd.
                           
                           
                              Oh my effects of passion euery thing,
                              That to a certaine purpose is applied,
                              His finall hope at last to end doth bring,
                              But such successe alas is you inuied.
                              For though mine eye his teares, my hart his bloud,
                              My brest his sighes bestowes, they doo no good.
                           
                           
                              For why the end for which you trauell sore,
                              Is not attained by the threefold gifts
                              
                                 Of mind of body, or of fortunes store,
                              Which man to tipe of matchlesse honnor lifts.
                              For what you seeke no limits doth admit,
                              Nor yeelds to time, nor is subdewd by wit.
                           
                           
                              Cease then my teares, and bleed no more my hart,
                              Restraine your stormes, my sighes you toyle in vaine,
                              For your felicitie exceedeth arte,
                              Whereto nor toyle nor labour may attaine.
                              For loue it is subtill influence,
                              Whose finall force still hangeth in suspence.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               In these passions and fantasies consumed the Sould
                     ••
                  
the most part of his time, now imagining hope of successe,
now fearing cause of repulse, adoring Emine as his Saint,
and placing his follace in his amorous conceits, vntill such
time as he heard the fatal message of his ouerthrow: till whē
we leaue him, returning to Behenzar, who hauing a prosperous
winde, and a better will, sayled so fortunatly, and trauailed
so forwardly, that he arriued at Rome, where what
successe he had, you shall vnderstand in the Chapter following.
            
            
               How Behenzar arriued at Rome, and of his repulse and
dispatch. The valiant courage of Robert hearing the
name of Christ blasphemed. The loue of Emine towards
him: and the assembly of the christian Princes
in the ayd of the Emperour.
               
                  THe rumor was no sooner spread throughout the
dominions of the Empyre, but all contributarie
Princes assembled together in the Citie of
Rome to doo the Emperour seruice, and make
his estate more pompous, and after letters of
safeconduit presented to the Embassador, Behenzar mounted
on a braue Barbarion Horsse, trapped in Tissue, and

Pearle, himselfe attyred after the Barbarian fashion, with
his Algozin of cloth of gold embrodered with rubies, being
led betweene two Kings, was in all solemnitie conducted
vnto the Emperours Pallace, who in his great Hall, set
among an innumerable troupe of Courtiers, as Phoebus amidst
the lesser Scarres, whome Behenzar after small or
no salutation attempted thus. Emperour of Rome, amongst
all the blessings thy God hath bestowed on thee, among all
thy fortunes that haue befalne thee from thy youth hitherto,
the onely good is this, that out Souldan of Babylon, the
terrour of the world for armes, the Lord of Conquerours,
for actions, dayneth to salute thee, who hearing of the
beawtie of thy Daughter the young Princesse Emine, and
vouchsafing to grace thée with his alliance, craueth her as his
Wife in Marriage, which bountie of his if thou neglect,
know, that thou fosterest the shadow of thine owne ruyne, thy
Kingdomes shalbe spoyled, thy Princes flayne, thy Crowne
troden at his féete, and thy ruines shalbe so grieuous, that thy
royalties were neuer so great. If thou entertaine his demaunds,
hold, take these presents (whereupon he caused
twentie Moores to discharge their carriages of gold & siluer,
and lay it at his feete) if not, be lendeth thee it as a pledge
of his reuenge, till he redéeme it with the sword, Great was
the murmure throughout the hall at the insolence of the Pagan,
and among the rest Emine was exceedingly moued,
who sitting at her Mothers féete, by her teares began to testifie
hir cause of terrour. The Emperour being a Prince of
a haught hart, disdayning to be outfaced by the brauest warriour
in the world, hauing long since determined neuer to
marrie his Daughter out of Christendome, returned Behenzar
this magnificall answer. It is not our custome in
Europe prowd Babylonian, to perswade with peremptorie
threats, but to woe with gentle intreaties, and as our natures
are mollified by mildnes, so are they indurate by menaces. If
y• Souldan salute me as his equall he erreth, for ye Emperour
of Christendom daines no so bace companion as a Souldan:

if as his superior, I thus answer him, the distance of his countrie,
the difference of his custome, the abiectnes of his riches,
the barbarisme of his religion, these disable him to be an Emperours
son; as for my daughter she must bee ruled by her father,
& her father wil not admit thy master, who if he attempt
me with iniuries, I will temper him for his iniustice; as for
his presents I bestow thē on thee, for golde (Barbarian) amongst
vs, is of small accompt in respect of vertue, go let thy
vassalls take it vp, and carrie thou that home as a gift meeter
for a messenger of the Souldans, than a Master of the Souldan;
for his inuasions I feare them not, since my Christ is
my protector, vnder whose safe conduct both these and I little
feare him, and so be thou answered. Behenzar mad with rage
seeing the Emperours small regard, stamped with his foote,
and sware thus: By Mahound (Christian) thy Carpenters
sonne that Christ, your God, shall not saue thy hands, nor thy
heads from the sword of the meanest Prince about the Souldan,
but this Citie shall be raced in despight of thy protector,
and thy power. Behenzar had so sayd, and in his furie was
stinging out of the Pallace, when Robin the Diuell hauing
all this while solemnely attended at the foot of the Emperour,
all on the sodaine arose, and not induring to heare the name
of his Sauiour blasphemed, he flung the Pagan to the groūd,
and stamped him vnder his feete, which done, he made shewe
of a foolish triumph, and bumming the proud Babilonian with
his bable, he had welny killed him, had not y• Princes drawne
him off, who safety conducted blaspheming Behenzar to his
shippes, and smilingly laughed at the insolence of the Idiot.
The faire Emine seeing the forwardnesse of her Champion
was meruailously delighting, shewing vnto her father by
signes that he was no foole but some man of high spirit, euerie
day dressed she meanes to recouer his wits, vsing prescripts
of Phisicke, and the councell of the learned, who secretly informed
her that he was a man of rare expectation. These suppositions
meruailously inflamed her, and loue began to show
himselfe in act in all her outward parts, inflaming her eyes,

changing her colour, which least it should be perceaued, she
with humble reuerence forsooke the assembly, leauing her father
with the other Princes in great consultation, who resoluing
to preuent all inconueniences, departed each one to his
Countrie, swearing by solemne oath each one to gather his
greatest power, and to come and assist the Emperour the next
yeare in the suspected, or rather certainlie pretended warres
of the Souldan: in which mindes I leaue them intentiue on
their forces, Robert deuout in his follies, Emine detayned
with fancies, Behenzar sayling to Babilon, who with such expedition
followed his businesse, that with a prosperous wind
hee arriued in Assiria, and so hastely posted to Bagdet: what
there insued the Chapter following shall declare.
            
            
               How the Souldan being repulsed by the Emperour, with a
huge and mightie armie sayled into Italy, and how he besieged
Rome, with some euents thereabout.
               NO sooner had Behenzar declared vnto the Souldan
the resolute and carelesse answere which the Emperour
had returned him, but racing his rich Pallace,
and stamping the statue of his Goddesse Emine to powder,
he furiously called for Armes, swearing all his Princes by
solemne and inuiolable othes, neuer to depart out of Christendome,
till they had ruinated the Empyre, and recouered
his loue: and hereupon he embarked himselfe as soone as the
next Spring appeared, accompanied with 11. Kings, 18.
Princes, & 300. Mesulmahes, his Armie cōsisted of 300000.
horse and foote, his Barkes and Gallies 
                     •
                  hoked the Sea, and
the billowes groning vnder the burthen, began to wonder at
the wood of stately Pines which laboured vppon their bosomes.
With these forces and in this Equipage arriued this
Souldan of Babilon in Italie, the terror of whose threats amated
all the Westerne parts; the poore countrie men throughout
Italie droue their Cattell to the chiefe Cities, forsaking
their houses, and leauing their riches; the noyse of trouble amated

                  Greece, and afflicted Spaine, and the French as all amazed
prepared armes. And as in common dangers a huge and
mightie armie is the onely meane to make head against a furious
Enemie, the whole Nations assembled them together
about Rome, and submitted themselues vnder the conduct of
the Empyre. Now at Rome in stead of beautiful houses were
builded strong Bulwarkes; in stead of Pallaces, Palisadoes,
and each man was mightily addicted to the safetie of his countrie.
But the Barbarian like the cruell riuer of Tigris, exceeding
his bounds with vnmeasurable and resistlesse waters, or
the lightning falling vppon the drie Cedars, ouerran all the
fruitfull champion, destroyed Cities, burned Uillages, raced
Manner houses; the voyce of desolation was heard on euery
side, and feare and wonder assayled men on euery side: The
Clergy with great deuotion called for assistance from heauen,
and euery man hearing of the daunger of his neighbour, suspected
his owne domage to be at hand. At last the Souldan
after great victories, rich spoyles, good fortunes, and long
iorneys arriued at Rome, begirting the Citie with a mightie
and strong siege, his streamers waned in the winde, and the
Egle of golde shining on the top of his Pauilion, seemed to abash
all the beauties of the Capitoll. The Emperour was no
lesse vigilant in preparing defence, for being assisted by the
brauest men of Europe, he neither pretermitted policie, nor omitted
oportunitie: often were the outrodes the Enemie
made about the Countrie, and there passed no day wherein
there was no some light skirmith, wherein for the most part
the fortune was doubtfull. But Behenzar mooued with the
outrage of the Idiot, among all the Pagans was most forward
to battaile, euery day would hee ride about the walles,
reuiling the Christians, calling the Emperour Toward, his
followers Foxes, that durst not stirre out of their hale, till at
last Pepin of France with other famous Lords, who indured
not concumelie, neither brooked braues, so earnestly wrought
with the Emperour, that the battaile was appoynted the day
following, and the Souldan thereof aduertised by a Harrolt;

great was the preparation on both sides, and greater the dread
among the Christians, in that the whole hope of the Empyre
depended on the fortune of that conflict. No sooner did the
bright and beautifull messenger of the day, with blushing
seemelines awaken the sleeple God of light, whose Chariot
being apparelled by the houres, with golden brightnesse gaue
possession to radiant Phoebus, but both the armies issued out
into the field, and in a faire plaine arranged themselues in
battaile, there might you heare on both sides the Captaines
exhort, the Caualiers applaude, the Trompets made a heauenly
harmonie, inforcing the horses to carrier, and the heart
to courage: in briefe, the battailes ioyned, where the Souldan
shewed inestimable feates of armes, hewing, murthering,
and ouerthrowing whom so euer he met. Pepin like Mars inraged,
or Achilles incensed, beating downe all that resisted,
brandishing his sword like lightning, now stroke hée downe
the King of Circasso, the Duke of Hieropolis, now reskewed
the olde Emperour, who laden with yeares and armes, yet
lacking no courage, sought all meanes possible to subdue his
enemies. Behenzar on the other side seemed like Alexander
among the Macedones, for being attended on by a troope of
Mamelukes, resembling the Macedonian Phalax,
                   he dispersed
the horsemen, tossing them on his pikes, so that after a
bitter and long 
                     •
                  ight, the right wing of the Christians was
discomforted: there might you see Ortacus of Denmark
                        •
                     
                  
shewe himselfe a braue war
                     •
                  iour, who entering vppon the
Thessalian horsemen with his Danish Regiment, so dismembred
them, that they fled about the fields, both disordered and
welny destroyed. But the Souldan relied them s
                     •
                  dainly,
and intermedling them with fresh hands of Souldiers, gaue
such a charge on the front of the enemies battaile, that it was
inforced to recoyle. The Christians in this incountrie were
put to the worst; of Princes were slaine the Duke of Consa,
the Earle of Malgrania, the King of Pontus, the Marques of
Pisarra, and to the number of 1700. Christians, the Emperour
himselfe hardly escaped, and was in great perrill of his

life, who gathering vp his broken wings together, in grieuous
discontent of minde entered his Citie, whilest the Pagans
triumphed in their Tents, hauing lost but to the number
of 900. men, besides those of marke and accompt.
            
            
               Of the great moane that was made throughout Rome for the
losse of the Christians, and how Emine the next day of
battaile gaue Robert the Diuell a rich white Armour and
Shield, with a white horse, who reskued the Emperour,
and did wonderfull deedes of armes.
               GReat was the moane through all Rome for the Christians
ruine, many the teares of the mothers be moaning
their sonnes, many the sighes of the daughters
weeping for their fathers, there was no house in the Citie
which solemnized not some funerall, and happie was he in his
misfortune, whose sonne had béen most forward. But among
all the mestfull families, the Emperours Court was most vnfortunate,
where in stead of rich spoyles, the Emperiall chambers
were replenished with dead and wounded bodies, and
confusion seeming to haue elected her habitation in that place,
began to infect euery particular person with his poyson. The
Empresse bathed in teares, had her eyes almost choaked vp
with weeping, and Emine the flower of beautie seemed like
the Rose ouerwashed with ouerlirant shewes, her crimson
staines became pale and bleake colours; so much doth sorrow
alter both the inward and outward habilities. Robert agréeued
in heart to see these discontents, groaned in mind, though
he dissembled mirth, practising all meanes possible to delight
the Emperour, to mooue laughter to the Empresse, to content
Emine; faine would he haue enterprised armes, but he durst
not, fearing it was preiudiciall to his vowe, and so much courage
wrought in his heart, that espying his Confessor one
day, who by reason of these warres had withdrawne himselfe
into the Citie, he by signes shewed his de
                     •
                  ires to doo the Emperour
seruice. The good old man falling on his necke blessed

him, and confidently perswaded him thereunto, (so his desire
were not for vaineglorie sake, but for the honour and in
the name of Christ). Robert resolued herein became more
frolicke, moouing great pleasure in the Princes, by kissing
their swords, and playing with their armes; many battailes
were there fought, wherein he would faine haue béen present:
One day among the rest, at such time as the Princes issued
out to battaile, Emine called Robert vp into the top of a high
turret, from whence they might behold all the manner of the
conflict: but alas, the day was fatall to the Christians, and
the cries of them that fled pierced the very heauens. Robert
not able to endure these massacres, wept bitter teares for anger,
and seeing Emine discontent, made signes vnto her for
armour; she by diuine instinct somewhat assertained of his intent,
secretly with her owne hands armed him in a rich white
armour of her fathers, which he vsed in his youth, giuing him
a faire sword and shield, and shutting his beuer close commanded
that a horse should bee giuen him; the groomes of y• Emperours
stable gaue him a fierce and stout Steede of selfelike
colour as his armes weare of, on which speedely mounting,
he issued foorth of the gates, gathering together the scattered
troopes, and entered the thickest of the Saracens with
such furie, that before his 
                     •
                   aunce was broken he dismounted
thirtie of the best Pagans: then taking in hand his well tempered
sword, hee performed such Cheualrie, as all the beholders
were amazed, his sworde lighted in no place where it
cleaued not a lim, neither was their Helmets of that temper
that could withstand his stroake, he slewe Behenzar hand to
hand, and had welny taken the Souldan prisoner, had not a
band of strong Tartarians reskewed him. Emine from her
solitarie Turret beholding his prowesse, was surprized with
meruailous sollace, now wished she that she could speake
whereby she might mooue her loue, now desired she that hée
were as noble, as hee was valiant, and as wittie, as hee was
worthie. But the Emperour among the rest was wholly reuiued
with the sight, and yéelding God most humble thankes.

animated his Souldiers to pursue the victorie; many and
valiant were the men that fell that day by Roberts sworde,
and had not the night by speedie approach departed both the
Armies, the Souldan had that day suffered an vndoubted ouerthrowe:
whereuppon both the Armies sounded the retreate,
and Robert with all expedition priuilie entered the
Citie, where encountering the Recluse his Confessor, he left
his Armour with him, and hid his horse in a Monastarie,
where the good man was resiant, returning to the Court in
his fooles habite: by which time the Emperour with his attendants
was entered the Citie, and being disarmed sat him
downe in great content, discoursing with his Princes and
Emperours vppon the affayres of that dayes seruice; great
was the noyse throughout the Citie of the white Knights
valour, and in Court was no other talke but of the straunge
Knight that behaued himselfe so valiantly. The Emperour
made great inquisition after him, but by no meanes could
vnderstande thereof.
               By this time Robert and his hound (as was his custome)
entered the dyning chamber, playing many pleasant trickes
before the Emperour, who tooke thereat wonderfull delight,
Emines eye was continually fixed on him, and whilest the
Kings talked of the valiant warriour, she purposely poynted
at him. It fortuned in this incountrie that Robert had a little
scratch ouer his right eye, which being but freshly wounded
bled a little; the Emperour that loued him deerely, examined
who had harmed him; great noyse was there about the
Pallace of this iniurie, and no man would be knowne of it,
only one Knight knéeling before the Emperour, certified his
grace that the knight who had deserued so much in his seruice
that day, was wounded in the same place, & that he suspected it
was he. Robert fearing least he should be discouered, began
much more to play y• Idiot, putting his Cockscomb vpon the
Knights head & laughing, which caused all ye Princes to take
great delight: but Emine still poynted at him, & if the libertie

of her tongue had graunted her meanes to discouer the secrecie
of her thought, Robert assuredly had at that time been
knowne. The Emperour notwithstanding began to gather
on these allegations, and desirous to knowe the certaine
trueth, priuatly appoynted certaine Knights against the next
day to the number of thirtie to attend the sayd Champion;
and by some meanes to cause his discouerie. In this manner
passed they the euening in delight, till it was bed time,
when as the Emperour and Emperesse (after order was giuen
for the safetie of the Citie) betooke them to their rest,
and the other seuerall Lords and Princes to their lodging, at
which time Robert and his hound entered their homely cabbin,
wherein meditating without closing his eyes, the salt
teares streamed downe his cheekes in remembrance of his
sinnes, in thought of his father, in consideration of his countrie:
and now came there to his minde how for sixe yeares and
mare hée had liued an abiect life, vnworthie his estate, the
thought whereof so much abashed him, that it is vnpossible
to reckon vp his perplexities: then called hee to minde the
kinde effections of Emine, and his soule bemoned that so perfect
a person should haue so palpable an vnperfection: now
applied hée the cause thereof to the Emperours sinne, accompting
the virgin happie, that by her want of speach escaped
from many occasions of offence: then recorded hee the
effusion of Christian bloud, and of méere compassion in middest
of that thought hee wept most bitterly, when the poore
kinde beast licked vp his teares. In this sort spent he the
night in consideration of many thinges, and in conclusion of
the aduenture of his life, for the s
                     •
                  fetie of Christendome:
whilest the approach of the morning called each one from his

                     •
                  ouch, and the warning Trompet called out to the fight, their
went euery one to arme him, and after they had heard the diuine
seruice, & taken some refection, prepared themselues vnto
the fight: In the Souldans Camp all were farre otherwise,
for y• losse they receaued y• day before en
                     •
                  enomed their harts,

and made them more vigorous vnto reuenge, each one resolued
with this Camarado, to subdue, or dye; to conquer, or be
confounded. In their lookes were shadowed their tyrannies,
and in their hast their hardinesse. Scarcely were the allarms
sounded on both sides, but the enemy gaue the charge, and
the Souldan inflamed with loue, and inraged with furie,
sought by all meanes possible to confound his aduersaries.
On euery side were heard the gronings of wounded men,
some hauing lost their armes, some their legs, the sonne oftentimes
was trampled vnder the horsse féete of his father,
and in these common miseries, nature her selfe stoode amazed
to behold the Massacres. The Souldan which way soeuer he
trauailed, ouerthrew his resistants, the Emperour was by
him vnhorssed and wounded, and had not Pepin, and Charles
of Burgundie rescued him at that time, actum esset de imperio.
Certaine men that were lightly wounded, brought no lesse
astonishment into the Citie, than was in the battaile, for they
aggrauated the discomfiture farre more than it was, reporting
that the Emperour was vnrecouerably distressed. Robert
hearting of these rumors, hasted to the Recluse, his soule
groaned within him, and zeale ouercame him, so that after
some deuout prayers, accompanyed with remorsefull teares,
he mounted on horsseback, and hauing taken his armes, he
so valiantly and furiously entered the fight, that those who
beheld him, thought that some tempest had bin stirred vp, and
some whirlewind issued from the Citie, in his furie he tooke
no regard of person, murthering whomesoeuer he incountered:
scarce could his horsse stirre himselfe for the multitude of
dead men that fell before him: such of the Christians as fled
out of the battaile before his entrance, returned vehemently,
so that the conflict was renewed with such vigor, as the heauens
in vehement showers seemed to be weepe the murther.
The Emperour beyond all expectation, shewed himselfe valiant,
and approching the place where the Norman Prince
fought, he cryed out for extreame ioy: Oh hope of Christendome,
thou flowre of chiualrie, thou anchor of mine Empire,

the heauens requite thee: see how old in yeares my person
shall accompany thee, how forward I will fight, and inforce
thy selfe the more to preuent the desolation of yond Citie.
Robert quickned with his words, departed as if he vnderstood
him not, and meeting with the Souldan, gaue him such a
stroke on the helmet, that his horsse fell vnto the ground, and
he himselfe was wonderfully amazed. The whole band of the
Mamelucks seeking to withstand him, were either dissipated
or destroyed, and be that thought to gaine ye chiefest triumph,
enacted the choicest tragedie: in briefe, as the tender blossoms
new apparra
                     •
                  led by nature, issuing from their stalks as new
borne creatures, vpon the violent breath of a Northren wind,
are depriued of their beawtie and decayed in their blossome:
so the Pagans beholding the forwardnes of the assaylant,
and the feeblenesse of their assembly, fled away, both carelesse
of their weale, and recurelesse in their wrack. Robert
seeing the euening approching on, the Christians prowd with
victorie, the pursuite hote, the flight hastie, sodainely withdrewe
himselfe; for the gentle Westerne winde (a kind louemate
of the euentide) began with curteous breathings to asswage
his ouergrowne wearinesse, the sunne in the East set
in his scarlet rednesse, pretending the beawtie of the succeeding
day, or the windynes of the following night; for which
cause, dreading to be be 
                     •
                  cried, and desirous to escape, (ascribing
all glory to heauens, and not vnto his hand) he sodainly
departed, leauing the Christians to pursue that with
swiftnesse, which he had compassed by his sword, but whilst he
seeketh to auoyd the furie of his enemie, he is readie to perish
through the meanes of amitie, for the thirtie chosen Knightes
appointed by the Emperour to descrie him, at such time as
he forsooke the battaile, followed him hastelie, and couching
their Launces all at once, on sodayne assayled him: he seeing
so many attempting him at once, turned his horsse, resoluing
to endure the hazard, but finding their armes to be Christian,
he spurred his horsse, detesting vtterly to come in knowledge:

the pursuite was hote, the flight seruent, the followers
in despayre, the flyer determined; how often smiled
Robert to himselfe, knowing that he fled before he feared?
how often feared they to touch him, that fled from them?
in briefe, some one better horssed than the other, seeing that
the hazard of their credits depended on their knowledge,
hauing the swiftest Horsse, pursued the Norman Prince,
and so egerly indeuored, that he gaue him a deepe wound
in the thygh, and sodaynely returned to his companyons,
knowing, that the bitternesse of the same, and the eagernesse
of his griefe, would soonest disclose the obscuritie of
the sufferer. And now began the night to giue freedome to
the afflicted, and Robert meanes of escape, who arriuing at
the Hospitall of the Recluse, set vp his Horsse, b
                     •
                  und
vp hys woundes, and in his Idiotlie habbit, entered the
Court. Emine that had seene the battaile, could hardlie
contayne her selfe, entertayning the supposed Ideot with
many solemnities, beeing onely priuie with the holie man
to his ordinarie rescouses. Often did she offer in signes, to
shewe he was wounded, but Robert so cunningly concealed
his agonyes, as the world could not discerne his greeuaunce.
In conclusion, the day closing vp, the daungers
were manyfest, the Christians had the vpper hande, the
Pagans were discomfited, and the Emperour returning
in tryumph vnto his Court, was solemnelye receyued
with Procession, and euery valiant Prince entertayned
also with publique applaudings. In the Pallace was prepared
a most sumptuous Banquet, aud such Bonefiers and
beneuolence was bestowed in the Citie, as if the Emperour
had been but newly established. After such as were
wounded were with comfortable Oyles and Medicines
reuiued, they set them downe to Supper, yeelding to almightye
GOD most hartye thanks for their so for
                     •
                  unate
victorye, passing away the night in such mirth and iollicie,
as if they had at that tyme solemnised some Festiuall.

The Emperours Treasurie was opened, and benefites were
employed on euery side with great bountie: the Io Pea
                        •
                     s of
triumph, resounded in all places, and amongst the rest a braue
Poet, yet deuout, after the solemne harmony of Musick presented
this Hymne.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Eurilochus Hymne.
                           
                              WHen wastfull warres, (fruites of afflicting time)
                              Haue left our soyle deuoyde of all suspence:
                              When barraine hope, the flowre of earthly Prime
                              Perceiues that grace exceedeth mans offence:
                              What may we worke, or what may man pretend,
                              Whereof to God he not ascribes the end?
                           
                           
                              Our dull and fruitlesse fruites of fleeting earth
                              Are sinfull (like our selues) that them suppose,
                              Sinnes haruest neuer failes, but grace hath dearth,
                              Oh how contrarious mortall men are those
                              That ground on this, that God hath griefes withstood,
                              And yet from God acknowledge not the good?
                           
                           
                              All Empires are exchanged, and changing thriue,
                              (Yet only God is cause of euery change)
                              Estranged the men that were, from men aliue,
                              Affections thus still liue, by being strange.
                              In changes yet since God alone directs,
                              He makes a change from grace who so neglects.
                           
                           
                              In colours thus we compasse mickle worth,
                              All senselesse in suppose thus sense we vse
                              (Great Princes) grace from secrets wendeth foorth,
                              Which proffered some accept, and some refuse.
                              Let those who tast the fruites commend the tree,
                              This I from God, and God hath taught it mee.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  And besides all these reuelings, Robert notwithstanding
his wounds, was in apparance maruellous pleasant, for
neyther the greeuousnesse of his sinne, nor the greatnesse of
his misfortune could alter his delights in this publike reioyce.
He made prettie skirmi
                     •
                  hes with his hound, and after
he had attayned the conquest, seemed in choller to leade the
kinde creature in his leash. Now began he in signes to discipher
his sollace, presenting the Emperour with Palme
bowes in stead of victorie and peace, and with an Oliue
Garland in token of a Conquerour, which gaue the Monarck
mightie occasion of reioyce, but the Monarck after his minde
had for a while béen detayned with pleasure in midst of his
thought of victorie, began to enquire of him who was the
occasion of his victorie, and conferring with his Princes, he
resolued himselfe by their counsayles in what manner he
might requite his curtesies, then calling vnto him the thirtie
Knights, he questioned with them about him, who could no
otherwise informe him, but that through the swiftnesse of
his Horsse, he escaped from them, and was by one of them
wounded in the thigh, by which meanes they thought he
should onely be knowne, and by no other: this made the Emperour
amazed, considering his voluntarie obscuritie, and
great desert, but Emine still poynted at Robert, Emine still
intimated Robert: some suspected this man, some that man.
To be short, in that Christendome had béen saued, and Rome
preserued by his mea
                     •
                  es, by common consent it was ordered,
and the next day most solemnly proclaymed, that he who
had so well deserued of the Common weale, if leauing his voluntarie
obscuritie, he would bring foorth his white horsse and
armour, and shew the wound that was inflicted him in the
last comba
                     •
                  e, he should inrecompence of his good deserts towards
Christendome, be made he
                     •
                  re apparant to the Empire,
and receyue in Marriage faire Emine the daughter of
the Emperour. This being thus concluded, Emine seemed
to reioyce, and imbraced Robert in open assembly, mouing
hir Father and Mother thereby to 
                     〈◊〉
                   admiration.

Each one thorough the Court, began to descant vpon this euent,
and the whole Citie was sodainely stiled with the rumor.
At last the houre of midnight approched, whereby the
w
                     •
                  erie trauailed Princes were called to rest, and Robert agreeued
with his wound layd him downe in his Cabban, and
the 
                     •
                  ound supplying the office of a Surgeon, licked vp the
clotted b
                     •
                  oud of his wound.
            
            
               How meruailously the Souldan was discontented after his
ouerthrow, with the tidings that was brought him as
touching the Proclamation.
               BUt where the Emperour sollaced for victorie, the Souldan
sorrowed in that he was vanquished, and entering
his royall tent, altogether discontent, he began to exclaime
on the destenies, to complaine of his desaster, to expostulate
with loue, to repeate of his losse, yea so was his hart

                     •
                  urthened with incessant griefes, his mind broken with remedilesse
grudges, that from a reasonable man, he became inraged.
Alasse sayd he preposterous and iniurious 
                     •
                  ortune, the
variable goddesse of human estates, and the 
                     〈…〉
                  
of worldly stabilitie, thou temperest the indignities of
those that trust thee not, and ouerturnest the dignities of
those that tempt thee not. Thou hast made me, who whilome
might compar
                     •
                   for felicitie with Caesar, complaine my misfortunes
with Sertorius. I am bereft of delight, banished
from loue, and is not this misrrie? I am robbed of my
friends, reuiled of my foes, and is not this martyrdome?
Oh that I had béen buried in my Cradle, or bereft of thy crueltie,
or thou hadst béen more c
                     •
                  nstant or I more 
                     〈◊〉
                  ?
Worldy mis
                     •
                  ries haue their medicines; discontents are 
                     •
                  elieued
by counsailes wants and decayes by works a
                     •
                  d diligence,
reproofes, by patience, in complections all contrarie
humors haue their helps. Anticira purgeth Melancholy,
Rubarbe Choll
                     •
                  r, Scency Flegme, Woundes haue their

                     〈…〉
                  
                  
philosophy to helpe it: but loue, the 
                     〈…〉
                  ,
the determined pestilen
                     •
                  e of 
                     〈…〉
                  
poyson of the hart, 
                     〈◊〉
                   vnconquered 
                     〈◊〉
                   of the soule,
that hath no Antidotes to preuent, nor elect
                     •
                  aries to comfort,
nor perswasions to relieue, nor purges 
                     •
                  o expulse, only it is
infinite in nature, and infinite in crueltie. Oh my life, how
art thou miserable through my loue? and my loue, how misgouernest
thou my life? by thee I haue lost friends, and am
desolate in fortunes, I perish in thy rage, my subiects perish
through thy rashnesse. Oh that I had been perswaded, or,
that I had better preuented. But why spend I the time in
wishes, which are no meanes of welfare, Vna salus 
                        〈◊〉
                     
nullam sperare salutem. Let me dye, for death taketh away
the scandale of my decay, yea only death is the medicine of
my miserie: this sayd, he cast himselfe groueling on his bed,
contemning all foode, refusing all nourishment, neyther
could the perswasion of his Princes, nor the prayers of his
souldyours, in any wayes withdraw him from his 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
till sodaine newes was brought by an espiall out of the
Citie, of the generall Proclamation published in Rome, that
who so could bring forth his white horse and armor, and
shewe the wound that was 
                     〈◊〉
                   him in the 
                     〈…〉
                  ,
he should in recompence of his good deserts towards Christendome,
be made heire apparant to the Empire, and receiue
faire Emine the Daughter of the Emperour in Marriage.
This newes somewhat relieued him, and a sodaine
hope entered his hidden thoughts. He knew his owne courage
of as great consequence as any mans, whereby if he
were crossed in his voluntary purpose, he might wag
                     •
                   the
Combate, he gathered by circumstance, that the Knight who
deserued, had vowed obscuritie, and these tokens that were required
were possible wherevpon 
                     〈◊〉
                   all his 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
he onely called vnto him a certayne 
                     〈…〉
                  
knowledge, with whom he so wrought with 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
that hee by Magicke found
                     •
                   the meanes to drawe the

                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                  Robins. Being by this meanes ayded with all
possibilities, he caused the 
                     〈◊〉
                   to be forged with all expedition,
and wounding himselfe vehemently in the thygh, he
presently 
                     〈◊〉
                   vp the same, resoluing by this meanes to deceiue
the Emperour, to compasse Emine, and keepe the remnant
of his 
                     〈◊〉
                   in securitie: wherevpon, discouering his
pretence vnto his Nobles, and shewing them both his manner
and meanes, he armed himselfe, and committed the care
of his armie to the charge of his Princes, and so taking his
leaue, departed towards the Citie.
            
            
               How the Souldan entred the Citie of Rome in his disguise,
and made his claime to Emine who should haue beene
betrothed vnto him, and what miraculous chaunce did
therevpon infew.
               ONe day and more after his last victorie, the Emperour
kept his bed, and viii. dayes continually after intended
quietnes, knowing that the enemie was too much
weakned to prouoke him as yet, yet sufficiently able in their
trench to worke for their owne defence: it chaunced, that vppon
the feast day of S. Peter (a day of great solemnitie in the
Citie of Rome) that after the Emperour with his other Princes
had heard the deuine seruice, and bestowed their bountiful
almes on the poore, whilst in great pomp the mighty potenta
                     ••
                  
sate in his hall, attended on by a manly trayne of Courtiers.
The Souldan entered the Citie in bright and lucid armour,
his cre
                     •
                  t replenished and beawti
                     ••
                  ed with a plume of rich feathers,
which ouerspreading the back of his milke white Steed
in many beawtifull colours, gaue greater beawtie to his horse
and himselfe, and in that he was armed after y• Christian maner,
the first court of gard let him passe. He was a Prince of
high maiesty, and wonderfull dexteritie in armes, and with
such agility managed he his horse, as all the Citizens began
to maruell, some alleaging this, some muttering that,
according to their naturall opinions, and dispositions; but

at such time as he entered the high streete wherein stoode the
Emperours pallace, the second court of guard stayed him, and
questioning with him what he was, it was answered that hée
was the very same knight that had reskewed the Emperour,
reléeued Christendom, and deserued Emine, and for that cause
he was come according to his Excellencies proclamation to
claime his due. The rumour was no sooner spred, nor the
word past, but hee was entertained with generall applause
of the Souldiers, the Citizens began a festiuall, and all the
chiefe Courtiers in magnificent pomp came out to méet him,
when being dismounted and brought before the Emperour,
after gracious saluations he began thus.
               Most mightie and famous Emperour of Rome, since the
common voyce throughout Christendome, and report in forraine
Countries, attributeth as much constancie to thy word,
as commendation to thy worthinesse; I haue being a Prince
as mightie as thy selfe, and more courteous than thou imaginest,
presumed to relie vppon thy promise, and require the accomplishment
of thy proclamation; I am the man Romane
Emperour, that bewitched with the excellent beauties of thy
daughter, haue forsaken mine owne friends, to relieue my
foes, and haue saued thy life, when thou soughtest my losse, I
haue inuested a meane subiect with the estate of a Souldan,
and from a Souldan haue I changed my selfe to procure thy
safetie; Loue (thou great Potentate) hath made me murther
mine own Mercenaries, massacre my natiue friends, yea loue
hath so gouerned my affections, that to enioye it I haue hazarded
my fortunes: yet is the reward of my trauell so great,
and the regarde of Emine so gracious, that were there thousand
kingdom
                     •
                   to aduenture, millions of Souldiers to loose,
hosts of friends to forsake, I would leaue them all to betake
me to Emine; that I am the man, behold the meanes, the armour,
the horse, beholde the wounds, which thy pursuing
Knights inflicted (wherewith hee discouered his thigh) all
which yéeld apparant testimony of my approoued towardnes;
had this action béen attempted by a stranger of meane estate,

the desert had béen mightie; but being practized by thy 
                     〈◊〉
                  
atchieued by thine equal, how worthie 
                     〈◊〉
                   I thy 
                     〈…〉
                  
The Emperour impatient of delay (his ioy was so accomplished)
arose from his royall seate, accompanied with all his
Princes, and ca
                     ••
                  ing his armes about his necke began thus.
I had not thought 
                     •
                  raue Souldan, that such bountie of mind
had remayned in a Barbari
                     •
                  n, to hazard his owne fortune,
and to relieue his foe: but since I see by apparant proofe that
thy vertue is beyond expectation, and thy deserts approoue thy
magnificence, my promise shall bee accomplished, and Emine
and this Empyre, these Péeres and mine owne person, shall
be at the Souldans commaund, onely great Monarke it behoueth
thée this, if thou meane to wed a Christian, to become
a Christian, which if thou shalt effect, such a league of consanguinitie
shall be knit betweene vs, as shall concerne thine own
safetie, and the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of both our subiects. The Souldan
that accompted no other heauen, than enioying Emine, and
rather respected his pleasure, than his profession, voluntarilie
condiscended, and in the presence of al the Estates of the Empyre
was christened by the Pope, that was at that time there
in presence, by the name of Fredericke: great was the solemnitie
in the pallace, and many the Caresses of the Courtiers:
then were Lists set vp, and Trophies erected, and nothing
sounded throughout Rome but the marriage of Emine, who
vnawares was called for by the Emperour, and certified by
signes of his determination. The poore Ladie expecting nothing
lesse than marriage of him she 
                     〈◊〉
                  , sent out plentifull
teares, and spent many bitter sighes to the astonishment
of her father, and the whole assembly continually poynting at
Robert, who in the thickest of the assembly had heard all the

                     •
                  oloured falsehoods, and smiled at them; but he that rather ha
                     •
                  
care of GOD, than the world, set all pompe and 
                     〈…〉
                  
nought, acknowledging his actions to haue been attempted
for conscience sake, not promotion. Merueilous was the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
of Emine, whose eye was neuer off of Robert, séeming
as though with piteous teares she claimed his protection,

which wrought in him a change of colour, and made him together
with the grieuousnesse of his wound to depart out of
the assembly. Emine astonished hereat fell downe in a sound,
and being at last dawed after many milde perswasions of her
father, alleaging how her repulse was disparagement of his
maiestie, she condescended and vouchsafed the accord: great
was the ioy of the Souldan, the reioyce of the Souldiers, the
content of the Princes, y• delight of the priuate: in briefe, the
day following y• solemnisation was to be accomplished. The
rumour of the Souldans successe was no sooner spred thorow
the Campe, but if there were applause in the Citie, there were
merueilous triumphs in the Trenches, in such sort as it happeneth
among Saylers, who when a bitter storme hath béen
past, and their ship in daunger of drowning, forget their olde
domage, and reioyce, their late escape: so fared it with these
Barbarians, who seeing the farie of warre ceased, the cause of
peace commenced, forgot their former broyles, and reioyced
at the preseuce of fortunes benefites. In great delight and iolitie
were these Princes conuersant all the day long, and at
night with no lesse expectation of pleasure, each one betooke
himselfe to his rest; onely Robert who knew the determined
day of his penaunce was expired, and sawe that the Princesse
Emine did mightely affect him, began to cōceaue some sparks
of pitie, gréening that an imp
                     •
                  ous Pagan should enioy such

                     〈◊〉
                  ; and in such sort fared hée, as those that play at the
game of Chesse, still preuenting, but alwaies fearing a mate,
his minde was wholy addicted to God but the portion of the
flesh began to conspire; great was the combat all the night
long betwéene hás affections, now of zeale, then of compassion,
straight of loue, for there is no generous heart but is capable
of the same, The morning meane while began to push

                     •
                  oorth her beauties, wéeping her 
                     〈◊〉
                   swéet 
                     〈◊〉
                   and pearlie
m
                     •
                  ysture on euery tree, plant, and flower in the medowes; the
hills were adorned with the golden beames of the Sunne,
and Rome inriched with all the beauties of Nations, the spacious
galleries 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
pearles, and tissue, euery street was adorned with 
                     〈◊〉
                  , virgins
with lampes of siluer with sweete per
                     •
                  umes and odors
apparelled in white, with Coronets of pearle, their haire scattered
about their bosomes attended for the Bride, and a
noyse of melodious musick, accompanied with delicate voices
awaked both the Princes that were to be espoused. First entered
the Souldan into the great Hall attended with his brauest
Musulmahs, so rich & gor
                     ••
                  ous, that the Sunne which
beheld them seemed to dazle at their deuises: after entered the
Pope with all his Clergie, singing most melodious himmes,
when sodainly all the Princes attending, the Emperour marched
forwarde, who twixt himselfe and Pepin of France, (the
greatest of crowned Kings) brought faire Emine apparelled
like Iuno in all her pompe, and attended with all the beautifull
of Europe; Robert among the rest in a newe fooles attyre,
was a speciall attendant, and oftentimes his heart earned and
his soule sighed to see that another should enioy his title; faine
would he haue spoken, but religious zeale closed his lippes:
In briefe, when the solemne seruice was accomplished, the
Pope in all solemnitie presented himselfe in his Pontificalib
                        ••
                     
                  
to couple these two magnificent Princes together, Emine
was brought foorth, the Souldan addressed, the Ceremonies
were begun, and the soothfastnesse was to be plighted; when
(loe the wonderous workes of almightie GOD) Emine at
such time as their handes should haue béen ioyned, violently
drewe hers backward, and suspited by diuine prouidence (
                     ••
                  
                  ter
she had béen 
                     〈◊〉
                   from her infancie thethert
                     •
                  ) she began
thus.
               Unhallowed Pagan, who to performe thy lust, counterfeitest
Religion, and to attaine my loue, hast coyned a lye;
knowe thou that though thou canst dissemble with the world,
thou canst not bée hidden from GOD: with what face (
                     〈◊〉
                  
Souldan) canst thou claime anothers right? or intitle thy self
to that honour which thy vetters haue deserued? It lyes not
in that weake hand to containe such hardines, in that 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
firmnes, couldest thou reach to that honour wanting faith. It
was not man (ye Princes) it was no humane power (dread
father) but the diuine working of God by the meanes of this
supposed Idiot, that gaue vs conquest: This Robert surnamed
(for his wicked life in times past) the Diuell, who hath
turned his damned deedes to deuotion, is he that reskewed
the Emperour, was armed by mee, was horsed by my command;
and if he be searched, is the very man who was wounded
by your Knights; this Souldans armour is magicall,
his Stéede infernall, himselfe perfidious; why permit you
(Princes) that he who hath soyled his hands in your blouds,
should be serued like a Prince of high bountie? Lay handes
on him, inflict bonds on him, flay the viper ere he sting, and the
Crocodile ere he can deuour. These words were vttered with
a confident and bolde spirit, and all the assembly was abashed
at this wonder; the Souldan stood as a man that had lost his
senses, and the best Romanes began to flocke about Robert.
During these miraculous euents, whilest each mans tongue
was kept mute with meruaile, the holy Recluse entered the
presence (ordayned as it is thought by diuine ordinance) in his
hands bare he the true Armour, and about his neck the girdle
and sworde, hauing a religious Nouice at his heeles who
led the white Steede; who taking Robert by the hand marched
throught the prease, and prostrating himselfe before the
Emperour and Pope, began thus. How many waies (you
tyes of Christendome) hath God permitted error to supplant
the righteous, to the ende that beyond expectation he might
expresse his righteousnesse? The lippes that were shut hath
he opened, and the things that were hidden hath he reuealed;
Patroclus is not Achilles (ye Princes) though he weare his
armour, nor the Foxe the Lyon though he weare his skinne,
nor the Crowe the king of birds, though hee hath borrowed
the feather, nor this Souldan the deseruer, though he hath
claimed the title: but most sacred Emperour, this man is the
cause of your safetie, Christendom is beholding to this prince,
and Normandy famous in this Robert; and that this is hée,

what greater 
                     〈◊〉
                   (before my God) than Emines testim
                     •
                  
                  nie?
hath not God giuen her an instrument to open desert,
which before time was closed with dumnesse? and that this
is hee, what greater proofe than the very Armour, the very
Sword, the very Steede, concealed and kept by me for greater
secrecie? Behold the wound, not inforced by a voluntarie
stroake as is the Souldans, but by a fauouring hand who laboured
to discouer him; if therefore trueth being opened, bee
preferred before error, and co
                     •
                  digne worthines before impietie
and wickednesse, Emperour accept this Prince of Normandy
for thy sonne, who procured thy securitie; for thy kinsman,
who reskewed thy Countrie, so shalt thou performe the
duetie of a iust Prince, and be commended for thy prouidence.
This sayd, he discouered Roberts th
                     •
                  gh, and presented all the
titles of his claime, and crauing priuate conference with him,
was permitted to conuerse with him alone in a hidden chamber:
meane while the Pallace was in an vprore, and some
swords were drawne to assaile the Souldan, who abashed
& ashamed at his discouerie, seemed rather a dead than a liues
man. But the Emperour who sawe in his lookes the tenour of
his loosenes, being a gracious and benigne Prince, withstood
the assailants, and after thankes giuen to the heauens, and
kinde embrace to Emine, he spake in this manner to the Souldan.
Pagan, though it be in my power to cut thee off, it is not
my pleasure to vse discourtesse, I see it was fancie that made
thee faine, and follie that hath procured thy fall, I know thy
estate is desperate, thy souldiers spent, thy Musulmahs discomforted;
and in that I disdaine to combate with these who
are welny conquered, I pitie thee, and pitying thee grant thy
peace: If therefore thou wilt presently depart my Court,
di
                     •
                  lodge thy Campe, and leaue Christendome, thou and thine
shall enioy both life and libertie, and that for Emines sake; if
not, resolue thy selfe to dye, to see thy Nobles destroyed, and
the memorie of thy name entirely exterminate and extinguished.
The Souldan pondering with himselfe his perilous
estate, seeing his loue recureles, and his libertie rechles except

he accepted the opportunitie, answered the Emperour in this
sort. If my fancies haue made me foolish, beare with me Emperour,
more mightie than I haue fallen; for the attainement
of Emine if I haue fained, I must now onely repent it, bearing
a deepe wound in my thigh, but more woe in my heart:
for my life I respect it not, were it not I regard my subiects;
for thy bountie I accept it, and will depart Christendome,
and so relying on thy word I take my leaue, surrendring thee
thy Christianitie, since thou hast here
                     •
                  t me of mine Emine.
This sayd, reuiling and exclayming on destinie, the Pagans
departed, and tru
                     ••
                  ing vp their baggage shipped themselues,
leauing both the siege and Christendome, which was mightily
comforted by their departure.
               By this time had the Recluse absolued Robert, and acquited
him of his penaunce, and aduising him to put on a robe of
maiestie, he brought him into the great Hall vnto the Emperour,
when as kneeling vpon his knee, the braue Norman began
thus. Since my penaunce is performed, and my conscience
discharged, (most mightie Emperour) I must acknowledge
thy inestimable bountie, who for this seuen yeres space
hast maintained me being an abiect in mine own countrie, and

                     •
                  dious both to God & man: for which bountie if I haue done
your maiestie or Christendome any seruice, it was my duetie,
who hauing defaulted in my former life time, ought in my reconciled
yeres to follow honorable actions. The Emperour
hearing his graue and wise salutation, seeing him an amiable
and comely Prince, embraced him, and lifte
                     •
                   him vp, replying
thus. I thanke my God (braue Norman Prince) that he hath
opened truth, to discouer trecherie, & in stead of a Pagan hath
recommended my Emine to a Christian, for which cause hold
take the honour of my estate, and the hope of her father, take
Emine, who by diuine prouidence was ordained for thee,
and by right and duetie appertaineth to thee: and in so
saying hée caused the Ceremonies of Marriage to bee solemnized
betweene them, to the wonderfull reioyce of all

the assistance. Pepin of Fraunce séeing one of his Péeres so
fortunate, wept for ioy, neither was there any one Potentate
that entertained not Robert with heartie loue and kind
                     •
                  esse;
the Empresse reioyced in him, Emine hartely embraced him,
and such was the sollace throughout the Citie, as may not be
expressed. During these pompous solemnities, the Emperour
bethinking him on his promise, caused the Princes to be
assembled, where hee inuested Robert with the Emperiall
Diadem, proclayming him heire apparant of the Empyre after
his decease. In which pompe and triumph I leaue them,
returning a while into Normandy where our Historie began.
            
            
               How A
                     •
                  bert hearing no newes of his sonne, after the terme
of seauen-yeares dyed, leauing the possession of his Dukedome
in the hands of Editha and the Lord Villiers, with
the lamentable treasons that thereupon ensued.
               
                  
                     AVbert the olde Duke of Normandy, after the
departure of his haplesse sonne Robert, liued a
desolate and discontented life, hearing no certaine
notice of his safetie, or securitie, for which
cause he tooke such inward thought, that at such
time as seauen yeares were ouergone and expired, he gaue vp
the ghost, leauing the charge of his Dukedome (till Robert
his sonne might bee founde out) in the handes of Editha his
Duchesse, and Villiers a Peere of his signorie. At such time
as his funerals were fully finished, Villiers sé
                     •
                  ing Editha was
a Princesse of a milde and mercifull nature, nothing delighted
with troubles, or worldy affayres, tooke vpon him the handling
of all controuersie; and so swéete was the baite of signorie
to him, in a short time, that from being an agent for another,
he began to imagine the meanes how to take the whole
possession into his handes: Little suspected hee that Robert
was liuing, and as for Editha since she was a woman, he supposed

it an easye matter to supplant her, and her power: for
which cause, after many conclusions, and melancholie deliberations,
he suborned two false witnesses, who accused the
Dutchesse of poysoning her deceased husband, so couloring
the accusation with probabilities, and corrupting great men
by bribes, that Editha was emprisoned, and after a while
adiudged, which was, either within the tearme of a yeare to
finde out a Champion to defend her truth, or else to be consumed
with fire. The chaste Princesse seeing iniquitie preuaile
against equitie, perceiuing the Iudges eares were sh
                     •
                  t,
and the great mens toongs silent, and beholding her former
friends, how like sommer birds they forsooke her, she cast off
all care of life, grounding her selfe vpon her innocencie, and
returning to prison, led therein a solitarie and lamentable
life, whilst Villiers enioyed the Signiorie. Often and many
were her complaints, accompanyed with feruent prayers,
and diuers times called she to remembrance her former offences,
and bethinking her selfe of her sonne, wept bitterly.
One day looking out of her prison windowe, (from whence
she might beholde the thicke Forrests, and pleasant Meades)
she bethought her selfe how wretchedly she had curssed her
wombe, and the vnhappie fruites of her tempting God: for
which cause, humbling her selfe on her knees, and sheading
teares of compassion, she spake thus. O my God, thou art
iust, but I iniurious: I tempted thee by vnlawfull cur
                     ••
                  es,
thou chastisest me with deserued crueltie: I imputed my
barrainesse to thy wrath, not to my wickednesse, and sought
helpe from the Fiend, in hope to be fruitfull: this my tempting
of thy Maiesty, exempteth me from thy mercie, and my
lewd desires are the cause of my lamentable destruction.
O Mothers learne by me, let him that made all things, moderate
all things: let him that graunteth increase, prefixe
the time of increase, except not against his glory, least he exempt
you of his goodnes: his delayes are no dalliance, his decrées
are deuine: since therfore he doth dispose of vs, let vs not
oppose our selues against him: O father of mercy pardon my

impietie: let mine innocencie haue rescous, as thou art the
God of the righteous: thou that sauedst Susanna succour me;
thou that relieuedst Daniel deliuer me: in this sort, and with
these sighes, full often and many times did this poore Princesse
bemone her mischiefe, exclaiming on the impietie of her
accusers, whilst suspitious Villiers thought euery houre an
age, and euery day a yeare, till her dares were determined,
yet in outward shewe he b
                     •
                  moned her, visiting her oftentimes,
presenting her with many delicates, enterprising with
all possible industrie to rid himselfe of suspition, and 
                     •
                  buse
her simplicitie: diuers of the Princes priuily murmured, séeing
his ambition by his behauiour, and his craf
                     •
                   cloked vnder
curtesie, but as times haue their reuolutions, so truthes
are discouered, which shall manifestly appeare by the sequeale
that in
                     •
                  ueth, wherein it is euidently prooued, that God neuer
fa
                     •
                  leth those who put their trust in his mercie.
            
            
               How Robert after he was inuested in the Empire, heard of
his Fathers death, and departed to take vpon him his
Dukedome, accompanyed with Emine his Empresse,
and Pepin of Fraunce, with other Princes.
               VVHen Robert surnamed Deuill, had in this
sort attained to the Monarchie, enioying the
tipe of worlds felicitie, wherewith ambitious
mindes are greatly delighted, yet shewed he himselfe to be
so farre estranged from vaineglory, that he wholy attributed
his good fortunes to the deui
                     •
                  e Maiestie: his delight was to
conuerse with holie men; his studie the heauenly doctrine, he
entertayned Hermits with great deuotion, and Pilgrims receiued
great presents at his hands: in this sort remained h
                     •
                  
beloued of his equals, and honored of his subiects, 
                     •
                  ffected by
the Emperour, fancied by Emine, till a desire tooke him to reuisit
his owne Countrey, & conuerse with his owne friends,
and 
                     •
                  o to the f
                     ••
                  therance hereof, how occasion ministred it
selfe. It chanced at such time as all the Christian Princes

prepare to make returne into the Countries, in that y• warres
were finished, that Pepin had certayne letters sent vnto him,
whereby hee vnderstoode of the decease of Aubert, and the
estate of the Du
                     •
                  hy, which he imparted with Robert, whose
sodayne sorrow caused the whole Court to be detayned with
disco
                     •
                  tent. In briefe, his heart so earned at the slender and
weake estate of his natiue Countrey, that at last he attayned
licence from the Emperour, to goe visite the same: Emine
likewise was permitted to accompany him, with many other
great Lords, so when all things were in a readynesse, hee
tooke his leaue of the Emperour, who with entire affection,
and tender fauour, embraced both his Sonne and
Daughter, recommending them to the safeco
                     •
                  duit of the
Almightie, and King Pepin, who accompanyed them: and
so long they trauayled with gracious entertaynement in all
great Cities, that at last they arriued on the frontires of
Normandie, when as Robert bethinking him of his Fathers,
losse, began to weepe, whome Emine comforted with
many amiable consolations, and Pepin perswaded with
sound and sage reasons. They had not long trauayled, but
they met a Damosell galloping in great haste, and lamenting
so piteously, that it greeued the beholders: aged shee
was, yet goodly of personage: and being earnest in her hast,
would haue ouerpassed the Princesse, had not Robert stayed
her, demaunding the cause of that her so great expedition.
O Prince (sayd she) for no lesse thou seemest, hinder not my
haste, least thou harme an innocent: for why, my let is the
losse of such a 
                     〈◊〉
                  , who hath not her equall in the world
for vertue▪ yet shortly is like to perish through treason and
villanie. Robert knowing her countenance, questioned further,
and his minde perswaded him, that the cause neerely
touched 
                     〈◊〉
                  , as in sooth it afterwards prooued, for the Lady
ripped vp vnto him the whole discourse of Edithas imprisonmēt,
her 
                     •
                  ccusatiō for poisoning her husband, y• subtil & maligna
                     •
                  t
insinuatiōs of Villiers, neither pret
                     •
                  rmitted she any thing

that might concerne his Mistresse, or moue affection: she
tould how his Ladie was adiudged to death within three
dayes, if she found not a Champion, (for onely three dayes
remayned of the yeare) she declared the earnest haste of the
accusers, and concluded thus: Now noble Prince, since
thou knowest the cause of my trauaile; if courage serue thee
in the attempt, O be forward, and helpe the forsaken, for
more noble canst thou not fight for, more gratious canst thou
not aduenture for: but if thou preferre thy reioyce before
iustice, pleasure before prowesse, and beare the name of a
Knight, but not the nature, O stay me not, stay me not good
Prince, I will seeke out Pepins Court of Fraunce, where
are valiant Knights and vertuous, sterne in rigor, studious
of right; who if they forsake this cause, are worthie to entertaine
none. This discourse finished she with aboundant
teares, neither was there any in the company so hard harted,
who be wept not Edithas miserie. Robert inflamed with displeasure,
replied thus: Lady, thou hast found a Champion,
seeke no further, heare is Pepin to allow him, and a Princesse
to appoint him: this sayd, he in priuate conferred with
the King of Fraunce and Emine, desiring them to take easye
iourneys, whilst he and the messenger intended the safetie of
Editha: the request was so reasonable, that it was quickly
graunted him▪ wherevpon he tooke his horsse and armour,
and trauailed with the auncient Lady, resoluing himselfe
in euery respect of that he suspected: yet concealed he himselfe,
though she required his name verie earnestly, and taking
vp his lodging neere the Citie of Roane, he charged
the Lady to goe and comfort her Mistresse, assuring her
that she had a Champion that either would dye or acquite
her. The Lady was not 
                     ••
                  ack to accomplish his commaund,
but so schooled her Mistresse by comfortable admonitions,
that she who before times was altogether comfortlesse, began
to gather some consolation. And now the prefixed day
was arriued, when Villiers desirous to effect his pretended
tirannie, had erected an ample and faire Listes in the chiefest

and fairest playne adioyning to Roan, building sumptuous
Scaffolds for the Iudges, prouiding place of audience for
the prisoner, leauing nothing vnsought for, that pertayned
to that tragedie: and at such time as the assembly of estates
was set, he brought foorth the Champion, a kinsman of his
owne, well instructed in armes, and resolued in the complot
of treason. This braue Caualier ritchly mounted, bonded his
horsse before the iudgement seate, offering to doo his de
                     •
                  oire
toward the approbation of the Dutchesse treacherie. Then
was the prisoner called for, where Editha carying in her
lookes the badge of modestie; in her behauiour the courage
of a Matron; apparrailed in black Ueluet, and couered with
a vaile of black Tissue, ascended her Scaffold, attended by
all the chiefe Ladyes of Normandie, who to testifie their melancholie,
were in like manner attyred mournefully. After
that Editha had done her obedience to the Iudges & Estate,
she was demaunded for her Champion, who returned this
answere. It is extreame iniurie, and no iustice (you Fathers)
when Princes shalbe condemned like priuate persons,
without respect of their Maiestie, or regard of their accusers:
for otherwise was Auberts hope (ye Lords) who appoynted
me to commaund you, and not to be condemned by you: but
dutie I perceiue was buried with him, and those that honored
him in his life time, it was not for loue, but in hope to get
liuing. I am accused for poysoning Aubert, ye Peeres, and
you your selues were eye witnesses of his naturall death,
when no signe of treason, no token of violent death, 
                     •
                  ppeared
either before his death, or after his departure. Had he taken
potions, they should haue wrought, but you knowe there was
no violence in his pangs, but euen the infirmitie of age that
fashioned him to his graue. But you will say there are witnesses,
and what alledge they? forsooth that I bought poyson,
but of whome? that I tempered poison, but where? that
I ministred poyson, but when? were you as forward to examine
circumstances, as you are affected to listen to complaints,
you would blush either at your wilfull blindnesse, or

                  
                     •
                  ndeserued malice. But be it as you pretend, adiudge me to
the fire, yet shal I dye innocent; call me murtheresse, I know
I am innocent; for my Champion, I haue not sought him, but
God hath sent him: if he come not at the summons, let my

                     〈◊〉
                   be consumed, this is the aime of mine enemie, and the
worst of your enuie. This conclusion she vetered with confident
boldnesse, insomuch as Villiers blushed, and some of the
Peeres began to suspect him: well, the summons was sounded
according to order, and braue Robert of Normandie
boldly entered the Listes, offering to aduenture his life in the
behalfe of Editha. Great was the ioy of all the Ladyes, to see
so goodly a Knight enterprise the Dutchesse right, and Editha
in thought seemed to claime some part of him: but leauing
tedious circumlocutions, this in briefe was the effect of the
matter, the Champions were sworne, and the Iudges appoynted,
and after sound of Trumpet, and Proclamation,
the Combate was commenced. Great was the courage of
the accuser, but greater the constancie of the defendant, the
one fought for money, the other fought for his Mother, the
one tru
                     ••
                  ed to his force, the other to his faith, the one fought
with feare, the other with confidence, in briefe, the one no
lesse animated by amitie, than the other emboldned by equitie,
after theyr Launces were broken, they betooke them to
theyr Swoords, where (after some small resist) Robert
lent his aduersarie such a stroke, that he cut off his right
arme, and killed his Horsse, and nimbly buckling himselfe
vnto his enemie, who prepared to flye, rent off his Helmet
fro
                     •
                   his head, and rudely casting him on the earth, commaunded
him either to discouer the truth, or hee was but
dead. It is woonderfull to see the affection of faithfull Commons
to their naturall Princesse, for no sooner was the appealant
ouerthrowne, but they all with common voyc
                     •
                  
cryed out, God saue Editha our true Princesse and innocent.
Villiers was abashed, and descending from the iudgement
seate, sought meanes verie politiquelie to make away

the vanquished, before the villanie were discouered: but
Robert preuented the same, for menacing him that was
in his daunger with present death, hee in open assemblye
discouered the Treason, the Complot of Villiers for the
Dukedome, leauing nothing vntouched, that might manifest
the Dutchesse innocencie. This his confession so moued
Robert, that taking Villiers by the heare of the head,
hee drewe him to the Iudgement seate, causing the Escheu
                     •
                  s
of Roan to lay holde on hym, when mounting vp
the Scaffold where the Princesse sate, hee tooke her by
the hand, and conducted 
                     •
                  r to the chiefest seate of Iudgement,
and opening his Beauer, hee humbling himselfe on
his knee, spake thus;
               Though my vnworthinesse before times (most gratious
Dutchesse, and curteous Mother) deserue not the sight
of so reuerent a person, yet acknowledging my faultes,
and beseeching your fauour, beholde your Sonne Robert
(for his wickednesse before times surnamed the Deuill)
now humblie prostrate before you in all du
                     •
                  tie: though I
haue béen a corosiue to you in your youth, behol
                     •
                  e, God
hath left mee to be a comfort to you in your age: Reioyce
(Madame) and as appertayneth to you, punish this Traytor
according to his demerits. And you vnnaturall Normans,
that neglecting duetie, haue affected doublenesse,
growe ashamed at your follyes, and confesse your faults,
who haue countenan
                     •
                  ed a Traytor, and contemned your
Soueraigne. Editha deuoured in ioy, in stead of reply, fell
vppon his neck in a sound, and with such entyre affection
embraced him, that it was thought that both their bodyes
were vnited together with a mutuall simpathie of affections:
and after she was reuiued a little, stealing a long kisse
from his lips, she began thus. And art thou yet liuing my
Sonne, or are mine eyes deceiued? Yea thou liuest my
Sonne, for nature tells me so, planting such a ioy in my
heart to sée thée, as I neuer had so great will to sigh for thée.

Oh the fruite of my wombe, and the comfort of thy father, had
Aubert liued to behold thee my sonne, to haue seene thy wilde

                     •
                  alliance exchaunged to wise discourse; thy fond behauiour, to
affable benignitie, thy diuellishnes to discretion; oh the ioy,
oh the sollace; but hee from heauen beholdeth thee, and I on
earth embrace thee. The Péeres and Ladies cut off her further
discourse, each one presenting him homage and humble
salute: whereupon taking Editha with him, and placing her
on the right hand, he with great grauitie ascended the Iudgment
seate, and spake thus to all the assemblie. Were I as
insolent, as I haue béen accustomed (my countrimen) neither
would I ascend the place of Iudgement, nor condiscend to
administer Iustice: but since God hath humbled my heart,
and altered my affects, and made you happie, in calling mée
home, hearken to me my Subiects, and consider on my sayings:
If absence alter not heritage, as it cannot, and forgetfulnesse
chaunge not dueties, as it should not, you ought yee
Normans to acc
                     •
                  mpt me for your Lord, and accompanie my
care for you, with your loue towardes mee: and for this loue
and duetie you imploy on mee, I must leuell out and deuise
meanes to preserue you, which can no better bee administred
but by iustice, which ordereth all things with so determined
iudgement, that the good are maintained for their goodnesse,
and the bad punished for their iniustice: Since therefore in
the entrance of my gouernment I finde cockle that hath choked
the corne, weedes that haue ouergrowne the herbes, and
peruerse mē who haue inuerted policie, I will take the sword
in hand like a commaunder, and roote out this cockle from the
corne, these weedes from the herbes, these rebells from the
righteous, that the good may better flourish, and the bad stand
in more feare; for which cause (ye Normans) since it is confessed,
and approoued, that Villiers with his competitors, haue
conspired against the Ladie Duchesse my mother, our will is
that they perish in the same fire they prouided for the faultles,
and suffer the same punishment they ordained for the innocent.
All the whole people applauded his righteous iudgement,

and iustice was orderly executed, whilest each one meruailed
at his excellencie and wisedome. After then that he had receaued
homage of the Péeres, and was inuested in the Dukedome,
at such time as hee was entering Roan with his Ladie
mother, the King Pepin with faire Emine richly accompanied
presented themselues; great was the gratulations twixt Pepin
and Editha, who courted her in this manner. Madame,
though your sonne Robert departed from you a rebell, hée is
returned in royaltie, being not only Prince of Normandy, but
Emperour of Rome, this his Ladie and wife, these his followers
and welwishers; so is your sorrowe paied home at last
with great sollace, and the griefe you haue endured requi
                     •
                  ed
with gladnesse. Editha when she heard these tydings was rauished
with ioy, humbly entertayning Emine, and honouring
her sonne; great was the triumph in Normandy for the libertie
of the Duchesse, the returne of the Duke, and after long
and festiuall sollace, Pepin receaued homage and fealtie for
the Duchie, and returned to Paris in great pompe: Robert,
Emine, and Editha remained in Roan, till afterwards being
called to Rome vpon the decease of the Emperour, he became
of an irreligious person, the onely royall paragon of the
world.
            
         
         
            
            Epilogus.
            GEntlemen, I haue giuen colours to a rare conceit, as ful
of wonder as worth, as full of perfection as pleasure,
in which I haue satisfied humours, and performed historie,
obseruing with Apelles the proportion of lines, as
Protogenes did the disposition of lineaments, keeping such
method in my humours, as the spheres in the heauens: where
Venus is placed neere Mars to correct his mallice, and mirth
is planted in this discourse to detect the imperfections of
melancholie. If Prosperus seeke for contemplation hee shall
finde it; if Quintilian for inuention, hee may meete it; yet
are all things tempered with that equabilitie, that wee contemplate
no more than we may auowe, nor inuent no more
than wee can verifie. Here may the dispayring father finde
hope in his sonnes vntowardnesse, and the vntoward sonne
take example to please his dispayring father: here is Eben,
though blacke in colour, yet abyding triall: let those that
make no Idoll of their wits, be masters o
                  •
                this work; for the
rest they shall if they reade, finde a thorne where they seeke
a thistle, and a reason to condemne themselues, though they
commend not this sequell: and so courteous Gentlemen relying
on your fauours, I bid you farewell.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   