
      
         
            
            
            Prosopopeia CONTAINING THE TEARES OF THE holy, blessed, and
sanctified Marie, the Mother of GOD.
            
               Luke 2. 
               And moreouer, the swoord shall pearce thy soule, that the thoughts
of many hearts may be opened.
            
            LONDON, Printed for E. White. 1596.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT NOBLE, THE MOTHER COVNTESSE, COVNTESSE of Darby,
and the vertuous and deuout Countesse of Cumberland, Charitie in life, and
eternitie after death.
            Right noble Madames (and more noble in that deuout) I haue made
you patronesses of a iust cause, the teares of a matchlesse mother, shed for a
Sauior & a sonne: If to begin your new yeere you shall but peruse these in
deuotion, I doubt 
                  〈◊〉
                but they wil proue holy
motiues of meditation: in shedding one teare with Marie, you shall confesse
with Barnard, that you purchase much interest in Iesus. I ioyne you in this
greatest of your honors, not for your births 
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
                
                
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
                
                sake, (for wee may disparage our selues) neither your wealth sake,
(for riches are as the deaw in Aprill) but for your vertue sake (which
retaineth this qualitie of the Sunne, communicating his beames to all things,
inriching euerie one without impouerishing himself.) Good Madames, accept these
teares in their nature, and hold it better to weepe many times with Iesus and
Marie, than to laugh with Belial and the world for the world hath deceiued
you long, but pietie will eternize you for euer. If you shall but grace what I
giue, my desires are satisfied: if giue what you owe, you shall grieue when you
reade, if as you reade you consider, you haue the end of true consideration.
For to lament sinne, is to redeeme sinne.
            Noble Ladies, vse not these giftes as the Romane Matrones their
puppies, spit not in their mouthes to make them waite at your heeles: neither
cocker them at your breastes, least Caesar holde you more  careful
of your whelpes than your sonnes: but vse them as the goldsmith his mettal,
trie them at the test of your contemplation, and so prise them. God worke that
in your hearts, that my deuotion intendeth to your soules, and blesse you in
giuing mee grace to serue him.
            
               Your Honors most bounden, T. L.
            
         
         
            
            
            To the Readers.
            
               IT was a custome amongest the Cretans, (gentle readers) when
they intended to vse their most bitter and vehementest execratitio, to desire
that those whom they hated, should fixe their whole delights and likings on an
inueterate and euill custome. This Cretan course, I feare me, is fallen vppon
our age, wherein men are so accustomed to vanitie, that nothing is pleaseth
which is not pleasant, nothing is sought after which is not amorous. Which
lamentable error and sicknes of our time, beeing so ordinarie, I almost waxe in
despaire of the happie issue of my deuotion: for some I know will condemn me,
& that iustly, for a Galba (who begat foul children by night, and
made fayre pictures by daie:) To whom I answere, that I paint fair 
things in the light of my meditation, who begot the soule forepassed progenie
of my thoughts, in the night of mine error. Some other, (and they
superstitiously ignorant) will accuse me for writing these teares, desiring
rather with Brentius, to impaire the honor of the mother of God, than
with Bernard to inhance it. To whom I answer, that it is better
imitating many holy mens deuotion, than cleauing to a few mens foolish and
gracelesse contemptes. For other that haue wept (as Peter his
apostasie, Marie her losse & misse of Christ,) their teares
wrought from them either for repent or loue. But these teares of Marie
the blessed, are not onely ratified by a motherlie compassion, a working
charitie, & vnstayned loue, but by a manifest prophesie, wherein
Zacharie tolde her, Et tuam ipsius animam pertransibit
gladius, And the sword of sorrow shall pearce thy heart. And the reason is
anexed, To the end that the harts of many may be opened. This swoord of griefe,
sayth Beda, is the swoord of sorrow for our Lordes passion,
Chrisostome and Bernard, the sword of loue. To good men therefore let this
suffice, that in imitation  of no lesse than fiue & twenty
ancient, holy, and Catholique Fathers of the Church, I haue enterprised this
Prosopopeia: to the bad I yeeld no reason at all, who wanting
deuotion, can haue no feeling at all. Some there bee that will not onely gybe
at this complaint, but impaire the person, drawing from Maries
demerite all that which the fathers in her life helde marueilous, to whome
beside the speciall testimones of Iohn Damascene, and holy Gregory, who haue
written largely of her dignities, I oppose that of Bernards, Quod seminae
obtemperat, humilitas sine exemplo, quod faemina Deo principetur, sublimitas
sine modo. Some there be that will accuse the stile, as to stirring, some
the passion, as too vehement. To the first I will be thankfull, if they amend
mine errours: to the next I wish more iudgment, to examine circumstances. Some
(and they too captious) will auowe that Scriptures are misapplied, fathers
mistaken, sentences dismembred. Whome I admonish (and that earnestlie) to
beware of detraction, for it either sheweth meere ignorance, or mightie enuie,
for  the detracter first of all sheweth himselfe to be void of
charitie, and next of all extinguisheth charitie in others. To leaue them
satisfied therefore, let this sussise, I haue written nothing without example,
I build no wares on mine owne abilitie. If therefore they hold it mistaken
which they haue not read, let them acquaint mee wyth their mislikes, I will
further their readings and establish their iudgements.
            Finally, whosoeuer Turke like, seeketh to kill mee with reproofes,
for cherishing him with meditation, let him beware of ingratitude, least
according to the opinion of the Platonikes, hee proue Corpus
obliuiosum, a forgetfull and fantastike bodie.
            Hauing thus preuented the captious, I turne to you curteous and
vertuous readers, to whome I commit and commende these labors, wherein if you
exercise your selues you shall gouern your senses, which as Gregorie
witnesseth, are certaine windowes, whereat the waters of temptation doo enter.
In meditating with Marie, you shall finde Iesus: in knowing Christs
sufferance, you shall be instamed in his loue: in hearing his wordes, you shal
partake his  wisdome, which who inioteth, leaueth the world as
transitorie, and seeketh after heauen for immortalitie. Heereon Augustine
exclaimeth, Vnhappie is he that knoweth all things, & knoweth thee not:
blessed is he that knoweth thee to despise all things. If these stirreanie fire
of deuotion in you, then shal I not greue to see the Baalits, my reprouers,
mangle themselues for shame, whilest the fire of Gods intire loue consumeth
and drieth the sacrifice, Briefly, our Lord send a plentifull haruest of teares
by this meditation, that the deuout heereby may wax more confident, the
incredulous beleeuing: the indifferent, more zealous, that now at last after I
haue wounded the world with too much surfet of vanitie, I maye bee by the true
Helizeus, cleansed from the leprosie of my lewd lines, & beeing washed in
the Iordan of grace, imploy my labour to the comfort of the faithfull.
            
               Yours T. L.
               
            
         
         
            
            ERRATA.
            Io A 4: page, li. 18 for sonne hath died, read son died In the 6:
p, li:14, for sonne, read syen: in the 7, li, 4 for rest read rest, l, 19: for
lost read lest: p 8, l. 8: for queen read quiet, p. 9, l: 16 & 17, read,
one indiuided graue, might burie two indiuid, p, 10, l, 16, hart, read hearse
p, 12, l, 4, for dissolution, read desolation: In C p, 8, li, 3, for a tree,
read fiue p, 10, li, 11, read them, beeing reproued, p, 13 l, 17, desires, read
disasters In D p, 16 Od
                  •
               tus read Odilus; E, In
p, 1, l, 20, mortuam, read mortuum.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE TEARES of MARIE the mother of Christ.
            
               AS soone as our Sauioure had paide the tribute of our
redemption on the tree of the Crosse, and suffered in the flesh, for the
offences of fleshly men, iust and compassionate Ioseph, (with his
associates, who had begged the bodie, and taken the true Isaac from
the pile of the sacrifice) wrapped the prison of Christs eternitie in fayre
linnen  clothes, addressing himselfe to beare him to his
sepulchre, but Mary the maiden mother, who during the time of his
passion had welnigh emptied all the riuers of her compassion, & rifled the
treasures of her remorse, to lament her sonnes most tragike martyrdome,
accompanying her deuotion with their duty, as they wrapt him, shee wept him; as
fitie zeale assisted their hands sounding griefe wrought on hir heart; her eie
grudged at that their hands did execute, and hir eyes onely griefe was so
vehement, that they executed themselues in executing griefe.
            Ahlas (amiable Ladie) howe satest thou like the desolate turtle
weeping thy make? How many legions of miseries were armed against thy sole
& singular patience? Thy dead ioyes gaue thy sorows f
                  ••
               ck, & sorrow  was so actiue in thee, as if thou
hadst bin wholy resolued into sorrowe. They that beheld thy griefe were amazed
to beholde it, yet thou in suffring it, thoughtest all to little for him thou
sufferedst. 
Chrisost. in Genes. Bernard Homil. 2. de
  virgin. Thou flaming bush replenished with fire, yet neuer burning,
thou flourishing rod of Aaron swiftly springing, thou lock of
Gedeon filled with celestiall dew, how neere neighbours were thy lips
to the dere lips of thy sonne? How redy were thy handes to discouer thy cause
of griefe, to the end thou mightest couer those lims which did cō
               fort thee in
life. Thornes could not let thee frō kissing his torne face, frō his dead
countenance grew thy disconsolate comfort: The suppose of what hee was, made
thee greeue, that so he is, & the hope of that he would be, 
gouerned and bridled the sorrow wherein thou wouldest be. Ah faire among the
daughters of Sion, hee that had seene thy cheeks (like clusters of grapes in
Engaddi) become more pale than the frosty face of Apennine:
hee that had seene the mother imbrued in the bloud of her Sonne, the Son
bedewed with his mothers teares, coulde hee leaue off teares, except hee had
for sworne them? Oh ye Angels of peace weep with this virgin, mourne heauens,
droup starres, the Lord of heauen hath suffered, and Marie sigheth
for him: the Sonne hath dyed for all, the mother deads her heart with sorow,
for the Lorde of all: his dead bodie is the mirror of her losse: her liuely
griese is the motion and spirite of her loue: she  exclaimes on
cuerie sense, but they forsake their offices: his eies will not beholde her,
his tongue will not salute her, his handes will not imbrace her, his eares will
not heare her, yet yeldeth her charitie such vigour to all her senses, that in
looking on him, shee seemeth to giue his dead eie a second sight; his deaf
eare, a relenting attention; his senselesse armes and hands, a habite of
imbrace, only seeing the tong the vnkindest member in requiting her, she
betrothed her tongue to complaint, and thus most pensiuely lamented.
            O my God,Ieremy 9. lend mine eyes a well
of teares, for they must weepe a worlde of wrongs. Let the voice of my
complaintes pearce the heauens, and let the centre shake, to heare my
shriks.
            
            Ahlas this day must I be tender,1: Reg:
  30 hauing as many sorrows to weepe for, as daies to liue; and no daie to
liue, that hath not his legion of sorrowes. Mine eyes breake my heart, when I
consider what my heart must discharge by mine eyes. Oh Lord thou seest my
wrong, take thou my cause vpon thee, for an infinite passion is required to
lament my infinite losse. I am the tygresse depriued of her young whelp, the
sacred tree that haue lost my sonne, that altar of heauen, who want my
sacrifice, the throne of Salomon,
               Chri: ho
                     •
                  de Io: Baptist Hier. in 44 Ezechiel Greg: Nissen de
  nat: Dom Bernard super missus hortum condusum, &c who faile my
king: the orientall gate, who lacke the bridegrome. I am the root of
Iesse, the high mountain, the ladder of Iacob, the
propitiatorie, the tower of Dauid, the terrestrial paradise, yet am I
not  in this, that I want my braunch, I lack my increase, I faile
of my Angell, I am'depriued of my tenant, I am robbed of my keeper, and rest
of my citizen.
            Come yee daughters of Ierusalem, and weepe with mee, beholde, hee
that leadeth captiuitie captiue, is nowe a captiue, and I in looking on am a
caitiue: Beholde the golde that was bright, is become dimme: the doues eyes are
growen darke: the growing Lillye is quite choaked by thornes: weepe yee
foolish virgins, your bridegroome is parted. Feede with poore Marie
on the bread of tribulation, for I haue lost a sonne, and you lost your
Sauiour.
            Ah looke with mee you iudiciall eyes of Israell, beholde riches
apparelled in pouertye;  beautie obscured in darknes, charitie
exemplified in death, death crucified by charitie. Beholde him whose beautie
the Sunne & Moon admire, whose maiesty the heauens and earth reuerence,
whose wisedome yeeldes wisedome to the queene of Angels, by whose beautie the
colledge of all happie soules are maintained: beholde him liuelesse, to get
you lyfe, breathlesse, for your benefite, naked, to giue you clothing, wounded
for your weal, bleeding, for your behest, and can you chuse but weepe with the
mother the losse of such a sonne? Red waxe in the Sunne becommeth white: hard
diamondes in vineger waxe softe:Bernard. Granaten. li.
  meditationū
                one Summer ripes many fruites: since then the Sunne of
iustice hath shined vpon you, be ye mollified like waxe, lenyified like
diamonds, tipened like fruite: that  the water of angels may drop
from your eies, that the fire of charitie may cause compassion distill from
your braines, so that weeping with me so great a losse as I weepe, the world
may know the want of him we weepe for.
            I lifte not vp my voice with Esau to weepe, hee found a
brother, I haue lost a sonne. Iacob kissed Rachel and wept
for ioy to see her: I kisse the bodie of my sonne, and weepe because I see him
not: Oh would my Rachel might bee his woundes, woulde my concubine
were his crosse: would his winding cloathes were my wedding coats, &
indiuided graue might bear to indiuided heartes. The daughters of Israel wepte
ouer Saul, and hee a wicked king:2. Reg. 1 O
yee daughters of Ierusalem weepe, houle, and lament, a Sauior is
departed from you, a iust king  hath suffered. Let your faces bee
swolne with weeping, for I wil water my couch with teares. Let the voice of my
mourning bee heard in your streetes, for the noise of tribulation is harbored
in my heart. Weepe discomfortable teares, and I wil mingle my drinke with
weeping: 
salme 102 with weeping conduct that Lord
to the graue, who weepingly bewailed, and be wailingly wept ouer your
Citie.
            Inforce your selues to weepe,em. 14
whilest my eyes faile me thorough weeping: powre your teares on his heart,
whilest I feede on teares daie and night. I will powr all my teares into his
wounds,
                  
                     •
                  salme 50 he
will put all your teares into his bottell.
            Let your teares run like a riuer, & let my teares be seas to
suck them vp, only assist me in my strong weeping and teares, and he will wipe
awaie  all your teares. Why claime I partners in my griefe, who
haue no partners in my loue? No creatute loued thee deerer in thy life, &
shal I seeke associats in bewailing thee? Ah my son, could ought but death
depart thee and mee? Nay, coulde there be one step betwixt mee and death, who
onelye in death maye now seeke thee?
            O Iesu my Father, my Sonne, see heere an indissoluble
Enigma,
               Enigma inextricabil-Maria est virgo,
  mater, sponsa, filia. Benedictus in vita Marie I a Virgine, had thee a
Sonne; thou a son, hadst mee a spouse; my sonne is my father, and I am the
daughter of my sonne. I will then weepe for thee as my father, sigh for thee as
thy daghter, die for thee as thy spouse, and grieue for thee as thy mother:
& as thou art wonderfully mine, so will I weepe such a labyrinth of
teares, as no mortall mourner shalbe able to tract them.  I will
dissolue my relenting, & yelding passions with all their fruites, to
lament thee as a sonne, I will put on the roabes of dissolution to mourne for
thee as my spouse, I wil gather & ingrosse al griefe, to weep for thee as
my father, & beginning where I end, and ending where I began, I will make
my tears famous in their continuance, and my loue more inflamed by thinking on
thee.
            I coniure you ye daughters of Ierusalem to looke on me,
but weepe no more with me, I lament a sonne lost, to teach you to weepe for the
sorowes of your children to come: but if the entrailes of your pittie, &
springs of compassion must needes breake out, weepe you onely his harmes in
life, & let me bewaile the losse of him by death: my confident minde and
firme constancie,  when the world was disturbed at his passion,
made me peremptorie: when the earth trembled, I was not troubled,Bernard in Medit. whē the pilets of heauen were shaken, I
sounded not, they sell, I stood: now am I drowned in the sea of bitternes, his
eie of compassion (the pilot in those seas) hath lefte mee, the helme of my
hope is broken,Granatensis lib de vita Christi. the
sunne of my comfort is eclipsed, hee hath past the brierie & thornie paths,
the scourges hath registred his patience on his backe, the nailes haue tied
his triumphs, our sinnes, his bodie to the crosse, I niurie hath spit her
venom, Infamie hath doone his worst, Iustice hath ransackt his right: wayle
this yee daughters of Ierusalem, for your children shall wring for it,
I onely exclaim on death, death hath triumphed ouer life, til glory ouercome
death, the holie one hath perished,  fished, & seeth no
corruption: one daies, one houres, one minutes want of that I loue, maks euery
day an age, euerie houre a million of ages, euerie minute an eternitie of
sorrow, for that I want.
            O you that passe this waie & beholde this bodie, you that
looke on these wounds, & see these lims; tell me, Is not beautie oppressed?
Maiestie imbased? Innocencie martired? Come neere and iudge if anie griefe
may bee compared with mine? The fairer children we haue the dearer we loue
them, and shuld I who bare the mirrour of all beautie in my wombe, cease to
weep for him? You men of Israel that beholde this, bee not amazed at my
griefe, my loue was extreame, my griefe must not be extenuate: the grace was
great to beare Christ, the courage is as great to bewaile him  his
beautie was infinite, and shall my moanes bee definite? These thornes which
martyrize his beautious browes, this bloud which bedeweth his bloudlesse
face, these woundes that disgrace his blessed bodie, this humilitie in so great
& mighty a monarch, 'are prickes and spurs to egge you vnto repentance;
springes to washe you from your wickednesse, gates to bring you to glory: all
these are but stinges to stir you to loue God, mirrors in which you see his
beautie, books in which you reade his wisedome, and preachers which teach you
the waie to heauen. Oh thou paschall lambe,Ambrose in
  Math. whose bloud hath bin sprinkled on the timber of the cross! Oh thou
by whō men are deliuered frō ye thraldom of Egipt, & the captiuity of
the prince of this world, whose death killed their death, whose sacrifice 
 satisfied for their sinnes. Whose bloud deliuereth them from the
chastising Angell, whose meeknes pacifieth the ire of the father, and whose
innocencie deserueth for them true securitie and iustice.
            Thou booke which the Prophet sawe written both within and with
out,sech. 2 why striue not men by theyr sighs to
breath life into thee? And why should not my cries of compassion recall thy
spirit? Ahlas my God, sinne hath gotten the vpper hand, these Iewes are amazed,
thy mother vnable, their zeale cold, my power small, the vnbeleeuing are many,
and penitents haue too fewe teares to bewaile thee: yet while teares yeeld me
anie tribute, sighes vouch safe me anie succour, tongue affoord me anie words,
I will weep for thee, sigh for thee, and talke of thee, desiring rather to
surfet in  wordes, than to shroude my zeale, and rather die in
bewailing thee to much, than liue to lament thee too little.
            O thou glasse of grace, who hath bespotted thee? who hath brought
thee into the shadow of death? Ah deare soule, what northwind of sin hath
blowen hether al this tempest? meeknesse could not offend, patience did not
insult, innocencie was faultlesse: the vvolfe shoulde haue suffered, not the
lambe: the guiltie, not the guiltlesse. Oh the immeasurable reach of thy
mercie, I haue spied the insearchable bent of the same, thou hast lefte life to
reuiue them that loath thee: suffred death, for such as detracted from thee,
borne mans infirmities, and satisfied his sinnes.
            O grace beyond all conceit, O marucilous mysterie: Thou diedst 
 for man, man declineth from thee: thou sufferedst for his sinnes,
he sigheth not for thy death.Prouerb. 6 O men swift
footed to run to wickednes, haue you no affects to bewaile him who suffered for
your defects? Wil you not weep for the prophet that died for your profit? Haue
you no teares to spend for him, whose life is spent for you? O ingratefull, O
iniurious, drawe neere and behold a mother bewailing your ingratitude: a son
dead for your redemption: and though you lament him not for the plentious
consolations you haue reiceiued by him, yet grieue for him for my plentious
griefe sake, who haue lost all my ioye for your generall comfort.
            Beholde these lippes are closed which were wont to vtter oracles
of comfort: those eyes are shut  which neuer behelde your
infirmities without flouds of compassion, the handes are maymed which were
liberallye opened to all good workes, the feete are wounded that brought you
tidinges of peace, eache parte of him is thus mangled, to amende you: hurt, to
heale you: galled, to doo you good: pearced, to worke your profite: And haue
you no one teare to tender for his kindness?
            Ah ingratefull that yee are, and more insensible than beastes,
more cruell than tygers, more harde than stones: the Sunne put on mourning
garmentes, when my sonne suffered, and shall not the swoorde of afflictions
pearce your entrayles to beholde this tragedie? The vaile of the Temple rent
from the top to the bottome,  and will you not rent your heartes
with ruth, to regard his rent bodie? The earth trembled for feare, and wil you
not weep for pittie? Stones breake in sunder, and shal not your stonie harts
wax tender? The dead for sooke their graues, to grieue for him, and shal not
the liuing despise their delights to lament him?.
            Ah iust Abel,
               
                  
                     •••
                  aeseos thy bloud cryeth for reuenge, and hath pearced
heauen, but it is dispersed and despised on earth.
                  
                     •
                  enes. 37 Ah holy
Ioseph, thy bloudie coate hath broached a spring of remorse in
Iacobs eies, though thy brethren lament thee not. The chosen
Israelites mourn for their Sampson,
               
                  
                     •
                  id. 6 though the Philistians afflicte thee.
Oh men, the Saints in heauen blesse this bodie, you sinners on earth will not
bewaile it: the heauens shew his greatnes, yet men on earth acknowledge not
his goodnes,  the starres declare his diuinitie, men decline not
to see his dead humanitie: the flowers of the fields testifie his beautie, but
the wormes of the earth sorrowe not his obscuritie.
            O you race of Adam, he that created all things without
trauell, gouerned them without care, sustained them without thought, and
possessed them without necessity, now lieth heere dead, trauelled by sorrow
and death, blinde to make you see, senselesse to make you feel, subiect to
make you soueraignes, and shall he haue so much care of you, & you so
little compassion of him? Oh you hardned in heart, blinded in vnderstanding,
surfeted in sensualitie, wil not then your stony harts otherwise suffer ye to
weepe, come gather teares from the wel-head of his benefits, that you may
assist me  to bewail him: he hath drawen you from your bannishment
to your blessing, from obscuritie to life, frō death to eternitie. What he
punished in the angells, he pittied in you: what he persecuted in
himselfe,
                  
                     ••
                  . 14 he
hath pacifid for you. In the old law whosoeuer had falne into the vncleannes
of leprosie, was thus cured and thus cleansed, the priest taking two sparrows,
when he had slain the one, dismissed the other, & anointing the sick of
the leprosie with the bloud of the dead one, hee thereby recured the sicke,
& purged the vncleannes. And what figure is this, ô ye sonnes of
vanitie, but the tipe of your owne imperfections: you are spiritually falne
into the leprosie of sin, this noble sacrifice, this sacred priest hath taken
two sparrows, his bodie and soule, to cleanse you of your leprosie, his bodie
hath hee suffered to die, to bee rent, to bee  torne, to bee
whipte for you, his soule hee hath dismissed, and by the bloud issuing from his
wounds he hath clensd your leprosy,Animā nullus potest
  occidere. Math 10 ratified his couenāt, shut you in the arms of
mercye, shuted you with your wedding garmēts. Oh then though his sufferance
touch not your harts let his benefites turne them: weep, weepe on him that
praieth for you as your priest, praieth in you as your head, and must bee
intreated by you as your God. Behold your phisition whom desire of gold hath
not drawen to you,Ierem. 107 but intirenes of mercye
hath prouoked to assuage your miserie. Beholde that Christ that hath vnited you
to God, reconciled you with his bloud, & vrged compassion for you with
his tears: your sins haue separated you from him,Ierem.
  59 his death hath alied you to him. O hard hearted men cannot this moue
you, thē harkē to further  motiues, and let them amend you. God
in the first lawe appointed a free citie of refuge for the afflicted, and
priuiledge for the offenders, whereto whosoeuer had grace to approch before he
were apprehended, hee was assured of safetie, and defended from iustice. In
this new law, this Christ (oh true tipe of charitie) hath made these cities in
himselfe, established this priuiledge in his body, and walled the same with
his wounds. Hether, ô you sinners, repaire, heere shall you haue mercy
for teares, life for repentance, remission of sinnes, for confession of sinne.
Oh contrite sinner, dwell in these cities, let your memorie inhabite them, thy
meditation imbrace them, thy pittie bewaile them. Thinke on these woundes, they
wil heale thee, forsake them, death will follow thee, forget them, mercie 
 will denie thee. Abuse not the priuiledge of wounds, death, and
passion, least thou bewaile too late the horror of hell, death, and
damnation. Will none weep with me? Will no reasons wound you? Are teares so
scant, for mercies so plentifull? Come, come and learne what tears be, that you
may know their benefites. The sinners teares are Gods mirrours: their penitent
sighs, his incense: God heareth praiers, but beholdeth tears: praiers moue God
to heare,
                  Esay 38 Ambrose tears compell him
to haue mercie. Silent teares are speaking aduocats. It was not Maries
anointing with sweet balme, Maries drying, with faire haire,
Maries attention with humble heart, but Maries teares, they
wrought my compassion. Oh come & weepe then, & if not weepe, yet
consider. Proude man, see here the patterne of humilitie: 
humble, learne heere whereof to releeue thee: irefull, learne here the benefite
of sufferance,
                  
                     •
                  ust.
patient, receiue here the crown of durance: couetous, learne heere to affect
pouertie: poor, receue here, how thou hast Christ thy companion: the only
sonne of God, hath made many sons of God, hee hath bought him brothers with his
bloud, approued them, and beeing approued, redeemed them beeing solde,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                honoured them by
suffering dishonours, and giuen thē life by suffring death. Let him therefore
be wholy infixed in your hearts, who wholy was crucified for you on the
crosse. O men loose not these blessings, forget not these bounties. This Christ
subiected himselfe to the power of death that he might deliuer you from the
yoake and power of the deuill: hee tooke seruitude vpon him, that hee 
 might giue you the libertie of eternal life, hear what he crieth
in your soules, and respect his summons.
            O man see what I suffer for thee,Ambrose. there is no griefe like to mine, I cry vnto thee
who died for thee. Behold the paines wherwith I am afflicted, see the nailes
wherwith I am pearced, and although the exterior griefe be so great, yet the
inward sorowes are more vehement, when I behold and find thee so vngratefull
for my passion. Behold man whom you crucified, beholde God and man whome you
woulde not beleeue,Hicrome beholde the woundes which
you inflicted, acknowledge the sides which you wounded, all which were opened
for you, but you will not enter: I gaue my selfe for you, that I might redeeme
you from all iniquitie,Ad Tu. 20 I suffered with
entire loue to winne your  entire loue, beeing God I became man;
beeing the fountaine of all plentie, I suffered hunger, I the wel spring
thirsted, I the light, was darkned, I the rest of al, was wearied for all,
false witnes outfaced veritie, I the iudge of the liuing & the dead, was
iudged by a mortall creature, Iustice was condemned by the vniust,
                  
                     ••
                  gust. discipline was
beaten, the cluster of grapes was crowned with thorns, vertue was weakned,
health wounded, and life made death, my heart for sooke me in torments for you,
they wounded my hands and feet, so that al my bones were broke asunder,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 5 euen in that
weaknesse I dyed for you being wicked. Why therefore fasten you me to a more
greuous crosse of your sins, thā that wheron I was crucified?
                  
                     ••
                  gust in
  
                     ••
                  dam ser
                  
                     ••
                  em de
  Iudicij. The crosse of your crimes is more irksome vnto mee than the
crosse whereon I  lately suffered. Taking compassion on you, I
willingly ascended. Oh then weepe for me, because I suffered for you. Thou
that runnest after delight, surfetest in pleasure, desirest ease, come to
this schoole, and learn thy lesson, let my grace draw thee from disgrace, my
sufferance, from thy sensualitie, my charity frō thine vncleanesse. Beholde
the law is satisfied in my bloud, and your infirmities are couered by my
crosse. I a man praide to me a God,Innocentius
Iaiudge wept ouer you being condemned: to ease your temptation I was tempted
for you: yet for all these dolorous deserts, you yeelde me no teares of true
sorrow. I was spit vpon to wash you, I was couered, to the end that the vale
of sin and ignorance shuld be taken from your hearts: my head was
wounded,Hiero. super Matth. to the end that your
head Adam 
                should be restored to health, I was buffeted
with fists, & mocked with wordes, to the end that you should applaud me
with your lips, lifte vp your hands vnto me, and worship me both in deeds and
wordes, thus louing you, and washing you from your sinnes, disdaine not to bee
reconciled to me in repētance. Heare the three things figured in my passion,
my head was bowed downe, in signe of remission of sinnes: water issued from my
sides, in token of the cleansing of your faults: bloud, in signe of the
redemption of your punishment. Oh let the effects of these signes force you, I
am a medicine to the sicke, a rule to the depraued, a dwelling place to the
desolate, and a light for the darkned. Oh come vnto me you hard harted, for to
be turned from me, is to fall: to be conuerted to me,
                  
                     ••
                  gust. lib. 
                     ••
                  put. is to rise: to be  grounded in me, is to
florish: ô turn vnto me, whom no man loseth, except deceiued, no man
seeketh vnmonished,Bernard and no man findeth
vnpurged. I am the first that come to you, and the last that go from you, I
being iust, came vnto you sinners, that of sinners I might make you iust: I
beeing holy, came to the vnhallowed, to the end I might make you whole: I
being humble, came vnto you being proud, that I might make you humble: I came
not for the iust sake, but to correct the reprobate: I came not for the
strong, but to heale the weake: I came not for the resolued, but to strengthen
the doubtfull: my melodie is the amendment of sinners, my triumph the
constancie of martirs, my desire the immortalitie of yt faithful. Thus sat

                  •
                blessed mother, somtime personating her son,
to persuade more  mouingly, sometime soliciting the assistance by
great motiues to bewaile him earnestly, somtime weeping, while sorow stopt
her speech, sometime perswading whilest charitie quickned her tongue, somtime
bemoning hir while she beheld hir dead sonne, sometime recomforting
Marie that fate weeping at her feet, so that those that disdained hir
fortune, were amazed at her constancie, for though shee bewayled like a
naturall mother, yet indured she like a confident martyr,Bernard & therfore sayth Chrisostome, she was
vexed with an intollerable agonie of griefe, because shee was touched with an
vnspeakable affection of loue, whereby being vnited to God, we seeme to be
conuerted & made one with him. Oh my soule consider a while, whilest the
solitarie maide sitteth ouer her sonne, what  she is that
bewaileth him? This is the blessed amongest women that was salu ted by the
Angell with Auc, as being deliuered,Libro de
  natura rerum. 
               ave, from al curse: This is that Marie
that by interpretation beeing the sea, retaineth sixe qualities of the same.
Of the sea it is said, that it is the collection of al waters, either sower or
sweet, the head and hosterie of all flouds, a helpe in necessities, a refuge in
perills, an ease in trauels, a gaine to laborers: of her it is said, Let al the
waters vnder heauen be drawn into one place, which gathering of waters, is the
accomplishment of natures:Anselmus Gen: 1 the sea is
the head and hostery of flouds, the head by the flux of waters, the hosterie by
the refluxe: so the blessed virgine is the mediation and head of grace, &
whatsoeuer good we receiue, it floweth from the fruit of her wombe. Thirdly,
ye sea is a help in necessitie,  Fourthly, as ye sea is a refuge
in perills when in her maine bodie we escape shipwrack: so the immaculate maid
bringing forth the fulnesse of our redemption, deliuereth vs from the
shipwracke of our soules. So testifieth Bernard of Marie. Quia
aperit sinum pietatis uniuersis. Fiftly, the sea is a helpe to shorten
the waie of the traueller: so in this great sea of this world this holy maiden
directeth vs and shortneth our waie by the staire of her humilitie. Sixtly, it
is a gaine to labourers, making thē rich by trafique: so he that trafiqueth
with this blessed maide in meditation, imitateth her in deuotion, accompanyeth
her in sorrow, shall receiue the gaine of his labour, and the fruites of
immortalitie. This is she of whom Ambrose speaketh in his booke of
virginitie, Virgo erat. She was a virgin not onely in bodie but in
minde, for no  circumuention of decit could adulterate hir
sincere affect: in hart humble, in words graue, in mind wise, in speech
sparing, in readings studious. This is the rose without prickles, the flower of
the rose in the prime: for as the spring is the cause of gladnes, so was her
fruit the cause or redemption. This is she whose humility hath raised vs,
whose virginitie hath inriched vs, & whose deuotion hath releeued vs. O
how wonderfull was the fruitfulnes of this virgine, sayth
Bonauenture,
               Anselme which no sooner
receiueth salutatiō, but conceiueth saluation. Before the virgin (saith
Oditius) conceiued Christ, it was winter, but after she had conceiued
the word of God, it became Summer. Finally, thorough the vapour of the holye
Ghost the flower sprong: A branch shall springe out of the roote of lesse, and
a flower shall ascende  from the roote, as faith Esaie. And what
other is this braunch (O thou blessedst amongest women) but thy selfe the
virgine of God: what this flower but thy sonne? O crimson rose Iesus how in all
thy bodie shine the perfect signes of thy loue? Ahlasse there is no little
space lefte without impression of loue or griefe. Hearke what Ambrose
faith further of this virgin, She fixed not her happines in vncertaine
substaunce, but fastned her hope to her son Christ, intentiue in her workes,
modest in her sayinges, whose purpose was not to satisfie man, but to seeke
after God: to hurt none, but to succour all: to salute euerie one, to reuerence
her elders, not to hate her equalls: to slie boasting, to followe reason, &
to loue vertue. When dyd this virgin hurt her parents with disobedient lookes?
When dissented  she from hir friends? When despised she the
humble? When decided she the weake? When shunned she the needie? Accustoming
her selfe to conuerse onely with that companie of men, whose conuersation shee
might not be ashamed of? Whome past shee by without modestie? hauing nothing
crabbed in her looks, nothing crooked in her sayiugs, nothing immodest in her
actions, not wanton in gesture, not insolent in gate, not foolish in voice, but
such she was, that the verie beautie, portraiture, and forme of her body, was
the image of her mind, and figure of her honestie. The beautie of this tē
               ple
of the Deity, was expressed in the Canticles, where it is sayd: O howe faire
art thou my loue?Cant: 4 Howe faire art thou? Thine
eies are like doues eies, yet is there farre more hidden within. This is the
paradyce which  God prepared to put the second Adam in. This is
that virgin of whom Hierome speaketh, which passed the night in contemplation
& watching the thiefe: in loue of God the most learned, in humilitie the
most humble, in the psalms of Dauid the most elegant, in charitie most
feruent, in puritie the most pure, and in all vertue the most perfect: All her
words were alwaies full of grace, because she had God alwaies in her mouth,
shee continually praide, and as the Prophet sayd, meditated in the lawe of God
daie and night.Psalm 1 This is the virgin of virgins,
the humble of hū
               blest, in whome humilitie greatned virginitie, &
virginitie adorned humilitie. This is shee whose humilitie adorned her
fecunditie, and whose fecunditie consecrated her virginitie. This is that
Marie, into whose armes the faire vnicorne Iesus retyred 
himselfe after a long pursuit, by the praiers, teares, and sighs of the
fathers.
            This is the exalted, according to the Hebrew, or the starre of the
sea, as Hierome translateth it: or the mistres of mankinde, according to the
Siriake.Hier. de nomimbus. Sibil Erichea Et breuis
  egressus Maria de virginis aluo. Exaita est nouatua. This is she of
whom the Sibils prophesied. This is she whom Euodius, Peters successour,
calleth immaculate, without spot, glorious in humilitie. This is shee
appointed before all ages, to beare the great fruit.
            This is the animated arke of the liuing God, which brought many
blessinges to Zacharie and Elizabeth, 
2, Reg. 6 as the Arke of the couenant did
to Obed Edom. This is shee of whom Albumazar prophesied, 
Albumazar li. 6 in inter. who speaking of
the signe of the Virgine, sayde that there shoulde an  immaculate
virgine be borne, sayre, elegant, and modest, that should norish an infant in
Iudea, who shoulde be called Christ. Of this virgin there was found a
testimony on the tomb of a pagan; where in a plot of ground these wordes were
written, & found in Constantine and his mother Irenes
time, An infant named Christ shall bee borne of a virgine, and I beleeue in
him. O sonne thou shalt see mee againe in the time of Constantine and his
mother Irene. The like Zonoras reporteth of a certaine Iew, who in a
certaine ancient book written in three languages vsed these wordes: This is
shee in whome Nestorius denying the vniting of the humanitie with the
diuinitie, our Lorde in iustice caused wormes to deuour and eate out his
tongue. This is she in whom all vertues did concurre, all learning abound,
all deuotions flowe, all comforts  depend. This is she, as
Gregorie testifieth, which foretolde the Iewes of their destruction,
and the desolation of their citie. This is the true celestiall
Pandora, decked and inriched with the whole gifts of God, the father,
the sonne, and the holie Ghost. This is shee whome the Moores reported to
surpasse in excellence, this is the perfectest of all perfections, as the
Turkes and Arabians testifie. This is shee whome all the fathers in deuotion,
the Mahumetists in theyr Alcoran, set foorth with praises, and inrich with
titles. Oh sweete mother of God, who so speaketh of thee as Hierome sayth,
speaketh insufficiently: humane abilitie cannot attain it, humane industrie is
too weake for it. Whether art thou transported my soule? O my heart bee no more
rauished with ioye, intentiue to praise: looke back to the foot of the crosse,
 there is more cause of meditation, more cause of moane.
            Ahlasse, what seest thou? Nay, what seest thou not to bewaile? If
thou seest the virgines lappe, it is bloudied with the streames that fall from
her Sonnes wounded head. If thou seest her modest eies, they are almost swolne
and sunke into hir head with teares. If thou looke for her pure colour, it is
decaied with extreame sorrowe, her breasts are defaced with often beating of
her handes, her handes are wearyed by often beating of her breasts.
            If shee looke on the one side, shee sees Marie the sinner washing
her sons feet with her tears: if on the other, she beholdeth Ioseph wofully
preparing his funeralls: if on the other, she seeth virgins mourning: if on
the other, she beholdeth soldiers  mocking: if anie waies, she
sees sorrowes plentifull: knowing therfore in her selfe, that true griefe
correcteth the minde, salueth the offence, and maintaineth innocence, shee
gan renue her teares, and thus tenderly bewailed her.
            If it bee a custome in nature, that fountains return from whence
they first issued, bodies bee resolued to that wherof they were first created,
ahlasse why should not the same law be in my tears, which first springing from
loue, must be buried in loue, & no sooner buried but renued: nothing
before his fulnesse hath his fairenesse, his ripenesse, his strength, his
perfection, his praise. Why then delaie I my teares, which can neuer receiue
their excellence, till they bee wepte to their vtteraunce. Ahlasse, ahlas,
teares are sweet weapons to wound and to winne harts,  I will vse
them, I will inuite them, I will maintaine them, I will triumph in them: Come
my son, what now shall I weep in thee? Not thy death, for it is thy triumph:
not thy contēpts, for they were thy cōtents: but thy martyrdom, which
wrought my miserie. O sinfull soules, behold two altars raised by one massacre,
one in the bodie of Christ, the other in the heart of the virgin: on the one is
sacrificed the flesh of the sonne, on the other the soule of the mother: such
a death no creature hath suffered, such a sorrowe no heart hath contained.
Philosophie concents to my sorow,Cic Famil. 6 for
mine eies increase in griefe, my passions are intollerable, beeing afflicted
in al my senses, my loue quickens my passions, my deuotion nourisheth my
loue, my teares beautifie my affection. Woe is me, nowe'am I rightly compared
to the Moone;  for my sunne is eclipsed, and I am confounded: now
iustly am I counted a peele, being sed no waies better than by the deaw of
teares: now am, I'improperly taken for a cedar, for the sweet sent of my
blossome is vanished, my fruit is decaid, the leaues of my delight are fallen,
onelye in this I retaine thy nature, by reseruing my griefe in force, & my
compassion to eternities. Oh what a wo is mine? What a sorrow is mine? If the
Angels behold this face, they bewail him; if the heauens look on this
crueltie, they weepe for him: if the aire discouer it, it loureth: if the earth
eie it, it renteth: What shall the mother then doo, that hath behelde her
sonne martyred, and could not succour him: naked, & could not cloath him:
thirsty, and could not comfort him: iniuried, and could not defend him:
defamed, and coulde not aunswere  for him, spit vpon, and could
not wipe him: finally, weeping, and could not comfort him. Out alasse, for
teares I will paie teares, teares for former tragedies, teares for after
passion: teares for present miserie: tears in abundance,Gregorie teares with vsurie. Oh thou so excellent in
holynesse, so mightie in power, and so merciful in pietie, how shal I more
righfully bewaile thee, than in considering the wants I haue, beeing diuided
from thee? I want thy presence to repayre my delights, I want thy counsell to
inrich my soule, I want my ioye by wanting thee. Nay, what wanteth not the
worlde by thine absence? The humble are turned to proude: the faithfull falne
to Apostasie,Barnard the poore are despised: the
iust, reuiled: the patient, spit at: the faithfull, afflicted: deuotion, nowe
is clothed with dissimulation: sanctimonie, with simonie: conscience, with
couetousnesse:  hypocrites wil be humble without contempt:
poore, with out defect: flatterers vnseene: enuious vnsuspected: slanderers,
without cause: craftie as foxes within, humble as lambes without. Ahlasse,
what confusion? What error? Thy scholers in humilitie haue forgotten their
lesson, they will not learn of the bird, which before hee soareth towards
heauen, humbleth his bodie to the earth, they will enter by thee as the gate,
and wil not learne of thee because thou art humble. Thou hū
               blest thy selfe to
thy equals, they despise their superiours.Bernar. li. de
  disp. & prec. The tree the more it aboundeth in fruit, the more it
abaseth his bowes towardes the earth: but man the more he is raised by thy
graces, the more hee resisteth against thy humilitie. Thy glorie is to submit,
serue, and obey: mans desire is to gouerne, rule, & command. 
Thou sayest that all thing perisheth, if it be not kept with humilitie: they
saie that nothing more breedeth cō
               tempt than obseruance. Thou biddest them
flie honours: they affect them. Thou biddest them possesse their soules in
feare: they deeme nothing assured but in honour. Oh sweet Iesus, thou sayest
that the gate of heauen is so straight, that no man laden with riches, no man
fatned with delights, no man decked in purple can be possest thereof before he
be dispossessed of these vanities: but the worldling saith, that welth
breedeth happinesse, delightes lengthen life, rich clothing bringeth credit:
so that they that possesse these, they vtterly despise heauen. What shall I
saie? the worlde is so fraught with pleasure, and auarice is so ful of
profite, that it is helde good pollicie to heare thee preach: but no wisedome 
 to followe thy pouertie. Oh deare Lord, thou giuest thy self
wholy vnto them, and they wholie flie thee: if they are hungrie, thou art
bread to them: if they are thirstie, thou art water to thē: if they are in
darknes, thou are light vnto them: if they be naked, thou cloathest them: yet
are they 
                  〈◊〉
                grounded in vngratitude, that
they forget thee. They knowe that what so euer the world is,Deut. 32 is eyther the desire of the flesh, or the desire
of the eyes, or the pride of lyfe, yet pretēding to flie the world, they
fansie nothing more earnestly. They knowe that a fatned, thicke, and dilated
body leaueth God, and forgetteth his creator: yet follow they sensualitie,
and forget thee, eāmque mortuam; sayth the Psalme, neither
cordially recorde they thy benefites. They knowe with Hermes,Libro de logostileos. that thy acceptable & best
incense is thanksgiuing,  yet haue they learned with Iudas, to
crucifie thee vngratefully. They knowe that they are blessed that haue not
seene,Iohn 20 Apoc: 20 Iohn 8 and beleeue, yet hauing
beheld thy passion, they despise it. They know the booke of life is opened,
but they will not reade. They know that those which folow thee shall not walke
in darknes se, yet take they pleasure to stumble in the daie time. Finally,
they knowe that thou hast spred the light of thy coū
               tenance on them, yet
preferre they darknes before light, to their owne damnation. The Naturalistes
write, that Bats haue weake sight, because the humor Christaline, which is
necessarie for the eie to see with, is translated into the substance of the
wings to flie with, whereupon they haue leatherne winges, and so for their
flight sake, haue lost their sight, because that is substracted from the eies,
which is imploied in the wings:  These bats betoken these proud
neglecters, who by how much the more they striue to flie, by so much more are
they depriued of the grace of the diuine light, because all their intention,
which ought to bee in consideration of heauenly things, is translated into
the feathers of ambition, so that all their thought is howe they may ascend by
degrees the steps of dignitie, not descende in imitation of thee, to the bosome
of humilitie. O man, the cause of the Angells fall was negligence, the cause of
Adams fall was negligence: why then art thou summoned so sweetly, &
neglectest so carelesly? If men & angels created by God, had vsed his
giftes orderly, the angels had neuer striued to surpasse God in excellence,
neither had man listned to the serpents perswasion, but because they were
careles of his graces, he suffred thē to  fall into errour by the
sinne of negligence, and from the error of neglygence, into the sinne of
pride & disobedience. Beware man, by mans first falling, flie man the
Angels negligence, least by both thou winne apostasie, and with apostasie,
perdition. Wilt thou be frind of this world: thou art enemie to God? Wilt thou
follow Beliall? thou art not for Iesus. Oh cast downe thy selfe, proud soule,
whatsoeuer thou hopest, trust not the weaknes of thy power, since strength it
selfe hath beene oppressed. Knowe that chastitie is hardned in delightes,
truth in riches, and humilitie in honours: iust, feare to fall: mercifull,
feare obduration: continence, feare lust: deuout, feare negligence: with
feare and trembling waxe you rich in Iesus, who wyth griefe and agonie hath
indured for you.
            
            Oh sinners, though nature cannot m
                  ••
               e you to sighs, (which is affecte
                  •
               
               
                  •
               y her obiects) let mee winne you by reasons,
to ratifie your remorse. If your friends come from far countries to visite
you, you imbrace them: if they giue you giftes, you thanke them: if they
counsell you, you consent vnto them: What then will you returne your sauiour
& my sonne for his curtesies? Hee comming into the worlde, hath shewed you
three principall signes of loue, mercie, and pietie. First, hee condescended
to your mortalitie. Secondly, hee prouided messengers of your saluation.
Thirdly, he gaue you precepts and admonishmentes of your welfare. He came from
heauen, to comfort you on earth: hee suffered on earth to carrie you to heauen:
he became the lowlyest amongst men, to make you the highest among creatures, 
 hee hath visited you with his graces, giuing ease to your labour,
comfort to your afflictions, salue to your infirmities: he hath presented you
with gifts, not golde and siluer, which are corruptible, not pomp & honor,
which seduce the senses, not securitie and vanitie, which corrupt the heart,
but he hath broken his bodie on the crosse for you, hee hath broken his bodie
in the Sacrament for you, he hath giuen you the cup of attonement (his'
precious bloud) hee hath made you one with God, by being generally condemned by
the world, he hath counselled you to rise from sins, to make your bodies
vessels of the holy Ghost, to sanctifie your soules in the bloud of his
testament, being made & approued iust: therefore you ought to loue him
wholy, 
Americus Card: in prol: suo lib to whō
you owe al what you are wholy. If you see an earthly king before you, you fal
before his throne  you humble your selfe before his iudgment, you
subscribe to his law, and obey his ordinances: why despise you then the king
of heauens?Math: 8 Phil. 2 to whom princes stoope,
and whom the wind and sea obeyeth, to whom all knees both in heauen, earth, and
hel are bowed. If you respect works, hee made heauen and earth: if the manner,
of nothing: if the purpose, for vngratefull man, who being lord of all by him,
will not acknowledge his due homage to him: if you dispose your affections by
the wisdom of your gouernors, who more wiser than Iesus? Where the Psalmist
sayth, Great is the Lord our God, & mightie his vertue, and his wisdom is
beyond number. And again, God is the God of sciences,1, Reg.
  2 & our thoughts are prepared vnto him: Who therefore is so wise
& mightie as her that by wisdom discouereth al things  and by
power punisheth all offences? How much wisedome and seuetitie is in this
Iudge? Who discouereth the thoughts of the hart,Rom:
  1i knoweth whereunto our imaginations are intended, measureth the
waight of our sinnes, and how iniquities are chained together. Fnally, all are
of him, by him, and in him. If wonders drawe your affections, who were
wonderfull, looke on his birth, it is wonderfull aboue nature, without man, of
a sole virgine: looke on his name, it is wonderfull: (Iesus) by
interpretation, a sauior. Yet more wō
               ders, a fraile man, and a strong God: a
poore mans sonne, and the prince of peace, borne in time, and the perpetuall
father of succeeding ages. Yet three more wonders. First, in those things which
were spoken of him. Secōdly, in those things which were spoken by him.
Thirdly, in  those which were forespoken of him by the Patriarks
and Prophets. Iacob prophesied his comming long before, The scepter
shall not bee taken from Iudah. Balaam called him the starre out of Iacob:
they called him the flower, and the branch, on which flower the holy Ghost
should haue his resting place. And is not this admirable? Wil you more wonder?
Hear Elizabeth prophesie, hear Zacharie prophesie, the shephearde prophesie,
the Sages prophesie. Yet more wonders. In his infansy his answeres were
admirable, all testifie of him, maruell at his answere, applaud his
prudence.Iohn 1 Luke 4 Mirabantur ludei quomodo literas
  seisset Marke 20 Will you more wonders. The people maruelled at him,
saying, He hath done all things wel, hee hath made the deafe heare, and the
dombe speake. Loue him therefore as your Lorde, honour him as your king, who
is admirable in his  conception, admirable in his birth: admirable
in his preachings, admirable in his passion, admirable in his death, admirable
in his charitie.
            And to this loue (O remorselesse lookers on) adde teares, for no
man can truelye loue, that is not affected, to see his beloued afflicted.
            Come,Anselme come and weepe bitterly
with mee, for you haue much cause of lamentation. If loue can diuorce you from
ingratitude, come and weep of pure loue: for my son hath therefore suffered,
because he loued: if in iustice; come mollifie your hearts, behold an innocent
reprochfully crucified: if consanguinitie can affect you, behold your father
which hath begotten and chosen you before all eternities, reckned amongst
theeues, rent by bloudthirstie  men, scourged by the guiltie: if
you be abashed to see God so mightily brused, bewail your deadly sins, the
causes of his detriment: if you wonder at his humilitie, blame your pride: if
you admire his patience, condemn your wrath. As the member that feeleth no
griefe, is sayde to bee dead, and the disease which is insensible, is alwayes
vncurable: so vnlesse you partake in passion with Christ, lament to see him
crucified, sorrowe to beholde his woundes, you are no liuing members, but dead
ones: no true sonnes of his, but bastardes: if you suffer wyth him, you shall
raigne with him: if you associate him in his passions, you shall partake wyth
him in his consolations.
            The Philosophers write, that the Harpie is a birde (hauing a 
 mans 
                  〈◊〉
               ) so fell, cruell, and
furious, that beeing pressed and assaulted with hunger, she inuadeth &
killeth a man: whome when shee hath deuoured, and whose bodie when she hath
torne, beeing assailed wyth thirst, she flyeth to the water to drinke, where
beholdin
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               
owne face, and remembring the similitude of him whome shee slew, shee is
confounded with so much griefe, that shee dieth for dolour. Oh carelesse
worldlings, except ther be lesse remorse in you than in this creature, looke
into the spring of your consciences, lodge in your memorie howe much you haue
crucified this Christ with your sinnes, & slain him by your offēces. &
though you die not through extremitie of grief, yet let fall some teares to
bewayle him tenderly.
            Oh let not sinne take hold of you,  idlenesse preuent
you, or pride consound you, for trees that haue broadest leaues, doo soonest
loose them, & men that haue proudest thoughts are soonest deceiued by them.
Foolish that thou art, canst thou bewaile thy dead father that begot thee, thy
sick sonne that delights thee, thy lost riches that maintained thee, & wilt
not thou weepe for Iesus that redeemed thee? Canst thou grieue to see thy
flockes perish, thy houses burnned, thy wise slaine, thy daughters defloured:
and wilt thou not weepe to see thy God, who gaue these, confounded with
tormēts, thy comforter that created these, suffer on the crosse: thy Iesus
that lightneth thee, cloathed with death? Oh let not your gronings be hidden
from him: praie with Iob, that thou mayest a little bewaile thy dolours, push
forth thy teares of griefe, and make them  flowe in abundaunce,
for laughlng thou descendest to hel, but murning thou ascendest to heauen:
Wilt thou haue Christ dwel with thee,Amb. hom: 1.
  lib. 1 mourn? Wilt thou haue Christe dwell in thee? mourne. Wilt thou
haue sinne mortified in thee? mourn: Wilt thou haue grace plentyfull in thee?
mourne. O remember that Peter after hee had bewayled his apostasie, found
greater grace by his teares, than hee lost by his deniall.
            Looke on Dauid the adulterer, hee weepeth, and is restored: Look
on Agar the desolate, she weepeth, and is comforted: Looke on weeping Anne,
she recouereth her barrennesse.
            Looke on mourning and weeping Iob, hee ouercommeth his
temptations: mourning Ieremie prophesieth, the mourning Publicane is 
 iustifyed, and mourning Ioseph is deliuered.
            Oh teares of great worth, working great thinges with GOD. By
teares Marie obtayned the pardon of her sinnes: by teares shee obtained the
resurrection of her deade brother: for her teares sake, the Angelles came and
comforted her: for her teares sake our Sauiour first appeared and shewed
himselfe vnto her.
            Great is the vertue and power of teares, which tie the handes of
the omnipotent, ouercome the inuincible, appease the wrath and indignation of
the Iudge, and doth change and conuert it into mercie.
            Hee that standeth on a profound and deepe pit, sayeth the
Philosopher, seeth the stars at noonstead:  where hee that
standeth on the face of the earth, seeth not one starre in so great a light: In
like maner, he that is placed in the deapth of humilitie, teares, sighs, and
tribulation, sigheth to heauen, and summoneth God by his cries: but hee that
standeth in the light of this worlde, and in the brightnesse of worldlye
lasciuiousnesse, can see no star, or retaine anie grace.1
  Dionisius. Shall I teach you how to bewaile Christ? First loue him, for
loue vniteth things together, drawing all mans interest from himself, and
placing it in another: when thou art conuerted into Christ, then mayest thou
truely bewaile him. For the losse of things then neerest touch vs, when they
are best knowee vnto vs. Those that are one in affection, are one in passiō,
one in desires, one in teares, one in loue, one in sorrow, one in minde, one in
martyrdome:  mockers martyr Christ, penitents weep for him,
blasphemeis crucifie him, the sorrowfull are comforted by him, O men, learne
and vnderstand this, our Lord suffered of will, not of necessitie, and hee
indured of commiseration, we in condition: his voluntarie passion therefore, is
our necessarie consolation, that being afflicted as hee was, we may be
confident as he was. Will you know the hunger and thirst of this aduocate?
Ahlasse, hee scarce found one theese on the gallowes whome hee might taft: his
Apostles are fled from him, and hid them in the throng: Peter that promised to
perseuer till death, hath denied him. Wherevpon then shall hee feed, if all
soules flie him? Nay, howe can hee hope orf loue, where none weep for him? Oh
man thou art made iust by the iustice of God? Thou art saued gtatis, and not 
 by thy graces: thou hast none to flie to, but to him in
necessities, thou hast no life but it proceedeth from him: vnder the Sunne thou
hast nothing but watching, sleeping, eating drinking, hunger, thirst, growth,
weaknes, infancy, childhood, youth, age, and all these hee gaue thee. Aboue
the Sunne, thou hast inuisible faith,August in Psalm
  38 inuisible hope, inuisible charitie, inuisible bountie, inuisible
feare in holynesse, which he willingly offereth thee. Oh then giue him teares
for his treasures, a small interest for so great riches. Oh yee sinful race of
men, what are you but a sacke of necessities? Ahlasse, what necessities are
these? Not to knowe anothers heart, to thinke ill oftentimes of a faithfull
friend, to thinke well oftentimes of a dissembling enemie? O hard necessitie!
yet another harder. Thou knowest not what thou shalt be tomorow. O greatest
miserie! yet another harder. Thou must needes  die: O harde
necessitie! not to wyll that which thou canst not escape? In this confusion
what canst thou man? Whether art thou carried? How art thou bannished? Crie and
crie out, vnhappie man that I am, who shall deliuer mee from these? Who shall
aunswere thee? Who shall helpe thee? Not ambition, for it is blinde: not lust,
for it hastens death: not wrath, for it subdueth reason: not the infirmities of
the world, for they are all fraile: It must be humble Iesus then, that must
heal these imperfectious, recouer these necessities, & determine these
daungers, to whom thou no sooner canst offer teares, but he sodainly sendeth
remedies. Oh what hart can bee so hardned?August in Psalm
  10 What mind so obdurate? What soul so sensles, that beholding a prince
in his owne kingdome, amongst his owne subiects, massacred  by
his owne sonne, wil not grieue at it: by how much reason then (ō you bond
slaues of sinne) should you be sorrowfull, that see a prince, not slaughtered
in his owne kingdome, but vniustly murthred in the world, not among his
subiectes, but his brethien: not by his sonnes onely, but sonnes, seruants,
and liegemen: nay, which is more, not for his owne offence, his owne default,
his owne errour, but for their sinnes onely who persecute him onely. Oh
wonderful charitie, Christ spreadeth his armes to imbrace those that spit at
him, openeth his woūds to intertain those that will enter, offereth his bloud
to ran some them that shedde it, giueth his flesh to bee eaten, to those that
mangled it: he praieth for theyr offences that fastned him to the crosse,August in Psalm 41 he made their sinnes his sinne, that hee
might make his iustice their iustice.  Oh if there be anie
kindnesse in thee (man) thinke on these benefits: looke, looke about thee,
consider the waight of thy offences, which stops the Fathers cares, though the
sonne crieth, Make Christ sweat water and bloud for verie agonie in bearing
them, make heauen, and earth, and all creatures breake out in miracles to
beholde them. Iob vppon the deuils request,Iob i was
lefte to him to bee tempted, and after his long patience receiued blessinges
two folde: but our Lord was whipte, and no man helped him: foulely spit vppon,
and no man succoured him: lewdly buffetted, and no man regarded him: crowned
with thornes, and no man pittied him: nailed to the crosse, and no man
deliuered him: hee cryed, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? and was
not succored. Why oh good Iesu, whence came  these thinges? For
what cause sufferedst thou all this? To what end are all these torments? Why
cryed the Iewes, Crucifie, crucifie? Why wert thou poured out like water? Why
were all thy bones dispearsed? Why became thy heart like melting wax? Why
cleaued thy tong to thy roof? Why diuided they thy garments & cast lots on
thy vesture? O Christ, the sonne of God, if thou wouldest not, thou shuldest
not haue suffred: shew vs therfore the fruit of this thy passion: It was thy
sinne (O sinner) that caused this, it was thy disobedience to God that was
punished in Gods sonne: to shew the horrour of thy offence, power was made
desolate. Oh stony heart be not so obstinate, let teares drop from thine eyes
to recompence the bloud pouring from his wounds: sigh bitterly with him that
praied earnestlye for thee.  What is this sinne, sayest thou, that
inforceth such a sacrifice? That which maketh all men in the world flie from
their saluation,August. li: 12 de ciuitate Dei and
runne after theyr owne concupiscences without anie feare: that which leadeth
men downe to hell, that which blindeth the vnderstanding, that which maketh men
like vnto foolish beastes: for as beastes incline themselues to earthly
pleasures, so sinners betroth themselues to worldly desires: that which maketh
men seeke onely those things which are of the flesh, that which maketh men
esteem their belly for their God. Sinners are compared to hogs by their
detracting, for as the hogge deuoureth doung, so detracting & sinfull men,
other mens sinnes and filthines: For lecherie they are compared vnto a
horse:Phil 30 Rom: 8 for folly and slownesse to an
asse: for their solicitude & worldlie  care, to an oxe: for
their curious cō
               uersations, to an ape: for their inconsiderate boldnes, to a
lyon: for their crueltie, to a beare: for their vanitie, to libards: for their
crafte, to a foxe. Sinne is the trangression of the laws of God,Numquid potest Athiops mutare pellem suain aui paidus varietate
  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                and the disobedience of his
commandements: Sinne, is the contrarie to nature: sinne draweth vs from the
soueraigne good, to make vs subiect to brittle, fraile, and mutable
pleasures.Ambrose li. de pa
                     •
                  ad: ho. 32 quest. 133 art. 1 
                     ••
                  ay
  
                     •
                  9 Plato in Gorgia Sinne diuideth vs
from God. To conclude, (as the Ethnike witnesseth) the sinner is onely
miserable: Sinne depriueth man of eternall beatitude, banisheth him from
heauen, confineth him with hell, despoileth him of graces, exileth him from
paradice. Briefely, it maketh him the most miserable amongest miserable. Sinne
peruerteth the order of nature, impugneth our reason, vigeth our sensualitie:
sin blindeth  the spirite, darkneth the vnderstanding (ordained
to contemplate spirituall things:) Sinne soileth and infecteth the solue,
depriueth it of her nuptiall garment, and maketh it filthie and loathsome:
according to that of the Prophet, Denigrata est super carbones facies
eius. Sinne after it hath blinded the vnderstanding, hardeneth the heart,
and maketh obstinate in iniquitie: whence commeth the habitude of sinne, which
is the extremitie of sinne, and as Philosophers conclude, another nature. Hee
that sinneth, whatsoeuer he be, either king in his diadem,Abissus abissum inuocat Psalm 41 Ex frequentatione actu um
  genetatur habitus Arist Categ Rom. 6 Iohn 8 prince in his purple,
poore, in his miserie, he is the slaue of sinne: who therefore by sinne is
giuen ouer as a praie to vices, looseth his libertie, and cannot resist his
vnhappines. See sinner, see, what horror, what confusion? Look with what foes
you are inuironed,  that you may knowe the greatnes of your
deliuerance: you are vncurable by sinne, & Christ healeth you: you are
separated from God, from the Angels, from the Patriarkes, Prophets, Apostles,
and Martyrs, by sin, and Iesus restoreth you: you are impouerished by sinne,
and hee inricheth you: you are made abhominable, and hee blesseth you.
            O if you knewe howe abiecte & wretched a sinfull soule is, you
woulde resist it, (saieth a father,) euen vnto the death. Waries, plagues,
famine (the whips of God) sicknesse, dishonours, and aduersity, (the tooles of
his correction) howe light trifles are these in comparison of loathsome sinne?
Tyrannies, iniuries, oppressions, the fury of the fire, the danger of water,
the contagion of aire, the trembling of the earth,  finally, all
the complements of euils which persecute man, proceed from sinne: so that
rightlye it maye bee sayde,Quicquid patimur peccata nostra
  merue
                     •••
                  t all that which the wretched
suffer, their sinnes haue deserued it. Oh the horrour of sinne, oh the terrible
issues thereof: wretched men take heede and looke about you, let your haires
stand vpright for verie fright, and let your bloud flie to your heart, to
comfort it in the extremity of your thoughts, no punishment can satisfie for
it, no death can recompence for it, but the flames of hell eternall in theyr
extremitie, extreame in their eternitie.
            Oh harde hearted soules, solde and quite giuen ouer to your owne
sensualities, beholde the issues of your euill liues, beholde your martirdomes
for crucifying Christ, if you reconcile not & weep with him 
you shall haue perpetuall darknesse without light, you shall be depriued of
Gods presence, (a greater tormēt to the damned than may be expressed) fire
shall burne you vnquenchably, darknes shall blind you vnseparably, conscience
shal accuse you incessantly, deuills shall persecute you eternally, cries,
cursinges, and blasphemies shall hant you continually, desolation and
discomfort shall detaine you perpetually. Finally, without remorse in life,
there is no redemption after death. O Iesus my son, how rich art thou in
compassiō, thou onely healest these wounds, & recouerest these harmes. It
is thou onely that canst dull the sting of this death, thy bloud onely
satisfieth for these defaults. Ah deare Lord, thou art worthie of teares, thou
deseruest remorse, thou hast purchased compassion. Oh woful spectacle for men 
 to weepe at, for angels to sigh at. Oh sacrifice for sinne, O
attonement for offences, oh seale of redemption. O contemplation to extort
teares, to behold innocencie martired with so many and grieuous wounds. Oh
libertie taken prisoner, oh truth accused, oh innocencie whipped, oh iustice
condemned, oh glorie discruciate, oh life dead and crucified: oh highnesse of
charitie, oh basenesse of humilitie, oh greatnes of mercie, oh excesse of
bountie. Thou hast wept for all,Granaten. & art
bewailed of none: thou hast borne many hurts, to cure a few hearts: thou hast
bene a corrosiue to thy mother, to be a cordiall to men: but men weepe thee
not, they passe by wagging their heads at my woe, & hiding their faces,
least they shuld be inforced to bewaile thee. Theyr hearts are become adamants,
& loathing to spende teares themselues,  they grieue to grace
my teares by hearkning to them. Ah heauenly father, let me consume with sorrow
till I see him: let my life passe like a tale that is told: let my soul (that
mourneth within me) giue a libel of diuorce to this flesh, that I in spirit
may seeke him out, who in the flesh did glorifie me. Thou that rainedst vppon
the earth fortie daies, to reuenge thee on the rebellious, open the cloudes of
thy compassion ouer mee, that they weeping on mee, and I with them, I may be
drowned in them, innocencie may be quickned by me. All Iudah & Israel
mourned for Iosiaz,Paral. 15 & shall teares want
to bewaile Iesus? See my sonne, I will beare thy crosse on my shoulders,
imprint thy passisions in my heart: I will beat so long vpon my breast, that
the eccho therof shall pearce all eares: I will sigh so long, till the furnace
of my charitie  steame out my hart, and the winged chast
affections of my soul, soare heauens, search earth, finde my sonne, or forsake
my soule. Ah my son, no Absolon a sinner, but Iesus a sauiour. The root of my
hope is waxed olde, and the stocke thereof is dead in the ground; When shal
these closed eies open to warme him as his sonne? When shall thy breath quicken
and cheere my barrennesse, the daies of my desolation are come. The blessedst
amongest women, is now the miserablest amongst mothers. Grief hath brought mee
to deaths doore, (my sonne) but death will not let me enter, oh then shewe thy
deitie to helpe thy mother, and let me die in this desolate flesh, to liue in
thy diuine bodie, the ioy in possessing the one, shall temper the losse of the
other, and dying in my selfe to giue thee life, I shall liue in death by
reason of thy lyfe. O Lorde  Lord of my life, how hath zeal made
mee presume? no soule meriteth to dwel in this body but thine own: thus
impatience in loue, makes mee too much presume for loue: Fruites long time shut
in their buds, by rain, deawe, and sunne are made to blossome: riuers closde
in then bounds by huge windes, are forced to ouerlope the bankes. The Ostridge
by helpe of the Sun and sand, breaketh the shell: ripen then (thou roote of
mine) for the raine of remorse hath watered thee, the deaw of compassion hath
wet thee, the sunne of my zeale and charitie hath looked on thee, and inflamed
thee: rise & rouse thy selfe thou riuer of God, for the windes of my sighs
haue summoned thee: ouerbeare death, holye spring of happines, and let the
waters of life issue from thee. Breake the shell of death, thou that fastedst
in the desart,  and let the sunne of my desire quicken the sun of
vnderstanding, be not to long in conquering death, least I loose life in
wailing thy death. How long ô Lorde, howe long wilt thou delay? Shall
death neuer haue end, because my life may be deuoured in death? Wilt thou not
awake like a strong warriour, to conquere these passions with combat with thy
mothers heart? Set thine axe to the tree of my sorrowe, let mine eyes which
bewaile thee dead, beholde thee liuing; let mine eares, which are scard with
mine owne clamors, bee consolated by thy counsels: let mee smell thee the rose,
and see thee the lilly richly clothed: let me tast howe sweet the Lord is: let
me touch him, whose absence toucheth mee at the hart: let my imagination be the
vsher, to present thee, my memorie, the painter, to describe thee, my
consideration  the fire to kindle loue. Let hell, hunger, thirst,
weepe and waile, come thou and ioy with Israel, thou hast not to doo with
Aegypt. Come thou corner stone, and let me builde on thee, wed me to death, so
thou returne to life, I cannot want thee. I will not misse thee, my loue is so
feruent, as it neither measures iudgement, or regardeth counsel, or is
brideled by shame,Bernard or subiect to reason: come
yeeld me peace with a kisse of thy mouth, and let my importunacy work more with
thee than all expectation can require. Lēd me the cloak of thy presence, to
diuide the waters of my woes: let thy mother bee as strong as thy prophet, that
by praying to our Lorde with teares, by putting my mouth on thy mouth,4: Reg. 
                     •
                  
                by fastning mine
eies to thine eies, by closing my handes in thy handes, I may make the flesh of
my sonne wax  warme: as he warmed the flesh of the Sunamites
child, then gasping seuen times I wold kisse thee seuētie times seuen, &
seeme more thy louer than thy mother. I wold expostulate with thee of thine
absence, and if thy wounds fell new a bleeding, I would wash them with my
teares; my hairs should dry them, my lips should suck them, thou shouldest make
me more than a mother, in recouering mee an absent sonne. Well Lorde, if thou
denyest that I want, I will reioyce in that I haue, I wil symbolise thy body
with mine, and quicken thy passion by my sufferance: There shal no sorrow be
hid from mine eies, till I see thy eyes open, and till the eies of our Lord
quicken mee, the eie of poore Marie shall see no comfort: mine eie
shal onely see by supposing thine eie seeth: all pleasures shal be smoake to
mine eies, till thy eies doo beholde  them: till thy eies bee
waking, mine eies shall be weeping, and vnles they grow open,Eccles. 21 I will shut mine eies with sorrow. I will set a
sure seale vppon my lips,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   4 till thy lips salute me, & my lips shall become
white as the lilly, til thy lips grow crimson like a rose coloured
riband.1. b 5 My vnsained lips shal bee tired with
praier, till such time I may inioy thy desired presence: my handes shall neuer
vnfolde, till the hands of my Lord be extended: I wil neuer deliuer thy bodie
out of my hands, till thou deliuer my soule out of her sorrow: I will lay my
hand vppon my mouth, till thou speakest, & neuer wil I cease to lift vp my
hands to heauen, till thy hands haue imbraced me on earth: till thou put
foorth thy hand, I will leane my head vpon my hande, and till thy fingers touch
me, my heart shall bee touched with sorrow: the wings of the cherubines 
 touched one another, ô let the wings of my charity touch
the wings of my life, both are allied, both loue. They that touched the hem of
thy vesture, recouered from their sicknesse, shall not I touch thy bodie to
recouer me of my sorrow? The bodie which liueles touched the bones of
Elisa,
               4. Reg: 13 were restored to life; and
shall my hands touch thee, my lippes kisse thee, my loue importune thee, and
thou not liue?Arist. libro Phil. 1 All heauie thinges
by nature search the center, I am in the abundance of my heauinesse, and
cannot descend into the graue: I will glorie in tribulation,2 Corint. 12 so thou grace me in thy life. My soule is in
bitternesse, and heauie captiuitie, oh make my burden light, by once looking
on mee.Ieremy 6 The Iewes by smiting haue wounded
thee, thou by absence hast wounded mee, sorrow and wounds are euer in my sight:
touch I thy  browe, thornes haue wounded it: kisse I thy cheekes,
crimson hath forsaken them, thy sides are wounded, thy hands are wounded, thy
feet are wounded, my wounds cannot bee hid till thy wounds be healed,Marke 11 and til thou liue to recure mee, I shall die
thorough wanting thee. Thou hast promised that whatsoeuer wee shall faithfully
aske in thy name, thou wilt grant it vs. Then ô Iesu, my sonne, my
cōforter, I coniure thee by thine owne name Iesus, to blunt and abate the
sting of death, to breake vp and dispearse the cloudes of darknes, and
appearing like a fair morning starre, quicken the dead comfort of thy mother,
and giue a light to this desolate and dismaide worlde. Shew the light of thy
countenance, and I shall be whole. O Lord my redeemer, tarrie not, my soule
thirsteth after thee my sonne, & as the hart desireth the 
hart desireth the water brookes, euen so my soule longeth after thee my God.
Appeare then thou chief shepheard,2: Pet: 5 thy
flocks saint without thee. Apparell thy selfe with life, to apparell our
hearts with ioy: my eies long fore for thy sight, oh when wilt thou comfort
me.Psal: 
                     〈◊〉
                   Ies
                     ••
                   9
            
            O who will giue my head water inough, and a spring of teares for
mine eies, that I may weepe daie & night for the absence of my son? Ahlas,
ahlas, sorow increaseth in me, and heauinesse swalloweth vp my soule: my teares
are like seede in a barren ground, the garden of my delight is become a desart
of sorrow, I am like a mother bemourning her child, because he is not. Oh thou
angell of peace, come and succour me: Ah my sonne, the happinesse in bearing
thee, is buried through the heauinesse in missing thee: and the hope 
 I conceiued of thy life, is preuented by thy lamentable death. Wo
is me, I am sicke to the death, to see thee dead, I am sicke for loue, and
desire to hasten thy life. Wilt thou lifte the poore out of the dust,Phil.23 and leaue thy mother in desolation? Oh lifte vp
thine eies, and see howe the mother lifteth vp her voice and weepeth!Cant: 8 Oh loue, if thou art mightier than death, now shew
thy power, lighten the lampe of his life, at the candle of my charitie: Poure
the oyle of thy compassion into these wounds, and heale them, breath the breath
of life into him by imbraces and kissing: as I claspe mine armes, let him gaspe
& breath: as I weep on his face, let him sucke vp my teares: O death, if
thou be more pittifull than loue, imprison thy dart in my heart, & ransome
my sonne. Ahlas the fairest among men, loue will not lend him me, death wil 
 not grant him me, his mother must be onely kinde, and her best
tributes are but teares, prayers, kisses, and wishes. Ah Bethelem, mourn with
me, and you inhabitants of Iuda, put on sackcloth, for sorrow is come vppon
you, and the voice of the mourner must ring in your streetes, houle and lament
Ierusalem, weepe the teares of contrition, sigh, sob, & complaine you, he
that loued you lost his lyfe, he that wept for you, is dead for you: hee that
praied for you, is plagued for you. Ah crosse that hast made my sonne a martyr,
and mee a mourner! Ah crosse that art the meane of my griefe: Ah crosse, the
cause of crosse, I must kisse thee, & accuse thee. See, see, thou art
honoured by my Iesus name, his purple drops of blud dwel in thee, thou diddest
kisse his bodie, his warme bodie, and for these causes I kisse thee. But cruel
crosse, since  all thy trophies are cause of my trouble: thy
titles, the occasions of my teares: let me accuse thee, which hast honored thy
selfe, and left me comfortlesse: yet art thou kinde to me in listning my
complaintes, and but in bearing the name of Iesus in thy front, thou hast
alreadie recouered my fauour. O crosse, the image of mortification,Bernard the tree of redemption, the bond of peace, the
seal of the couenant, I will crosse mine armes to imbrace thee. Crosse, all my
ioyes to containe thee, I will be a crosse to mine owne soule, if it seeke thee
not, and count euerie comfort a crosse, that is not crost by thee. I will
crosse the seas of tribulation to incounter thee, & whilst I hold thee holy
crosse I will count no crosse too cruell: I that bare my sonne, will holde it
for no base benefit to beare his crosse,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  : 4 & the onely glorying in the
crosse of  Christ crucified, shal be my best blessing: my loue
shall fasten mee to my sonnes crosse, and in that he vouchsafed a crosse,Col: 1 I will esteeme no glorie but in his crosse. O
sonne, the words of thy wisedome were pricks and nailes to my meditation: these
fastned thee vnto me in all assaultes of sorrowe, and those nailes which nailed
thy handes and feete to the crosse, shall nail my soul & thoughts to thy
crosse, & with my nailes I will dig my owne graue, before I forsake those
nails which forced thy hands: Like as a nail in the wall sticketh fast, so
fastly shall the nailes of thy martirdome sticke in my heart:Eccle. 27 I will naile vp my soule from all ioy, because
the naile that issued from Iuda is broken: my flesh is torne with
thornes,Zach: 16 because thy forehead is rent wyth
thornes: the thornes of tribulation persecute me, because the thornes of 
 martirdome pearceth, I will hedge in my heart with thornes,
because they haue hemd in thy braines with thornes. Whether vnto extendeth my
sorrowe? If it was thy loue that madest thee suffer, it becommeth my loue to
suffer with thee:Iob 81 and since thou giuest mee an
example of patience, why should I not preserue the same? Though the shadow of
death ouerspred thine eies, hope saith they shall be lightned: though thy life
be nowe like the darke night, it shortly shall be as cleere as the noone daie,
yea, thou shalt shine forth and bee as the morning.
            The shepheards after great storms wait for faire weather: the
souldiers after dreadfull warre, expect happie peace: the sentinell after his
colde watch, attendeth, and intendeth his desired and wished sleepe: pleasures
are the heires of displeasures, & comfort  treadeth on the
heele of care. Why expostulate I then with death? who hauing a time to
tyrannize, shal at last be lead in triumph: the storms of afflictions shall bee
calmed, the warres of rufull wailing, shall haue a peacefull delight: these
watchfull complaints and attendings to see my loue, shal at last be quieted,
and I shal laie me downe and take my rest, for my Lord shall come, and cause
mee to dwell in safetie. Brieftie, all teares shal be wiped from mine eies,
deaths sting shall bee dulled, lifes triumph shall bee established, sorrowe
shall be disinherited, and maiestie reuiued.
            Oh my charitie, how much doest thou helpe mee in this? my faith
onely presenteth mee wyth all these hopes, as it were vnder a vaile, my hope
beholdeth my sonne (& these future prophesies of him (as the 
chiefest good (which as yet vnpossessed she hopeth to inioy) but thou my
charitie makest all these ioyes present, so that I behold effectuallye thinges
before thy bee, and craue no interest in beleefe, whereas my loue assures mee
all is present. Ah that the aduersitie of an houre shoulde make mee thus forget
the pleasures I had in lyfe? when I lulled thee in my lap my son, fostered thee
at these teates, followed thee in trauels, fedde with thee in Aegypt: Then,
ô then what sweetnes inioyed I in thy presence: what comfort in thy
counsels, what courage in extreams? Ah but if it be true, that thinges the
dearer they are loued, breed the more hart griefe by their losse: howe can I
choose but waile, that hauing had pleasure to wrappe thee in thy swathing
bands, must nowe to my discomfort, close thee in thy winding sheete: Can 
 the want of thy companie, the lacke of thy counsells, the muficke
of thy preachings, the miracles in thy lyfe, the charitie in thy death be
expiated but with another death, or answered with a few sighs? Ah this
aduersitie of an hour (in other mens thoughts) is an age in mine. Compare the
age of thy pleasure, to one minute of the griefe, and it exceedeth it. The
earth for a little trauell rewardeth the husbandman with a huge crop,Tul ▪ Offi. 1; and shal I bee more vnkind than the
earth, to the king of the heauens (who as the beam in the glasse, hath inriched
my wombe, and annointed me with the oyle of gladnesse aboue my felows) shall I
requite his kindnesse & great mercies with a few faint teares? No my
charitie shall not let me, my loue shall suffer my griefe to exceed her, and
reason shall surrender his Lordship to passion, sufficeth it my son, 
 that in spirit I assure mee of thy life; yet in flesh whilest
thou art absent, & dwellest with death, let mee bewaile thee, (for humane
weaknesse requireth a little more weeping. Of one spark, (saith the wise man)
is made a great fire, of one kernell a large tree, of one grain of mustard
seed, a great and grosse number: why then shuld not one care beget another, one
tear produce multitudes, one sighe inforce stormes, wherethorough my griefe
might bee endlesse in lamenting, my teares ceaselesse in weeping, and my sighs
incessant in their doubling? Hanna was troubled in her minde, and wept sore to
get a sonne, and shuld not Marie be tormented in soule, and weep
instantly that hath left a sonne? Achsah married to
Othouiel, humbled her selfe before her father, and sayd, Giue me a
blessing, thou hast giuen mee a South lande,  giue mee also
springes of water. As Achsah to Caleb her father, so I to shee my God;Greg. libro 
                     •
                   Dialog. thou
hast giuen mee a South land of desolation, wherin the fruits of hope are barre,
the blossoms of ioyes are blasted: Oh giue mee therefore a well spring of
teares, to water this wast, that my hopes maye ripe by my ruth, and my ioyes
maye bloome after their blasting. Iosiah considering the long absence &
concealment of the bookes of the lawe, rent his garments for griefe, &
wept bitterly: Wonder not therefore ô ye men of Israel, though Marie rent
hir heart, rent her hairs, rent hir clothes, for the hath lost & long
wanted, the Lord of the lawe, the maker of Moses, the father of the people,
the passeouer and pledge of mans redemption. As the hand which is filled with
oue thing, can receiue and containe no other thing,August. so my heart being filled  with the
loue of this absent Christ, the griefe in wanting him, & the woundes that
wounde him) can loue nothing better than to lament him: can grieue at nothing
else but his want: finally, my eyes presenting his woundes to the
consideration of the same, my thoughts are wounded, by dwelling in my heart,
my heart is wounded by containing my thoughts, and both are wounded in
imagining his wounds: yea, they are so filled with compassion, that they yeeld
no place to consolation. Why then begette not these griefefull thoughtes more
griefefull thoughts: these teares, more teares: these sighes, more sighes:
which hauing onelye emperie in my heart, maye giue place to no ioye, but
breake the circumference that incloseth them in in the centre of care, and
getting better freedome to produce  more, they maye in theyr
eternitie make mee more miserable, and my moane more fruitful', my sorrowe
more plentifull, thorough the foisons of my misfortune. Ah Marie, thou canst
not make thine abilitie aunswerable to thy will, thy life hath limites, and
must limite thy teares. Hee that bindeth the flouds that they ouerflow not,
boundeth thy teares. Thou hast wept to the vtterance, thou hast no more to
vtter: the darknes must once come to an end, the cloudes must at last bee
dissolued, and euerie thing must end at his appointed time, and as there is a
time to bemoane, so lykewyse there is a time to bee merrie.
            If thou weepe tyll thou weepe awaie lyfe, and crie till thy dayes
bee consumed and quite wasted, a daie shal come to determine both? What 
 shall I become a comforter? or giue a lawe to my remorse, who
cannot comprehend my losse? No mine eies weepe on, whilest I haue a time to
liue, giue no tearme to your teares: as fast as you weep them, my braines shall
distill them, the fire of my loue shall helpe to distill them, they cannot
cease till I die, and beeing dead, what need I seeke to bewaile, his absence,
being assured of his presence? Th̄e til I die I wil not cease to weep, that
being dead, I may behold him, & whilest I liue, I will count all food
vaine, till I feede on his presence. If mine eies growe wearie, my sighes shall
assist them, and when both of them are infeebled, my cries shall be inforced:
in the hollow of his sepulchre I wil execute these drirements, and I will
exclaime so long on death till I make him deafe with hearing me. Make him deafe
poore Marie?  Ahlas, he is alwaies deafe and insensible, it were
a second death to assault him: hee is not tamed by intreaties, tempted by
perswasions, bribed by benefits, or allured by lamentations, tearmes please him
not, tears pearce him not, it were an endlesse labour, a fruitlesse worke. Oh
my sonne, how am I discruciate for thee, I woulde worke, I know not what, to
win thee I know not how, I wold end my sorrow, and desire to begin it, I
woulde beare thee to thy graue, could I cease to imbrace thee, I would
complaine of my desires, so I might appease them, and conquer my affections, so
I might command them: but flames that are 'quickly kindled, are hardly
quenched, and where oyle seeds the lampe of sorrowe, it will hardly bee
extinguished. My sighs preuent my teares, and inforce them to issue, my teares
preuent my thoughts, & make  them impatient, my thoughtes
preuent my reason, and admit no moderation, my reason would preuent all this,
but loue preuenteth it: my loue beeing of it selfe firie, will not cease
burning till it imbrace thee, flaming, till it find thee out: my charitie is
soueraigne of all my delights, she wils mee die to liue with thee: And as in
Salomons temple there, there was nothing that was not couered with golde, so
is there not anie parte, sense, motion, or action in me, or the liuing temple
of my soul, which is not inuested with loue, clothed with charity, which
hauing the nature of fire, (which is the most actiue of all elementes) is
neuer idle, but reuiueth teares when they are extinct, quickneth sighs when
they cease: armeth thoughtes, when they are dismaide: and forceth reason when
shee fainteth. As the roote is  to the tree, the soule to the
bodie, the sunne to the worlde: such are thou to mee, O my sonne: the boughs
are not clothed with green, except they bee vnited to the root: the members
inioye no lyfe, except they be imformed by the soule: the worlde partaketh no
light, excepte the Sunne illuminateth and lightneth the same: so my bodie
inioyeth no lyfe except thou liue in mee, mine eyes no delight, excepte thou
loooke vppon them, my thoughtes no cleere and perfect vnderstanding, vnlesse
thou beautifie and beholde them. Briefely, I cannot bee mine owne without
thee, I cannot liue, thou beeing dead, I cannot leaue weeping teares, vntill
thou come and wipe awaie my teares. Hee that truely loueth (saith the
Philosopher) is dead in his owne  bodie, and liueth in anothers:
then how commeth it to passe my sonne,Arist: Polit: 1
(if this reason doo holde) that I liue not in thee, who loue thee so dearly? If
it be true, that ther are two tearms in all motions, the one from whence the
thing parteth, the other whether it is resorted: why is it not this lyfe that
hath lefte thee, incorporated in my bodie? and my life which should forsake my
bodie, possessed of thine? Our loues are in the highest degree perfect, why
haue not then these causes their effects? Why liuest thou not my sonne? Why
moue not these handes with mine? Why stirres not this hart with mine? Why open
not these eyes with mine? Why speakes not this mouth with mine? Oh my God,
except it bee imperfection of my bodie, I know nothing can withdrawe thy lyfe
from me. By it I liue,  by thy spirit my spirit breatheth, only
my life is not in thy body, because it is vnworthie to expresse it, vnworthie
to animate thy heart, open thine eyes, quicken thy handes and tongue: and thy
life is not in mine, because my bodie is vnable to contain it: yet a sparke of
thy spirit is my loue, and a beame of this loue is my desire, which by kisses I
breath into thy lippes, which though it actually worke not in thee, yet by
effectuall wil, I wish it in thee. What I can giue of my life, I lauishly haue
spent on thee, my life liueth in my bodie, though my body liue not, til thy
bodie inioy life, the life of my bodie is liuelesse, onely my charitie which
is in me, taken from thee (who art the tree' of life, and fountaine of charity)
maketh my bodie liuing in spight of my will, and inforceth all my senses 
 (through vehemencie of my spirit,) to worke theyr offices in a
liuelesse body, and a hartlesse creature, which liueth onelie by thee, and
cannot liue but in thee: so if I liue, I liue forcibly, till thou liue. And to
verefie this philosophie (in that I loue thee truly) I leaue my selfe to liue
in thee, & onely by the liuing charity which is in me, my handes imbrace
thee, as they doo, mine eies bewaile thee with teares, and euerie other parte
worketh as thou wouldest. Ah Lord now see I the reason of my deadlie lyfe, and
thy wounding death: thou the hope of the disconsolate, art crucified. thou the
fountaine of life, art troubled: how can my life then bee fruitfull, who was
ingraffed by thee, Or thy death bee but wounding, when thou the fountayne (by
whom I liue) art dried vp by death?  If of contraries, there growe
a contrarie reason, why shoulde I feare? The wicked (sayth Iob) shall neuer
departe out of darknesse, the flame shall drie vp their branches, with the
blasts of Gods mouth shall they bee taken awaie. What then shall become of the
godly? If the wicked dwell in darknesse, they shall inioye light? If the flame
dry vp their branches, the children of the righteous shall bee like Oliue
branches: if the godlesse be blasted by Gods mouth, the innocent shall bee
blessed with his benefites: Then what shoulde I feare? And what not hope? Thou
knowest me (ô Lord my father) how I have conceiued in' innocencie, and
hated the workes of darknesse: thou knowest my sonne hath suffered in
innocencie, let therefore the fruit of my wombe florish, let thy promises be
accomplished in Iacob, & thy couenant in Israel.
            
            Though death hath blasted the branch, by a winter of others sinne,
let the spring of thy mercie comfort the roote, and animate the bowes, so shall
thy terrors and promises be accōmplished in both sortes. The waight of their
shames shall weigh downe the euill: the workes of the iust shall preuaile
before thy mercie seate. There are two teares, O Lorde, wherewith thou art
pleased, the one of ioy and praise, the other of sorow and lamentation: I wepte
the teares of ioye when thou blessedst my wombe, I weepe the tears of sorow,
because the hope of my daies is decaid. Quicken him O Lord, and incourage
mee, and as I receiued him with delight, nourished him with care, wept for him
with ioy, and lost him with griefe: so let mee recouer him with cōfort, who
wept for him through discontent & losse, and behold  him in
his resurrection, and triumph in his ascention, that pleasing In either sort
of teares, I maye praise thee for both sortes of mercie. O my bodie, thou hast
passed the wildernesse of woe, no rocke hath beene so kinde to yeeld thee an
eccho, my only breast by often beating on, hath ecchoed my stripes, so that in
my self I haue had the cause of complaint, & report. Oh my soule, thou hast
been sifted by incessant sorrow, all thy intellectual powers & discurfiue
parts, haue beene plagued by themselues, and supposing their weale lost, they
intertaine no hope to come.
            Thus plagued in bodie and distressed in soule, sate poore
Marie (a holy and happie virgin) enacting hir griefe with her armes,
when she had ouerforced both her tongue and eies with compassion: briefely, her
paine & impatience beeing so great  as her wordes could not
expresse it, hir desires so importunat, as they exceeded all her delightes.
The image of her griefe before her, and the domage of her losse within her,
shee sownded on the senselesse earth, and being conueied to her oratorie by the
holy assistance, the sacred bodie of Christ was bound vp and borne to the
sepulchre.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   