
      
         
            
            
               
                  ORIGO CASTI CORDIS.
                  Ego dormio et cor meum vigilat. cant. 5.
Ego ſto ad oſtium et pulſo, ſi quis aperue:
rit ianuam, intrabo ad illum. Apoc. 
                        •
                     .
                  Hieronymus Wier
                        •
                      ferit et excud. Cum Gratia et Priuil. Piermans.
               
            
         
         
            
            INSTRVCTIONS AND
ADVERTISEMENTS,
HOW TO MEDITATE THE
Miſteries of the Roſarie of the moſt
holy Virgin MARY.
            Written in Italian by the Reuerend Father
Gaſpar Loarte D. of Diuinitie of the Societie
of IESVS. And newly tranſlated
into English.
            
               IHS
            
            
               Non nobis Domine, non nobis, ſed Nomini
tuo da gloriam.
            
         
         
            
            
            THE AVTHOVR
to the deuout
Reader.
            
               
                  ALBEIT THE PROFITE
and importance of holye
prayer, and meditation of
heauenly thinges, hath not bene ſo
wel vnderſtoode heretofore, yet is it
nowe through Gods good grace ſo
much the better knowen, as it is more
vſed. And amongſt other thinges
which they are wont and may meditate
that geue them-ſelues to this holye
exerciſe, the deuotion of the holy
Roſarie is one that is very commendable,
very eaſie, and almoſt exerciſed
of eche one; wherein the moſt highe
and diuine miſteries are conteined: eſpecially
being inſtituted by the glorious
Patriarch S. Dominike, who receaued
it by reuelation of our Lady,
as his Religion doth witnes and obſerue.

And hauing in like maner
bene confirmed by many Popes, and
enriched with many graces, prerogatiues,
and indulgences; namely, by
Pius Quintus of holy memorie, as
appereth by the authentical priuiledges
which the Fathers of the ſaide
Religiō haue in Rome, Bononia, Naples,
and other places. Howbeit, becauſe
al knowe not how to meditate
theſe Miſteries (as it bohoueth) and
by this lacke they looſe a great part
of the fruit which might wel be gathered
thereby, for their helpe this
preſent Treatiſe hath bene compoſed;
wherin is ſhewed, in what maner
they ought to meditate with greateſt
profite and conſolatiō of their ſoules.
And that thou, welbeloued Reader,
maieſt the better vnderſtande, howe
fruitful this holy deuotion is to euery
ſort of people, and howe it behoueth
thee to exerciſe thy ſelfe therin, thou
maieſt reade the Chapter folowing

wherein this matter is ſo amply intreated
of, as I hope thou wilt not
grudge to read the reſt of the booke,
meaning to embrace this ſo holy an
exerciſe, which thou maieſt aſſuredly
beleeue, ſhal-be more profitable
and pleaſaunt, then
painful and yrkſome
to thee.
         
         
            
            
               
                  Monſtra te eſſe Matrem.
                  Monſtra te eſſe Filium.
               
            
            Conditor Omnipotens, coelo
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               , ſalo
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               ,
ſolo
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               
            
            Sanctius hac nullū Virgine fecit opus.
         
         
            
            THE AVTHOVRS
Preface touching the great profite and vtilitie
that may be gathered by meditating vpon the
life of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſte; and in what
maner we ought to meditate the miſteries of the
Roſarie (which are intreated of in this
Treatiſe) and conteine in them the
principal part of this moſt
holye life.
            
               
                  LIKE AS THE Sonn of God
vouchſafed to come downe
from heauen to earth, and to
make himſelfe man for the wel-fare
and life of man, according to that
the ſelfe ſame word incarnateIoh. 10. b Gal. 4. a. ſaith;
I am come that men may haue life, and that
they may haue it plentilully: euen ſo, for the
conſeruation of this life of grace, and
ſpiritual conſolation of man, one of
the thinges that maie moſte chieflie
helpe him herein, is the often meditating
of the life of the ſaide worde
incarnate Ieſus Chriſte our Sauiour, and
the imitation of his moſt meruailous

examples; ſith, the celeſtial Father
hauing geuen him to the world for a
Luc. 2. c. Ioh. 1. a. 3. c 8. b. 12. f Act. 13. g light, for a guide, and for a Schoolemaſter
and teacher of men; and the
Sonne him-ſelfe aſſuring vs, that1. Ioh. 1. a. 2. b. Ioh. 13. b 1. Petr. 2. d al,
whatſoeuer he did, was done to geue
vs an example, that we ſhould do the
ſame; what ſhould ſuch doo, as could
not enioy his vifible preſence here in
earth? how ſhould they be illuminated,
guided, and inſtructed of him, if
they had not this remedie of the meditation
of his moſte holye life? by
means wherof, he euen at this day illuminateth,
guideth, and teacheth vs,
as though he were preſent, with that
he earſt did (wandring corporally in
this world) ſpeake, worke, endure, and
teache.
            
               IT BEHOVETH therfore, that this
meditatiō ſerue vs as a mirror, wherin,
by eftſons looking & taking view,
we may with the eies of our ſoule ſee
that, which with the eyes of our bodie

we neither could nor can ſee; and
according to it direct and frame our
life, ſithRom. 15. 
                     〈◊〉
                   1. Pet. 2. d al Ieſus Chriſte his actions
were done for our inſtitution and inſtruction;
yea, as S. Iohn the Apoſtle
1. Ioh. 2▪ 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                ſaith: Who ſo ſaith that he dwelleth in Ieſus
Chriſte, that is to ſay, that he is a member
and ſeruant of Ieſus Chriſt, ought
to walke as he hath walked. As if he had
ſaide: Who-ſoeuer ſaith, that he is a
member of Ieſus Chriſt, muſt be lowlye
Mat. 11. d and meeke, as Ieſus Chriſt was;
muſt contemne al delightes, honours,
and woorſhipp of this worlde, as he
did, ſeeking in al things the only glorie
of God,Ioh. 7. c 8. g & not regarding in any
thing his owne peculier eſtimation;
he muſt loue frendes andMat. 5. g. foes, doo
iniurie to none, and if any be done to
him,Luc. 6. d 1. Pet. 2. d. bear it patiently; deſire rather
to ſerue others, thē to beMat. 20. d ſerued him
ſelf. To be ſhort, he muſt ſo loue his
neighbour,Mar. 10. g as if need require at any
time, he be ready to loſe his life for
his welfare and ſaluation.
            
               
Howe is it then poſsible for a true
Chriſtian to doo theſe and ſo manie
mo things as be neceſſarie to be done,
to imitate Ieſus Chriſt a-right, but if
he knowe that Ieſus Chriſt him-ſelfe
did firſt practiſe and doo them moſte
exactly? and howe ſhal he wot them,
but by eftſons meditating his life, &
the liuely & perfect examples, which
of ſuch like workes he left vs? and
howe may a man learne the leſſons
of charitie, patience, pouertie, obedience,
and of al other vertues, but if he
knowe the life of the Lorde of al
vertues? and therfore, as ſaith glorious
S. Bernard:Ber. ſub finē ſerm. 22. in Can. In vaine trauaileth he
to attain vertues, that hopeth by anie
other meanes then by the Lord of al
Pſ. 23. b. 79. 83. 88. vertues to attain them; whoſe doctrine
is a nurcerie of prudence; his
mercie a worke of Iuſtice; his life a
mirrour of temperance; his death a
liuely paterne of prowes. Thou ſeeſt,
Reader, by this holye Doctour his

wordes, confirmed by the teſtimonie
of ſo manie other famous men, howe
neceſſary the continual meditation
of Chriſtes moſt holie life is, to the
obteining of ſuch vertues as be needful
for al thoſe that couet to participate
of the true and euerlaſting life.
            Moreouer, beſides this ſo great a
profite, which proceedeth neceſſarily
out of this moſte laudable exerciſe,
weigh wel, good Chriſtian Reader,
what other fruites, graces, and ſtore of
ſpiritual treaſure doo aſſociate this
holy meditation. Tel me, I pray thee,
what thing more ſweeter, and of greter
conſolation may any man deſire,
that hath not wholly loſt his taſte,
then to meditate, diſcourſe, and think
vpon the wordes, workes, examples,
and life of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſte?
Of whom we findeSap. 8. d. written, That his
conuerſation was without al ſournes, and his
companie had no encombrance, but ioy and conſolation:
What time maye we deeme

better ſpent, then that which is emploied
in ſuch profitable meditation?
what exerciſe can there be more meritorious
or acceptable to Chriſte,
then this, wherin the ſoule is buſied,
in performing Mary Magdalen that
moſt woorthy penitent her function
& office, whoLuc. 10. g Aug. 1. de Trinit. init ca. 10. to. 3. chuſed the beſt part,
in ſitting her downe at our Lordes
feete, and liſtning to his wordes. The
like did our Souerain Lady the bleſſed
virgin Mary,Luc. 2. g marking wel, and
reuoluing the ſame wordes in her
heart: What thing may ther be more
valable to gain mercy, grace, and the
familiaritie of Ieſus Chriſte? what
more ſoueraine remedie to come by
litle and litle to the contemplation of
his infinite maieſtie, then is attentiue
and ſerious meditation? Seing the
ſame our Lorde aſſureth vs him-ſelfe
therof,Ioh. 10. b ſaying: If anye enter in by me
he shal-be ſaued, and shal finde moſt ſweete feedings.
In fine, what thing may ther be

more eaſie or more pleaſant for al
ſortes of people, then is this holy meditation?
ſith in meditating the life
of Chriſte, we muſt needes meditate
withal the life of his bleſſed mother,
as alſo cal the Apoſtles and other holye
Saintes to minde, that liued and
conuerſed with him: yea, al the bleſſed
Angels too, who greatly delight
in this kinde of exerciſe, and therfore,
no doubt, but fauour greatly al
thoſe that vſe it. In ſuch wiſe, as if
thou wert not to receaue any other
guerdon, nor to reap any other commoditie
by this ſo holy an exerciſe,
yet ought this onely thing to allure,
yea, conſtraine thee, to frequent and
practiſe it; to wit, the pleaſure and
ſweetnes which thy ſoule ſhal feele,
in contemplating ſo holy a life, in remembring
his ſo abſolute and wonderful
workes, in beholding with the
eyes of thy ſoule ſo beautfulPſ. 44. a Sap. 13. a Bern. initio Ser. 2. de Epiph. and amiable
a Lord aboue al the ſonnes of
men.
            
               
What thing can be more ſweete,
then to conſider his moſt holy behauiours?
howe humble he was in his
conuerſation; howe affable in his
wordes; howe milde in his anſweres;
howe feruent in his preaching; how
ſeuere in reprehending vice; howe
zealous in procuring diuine honour;
howe patient in putting vp iniuries;
how diligent in ſeeking the ſauegard
of ſoules; howe ful of compaſsion, in
bewailing others annoyes; how curteous
in receauing ſinners; how merciful
in pardoning offenders; how liberal,
in graunting that which was
required him; howe mightie in his
miracles; howe modeſt in his going;
howe temperate in his eating; howe
great a louer of pouertie; how prone
to paines; how frequent in watching
and praying; how gratious and amiable
towardes al men: he deſpiſed
none, although a ſinner; he ſhunned
none, were he ſick or a lepre; he flattered

not the riche, ne draue the needie
out of his companie; he fledd al
worldly honours, and was not careful
for temporal treaſure; he was common
to al; and toSic Paul 1. Cor. 2. d. win al, conuerſed
with al. Briefly, he was ſo delectable,
ſo ſweete, and ſo amiable, as it is not
poſsible to finde, wiſh, ne yet imagine,
a more gratious, exact, and perfect
life then his was. What is he
therfore that wil-be ſo ſenſeleſſe, and
of ſo corrupt a taſte, as wil not be delighted
therwith, and feele a ſinguler
ſweetnes in meditating of this ſo holie
a life?
            Neuertheleſſe, thinke not, that in
ſaying, that the meditation of Chriſt
his life is of ſo great importance, I
meane to exclude his paſsion and
death, neither yet his Reſnrrectiō and
Aſcenſion; ſith vnder this worde of
life, al theſe miſteries are comprehended;
and out of thē al oughteſt thou
to gather, as it were, a pretie poſie, to

beare alwaies about thee in thy boſome,
like to that of mirrhe, which
the SpouſeCan. 1. d ſaid in the Cantikes, ſhe
caried continually in hers. GoodBer. init. Ser. 43. in Cant. & ger. 12. de d
                     •
                  lect. dei, in tract. de 
                     〈◊〉
                   be. viu. S.
Bernard ſaide, howe he had gathered
ſuch a one, out of al the diſtreſſes and
annoyances our Lorde had in his infancie,
the paines he abidd in preaching,
the toiles he endured in his
voiages, the temptations he ſurmoū
               ted
in faſting, the teares he ſhedd in
praying; and to ſay al at once, out of
al the iniuries, outrages, ſcornes, ſpittinges,
blows, nailes, with al the other
tormentes; and amongſt ſo manye
branches of this moſt ſweet-ſmelling
mirrhe, he ſaith, how he left not that
out of the ſoure drinke which was
geuen him on the Roode, nor yet that
wherwith he was anointed in the ſepulchre.
By which wordes this holy
Saint declareth, howe in meditating
our Sauiours life, al theſe thinges are
to be conſidered.
            
               
Howbeit, foraſmuch as it is not
long agone, that being commaunded
by my ſuperiors, I made a ſmal Treatiſe
that was publiſhed abroade, touching
the matter of the Paſsiō, wherin
were certaine inſtructions and
aduertiſementes geuen, both of the
principal pointes therof, and in what
maner they were to be meditated;
mine intent was in this Treatiſe (being
in like maner commaunded me)
to haue principally intreated of ſuch
other miſteries of this moſt holy life,
as had not beene ſpoken of in the other
Treatiſe. Notwithſtanding, whē
I afterwardes had perceaued, how to
write al that might be gathered
out of the holy Goſpels touching the
life, preaching, and miracles of our
Lord, would be a veri long thing, and
require a iuſt volume, I determined
with my ſelfe to write onely vpō the
miſteries of the Roſarie of the moſte
bleſſed virgin Mary; ſithens, beſides

is ſo godly, renowned, and approued,
a deuotiō as is aboueſaid in the Prologue;
therein, in my fancie, are the
chief points of the life of Chriſt cō
               teined,
frō the time of his incarnatiō,
vntil the ſending downe of the holy
Ghoſt; in-ſomuch as, who-ſoeuer he
be that ſhal meditate theſe wel, may
aſſure him-ſelfe to haue meditated
the greater and more principal part
of his moſt ſacred life.
            This is the thing therfore, my derelye
beloued brother, which I here
preſent vnto thee; to wit, the meditations
of the miſteries of the aforeſaide
Roſarie, whereof eche one, (as
was done in the other meditations of
the Paſsion) is diſtinguiſhed into
three pointes, aſ-wel for the perfectiō 
               Aug. ca. 16 lib. 2. de doct. Chriſ. to. 3. & li. 2. q. euan. cap. 6. to. 4 & in pſal. 6. tom. 8
and deuotion of this number, as alſo,
that eche one may meditate them
more amply, and with leſſe confuſiō.
            But becauſe the pointes which I
noted in the other meditations of the

ſacred Paſsion were no whitt amplified
and dilated, but onely a bare text
ſet downe of the matters that were
to be meditated vpon (the which was
done, ſuppoſing that eche one would
them-ſelues, according to their deuotion
haue dilated and amplified the
ſame) vnderſtanding ſince, that if
ſome doo make this diſcourſe and dilatatiō,
yet, al for lack of capacitie doo
it not; for this cauſe haue I done mine
indeuour in this booke, to content
both th'one and th'other; acknowledging
my ſelfe, as S. PauleRom. 1. b. ſaith,
to be indebted both to the learned
and the ignorāt. For the lerned therfore,
I haue thought good, after a text
wiſe, firſt to ſet downe that which
they maye meditate vpon in euerye
miſterie, leauing eche one to pauſe
therein, and to dilate the ſame, according
to their capacitie and deuotion:
nowe for the ignorant, that knowe
not howe to doo this, without ſome

further helpe, I haue ſhewed thē the
maner, how to interteine thē-ſelues,
and to diſcourſe vpon eche point,
which ſoeuer they may thinke good
to meditate vpon; out of which maner
of amplification they may gather
theſe commodities folowing.
            1. Firſt, they ſhal better vnderſtand
the hiſtorye of that point, whereon
they purpoſe to meditate.
            2. They maye conceaue the document
or example, which ſome-times
is intermedled for their iuſtruction.
            3. They maye learne, howe other-whiles
to aske our Sauiour ſuche
thinges, as the point whereon they
meditate, may moſt fitly miniſter occaſiō
of; other-whiles to yeeld thanks
for ſuch graces and mercies as they
maye be put in minde to haue beene
done vnto them, and to this purpoſe
may they apply the vocal prayer ſet
downe at the end of euery miſterye.
            4. They maye with the reading of

theſe amplifications, helpe thē-ſelues
to auoide the diſtractions and wandring
of minde, which other-whiles,
yea, eftſons, happeth in time of meditation.
            5. The Apoſtrophes and familier
ſpeeches which I haue nowe and thē
intermedled in this methode and maner
of dilatation, may ſerue to excite
and kindle deuotion, being weake or
wāting, as happeth many times to be.
            6. After they haue read more then
once the foreſaid maner of amplifications
vpon eche point, they ſhal perceaue
them-ſelues ſo ſufficiently inſtructed,
as that of them-ſelues they
may eyther altogether, or in part, be
able to amplifie ſuch articles as they
are minded to meditate vpon; and
when they found nothing ſuggeſted
of their owne brayne and peculier
deuotion, yet maye the readinge of
theſe points that are here propoūded
thē, with their amplificatiōs wel and

leiſurly conſidered, ſerue for a ſufficient
meditation, whiles nothing els
were graunted them. And of theſe,
and ſuch like fruites which the
ſimple ſort may ſuck and gather out
of the fore-ſaide amplifications, the
learned may in like wiſe helpe them
ſelues ther-withal at ſome times, whē
beſt ſhal like them; ſo that, aſ-wel to
th'one as th'other they ſhal not be
vnprofitable.
            Moreouer, this maner of diſtinguiſhing
and entertaining a mans
ſelfe vpon euerie article, may ſerue
for al ſortes of people; for who ſo
mindeth to diſcourſe vpō al the three
pointes of the miſterie, whereon he
meditateth, wel may he ſo doo; and
who fancied not to pauſe in eche
point ſo long time, may make choiſe
of that point that ſhalt beſt like him;
ſeruing his turne, if he thinke good,
with the meditating of one onely
point, and the amplification therof,

if he liſt; which he may right eaſilye
finde out, ſeing euerye point is ſo
plainly diſtinguiſhed a-part, as one
hangeth not of an-other, but ech one
is abſolute in his owne concluſion. I
thinke it good beſides, to aduertiſe
thee in this place, that the inſtructions
which I haue geuen thee in the
6. 8. and 11. Chapters of, The exerciſe
of a Chriſtian life; as alſo thoſe aduiſes
that I ſet thee downe in the Tretiſe
I wrote of the meditation of the
Paſsion, at the ende of the inſtructiō,
may greatly helpe thee to the better
meditating of theſe miſteries; al the
which documentes I here omitt for
breuitie ſake, referring thee onely to
the foreſaide places in the bookes aboue
eſpecified.
            Finally, I thinke it meete to aduertiſe
thee, that for-ſomuch as in the inſtitution
of the Roſarie it is ordeined
that tenn Aue Maries and one Pater noſter
be recited vppon euery miſterie,

theſe maye be ſaide in three ſundrye
maners. The firſt is, to recite them
before thou enter into thy meditation.
The ſecond is, to ſay them in the
very time of meditation. The third
is, to ſaye them after a man hath finiſhed
his meditation. And this laſt
way is, in mine opinion, the beſt, ſith
the ſoule doth commonly after meditation
finde it ſelf more ſupple, and
better diſpoſed to praye with attention
and deuotion. Yet meane I not
hereby to make a lawe, but that eche
one may ſay them, at ſuch time as beſt
ſhal like them.
            Theſe particularities haue I thought
good to touche, minding thereby to
helpe nouices, and ſuch as are ſmallye
acquainted with this exerciſe, a labor
that I haue willingly laide my handss
to, aſ-wel, for that it was appointed
me by thoſe that haue authoritie to
commaund me, as alſo, in regarde of
the hope I haue conceued that it ſhal

benefite the brethren of our companie,
for whoſe profite and commoditie,
this pamphlet was principallye
compoſed: whom I exhort and pray
as earneſtly as I can, to geue them
ſelues diligently to this holy exerciſe
of meditation, conſidering that for
ſo ſmal paine they are promiſed ſo
great a gaine, and ſo ſinguler conſolation,
as I am perſuaded al thoſe ſhalbe
able to teſtifie, who with a willing
and feruent deſire ſhal for ſome time
geue them-ſelues to aſſaye and proue
the ſame: For verily doo I hope, that
ſuch ſhal by experience finde his life
to be the guide of their life, who is
the way,Ioh. 14▪ 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                the truth, and the life; to
whom, with the Father and the
holy Ghoſt be eternal and
euerlaſting glory.
            Amen.
         
         
            
            TOTIVS LIBRI
SVMMA.
            Nunciat, inuiſit, Parit, Offertur, Reperitur:
            Orat, Flagra, Vepres, Fert
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               , Subit
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                Crucem:
            Viuit, & Aſcendit, Paracletum mittit ab alt
                  ••
               
            
            Mors Mariae, Redimit ſacra Corona Caput.
         
         
            
            THE FIFTEENE
MISTERIES OF THE
ROSARIE OF OVR
LADIE.
            WHEREOF THE FIVE
FIRST ARE CALLED
IOYFVL; THE SECOND
DOVLFVL;
THE THIRD
GLORIOVS.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE ANNVNTIATION.
            
               
            
            Hic Maria Gabriel Superi Conſulta Senatu
                  •
               
            
            Nunciat, implentur viſcera Caſta Deo.
         
         
            
            ¶THE FIRST IOYFVL
MISTERIE IS OF THE INcarnation
of the Sonne of God; and
of the Annunciation of our Ladye;
where vpon thou shalt meditate theſe
three pointes folowing.
            
               
                  FIRST, that Cordial charitie of
God, who1. Ioh. 4. c Ioh. 1. b. 3. b vouchſafed to be incarnate,
and to make him-ſelfe man,
as we are, to repaire thereby the fal
of miſerable man-kinde, deliuering
vs by this meanes from the ſlauerie of Sathan,
and this without any merite of ours going
before,Tim. 1. b Ad Tit. 3. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   woorthie the receeuing of ſo great
a benefite.
               SECONDLY, Conſider, howe for the accomplishment
of this miſterie, he ſent that celeſtial
Ambaſſage to the moſt ſacred virgin,
the which Gabriel the Angel caried, according
as the Euangeliſt S. LukeLuc. 1. c. reporteth. Wherein
thou maieſt contemplate the circumſtances of
the Ambaſſadour, and of the great Lady, to whō
the Ambaſſage was ſent; as alſo the wordes of
thoſe moſt amiable ſpeeches that paſſed betwixt
them twaine.
               
                  
THIRDLY conſider, howe preſently after
the moſt ſacred Virgin had yeelded her conſent
to the meſſage that was deliuered her by the
Angel, this diuine miſterie was forth-with accō
                  plished.
Here maieſt thou meditate, what meruailous
matters were done in that inſtant.
            
            
               
                  THE FIRST Article maye be
amplified, by meditating the
pitiful eſtate which the
world was in, when God vouchſafed
to beſtow this his ſo bountiful a benefite
vpon it; how many ſinnes did
euery where beare ſway; how many
errours, howe great blindnes, howe
many dangers, howe ſlender a deſire,
ne yet any imagination to receaue ſo
great a benefite; and yet, ſuch was the
loue of God towardes the world, as
without any good deſert of our part,
yea, with an infinite number of moſt
enormous crimes; the dai being come,
which his maieſtie had before al daies
ordeined,Gal. 4. a. Leo Papa Ser. 2. de Natiuit. D
                     •
                  m. he remembred them that
had forgotten him, and with moſte
rare clemencie vouchſafed to viſite

them that deſerued moſt ſeuerely to
be chaſtiſed; and to redreſſe the endleſſe
euils and miſeries that reigned
round about the world; albeit ſo beetle
blinde were men, as they knewe
them not, nor any whit perceued thē.
And for the doing of this matter, he
diſdained not to ioyne him-ſelfe to
the miſerie of humane nature, making
him-ſelfe man for vs, and thral
to thouſands of annoyes, for our ſaluation.
O ineſtimable Charitie? O infinite
liberalitie? Lorde, thou liberally
departeſt with more to the world, thē
it either durſt craue or wiſh for at thi
handes. What diddeſt thou eſpie in
vs, O Lorde, to conſtrain thee in ſuch
lowly wiſe to viſite vs? what wer our
merits towardes thee? what ſeruices
had we performed to thy diuine maieſtie?
thy mere goodnes it is, that
only prouoketh thee therto; that thy
mere clemencie cauſeth thee to deſcend
from heauē to earth, and to take

humane fleſhe in the bleſſed virgins
wombe for our wel-fare, which made
thee earſt to deſcend downExod. 3. a Deut. 33. b. Mar. 12. b Luc. 20. f. Act. 7. d Ber Ser. in verba. 12. Apoc. ſignū magnum apparuit. into the
buſhe, taking pitie of thy peoples affliction,
and to procure their deliuerance,
as then thou ſaideſt to Moiſes;
whereby thou figuredſt this thy ſecond
diſcent of clothing thy ſelfe
with the mantel of our humanitie.
Al the Angels praiſe and thank thee
for this thine ineffable mercy; ſeing
man can-not condignely thanke thee
therefore, nor yet acknowledge it
ſufficientlye.
            
               IN THE ſeconde point thou ſhalt
haue a plentiful ſubiect to dilate vpō,
conſidering on thone ſide the qualitie
of the Ambaſſadour which God
ſent downe for the dealing in this affaire;
his high eſtate, being one of the
Luc. 1. b. Ber. non longè à princ. hom. 1. ſuper Miſſu
                     •
                   eſt▪
                principal Angels of heauen; the
beautie and brightnes of body, wherin
he appered to the moſt ſacred virgin;
the humilitie & reuerence, wherwith
he ſaluted her; the gratious ſpeeches,

repleniſhed with al conſolation,
which he vſed towards her; the great
skil and wonderful wiſdom he ſhewed
in reporting his Commiſsion to
her, declaring by degrees the diuine
miſterie of the Incarnation. In this
maner maieſt thou likewiſe diſcourſe
vpon al the other circumſtances.
            On th'other ſide, weigh wel the excellencie
and ſouerain dignitie of her,
whom this ambaſſage was ſent to; her
modeſt countenance in harkening;
her graue prudence, in pondring the
wordes that were ſpoken to her; that
wel-beſeeming baſhfulnes which
made her bluſh, in hearing her owne
praiſes; the feruent zeal ſhe caried to
virginitie, which made her make anſwere,
meaning to be aſſured thereof;
the liuely faith, wher-with ſhe firmly
beleeued al that was on Gods behalfe
announced her, for the which ſhe was
of her couſin S. ElizabethLuc. 1. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                ſingulerly
cōmēded; & laſtly, the profoūd humi

with ſhe reſigned and gaue vp her
ſelf as our Lord his obedient ſeruant,
he hauing choſen her for his beloued
mother. If thou diſcuſſe diligently
al theſe particularities, as al other the
like circumſtances of this diuine miſterie,
thou ſhalt finde thy ſelfe rapt
into ſuch an admiration, as ſhal make
thee crie out with the Roial Pſalmiſt
Pſ. 138 Dauid: Great and wonderful is thy wiſdome
O Lord, it is ſo high, as I cannot comprehend it.
It ſurpaſſeth my retche and vnderſtanding;
ſithens of what ſide ſoeuer
thou turneſt thee in this Ambaſſage,
thou ſhalt finde great, and right miraculous
meruailes. Great is the meſſage;
great the Lord that ſent it; gret
is the perſonage, to whō it was ſent;
great the Ambaſſadour that brought
it; great is the affaire that is intreted
of; great and meruailous the maner
of proceeding in it. Our Lorde be
lauded euery wher,Dan. 6. g that doth ſo gret
matters both in heauen and earth.
            
               
               IF THOV deſire to ſtaye vpon the
third point, thou ſhalt neuer want
matter, meditating the thinges that
tooke effect preſentlye after the
Queene of heauen had geuen her cō
               ſent,
Luc. 1. d. ſaying: Fiat mihi ſecundùm verbum
tuum. Be it done vnto me according to thy
worde. Sith in that verye inſtant the
moſt ſacred body of Ieſus was by vertue
of the holy ghoſt formed of the
moſt pure bloud of the bleſſed virgin
Mary; and in the ſelfe ſame inſtant
was his glorious ſoule created
and infuſed in his body; and in the

                  •
               ame inſtant was his moſt holy humanity
vnited with the eternal word
of God in one ſelf-ſame perſon. And
thence-forth was the bleſſed virgin
mother of God, Queene of Angels
and men, ful of grace, repleniſhed
with al the gi
                  •
               tes and prerogatiues
meete for ſo incomparable a dignitie.
O Fiat moſt puiſſant and effectual?
with an-otherGen. 1. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
               Fiat God did earſt

make the heauens, earth, and al the
creatures of the world; yet were ther
farre greater & more important matters
made with this Fiat▪
                ſeing that by
means of this Fiat, the ſame God made
him-ſelf mā, and mā was made God;
with al the other right wōderful workes
that proceed out of this chāge &
moſt miraculous metamorphoſis.
            O mightie Lady, thou haſt not ſaid
without cauſe in thyLuc. 1. c. Canticle, That
he which is mightie hath done great things vnto
thee; and what greter matters might
there be, then to haue made thee his
mother, thou enioying ſtil thy pure
and immaculate virginitie? what greter
matter, thē to haue made thee his
temple,Vide Litaniam B. Maria in fine huius 
                     ••
                  bri. and the ſacred tabernacle of
the holy Ghoſt? what greater matter,
then he whō the cope of heauen can
not conteine, to haue vouchſafed to
ſhut him-ſelf vp in thy ſacred wōbe,
it being made thereby a celeſtial Paradiſe,
wherein the Angels delite to
adore their Maker. Verilye the Almightie
hath done great matters to

thee, wherby thy ſpirite may rightly
reioyce, and without intermiſsiō magnify
him, who hath ſo highly magnified
thee. And we al may rightly for
the ſame cauſe cōgratulate with thee,
and praiſe and reuerence thee perpetually,
endeuouring our ſelues al we
may, to be thy true & faithful ſeruāts.
            
               A PRAYER.
               
                  
                     GREAT and ineffable was the
ioye, O moſte ſacred virgin
Mary, which thy moſt holy
hart was ſeaſed with, whē being ſaluted
by the Angel Gabriel, and vnderſtanding
the cauſe of his Ambaſſage,
thou with a moſt profoūd humilitie
reſigneſt thy ſelfe into our Lorde his
handes, andAug. ca. 5. lib. 2. de▪ Symb. ad Catech. Chriſol. Ser. 143. wert preſently thervpō
made the true mother of thine owne
Father & Creator. I beſeech thee Lady,
by this thine incomparable dignitie,
that with thy worthy praiers thou
wilt obtein me abūdāt grace, wherby
I may cōceue ſpiritually the ſelf-ſame
Lorde, and knowe alwaies howe to
keepe him in my ſoule. Amen.
            
         
         
            
            THE VISITATION.
            
               
            
            Viſitur Elizabeth, Chriſtum
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ſalutat ab alu
                  •
               
            
            Infans, qui geminae legis alumnus erat.
         
         
            
            THE SECOND IOYFVL
Miſterie is touching our bleſſed Ladye
her viſiting of S. Elizabeth; wherevpon
thou maieſt meditate theſe three articles
or pointes folowing.
            
               
                  THE FIRST is, how our Lady hauing
Luc. 1. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   by the Angels reuelation vnderſtoode,
howe her Couſin was nowe
ſixe monthes gone with child, she with
an exceeding charitie and diligence went to viſite
her.
               SECONDLY, Conſider the paſſing ioye
which S.Ibidem. Elizabeth felt preſently after she had
ſeene the bleſſed Virgin, and heard the voice of
her ſalutation, as alſo the wordes which she ſpake
in her praiſe and ſinguler commendation.
               THIRDLY, contemplate, howe our Ladie
hearing the wordes that S. Elizabeth ſpake, and
vnderſtanding the ſecret thinges that were reuealed
vnto her, she was ſ
                     •
                  rceaſed with a great
ioy and exultation of ſpirite; and being whollye
inflamed in diuine loue, pronounced that moſte
miſtical Canticle ofLuc. 1. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   
                  Magnificat anima mea
Dominum.
               
            
            
               
               
                  MINDING to pauſe in the
conſideration of the firſte
Article, meditate the charitie
which cauſed the moſt ſacred mother
to enterpriſe ſo long and laborſome
a iourney, onely to viſite, and to
doo ſome ſeruice to that holye olde
woman Saint Elizabeth, woting wel,
that by her preſence ſhe might be
greatly comforted and holpen.
            ThisAmb. in Luc. lib. 1. &. 2. de virginibus. may ſerue thee for a leſſon to
endeuour thy ſelfe, according to her
example, to exerciſe the workes of
charitie and mercie with a willing
and readie heart. Ponder likewiſe her
moſt profound humilitie, wherewith
albeit ſhe receaued ſo high a dignitie,
as to be made the mother of God,
yet did ſhe not for al that refuſe to
humble and depreſſe her-ſelfe, in going
to doo that office, which the mener
ſort is wont to performe vnto
their betters. O moſte holy and moſt
humble mother, howe farre art thou

eſtraunged from al arrogant hawtines;
howe farre abhorring from the
peſtilent preſumption of men and
women of this world, which being
but vile and abiect in the ſight of
God, wil exalt them-ſelues, and couete
to be viſited, courted, and ſerued
of al others, not knowing that, moſte
ſoueraine Lady which thou kneweſt
ſo wel, to witt,Eccle. 3. 
                     〈◊〉
                   Phil. 2. a. that to finde fauour
in the face of God, and to be reſpected
of his diuine Maieſtie, looke how
much any one is greater, and more
woorthy renowne, & ſo much ought
he the more to humble and ſubmitt
him-ſelfe to others.
            Thou mayeſt extende thy ſelfe in
the conſideratiō of the ſecond point,
meditating, howe great efficacie the
preſence & ſpeech of the moſt ſacred
virgin is of, and how happy thoſe are
to be deemed, whō gratiouſly ſhe fauoreth,
ſeing S. Elizabeth (immediat-after

ſhe was viſited and ſaluted of
her) receaued, both ſhe, and the childe
ſhe bore in her entrals, ſo great a ioye
and meruailous illumination of ſpirite;
Sithēs the miſterie of the Incarnation
of the ſonne of God (at that
time vtterly vnknowen to the whole
world) was reuealed vnto her. And
by the wordes which ſhe vttered thē
vnto our Lady, plaine teſtimonie did
ſhe geue, what other graces and fauours
ſhe had receaued, the which
ought mightily to moue thee to enforce
thy ſelfe al thou maieſt to be a
deuout and zealous ſeruant of this
great Lady, by honoring her continually
in thine heart; whereby thou
ſhalt merite to be ſpiritually viſited
and fauoured of her; in ſuch wiſe, as
thou maieſt haue an aſſured hope,
neuer at any time to be deſtitute of
God his diuine giftes and graces.
            
               TOVCHING the contemplation
of the third Article, thou ſhalt haue

a large ſcope to walke in, imagining
howe this moſt ſacred ſoule of the
Luc. 1. d. holy mother was affected in hearing
what her couſin S. Elizabeth ſaid vnto
her; how gratious, how glittering,
howe gladd ſhe was, and repleniſhed
with al conſolation; howe ſhe bluſſhed,
to heare her owne praiſes ſpokē
of; how lowly ſhe humbled her-ſelf,
attributing al the vertues ſhe was adorned
with, to the bountiful goodnes
of our Lord that gaue her thē; with
how inflamed an affection ſhe thanked
God, for this his ſo ſinguler a benefite
done both to her, and to al the
whole race of mankinde. In ſōme, as
not able anye longer to repreſſe her
inward exultations, ſhe diſcouered
her-ſelfe at laſt, and gaue the feruent
flames of diuine fire leaue to burſt
out, which burned ſecretlye within
her holy heart, reuealing to the world
what treſures God had endowed her
with, and this by the diuine Canticle

ful of miſteries, which ſhe then pronounced,
Luc. 1. e. magnifying thereby that
Lord, who had ſo greatly magnified
her, and confeſsing plainly, that her
lowlines and humilitie was occaſion
of this her ſo high a dignitie.
            O ſacred virgin both great and litle;
great in thy holines, great in the
graces and fauours which thou haſte
receaued from God; great, in the greteſt
dignitie that was euer imparted
to any pure creature. Litle in thine
owne eyes; litle, in reſpect of thy profound
humilitie; litle, in regarde of
thine innocencie and ſimplicitie of
an infant, which is a very neceſſarye
andmat. 18. a &. 19 b. Mar. 9. e Luc. 9. f 1. Cor. 14. d. requiſite vertue to enter into
the kingdome of heauen with▪ Right
woorthely ſaide one,Ber. ho. 1 ſuper Miſſus eſt. that with thy
virginitie thou pleaſedſt God; but
with thine humilitie thou made thy
ſelf his mother. Alas! why can-not
I learne of thee, and of the bleſſed
fruit of thy wombe, to be humble in

hart; ſeing that, as thou affirmeſt, and
thy ſonn hath confirmed,Luc. 14. c &. 18. c the humble
are thoſe onely that ſhal-be by
him exalted.
            
               A PRAYER.
               
                  
                     RIGHT delectable and plentiful
was the ioy thou hadſt,
O moſte ſacred virgin, and
mother of God, when being repleniſhed
with charitie, thou wenteſt to
viſite thy holy couſin Elizabeth, and
didſt vnderſtād the miraculous effectes,
which by meanes of thy ſalutatiō
God eternal wroght, both in her-ſelf,
and in the child which ſhe bare with
in her wombe. I beſeech thee, O bleſſed
Lady, by that exultatiō thou felteſt
then, and diddeſt manifeſt by thy
celeſtial Canticle, that it may pleaſe
thee to make me partaker of thy ſpiritual
viſitation, by meanes wherof I
may contemne al worldly conſolations,
and reioyce me onely in God
mine onely Sauiour. Amen.
            
         
         
            
            OF THE NATIVITIE.
            
               
            
            Naſcitur, & iacet in Stabulo qui torquet
Olympum:
            Paſtorum, & Superum cantibus antra
ſonant.
         
         
            
            THE THIRD IOYFVL
Miſterie is of the Natiuitie of Ieſus
Chriſte our Lord, whervpon thou maieſt
meditate theſe pointes folowing.
            
               
                  THE FIRST is, howe our Ladye
meaning to obey the Emperour Caeſar
Auguſtus his proclamation, went frō
Nazareth to Bethleem,Luc. 2. a. where not
finding any conuenient lodging, she withdrewe
her ſelfe into the publike and common Inne, or
(if you thinke good) into the houel and shroud
that was there made with bowes for poore folkes.
               SECONDLY, conſider howe the houre of
the glorious child-birth of the moſt ſacred mother
being come, she brought forth the Sauiour
of the world, and with a wonderful great reuerence
adored him, ſwaddled him vp in ſuche
poore cloutes as she had, and laide him in a
manger.
               THIRDLY, conſider the Angels ſonges,
Luc. 2. b and the ioye and triumph they made in this
moſt happy child-birth, wherof one announced
the ſame to the Sheppardes that in that coaſt
did watche ouer their flocks; who ſpeedily came
to ſee and adore this celeſtial Infant.
            
            
               
               
                  TOVCHING the firſt point,
thou maieſt amplifie thy meditation, by weighing the
circumſtaunces that happed in the
voiage which our Lady vndertooke;
wherby is plainly ſhewed, what pains
and trouble ſhe endured therein, albeit,
what-ſoeuer it was, ſhe paſſed it
ouer with exceeding patience. Firſt,
the ſharpnes of the ſeaſon did greatly
augment her annoyes, ſith this iorney
was performed in the verye hart
of winter, when as we ſee it is verye
painful trauailing. Secondly, her pouertie,
which forced her to ſuffer manye
diſcommodities, eſpecially, being
great with childe, and ſo tender and
delicate as ſhe was. Thirdly, the lack
of lodging, which could not be prouided
her in al the whole Citie of
Bethleem, albeit (wel may we beleue)
that good Ioſeph tooke great paines
in ſeeking it very diligentlye; and
howe ſeing them-ſelues thus refuſed,

it coulde not be, but that they felt
great ſhame and confuſion. O what a
ſoueraine ſolace and ſinguler cōfort
ſhould this be for poore folkes that
are in this world diſtreſſed, deſpiſed,
and forſakē, if they conſidered, how
the moſt woorthy, noble, and moſte
holy creatures, which ought to haue
been more honored & reuerēced then
al the whole world again (to witt, the
Queene of heuen, and her moſt bleſſed
Infant) were the moſt diſtreſſed,
annoyed, and pained of al others.
            
               THOV maieſt pauſe in the ſecond
point, beholding with thy ſpiritual
eyes, in what ſtate the moſte bleſſed
virgin found her-ſelfe the day of her
moſt ſacred deliueraunce; and here
ſhalt thou ſee in her ſo vertuous a
diſpoſition, ſo holye a deuotion, ſo
graue a modeſtie, ſo ſinguler a beautie,
ſo great an eleuation of ſpirite in
God, as no mans tonge can poſsiblye
declare it.
            
               
Thou ſhalt finde, howe in counterchange
of griefesGen. 3. c. which other women
feele in child-birth, ſhe felt a
ſtrange and ineffable ſolace, a ſinguler
ioy and diuine conſolation; and being
there-with wholly rapt and eleuate,
the celeſtial bridegrome iſſued miraculouſly
out of her wombe, as out of
a moſt pretiousAug. initio tract. 1. 
                     •
                  n Ioh. to. 9 bride-chāber, without
any alteration or detriment at al
to her moſt perfect virginitie. O virgin-mother,
and mother-virgin; A
priuiledge neuer graunted to any other
creature! O diuine excellencie,
and dignitie due to thee alone, to be
the mother of God, and mother of
thine owne Father andPſa. 18. a Aug. in principio cap. 5. li. 2 de Symb. ad Catech. Tom. 9. Creator!
Who can poſsibly conceue what thy
heart felt, when with thy bodily eyes
thou beheldeſt the Prince of heauen
lying naked in earth; and him ſhiuering
for colde, who doth clothe and
warme al other creatures? O with
what reuerēce diddeſt thou proſtrate

thy ſelfe, to adore that infinite Maieſtie,
masked vnder the vaile of ſo
great diſtreſſe and miſerie! Oh, with
what compaſsion diddeſt thou aſſociate
with thy teares thoſe, which thy
deere yonge ſonne ſhed, feeling his ſo
great annoiances! Oh, with what cordial
loue endeuouredſt thou to lul
and lapp him vp in ſuch poore ſwaddling
cloutes as thou haddeſt, geuing
him thy ſacred breſtes to ſuck vpon,
which were at that time miraculouſlye
repleniſhed with milke! Matters
ſufficient to melt anye flintie heart
that would with leiſure ponder and
diſcuſſe them.
            
               THE MEDITATION. of the
thirde point wil furniſh thee of fitt
matter to moue compaſsion, if thou
conſider, howe this moſte mightie
monarche, this KingColl. 2. b 1. Tim. 6. c. Apoc. 17. d. &. 19. c of al kinges, he
whom neither the heauens nor earth
can holde and comprehende, hath in
ſuch wiſe debaſed, humbled, and

throwen him-ſelfe downe in a harde
manger vpon a litle haye; he, whom
the Angels doo adore, and in whoſe
preſence the powers of heauen doo
quake againe, lieth quaking him-ſelf
for colde betwixt two brute beaſtes.
O diuine darling, what meaneth this
geere? what humilitie and baſenes is
this, O SouerainePſ. 23. b Ad Tit. 2 d King of glorye?
what haſt thou to doo with the crib,
thou that haſt thy throne aboue the
2. Re. 6. a. 1. Par. 13. b Cherubins? how art thou made thus
dombe, OIoh. 1. a eternal worde of the Father?
whye weepeſt and waileſt
in ſuch ſort, thou, that art the ioye of
al the holy Angels? verily, thou haſte
masked thy diuine nature with our
humane nature, to be the King and
Sauiour of Iſrael, and of the vniuerſal
world. The deſire which thou haſt
to redeeme vs, moueth thee to doo
theſe ſtrange matters; the loue which
made thee wel-
                  •
               are deſcend frō heuē
for our wal-fare, cauſeth thee nowe

to be borne, and toBer. ſer. 3 in Natius. Domini. cloake thy puiſſance
with ſuch penurie and extreme
want of al thinges, that we ſhoulde
thereby learne to meeke and humble
our ſelues, and to deteſt al pride, al
pamperinges and delicacies of the
fleſhe, louing the lowlines, the penance,
and the pouertie, which thou
diddeſt chuſe and teach vs, and wouldeſt
for this cauſe haue thy natiuitie
announcedLuc. 2. b to poore Sheppardes, of
whom thou waſt viſited and adored,
the which their viſitation and adoration
we ought attentiuely to ponder,
and diligently to imitate.
            
               
               A PRAYER.
               
                  
                     VVHAT tongue can woorthely
tel, O moſt woorthye
Queene of Angels, the ineffable
ioy and exultation which thou
wert ſeaſed with in thy moſte ſacred
and virginal child-birth? When thou
ſaweſt the Redeemer of the worlde
borne of thee, and adoring him with
great reuerēce, didſt ſwaddle him vp
in poore cloutes, and laide him in a
manger, where he was announced of
the Angels, & viſited of poore ſhepperds:
I beſeech thee, O moſt happy
mother, by this his moſt holy natiuitie,
that ſeing he was borne for vs,
and geuen vnto vs, thou wilt obteine
me of him, that he vouchſafe to be
borne in my poore ſoule, with whom
I maye be borne anewe, and leade
henceforth ſuch a new life, as maye
continually be grateful to his
diuine Maieſtie.
Amen.
            
         
         
            
            OF THE PRESENTATION.
            
               
            
            Luſtratur Genetrix, & templo ſiſtitur Infans:
            Anna Deum, at
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                hominem, cum Simeone
canit.
         
         
            
            THE FOVRTH IOYFVL
Miſterie is of the Preſentation; to witt,
when our Ladye preſented her bleſſed
Sonne in the Temple, wherevpon thou
shalt meditate, as foloweth.
            
               
                  FIRST, how theLuc. 2. c. fortie daies that
the Virgin-mother had ſtaide in
Bethleem, being nowe fully expired,
she went from thence to Ieruſalem,
there to preſent her moſte ſacred
Sonne in the Temple, meaning to accomplish
that which the lawe commaunded al w
                     •
                  men to
dooExo. 13. a Num. 8. a Leu. 12 b in like caſe.
               SECONDLY, conſider howe our Lady carying
her moſt ſweete Sonne to the Temple, that
holye olde Father S. Simeon tooke him in his
armes, who for that cauſe came at that time to
the Temple by inſpiration of the holy Ghoſte;
weigh alſo the conſolation he receaued by doing
thus, and the moſt deuout ſpeeches whichLuc. 2. d. he
vttered.
               THIRDLY, contemplate the deuotī and
ioy of that old womanIbid. c S. Anna (that neuer taried
out of the Temple) when she ſaw this moſte
pretious preſent, which the moſte ſacred mother
brought. Behold alſo, with what reuerence and
ſpiritual conſolation the wel beloued Sonne was
offred vp to his celeſtial Father, being accōpanied
with ſo holy and reuerent perſons as wer there
preſent.
            
            
               
               
                  AS FOR the firſt article, thou
maieſt intertaine thy ſelfe
therein, meditating, howe
rightly the virgin-mother doth imitate
her bleſſed ſonne; eſpeciallye, in
ſuch thinges as concerne humilitie (a
vertue ſo highlye commended and
practiſed of them twaine) ſith the
ſonne vouchſafed to beLuc. 2. 
                     〈◊〉
                   Ber. Ser. 3. de Circūſi. circumciſed,
albeit he were not bound therto,
nor had any neede at al of Circumciſion
(which appertained to ſinners
Gen. 17. b Leuit. 12. Rom. 4. b alone;) and the mother, ſhe vouchſafed
to fulfil the precept of Purification
(which oblieged only the vncleane
women) albeit ſhe were whollye
pure, and deuoide of alBer. init. Ser. 3. de Purif. vnclennes.
O moſt ſacred mother, why wilt
thou obey this ordinance, which neither
toucheth thee, nor maketh anye
mention of thee? for like as for thy
ſanctitie thou differeſt from al thy
ſexe, and ſurpaſſeſt al women in

thy moſt wonderful vertues; euen ſo
is the conception of thy bleſſed child
far differēt frō that of al other womē,
and without compariſon exceedeth
al other conceptions: Sith others are
wrought by humane ſocietie, and
thine is accompliſhed by the operation
of the holyeMat. 1. d Luc. 1. d. ghoſt. What is it
therefore, whereof thou wilt purifie
thy ſelfe, O bleſſed Ladye? Seing the
holy Ghoſt witneſſeth of thee in this
wiſe:Cant. 4. b 
               Thou art al faire, my Louer, neither is
there any blemish at al in thee; forſomuch
as thy moſt ſacred child-birth, ſo farr
was it frō defiling thee, or diſtaining
th
                  •
                moſt pure virginitie, as it adorned,
exalted, & renowned thee. What
other thing maketh thee then fulfil
this lawe (whereout thou art exempted)
but the ſelfe-ſame reaſon that
made thy deere ſonne to ſuffer circumciſion;
that is to ſaye, the deſire
thou haddeſt to be by this meanes a
glittering mirrour of moſt obedient

humilitie. As he therfore vouchſafed
to be taken for one of the common
ſort of children, ſo haſt not thou diſdained
to be thought like to other
women. This thine humilitie and
charitie, with that of thy ſacred ſons,
be hallowed and imitated of vs al for
euer.
            
               IN THE ſecond Article thou ſhalt
haue great cauſe of conſolation, if
thou fixe thine imagination of the
ineſtimable offering which the moſt
gratious mother brought to the temple,
there to preſent vnto her Lorde.
Contemplate attentiuely, the modeſtie,
grauitie, and comely reuerence,
wher-with the bleſſed virgin entred
into the temple, carying in her armes
that moſt pretious fruit of her virginal
wombe. O what an ineſtimable
ioye was it, to ſee the ſonne thus
borne, and to behold the bleſſed mother
that bare him! whoſe preſence
reioyced the Angels, and enriched the

whole Temple in ſuch wiſe, as the
glory therof was then farre greater,
then when king3. Re. 5. 6 7. & ſequ. 
                     •
                  ap. Salomon cauſed it
to be builded.
            Conſider alſo what the good olde
father Simeon felt, at ſuch time, as
(being inſtructed of the holy Ghoſt)
he ſawe and knewe that to be come
to paſſe, which he ſo long time had
wiſhed for, and ſo oft had craued at
Gods handes with continual teares
and praiers. Beholde with howe great
zeale he beclippeth him in his armes,
with howe great reuerence he adoreth
him, with howe ſweete embracinges
he cloſeth him againſt his
breſt, neuer being contented with
kiſsing, and beholding him. Al the
which his amiable intertainmentes
this moſt ſweete babe liked very wel
of, as a louer of al thoſe that loue
him, and did with his gratious lookes

perce and melt the poore olde mans
heart, who behelde him al rapt in admiration,
as he moſt apparantlye teſtified
by the teares he ſhedd for
ioye, and by the feruour of the words
he vttered in his moſte excellent
CanticleLuc. 2. d of Nunc dimittis ſeruum tuum
Domine. &c. whereby he plainely declared,
what ſinguler conſolation and
contentment his ſoule receaued by
hauing ſeene with his corporal eyes
the Sauiour of the worlde. Ah, how
happye were they that merited
with theirmat. 13. b corporal eyes to beholde
ſo gratious a ſpectacle; yea, and happye
are they, who with the eyes of a
liuelyIoh. 20. b. fayth doo deuoutly beholde
the ſame; ſith they in like maner
ſhal-be partakers of the ſame ioyes
and conſolations.
            
               THOV MAYEST IN the thirde
point interteine thy ſelfe with

great profite and conſolation of thy
ſoule, weighing the feruour of Anna
the Reuerent matrone, who through
her auſter faſtes, and the perpetual
praiers which ſhe made with great
deuotion in the temple, as S. Luke
th' euangeliſtLuc. 2. f. reporteth, merited to
be an aſsiſtant at this ſo glorious a
ſpectacle, and to receaue ſouerain cō
               fort
through the ſight of ſuch a ſonn
and a mother; of whom, al the miſteries
were reueled vnto her, which ſhe
confeſſed and publiſhed to al thoſe
deuout perſons that were in the temple,
and gaue eare vnto her. Whence
thou maieſt learne, that but if thou
keepe the Church with religious deuotion,
addict thy ſelfe to often praier,
and with rigorous abſtinence dōpt
the diſordinate deſires and concupiſcence
of the fleſhe, as chaſt S. Anna
did, thou ſhalt then be made partaker
of the ſight and diuine ſolace, of the
fauours and other graces that were at

that time ſo bountifully beſtowed
vpon her.
            Meditate beſides the ineffable conſolation,
wher-with the ſacred virgin
was ſurceaſed, vnderſtanding the
meruailous matters that were then
ſpoken of her dearly beloued ſonne,
who by the ſpeeches of S. Simeon
and S. Anna was apparantly reuealed
and knowen what he was, to al thoſe
that were then preſent in the Temple.
Contemplate with-al, the moſte
deuoutBer. ſer. 
                     〈◊〉
                   in Purif. de mod
                     •
                   proceſſ. proceſsion which al that
holy aſſemblie made, going vp to the
Aultar to offer vp to Almightie God
this the moſt pretious, the moſt worthie,
and moſt acceptable preſent to
his diuine Maieſtie that was preſented
him til that day, from the beginning
of the world. Ponder alſo, with
what deuotion, charitie, and reuerēce,
with what a cheerful and willing
heart the moſt happy mother offred
vp her wel-beloued Infant to the celeſtial

Father; who had of his infinite
fauour geuen him for her ſonne; and
did by that meanes make her his
owne mother, who was her owne
and natural Father. O great Ladye,
what did thy heart feele at the time,
and at al times after, when thou vnbethoughteſt
thee of this Miſterie!
howe zealous thankes diddeſt thou
breath forth to God, for the gifte he
had beſtowed vpon thee, and vppon
al man-kinde! with what affection,
and with what inflamed deſire diddeſt
thou preſent this moſte ſacred
oblation to God! which thou kneweſt
wel, was onely ſufficient to reconcile
man to God his maker, and to
cauſe him to recouer againe the bleſſinges,
which he had earſt ſo lewdlye
loſt. And howe did thy ſonne in like
maner conforme him-ſelfe to thy pietie
and deuout intent, he at that
time offering him-ſelf with a frank
heart to his eternal Father asNu▪ 28. a a morowe

ſacrifice, whiles the euening ſacrifice
came, which he was afterwards
to offer vppon the Aultar of the
Roode. O my ſoule, if thou wouldeſt
attentiuely conſider al this, offering
thee wholly to this Lorde, who was
offered for thee, what giftes, and
what ſpiritual riches ſhould
be imparted vnto
thee?
            
               A PRAYER.
               
                  
                     THY HEART, O moſt bleſſed
mother of God, thy hart
was ſeaſed with ſurpaſsing
ioye, when (the fortie daies after thy
childe-birth being at an ende) thou
wenteſt to the Temple of our Lord,
there to offer vpp the ſelfe-ſame
Lorde thereof, who was thy firſte

thy firſt begotten and onely Sonne,
and the onely ſonne of the Father
euerlaſting. O what a conſolation
diddeſt thou feele, ſeing the thinges
that S. Simeon did and ſpake, taking
him in his armes, kiſsing and adoring
him with great reuerence. I beſeeche
thee, O moſt ſweete Lady, in fauoure
of this ſacred miſterie, that I may by
thy holy interceſsion haue the vertue
of perfect charitie graunted me,
wher-with I may in ſuch ſort loue
thy bleſſed Sonne, as I may be woorthye
to be preſented to him in the
Temple of the celeſtial Ieruſalem,
which is our true home. Amen.
            
         
         
            
            OF THE FINDING.
            
               
            
            Diſputat in templo, dum quaeritur inter amicos:
            Maſta Parens notas it
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                redit
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                vias.
         
         
            
            THE FIFT IOYFVL MIſterie
is of the conſolation which our
Ladye receaued, when hauing loſt her
ſonne, she founde him in the Temple,
where-vpon thou shalt meditate theſe
three pointes.
            
               
                  
                     FIRST the great deuotion wherewith
ourLuc. 2. f Ladye went euery yeare
with her affianced husbande Ioſeph
to celebrate the Paſcal ſolennities,
and caried with her, her ſweete ſonne Ieſus. By
meanes wherof he remained there behind in the
Temple, vnwitting to his moſt louing mother.
               SECONDLY imagine the extremeIbidem. ſorowe
which the ſacred mother felt, when the holy
daies being nowe at an ende, the returned backe
againe to her houſe, and founde not there her
moſt louing ſonne, whom she thought to haue
been earſt returned in companie of her holye
affianced husband Ioſeph.
               THIRDLY meditate, with howe great
diligence she went ſeeking him, where she deemed
he might be, not reſting any whitt at al, vntil
she had found him, and ponder the ineffable ioye
she receaued, when at laſt she founde him in the
Temple amidſt the Doctors.
            
            
               
               
                  MEANING to pauſe in the
firſt point, conſider howe
our bleſſed Ladye is the
Amb. li. 2 de Virgin. Hier. initio ſer. 1. de Aſſump. tom. 4. liuely paterne of al vertue and perfection,
which ſhineth forth in euery
one of her actions; and thus was ſhe
a fulfiller of the lawe, not only when
ſhe was thereto oblieged, but alſo,
when ſhe might iuſtly haue excuſed
her-ſelfe; and therefore, albeit men
Exo. 23. d &. 34. c alone
were bounde to go to the
Temple of Ieruſalem, to celebrate
the Paſcal ſolennitie, yet did ſhe for
her deuotion ſake go thither too, as
alſo her affianced husbande Ioſeph,
and her ſweete ſonne Ieſus; geuing
vs an example herein, of the care,
where-with we ought to obſerue
the ſolennities of the Churche, and
of the deuotion and reuerence, wherwith
we ought tomat. 21. a Ioh. 2. c Ierem. 7. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . go and remaine
in our Lordes Temple. O howe ſacred
were thoſe ſolennities, where
ſuche perſons were preſent, who

adored the celeſtial Father in ſpirite
and truth, as he2. Cor. 3▪ d cōmaundeth thoſe
which adore him, to doo. O howe
odoriferous was the Temple at that
time, wherein was ſo great abundāce
of the moſt ſweetApoc. 8 incenſe of their
prayers! O howe much more did the
glory of our Lorde fil at that time al
that holy houſe, thē when king3. Reg. 5. & ſequ. Salomon
made his praiers therein! O
ſacred virgin, who can poſsibly comprehend
what thy praiers wer which
thou madeſt in that temple, howe
feruent, howe deuout, howe effectual,
howe they pearced the heauens, and
mounted vp to the throne of Gods
diuine Maieſtie; howe grateful were
to his goodnes the moſt zelous thankes
thou gaueſt him, for hauing
vouchſafed to make thee the mother
of ſuch a ſonne; of whom depended
the welfare and redreſſe of the whole
world! O, I would it were his holye
wil, that ſome one ſparke of ſo feruent

praiers and thankeſ-geuinges
might fal into the froſen coldnes of
our deuotions.
            
               IN THE ſecond point thou maieſt
dilate, meditating, howe the ſolemnitie
being now ended, the virgin-mother
returned backe to her owne
houſe, with great deſire to ſee her
deere ſonne, whom ſhe thought to
haue been returned before with Ioſeph,
not hauing ſeene him her-ſelfe
al that day; and finding afterwardes
that the deſired of her ſoule was wā
               ting,
here maieſt thou deeme, in what
a caſe ſhe was, whatLuc. 2. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                dagger of woe
did wounde her heart, what pitiful
teares ſhe ſhed, what ſighes and doleful
ſobbes ſhe fetcht, to eaſe by that
meanes the internal anguiſh which
ſhe felt in her afflicted hart; how manye
feares did fright her; how many
imaginations did amaſe her; not woting
on which ſide to turne her; and
for that it was alreadie night, ſhe reſolued

to ſtay vntil the morning, remaining
in that anxietie and heuines
which thou maieſt wel imagine. O
moſt innocent virgin, howe long and
Ier. 13 c Thren. 1. a. dark a night was that to thee, wherin
thou weptſt with woe, and thy
teares neuer left trickling downe thy
cheekes, and nothing was able to afforde
thee any comfort, ſith the true
comforter being abſent, al the creatures
coulde not yeelde conſolation.
Thy greateſt eaſe al this long night
wer thy prayers, thy ſighes and tears,
the thinking of thy beloued ſonne,
thy talking to him, as though he had
beene preſent, the beholding of his
beautie, his ſanctitie, his vertues and
perfections; the vnbethinking thee of
his gratious wordes, and of the works
which thou haddeſt ſeene him doo;
albeit al theſe thinges, as they did on
th'one ſide yeeld thee contentment,
ſo on th'other ſide did they increaſe
thy woe, when thou conſideredſt

that he was abſent, and kneweſt not
when thou ſhouldeſt merite to enioye
his preſence againe. Finally, this
day and night thou feddeſt thee with
thy teares in ſteade of bread, when
thou enquiredſt of thy ſelfe,Pſal. 41. &. 111. 
                     •
                  
                where
was thy God? Herein maieſt thou
wel ſuppoſe, that the bleſſed Virgin
did paſſe ouer the time without ſleep
or reſt vntil the thirde day.
            
               IN THE THIRDE point thou
mayeſt pauſe alſo, conſidering, howe
preſentlye after the dauning daye
once appered, the moſte ſacred Virgin
went with great diligence to
ſeeke the treaſure ſhe had loſt, where
thou maieſt meditate, with what
zeale and feruour ſhe asked thoſe
that ſhe mett with, if they knewe
anye thing of him whom her ſoule
did loue; and howe great griefe and
ſorowe ſhe felt, when they coulde

tel her no tidinges of him. She could
neither finde him amongſt his kinſfolkes
nor acquaintance, where ſhe
went ſeeking of him very diligently.
Sithens IESVS is not to be founde
Iob. 28. b where the daliances and delightes
of the fleſhe and bloud doo reigne;
yea, there is he wont to be loſt, and
therfore did ſhe returne to the Temple
of Ieruſalem, where ſhe had earſt
left him; and therin did ſhe find him
ſtanding in the middeſt of the Doctours,
geuing eare to thē, and queſtioning
of them toLuc. 29 Mat. 7 d Mar. 1. b Luc. 4 c Ioh. 7. b their great admiration.
O moſt happy mother, who can
poſsibly declare the ineffable ioye
thou receauedſt at ſuch time as thou
ſaweſt thy deſired ſonne, whom with
ſo great ſorow thou ſoughteſt for! thē
did thy heart reioyce which was before
oppreſſed with dole; thē did thy
troubled and ecclipſed mind through
his abſence, growe calme and cleere againe
through his preſence; then al

anguiſh, feares, and ſuſpitions departing,
was the peace and tranquilitie
reſtored, the which thou wantedſt,
then were the teares of ſorowe changed
into teares of ſolace; thē mighteſt
Luc. 15. a thou wel cal vpō the quires of Angels
to congratulate with thee, for
hauing founde the pretious iewel,
which with ſuch ſorow thou ſoughteſt.
Conſider then how the obedient
ſon ſeing his deere mother, doth moſt
gratiouſly come vnto her, and with
what paſsing loue ſhe receaueth him,
how ſhe embraceth, howe ſhe entertaineth,
howe ſhe holdeth him, and
will not let him go, with what pietie
ſhe complaineth of him, for that he
had ſo manye daies depriued her of
his deſired preſence. Be mery therfore
OAug. ſer. 2. de Aſſump. qui eſt. 35. de Sanctis. tom. 10. Ber. Ser. 
                     〈◊〉
                   de Aſsūpt. Queene of heuen, and forget thy
former ſorowes, ſith nowe thou haſt
found, and poſseſſeſt him, whom thy
ſoule deſired, and according to the
greatnes of dolours paſt, art now ſurceaſed
with preſent conſolation.
            
               
               A PRAYER.
               
                  
                     VVHAT pleaſure and contentment
did thy ſoul feele,
(O moſt ſacred Queene of
heauen) when hauing loſt thy deerly
beloued ſonne, thou foundeſt him againe
in the Temple amongſt the
Doctors. None can poſsibly conceue
it, but he that wel weieth with howe
great grief, deſire, and diligence, thou
wenteſt thoſe three days ſeeking him
amongſt his frends & kinſfolks: I beſeech
thee therfore, O mother ofAnſ
                        •
                     lm. lib. de excel B. virg. cap. 12. mercy,
aſwel by the extreme annoy, wherwith thou ſoughteſt him, as by the
inexplicable ioy, wherwith thou receuedſt
him hauing founde him, that
thou wilt vouchſafe to helpe me, that
I deſerue not through my ſinnes and
offences, to loſe the ſame Lorde; and
if at ſome time he ſhould abſent him
ſelfe from me, I may knowe howe to
ſeeke him, and howe againe to finde
him. Amen.
            
         
         
            
            ¶THE SECOND
MISTERIES ARE CALLED
DOLOROVS,
THROVGH THE GRET
dolours which the moſte ſacred virGIN-MOTHER
FELT, WHEN
ſuch thinges happed, as thou ſhalt
MEDITATE THEREIN;
whereof ſome she ſawe with her
CORPORALEYES,
and ſome with her
ſpiritual.
         
         
            
            OF THE PRAYER.
            
               
            
            Expauet, ingeminat
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                preces, & ſanguine m
                  •
               
               nat:
            Dum ſocij fugiunt impia vincla ſubit.
         
         
            
            ¶THE FIRST DOLOROVS
MISTERIE is of the praier
which our Lorde made in the garden
of Geth-ſemani: wher vpon thou shalt
meditate theſe pointes in maner folowing.
            
               
                  FIRST, how ourmat. 26 
                        〈◊〉
                      Mar. 14. d. Luc. 22. d Redeemer comforting
his Diſciples, and exhorting
them to pray and watche with
him, pronounced this moſt doulful
ſpeeche, My ſoule is heauy, euen
til death.
               
               SECONDLY, howe withdrawing him ſelf
from his Diſciples about a ſtones caſt, he praied
with moſt profound humilitie and reuerence to
his Father, ſaying:mat. 26. d My Father, if it be poſsible,
paſſe ouer this cupp from me; howbeit
not my wil be done, but thine.
               THIRDLY, howe he came to viſite his
Diſciples, and finding them aſleepe, awaked and
commaunded them to praye, as he did twiſe
more him-ſelfe, with the ſame wordes; and ſwett
droppes of bloud, which trickled downeLuc. 22. d to the
grounde, and then did an Angel diſcend from
heauen to comfort him.
            
            
               
               
                  AS TOVCHING the firſte
point, thou maieſt pauſe
therein, meditating, how our
Redeemer fore-knowing the hour of
his moſt holy Paſsion to draw nigh,
(wherto he through his moſt feruent
charitie,Iſai. 53. b freely offred vp him-ſelfe)
got him to the garden of Geth-ſemani,
where he wasIoh. 8. a eftſons wont to
pray, that Iudas the Traitour, and the
other which he brought with him,
might knowe where to finde, and to
apprehend him. Howbeit, before thei
came, our Lorde had praied a longe
time, and commaunded, that his Diſciples
ſhoulde doo in like maner.
wherein he ment, to geue both to thē
and vs an example, that againſt al the
perils, temptations, and tribulations
that may befal vs in this life, and that
in any matter of importance whatſoeuer
it be that we haue to doo, that
we firſt arme and fortifie our ſelues
with the armour of holy prayer; by

meanes wherof we ſhal-be illuminated
to knowe what we ought to doo,
and comforted to endure patientlye
the afflictions which we are to ſuffer.
            Meditate alſo, how our Sauiour finding
him-ſelf ſore afflicted inwardly
through the conſideratiō of ſo many
ſorts of griefes and torments as were
prepared for him, he ſhewed the moſt
vehement affliction and heauines
which he felt by thoſe woful wordes
he vttered to hismat. 26 a Cyril. Alex lib. 9. Theſ. cap. 3 & Leo ſer. 3. de Paſſ. Diſciples; My ſoule
is heauie, euen til death. The which ought
to perce to the verye depth of our
heartes, ſeing we haue been the cauſe,
that he ſhoulde ſuffer ſuch ſorowe,
who is the ioy of Angels. And howe
can it be, O Lorde, but my heart, be it
neuer ſo harde, ſhal-be heuie, and
melt againe, contemplating thy heart
ſo extremely anguiſhed and diſtreſſed!
What ſolace can my ſoule receaue,
ſeing thee, who art the Sonne

that illuminateſt and reioiceſt it thus
oppreſſed with dole and ſorowe? If
thou which art the ioye of Angelical
quiers, art thus grieued
                  •
               , what thing
can ſuffice to reioyce and comfort
man, but to think, that thine infinite
charitie which bringeth thee to thy
death, doth make thee heauy euen to
death, to th'ende, that as thy death is
cauſe of our life, ſo in like maner thy
heauines might be cauſe of our conſolation,
and deliuer vs from that
mortal heauines, wherein we ſhoulde
perpetually haue remained, if thou
haddeſt not vouchſafed to haue bene
made ſorowful and heauy for our
ſakes. This thy heauines, O King of
glorie, ſhal continue euē til thy death,
for that euen to death ſhal thy trauaile
endure, wher-with like a moſte
louing mother thou deliuereſt vs;
but when we ſhal by thy death be
borne a-newe, then ſhalt thou not
thinke any more of heauines, by reaſon

of the ioy of our newe birth, and
thisHeb. 12. maye ſome-what mitigate his
ſorowe, who contemplateth this ſorowful
paſſage.
            
               AS FOR the ſeconde point, thou
maieſt ſtaye therein, conſidering the
circumſtaunces that happed in this
our Lordes praier, and the wordes he
vttered.
            Firſt the text ſaith, howe he withdrewe
him-ſelf from his Diſciples to
pray; and this withdrawing or ſeparation
doth S. Luke declare by this
worde, auulſus eſt; which ſignifieth
plainely, with howe great difficultie
he withdrewe him-ſelfe from them
through the loue he bare them, and
that to pray: which muſt be done in
ſolitarines,Mat. 6. a Act. 10. b 4. Reg. 4 Ber. ſer. 86. in Cant. ſilence, and attention:
and he withdrew him-ſelfe from thē
but aLuc 22 Mat. 26. d. Mar. 14 Luc. 22. d Tert 
                     •
                  i de orat. ſtones caſt, ſo that he might
eaſily ſee and heare them being called,
yea, he came eftſons to viſite thē
to wake them, and to warne them of

that they had to doo, inſtructing al
Paſtors and Curates, how they ought
to behaue them-ſelues towards their
flockes, by theſe his particularities.
Learne alſo of the profounde humilitie,
wher-with he threwe him-ſelfe
on ground to pray, what humilitie is
neceſſary for thee when thou praieſt;
ſith thou preſenteſt thy ſelfe before
the face of the ſelf-ſame infinite Maieſtie,
before whom the Potentates of
heauen doo tremble againe. In like
maner thou maieſt out of the wordes
which he vſed in his petition, learne
the forme which thou oughteſt to
obſerue in thy prayers, not crauing
ſuch temporal thinges as thou deſireſt,
abſolutelye; but remitting al
things to his diuine wil, wherto thou
oughteſt to conforme thy wil. Here
maieſt thou contemplate alſo, howe
with the ſilence and obſcuritie of the
night, and with the words which our
Lorde pronounced in his petition,

this inwarde heauines he felt in his
heart, increaſed and grewe greater,
finding nothing that might poſsibly
afforde him comfort. Ah! my moſte
ſweete Sauiour, the onely comfort of
the comfortleſſe and afflicted, how is
it, that I ſee thee this night without
any comfort or eaſe at al, neither is
there any of al thy deere frendes to
comfort thee, for whoſe ſakes thou
art fallen into ſuch heuines and anxietie.
O that I had heard thoſe pitiful
ſighes and grones, which eftſons iſſued
out of thine annoyed heart, to
th'ende, that nowe I am not able any
wayes to comfort thee, I might yet at
leaſt taſte ſome part of thy heauines
and afflictiō, wherwith I might waile
the occaſion that I haue geuen thee
to be heauie, and that my tears might
ſerue for breadePſ. 41. a. & 79. a to ſuſteine me in
this my miſerable pilgrimage.
            
               
               IN THE thirde point thou maieſt
conſider many thinges; firſte, by the
diligence, where-withmat. 26 d Mar. 14. d. our Lorde
went from his praiers to viſite his
Diſciples, and returned from them
backe again to his prayers, thou maieſt
note the charitie and fatherlye
care he had of them, whom he viſited
thus oft; Secondly, conſider the greeuous
anguiſh and inwarde paine he
ſuffered, which permitted him not to
reſt in any place: Thirdly, weigh the
perſeuerance and often praier which
he taught vs, and is moſt neceſſarye
ſo to be, to be fruitful and effectual.
Fourthly, conſider the griefe it is like
he felt, (fore-thinking the tormentes
which he was to endure) ſeing that
by the imagination only thereof, he
ſwett in ſo ſtraunge and miraculous
a maner. O my Lorde, if the bare apprehenſion
of thy future tormentes
doo ſo ſore afflict and make thee
ſweat ſo ſtrangely, what ſhal the impreſsion

of the ſelf-ſame tormentes
doo! right euidently doth thy readye
and willing heart ſhewe it ſelf, wherwith
thou wilt redeeme vs with the
ineſtimable price of thy pretious
bloud, ſithens thou beginneſt ſo plē
               tifully
to ſhedd it before thoſe manifold
wounds and ſtrokes, wherwith
it ſhal hereafter be whollye drawen
out of thy body. O my ſoule, learne
to ſet by thy ſelf, and doo not ſel thy
ſelfe ſo vilely, as for the filthy pleſure
of ſinne; ſeing here, howe greatly
thou art ſet by of thy Redemer, who
with ſo great a price hath bought
thee, and hath begonne to paye the
ſame, ſo long time before the daye.
Occupie thy ſelf a while in contemplating
the meruailous viſion of this
garden, which is farre ſurpaſsing that
that Moyſes ſaw in theEx
                     •
                  . 3. c mountaine;
and ſhake off the ſhoes of thy carnal
concupiſcēces, approching to behold
this beautiful face al bathed in bluddie

ſtreames of ſweat, wherin al the
Angels take ſinguler delite to looke.
Gather me thoſe doleful drops that
fal on ground, by the vertue whereof
thy paines ſhal-be aſſwaged, and thy
woundes recured; ſith the celeſtial
Phiſition hath thus vouchſafed to
ſweat them for thy wel-fare.
            Laſtly meditate, how our Lord being
in this pitiful extremitie, anLuc. 22. c Angel
came downe from heauen to cō
               fort
him. O Prince of Angels, howe
haſt thou thus exceedingly abaſed
thy ſelfe for vs, that thou ſtandeſt in
neede to be comforted by one of
thine ownePſ. 103. a Heb. 1. b Epiph. lib. 3 in Arria. tom. 2. ſeruauntes? Al the Angelical
quires yeelde adoration and
thankes vnto thee, who wot muche
better then we doo, howe greatly we
are bounde to thee, for hauing
vouchſafed thus to humble and abaſe
thy ſelfe for vs thy moſte vile creatures.
O ſacred virgin, if thou haddeſt

with thy corporal eyes viewed this
ruful ſpectacle (as it is likelye thou
diddeſt ſee it with thy ſpiritual eyes)
wel haddeſt thou ſtoode neede of
an-other Angel to haue come
and comforted thee. For wel may we
deeme, that thy woes ſhould not haue
wanted, nor any anguiſhe and affliction
to haue tormented thee. And albeit
thou diddeſt not then bedewe
the grounde with thy blouddie
ſweat, as did thy ſweete ſonne; yet
haply diddeſt thou bedewe it with
teares trickling from thine eyes, and
filledſt the ayre with lamentable
ſighes, and heauen with feruent praiers.
Howbeit, al this was litle in compariſon
of that which remayned behind,
both for thee to ſee, and for him
to ſuffer.
            This vigilantIoh. 10. b Zach. 13. c Mar. 14. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                Shepparde being
nowe laſtlye of al returned to his
ſleapie ſheepe, thou maieſt meditate,
howe he remained with them,

expecting the furious arriual of thoſe
Pſa. 21. b mad dogges that came to ſeek him,
by whom he was cruellye aſſailed,
bound, and caried to the houſes of
Ioh. 18. c Mat. 26. f Mar. 14. f Luc. 22. f Anna and Caiphas.
            
               A PRAYER.
               
                  
                     LIKE AS, O moſt ſacred virgin
and mother, thou wert
partaker of the ioyes and cō
                  ſolations
of thy moſt holy ſonne, euē
ſo didſt thou likewiſe participate of
the pains and griefs of his moſt bitter
paſsion, ſith that which he ſuffred
in body, did cruciate thy bleſſed ſoul;
and therfore, at ſuch time as he praied,
and ſweat droppes of bloud thorough
the great anguiſhe he felt in
the garden of Geth-ſemani, thē were
thou by imagining the ſame, whollye
ſurſeaſed with vehement ſorowe. I
beſeeche thee therefore, by this thy
dolour, and his and thy heauines, that
it may pleaſe thee to make me partaker

thereof, that praying with bitter
teares, and wailing my former manifolde
and grieuous treſpaſſes,
I maye obteine a ful forgeuenes
of the ſame.
Amen.
            
         
         
            
            OF THE WHIPPING.
            
               
            
            In virgas, in flagra datur, rigat atria ſanguis,
            Verbera deficiunt, non patientis amor.
         
         
            
            ¶THE SECOND DOLOrous
Miſterie is of the whipping of our
Lorde, concerning the which thou shalt
meditate theſe pointes folowing.
            
               
                  FIRST, how Pilate ordeined, that
ourLuc. 23. 
                        〈◊〉
                      Ioh. 18. a Redeemer should be whipped,
ſuppoſing, that by this chaſtiſement
he might ſome-what appeaſe the
fiendish fury of thoſe cruel Iewes,
who with ſuch obſtinaciemat 27. c Mar. 25. b Luc. 23. 
                        〈◊〉
                      Ioh. 19. a required him to condemne
him to be crucified.
               SECONDLY, with what diligence and
crueltie thoſe barbarous executioners caried our
Lorde into the Palace; and ſtripping off his
clothes, bound him faſt to a piller, there to beate
him.
               THIRDLY, thou maieſt conſider the extreme
dolour, which this moſt mild Lambe felte,
whiles they whipt him; his moſt delicate flesh being
with ſo many and ſo cruel ſcourges and ſtrokes
wholly torne and wounded.
            
            
               
                  VPON the firſte point thou
maieſt amplifie, by conſidering
the ſhiftes that Pilate
ſought to excuſe him-ſelf from condemning
him to death, who is the authour
of life; for firſt heLuc. 13. a. &. c. Ioh. 18. g Luc. 23. a proteſted,

that he found no cauſe in him whye
he ought to dye; ſecondlye, he ſent
him to Herode, that he might pronounce
iudgement of him; thirdly,
heMat. 27 b Mar. 15. a compared him with Barrabas the
thiefe, perſwading him ſelfe, that the
Iewes hauing choiſe to ſaue one of
their two liues, would rather take innocent
Ieſus, then the ſeditious thiefe
and murtherer; fourthly, this being
not ſufficient, he determined for a
laſt remedie to make him beLuc. 23. c Ioh. 19. a. whipt,
weening that by this puniſhment he
ſhould mittigate their felonious madnes.
Where note that al theſe meanes,
wherby Pilate ſought to deliuer him,
(woting wel his innocencie) were occaſion,
that our Redeemer was more
tormented and afflicted; for by this
meanes heLuc. 23. b added to the death of the
Croſſe, which they required, and was
afterwardes graunted them, the pain
andLuc. 23. b ſhame he ſuffred going and cō
               ming
from Herode, and being accompted

worſe then Barrabas, and
afterwardes moſt cruelly whipt and
crowned with thornes, in ſuch wiſe,
as not onely they which are his open
enemies, cauſe him to ſuffer, but he
alſo, who deſired to deliuer him, encreaſed
his annoyes. And thou, moſte
louing Lorde, letteſt euery thing redounde
to thy greater griefe, to the
ende, that to thoſe that loue thee, euerye
thing may redound to their greter
benefite. Bleſſed be thine infinite
charitie for euermore, which maketh
thee reſpect more our profite then
thine owne peculier torment. Conſider
alſo,Ioh. 19. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                how many miſchiefes a vain
loue and feare of the worlde is cauſe
of, where-with this miſerableLuc. 23. a &. c. Ioh. 18. d Pilate
let him-ſelfe be ouercome; ſith that
(confeſsing him-ſelfe, that he founde
noLuc. 23. a &. c. Ioh. 18. d fault in our Sauiour, and knowing
that he was accuſed of mereLuc. 23. b. malice)
yet for al this did he condemne
him iniuſtly to this torment, and afafterwardes

to death, making more
accompt of his owne intereſt, then of
iuſtice and of truth.
            
               IN THE ſecond point thou maieſt
entertaine thy ſelfe, meditating with
great compaſsion the crueltie, wherewith
thoſe vile and wicked miniſters
ſtripp the moſt innocent Lorde of
his clothes, and binde him with hard
cordes faſt vnto a piller. Conſider
that his mildnes, more then of a
Lambe, wher-with he ſuffereth him
ſelfe to be ſtript and tied, without
making anye reſiſtance, for ought
that they could doo to him. Beholde
with the eyes of thy mind that moſt
ſacred body, more beautiful thenNiceph. cap. 14. li. 1 hiſt. Eccle. al
mens, howe it ſtood al naked, ful of
ſhame, with necke, armes, and feete
faſt bound vnto the piller, in maner
of a ſlaue, waiting for that greeuous
puniſhment, which he was forthwith
to receaue; and weigh that his redie
and prompt wil, wher-with he haply

ſaide inwardly that verſe of the prophet
Pſ. 37. 
                     •
                  . Dauid: I am redie to be whipt, and
my griefe is alwaies in my ſight. O moſt
ſweete Redeemer, me thinkes I ſee
thee faſt bound to that hard piller;
howbeit, theſe cordes, be they neuer
ſo ſtronge, would litle auaile to holde
thee, if thou wert not more ſtraitlye
bound therto with the bandes of thy
moſt burning charitie, the which tied
thee much faſter, with the deſire
which thou haddeſt to warme and
mollifie our heartes harder a great
deale, and more froſen then the piller
of marble, whereto thou art thus
bound. They ſtripp thee like a ſlaue,
that being ſtarke naked, they maye
more cruelly ſcourge thee, and thou
willingly conſenteſt thereto, that by
this meanes thou maieſt veſture with
thy graces, and ſet at libertie thoſe,
who had earſt with their vices made
them-ſelues the ſlaues of Satan.
            
               
               IN THE third point thou maieſt
pauſe very conueniently, ſith therein
thou ſhalt finde more ample matter
to melt thy heart with, conſidering
that cruel rage, wherewith thoſe wicked
executioners beginn to beat this
moſt ſacred virginal bodye, cauſing
that white fleſh to turne to a ſanguin
hewe, and howe with the violence of
their blowes they flea his tender skin
in ſuch pitiful wiſe, as his moſt pretious
bloud guſhed out al ouer his
body; the which was ſo barbarouſlye
torne and wounded, that he might
wel pronounce that which was writtē
               Pſa. 37. a 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 1. a of him: There is no ſoundnes in my flesh.
Beholde nowe, O my ſoule, beholde
attentiuely this moſt ruful ſpectacle,
and take compaſsion of ſuch a Lord,
who hath vouchſafed to ſuffer ſuche
paines for thee; beholde that Reuerend
viſage made pale and heauie, lening
againſt that hard piller, wherto
he preſſeth him-ſelfe cloſe through

the moſt vehement pains he ſuffreth,
which made him to breathe verye
ſhort, and to ſounde out moſt lamentable
ſighes. Beholde, howe he ſtandeth
faſt tied and bounde vnto the
piller, ſhedding his bloud on earth,
his eyes lifted vp to heauen, offering
thoſe moſt grieuous tormentes to his
celeſtial Father, which he endured
moſt willingly for our treſpaſſes. Cō
               ſider
how al this puniſhment and affliction
which he ſuffered, ſufficed
not to diſquiet, or make him lament
at al; yea, the tormentours waxing
wery through the infinite number of
blowes which they had laide on him,
yet was not he for al that weried
with ſuffring; and his body being al
torne and rent, yet was his ſoule and
courage alwaies ſounde, and readie to
abide greater tormentes through his
inſuperable charitie.Ioh. 1. d Apoc. 
                     •
                  . b O immaculate
Lambe, howe doo I ſee thee al forlorne,
beſprinkled and died with thy

moſt pretious bloud; and thou not
onely ſtandeſt without wailing, like
other Lambes,Iſa. 53. b. Act. 8. f. before them that
ſhere thee, but alſo before them that
ſtrike and whipp thy virginal body,
thou neither ſpeakeſt, nor complaineſt
thee at al. O moſt ſacred Virgin,
if thou hadſt ſeene the pitiful plight
wherin thy moſt ſweete ſonne ſtood
bound, naked, couered with blud and
blowes, howe would thy heart haue
been couered and wounded with
mortal woe; ſeing him, not onely bereft
of that robe, which with thine
owne handes thou haddeſt wouen for
him, but alſo without a great part of
the skinne and bloud, which he had
taken in thy virginal wombe! O how
much more iuſtlye mighteſt thou
haue lamented then Iacob did, and
vpon greater cauſe haue ſaide that
which heGe. 
                     •
                  7. g. &. 44. g ſaide: Enuie, that moſt cruel
beaſt hath deuoured my ſonn, she it is that hath
thus wounded and ill intreated him. Behold,

O my ſoule, howe meruailous is the
mercie and charitie of thy Lorde,
that hathmat. 27 b endured al theſe thinges,
to ſhadowe thee with hisPſ. 90. a. ſhoulders,
and with his woundesIſai. 53. a to heale thy
woes, vouchſafing to take the correction
and chaſtiſment due to thee vppon
him; that thou mighteſt preſent
this ſatiſfaction to the eternal Father,
crauing humblye, that it maye pleaſe
him, for theſe ſo great and cruel beatinges
of his beloued ſonne, to diuert
from thee the whipp of his wrath,
which thou through thine offences
haſt moſt iuſtly
merited.
            
               A PRAYER.
               
                  
                     O MOST holy Lady, who can
poſsibly conceaue, how greuous
was the ſorowe of thy

ſoule, when the virginal body of thy
moſt ſweete ſonne faſt bound to the
piller, was with moſt cruel ſcourges
whipped. O howe did his cordes
gripe thy heart, howe did his wounds
occaſionate thy woes! I beſeech thee
therefore, holding vp my handes to
thee in humble wiſe, O mother of
mercie, by the moſte vehement anguiſh
of this his and thine affliction,
that ſithens he hath been tied for my
treſpaſſes, I maye be loſed by meanes
of thy ſacred interceſsions; and that
I may for the merite of ſo manye his
blowes, eſcape the puniſhment
due vnto my moſt greeuous
ſinnes.
Amen.
            
         
         
            
            OF THE CORONATION.
            
               
            
            Spinea ſerta caput pungunt, illudit amictus
            Purpureus, turbis, Ecce homo, Praetor ait.
         
         
            
            ¶THE THIRD DOLOrous
Miſterie is of the Coronation, whē
our Redeemer was crowned with thorns,
about the which thou shalt meditate
theſe pointes.
            
               
                  FIRST, howe theſe cruel miniſters
hauing beaten our moſt patient
Lorde vntil they were werie, they
then vnloſe him from the piller, and
how he, hauing very hardly made
shift to gett on his clothes, they ſtripp himmat. 28 d Mar. 15. b Ioh. 19. a. anewe
to put on that cote of ſcorne.
               SECONDLY, howe Pilate his ſouldiers
ſcorned him, putting on his backe an olde purple
garment, crowning him with a crowne of sharpe
thornes, and geuing him in his hande a reede in
ſtead of a ſceptre; howe they adored him in mockerie▪
                  Ioh. 1. d Apoc. 5. b. ſaying: Al haile king of the Iewes:
ſmote him with the reede, and gaue him manye
blowes.
               THIRDLY, howe hauing thus ſcorned and
mocked him a good while, Pilate cauſed him to
be brought forth, and shewed him to the Iewes,
Iſai. 53. b Act. 8 f. ſaying: Ecce homo, Behold the man; that by
this meanes they might be moued to pitie, ſeing
him thus ſcornfully and cruelly handled, albeit
nothing ſufficed to mitigate their diabolical obſtinacie.
            
            
               
               
                  IN THE firſte point thou
maieſt pauſe, meditating
how with the ſame barbarouſnes
and crueltie, wher-with theſe
wicked miniſters had bounde our
moſt merciful Lorde, they nowe vnloſe
him, and vſe no kind of plaiſters
and pitie towardes him, who is towardes
al men the moſt pitiful. Beholde
howe he ſtandeth fraight ful
of griefs, and frō top toIſai. 1. a Pſal. 37. a▪
                toe al torn
with ſcourges, with the printes of the
cords deep rooted in his tender fleſh,
which cauſed his no ſmal annoy; ſith
he was faſtned with ſuch force, as (according
as diuers doo contemplate)
the cordes were al couered with his
very fleſh; & with this grief went he
vp and downe ſeeking his garments,
which they had throwen here and
there on the grounde; and thus
humblye gathering them vpp, put
them on him with very great paine,

no one vouchſafing to helpe him, or
to afford him any comfort, but moſt
redie were they, al of them, to tormēt
and afflict him.
            Ah my Lorde, where be nowe the
thouſand thouſandes, that Daniel in
ſpirite ſaw,Dan 7. c. Apoc. 5. c doo thee dutiful ſeruice;
and tenne hundred thouſand thouſandes
which aſsiſted at thy throne,
and yeelded thee due adoratiō? Here
is no one of thoſe high Angels of heuen
to be ſeene, that might adore and
ſerue thee; but contrari-wiſe, ſo many
contemptible men of earth, which
commaund thee, and treade thee vnder
their feete; and thou art wel contented
here-with, ſithmat. 20 d Mar. 10. f. 
               thou art not come
into the world to be ſerued, but rather to ſerue
others, and therfore doth euery one abandon
thee, and no one afforde thee
helpe, like as thou alone, without others
helpe, haſt perfected our Redemption.
            In the ſecond point thou haſt iuſt

cauſe to ſtay, pondring that new deuiſe,
which theſe deuiliſh executioners
contriue to mocke, and withal to
torment our bleſſed Sauiour.
            What greater ſpite and ignominie
might there be inuented, then to ſett
him thus out withmat▪ 27 d Mar. 15. b. Ioh. 19. a thoſe counterfait
enſignes of a king which they put
vpon him? meaning thereby to ſignifie
that he was ambitious, and vſurped
the Title and Regal dignitie,
which was not due vnto him? and
what greter torment then that which
they gaue him, in crowning him with
ſuch a crowne? the pricking thornes
whereof did perce his head verye
deeply, &mat. 27 d Mar. 15. b ſmiting of him with the
reede, which in liew of a Regal Scepter
they had put into his handes; in
ſuch wiſe, as his eyes and face were al
couered with the bloud which they
cauſed to iſſue out of him; and yet
doeſt thou ſee, howe he abideth al
this with an inexpugnable patience;

ſith with his tormentes and annoiances,
he vouchſafed to ſatiſfie for our
diſordinate delightes and diſſolutiōs;
and with his ſcornes and mockeries
to pay for our pride and ambition.
            O King of heauen, O ſupernal
Maieſtie,Pſa. 99 b Heb. 1. b adored and reuerenced of
Angels, and mocked and ſcorned of
men! I knowe not wel, what I ſhould
moſt meruaile at; whether at the
blindnes and moſt cruel moode of
them that knowe thee not, and thus
doo beat thee, or at the pietie and patience,
wher-with thou abideſt them,
making farre greater accompt of our
wel-fare and ſatiſfactiō, then of thine
owne contempt and moſt bitter ſorowes.
Great, no doubt, is their impietie,
which did thus torment thee;
great alſo is the malice of our offences,
which did occaſionate the ſame;
but farre greater is thy bountie and
clemencie, which is infinite, wherewith
thou wert redie to ſuffer more

dolours and afflictions then al they
could lay vpon thee. O my ſoul, contemplate
deuoutly this moſt woorthie
ſpectacle, and imprint it in thy
heart, ſeing thou haſt been the occaſion
of al theſe tormentes and reproches,
which thy Lorde hath ſuffered:
Let that his moſt ignominious robe,
warme and heat thy coldnes; let that
horrible crowne penetrate thy bowels;
thoſe ſharpe and pricking thornes
let perce thy head; let that be to thee
an occaſiō of cōtinual loue, which was
to him an occaſiō of exceſsiue griefe.
            
               IN THE thirde point it is right
meete thou interteine thy ſelfe, beholding
and adoring this thy moſte
merciful Lord ſo lately crowned with
that moſt cruel Diademe, and the other
roial enſigns, which his pitileſſe
aduerſaries haue geuē him, wherwith
Pilate made him be brought forth be
fore al the people, that by ſeing this
his ſo ruful a figure, their furious

might be ſom-what pacified; and for
this cauſe did he ſhew him vnto thē,
ſaying:Ioh. 19. a. Aug. tract. 196. in Ioh. 
               Ecce homo; as if he had ſaide:
Behold the man, whom you vniuſtly
perſecute, and whoſe death you ſo
greatly deſire; Behold him, whom ye
ſay, would haue made him-ſelfe your
King, how gretly to your liking doo
you nowe ſee him crowned and attired?
Behold him chaſtiſed, in ſuch
wiſe, that hardly can he be taken for
a man, ſo farre is he from being reputed
a king. And ſeing neither theſe
wordes which they heare, nor that lamentable
figure which they behold,
is ſufficient to make their adamantical
heartes relent, beholde thou him,
O Chriſtian, and let thine relent, yea,
rent and burſt in twaine for ſorowe,
conſidering, howe for thee it is, that
he is thus ſcorned, and vilanouſly intreated.
For thy pride and hautines, is
he crowned with theſe pricking
thornes; for thy ſuperfluous and diſhoneſt

decking, is he thus veſtured
with this ridiculous robe; for thy folies
and moſt vaine vanities, doth he
beare this ſceptre of reede in hande;
for thy beaſtlines and abhominations,
is that moſt beautiful face defiled and
beraide with filthie ſpittle;Iſai. 50. 
                     〈◊〉
                   Lact. lib. 4. Inſt. de vera ſap▪ cap. 18. for thy
diſſolutions and wanton toyes, are
thoſe handes, and that necke faſt tied
with harde cordes to the piller. See,
O thou miſerable and wicked man,
ſee what God a moſt righteous and
merciful man hath ſuffred for thy iuſtification;
procure thou therfore to
be grateful to ſuch a benefactour, and
not to renewe his griefes with thy
newe ſinnes. And to th'ende, that for
the doing of this, thou maieſt haue a
more aboundant grace graūted thee,
preſent this pitiful figure to his eternal
Father, beſeeching him, that he
will looke vponPſa. 83. 
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                his Chriſts face, as it
was thē diſfigured. whē Pilate ſhewed
him to the people; and ſerue thy

turne with the ſelfe-ſame wordes he
then ſpake, ſaying: Beholde the man,
O celeſtial father, which thou ſo long
haſtEze. 22. g ſought for, to oppoſe him-ſelfe
againſt thy wrath, and to be a Mediatour
betwixt theeRom. 5. a. Heb. 7. d &▪ 12. f. 1. Ioh. 2. a Heb. 1. a and ſinners. Beholde
him, who is the brightnes of
thy glory, and the figure of thy ſubſtance,
how gretly he is obſcured and
difformed, to reſtore by this meanes
the beautie, which my ſoule through
ſo great a number of ſinnes had loſt.
Beholde the man, who with his diuine
bloud hath ſufficiently ſatiſfied
thy iuſtice. Looke therefore, O moſt
merciful Father, looke vpon the lamentable
face of this man, who is
both God, and thy Sonne, and for
the honour of that, which he, being
moſt innocent hath paide for me, pardon
the manifolde ſinnes, which I
haue committed againſt thy Maieſtie.
            Finally, thou maieſt in this point

conſider the incomparable ſorowe,
which his moſt ſacred mother felt, if
(as it is thought) ſhe were there preſent,
and ſawe with her bodilye eyes
this moſt woful Spectacle; which (albeit
wer not ſufficient to moue thoſe
Iewiſh pitileſſe heartes to compaſsion)
yet ſufficed it to rent the moſt
ſorowful Virgins bowels in twaine,
and to perce through her moſt heauy
and dolorous heart. O moſte ſacred
mother, looke wel, whether this man
that Pilate ſheweth, be thy ſweete
ſonne or no; ſith hardly canſt thou
know him with this attire and hew,
ſo farre different from that thou
waſt wont to ſee him in. Thy beloued
ſonne is white andCan. 5. c. ruddie, the
faireſt that was euer ſeene amongſt
thePſ. 44. a ſonnes of men, the brightnes of
the eternal light, and Mirrour without
mole, as theSap. 1. d ſacred writt doth
cal him; but nowe, ſeing him al bathed

him al bathed in blood, defiled with
ſpittle, al wanne and pale with woes,
howe canſt thou poſsibly know him?
Thy ſonne, O Lady, is king of heauen,
before whom al the powers celeſtial
doo quake, and the Dominations
doo adore him; what hath that
crowne of moſt cruel thornes to doo
with him, that ſcepter of reede, and
that robe of irriſion, wher-with thoſe
caitiues doo thus ſcorne him? yet neuertheleſſe,
albeit by his outward apparāce
thou canſt hardly know him,
yet maieſt thou right eaſily doo it by
his inuincible patience, by his profound
humilitie, by his infinite charitie,
wher-with he condeſcended, to
be thus crowned like a counterfaite
king, and mocked here in earth, that
we may merite to be crowned
with glory, and to reigne
with him in
heauen.
            
               
               A PRAYER.
               
                  
                     THY HEART was whollye
wounded with woe on euery
ſide, O moſt doleful mother,
when thou ſaweſt thine onely ſonne
king of heauen and of earth, crowned
with pricking thornes, arraied
like a counterfeit king, made a ſpectacle
and mocking ſtocke of men,
and that al this crueltie ſufficed not
to moue or melt thoſe flintie heartes;
I humbly beſeech thee, O moſt merciful
Ladie, by this thine ineffable
griefe, that thy merciful entrals take
compaſsion of my great miſerie; and
ſeing thou ſeeſt wel, howe the thorns
of mine offences doo pricke and
wound my ſoule, obtein me by thine
interceſsion, that the ſuccour of
diuine grace be aboundantlye
graunted to me.
Amen.
            
         
         
            
            OF THE CARYING OF
THE CROSSE.
            
               
            
            Pondera dum trahit, & trahitur, dum terga
                  •
               
laborant
            Sub cruce, puniceo rore cruentat iter.
         
         
            
            ¶THE FOVRTH DOLOrous
miſterie is, when our Lorde caried
the Croſſe on his backe, whereon he was
to be crucified, where-vpon thou shalt
meditate the pointes folowing.
            
               
                  THE FIRST is, how miſerable Pilate
being vanquished with a worldlye
feare, through the IewesIoh. 19. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   threatninges,
mat. 27 
                        〈◊〉
                      Act. 19. d Mar. 15. 
                        •
                     . Luc. 23. c▪
                   waſshing his handes, adiudged
him to be crucified, whom he confeſſed to be
innocent; the which his ſentence our Lorde and
Redeemer accepted very humbly, deſiring greatlye
to dye for our life.
               SECONDLY, contemplate, how that moſt
heauie Croſſe was laide vpon his shoulders, which
he embraced verye willinglye, and did what he
could to beare it, albeit with great griefe and
paine, which made him eftſons to fal flatt vnto
the grounde.
               THIRDLY, how the King of heauen hauing
caried the Croſſe a good ſpace, not being able to
go anye further with that haſte which they made
him doo, they, not for compaſsion ſake, but for the
deſire they had to put him the ſooner to death,
tooke the Croſſe frō him, and cauſedmat. 27▪ 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Mar. 15. 
                        〈◊〉
                      Luc. 23. d Cyreneus to
beare it; and then did our Lorde ſpeake to thoſe
Luc. ibid deuout wemen, which folowed him with weeping
eyes, amongst whom wel may we deeme
that his moſt holy Mother was.
            
            
               
               
                  AS TOVCHING the firſte
point, thou maieſt conſider
the rage and diabolical obſtinacie
of thoſe wicked Iewes, who
ſeing our Redeemer thus weakned
and afflicted, & in ſo pitiful a plight,
as had beene ſufficient to make al other
heartes to relent, although they
had bene harder then the verye ſtones;
yet were they no whitt at al appeaſed,
nor any deale moued to compaſsion;
yea, they cried out with a terrible
fury,Luc. 23▪ c Ioh. 19. c Mar. 15. d Mat. 27. c 
               Crucifie him, Crucifie him: Thē
might that haue been wel ſaide by
them which Iacob had prophecied,
ſa
                  •
               ing:Ge. 49. a 
               Wo woorth their ſo obſtinate furye,
and their indignation ſo harde and cruel.
Where note, howe great a miſchiefe
it is, for a man to let him-ſelfe be
blinded and poſſeſſed with the Deuil;
for after he is once come to this
point, then doth he participate of the
ſame properties and conditions that
the Diuel him-ſelfe is of, and by that

meanes is his enuie, his furie, and al
his other vices rather helliſh thē humane.
Note alſo to the ſame purpoſe,
the blindnes and iniuſtice of miſerable
Pilate, who hauing ſo many times
confeſſed, that he foundeLuc. 23▪ a no cauſe
wherefore to condemne our Lorde,
yea, that he was iuſt; knowing alſo,
that vpon a ſpite the Iewes had accuſed
him, and deliuered him into his
handes, yet did he for al this, being
vanquiſhed with their importunitie,
and a worldly feare, condemne the
innocent to ſuffer death, and weeneth
(wretche that he is)mat. 27▪ 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                howe by the
waſshing of his hands, his conſcience
ſhould be cleered. They are like to
Pilate, who for feare of the worlde,
and of loſing their commodities, doo
defile their conſciences, and weene to
waſh them-ſelues with certain workes
and outward apparances; wherewith
albeit they maye other-whiles
caſt a miſt before mens eyes, yet are

they once ſure, they can-not deceaue
the eyes of God, who1. Re. 16 b Pſal. 6 b 1. Par. 28. b looketh chiefly
at the heart and meaning of eche
one. Doo thou therefore (good brother)
conſidering this point, take
heed of falling into ſuch like errors,
and thinke, howe it ſufſiceth not to
beginne wel, as Pilate did, but it behoueth
thee to be conſtant, and to
perſeuer vntil the ende,mat. 10. c if thou wilt
be ſaued.
            Laſtly, thou maieſt in this Article
conſider the gret patience and humilitie,
wher-with the innocent Lambe
accepteth ſo iniuſt a ſentēce of death,
pronoūced againſt him, by the which
he merited, that the iuſt ſentence of
eternal death ſet down againſt vs for
our ſinnes, ſhould be reuoked; and
that the ſentence of abſolution and
pardon pronounced by the vicar of
Ieſus Chriſte, when we rightly confeſſe
our ſelues vnto him, might be valable
and effectual.
            
               
               IN THE ſecond point thou haſt
great occaſion to be ſory, meditating
the crueltie, where-with the wicked
Iewes (preſentlye after ſentence was
pronounced againſt him, which they
ſo earneſtly deſired and craued) doo
then take our Redeemer, and handle
him much more ſpitefully then they
did tofore, Pilate nowe hauing geuen
him to them, to execute freely their
furious rage vpon him. And if heretofore
they handled him ſo cruelly,
hauing him but as a priſoner, alas,
what maye we ſuppoſe they did to
him being now condemned, and geuen
wholly ouer into their moſt ſacrilegious
handes. Contemplate, with
what inhumanitie they ſtripp off his
robes ofMar. 15 b Mat. 27. d. Ioh. 19. a. mockerie, where-with they
had earſt ſcorned him, and put his
own clothes on again, that he might
by that meanes be knowen of euery
one; heping grief vpō griefe, & ignominie
vpon ignominie. Behold howe

lay that moſt heauie Croſſe on his
weak ſhoulders, which they had with
great diligence prepared in ſuch wiſe
for him; ponder wel, how greatly his
paine was increaſed by that ſo vnmerciful
a weight, being ſo ſore weakned with his former tormentes, and
the bloud which he had loſt alreadie.
Conſider howe they make his condition
worſe then that of the twoo
theeues, whom they carye with him
to ſuffer the like death; ſith neither of
them carieth his Croſſe, as they make
our moſt mild Sauiour to doo. This
is the ſceptre, (O my King) which
theſe Infidels, and rebellious ſeruants
of thine geue thee in ſigne of the ſoueraintie
Iſai. 9. b &. 22. f. Tertul lib on Iudaeos. which thou haſt ouer thē;
the which anſwereth very wel to the
crowne, wherwith they haue alredie
crowned thee; and thine ineſtimable
charitie diſſembleth and embraceth
al with the great deſire thou haſt to
conduct them by this way to thy celeſtial

kingdome. This is the ſtaffe
whereon thou leaneſt, and goeſt therwith
like an-otherGe. 23. 
                     •
                  . Iacob, to paſſe
the floud of Iordan, to witt, of death;
to returne anon after thy reſurrectiō,
aſſociated with thoſe infinite legions
of ſoules, which thou deliueredſt
out of Limbo, and cariedſt vp to heuen
with thee. With this ſtaffe, and
1. Re. 17. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                with the fiue ſtones, which thou
tookeſt in the mount Caluarie, that is
to ſay, thy fiue moſt ſacred woundes,
thou foughteſt like an-other Dauid
againſt that proude giant Lucifer,
& ſubduedſt him, deliuering by this
meanes thy people from the helliſh
hoſte, which did on euery ſide enuirone
them. This is the wood which
thou beareſt on thy backe like an-other
Ge. 22. b. Iſaac, to offer thy ſelfe thervppon
for vs in this moſt acceptable ſacrifice
to thine eternal Father, being
burned with the 
                  •
               ire of thy moſte
feruent charitie. Conſider beſides,

how the Redeemer going thus loden
with the grieuous weight of the
Croſſe, fel to the ground through the
vnmerciful weight that he bare; and
howe they ſmiting him then a-freſh
moſt tirannouſly, make him riſe vp
and go an ende; where thou maieſt
meditate, how not only the weight of
the Roode did grieue & tormēt him,
but alſo both thine and the whole
world their manifold and enormous
offēces, which he then bare vpō him,
going for thē in this wiſe to be crucified.
So did the ProphetIſai. 53 b Eſay affirme,
ſaying: Howe the eternal Father had laide
vpon him al our iniquities, that he should ſtiſfie
for al, like as he had offred him-ſelfe for al.
O my moſt ſweete Redeemer, howe
grieuous a burden did the1. Pe. 2. d multitude
of mine abhominations occaſionate
thee, which thou bereſt on thy
backe, and paine thee much more
then the Croſſe it ſelfe doth. O, how

great reaſon is it, that I weepe and
waile with thee, for the paine which
I haue cauſed thee to endure; and
with-al, yeeld thee thankes, that thou
like a good Sheppard haſt vouchſafed
to carye vpon thy ſacred ſhoulders
this
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   c. 15. a Ma
                     •
                  . 18. b. miſerable ſtrayed ſheepe,
which thou diddeſt come to ſeeke in
the wildernes of this world. Al the
quiers of Angels, which thou lefteſt
behinde thee in heauen, adore and
bleſſe thee, who knowe much better
then we doo, howe greatlye the clemencie
meriteth to be thanked,
which moued thee to come, carye,
and cure ſo vile a ſheepe, as is that
of humane nature, which thou diddeſt
beare vpon thy backe, in carying
of thy Croſſe.
            
               IN THE THIRDE point thou
mayeſt alſo interteyne thy ſelfe,
contemplating, in what a pitiful
plight our Lorde and Sauiour

was in, when the Croſſe was taken
from him, and geuen tomat. 29 d Mar. 15. b. Luc. 23. d Cyreneus,
becauſe he was not able to go ſo faſt
as thoſe wicked helhoundes woulde
haue had him. Howe greatly he was
pained and afflicted, ſweting through
the wearines of the viage he had
made, howe wounded and annoyed
through the heauines of the Croſſe,
ſhedding his bloud a-new, which intermedled
with ſweat, did bedew the
ground he went vpon; howe fraight
with the ſhame and vilanies they did
vnto him, howe bruſed with the
blowes and ſtrokes which they gaue
him to make him go on ende. O my
God, what a countenaunce is this, ynough
to burſt his heart with compaſsion,
who had neuer ſo litle of humane
pietie. O my ſoul, if thou couldeſt
throughly conſider this paſſage,
howe great cauſe ſhouldeſt thou find
to take compaſsiō & grief, at ſo many
griefs, ſo many and outragious ſpites,

as thou ſeeſt him ſuffer for thy ſins,
1. Pe. 2. d 
               who neuer ſinned, nor euer was ani falshod foūd
in his mouth; and howe greatly oughteſt
thou beſides to waile the hardnes
of thy heart, which is not rent in
twain with the remembrance of ſuch
a ruful countenance. O, if thou didſt
loue this Lord with ſuch loue as thou
art bound to doo, he louing thee ſo
dearlye, with howe great feruour
wouldeſt thou deſire to gather vpp
thoſe pretious droppes of bloud and
ſweat, which did fal on the grounde,
wher-with thou mighteſt waſhe out
thy ſtaines, and beautifie thy beaſtlye
blemiſhes. Ah! what a ſpite ſhouldeſt
thou beare that Cyreneus, who eaſed
in ſome wiſe the paine of this Celeſtial
Monarche, caryingLuc. 23. d his Croſſe
hefore him as a Royal Standard; and
that which he bore then perforce,
Amb. li. 10. in Luc. ca. 99. poſt Hieron in Mat. and maugre his wil,Orig. hom. 35. thou ſhouldeſt
beare on thy backe with a willing
and cheerful courage,Theoph. & Euthy cap. 67. in mat Mat. 27. d. Mat. 16. d Mar. 8. d Luc. 9. c vbi quotidie additur. woting howe

the ſame Lord hath ſaide: That if any
wil folowe him, he muſt take vp his Croſſe and
folowe him. And ſeing thou haſt not
deſerued to cary that Croſſe, which
Simon Cyreneus did, carye at leaſt
thine owne, like as thou art cōmaunded,
that is to ſay, the toils and tribulations,
which in this life ſhal befal
thee. Carye alſo the Croſſe of compaſsion,
vnbethinking thee of that
which thy Lord vouchſafed to ſuffer
for thee; ſith in this ſort, thy ſeruice
which now thou doeſt, ſhal be much
more grateful to him, thē that which
Cyreneus earſt performed.
            Meditate alſo in this Article the
pitiful plaintes of thoſe deuout women
thatLuc. 22. d. folowed him, who
al of them wept ful bitterlye, ſeing
the crueltie, wher-with the moſt patient
Lambe was handled; but aboue
al, take compaſsion of thoſe teares,
which the moſt mournful mother
ſhed, who, like as ſhe loued her ſonne

more then did al the other women,
ſo did ſhe weepe more bitterly then
the other, lament more then the other,
and feele more greeuous corſeys
then the other. O ſacred virgin,
who can poſsiblye conceaue the exceſſe
of thy moſt vehement griefes,
when thou ſaweſt him whom thy
ſoule loued ſo tenderly, lodened with
that importable weight, weakned
with ſo many woes, pained with ſo
many woundes, contemned with ſo
many iniuries, felowed with theeues,
and adiudged to the death of the
Roode, which they cauſed him with
ſuch reproche and paine to carye.
Euen ſuch was thy ſoule then, as
was the figure which thou beheldeſt
with thy weeping eyes; neither did
the thornes of ſorowe perce thine
entrals leſſe, then thoſe of woodd
pearce his moſt Reuerend head.

This onely anguiſh, O my Soueraine
Ladye, had beene ſufficient to haue
made thee dye, as it ſufficed to make
thee ſowne, were it not thy life had
been ſupernaturally pre
                  •
               erued, to ſee
the other tormentes which remained,
for him in body, and for thee in ſoul,
to ſuffer. O how much more willingly
then Cyreneus did, wouldeſt thou
haue performed his office, in carying
of the Croſſe; ſith the ſtrength which
thy tēdernes and ſorows denied thee,
loue did make ſupply of, and the deſire
thou haddeſt to beare ſome part
of the afflictions, which, without al
pitie they gaue vnto the afflicted,
and grieued thee no leſſe then they
did him-ſelfe. Laſtlye conſider the
wordes, which our RedeemerDaughters of Ieruſalem, weepe not for me, but weepe for your owne faults, and for thoſe of your children. ſpake,Luc. 23. d
turning him to the wemē that wept,
which ought to make thee careful,
and deſirous to bring forth ſome
good fruit; ſith otherwiſe, if thou beeſt
a drye tree and barreine, thinke

what puniſhment thou ſhalt deſerue,
if he be thus tormented for thy ſins,
which was a greene tree, ſo pretious
and ſo fruitful.
            
               A PRAYER.
               
                  
                     HOWE grieuous and paineful
was that viage to thee, O
moſt ſacred virgin, whē thou
diddeſt accompanye thy deere ſonne
to the monnt Caluary, carying the
Croſſe on his backe, whereon he was
condemned to ſuffer death; wel did
thy manifold ſighes geue teſtimonie
therof, as alſo the pitiful ſobbes, and
aboundance of teares which thou
ſheddeſt with the other wemen that
wept with thee, and accompanied
him. I beſeech thee, O moſt doleful
mother, by the dolour and affliction
which thou felteſt in that houre, that
by thine interceſsion I maye haue
ſuch grace graunted me, as that I may
alwaies faithfullye accompanie the

ſame Lord, in carying of my Croſſe;
and that no worldly thing, be it proſperous
or contrary, may euer
ſeperate me from him.
Amen.
            
         
         
            
            OF THE CRVCIFYING▪
            
            
               
            
            In Cruce dum pendet tenebris obnubit Olimpū
               ▪
            
            Expoliat tumulos, & iuga celſa quatit.
         
         
            
            ¶THE FIFT AND LAST
dolorous Miſterie is of the crucifying of
Ieſus Chriſt our Redeemer, touching the
which thou shalt meditate theſe pointes
folowing.
            
               
                  FIRST, howe being arriued to the
moūt Caluary, which was the place
where they commonly did execute
offenders, thoſe wicked tormentours
ſtript our Lorde out of his clothes,
to naile him naked vpon the Roode.
               SECONDLY, conſider the incomparable
torment, which the moſt milde 
                     •
                  ambe receaued,
when they racked him out vpon the Croſſe, and
that his moſt holy handes and feete were perced
through with great nailes, as alſo the wonderful
patience wher-with he endured euery thing.
               THIRDLY, thou shalt meditate the
shame which increaſed his other annoyes, when
being thus naked and crucified, he was lifted vp
vpō the Croſſe, and placed a betwixt two theeues;
and ponder here,mar. 15. c Luc. 23. e. I
                        •
                     h. 19. c. what his moſt heauy mother
felt, when she ſawe him in this caſe, and hearde
the wordes which he ſpake being on the Roode.
            
            
               
                  IF THOV wilt dilate the meditation
of the firſt point,
conſider, in what caſe our

moſt louing Lorde was, hauing finiſhed
this his laſt and moſt dolorous
proceſsion, howe great the wearines
was, which he felt, hauing made ſo
long and labourſome a iourney on
foote, and lodened a great peece of
the way with the heauie burdē of the
Croſſe. How gret his weaknes, which
made him almoſt to ſowne, hauing
ſhed ſo great a quantitie of blo
                  •
               dd
out of the manifold woundes he had
receaued. Howe great the affliction
was, that oppreſſed his moſt ſacred
ſoule, vnbethinking him of the extreme
torments which he looked for,
beſides thoſe that he had alredye endured;
and for the mitigation of ſo
many paines and griefes, the bedd
which they had prepared for him,
was that harde and narrowe Croſſe,
wheron they minded to crucifie him;
and the drinke which they preſented
to cōfort him withal, was that wine
mingled with gal, to th'ende that no

of his ſenſes or members might goe
ſcot-free without their peculier torment.
O ſweet Ieſus, thou which art a
moſt pleaſaunt hony-combe deſcended
from heauen toMat. 22 d. & f. Mar. 15. b. Luc. 23 c Ioh. 19. 
                     〈◊〉
                   Pſal. 98. c Cyril. Alex li. 12▪ in Ioh. ca. 29. li. 1. hiſtor. Eccl. ſweeten the
ſournes of men, and to eaſe their annoyes
and griefes, findeſt no one amongſt
them that wil take compaſſiō
of thee, nor geue thee any momēt
of reſt, yea, cōtriue new means how to
afflict thee, and to heapePſ. 68. d. ſorow vpō
ſorow. O ingrateful world, how yl a
counterchange is this thou geueſt to
thy maker and benefactor, which for
hony affordeſt him gal; and for ſolace,
ſorowe; and hatred for the loue
wher-with he created thee, and came
to redeeme thee; and this thine ingratitude
and moſt blame-woorthye
blindnes is cauſe of thy ſo barbarous
crueltie, as meaning to crucifie him;
thou wilt ſtripp him out of his clothes,
that he may go naked to ſuffer
deth, who came naked into the world
to geue thee life. Conſider then, with

what inhumanitie thoſe cruel hangmen
plucke off his clothes, and withal
plucke off his tender skinne, and
part of the fleſhe which did cleaue
thereto. Behold, how the moſt beautiful
of al men ſtandeth naked, and
fraight ful of ſhame, amongſt ſo gret
a multitude of people, bleeding anewe
al ouer, through the rauing of
his former woundes; and ponder the
intolerable griefe of his moſt heauie
mother, when ſhe ſawe him bereft of
theIoh. 19. d. robe which with her own handes
ſhe had wouē for him, & without
part of the skinn and fleſh which ſhe
had geuē him in her entrals; and clothed
only with dolours, heauines, and
confuſion, with which kind of attire
his ſoul was alſo couered. Learne here
to loue pouertie, ſeing he loued it2. Cor. 8. b Ber. Ser. 1. de Vig. Natiuit. ſo
greatly,Amb. ca. 13 inſtit. virg. who was geuē to vs for a teacher;
& was borne poore, liued poore,
and poore and naked departed this
ingrateful world.
            
               
               IN THE meditation of the ſecond
point thou maieſt pauſe in like maner,
conſidering, howe aboue al the
dolors and torments, which the moſt
innocent Lambe endured, they paſſed,
which he felt, when his moſt ſacred
handes and feet were with huge
nailes faſtned hard vnto the Croſſe.
Conſider the cruel blowes wherwith
they nailed him; and how the blowes
miſsing many times through the
fiendiſh fury, where-with they were
enraged (as we may godlily meditate)
they fel many times vpon the palmes
of his handes, and vpon his fingers &
toes, with ſuch a force, as thoſe delicate
partes were wholly cruſshed in
ſunder, and wounded with intolerable
torment. Behold like wiſe, how to
make his members ſtretche out to
the holes which they had alredy bored
in the Croſſe, they racke thē out
ſo vehemently, as they plucke the
bones out of the ioyntes with incō
               parable

griefe; wherby was that fulfilled,
which Dauid had prophecied,
Pſa. 21. b ſaying: They haue bored through my handes
and my feete, and haue numbred al my bones.
Behold then, how theſe ſacred armes
of our moſt louing Lorde are thus
ſtretcht out vpō the Croſſe, redyAuguſt. to
embrace al thoſe, that wil draw nighe
vnto him; euen like to that his infinite
charitie, where-with he ſuffred
for al. Beholde theſe moſt puiſſant
handes that earſt created heauen and
earth, and wherwith he had wrought
ſo many miracles, howe they are now
Zac. 13. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                nailed faſt to the Roode, and diſtil
forth that pretious liquor of his moſt
ſacred bloud, ſufficiēt to cure al their
ſpiritual infirmities that wil gather
therof; ſith this is the wholſome and
moſt approued mirrhe, which the
SpouſeCan. 5. a. ſaith in the Canticles, that
her handes and fingers did diſtil. Cō
               ſider
alſo, how thoſe huge nailes were
not onely driuen through the moſte

holy Sonne his handes and feete; but
alſo perced the entrals of his bleſſed
mother being there preſent. O what
a horrible ſounde made thoſe vehement
blowes of the hammers in her
eares, which, no doubt, did more torment
and wounde her woful heart,
then if in very deede her holy hands
had been ſtroken through. And this
was a cauſe of doubling our moſt
merciful Lorde his tormentes, who
wiſt it wel inough, and loued her ſo
tenderly, and tooke great compaſsion
of her paines; in ſuch ſort, as beſides
the torment which theſe outward
nailes did occaſionate in his bodye,
he had other inwarde nailes
which afflicted more vehemently his
moſt ſacred ſoule. O moſt patient Ieſus,
how art thou on euery ſide enuironed
with annoiances? Rightlye
maieſt thou ſay,Pſ. 68. a. 
               that the waters of tribulation
are entred into the very botome of thy

ſoule; and thine inuincible patience
abideth al, which maketh thee become
dombe, and to ſtande like a
Lambe,Iſai. 53. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                before thoſe that ſhere thee
and torment thee. And if haply thou
openeſt thy mouth, it is only toLuc. 23. 
                     〈◊〉
                   Beda ca. 94 in Luc. Leo Ser. 11. de Paſſio. Theoph. Anſelm. excuſe
& to pray for thē, for ſo much as
thine infinite charitie is that which
holdeth thee ſurer nailed and faſtned
to the Croſſe, then doo thoſe
material and yron nayles, minding
with this ſo great coſt, to confect a
ſoueraine medicine to our ſaluation.
            
               CONCERNING the thirde point,
thou haſt a more ample matter to enterteine
thee, pondring how our Redeemer
being crucified, was exalted
on high vpon the Croſſe, that as he
died for al men, ſo he might be ſeene
of al men. This exaltatiō hadNu. 31. 
                     〈◊〉
                   Ioh. 3. b Moiſes
earſt prefigured, whē he raiſed vp
the Serpēt of braſſe in the wildernes;
ſithens like as thē al they were healed

of their corporal wounds which looked
vpon the Serpent; euen ſo they,
which with a liuely faith behold this
Lord exalted vpon the Roode, receaue
cure of their ſpiritual infirmities,
which are farre more dangerous.
Pauſe therefore (O my ſoul) pauſe and
ſhroude thy ſelfe vnder the ſhadowe
of thisCant. 2. a tree of life, if thou wilt
rightly repoſe thee, and cure thy feſtred
woundes. Behold the wholſome
fruit that hangethDeu. 28 g theron; which albeit
thou ſeeſt naked, contēned, blaſphemed,
and reproued of this miſcreant
natiō, yet is he moſt ſweete, moſt
high, and of infinite Maieſtie; God
hiddē, who vouchſafeth thus to diſſē
               ble
and cloke his puiſſance, to make
his mercy ſo much the better knowē.
Gather then this pretious fruit, and
trial ſhal teach thee the meruailous
vertue thereof. Make thy neſt like a
ſimple doue, in the crannies and holes
of thisCan. 2. c Ier. 48. d. rocke, that is to ſay, inBer. Ser. 61. in Can. his

moſt ſacred woundes, ſith he geueth
thee leue, yea, inuiteth thee ſo to doo.
Weigh wel the throne which this
day the eternal King hath choſen amidſt
two theeues and treſpaſſers,
in the ſame mount where ſuch accuſtomably
were executed; meaning to
ſignifie by this, that as for ſinners and
offenders he deſcended from heauen,
and was borne in the world; ſo did he
for ſinners and theeues dye in that
place betwixt theeues, paying by this
meanes that he had notPſ. 68. a. ſtolne, and
taking away the filth andAbac. 3. d▪
                infamie
of that ſtinking place, with the moſt
ſweete incenſe of the ſacrifice which
he offred. Learne moreouer in this
point to doo according to the example
which is ſhewed thee in the
Exo. 25▪ d Heb. 8. b Act. 7▪ f mountain, crucifying thy fleſh with
her vices and concupiſcences, as the
Gala. 5. 
                     •
                   Rom. 6. a Coloſ. 3. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                Apoſtle doth admoniſh thee; ſith
it is not meete that thou ſeeke after
delicacies & ſuperfluous pamperings

of the fleſhe, ſeing thy Lord his fleſh
thus cruelly handled, as from the ſole
Iſa. 1. a. Pſa. 37. a of his foote vnto the crowne of his
head there is no one free ſpot in him;
And very indecent ſhould it be, that
vnderBernard. a head crowned with thorns
the other partes ſhould not be nice
and delicate. Contemplate laſtly in
this point the extreme dolors which
the moſt ruful mother felt, at ſuch
time, as ſtanding by the Croſſe, ſhe
ſaw him heaued vp thereon, naked,
racked, al wounded, hauing his hands
and feete perced through, whereout
thoſe foure flouds of bloud did iſſue,
being farre more pretious then the
Gen. 2. b Eccl. 24. c foure flouds that iſſued out of terreſtral
Paradiſe; when ſhe behelde
thoſe gratious eyes wanne and pale,
where-with he was wont to comfort
al thoſe that were heauie and afflicted;
that beautiful face, wherein the
1. Pet. 1. c Angels deſire to looke, difformed
and withered; that diuine head ful of

thorns, which hadMat. 8. 
                     〈◊〉
                   Luc. 9. g not where to reſt
it. O Queene of heauen, what dolor
was euer like to thine, when with thy
weeping eyes thou beheldeſt this woful
figure! O, howe much more were
thy anguiſhes ſufficient to darkē thy
moſt heauy heart, thē was theLuc. 23. f darknes
which came then vpon the earth,
ſufficient to darkē it. To whom may
I compare thee, or to whom may I liken
thee, O moſt ſacred virgin, thine
affliction and tribulation, being ſo
great as is the Ocean Sea! If the Angel,
when he firſt ſaluted thee, did cal
thee,Luc. 1. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                ful of grace, at this inſtant he
may cal thee, ful of griefs and ſorow,
ſo great a part of the bitter cupp,
which thy deare ſonne dranke, being
fallen to thy ſhare; to whom, I
humbly beſeech thee, to offer thoſe
greeuous dolors, which thou then
enduredſt, like as he offered al his
bitter griefes, and the bloud he ſhed,

to his eternal Father for the redemption
of the world. And thou, O celeſtial
Father, behold, in al humilitie I
begg it, beholde thePſ. 83. c face of thy
Chriſte, and ſmel the ſweetnes of the
ſacrifice which he offreth thee. Regard
thoſe out-ſtretched armes, that
repreſent the bowe which thou promiſedſt
to place in the cloudesGen. 9. b Eccle. 43. b Haba. 3 b in
ſigne of peace and frendſhipp, which
thou vouchſafedſt to make with
mankinde. Liſten that ſweete muſike
he maketh with the wordes he
ſpeaketh on the Croſſe, where his
head is al to torne, and his members
and ſinewes ſtretched out like Dauids
harpe, whereon when he played,
1. Re. 16 d he made the fiend to flye; and ſeing
al that he hath done and ſuffred,
hath been to appeaſe thee, and to obteine
mercie for vs, accept the ſame,
O Lord, and ſend vs from heauen thy
holy benediction.
            
               
               A PRAYER.
               
                  
                     VVHAT griefe was euer like
to thine, O Virgin & moſt
woful mother, when thou
ſaweſt thy dearly beloued ſonne exalted
on the Croſſe, faſtned thereto
with huge nailes, from topp to toe al
wounded like a lepre; hauing gal and
vinegre geuen him to drinke, and
blaſphemed and mocked of that wicked
nation! O howe in very deede
did then the dagger of woes, which
Luc. 2. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   Simeon had foretolde thee, pearce
through thy moſt afflicted ſoul! I beſeech
thee humblye, O moſt woful
Lady, with ioyned hands, that for thy
ſonne his moſt bitter paſsiō, and thy
compaſsion ſake, thou wilt obteine
me graces to feele the taſte of his ſo
ſtrange torments, and of thy exceſſiue
ſorows, that being touched with
a true compunction, I may crucifie

                     b
                   mine olde man with al his vices &
concupiſcences. Amen.
            
         
         
            
            ¶THE FIVE LAST
MISTERIES ARE CALLED
GLORIOVS,
            FOR THAT THE MOST
HOLY VIRGIN MARYE RECEAVED
THEM, AFTER
HER SONNE WAS WHOLLYE
GLORIOVS, TO
WITT, BOTH IN
BODY AND
SOVLE.
         
         
            
            OF THE RESVRRECTION.
            
               
            
            Poſt triduum ſoſpes repetit data membra ſepulchro:
            Tartarea
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                refert rapta trophea dom
                  •
               .
         
         
            
            ¶THE FIRST WHEROF
is of his triumphant Reſurrection, about
the which thou shalt meditate theſe
pointes folowing.
            
               
                  FIRST, howe our Redeemer being
dead, his moſt ſacred ſoule deſcended
downe toPſ. 15. b Limbo to comfort
Zac. 9. c. Col. 2. c. and deliuer thence thoſe holy fathers,
which had ſo long time looked
for him; with whom he ſtaied til Sundaye
morning, when very early he returned to the ſepulchre,
and taking againe his moſt holy bodye,
he roſe vp glorious, and iſſued out of his cloſed
ſepulchre.
               SECONDLY, thou maieſt meditate,
howe our Lord being thus riſen vp, he appered
firſt to his moſt holyNiceph. cap. 32. li. 1 Hiſt. Eccl. mother, who receaued an
incomparable gladnes, ſeing him riſen vpp ſo
beautiful and ſo glorious.
               THIRDLY, meditate, howe after he had
remained ſome ſpace with his moſt bleſſed mother
comforting and reioyſing her▪ he went afterwardes
to performe the ſame office to his
Luc. 24 b &. f. Act. 1. a Diſciples, and his other deuout ſeruauntes;
amongst the which, he firſt appered to good
mat. 28 b Mar. 16. b Mary Magdalen, who loued him moſt feruently,
and with greateſt deſire did ſeeke him.
            
            
               
               
                  IN THE firſte point thou
maieſt entertaine thy ſelfe,
meditating, how al thoſe holy
Fathers, Patriarches, and prophets,
with al the otherAug. li. 20 de Ciuit. ca. 15. Hier. in ca. 4. ad Ephe. righteous perſons
which had been dead from the beginning
of the world, were al detained
in Limbo, expecting the happye
comming of our Sauiour, who with
the ſame charitie and humilitie, wher
with he had hūbled him-ſelfe, in ſuffring
Phil. 2. b death vpon the Croſſe, vouchſafed
alſo to humble him-ſelf, in diſcending
downe to Limbo, and viſiting
that bleſſed congregatiō, which
with ſuch feruent zeale had long
time deſired to ſee this happy daye.
I leaue thee now to thinke, what ſurpaſsing
ioy thoſe ſacred ſoules receaued,
when they ſawe this moſt ſacred
ſoule of ChriſtAug. Ser. 137. de tempore. vnited to the Diuinitie
enter with ſuch triumph and
puiſſance into their priſon, and with
his brightnes to illuminate thoſe miſtie

dongeons; and vnderſtood beſides
what he had done and ſuffred in the
world, and then, wherfore he was diſcended
thither to be onely to deliuer
them out of their impriſonment, and
to make them endleſſe happie.
            What tongue can woorthelye tel
their conſolations, their ioyes, their
ſonges, praiſes, and benedictiōs, which
they ſounded forth in praiſe of their
glorious benefactour? Neuertheleſſe,
albeit the ioye of theſe redeemed
ſoules were ſo exceeding great, yet
farre greter was that of their Redeemer,
beginning now to ſee the glorious
fruit of his great paines, and the
great good, which his grieuous paſsion
had wrought. O, with how great
reaſon might eche one thenPſ. 117. d ſaye:
This is the day that our Lorde hath made, let vs
reioyce and be gladd therein: Where note,
that albeit it may ſeem other-whiles,
that our Lorde hath forgotten his elect,
and that which he hath promiſed
them; yet doth he not ſo, but expecteth

the fitteſt time, wherein he
knoweth how to fulfil the ſame, like
as we ſee he hath here done towardes
theſe good holy Fathers. We
muſt not therefore wauer in our beliefe,
but abide and waite with patience
for his moſt holy comming. Sithēs
as the Prophet Abacuch admoniſheth
vs:Aba. 2. a 
               Our Lorde, whom thou haſt ſo
greatly called on, wil come at length, and wil not
lye; if he tary, expect him; for he that commeth,
wil come, and wil not tarye long. Conſider
alſo in this point, howe our Sauiour
hauing ſtaide al Saterday with
thoſe holy Fathers, reioycing and cō
               forting
thē, as wel thou maieſt imagine,
his moſt bleſſed ſoule did on
Euang. vbi ſupra Act 10. f &. 13. 
                     〈◊〉
                   Rom. 4. d &. 8. f. 1. Cor. 15. a▪ 2. Tim. 2 Nic. ca. 37. li. 1. Sunday morning returne to reuiue
his moſt ſacred body, which laye in
the ſepulchre; wherinto he entring,
made it become ſo beautiful and
glittering as the Sunne; and that bodye
which earſt through the tormentes
of his paſsiō was al wounded,

al blacke, and al difformedLuc. 24. f Ioh. 20. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                like a
Lepre, preſently after it was vnited
to the moſt ſacred ſoule, and by it reuiued,
became the moſt beautiful of
al bodies; & the blacknes being now
changed into brightnes, the woundes
and deformitie conuerted into an incomparable
beautie, he reſerued only
theLuc. 24. f Ioh. 20. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                fiue moſt ſacred woundes of
his handes, feete, and ſide, in memorie
of our redemption, the which doo
wonderfully ſhine forth, and beautifie
the ſame; and the fight therof cauſeth
a ſinguler contentation to the
bleſſed Saintes, and moueth his eternal
Father to mercy in our behalfes,
when for this intent it pleaſeth him
to ſhewe them. O, happy are thoſe
euer, that ſhal enioye ſuch a ſight! O
what a Mirrour is this ſo cleare and
beautiful, wherein we maye eftſons
take viewe of our ſelues, to know our
defects, and to reioyce our hartes, like
as his diſciples did reioyce eche time,

               mat. 28. b Luc. 24. e. f Ioh. 20. e that the ſame Mirrour did ſhewe it
ſelfe vnto them; and at this day are
they neuer ſatiated with beholding it
in heauen.
            
               IN THE ſecond point thou mayeſt
enterteine thy ſelfe, meditating
and beholding with the eyes of thy
ſoule, howe our Lorde and Redemer
did preſently after he was riſen vp,
viſite his moſt holyNiceph. ca. 32. lib. 1. Sedul. in carm. Paſ. ca. 20. de Reſur. ver. 4. a fine. mother, whom
thou maieſt wel beleue, to haue been
the firſt, albeit in the Goſpel there is
no mention made thereof; for, that
being a cōmaundement of his, which
the wiſe man reporteth,Eccl. 7. c. Tob. 4. a 
               Honor thy Father,
and forget not thy mothers ſorowe, howe
were it poſsible for the moſt obedient
ſonne to forget his mother, who
loued him ſo dearly, and had ſo bitterly
wailed, wept, and ſorowed his
paſsion and paineful death? Whye
ſhould not ſhe be viſited and comforted
before al others, which was
more afflicted then al others? If, as

the EuangeliſtLu
                     •
                  . 24. e Niceph. cap. 34. & 35. lib. 1. reporteth, our Lorde
did, after he was riſen vp, appere to
S. Peter that had earſt denied him,
why ſhal not we beleeue, that he appered
firſt to his bleſſed mother, that
neuer did denye him? yea, continuallye
confeſſed him, and loued him aboue
al; and in whom alone the faith
remained firme and incorrupted. Admitt
therefore it was ſo, as reaſon requireth
it ſhould be, force thy ſelfe to
meditate a litle, what ioy this bleſſed
Lady felt, when, being ſolitary in her
chamber, weeping, waiting, and longing
to ſee the ſonne ofMal. 4. a righteouſnes
riſe vp, to lighten and clear her
darke and doleful heart, ſhe ſawe her
ſelf in a moment enuironed with the
glittering beames of the beautiful
light thereof. Howe great her gladnes
was, when ſhe ſawe that bodye
which ſhe had lately left in the ſepulchre
dead, al wounded and deformed,
nowe liuing, whole, glittering,
and glorious. How great contentatiō
               
ſhe receaued, when ſhe ſawe the ſoueraine
beautie and brightnes reſtored
to that face ful of al graces, and
thoſe diuine eyes, wher-with he looked
vpon her ſo cleare and ſo louely.
What pleaſure her ſence receaued,
when with her eares ſhe heard the
moſt ſweete voice, where-with he ſaluted
her. Howe ſoueraine her exultation
was, when ſhe ſaw thoſe moſt
ſacred armes embrace her ſo louinglye,
and how with thoſe moſt ſacred
handes which ſhe had ſo lately ſeene
faſtned to the Roode, he with ſuch
pietie wipedIſai. 22. 
                     〈◊〉
                   Apoc. 7. d &. 21. b off the trickling tears
of her reuerend face; then might ſhe
ſaye, and that with great cauſe, that
ſentence of the ProphetPſ. 93. d Dauid;
According to the multitude of griefes that
my heart hath ſuffered, thy conſ
                     •
                  lations haue
reioyced my ſoule. Conſider then in the
beſt wiſe thou canſt the ſweete communication
that paſſed betwixt the
bleſſed mother and the Sonne, the

the which, wel maye we beleue, did
occaſionate no leſſe comfort to the
mother, then did his ſight, albeit ſhe
could vtter but fewe wordes, by reaſon
ſhe was wholly rapt in beholding
that glorious viſion which ſhe had
before her eyes, and in viewing euery
particuler fealtie of that body, and
that amiable countenance, whoſe
brightnes and beautie did ſo greatlye
delite her nowe, as did the ſeing of it
blacke and wounded heretofore torment
her, in the time of his painful
paſsiō. In like maner, beholding thoſe
wounds, which in his death had perced
her virginal heart with ſorowe,
nowe became ſo faire and ſo glittering,
ſhe was therby repleniſhed with
ſo great a ioye, as ſhe remained like
one aſtoniſhed, not being able to pronounce
ſcarſe any one word. Reioyce
therfore, O Queene of heauen, ſith
thou haſt ſo great cauſes to reioyce
thee; Let thy ſpirite nowLuc. 2. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                be glad in

God thy Sauiour, who hath fully ſatiſfied
the lōging deſires of thy ſoule?
Nowe thou ſeeſt him riſen vp again,
whoſe death thou earſt lamentedſt.
Can. 2. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                Now is winter, and the ſtormes of
his perſecutions, ignominies, and tormentes
cleane paſſed ouer; now liueth
he, and death ſhal haue no moreRom. 6. 
                     •
                  
                any
dominion ouer him. Thou ſeeſt him
nowe farre more exalted then he was
before depreſſed; now is he a conquerour
of Death, of Hel, and of the Diuel;
nowe is neither he to ſuffer anye
more, nor thou to haue any further
feare. Reioyce therfore, O Lady, and
let thy ſoule receaue ſolace through
his triumph and Reſurrection, as it
was before made ſorowful, euē almoſt
to death, through his painful death
and paſsion.
            
               IN THE THIRDE point thou
maieſt in like maner enterteyne thy
ſelfe, being a matter of great conſolation,
conſidering howe our Lorde,

looke what office he had performed
to his moſt bleſſed mother, and the
ſame vouchſafed he to doo toMat. 28 b Luc. 24. b Ioh. 21. a. b Act. 1. a Nic▪ ea. 34 &. 35. li. 1▪
                his
Diſciples, and other deuout ſeruants;
wher-with we may wel beleeue, that
the louing Ladye repleniſhed with
charitie, was very wel contented, yea,
deſired him ſo to doo; ſithens, like as
when he was borne, ſhe laide him in
a manger, ſignifying thereby, that albeit
ſhe alone did beare and bring
him forth, yet would ſhe not haue
him for her-ſelfe alone, but for al; euē
ſo would ſhe not haue al the ioye of
his glorious reſurrection to her-ſelfe
alone, but would in any wiſe, that others
were made partakers thereof.
Meditate therfore, how he firſt appered
to goodmar. 16 b Mary Magdalen, according
to the teſtimonie of the holy Euangeliſts,
who went with the other
deuout womē toIbid. 16. a Luc. 24. a annoint him with
pretious oyntments (which they caried
with thē) in the ſepulchre; where
not finding of him (albeit her companions

went away) yet wouldIoh. 20. 
                     •
                  
                not
ſhe depart, ſith loue held her faſt linked
to the place where ſhe had earſt
left him, whom ſhe ſo dearly loued,
and remaining there weeping, ſhe
with a deſire ſhe had to finde him
dead, merited to ſee him aliue and riſen
vp, albeit in Gardners weede,Ibid. d in
ſuch ſort, as ſhe ſawe him and knewe
him not, our Lord aunſwering herein
to the diſpoſition of her ſoule; for
ſhe loued and doubted, as he for the
ſame reaſon apperedLuc. 24. b in pilgrims
ſhew to thoſe two diſciples that went
to Emaus; where thou maieſt note,
how this Lord knoweth at one time▪
how both to comfort, inſtruct, and
manifeſt the defects of his elect, and
how ſuch are beſt fauoured of him
as moſt feruently doo loue him, like
as we here ſee by good Mary Magdalē,
to whō for her feruent loue ſake
was this prerogatiue geuen, that ſhe
might firſt ſee her deerlye beloued

maſter,Ioh. 20. d and that ſhe might be the
meſſenger to announce the ioye of
his Reſurrection to thoſe that litle
thought therof, by reaſon of the heauines
they were in, through the remembrance
of his death and doleful
paſsion.
            Thinke nowe, (good Chriſtian)
think attentiuely, what ioy that moſt
denout gentlewoman did feele, whē
ſhe both ſawe and knew her ſo dearlye
beloued maſter. Ah Lorde, howe
that heart leaped againe for ioy, whē
our Sauior called herIoh. 20. d Mary, and ſhe
anſwered him forth-with with this
louing word of maſter. O what a ſodaine
chaunge is this, how preſent an
alteration? What did thy hart feele
(O good Mary Magdalen) being
thus in a moment deliuered from thy
ſurpaſsing ſorows, and ſurſeaſed with
ſuch a wonderful conſolation? What
a boiling heat of hart wasIoh. 20. d Mat. 28. b that, that
made her ſo impotent ouer her ſelfe,

be about to embrace him, like one
dronke in loue, wherby ſhe quite forgot
her-ſelfe of his moſt ſacred Maieſtie.
O moſt happy teares, wherewith
ſhe bedewed the ground of that
garden; which made her ſo ſoone to
reape ſo ſweete a fruit; happy the
perſeuerance, which made her tarye
ſtil in that place, wherby ſhe was ſo
ſingulerly reioyced and comforted of
our Sauiour. O happy loue,Can. 8. b more
ſtrong thē death, which made her to
finde the authour of life reuiued and
riſen vp, in the very place of death.
Contemplate afterwardes, howe ſhe
hied her to tel theſe ioyful tidinges
to the Apoſtles,Mal. 4. a whom, euery one
of them, this Sonne of righteouſnes
minded to white, confect, and illuminate;
for like as he was borne for al,
and died for al, ſo did he riſe vp again
for al, and vouchſafed to cōmunicate
the ioyes of his Reſurrection to
al; forgetting neitherLuc. 24. c Nic. ca. 34 & 35. li. 1 Peter, who denied

him, nor the othermat 28. c Mar. 16. c Apoſtles,
who were nowe for woe and diſtruſt
departed from Ieruſalem;Ioh. 20. f Nic. ca. 35. li. 1. neither
Thomas, who cōtinued ſo long time
in his obſtinate incredulitie; wherby
is ſhewed vs, howe much more this
Lord is inclined and prone to comfort
and to fauour, then to afflict and
puniſh; ſeing how in counterchange
of thoſe fewe dayes, wherin he permitted
them through his death to be
ſcandalized, troubled, and afflicted, he
did afterwardes comfort and reioyce
them farre more with his deſired preſence,
appering many times to them,
during theAct. 1. a Nic. ca. 34 lib. 1. hist. Eccl. fortie daies; mening ther
by to aſcertaine thē the better of the
veritie of his Reſurrectiō: where out
thou maieſt learne to put thy truſt in
this moſt faithful Lorde. And albeit
thou feele thy ſelfe other-whiles afflicted
and greeuouſly tempted, diſpaire
not yet, for he wil haue care to
comfort and viſite thee in due time,
and wil deliuer thee out of al thy

temptatiōs and afflictions, according
as it isTob. 3. d written: After a ſtorme he ſendeth
a calme, and after ſobbes and teares, he geueth
conſolations.
            
            
               A PRAYER.
               
                  
                     AFTER a ſtorm the aire grow
eth commonly clear againe;
euen ſo is it happed to thee,
O moſt Souerain Queene of heauen,
for after the ſtormie and woful time
of thy dere Son his paſsiō, the bright
and calme day of his Reſurrectiō appered
to thee, wherein thy heart was
incomparably reioyced, ſeing him riſen
vp glorious, immortal, and impaſſible.
I beſeech thee, O glorious Ladi,
by that ineffable exultation which
thou receauedſt on this moſt happy
dai, that it mai pleſe thee to make me
partaker therof, obteining me that I
may dye to mine old life of ſinn, and
may riſe vp againe with a newe life
of grace, by means wherof I may afterwardes
attaine to the true and perpetual
life of glory. Amen.
            
         
         
            
            THE ASCENSION.
            
               
            
            Victor agit ſpolijs auctos in ſydera currus:
            Et Patris aeterna dexter in arce ſedet.
         
         
            
            ¶THE SECOND GLOrious Miſterie is of the Aſcenſion of our
Lorde, concerning the which thou maieſt
meditate theſe pointes folowing.
            
               
                  FIRST, how our Lord appered the
Act. 18. a Nic. ca. 34 lib. 1. fortie day after his Reſurrection,
to his Diſciples then beingmar. 16 
                        〈◊〉
                      Luc. 24. f at table;
and blamed their ſlacknes and
difficultie in beleeuing his Reſurrection,
and afterwardes taught them what they
ought to doo after his Aſcenſion, and commaunded
them to goe to Mount Oliuet, there to ſee
him aſcend.
               SECONDLY, thou shalt meditate, howe
al our Lord his Diſciples being gathered together
in the Mount Oliuet, as alſo the moſt holye
mother our Lady, and the other deuout women
there with them, our Sauiour came to the place
where they were, hauing with him thoſe bleſſed
troupes which he had earſt deliuered out of
Limbo; and after he had ſpoken to them, and
bidd them al fare-wel, he beganne in their
ſightes to mount vp to heauen with great triumph
and exultation,
               THIRDLY, conſider, how the bleſſed mother,
with the Diſciples, and other deuout womē,
as they were al-together looking vp to heauen,

where they ſaw our Lord aſcend, there deſcended
Act. 1. b two Angels downe cladd in white, aduertiſing
them to make no longer abode there, and then
they al of them returned backe to Ieruſalem.
            
            
               
                  IN THE firſte point thou
maieſt meditate the exceeding
clemencie and lowlines
of this our Lord; who being that he
was, did neither diſdaine, ne was aſhamed
to viſite his poore ſeruants, and
to ſtay with them in any time, place,
or diſpoſition whatſoeuer. Sith as the
Goſpelmar. 16 b telleth, he appered to them
when they were at table, and peraduenture
didLuc. 24. f eate with them, therby
to doo thee to witt, that thou maieſt
at al times, and in al places ſecurely
cal vpon him, and howe thou oughteſt
to enforce thy ſelfe to order al
thine actions in ſuch ſort, as if euery
houre thou diddeſt expect his holye

viſitation. Note moreouer, howe his
checkes and ſcoolinges be of a Father
that loueth vs right tenderly,
and is greatly deſirous of our profite.
Like as thou ſeeſt here, howe after he
had found fault with his Diſciples
incredulitie, he forthwith taught and
inſtructed them of that they ought
to doo in going rounde about the
world, beſides othermat. 18 d mar. 16. c. d Luc. 24. g Ioh. 20. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                graces and fauours
which he did impart vnto thē.
At what time therefore thou feeleſt
either inwardly his rebukes, or outwardly
his roddes, be not troubled
thereat, nor anye deale diſcouraged,
but beleeue aſſuredlye, that in
thus exerciſing his whipp, he doth
like a louing Father, who, as holye
writt dothHeb. 12. b Apoc. 3. d Pro. 3 b Iob. 5, c. witnes, Chaſtiſeth him whom
he loueth, and ſcourgeth him whom he taketh
for his childe. Contemplate then the ſinguler
ioye wher-with the holy Apoſtles
were ſurſeaſed, in beholding
their moſt louing Maſter; and

and with what attention they gaue
eare to his diuine wordes; and if the
moſt holy mother wer thē preſent amongſt
them (as with godly deuotiō
we may beleeue ſhe was) howe much
more ſhe deſired to behold and heare
her ſonne, then to taſte any corporal
foode: and if at other times when ſhe
was at table with him, ſhe forgot to
eate her meat, as we may wel beleeue
ſhe did, through the contentatiō ſhe
receaued by looking of him, howe
much more did ſhe ſo this laſt time,
woting, how preſently after he was
to depart this world. O ſacred virgin,
who can poſsibly conceue, with how
ſundry cogitations thy heart was at
that inſtant occupied! for on th'one
ſide thou waſt delighted with beholding
his ſo amiable preſence, on th'other
ſide thou languiſhedſt, vnbethinking
thee, how, not many houres
after he ſhould be taken from thee,
and that thou ſhouldeſt remaine here

in earth, he aſcending vp to heauen,
whoſe abſence could not chooſe, but
be greatly grieuous to thee; in ſuch
ſort, as the ſelf-ſame cauſe and obiect
did make thee both glad and ſorowful;
howbeit, this did in th'end chieflye
comfort thee, that thou kneweſt
ſuch to be his wil and pleaſure, wherto
continually thou diddeſt conform
thy ſelfe.
            
               IN THE meditation of the ſecond
point thou maieſt intertaine thy ſelf,
being a matter of great deuotiō, conſidering
the wonderful Aſcenſion of
our Lorde, and beholding with the
eyes of thy minde euery particularitie
of the maner of his aſcending; the
which wil, no doubt, afford thee gret
comfort and ſpiritual fruit. For if the
4. Re. 2. b Eccl. 48. b. Prophet Elias promiſed to geue his
Diſciple Heliſeus the gift of his ſpirite
which he required, if ſo be he
ſaw him aſcend in that fierie chariot,
where-in he was tranſported into

earthly Paradiſe; howe much more
iuſtly mayeſt thou hope to obteyne
a greater gifte, if thou contemplate
and viewe with the eyes of thy
minde deuoutly and with attention,
howe, not the Prophete Elias, but
the Lorde of al the prophetes aſcendeth;
not in a chariot of fire, but by
his owne vertue and power; not into
terreſtral Paradiſe, but into the
Emperial heauen, where hePſ. 109 a Mat. 22. d. Mar. 16. b. Luc. 22. d Act▪ 7. g Aug. lib. de fide & Symb. ca. 7. ſitteth
on the right hande of his eternal Father;
and if, as S. PauleEph. 4. b Pſal. 67. b. ſaith, Chriſte
when he aſcended into heauen, gaue
many giftes to men, wel maieſt thou
beleeue he wil doo the ſame euen
nowe towardes them that doo ſpirituallye
contemplate the ſame Aſcenſion.
Open therefore thine internal
eyes, and with great faith and attention
beholde howe the moſt holye
Virgin with al that bleſſed companye
that aſſociated her, being arririued

to the mount Oliuet, her moſt
ſweete ſonne came alſo to the ſame
place with the ſacred ſpoiles of ſo
many ſoules as he had earſt deliuered
out of Limbo. Doo nowe contemplate,
with howe great ſweetnes
and affabilitie he talked to euerye
one; with howe great benignitie he
embraced euerye one; with howe
great charitie heLuc. 24 
                     •
                  
                bleſſed and comforted
euerye one; and if he did thus
to al, conſider in what maner he behaued
him-ſelfe towardes that his
moſt ſacred Mother, who loued him
more then al, merited more then al,
and was more tenderlye moued
then al with his departure. O howe
much more ſugred wordes maye
we thinke he ſpake to her, howe
much more ſinguler fauours he did
her, and howe much more amiably
he embraced her. The bleſſed

mother deſired to accompanie her
moſt dear ſonne, without whoſe preſence
and company her life was lothſome
and painful to her; how-beit, it
was not graūted her, our Lord vouchſafing,
that ſhe forVndecim annos a morte Chriſti Maria vixiſſe dicitur apud Niceph. ca. 3. li. 2. hiſt. Eccl. ex Euodio. ſome time ſhould
remaine here in the world, as a Keeper
and comforter of that litle flock,
which the good Sheppard left comfortleſſe
with his departure; neither
thought he it meete, that in one day
they ſhould be made Orphans, being
depriued of ſuch a Father and a
mother; the which this Lady vnderſtanding,
quieted her-ſelfe, and like
an humble and obedient hand-maid
reſigned her wil to his diuine wil,
ſaying haply the ſame wordes in the
Aſcenſion, which ſhe vttered in the
incarnation; toLuc. 1. d wit, Beholde the hand
maid of our Lord.
            
            Hauing then in this wiſe talked
with euery one, and taken his leaue
of them al, behold, how by litle and

litle he beginneth to eleuate him-ſelf
from earth, and to mount vpwardes
into the aire with his hands lifted vp
on high, wher-with heLuc. 24. g bleſſed thē,
and with his eyes fixed on them, did
amiably behold them. Here maieſt
thou meditate, what the moſt ſacred
virgin, with al that holye aſſembly
felt, ſeing him mount vp thus triumphantly;
how their heartes did rent in
twaine through loue, and howe they
melted againe with teares, ſeing him
goe further and further from them;
and how they withal were incomparably
reioyced, by beholding the triumphe
and Maieſtie, where-with he
aſcended, and hearing that heauenlye
melodie, which the Angels and bleſſed
Saintes did make, who al of them
ſounded forth moſt melodiouſly the
praiſes of this triumphant Conquerour;
ſo that the hearing and ſeing of
theſe thinges could not chooſe, but
make them for ioye and tendernes of

heart poure forth plentiful ſtreames
of teares. O glorious day, O Soueraine-ſweet
ſolemnitie, O moſt renowned
triumphe! thus is he honored
Esther 6. c. whom the King of heauen wil
honour; thus is he exalted,mat. 23. b Luc. 14. c &. 18. c who
humbled him-ſelfe ſo profoundly;
thus meriteth he to triumph, who
hath obteined ſo glorious a victorie.
Behold, O King of heauen, thy exaltation,
and the name aboue al names
that was geuen thee for being thus
humbled and made obedient to the
death of the Croſſe. Beholde, howe
thou beginneſt nowe to reape the aboundant
fruit that was promiſed
thee, for hauingIſai. 53. d loſt thy life for our
ſinnes. Beholde the noble triumphe
thou haſt attained, for hauing with
ſuch prowes ouercome ſo daungerous
and difficult a daye. Gett thee
therfore, O Lord, get thee now to thy
Pſ. 131. b 2. Par. 6. g. reſt, ſeing thou haſt taken ſo great

paines, and carye with thee the arke
of thy ſanctification, that is to ſaye,
thy moſt ſacred humanitie, which is
the moſt rich arke, whereout was taken
that pretious treaſure of our
redemption. BePſa. 107. thou exalted aboue
al the heauens, O my God, and thy
glorie be ouer al the world; Al Angels,
and al men yeeld thee due adoration
and reuerence, ſeing thou haſt
enriched and reioyced them al with
this thy glorious and moſt miraculous
Aſcenſion.
            
               IN THE THIRDE point thou
maieſt in like maner enterteyne thee,
meditating, howe the moſt bleſſed
Mother remained with that holye
flocke in the mountaine, where ſhe
ſawe her moſt glorious Sonne aſcende
vp to heauen; who al of them
accompanied him with their corporal
eyes whiles they might poſsiblye
diſcerne him, and did after he

was once out of ſight (being receued
into a whiteAct. 1. b. cloude) aſſociate him
with their ſoules.
            Contemplate a while here, how ſhe
with the other lookers on, being al of
them deuoutly on their knees, fixed
their eyes on heauen without anye
looking a-ſide or ſhifting of places,
being bereft, as it were of al their
ſenſes, and wholly rauiſhed with this
moſt glorious viſion.
            Meditate beſides, the ſolemn pompe
and reioyſing, where-with this glorious
triumpher king of heauen and of
earth was receaued into heuen; think
aſ-wel as thou canſt, with what muſike,
with what ſonges, with what
praiſes, and with what reuerence euerie
celeſtial order did receaue and adore
him; howe the Angels reioyced;
how the Archangels wondred; how
the Scraphins burned in loue; howe
the inferior orders enquired of the
ſuperiour that which the Prophet

               Iſa. 63. a. Eſaias had ſo long time before foretolde:
Who is this that commeth from Edom?
to witt, the world; Who is this ſo beautiful
and ſo attired in new garmentes, that aſcendeth
with ſo great puiſſance and triumph? with other
like words and queſtions, wherof
thou maieſt meditate according
to thy deuotion. Contemplate laſtly,
how this moſt humble Lorde being
arriued to the Emperial heauen (who,
as touchingIoh. 14. d his humanitie was leſſe
then this Father) bowed him-ſelfe
downe, repeting, it may be, the ſame
wordes which in his prayer of the
laſt ſupper he had vſed in the world;
that is toIoh. 17. a ſay, My Father, I haue preached
and announced thy name vpon earth, and haue
perfected the worke which thou commaundedſt
me that I should doo; now therfore, doo thou clarifie
me, O Father, with the clearnes of the glorie
which I had with thee before the world was made
And then maieſt thou meditate, how
his heauenly Father made him ſitt in
that high throne, on his right hand,
where he noweRom. 8. f. Epheſ. 
                     •
                  . d Colloſ. 3. a 1. Pet. 3. d ſitteth; that is to

ſay, that he exalted him, & made him
partaker of the greateſt goodes and
excellencies that either haue been, or
euer ſhal-be graunted to any other;
yea, that no creature can poſsiblye
comprehend; which is to be vnderſtood,
in as much as he was man;
for as he is God;Ioh. 10. f he is equal with
his Father, and hath the ſame glorye
and Maieſtie that his Father hath.
The Prince of glorie being then receaued
in this maner, (who neuer forgetteth
them that loue and put their
truſt in him) ſentAct. 1. b two Angels down
to earth to viſite his moſt dear
mother, with al the other companie,
as alſo to informe them of his arriual
into heauen, and to deliuer ſuch
other ſpeeches as he ſpoke to them;
by whoſe comming thou maieſt wel
weene, how great conſolation they al
receaued, what praiſes and what bleſſinges

they yeelded vnto their Lord,
whom after they had with moſt profound
humilitie adored, they returned
with great ioye toLuc. 24 g Ieruſalem:
Sithens albeit they were ſorowful
and heauie, as being left Orphanes in
great ſolitarines through the abſence
of ſuch a maſter and a Shepparde,
yet for becauſe they loued him better
thē them-ſelues, Charitie (which ſeeketh
1. Cor▪ 13. b. not her owne thinges) made
them to reioyce more at the proſperitie
and glorye of their moſt louing
Lorde, then to ſorowe the want
of their owne conſolations. This is
that which thou mayeſt meditate
touching the hiſtorie of this moſt
glorious Aſcenſion; and learne withal
to deſire, ſeeke and ſigh for celeſtial
thinges, and to lothe al tranſitorye
traſhe, endeuouring, that thy
conuerſation be in heauen, where

Chriſte remainethColloſ. 3. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                ſitting on the
right hand of his eternal Father.
            
               A PRAYER.
               
                  
                     LIKE AS, O moſt ſacred mother,
thou louedſt Ieſus thy
moſt ſweet ſonne better thē
thy ſelfe, euen ſo didſt thou make
more accompt of his ioyes and happines
thē thou diddeſt of thine own.
And therfore, albeit thou remainedſt
behind him here in earth, yet diddeſt
thou reioyce greatly, when thou ſaweſt
him aſcend vp to heauen, accompanied
with the Angels and Saintes
he caried with him, with ſuch iubilation,
power, and Maieſtie, as was conuenient
for ſo glorious a triumpher.
I beſeech thee, O moſt holy Lady, by
this thy ioye, that ſeing thou then
remainedſt in the world, for the ſuccour
and conſolation of man, that I
may neuer be deſtitute of thy protection,

to th'ende, that by meanes
thereof I may know my ſelfe to be a
pilgrime in this world, and that my
thoughtes and conuerſation maye be
principallyColloſ. 3. a in heauen, where
the ſelf-ſame Lorde reigneth
in the glory of
God his Father.
Amen.
            
         
         
            
            OF THE COMMING OF
THE HOLY GHOST.
            
               
            
            Iam Mariae ſocijs
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                datur Paracletus Olymp
                  •
               :
            Munere quo magno munera magna parant.
         
         
            
            ¶THE THIRD GLORIous
Miſterie is of the cōming of the holye
Ghoſt, concerning the which thou
shalt meditate theſe pointes folowing.
            
               
                  FIRST, howe the moſt ſacred Virgin,
and that holy aſſemblye which
was preſent at our Redeemer his
Aſcenſiō, remained together in the
dining chamber or refectorie of Ieruſalem,
expecting the comming of the holye
Ghoſt, like as the ſame LordLuc. 24 g Act. 1. a had commaunded
them to doo.
               SECONDLY, conſider, how onAct. 2. a Nic. cap. 2. li. 2. Whitſonday,
al of them being in the ſame place, and
deuoutly at their prayers, the holy Ghoſt came
in forme of fyrie tonges, which were ſeene ouer

                     •
                  che one of the Apoſtles heades, who were greatlye
retoyced and comforted with this comming.
               THIRDLY, conſider the meruailous effects,
which the holy Ghoſt wrought in them, ſith
they which before were shutt cloſe vpp for feare
of the Iewes, preſently after they had receaued
the holy Ghoſt, iſſued forth, preaching with great
feruour in the ſtreates and market-places, by
the which preachinges a great multitude of people
was conuerted.
            
            
               
               IN the firſt point thou mayeſt
entertain thy ſelf, meditating,
howe the moſt ſacred
Virgin, with al the Apoſtolical Societie
remained ſecret in the great hal
of Sion, expecting, in great peace,
charitie, and vnion that celeſtial Cō
               forter,
which our Lord hadIoh. 14. b 25. d. 19. a promiſed
them. Thinke what ſighes, what
ſobbes, and what ſtore of teares they
ſhedd, and how feruent and continual
praiers they made in this behalfe;
and learne thou, that if ſo be thou couet
to haue the ſame comforter come
to thee, it behoueth thee neceſſarilye
to haue the ſame diſpoſition; that is
to ſay, to be vnited with al in perfect
peace and charitie, eſtranged from al
ſtrife and contention; ſith this diuine
ſpirite wil, that ſuch as dwel in the
houſe wherePſ 67. a he is to come, be of
this diſpoſitiō; like as contrarywiſe,
the wicked ſpirite, where-ſoeuer he
ſoiourneth, doth what he can tomat. 13. d ſow

furious debates and enmities.
            This L. wil alſo be greatly longed
for, and inuited with often praier, according
to that our Sauiour ſaid once
with a loudeIoh. 7. f voice: If any be athirſt, let
him come to me and drink Which he ment
by the holy Ghoſt; which al they
were to receaue that would beleeue
in him. Note moreouer in this point,
how the Apoſtles went not forth to
preache before they had receaued the
holy Ghoſt, like as theirLuc. 24 g Act. 1. a Maſter had
warned thē tofore; whence ſuch as are
to exerciſe the ſame office, may learn,
how before they beginne, it behoueth
them to with-draw them-ſelues, and
to pray for the receauing of the ſame
ſpirite, without the which, the worde
they preache ſhal-be of ſmal efficacie
and auaile.
            Here maieſt thou meditate in like
maner, how feruent and deuout were
thoſe prayers which our Lady made
in this place, who vnderſtoode much

better then the reſt, the cauſe of this
their retyring, and of how great importance
and woorthines was the ſpirite
which they required, by whoſe
meanes the Goſpel was to be preached
through the vniuerſal world. O
happie was that habitation where
ſuch worthie perſons remained; more
happy the exerciſes wherto they addicted
them-ſelues; but moſt happie
the treſure and the conſolation which
they looked for. O Harbour far more
excellent and delicate then is the terreſtral
Paradiſe! howe iuſtly might
that be applied to it which Iacob
had earſtGe. 28. c ſaid: Verily our Lorde is in this
place, this is the houſe of God, this is the batche
of heauen. Sith here there was nothing
thought of but God, nothing ſpoken
of but God, nothing deſired and wiſſhed
for but onely God him-ſelfe.
            
               AS TOVCHING the ſecond point
thou haſt a plentiful ſubiect to warm

thy ſoule with, entertaining thy ſelfe
in meditating the comming of the
holy Ghoſt. Thou maieſt therefore
thinke with godly zeale, according to
thy deuotion, howe after that ſacred
Colledge had beene thus aſſembled
together certaine dayes, geuing them
ſelues diligentlye to the exerciſe aforeſaide,
and ſeing howe the holye
Ghoſt ſtaied longer in his comming
then they deſired, they beganne to be
heauie; for as it isPro. 13. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                written, The delaied
hope afflicteth the ſoule; yea, and ſome did
haply beginne to doubt. Our Ladye
vnderſtanding their affliction, like a
true mother and comforter of the afflicted,
endeuoured al ſhe might to
comfort and harten them, perſuading
them to perſeuer in their prayers
with greater feruour andIac. 1. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                faith, aſſuring
them, how they ſhould be ſooner
viſited and comforted of the holy
Ghoſt then they looked for, and to animate

them the better, fel her-ſelfe to her
prayers with them.
            Contemplate nowe, howe the pitiful
mother kneeling on the grounde,
with her handes and eyes eleuate vp
to heauen, wholly inflamed in diuine
loue, pouring forth aboundant ſtreames
of bitter teares, did with great
inſtance and feruour craue, that the
celeſtial Comforter whom they expected
would vouchſafe to come;
and amongſt other deuout ſpeeches,
wherof thou maieſt meditate, ſhe vttered,
likely ynough, that ſentence of
the royal ProphetPſ. 103. d Dauid: Sende
Lord thy holy ſpirite, and they shalbe created:
to witt, new affectes, newe thoughtes,
new wordes, newe force, in theſe thy
ſeruants which deſire and craue thee;
Ibidem. 
               And ſo shalt thou renew the face of the earth.
O how great conſolatiō did the praiers
and ſpeeches of this moſt bleſſed
Lady geue to this holy Congregatiō;
howe exceedingly did ſhe comfort

them, how did ſhe inflame thē, howe
did ſhe animate and ſtirre them vp
to doo the ſame. A moſt pleaſant and
deuout thing is it to meditate and
viewe with our ſpiritual eyes this
prayer which the moſt holy mother
made in earth, but much more to cō
               template
that which the moſt ſacred
Sonne, as man, made in heauen, like as
he had promiſed to his Diſciples, ſaying:
Ioh. 14. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                
               I wil pray my Father, that he wil geue
you an-other Comforter. Whoſe prayer
thou maieſt wel thinke, how feruent,
how gratious, how effectual and acceptable
it was to his eternal Father,
eſpecially, when he preſented to him
thoſe moſt ſacred woundes, which ſo
lately he had receaued, and reſerued
to this ende. Thus ſo many deuout
prayers, ſo many ſighes, wiſhes, ſobbs,
and teares hauing been made before,
on whitſonday, at theAct. 2. 
                     〈◊〉
                   Nic. li. 2. cap. 2. hiſt. Eccl. thirdThe third houre is about nine of the cloke in the morning, according to our accompt. hour,
which was the ſelfe-ſame daye and
houre, wherin the old lawe had earſt

bene geuen in the mount Sinai,Exo. 20 a & 34. d Leuit. 19. a Deut. 4. a. 5. a. 10. a
they receaued the holy Ghoſt in the
mount Sion, who engraued the newe
and Euangelical lawe, not in tables of
ſtone asExo. 31. d Deut. 9. b before, but in their2. Cor. 3. a heartes
of fleſh; & thoſe tonges of fire which
wer ſeene ouer the Apoſtles, ſignifying
the fire of diuine loue which he
kindled in their heartes, and the eloquence
which he gaue to their tongues
to preach with efficacie this Euangelical
lawe, like as they did ouer
al the whole world. O happye were
they which merited through the
grace of God to be inſtructed of ſuch
a Maſter, and comforted of ſuch a
Comforter; ſith that good part befel
to them, which the prophet Dauid
wiſhed for, when hePſa. 93 b 
               Bleſſed is
the man whom thou shalt inſtruct, O Lorde, and
to whom thou shalt teach thy lawe.
            
            
               IN THE thirde point thou mayeſt
like-wiſe enterteine thy ſelfe, if thou
liſt, conſidering the great matters

which the holye Ghoſt wrought in
the Apoſtles, in ſuch ſort, as one
might welPſa. 76 b 
               This is a change wrought
by the right hand of God; ſeing in one inſtant,
he made them, of feeble, ſtrong;
of ignorant, learned; of indeuout, feruent;
ioyful of ſadd; and of terreſtral,
celeſtial. Wel ſaith the Euangeliſt S.
Luke, that at the comming of the holye
Act. 2. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                Ghoſt, Ther was ſodainly a ſound made
from heauen, as of a great winde, which filled al
the whole houſe where they ſatt. It was no
noyſe or ſounde of trompett which
might moue any feare or horror, but
a ſound as of a ſweet muſike, and harmonious
melodie, which comforted,
encouraged, moued, aſcertained, and
gaue ſigne of the aboundant graces
that were infuſed. And therfore is it
ſaide, that it filled al the whole houſe,
it filled their heartes which was the
chiefe houſe wherein this heauenlye
geſt came to lodge; it filled al their
ſenſes & powers, their vnderſtāding

with wiſdome, their wil with loue,
their memorie with aſſurance, their
eyes with modeſtie, their tonges with
eloquence, their handes with liberalitie,
their feete with diligence, and al
their ſoules with al kinde of vertues.
Thus behooued it that they ſhould
be filled, who were to fil others,
and that they ſhoulde receaue al
maner of giftes, who receaued them
for the whole Churche. And
therefore preſentlye after they
were filled, they beganne to ſpreade
and ſowe what they had receued, and
to ſhew the ſtrength which was geuen
vnto them; ſith they which were
before ſhutt vp for feare, and durſt
ſcarſe mutter the name of Ieſus
Chriſte, or make any mention at al of
his moſt holy miſteries, doo now coragiouſlye
come abroade in publike
ſhew to preach, to reprehend, toAct. 4. b diſpute,
and to ſhew, that there is no other
name, wherin they might be ſaued,

but only that of Ieſus, whō they
them-ſelues had crucified, to whom
they thus preched. And this did they
with ſuch feruour and efficacie, as S.
Peter in the verye firſt SermonAct. 2. f Nic. ca. 2▪ li. 2. hiſt. Eccl. he
made conuerted almoſt three thouſand
of his audience. O diuine power,
O meruailous vertue, O celeſtial
force! This is the newe wine, which,
as our SauiourMat. 9. b Mar. 2. c ſaid, ſhould be put
into theſe newe veſſels which were
prepared for this purpoſe.
            O my ſoule, if thou wouldeſt diſpoſe
thy ſelfe to taſte of this ſweete
wine, howe ſoure would al worldly
thinges be to thee, which at this inſtant
ſeeme ſo ſauourie? If thou wert
ſo happie, as that this holye winde
might breath vpon thee, refreſh thee,
and guide thee, O, howe much more
ſecurely mighteſt thou ſaile and arriue
to the deſired port? This is that
wind which the Spouſe deſired and
craued in theCan. 4. d. Canticles, when ſhe

ſaide: Gett thee gone thou wind of North; and
come thou wind of South; breath vpon my garden,
and it shal become odoriferous and fruitful
Thou maieſt contemplate laſtlye in
this point the ineffable ioye which
the bleſſed Lady receaued, who was
more then al other repleniſhed with
the graces and giftes of the holye
Ghoſt, ſeing and hearing the proſperous
beginning and ſucceſſe of the
holye Church, and the aboundant
fruit that begann to riſe of the ſacred
bloud which her bleſſed Sonne had
ſhedd; which did ſo much the more
reioyce her, as her deſires were more
feruent, her charitie more inflamed,
her grace more plentiful, with al the
other giftes ſhe had receaued.
            
               A PRAYER.
               
                  
                     GREAT was the ioy and comfort
which thou haddeſt, O
ſacred mother of mercy, whē
                  
being aſſembled with the holy Apoſtles
and Diſciples of thy bleſſed
Sonne, the holy Ghoſt diſcended in
forme of fire, and illuminated, inflamed,
and comforted them al to goe
and preach the ſacred Goſpel with
great feruour. Wherefore, I beſeech
thee moſt ſweete and bountiful Lady,
by this ioye common to thee, and
to al them, that thy effectual prayers
may helpe me, to th'ende that I
poore and comfortleſſe wretch maye
alſo be made a partaker of the graces
and giftes of the ſame celeſtial Comforter,
wherby I may feruently loue
him, announce him, and praiſe
him euerlaſtingly.
Amen.
            
         
         
            
            OF THE ASSVMPTION.
            
               
            
            Quae vitam peperit, moritur; ſed reddita vit
                  •
               
            
            Scandit, vbi Nati Regia celſa ſui eſt.
         
         
            
            ¶THE FOVRTH GLOrious
Miſterie is of the Aſſumption of
our Lady; that is to ſaye, of her happy
death; when her moſt holy ſoule being
ſeperated from her body, went to enioye
the endleſſe ioyes of heauen; about the
which thou maieſt meditate theſe points
that folow.
            
               
                  FIRST, the great deſire which our
Lady had to depart out of this
vale of teares, and to go ſee her
most ſweet ſon, and howe great the
ioy was which her ſoule felt, when
the vnderſtood, how the houre was now at hande,
wherin she was to abandon this temporal life.
               SECONDLY, thou maieſt meditate, in
what maner the moſt holy virgin prepared her
ſelfe for this laſt houre, and the companie which
she had with her at the time of her moſt happye
departure.
               THIRDLY, conſider the puritie and innocencie
of that moſt bleſſed ſoule which we may
wel thinke was caried vp to heauen in her Lorde
his armes, the Hierarchies of heauen, accompanying
her with moſt ſweet ſonges and ineffable
exultation.
            
            
               
               
                  IN THE firſte point thou
maieſt entertaine thy ſelfe,
meditating,Nic li. 2 ca. 21. et. 22 as ſome doo,
howe after the Apoſtles were gone
abrode into diuers places of the world
to preach the holy Goſpel, according
as wasmat. 28 c Mar. 16. c. Luc. 24. g commaunded them, our Ladye
remained in Ieruſalem, and went
afterwardes to Nazareth, where her
principal exerciſe was, to attend diligently
to contemplation, and to pray
for the holy Church; and other-whiles
through the great deuotion, and
continual remembrance which ſhe
had of the things that her moſt ſweet
ſonne had done and ſuffred, ſhe went
moſt deuoutly to viſit thoſe holy places,
wherin he had wrought any particuler
Miſterie, and ſhed there great
aboundance of deuout teares. Thus
paſſed ſhe on her moſt holy life with
a moſt zealous deſire which ſhe had
to ſee him whom her ſoule loued. For
if S. PaulPhil. 1. c deſired to dye, to liue with
Ieſus Chriſte, how much more is it to

be thoght, that ſhe ſhould deſire this,
who loued him much more feruentlye.
If the Royal ProphetPſ 119. a lamented
greatly his ſo long abode in this obſcure
world, andPſ. 41. a ſaide: As the panting
deare deſireth the fountaines of water, euen ſo
deſireth my ſoule to come to thee, O Lord▪
                how
much more ſhoulde the Queene of
heauen lament her abode in earth;
where ſhe thought her-ſelf detained
as in a long exile? & how much more
ſhould ſhe deſire her God, then anye
deare the fountaine of water? O moſt
ſacred Virgin, who can poſsibly tel,
with what inflamed deſires, with
what pitiful teares, with what continual
ſighes thou crauedſt & deſiredſt
to ſee an end of thy pilgrimage, and
to be deliuered from thy bodily priſon?
How oft didſt thou haply with
weeping eyes ſay to the Angels that
came to comfort and viſite thee, that,
which the Spouſe ſaide in the Canticles:
Can. 5. b. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                
               I adiure you, that if you meet my louer,
you tel him frō me, that I languish in his loue.
               
Howe oft did this loue and languiſhing
deſire wholly rauiſh thee, and
tranſport thee out of thy ſelfe, not
being able to eate, ſpeake, ſleepe, or
attend to any other thing; ſith thy
ſoule was rather there where it loued,
then where it liued. This being ſo,
contemplate then the ineffable gladnes
which our bleſſed Lady felt, whē
by reuelation ſhe knewe the daye to
approche, wherein ſhe ſhould haue
that graunted her which ſhe ſo gretlye
deſired. If the holy Prophet Dauid
Pſ. 121. a. reioyced ſo greatly, when it was
tolde him, that he ſhould go to our
Lords houſe; what was the ioy, thinkeſt
thou, of this great Lady, whē ſhe
vnderſtood, how ſhe was preſently to
goe to our Lordes houſe; and that ſhe
ſhould ſee our Lord, and dwel perpetually
with our Lorde, and be more
made of and fauoured of our Lorde,
then al other creatures what-ſoeuer.
O bleſſed day, O happie tidinges; ſo

much more ioyful, as more deſired.
Wel might the moſt bleſſed mother
Lu. 2. d ſay then with Simeon: Nowe thou leaueſt
thy ſeruant, O Lorde, contented and comforted,
with the aſſurance, that mine eyes shal
ſee thee who art my Sauiour.
            
            
               IN THE ſecond point thou mayeſt
meditate, how our Lady, ſo much
the neerer as ſhe drewe to her
happie departure, ſo much more feruent
were her deſires, ſo much more
zealous her prayers, and al her
powers ſo much more quickned. For
like as her death proceeded not of anye
natural infirmitie (according as
we beleeue) by reaſon of the excellencie
of her complexion, like to
that of her moſt ſacred ſonnes, ſo
could not the functions of her ſenſes
and powers be in any wiſe impeched.
Woting therfore, that her deth
drew nigh, ſome doo contemplate,
how before her departure, ſheNic. li. 2. ca. 21. &, 22. hiſt. Eccl. deſired
to ſee the Apoſtles (whom ſhe ſo

greatly loued and were diſperſed abrode
in diuers regions of the world)
that they might accompanye her in
this her laſt houre, geuing vs an exā
               ple
hereby, howe we ought to deſire
and procure to haue ſomeIac. 5. c deuout
and ſpiritual perſons to accompanye
and comfort vs in this houre of ſo
great peril. Our Lord therfore moſte
bountiful, condeſcending to her deſire,
cauſed the ApoſtlesNic. vbi ſupra. & Mich. Sing poſt med. encomij in Dion. Are opagit. miraculouſly
to meete together (ſuch as
yet were liuingIn domo Iohannis Euangeliſta, vt ait Nic. cap. 3. &. 21. li. 2. in the world) in the
houſe where his moſt holye mother
dwelt, who were preſent at her departure,
as the greatDion. Areop. 3. ca. ad Timot. vt re
                     •
                  ert Nic, initio ca. 22. li. 2. hiſt. Denis Areopagita
affirmeth. Conſider then, howe
great was the Apoſtles conſolation,
finding thē-ſelues thus aſſēbled together,
and ſeing their moſt holy mother
and Lady, whom they loued ſo
dearly, and deſired once to ſee; with
what reuerence may we deeme did
they ſalute her? with what reuerence

did they kiſſe her garments as moſt
pretious reliques? with what admiration
did they conſider her dignitie,
which they knewe farre better then
any other? with what co
                  ••
               tentation
did they behold that reuerend viſage,
ſuppoſing that in ſeing her,Nt. c. 40 lib. 2. hiſt. they
ſaw their moſt derely beloued Lorde
and Maſter? How ſweet was the communication
that was vſed there, how
feruent the diuine praiſes that were
there celebrated; how ſweet the tears
of tendernes and ioy that were ſhed
there. Thinke then with what confidence
and contentment this bleſſed
Lady aſsiſted with ſo notable a company,
and aſſured of her conſcience,
expected death, which is to others ſo
Ariſt. ca. 6. li. 3. Ethic. dreadful. Thou muſt not thinke
therefore, that ſhe was before her
death in any agonie and paine, as others
are wont to be, but howe in
mild maner and with a cheerful coū
               tenance
that moſt holy ſoul departed

out of her body more glittering and
more faire then the clere moone. O
moſt pure Virgin, how truely maye
we ſay, that in euery thing theLuc. 10. g Ber. Ser. 3 de Aſsūpt. beſt
part hath bene geuen thee. The beſt,
in thine immaculate conception and
Natiuitie, which was moſt pure and
free from al ſinne; the beſt in thy life,
which was al holy, and a Mirrour of
al perfection; the beſt in thy death,
which made thee no whitt afraide, as
it doth ſinners, yea, was to thee a paſſage
to true life. The beſt part therfore
hath bene geuen thee both in
earth, and in heauen, whether thou
wenteſt to reigne eternally.
            
               IN THE third point thou mayeſt
pauſe, delighting thy ſelfe with the
conſideration, howe that moſt ſacred
ſoule departed outMaria obijt anno aetatis ſuae 59. a Chriſto paſſo. 11 Nic. ca. 3 li. 2. of this life the
moſt beautiful, the moſt gratious, the
moſt holy of al pure and ſimple creatures,
how repleniſhed with merits,
with giftes, with vertues, with excellencies,

and ſpiritual riches, the greateſt
that may be poſsibly imagined,
proportionable to the incomparable
dignitie which was beſtowed vpon
her.Amb. li. 2. de virginib. Aug. 2. Serm. de Aſſumpt. Conſider a while the maner
how this moſt bleſſed ſoule accompanied
with quires of Angels was
conducted vp to the Celeſtial Court;
neither are we to doubt at al hereof;
for if we read of S.Apud Sulpitiū Seuerum ſub finē li. 1. de tranſ. B. Mart. Martin and manye
moHier. de Paulo. 1. Eremit. in ipſius vita. Saintes of bothde Catharina conſtat ex Mataphraſt. ſex, who
leauing this life, were accompanied
with Angels, and honored with their
heauenly ſonges, I ſee no reaſon why
this fauor and honour ſhould be denied
the holy of holies, and more holy
and woorthy then al? Yea, we may
not only affirme this to be moſt true,
but beleeue with godly deuotiō, that
not onely the Angels, but that which
is more, the king of Angels in proper
perſon vouchſafed to come and doo
her this honour. Herevpon is it, that
ſome doo contemplate, how the moſt

holy mother being vpō the laſt hour
of her bleſſed departure, her moſt
ſweet ſonne deſcended from heauen,
aſſociated with the celeſtial powers,
and entredApud Io. Euang. cui commendata fuerat. Io. 19. c Vide Nic. ca. 21. lib. 2 & Hier. ſer. 1. de Aſſumpt. 
                     •
                  om. 4. into that bleſſed houſe
where ſhe laye; and beholding her
with thoſe his amiable eyes, ſpoke
that with a moſt ſweet voice to her,
which the husband ſaid to the ſpouſe
in theCan. 4. b. Canticles; Thou art al faire, my
frende, and there is no blemish at al in thee;
come from Liban, my Spouſe, come from Liban,
and crowned shalt thou be. That is to ſaye,
Come receue the recompence of thy
deſertes, the treaſure which thy moſt
holy workes haue merited, the crown
that is due to thy ſo excellent vertues;
Cant. 2. c. Get vp, my Doue, it is nowe
high time to iſſue out of this exile;
no toiles, no teares, no ſobbes or ſorowes
any more. Come to enioye the
pleaſure of thoſe woundes, which
when they were geuen, did occaſionate

thy ſo great woes; come nowe
and reſt thee for the paine which
thou haſt taken. Come, nowe be merye,
for that thou haſt wailed and
wept, and for that thou humbledſt
thy ſelfe ſo lowlye, come nowe to
reigne perpetually.Aug. ſer. 2. de Aſsūpt. to. 10. & Hier. epiſt. 1. de Aſſumpt. ad Paulā & Euſto. to. 4. Theſe and ſuche
like wordes maieſt thou according to
thy deuotion meditate to haue bene
ſpoken vnto her; ſithens there is no
Goſpel nor other ſacred writt, wherout
we maye gather the certaine
Storye of her departure; and therefore
eche one maye lawfullye meditate
that which ſhal cauſe him to
haue beſt deuotion. Doo thou therefore
contemplate, what conſolation,
what ioye, what iubilation this moſt
holy ſoule receaued with ſuch woordes,
with ſuch a ſight, and with
ſuch a companye; with what conſidence
and ſecuritie did ſhe depart
this life, the moſt Soueraine King of

heauen, taking her in his moſt ſacred
armes,Ber. paulo poſt medium Ser. 1 de Aſsūpt. virg. kiſsing & cheriſhing her moſt
louingly according as S. Bernard meditateth.
O glorious Ladye, what
tongue can poſsiblye declare the
ioye thou felteſt, ſeing thy ſelfe
thus highly honoured, and thus embraced
betwixt thoſe ſacred armes of
thy dere ſonne. If the SpouſeCan. 5. b ſaith,
that her ſoule was melted when her
louer ſpake vnto her, howe fared thy
ſoul, I beſeech thee, hauing heard thy
beſt beloued his wordes, ſeene his amiable
countenance, and taſted of his
courteſies. Howe much more was it
melted with loue,Aug. initio ſer. 2. de Aſſumpt. qui eſt. 35. de Sanctis. to. 10. and tranſformed
into her louer, and repleniſhed with
ſuch delightes. Behold now, O moſte
bleſſed mother, al thy deſires fulfilled,
nowe haſt thou obteined that
which thou requiredſt; now haſt thou
found that which thou ſoughteſt for;
now doeſt thou poſſeſſe that which
thou deſiredſt. Sweet were the kiſſes

thou gaueſt him, and the louing intertainment
thou vſedſt towardes
him, when thouMat. 1. c. boreſt him being a
litle one in thine armes into Egipt;
Ber. ſer. c de Aſſump. Aug. Ser. 2. de Aſsūp. but farre ſweeter were thoſe which
thou receauedſt of him, when nowe
being a great one he caried thee to
heauen, to enioy the greateſt goodes,
the greateſt riches, the greateſt felicitie
that was euer graunted to any creature.
For if ſo be no1. Cor. 2. c. Iſai. 64. a eye hath ſeene,
nor care heard, nor humane vnderſtā
               ding
can poſsibly conceaue the goods
that God hath prepared for thoſe
that loue him. Who can poſsibly cō
               ceue
or imagine thoſe which he hath
prepared for thee, which diddeſt not
onely loue him more then al, but diddeſt
engender him of the moſt pure
bloud in thy body? a priuiledge
graūted to thee alone, and
worthye thee
alone.
            
               
               A PRAYER.
               
                  
                     WHAT ſpirite can poſsiblye
conceaue, O moſt bleſſed
Queene of Angels, that incomparable
ioye, wherewith
thy heart was filled, when that
happie hour being come which thou
with ſo great deſire haddeſt longed
for, thy moſt holy ſoule was deliuered
from the bondes of the fleſhe,
and went to enioye thoſe ineſtimable
treaſures which were prepared
for thee in the Celeſtial Region. I
humbly beſeech thee, O moſt glorious
Lady, by this moſt happy day of
ſo ſoueraine conſolation, that thou
wilt vouchſafe to remember me moſt
vnwoorthie ſinner that remaine in
this vale of teares, ſubiect to ſo many
miſeries and perils, from the which, I
beſeech thee, that by thy holy interceſsion
I maye be alwaies defended
and preſerued. Amen.
            
         
         
            
            OF THE CORONATION
OF OVR LADY.
            
               
            
            Virginis auricomo cingit diademate frontem
            Hic Deus, excelſo dat
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ſedere loco.
         
         
            
            ¶THE FIFT AND LAST
glorious Miſterie is of the Coronation
of our Lady, that is to ſay, when being
riſen vp (according as we doo holily beleeue)
she was glorified both in bodye
and ſoule, and crowned with glory of the
moſt holy Trinitie, cōcerning the which
thou shalt meditate the points folowing.
            
               
                  FIRST, how within a few dayes after
that the ſoule of the moſt bleſſed
virgin was aſſumpted into heauen,
it diſcended to take her moſte
holy body, by entring into the which
it roſe vp glorious, immortal, and impaſſible,
with al the other glorious prerogatiues, which
shal-be graunted to the elect when they shal riſe
vp in the day of iudgement,
               SECONDLY, conſider the glory, triumph,
and ioy, wher-with that great Queene accompanied
with Saintes, and quires of Angels, went vp
to heauen, aboue al the which she was exalted
in the celeſtial kingdome.
               THIRDLY conſider that moſt riche and
pretious crowne where-with she was crowned of
the moſt holy Trinitie, and placed in that
moſt high throne which was geuen her, where she
remaineth making interceſſion for them that
recommend them-ſelues vnto her.
            
            
               
               
                  VPON the firſte point thou
maieſt pauſe, meditating in
what maner that glorious
Virgin-mother was raiſed vp, being
a thing very iuſt and conuenient, that
we affirm this of her; ſithēs it is more
then likely, that like as our bleſſed
God would, that the ſoule of this Lady
ſhould be free from ſinn, ſo would
he in like maner, that her moſt holye
body ſhould be free from al corruption,
and not permitt that fleſhe to
turne to aſſhes, whereof the word eternal
had taken his fleſh. For if our
Lord would not thatIoſue. 6 d Heb. 11. f Raab the harlots
houſe ſhould be raſed with the
other houſes of Ierico, becauſe ſhe
had receaued and lodged for one onlye
day the ſpies of Ioſue: how much
more reaſon is it, that the houſe of
the bleſſed Virgin Mary which had
receaued our Lord him-ſelfe, yea, and
lodged him therein nine monthes,
ſhould not be deſtroyed and turned

into aſſhes. Let vs beleeue therefore,
that as God gaue to the firſtGen. 2. d. 1. Cor 11. c. Mat. 19. a. Adam
a companion like vnto him, to th' end
he might not be alone in terreſtral
Paradiſe: ſo was it conuenient, that
ſuch a like companion ſhould be geuen
to the ſecond Adam, who being
riſen vp and glorious, might reigne
with him riſen vp and glorious in
the celeſtial Paradiſe. And ſeing it is
ſaide of other Saints, that being now
riſen vp they doo reigne inmat 27. f Hier. epiſt. 1. de Aſsūp to. 4. heauen;
much more meet is it, that we both
ſay and beleeue this of her, who in
ſanctitie ſurpaſſeth al Saintes, and in
dignitie al pure creatures. The which
being preſuppoſed, cōſider, how with
the very ſame ſolemnitie, with the
ſame ioye, with the ſame honour and
triumph, where-with that moſt happie
ſoule was aſſumpted into heauen,
it deſcended downe to earth, & came
to the ſepulchre, where her virginal
body lay, which, as it is ſaid, was in
the vale of Ioſaphat, and by operatiō
               
and diuine vertue,Hier. ib
                     •
                   vbi vallem Ioſaphat inter montē Sion & montē Oliuetū eſſe ſcribit. did not raiſe her
ſelfe vp, as the ſonne of God and hers
did him-ſelfe; but was of her ſonne
raiſed vp. Ponder nowe the ſtate of
this virginal body being re-vnited to
the glorious ſoul, how beautiful, how
glittering, immortal, impaſsible,D. Th
                     •
                  . q. 82. 3. p. & q. 95 and
adorned with the other glorious partes,
which the elect being riſē vp, ſhal
be indued with. And if themat. 13. f. Sap. 3. b Dan. 12. a Goſpel
telleth vs of the other iuſt perſons,
howe they ſhal ſhine like the Sonne
in the kingdome of their Father, how
ought this Lady, being riſen vp, to
ſhine, which is the moſt righteous of
al righteous, the moſt holy of al holies,
the moſt gratious of al gratious?
how ſhal that bodi glitter, which was
thePſ. 14. a. Apoc. 21. a. Iacob in Liturg. tabernacle and habitation of the
ſon of God? what ſhal the beautie of
that body be, which was neuer defiled
nor ſubiect vnto ſinne? If liuing
in mortal fleſh, it was ſo faire,Amb. li. 2 de virgin. Ber. Hom. 3 ſup. Miſſ. that it
ſufficed to make God him-ſelfe take
pleſure therin, what ſhal th' excellēcie

thereof be, being riſen vp with al the
moſt abſolute gifts, graces, and excellencies
that are added thervnto.
            O with how great reaſon are al deuout
ſoules allured to beholde this
glorious ſpectacle by thoſe wordes
that ſay thus:Cant 3. c Ber. Ser. in verba. 12. Apoc. Apparuit. 
               Come out ye daughters of
Sion, and ſee your Queene, whom the morning
ſtarres geue laude vnto: At whoſe beautie
the Sonne and Moone doo meruaile
againe. But what meruaile is it, if the
Sonne and Moone doo meruaile at
her beautie, if the Angels thē-ſelues
doo meruaile thereat, as alſo at her other
riches and fauours, and as amaſed
at ſuch matters, doo ſaye:Cant. 8. a Ber. initio ſer. 4. de Aſſ. 
               Who is
this that aſcendeth from the deſert, replenished
with ſuch delicacies, and leaning vpon her louers
shoulder? What is ſhe this ſo glittering,
ſo faire, ſo gratious, that mounteth vp
thusCant. 3. b. odoriferous, as the fragrant ſmel
of her vertues doth delight and fil al
the whole Court of heauen? Howbeit,
meruaile not, O ye Angels of

to ſee in earth a creature ſo faire and
glittering, being veſtured with the
Apo. 12. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                Sonne, and hauing the Moone vnder
her feete. Meruail not to ſee ſuch
riches and excellencies in a houſe
which the eternal wiſdome hath
thought good toPro. 9. a. Amb. li 2. de virgin. frame for him-ſelf;
And this day hath he made an ende
to geue it the laſt and entier perfection,
fulfilling that which theIſai. 16. b Exod. 15. c. Prophete
Eſaie he hadIſai. 16. b Exod. 15. c. foretolde: I wil
glorifie the manſion of my Maieſtie.
            
            
               IN THE ſecond point thou maieſt
pauſe, aſsiſting with thy ſpirite the
moſt ſolemne triumph that was celebrated
in the celeſtial court, on that
daye that the moſt ſacred virgin being
riſen vp, was both in body and
ſoule aſſumpted into heauen.
            We reade in holy writt of two ſolemne
feſtiual dayes that wer kept at
the Arke of the old Teſtament.2. Re. 6. c. Exod. 15. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                The
firſt, when king Dauid caried it from
Obeded on his houſe to the Citie, and

to his palace; & this did he with ſuch
reioycing, both of his owne part, and
of al the people, that it is a wonderful
matter to conſider the great ſolē
               nitie
which the Scripture telleth to
haue bene celebrate that daye, in ſo
great a multitude of ſacrifices as wer
offred, ſuch varietie of muſical inſtruments
as were plaied vpon, ſuch ſtore
of Canticles, himnes, and diuine praiſes,
as were there ſounded forth, yea,
and king Dauid him-ſelfe did ſing,
play, and daunce (being araied with
newe robes made for the ſame purpoſe)
through the great feruour and
deuotion which he felt inwardlye in
him-ſelfe. Yet for al this was the feſtiual
and ſolemne daye that his ſonne
3. Re 8 a Salomon made farr greter, when he
caried the ſame Arke into the famous
Temple which he had erected for it.
Theſe two ſolemn feſtiual daies that
were thus celebrate in the honour of
that holy material Ark, doo foreſhew
in figure the farre more ſolemn feſtiual

daies that were celebrate in the
honor of the miſtical Arke, that is to
ſaye, of the moſt ſacred virgin-mother,
which was a farre more woorthy
and more pretious Arke then th'other
(albeit it were of ſouerain ſanctitie
and woorthy great woorſhipp)
for that a farr more rich and pretious
Chriſtus omnes theſauri ſapientiae Dei. Coloſ 2. a treaſure was kept in this Arke miſtical,
thē in thatDuae tabulae lapideae. 3. Re. 8 a material. The firſt
ſolēnitie was celebrate in her honor,
whē in ſoul ſhe was aſſumpted vp to
heuen, wherof I haue alredy ſpokē in
the former miſterie: And the ſecond
it was ſolemnized, when being riſen
vp in body and ſoule, ſhe was placed
in that celeſtial throne that was prepared
for her. And albeit the firſt ſolemnitie
were of ſo ſurpaſsing ioye,
as no humane eloquence can poſsibly
expreſſe it, yet was the ſecond, without
al compariſon farr greater. Howe
may therefore any humane capacitie
ſuffice to comprehende the ſolemne

reception and intertainment, that was
made vnto this glorious Queene of
al the celeſtial Court, when with her
moſt beautiful and glittering bodye
ſhe aſcended into heauen in ſo great
a Maieſtie? What ſtore of muſical inſtrumentes
yeelded forth a moſt melodious
harmonie?Amb. lib 2. de virg. what Canticles,
Himnes, Pſalmes, and praiſes were
there ſounded forth vnto her? howe
gret the ioy and iubilatiō was, which
al the bleſſed ſpirites ſhewed? howe
ſoueraine the contentment and conſolation
which al thoſe auncient Fathers
and other Saintes of both ſexe
felt? O how much more iuſtly might
they ſay to this moſt bleſſed Ladye
what they had ſaide tofore to the
chaſt and valiant Iudith:Iud. 15. c. 
               Thou art the
glory of Ieruſalem, thou art the ioy of Iſrael,
thou art the honour of our people.
               Ibid. 13. c 
               O daughter,
thou art bleſſed of our Soueraine Lord God,
for by means of thee we haue obteined the fruit
of life, bleſſed art thou therfore amongst al
women. Now, if al the Saintes and Angelical

ſpirites did reioyce ſo greatly,
and make ſo exceeding triumphe for
the Aſſumption of their Queene;
what maieſt thou thinke was the exultation
of her moſt puiſſant Sonne,
and th'onour and interteinment he
vſed towardes her, vouchſafing to accompany
her,Ber. Ser. 1. de Aſſumpt. and to lodge her him
ſelfe, in counterchange of the lodging
which he had receaued of her
in her entrals and virginal wombe. O
moſt woorthye mother, thou alone
haſt merited to receaue ſuch fauours!
Thou alone waſt woorthy of ſuche
interteinmentes! Thou alone couldeſt
tel thy pleſures and ſugred taſtes, thy
delightes, and ſoueraine iubilation,
and vpon new cauſes mighteſt thou
recite and ſing a-newe that diuine
Canticle which thou pronouncedſt
earſt before thy holy Couſin S. Elizabeth,
for that he hath done great
thinges to thee which is mightie,
whoſe holy name be bleſſed euerlaſtingly.
            
               
               REASON requireth, that thou pauſe
in the laſt point, meditating, how the
glorious Queene of Angels going
with them, and with al the bleſſed
Saintes thus accompanied, thus reuerenced,
and thus honored, arriued to
heauen, where ſhe preſented her-ſelfe
before the high throne of the moſte
ſacred Trinitie, who receaued her
moſt louingly, and exalted her ſo
much the more as ſhe had humbled
her-ſelfe more profoundly liuing in
the world, like as our Sauiour had manye
times fore-tolde,mat. 23 b Luc. 14. c &. 18. c. ſaying: Who ſo
humbleth him-ſelfe shal-be exalted. The celeſtial
Father receaued her as his moſt
dere daughter, The ſonne receued her
as his moſt worthy mother; the holy
Ghoſt receued her as his moſt holye
ſpouſe; and thē was ſhe of al the thre
diuine perſons crowned with a moſt
pretious crown, and placed in a moſt
ſumptuous throne on the right hand
of her ſonne. Then was that fulfilled

which the royal Prophet had with
diuine ſpiritePſ 44 fore-tolde: The Queene
hath aſſiſted at thy right hande in a garment
of gold enuironed with varieti. By the which
wordes he ſignified her ſouerain
                  •
               ie,
her dignitie, her beautie, the diuerſitie
of giftes, vertues, prerogatiues, riches,
and excellencies that wer graū
               ted
vnto her; ſith ſhe neither wanted
the faith of Patriarkes, nor the charitie
of the Apoſtles, nor the conſtancie
of Martirs, nor the wiſdome of
Doctors and Confeſſors, neither the
chaſtitie of Virgins, nor the puritie
of Angels; nor the knowledge of
Cherubins, nor the moſt inflamed
loue of Ceraphins, & beſides, the vertues
& graces that wer geuē to other
by peece-meal and meaſure, were al
geuen to her together, and heaped in
al fulnes one vpō an-other. And like
as her vertues and excellencies exceeded
far thoſe of al the Saints & bleſded
ſpirites, ſo in like maner merited
ſhe to be exalted in heuē aboue thē al
            
               
This is the womā that S. Iohn ſaw
in hisApo. 12. a Ber. Ser▪ in illa eadem verba. Reuelation clothed with the
Sonn, and hauing a crown of twelue
ſtarres on her head, wherby are denoted
the prerogatiues of plentiful graces,
where-with ſhe was adorned,
wherat we are rather to wonder, thē
to go about to write them.
            O moſt bleſſed Ladye, and moſt
woorthy of al praiſe, who can tel
what thy merites were, but he that
conſidereth thy reward? who can cō
               ceaue
what thy grace was, but he that
contemplateth thy glorie? who can
knowe what thy perfection was, but
he that beholdeth thy Crowne? Reioyce
therfore, O noble Lady, reioyce
for hauing atchieued ſo Soueraine a
felicitie as ſhal neuer in al eternitie
be taken from thee; And remember
them that remaine in this vale of
tears; Seing alſo, that thy greatnes can
not make thee forget thy profounde
humilitie, encline thineBer. 4 Ser. de Aſſumpt. eyes of mercie

towardes vs, and make interceſsiō
for vs. Ceaſſe not to continue thy office
of being our Aduocate, ſith thou
art now more mightie, and of greater
credite andBer. ſer. 1 de Aſsūpt. authoritie then thou
waſt tofore. Procure, O Queene of
heauen, procure, that by thy meanes
we maye be pardoned our offences;
and that the ſame moſt ſacred Trinitie
which hath enterteined and crowned
thee ſo liberally, vouchſafe to receaue
vs like-wiſe to his fauour and
mercie; To th'end, that when we ſhal
depart out of this exile, we may merite
to remaine in thy company, praiſing,
adoring, and enioying the ſaide
moſt Soueraine and ſacred Trinitie
perpetuallye in the celeſtial Kingdome.
Amen.
            
               A PRAYER.
               
                  
                     WHO ſo loueth thee beſt, O
moſt ſoueraine Queene of
heauen, hath beſt cauſe to
reioice at thy laſt and moſt

inexplicable ioy which gaue the perfect
accompliſhment to al thy felicities,
when being now riſen vp, and in
bodie and ſoule aſſumpted into heauen,
thou waſt crowned with a pretious
crown of the moſt holy Trinitie,
and placed aboue al the quires of Angels
in that moſt high throne which
was prepared for thee, where nowe
thou ſitteſt as Queene on the right
hand of thy moſt louing ſonne king
of glorie, who ſitteth on the right
hand of his eternal Father. I humblye
beſeech thee, O moſt happy Lady, by
this thy glorious exaltation, that by
howe much the dignitie is greater
which thou haſt obteined in heauen,
by ſo much the fauours may be greater
which by thee both I and al others
may obtein here in earth. Amē.
               The moſt ſweet name of IESVS, and of
his moſt holy Mother the Virgin MARY,
be praiſed for euermore. Amen.
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            
            Diuini diuina patet vis nominis: vnum
            Orco, eſt poena: polo, gloria: vita, ſolo.
            
               
            
            Dulce tuum noſtro ſcribas in pectore nomen,
            Nam
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                tuo conſtat nomine noſtra ſalus.
            
               
               
                  Monſtra te eſſe Matrem.  Monſtra te eſſe Filium.
               
            
         
         
            
            LITANIAE DEIPARAE
VIRGINIS EX SACRASCRIP
tura depromptae, quae in alma domo
Lauretana omnibus diebus Sabbati, Vigiliarum,
& Feſtorum eiuſdem B. Virgiginis
muſicè decantari ſolent.
            
               
                  KYRIE eleiſon.
               Chriſte eleiſon.
               Kyrie eleiſon.
               Chriſte audi nos.
               Chriſte exaudi nos.
               Pater de coelis Déus. Miſerere nobis.
               Fili Redemptor mundi Déus. Miſerere
nobis.
               Spiritus ſancte Déus. Miſerere nob.
               Sancta Trinitas vnus Déus. Miſerere
nobis.
               Sancta MARIA. Ora pro nobis.
               Sancta Dei Genetrix. ora.
               Sancta Virgo Virginum. ora.
               Mater viuentium ora.Geneſ. 3. d.
               
               Mater pulchrae dilectionis.Eccl. 24. c ora.
               Mater ſanctae ſpei. ora.
               
                  
Paradiſus voluptatis.Geneſ. 2. c. ora.
               Lignum vitae. ora.
               Domus ſapientiae.Prou. 9. a. ora.
               Porta coeli.Gene. 28. d. ora.
               Deſiderium collium aeternorum.Gen. 49. d. ora.
               Vrbs refugij.Num. 35. b. ora.
               Gloria Ieruſalem.Iudith. 15. c ora.
               Sanctuarium dei.Exod. 15. c ora.
               Foederis arca.2. Reg. 6. b ora.
               Altare thy miamatis.Exo. 30. a. ora.
               Scala Iacob.Gen 28. b ora.
               Speculum ſine macula.Sap. 7. d ora.
               Lilium inter ſpinas.Cant. 2. a ora.
               Rubus ardens incombuſtus.Exod. 3. a ora.
               Vellus Gedeonis.Iudic. 6. g. ora.
               Thronus Salomonis.3. Reg. 1. d. ora.
               Turris eburnea.Cant. 7. a ora.
               Fauus diſtillans. ora.
               Hortus concluſus.Cantic. 4. c ora.
               Fons ſignatus. ora.
               Puteus aquarum viuentium. ora.
               Nauis inſtitoris de longe portans panem.
Prou. 31. b. ora.
               Stella matutina.Eccl. 50. a ora.
               
                  
Aurora conſurgens. ora.
               Pulchra vt Luna. ora.
               Electa vt ſol.Cantic. 6. c. ora.
               Caſtrorum acies ordinata. ora.
               Solium gloriae dei.Iſai. 5. d. ora.
               A cunctis periculis.
               Reſp. Libera nos virgo glorioſa.
               Per ſalutarem conceptionem tuam.
               Libera nos.
               Per ſanctam Natiuitatem tuam. Lib.
               Per admirabilem Annunciationem
tuam. Libera.
               Per immaculatam Purificationem
tuam. Libera.
               Per glorioſam Aſſumptionem tuam.
               Libera nos. Verſus.
               Peccatores. Reſp. Te rogamus
audi nos.
               Vt veram poenitentiam nobis impetrare
digneris. Reſp. Te rogamus
audi nos.
               Vt Societates tibi peculiari obſequio
deuotas conſeruare, & augere digneris.
Reſp. Te rogamus audi nos.
               
                  
Vt Eccleſiae ſanctae, cuncto
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   populo
Chriſtiano pacem, & vnitatem impetrare
digneris. Reſp. Te rogamus
audi nos.
               Vt omnibus fidelibus defunctis requiem
aeternam impetrare digneris.
               Reſp. Te rogamus audi nos.
               Mater Dei. Reſp. Te rogamus audi
nos.
               Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi.
               
                  Reſp. Parce nobis Domine.
               Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi.
               
                  Reſp. Exaudi nos Domine.
               Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi.
               
                  Reſp. Miſerere nobis.
               
                  Verſus. Ora pro nobis ſancta Dei Genetrix.
               
                  Reſp. Vt digni efficiamur promiſsionibus
Chriſti.
            
            
               OREMVS.
               
                  PIetate tua quaeſimus Domine
noſtrorum ſolue vincula
peccatorum, & intercedente

Beata Maria, cum omnibus ſanctis
tuis, nos famulos tuos, benefactores,
Praelatos, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   loca noſtra in omni
ſanctitate cuſtodi: cunctos
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   conſanguinitate,
affinitate, & familiaritate
nobis coniunctos à vitijs purga, virtutibus
illuſtra: pacem & ſalutem nobis
tribue: hoſtes viſibiles, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   inuiſibiles
remoue: carnalia deſideria repelle:
aërem ſalubrem indulge: Inimicis
noſtris charitatem largire. Regnum
etiam Angliae, vrbem
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   noſtrā
N. vnà cum vniuerſis in ea commorantibus
ab haereticorū feritate conuerte.
Omnibus fidelibus viuis, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
defunctis in terra viuentium requiē
aeternam concede: & benedictio tua
ſit ſuper nos ſemper. Per Chriſtum
Dominum noſtrum. Amen.
            
         
         
            
            QVI VOLET, HAS QVOQVE
IN DEIPARAE
virginis laudem recitare
poterit.
            
               SECVNDO DIE
               
                  
                     ANcilla & Mater Domini.Luc. 1. d.
                  
                  Columba Chriſti.Cant. 2. c.
                  
                  Vas electionis.Act. 9. c.
                  
                  Arca Teſtamenti.Apoc. 11. d.
                  
                  Lectulus Salomonis.Can. 3. c.
                  
                  Tabernaculum dei.Apoc. 21. a.
                  
                  Tabernaculum Cedar.Can. 1. a.
                  
                  Domus aurea ſancti ſanctorum.2. Par. 3. a.
                  
                  Turris Dauidica.Canti. 4. b.
                  
                  Turris Libani.Cantic. 7. b
                  
                  Terra Domini benedicta.Pſal. 84.
                  
                  Terra ſacerdotalis libera.Gene. 47. c.
                  
                  Cypreſſus in monte Sion.Eccl. 24. b
                  
                  Plantatio roſae in Iericho.
                  Palma in Cades exaltata.
                  
                     
Oliua ſpecioſa in campis.
                  Cedrus exaltata in Libano.
                  Lilium in aquae tranſitu.Eccle▪ 50 a.
                  
                  Flos roſarum in diebus vernis.
                  Thus ardens in igne.
                  Thus in aeſtate redolens.
                  Arcus refulgens inter nebulas.
                  Luna plena.
                  Sol refulgens.Cantic. 1. a.
                  
                  Nigra, ſed formoſa.
                  Mulierum pulcherima.Cantic. 5. d.
                  
                  Benedicta inter mulieres.Luc. 1. d.
                  
                  Gratia plena.
                  Ianua coeli.Pſal. 77. c.
                  
                  Regina varietate circundata.Pſal. 4. 4. c.
                  
               
            
            
               TERTIO DIE.
               
                  ALtare dei.Pſal. 42. a.
                  
                  Ambroſ. li. 2. de Virginib.
                  Arca Noë.Geneſ. 7. a.
                  
                  And. Hieroſ. in ſalut. Angelie.
                  Aula regalis ſpei noſtrae.Pſal. 59. b.
                  
                  Ambr. in inſtit. virg. cap. 12.
                  
                     
Ciuitas Dei.Pſal. 86. a.
                  
                  Bruno ſer. de laudibus Mariae, & Aug. ſub
finem ca. 16. li. 17. de Ciuit. Dei.
                  Decora ſicut Ieruſalem.Cant. 6. a.
                  
                  Bruno Carth. vbi ſupra.
                  Forceps carbonis ardentis ſeraphica.Iſai. 6. b.
                  
                  And. Hieroſ in ſalut Angel.
                  Lapis abſciſſus ſine manibus.Daniel. 2. c.
                  
                  Damaſc. ſub f. carm. de Annunciat.
                  Magiſtra gentium.2. Tim. 1. c
                  
                  Aug. ſub. f. ſer. 6. de Natali.
                  Mons Ephraim.1. Reg. 1. a
                  
                  Greg. pp. initio ca. 1. li. 1. in lib. 1. Samueli
                        •
                     .
                  Mons pinguis.Pſal. 67. b.
                  
                  And. Hieroſ. in ſalut. Angel.
                  Mulier fortis.Prou. 31. b.
                  
                  Bern. hom. 2. ſuper Miſſus, & Innocent. 3.
ſer. 2. de Aſſumpt B. Mariae.
                  Mulier amicta ſole.Apoc. 12. a.
                  
                  Bern. ſer. in verba ca. 12. Apo. ſignum magnū
apparuit.
                  Nubes leuis.Iſai. 19. a.
                  
                  Hier. in ca. 2. Zach. to 6. & li. 7. comment. in
19. Iſa. & Amb. ca. 13. Inſt. Virg.
                  Oleum effuſum nomē tuum.Cantic. 1. a.
                  
                  Amb. ca. 13. in inſtit. virginis.
                  Porta clauſa Orientális.Ezec. 44. a
                  
                  
                     
Hier. in fine Apolog. pro li. ad Pamachium.
Aug. ſer. 2. de Aſſumpt. & Damaſc li. 4. ca. 8
& Amb ca. 7. 8. &. 9. Inſtit. Virginis. Bruno
Carth. ſer. de laude Mariae. Beda lib. 4. in cap.
11. Luc. tom. 2.
                  Sepulchrum nouum Chriſti.
                  Hier. li. 1. cont. Iouinian.Mat. 27. g. & in fine Apologiae
ad Pamach.
                  Soror,Cantic. 4. c. & ſponſa Dei.
                  Aug. ſer. 6. in natali. 10. de temp.
                  Stella Iacob,Num. 26. c.
                  
                  Bern. ſub finem homil. 2. de laudibus Mariae.
                  Templum miſericordiae dei.Pſal. 47. b.
                  
                  Aug. ſer. 2. de Aſſumpt.
                  Terra irrigata fonte.Geneſ. 2. a.
                  
                  Beda in cap. 2. Geneſ. tom. 1.
                  Terra promiſsionis.Gene. 12. a.
                  
                  Aug. ſer. 1. poſt Dominicam. 1. Quadrag.
                  Thalamus ſponſi.Pſal. 18. a.
                  
                  Bern. ſer. 2. de Aduentu, & Beda lib. 4. in cap.
11. Luc. tom. 2.
                  Thronus dei.Apoc. 14. a.
                  
                  Aug. in praefat. li. 1. de Aſſump. to. 9. & Bruno
ſerm. de Annunciat.
                  Thuribulum aureum.Apoc. 8. a.
                  
                  Ephraem in orat. de Laudibus Mariae.
                  Vas ſolidum auri ſplendidiſsimum.Eccl. 50. a
                  
                   
                  
                     
Vas ornatum omni lapide pretioſo.
                  Ephr. ibidem.
                  Virgo florens Aaronis.Num. 17. b
                  
                  Damaſc. li 4. cap. 8. et Bern. homil. 2. ſuper
Miſſus, et Ephr. vbi ſupra.
                  Virga Ieſſe.
                        
                           •
                        ſai. 11. 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
                  
                  Hier. epiſt. 22. ad Euſtoch. de cuſt. virg. et in
epitaph. L. Betici ad Theodoram: et Ambr. in
inſtit. virg. cap. 9. et Tertul. cap. 6. de probat.
Natiuit. Chriſti li. contra Iudaeos: et Leo PP.
1. init. ſer. 4. de Nat. Domini.
                  Virgo ſancta corpore, & ſpiritu.
                        
                           •
                        . Cor. 7. f
                  
                  Hieron. poſt initium Ser. 1. de Aſſumpt. tom. 4
et Bern. homil 2. de laud. Mar. Bruno ſer. 1. de
laud. Mariae.
                  Vrna aurea habens Manna.
                        
                           ••
                        Heb. 9. a
                  
                  And. Hieroſ. in ſalut. Angel. Ephr. quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      in
orat. de B. Virgine.
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶EX NONNVLLIS PAtribus
nonnullae aliae compellationes
perhonorificae.
            
               QVARTO DIE.
               
                  
                     VIRGO Maria ſemper glorioſiſsima.Iacob.
                  Apoſt. in ſua Liturg.
                  Ab aeterno dei conſilio praeuiſa.
                  Damaſc. li. 4. cap. 8.
                  Electa à ſeculo.
                   
                  Altiſsimo praeparata.
                   
                  Ab Angelis ſeruata.
                   
                  A Patribus praefigurata.
                   
                  Promiſſa prophetis.
                   
                  Virgo admiranda.
                  Bern. hom. 2. de laudibus B. Mariae ſuper Miſſus
eſt.
                  Virgo beata.
                  Aug. ſer. 2. de Annunciatione.
                  Virgo benigna.
                   
                  Virgo clemens.
                  Ephr. in orat. ad B. Virginem.
                  
                     
Virgo deuota.
                  Ber. homil. 3. ſuper Miſſus.
                  Virgo dei Genetrix glorioſa.
                  Aug. Ser. 2. de Aſſump.
                  Virgo Deipara intemerata.
                   
                  Virgo inuiolata.
                  Ephe. in orat. de laudib. Mar.
                  Virgo impolluta.
                   
                  Virgo miſericors.
                  Ephe. in orat. ad B. Virginem.
                  Virgo obediens.
                  Ireneus li. 3. cap. 33.
                  Virgo prudens.
                  Bern. hom. 3. ſup. Miſſus. & ſerm. de Natiuit. Mariae.
                  Virgo regia.
                  Ber. ſer. 2. de aduent.
                  Virgo ſacra.
                  Leo pp. 1. ſerm. 3. de Natiuit. Domini.
                  Virgo ſancta.
                  Cyrillus lib. ad Reginas de recta in Chriſtum
fide, & lib. 8. in Iulianum.
                  Virgo ſincera.
                  Ephr. in orat. ad B. Virg.
                  Virgo ſapiens.
                  Rupertus in ca. 3. Math. li. 2.
                  
                     
Virgo caſtiſsima.
                  Greg. Naz. in Chriſt. pat.
                  Virgo omni honore digniſsima.
                  Bern. hom. ſuper Meſſus.
                  Virgo omnium pulcherima.
                  Greg. Naz. in trag. Chriſti patientis.
                  Virgo ſanctiſsima.
                  Athanaſ. in Euang. de ſancta noſtra Deipara.
                  Virginum Corona.
                  Ephr. in orat. de laud B. Mariae.
                  Virginum gloria.
                  Iacobus in Liturgia.
                  Virginum mater.
                  Hier. li. 1. aduerſus Iouinianum.
                  Virginitatis imago.
                  Amb. li. 2. de Virgint
                        •
                     .
                  Filia ſuperni Regis nobiliſsima.
                  Bruno ſer. de Natiuit. B. Mariae.
                  Puella gratioſa.
                  Baſil. hom. 25. de humana Chriſti generatione▪
                     
                        •
                     t Nazianz. in Chriſto patiente.
               
            
            
               
               QVINTO DIE.
               
                  
                     MAter, & virgo perpetua.
                  Hieron. in Apol. ad Pammachiū
pro li. contra Iouinianum.
                  Mater Dei pura.
                   
                  Mater integra.
                   
                  Mater inculpata.
                  Bern. ſer. 2. dominicae. 1. poſt oct. Epiph & ſer. 1
de Aſſumpt. Anſelm. etiam lib. de excellentia
                        •
                     
Mariae. cap. 12.
                  Mater Dei penitùs incontaminata.
                   
                  Mater omnibus modis irreprehenſa.
                   
                  Mater honoratior quàm Cherubim.
                   
                  Mater glorioſior quàm Ceraphim.
                  Iacob. frater Domini, & Chriſoſt. in ſuis Liturgiis.
                  Mater celeberrima.
                  Ephr. in orat. a
                        •
                      laud B. Mariae.
                  Mater ſacroſanctiſsima.
                  Bern. ſer. 2. dominicae 1. poſt oct. Epiph. & Ser.
1. de Aſſump. Anſelm. quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      de excell. Mariae.
cap. 12.
                  
                     
Mater Dei noſtri beatiſsima.
                  Iacob & Chriſoſt in Lit.
                  Mater ſalutis.
                  Bern. ſerm. de aduentu.
                  Mater ſempiterni gaudij.
                  And. Hieroſ. in ſalut. Angelic.
                  Mater miſericordiae.
                  Bern. ſer. 2. dom. 1. poſt Epiph. & ſer. 1. de Aſſumpt.
& Anſelm. ca. 12. lib. de excell. Mariae.
                  Mater gratiae.
                  Anſelm. ibidem.
                  Mater & genetrix vitae.
                  Athan. in Euangelio de noſtra Deipara; &
Bern. ſer. 2. de aduentu.
                  Genetrix Dei beata.
                  Aug. ſer. 2. de Annunciat. & Beda. lib. 4. in
cap. 11. Luc.
                  Genetrix Genitoris tui.
                   
                  Nutrix nutritoris omnium viuentiū.
                  Chryſola
                        •
                     us ſerm 143. in Euang. de Annunc.
                  Deipara ſemper immaculata.
                  Iacob. & Chriſ. in Liturg.
                  Puerpera ſublimis.
                  Aug. ſer. 2. de Aſſumpt. refertur etiam inter
opera Hieronimi. tom. 4.
                  Foemina ſingulariter veneranda.
                   
                  
                     
Foemina ſupra omnes admirabilis.
                  Bern. homil. 2. de laud. Mariae ſuper Miſſus eſt.
                  Foeminarum reſtauratio.
                  Aug. ſer. 11. de Natali, qui eſt 15. de ſanctis, et
Fulgentius ſer. de laud. B. Virginis.
                  Domina ſuper omnes benedicta.
                   
                  Domina glorioſa.
                   
                  Domina immaculata.
                  Chriſ
                        ••
                     n Liturg.
                  Domina piiſsima.
                  Anſel. lib. de excellentia B. Mariae. cap. 12.
               
            
            
               SEXTO DIE.
               
                  
                     
                        AVLA REGIS aeterni. ora.
                  Aug. init. Ser. 1. de Aſſumpt. tom. 9.
                  Thronus dei coelis amplior. ora.
                  Iacob. in Liturg.
                  Sacrarium ſpiritus ſancti. ora.
                  Cyp. ſer. de Natiuit. Chriſti. to. 2. et Bern. ſub
finem ſer. de Aſſumpt.
                  Coelum in quo Rex gloriae ſplendet.
ora.
                   
                  Palatium Regis ſacroſanctum. ora.
                   
                  Domicilium coelo praeſtantius. ora.
                   
                  
                     
Habitaculum illius qui nuſquam capitur
ampliſsimum. ora.
                   
                  Templum diuinae gloriae ornatiſsimum.
ora.
                  And. Hieroſ in ſalut. Angelicam.
                  Templum ſanctificatum. ora.
                   
                  Paradiſus ſpiritualis. ora.
                  Iacobus in Liturgia.
                  Hortus delitiarum. ora.
                  Bern ſer. de Natiuit. B. Mariae.
                  Thalamus ſanctimoniae. ora.
                  Cyprian. ſer. de Natiuit. Chriſti.
                  Ianua filij Dei. ora.
                  Aug. ſer. 14. de Natali qui eſt. 18. de tempore.
                  Via regia Saluatoris. ora.
                  Bern. ſer. 2. de aduentu.
                  Feneſtra coeli. ora.
                  Aug. ſer. 11. in Natali, & poſt medium ſer. 2.
de Aſſumpt. Fulgent. & ſer. de laud. B. Virg.
                  Stella maris. ora.
                  Bern. hom. 2. ſuper Miſſus, & Hier. in inter.
Hebraic. nominum, et Beda in ca. 1. Luc. lib. 1.
                  Stella fulgentiſsima. ora.
                  Ephraem in orat. de laud. B. Mariae.
                  Typus eccleſiae ſanctae. ora.
                  Aug. ſub finem ſer. 6. de Natali qui eſt. 10. de

tempore.
                  Exemplum perfectionis. ora.
                   
                  Forma diſciplinae Chriſti. ora.
                  Hier. non longè à princ. ſer. 1. de Aſſumpt. to. 4.
                  Species caſtitatis. ora.
                   
                  Secretum verecundiae. ora.
                   
                  Vexillum fidei. ora.
                   
                  Obſequium deuotionis. ora.
                   
                  Forma virtutis. ora.
                   
                  Diſciplina omnium. ora.
                  Ambroſ. li. 2. de virginibus.
                  Reparatrix parentum. ora.
                   
                  Purificatrix poſterorum. ora.
                  Bern. hom. 2. de laude Mar. ſuper Miſ.
                  Inuentrix benedicta gratiae. ora.
                  Bern. ſer. 2. de Aduent.
                  Mediatrix mundi. ora.
                   
                  Auxiliatrix praeſens. ora.
                  Ibid. Bern. et Ephr. in orat. de laud. Mar.
                  Cauſa ſalutis humani generis. ora.
                  Irenaeus li. 3. contra haereſes. ca. 33.
                  Praeſes vitae noſtrae. ora.
                  Greg. Naz. in Chriſto pa
                        •
                     .
                  Aduocata noſtra. ora.
                  Bern. ſer. 2 de Aduent.
                  Aduocata Euae. ora.
                  Iren. li. 5. aduerſus haereſes.
               
            
            
               
               SEPTIMO DIE.
               
                  
                     COntritio prauitatis haereticae.
                  Bern. ſerm. in verba Apoc. 12. Signum
magnum.
                  Gratiae plenitudo.
                  Chryſolaus ſer. 143. in Euang. de Annunciat.
                  Obſes fidei noſtrae apud Deum. ora.
                  Aug. ſer. 6. de Natali.
                  Scala coeleſtis. ora.
                  Aug. ſer. 11. in Nat. et. 2. de Aſſumpt. et Fulg.
ſerm. de laud. Mar.
                  Scala peccatorum. ora.
                  Bern. ſer de Nat. B. Mariae.
                  Studioſorum lumen. ora.
                   
                  Clauſorum Liberatrix celeberrima.
ora pro nobis.
                   
                  Orphanorum ſuſceptio. ora.
                   
                  Adiutrix deſtitutorum. ora.
                   
                  Vexatorum portus. ora.
                   
                  Solatium mundi. ora.
                   
                  Redemptio captiuorum. ora.
                   
                  Egrotantium exultatio. ora.
                  Ephr. in orat. de lau. B. Mariae.
                  Subſidium oppreſſorum. ora.
                   
                  
                     
Chriſtianorum profugium. ora.
                   
                  Spes deſperantium. ora.
                  Idem Ephraem in orat. ad B. Virg.
                  Spes vnica peccatorum. ora.
                   
                  Spes veniae delictorum. ora.
                  
                     
                        •
                     ug. ſer. 2. de Annunc. qui eſt. 18. de ſanctis
tom. 10.
                  Spes Chriſtianorum ſanctiſsima. ora.
                  Ephr. in orat. ad B. Virg.
                  Expectatio praemiorum noſtrorum.
ora pro nobis.
                  Aug. ſer. 2. de Annunc.
                  Gaudium mortalium. ora.
                  Greg. Naz in Chriſt. patient.
                  Laetitia Sanctorum. ora.
                   
                  Omnium ſalus. ora.
                  Ephr. in orat. de laud. Mariae.
                  Regina mundi. ora.
                  Gregor. in Chriſt. pat. & Hieron ſer. 1. de Aſſumpt.
to. 4.
                  Regina coelorum. ora.
                  Aug. ſer. 2. de Aſſumpt. 35. de ſanctis.
                  Decus Patriarcharum. ora.
                  And. Hieroſ in ſalut. Angelic.
                  Gloria Prophetarum. ora.
                   
                  Praeconium Apoſtolorum. ora.
                   
                  
                     
Honor Martyrum. ora.
                  Ephr. in orat. de laud. B. Mar.
                  Lux alma Virginum. ora.
                  Greg. Naz. in Chriſt. patiente.
                  Mater, & Virgo ſingulis inſignita titulis.
ora.
                  Cyprian. ſer. de Natiuit. Chriſti. tom. 1.
               
               
                  Cùm Litanias dicimus, non humanis verbis,
ſed oraculis ſpiritum Deum
placamus.
Baſil. ep. 63. anno Domini. 300.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE MANER HOW WE
ought to examine our
conſcience.
            
               WHAT we ought to doo in the morning
after we are got vp
               
                  FIRST, to thanke God generally
for benefits receued, and
particulerly for hauing preſerued
vs the night paſt.
               SECONDLY, to offer our
ſelues wholly into the handes of his diuine
Maieſtie, and to praye him that he
wil keepe vs, and geue vs grace to doo euery
thing that day according to his holye
and diuine wil.
               THIRDLY, to conſider what vices and
ſinne we are moſt enclined to, purpoſing
to eſchew the ſame, and to beginne preſently
to renew our ſelues according as
our Lord Ieſus Chriſte hath taught vs.
               FOVRTHLY, to craue helpe for the
doing of this of the bleſſed Virgin, and
of our Gardian Angel; recommending
our ſelues to al the whole company of
the bleſſed Saintes in heauen.
               FIFTLY and laſtly, to ſaye three Pater
noſters and three Aue Maries for al the
faithful liuing and departed, procuring
to go deuoutly to heare holy
                     •
                  Maſſe, and

to offer that ſacrifice to God for our own
ſinnes, and for al the neceſsities of holy
Churche.
            
            
               WHAT we ought to doo at night
before we go to bedd.
               
                  FIRST, to thanke God generally
for al benefits receaued
heretofore, and eſpecially of
that preſent day.
               SECONDLY, to require
grace and true light, to knowe and hate
our ſinnes.
               THIRDLY, to cal our ſoules to an accompt,
wherein they maye on that daye
haue offended God, hauing a ſpecial conſideration
of ſuch defects, wherto we are
moſt inclined.
               FOVRTHLY, to craue pardon humbly
of God for al the defects whereof we
finde our ſelues giltie.
               FIFTLY, to haue a firme purpoſe thorough
Gods grace to beware of ſinne
hereafter, with a purpoſe to confeſſe thē
which we may haue already tranſgreſſed
in. Laſtlye, to ſaye the Pater noſter, Aue
Mary, and the Creede, making then the
ſigne of the holy Croſſe vpon vs.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE faultes eſcaped in printing are to
be corrected in this wiſe.
            The firſt figures ſignifie the leafe, the letters
folowing the page, the figures next after,
the line.
            Fol. 16. pag. a. lin. 17. for reſigneſt, read
reſignedſt.] 68. a. 12. read, this his ſo
great coſt.] 69. b. 7. read, ſhould be
nice] 71. a. 19. read, grace.] 72. b. 1. read,
The firſt glorious Miſterie is of his
triūphant. &c.] 73. b. 3. read, and the
ende wherfore. &c.] 74. b. 19. read,
happie are thoſe eyes that. &c.] 75. b.
14. wailing.] 76. b. 7. read, particuler
feauters.] Ibid. lin. 17. read, become ſo
faire.] 87. a. 2. Edon.] 93. a. 8. contemplate
that.] 93. b. 7. ſignified.] 107.
a. 11. read, Eſaie had. &c.
            
         
      
   