
      
         
            
            To the moſt Honorable aſſembly of the Commons
Houſe of Parliament.
            The Binders of Bookes in London doe moſt humblie ſhew
            THat in Anno Domino 1619. the Goldbeaters in London by the procurement
of Sir Henry Bretton Knight, and Docter Egliſham obtained a Charter
of Incorporation: for procurement whereof (beſides other annuall payments)
Doctor Egliſham receiueth of the ſaid Goldbeaters at the leaſt 200. lib per
annū. But what recompence Sir Henry Bretton hath; the Petitioners cannot declare.
            That by colour of that new Incorporation, & for ſatisfaction of the ſaid yearelie
payments the Goldbeaters haue combined and confederated together, and
bound themſelues, both by bond and oath to ſell all Gold foliate onely at one place
and at one rate, both good and bad: by which meanes they haue inhaunced the
price thereof a ful eight part viz. 1. d. ob. in euerie ſhiling, to the great impoueriſhment
of the Petitioners and other his Maieſties ſubiects.
            That the ſaid Companie of Gold beaters exceed not 30. in number, of which nū
               ber
ſixe onely reape the profit of the others labours, for the reſidue are bound to
ſell all their Gold foliate to thoſe ſixe at the old rates: which ſixe ſell the ſame to
the Petitioners at the new inhaunced prices.
            That the ſaid Goldbeaters are free of other ſeuerall Companies in London,
where they ſtill bind their Apprentices. That they vſe all poſſible meanes to diminiſh
their number. So that in ſhort time although the Goldbeaters in London
will be but few, yet they will ſell their Gold foliate at what prices they liſt for their
priuat gaine, but to the preiudice of the Common Wealth.
            The petitioners further ſhewe, That of all the Gold foliate which is ſpent they
ſpend vpon the binding and adorning of bookes not aboue the value of 300 lib.
per annum. the reſidue being ſpent on Coaches and other vnneceſſarie things.
            The Petitioners therefore moſt humblie praie that either the Goldbeaters
maie be ordered to ſell at their owne houſes their Gold foliate at the old
Rates. Or that the importation of Gold foliate from forraine parts may be
tolerated. By which meanes not onely Gold foliate wil be ſold better cheape.
But alſo a great quantitie of Gold will be brought to his Maieſties
Mint yearely, which the Goldbeaters now ſpend, by reaſon of the prohibition
of the importation of Gold foliate from beyond the Seas.
         
      
   