
      
         
            
            
            To the moſt Honble Aſſemblie of the high Court of Parliament,
The humble Petition of many thouſands of poore diſtreſſed Carpenters,
Bricklayers, Smithes, Plaiſterers, Glaziers, Painters and other
handy-crafts men.
            IN moſt humble wiſe ſheweth, that whereas your poore Petitioners exhibited their humble
Petition vnto the Honourable houſe of Commons, concerning the manner of building and
rep
                  •
               iring of houſes being denyed, which they lovingly heard, and preſently gaue order for the
cal
                  •••
               g in, of M. Innago Iones to anſwer the cauſe, how be it he did not attend the Committees
at D
                  〈…〉
               day of hearing, as your poore diſtreſſed petitioners did, which made the Kings Majeſtie
conceiue (as we take it) that the Commiſſioners were never called before the Honorable Houſe
of Commons, as it appeares in His moſt Royall ſpeech at the laſt Seſſion.
            In tender conſideration whereof, it would pleaſe your Honours, to take into your Noble
and graue conſiderations, the few Arguments and Reaſons herevnto annexed, which doe
tend vnto the generall good, benefite and ſafetie of the Honourable Citties of London and
Weſtminſter, and to graunt, that if their be any oppoſition made, their may be a publike hearing,
betweene thoſe appoſers and vs, whereby the ſaid Arguments and reaſons may paſſe
with authoritie to the generall good, as ſhall ſeeme beſt vnto this moſt Honorable Aſſembly.
            And your poore Petitioners ſhall (as duty bindeth them) daily pray vnto God, for your
Honorable healthes, peace and tranquillity long to continue.
            
               Reaſons moving this their humble Petition.
               1 Firſt it doth vndoe many, that can repaire their houſes but not new build them.
               2 Secondly, Whereas fiue or ten pounds, will make a houſe ſerue 30 or 40. yeares, whereas
three or foure hundred pounds will not new build it.
               3 Thirdly, it hath and will be a meanes to waſt abundance of timber, when houſes muſt be
pulled downe before they haue need.
               4 Fourthly, if a man take a Leaſe of 21. yeares, and if the houſe ſtand not aboue 14 or 16.
yeares, but muſt be repaired, and being denyed repairyng, the houſe muſt either fall or elſe
the building will be to chargable for the remainder of the yeares, beſides breach of Covenants
contrary to Law.
               5 Fifthly, If a caviling tenent be not diſpoſed to repaire his houſe, according to his Covenants
but to wrong his Landlord will complaine vnto the Commiſſioners for building, and
ſo 
                     •
                  ave it puld downe, when reaſonable reparations will ſerue.
               6 Sixthly, by this occaſion, many thouſands haue ben caſt out of imployment in their lawfull
callings, and by this meanes many haue periſhed.
            
         
      
   