
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  blazon or coat of arms
               
            
            The Othe of euerie Free man, of the
Cittie of London,
            YE ſhall ſweare that ye ſhall be good and true to our Soueraigne
Ladie Que
                  ••
                
               Elizabeth, &c. and to the heires
of our ſaide Soueraigne Ladie the Queene. Obeyſant
and obedient ye ſhall be to the Maior and Miniſters of this
Citie. The Franchiſes and cuſtomes thereof ye ſhall maintain,
and this Citie keep harmeles in that that in you is. Ye
ſhal be contributorie to all manner of charges within this
Citie, as ſummons, watches contributions, taskes, tallages,
lot and ſcot, and al other charges, bearing your part as
a free man ought to do. Ye ſhal colour no forreines goods,
vnder or in your name, whereby the Queene or this Citie,
might or may looſe their cuſtomes or aduantages. Ye ſhall
know no forreine to buy or ſell any Marchandiſe, with any
other forreine within the Citie or franchiſe thereof, but yee
ſhall warne the Chamberlaine thereof, or ſome Miniſter of
the Chamber, Ye ſhall impleade or ſue no freeman out of
this Citie, whiles ye may haue right and law within the
ſame Citie. Ye ſhal taken one Apprentiſe, but if he bee free
borne (that is to ſay) no bond mans ſonne, nor the childe of
any Alien, and for no leſſe terme then for ſeauen yeres, within
the firſt yere ye ſhall cauſe him to be enrolled and at his
termes ende, yee ſhall make him free of this Citie, if he haue
well and truelie ſerued you. Ye ſhal alſo keep the Queenes
peace in your owne perſons, ye ſhall know no gatheringes,
conuenticles nor conſpiracies, made againſt the Queenes
peace, but ye ſhal warne the Maior thereof or let it to your
power. All theſe pointes and Articles yee ſhall well and
truelie keepe, according to the lawes and cuſtomes of this
Citie, to your power. So God you helpe.
            God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            Printed at London by Iohn VVolfe.
         
      
   