
      
         
            
            
               
                  HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
               
               
                  I. G. M.
               By the Major.
            
               WHereas the infection of the Plague is daily diſperſed more & more in diuers parts of this City and the Liberties therof, aſwell for that the houſes infected haue not been, nor yet are kept ſhut vp, according to the Proclamation, and many Precepts and Orders in that behalfe made and taken, aſwell by the Kings moſt excellent Maieſtie, as by mee and my Brethren the Aldermen, as alſo for that the people infected, and whoſe houſes are infected (againſt all honeſtie, humane ciuility, and good conſcience, ſeeking as it were rather the deſolation of the Citie, and of this Kingdome by diſperſing of the infection, then otherwiſe) do daily intrude themſelues into all companies, both priuate and publike, aſwell at Sermons as elſewhere, and doe flocke and follow the dead to the Graue in multitudes, one ſtill infecting another, to the diſpleaſure of Almighty God, and great griefe of his Maieſtie, to vnderſtand of the deſtruction of his Subiects in ſuch wilfull and deſperate manner. To the end therefore that the cauſe of further infection, which may happen by any of the aforeſaid occaſions (if God be ſo pleaſed) may be taken away, and the Kings Subiects (whom in his Princely and gracious care had ouer them, he tendereth as dearely as himſelfe) may be preſerued from that perill. Theſe are in Gods Name to exhort and perſwade, and in his Maieſties Name ſtraightly to charge and command all perſons whatſoeuer, inhabiting within this Citie and the Liberties thereof, whoſe houſes now are, or hereafter during this Viſitation, ſhall be infected with the Plague, vpon their Allegiance, and due obedience, that they doe owe vnto our ſaid Soueraigne Lord the King, to keepe their ſaid houſes ſhut vp, for the ſpace of xxviii. dayes next after the buriall of any dying of the Plague out of their ſaid houſes, And that the people infected, and of the ſaid infected houſes, doe continue in their ſaid houſes, during the ſaid time of xxviii. dayes, and none of them goe abroad, but onely for neceſſarie food, and with red wands in their hands, and doe not come into, or frequent any publike aſſemblies, nor follow the dead infected bodies to the Graue, vpon paine of his Highneſſe heauy diſpleaſure and impriſonment of their bodies ſo offending by the ſpace of ten dayes, without bayle or maynprize: Requiring alſo, and charging all Churchwardens, Conſtables, Beadles of Wardes, Clarkes and Sextons of Pariſhes, and all other Officers and Miniſters within this Citie and the Liberties thereof, euery one of them in his place and office, carefully to looke vnto the performance of the premiſſes, and of all other orders formerly ſet downe by the Lord Maior and Aldermen of this Citie for the time being, or by me and my Brethren the Aldermen, concerning the auoyding of the Plague, vpon like paine as aforeſaid. Giuen at Guild Hall, the fift day of Aprill, 1625.
            
            
               ❧ 
               God ſaue the King. 
               ❧
            
         
      
      
         
            London Printed by Iſaac Iaggard, Printer to the Honourable Citie of London. 1625.
         
      
   