
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ THE Lawes of the Markette,
            Anno 1. 5. 62.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ¶The Lawes of the Markette.
            
               FIRST in all  the Markettes of thys Citie, no Victuall ſhalbe ſolde, but by the pryce ſet by the Mayor of thys Citie.
            No man ſhall forſtall any Vyctuall  commyng to the Market, as for to bye in anye Inne, or other pryuye place, or yet commynge to the Market, whether it be founde in the handes of the byer or of the ſeller, vnder payne of forfayture of the ſame, and no Inholder ſhall ſuffer nothyng to be ſold in his houſe, vpon payne of forfeyture of▪ xl. s.
            
               No man ſhall regrate any Victuall, which is in the markette, or bye any vyctuall to ingrate in the market, ſo that the commons can or maye haue any part of ſuch victuall, as in eſpecial ſuch as be knowen for huxſters, or other people, occupying theyr lyuynge by ſuche victuall, as they would ſo ingroſe vnder payne of forfeyture of ſuche victuall ſoo regrated: Prouyded alwayes that anye Steward for any noble feaſt, mai bie or ingrate ſuch vyctuall as is conuenient for the ſame leaſt.
            No Butter ſhalbe ſolde but according  to the waight for the time of the yeare allowed.
            No Poulters ſhall deceiuably  occupy the Markette to ſette anye Stale victuall or ſuch as be poulters of this Citie, for to ſtande in

ſtraunge clothyng ſo to do, vnder payne of forty ſhyllynges, and the forfeyture of ſuch vyctuall. xl. s.
            No Huxſters ſhal ſtand or ſytte  in the markette, but in the lower place, and the endes of the market to thintent they maye be perfytlye knowen, and the ſtraunger markette people haue the preeminence of the markette, vnder payne of three ſhyllynges foure pence, if the Huxſters dyſobey the ſame.
            No vnholeſome or ſtale victuall  ſhalbe ſolde. vnder payne of xl. s. and forfayture of the ſame victuall. ⸫
         
         
            
            ¶ The Statutes of the Streates of thys Citie, agaynſt Noiſaunces.
            
               FIRST, noo  manne ſhal ſwepe the filth of the ſtreate into the canell of the Citie▪ in the tyme of any raine, or at any other tyme, vnder payne of. vi. s. viii. d.
            No man ſhall caſt or ley in the  Streates, Dogges, Cattes, or other carrin, or any noyſome thing, contagious of ayer, nor no Inholder ſhall ley out dounge out of his howſe, but yf the carte be redy to carry the ſame away incontinentlye, vnder payne of. xl. s.
            
               No Brewer ſhall caſt wylfully  Dregges, or droſſe of Ale or Beare into the Canel, vnder paine of. ii. s
            No manne ſhall encomber the  Streates with Timber, Stones, Cartes, or ſuch like, vnder payne of forfayture of the ſame thinge, that ſo encombreth the Streates, whiis twentye ſhyllynges fyne: Yf he amoue it not at the warnynge of the Sargaunt of the Markette.
            Euery Bylder of howſes ought  to come to the Mayor. Alderman, and Chamberlyn, for a ſpecyall lycence for hourde of, by hym to be made in the hygh ſtreate, and noo Bilder to encomber the Streates with any maner of thing, takynge downe for the preparynge of hys newe byldynge, vnder payne of forty ſhyllynges, excepte he make a hourd of. xl. s.
            
               No man ſhall ſet any Cartes in  the ſtreates by nyght tyme, vnder payne of. xii. d. and recompence to ſuch perſons as ſhalbe hurte therby yf any ſuch be. xii. d.
            No bugeman ſhal leade but. ii. horſes. and he ſhal not let them go vnled vnder payne of. ii. s:
            No man ſhall ride or dryue his  carre or carte a trote in the ſtreat, but paciently vnder payne of. ii. s.
            No man ſhal gallope his horſe  in the ſtreate vnder payne of. ii. s.
            No man ſhall ſhote in the ſtreat  for wager or otherwyſe, vnder lyke payne of two ſhyllynges.
            No man ſhall Bowle or caſte any  ſtone in the ſtreate for wager or gayne, or ſuch lyke, vnder payne of two ſhyllynges.
            
               No man ſhall dygge any hole in  the ſtreat for anye matter, excepte he ſtoppe it vp againe, vnder paine of two ſhyllynges, and recōpence to any perſon hurte thereby. ii. s.
            No man ſhall berry any doung  or gounge, within the liberties of thys Citie, vnder payne of. xl. s.
            No Goungfermor ſhall cary any  Ordoure tyll after nine of the clocke in the night vnder payne of thyrtene ſhyllynges foure pence.
            No Goungfermor ſhall ſpil any  Ordour in the ſtreat vnder paine of. xiii. s. iiii. d.
            No man ſhall baite Bull, beare. or Horſe, in the open ſtreate vnder payne of. xx. s.
            No man ſhal haue any kine, gotes,
               
Hogges, Pigges, Hennes, Cockes, Capons, Duckes, in the open ſtreate, vnder payne of forfayture of the ſame.
            No man ſhall mayntayne anye  bytynge Curres, or mad Dogges, in the ſtreates, vnder payne of. ii. ſhillinges, and recompence to euery party hurt therewith. ii. s.
            No Cartes that ſhalbe ſhodde  with Spignayle, that ſhall come vpon the ſtreates of this Citie, vnder payne of. iii. s. iiii. d
            No Cartes vſynge daylye carryage  within the Citie, nor Carre ſhal haue the wheles ſhod wt ani Iron, but bare vnder paine of. 6. 8.
            No man ſhal burne any ſtrawe, Ryſſhes, or other thyng, Lynnyn, or Wollyn, in the Streates, by night or by day, vnder paine of. 3. 4
            
               No man ſhall blowe any horne  in the night▪ within thys Citie, or Whiſtell after the howre of nine of the clocke in the night, vnder pain of impryſonment.
            No man ſhall vſe to go with viſoures, or dyſgyſed by nyghte, vnder lyke payne of impryſonmente.
            Made that nyght walkers and  Euyſdroppers, lyke ponyſhment.
            No Hammar man as a ſmyth, a Pewterer, a Founder, and all Artyfycers, makyng great ſound, ſhall not worke after the howre of nine in the nyghte▪ nor a fore the howre of foure in the Mornynge, vnder payne of. iii. s. iiii. d.
            No man ſhall caſt into the Diches  of this Cytie, or the ſewers of this Citie, without the walles, or

into the Walles, Grates; or Gullyttes of thys Citie, any maner of carryn, ſtynkyng fleſh, rotten fiſh, or any rubbiſhe, dounge, ſand, grauell, wedes, ſtones, or anye other thynge, to ſtoppe the courſe of the ſame, vnder payne of clenſyng of, at his owne coſte and charge. vnder payne of impryſonment.
            No man ſhall make any wyded  rawtes in anye of the towne dythes, or the towne Gullyttes, vnder payne of. xx. s.
            No man ſhall buylde nigh the  walles of thys Cytye, withoute lycence of my Lorde Mayor, Aldermen, and Chamberlen, vnder payne of throwynge downe the ſame, and no licence may be graunted excepte that the Chamberlen freelye at all tymes conuenyent

and nedefull for increaſe and entre, oute goynge, and cleare recourſe.
            No man ſhall goo in the ſtreates  by nyght or by day, with bowe bent or arrowes vnder his gyrdell nor with ſworde vnſcabberd, vnder payne of Impriſonmente, nor with hande gonne, hauynge there with pouder and matche: excepte it be in anye vſuall mayegame or fyght.
            No man ſhall after the howre  of nine in the nyght, kept any rule whereby any ſuch ſoden oute crye be made in the ſtyll of the nyghte, as makyng any affray, or beating his wyfe, or Seruaunt or ſinging or reuylynge in hys houſe, to the dyſturbaunce of hys neyghbours, vnder payne of. iii. s. iii. d.
            
               No man ſhall make any affray  vpon ani officer, which with good demener doth his meſſage by cō
               maundement of my Lord Maior, or any Alderman, or maiſter She ryffes, or Mayſter Chamberlyn, or myſbehaue hym ſelfe in any railynge vpon any Iudge of thys Citie, or there officers, which by commaundement be ſent to bring any breaker of this lawe, and cuſtome to warde, or to dyſtreſſe or ſuche like, vpon payne of Impriſonment of fortye dayes, and forfayture of the dobble penaltie, for the offences aſſeaſſyng, raylyng vpon anye Alderman, or Mayor in hys office is Iudgement of the pyllary, raylynge vpon Mayſter Chamberlyn in hys offyce, forty dayes impriſonmente, beatinge, threatnyng, and raylynge of an offycer is impriſonment, after as the treſpas is.
            
               Memorandum that euery offence  found in this citie, it is accuſtomed that the offycer, or a freman, fyndynge it, whiche is called Primus Inventor, hath halfe the penaltie by the grace of the court.
            Alſo euery freman maye finde  any offence, but he hathe no power to bryng the partye before anye Iudge of thys cytye, wythout an offycer, except the party wil come to his aunſwere by frewyll.
            No man hath power to areſt. attache, or make diſtreſſe of anye goods forfitable, or offēces, except the Conſtable or Sargaunte of the Maſe.
            No Butcher or hys ſeruaunte  ſhall not vſe to dryue any Oxe, or Oxen a trotte in the ſtreates, but peaceably, and yf oxen happen to

be lette go when he is prepared to ſlaughter, the Butcher ſhal forfayt two ſhyllynges, beſydes recompence, yf any perſon be hurt thereby.
            No Butcher ſhall ſkaulde noo  Hogges, but in the commō ſkaulding houſe vpō paine of. vi. s. viii. d
            No Butcher ſhal ſell any Meſyll  Hogge, or vnholeſome fleſhe, vnder payne of. x. li.
            No Butcher ſhall ſell any olde  ſtale Victuall: That is to ſaye, aboue the ſlaughter of thre dayes in the Winter, and two in the Sommer, vnder payne of. x. li.
            None vnſeaſonable Victuall for all maner Vyctualls.
            No Victualler of thys Cytye  ſhall geue any rude or vnſettynge

language, or make any clamor vpon any man or woman, in the open markytte, for chepyng of Victuall, vnder payne of. iii. s. iiii. d.
            No Butcher ſhall caſte the inwardes  of beaſtes into the ſtreates, cleaues of beaſtes feete, bones, hornes of ſhepe, or other ſuch lyke, vnder payne of. ii. s.
            The Poding Carte of the ſhambelles, ſhall not go afore the howre of nine in the nyght, nor after the howre of fiue in the mornyng, vnder payne of, vi. s. viii. d
            No man ſhall caſt anye Vryne  Bolles, or ordure Bolles, into the ſtreates by day or nyght, afore the howre of nine in the night: And alſo he ſhal not caſt it out, but bringe it downe, and laye it in the canell, vnder payne of iii. s. iiij. d. And yf

he do caſt it vpon anye perſonnes head, the party to haue a lawefull recōpence, yf he haue hurt therby.
            No man ſhall hurte, cutte, or  deſtroy anye Pypes, Seſperalles, or wynde Ventes pertaynynge to the Condytte, vnder payne of impryſonment, and makyng ſatiſfaction, thoughe he doth it out of the Citie, yf he maye be taken within the Citie.
            No man within this Citie may  make any Quyll, and breake anye Pype of the Condytte, commynge throughe hys houſe, or nighe hys ground, vnder payne of the Pyllorye, or take any water pryuely vnto hys howſe.
            Caſtynge any corrupte thinge, appoyſonyng the water, is Lourgulary and Felonye.
            
               Whoſoeuer deſtroy or peryſhe  any Cockes of the Condytte, muſt haue Impriſonment, and make ſatyſfaction.
         
         
            ¶ Olde Lawes and Cuſtomes of thys Citie.
            
               NO man ſhall ſet  vp Shoppe, or occupye as a freman afore he be ſworne in the Chamber of London, and admytted by the Chamberlen, vnder payne of.
            No man ſhall ſette ouer his apprentyce  to anye other perſon, but by licence of maiſter Chamberlen, & there to be ſet ouer vnder paine.
            No man whiche is a forreyne  ſhall not bye or ſell within the lyberties of this Citie, with an other

forteine vndēr paine of forfayture of the goodes ſo forteyne boughte and ſolde.
            No Freman ſhalbe diſobedient  for to come at Mayſter Chamberlaynes commaundemente, to anye Sommons, to hym gyuen by any officer of the Chamber, vnder payne of impryſonment.
            Maiſter Chamberlen hath power  to ſende a Freman to warde, ſo that he incontinentlye after ſend to my Lord the cauſe why that he is punyſhed, ſo that my Lord Maior releace him not, but by the Chamberlens aſſent, and yf he be a great commener and diſobedyent to the Chamberlen: Mayſter Chamberlen maye referre it to a courte of Aldermen.
            Maiſter Chamberlen hath aucthoritie 
               
for to ſend or commaunde any apprentice to the counter, for there offences, and yf there offences be greate, as in defyiinge their Myſtris houſes, by vicious liuing, or offending his mayſter by theft, or diſſlaunder, or ſuch like, then to commaunde hym to newegate.
            
               Apprentyce enrowleth▪ hys maiſter payeth. ii. s. vi. d.
               Apprentice ſette ouer he that receyueth. ii. s.
               Apprentyce made free, hym paieth. iiii. s.
               Apprentyce neuer enrollid, and made fre his Maiſter payeth. xiii. s. ii. d.
               A man made fre by his fathers Coppy, payeth. xviii. d.
            
         
         
            A Proclamation made in the tyme of the Mayorraltie of Syr Myhell Dormer knyght.
            
               An Acte of Common Councel, made in the euyn of Saynt Mychaell. Anno Regis, Henrici Octa xii. xxxi. that no perſon ſhoulde ley anye Mares in the Streat, or beyonde the edge of theyr ſtall, vpon payne of forfayture, the firſt tyme. vi. s. viii. d. the ſeconde tyme. xiii. s. iiii. d. and the thyrd tyme the ware ſo layde.
         
         Finis.
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprynted at London in Povvles Churchyarde by Iohn Cawoode, Prynter to the Quenes Maieſtye.
            Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis.
            
         
      
   