
      
         
            
            
            By the Maior of London.
            
               
                  WHERE as a very rich L
                     •••
                  erie generall hath now lately bene
erected by the order of our ioſt dread Soueraigne Lady, the
Queenes moſt excellent Mieſtie, and by hir highneſſe commaundement
ſince publiſh
                  •
                within this hir highneſſe Citie
of London, the .xxiij. daye of Auguſt, in the .ix. yeare of hir
Maieſties moſte proſperois Raigne, together wyth the Prices,
Articles, and Condtions concernyng the ſame, as by
the Charte of the ſayde Lotterie more playnly doth at large
appeare. In whiche Charte among other thyigs it is compriſed, that hir Maieſtie
and hir ſayd Citie of London wil anſwere t
                  •
                all and ſingular perſons, hauyng
aduentured their money in the ſayd Lotterie, to obſerue all the Articles and conditions
conteined in the ſame from poynt to piynt inuiolably.
            Nowe to auoyde certaine doubtes ſince the publication of the ſayde Lotterie, ſecretely
moued concernyng the aunſwering thereof, wherein though the wiſer ſort
may finde cauſe to ſatiſfie them ſelues therin yet to the ſatiſfaction of the ſimpler
ſorte, The Lorde Maior of the ſayde Citie, and his brethren the Aldermen of the
ſayd Citie, by the aſſent of the common Councell of the ſame, doe ſignifie and declare
to all people by this Proclamation, That accordyng to the Articles of hir
Maieſties order conteined in the ſayde Charte ſo publiſhed, euery perſon ſhalbe duly
aunſwered accordyng to the tenour of hir highneſſe ſayde proclamation.
            And it is newly 
                  〈◊〉
                for the advantage of the Aduenturers, that the daye
of the Readyng of the ſayde Lotterie ſhall not be deferred after the .xxv. daye of
Iune mencioned in the ſayde Charte without very greate and vrgent cauſe: and
yet the ſame at the furtheſt, ſhall not be deferred paſt the feaſt of the Purification
of Saincte Marie the virgin, which ſhall be next folowyng, in the yeare of oure
Lorde God. M. D. Lxviij. after the computation of the Church of Englande.
            And that from the day of the ſayd prorogation vntill the very day of the Reading,
the parties hauyng put in their Money to the ſayde Lotterie, ſhall be allowed
for the forbearyng thereof, after the rate of Twelue in the Hundred. &c.
            
               Proclaimed in London the .xiij. day of September, in the forſayd. ix. yeare of hir
Maieſties Raigne.
               
God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            ¶Imprinted at London, by Henrie Bynneman, dwelling in
Pater noſter Rowe, at the Signe of the Marmayde.
Anno. 1567. Septembris. 13.
            
         
      
   