
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  blazon or coat of arms
               
            
            
               ❧An Acte of common Councell.
            
               WHere at a court of common Councell, holden at the Guild-hall
of this Citty of London, on the tenth day of Nouember, in the xxix. yeere of
the raigne of our ſoueraigne Lady the Queenes moſt excellent Maieſty that
now is. Before the right honorable George Bonde Lorde Maior of
the ſaide Citty, and the right worſhipfull the Aldermen his brethren,
and the commons in the ſame common Councell aſſembled. It was amongeſt other
things enacted, eſtabliſhed, and ordered: that from after the viii. day of the
ſame moneth of Nouember, vntill the feaſt of the byrth of our Lord God, whych
ſhalbe in Anno Domini, 1589. in all and euery caſe and cauſes, where the ſeller of any cloath or cloathes whatſoeuer,
Linnen or Wollen, Kerſies, Fryſes, Rugges, Bayes, Cottons, or other cloathes or thinges whatſoeuer,
ſhalbe by vertue of any Actes, cuſtome, vſage or ordinaunces heretofore eſtabliſhed or vſed within the ſayde
Citty. By common Councell or otherwiſe for the payment of any quantity ſumme or ſums of money whatſoeuer
vſuallie payed, or to be payed by any ſeller in the Citty of London, or the liberty, or the Suburbes thereof, for or
by the name of Hallage: That then the buyer of all and euery ſuch Cloath or Cloathes, Linnen or Wollen, Kerſyes,
Fryſes, Rugges, Bayes, Cottons or other Cloathes or thinges whatſoeuer, ſhall by vertue of the ſayd acte
be charged & chargeable to pay like quantity ſumme or ſummes of mony, as hath been, is or ſhalbe vſually payd or
paiable by the ſeller. The ſame to be payed to the hande or handes of ſuch perſon or perſons, as ſhalbe appoynted
from tyme to tyme, by the Lord Maior and courte of Aldermen for the time being, or by the gouernours of
Chriſts Hoſpitall or the more part of them, for the collection of the mony which ſhalbe due and paiable by ſuch ſellers,
to be imployed towards the charges of the buylding of Blackwel Hall. And it was likewiſe enacted yt if any
perſon or perſons, which after ye ſaid xiii. day of this preſent moneth, ſhal buy or cauſe, or procure to be bought any
ſuch cloathes, Lynnen, Kerſyes, Fryſes, Rugges, Bayes, Cottons or other thinges whatſoeuer before expreſſed,
or in true vnderſtanding or meaning intended by this acte. And ſhall not vpon demaunde to him or them, to bee
made by ſuch perſon or perſons, as are or ſhalbe appointed for collection thereof as aforeſayd, before the Saterday
night next after ſuch demaund, pay or cauſe to be payd to the ſame perſon or perſons ſo appoynted, or to bee appoynted,
ſuch quantitie ſumme or ſummes of money as is appointed, meant and truely intended by this Acte.
That then euery perſon which ſhall denie or fayle to pay ſuch quantity ſumme or ſummes of money, ſhall for euerie
penny which he ſhall ſo denie, refuſe, and fayle to pay, forfeite and paie the ſumme of iii. ſhillings iiii. pence, to
be leuied by diſtreſſe of the goods and Cattels of ſuch perſon or perſons, which ſhall ſo denie, refuſe and fayle,
wherſoeuer they ſhalbe foūd by ſuch perſon or perſons, as are or ſhalbe appointed as aforeſayd. And it was then
further enacted by th'authoritie aforeſayd, yt if any cloathes, eyther Linnen or Wollen, Kerſies or other things before expreſſed or intended by this Acte, which ſhalbe brought to thys Citty, ſhalbe harboured or receyued in anie
houſe, Shop, Chamber, or other place within this Cittie out of Blackwell hall, or the place where cloathes ſhalbe
appoynted to be ſolde. That then if ſuch perſon or perſons in whoſe houſe, Shop, Chamber, or place, the ſame
cloathes or other thinges as aforeſayd, ſhalbe ſo harbored or receiued, ſhall not before Saterday night, next after
demaund, pay to the Collectors appointed for yt purpoſe as aforeſayd, or to ſome one of them, all ſuch ſummes
of mony to the vſe aforeſayd, as ſhould haue beeue due for Hallage of the ſame cloathes or other thinges, if the
ſame had beene brought to Blackwell hall and there bought and ſolde: then ſuch perſon or perſons, ſhall forfeite
the ſum of iii. ſhillings iiii pence for euery penny, which ſo ſhould haue beene due. The ſame penalty to be recouered
by action of debt, bill, playnt, or information, commenſed or exhibited, and purſued in the Queenes Maieſties
court holden in the vtter chamber of ye Guild-hall of this Citty, commonly called the Maiors courte, by and in the
name of the Chamberlaine of this Citty, or elſe to be leuied by way of diſtreſſe by ye perſon or perſons, which are or
ſhalbe appoynted as aforeſayd, all which ſummes of mony ſo to be recouered eyther by diſtreſſe or otherwiſe, ouer
and aboue the charges of the ſute, ſhalbe imployed in and about the building of the ſayd Blackwell hall.
            God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            ¶Imprinted at London by Hugh Singleton, Printer for the
Cittie of London. 
            
               
                  printer's or publisher's device
               
            
         
      
   