
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧For the Alderman of the Warde.
            
               
                  ❧Meanes deuiſed for better execution of the Statute
for reliefe of the poore, and redreſsing the diſorders of
perſons vagarant and begging in the Citie of London.
            
            
               THat euery Conſtable or his deputie
alway attending in the pariſh, ſhal continually
from tyme to tyme make it known to the Surueyor
hereafter mentioned in what place ſuch
Conſtable or his deputie ſhall bee vpon any occaſion
ready to be found.
            Item, that the inhabitantes of euery pariſh,
at a veſtrie or aſſembly to be holden euery ſonday,
ſhall euery Sonday wekely, appointe for
the whole ſeuen dayes next followyng, or & for
euery pariſh in his warde, one or mo ſurueyors
for euery day, according to the quantitie of the parſh, the ſame ſurueyors to
be choſen of the honeſt inhabitantes of the pariſh.
            Item, the ſame choiſe of Surueyors ſhall be euery ſonday alſo ſignified
by writing to euery perſon ſo choſen, and alſo to the Conſtable or his deputie,
togither with the day that ſuch ſurueyor is appointed to attend.
            Item, euery ſuch Surueyor ſhall by himſelfe or his Deputie euery ſuch
day for which he is appoynted, attend in ſome conuenient place or places
of the pariſh where he thinketh beſt for that purpoſe, to ſee if any perſones
ſhalbe found vagarant in that pariſh contrary to the ſtatute.
            Item, the Surueyor finding any ſuch perſon vagarant, ſhall forthwit
geue notice therof to the Conſtable or his deputie.
            Item, the Conſtable or his deputie hauing ſuch notice, or himſelfe eſpying
any ſuch perſon vagarant, ſhall apprehend ſuch vagarant, and conuey
the ſame to the next Conſtable, according to the forme of the ſtatute, and ſo
to be conueyed from Conſtable to Conſtable, to ſuch place as they are to be
ſent by the ſtatute.
            Item, that euery Conſtable make his ordinary vewes, and do all other
thinges according to the ſtatute.
            Item, that euery Conſtable with one Churchwarden at the leaſt, & the
bedle attending on them once in euery xiiij. dayes at the leaſt, view all the
houſes of poore perſons in allies and ſuch like, and there ſearch if any new
inmates be receiued, or any new tenantes not able to liue without burdening
the pariſh, or any poore that by the ſtatute are to be ſent to other places,
and therof euery ſecond Saterday at the furtheſt or oftener vpon occaſion,
to giue certificate in writing to the Alderman or his deputie.
            Item, that euery perſon choſen Surueyor, or appointed to any charge

                  •
               y theſe ordinances, and refuſing or failing to do his duetie therin, ſhall be
committed to warde by the Alderman or his deputie.
            Item, that there be conuenient cages for committing of vnruly vagarantes
in euery warde.
            Item, that conuenient order and puniſhment be prouided for ſuch watermen
as ſhall tranſport vagarants from Southwarke, Lambehith, and
ſuch places.
         
      
      
         
            ¶Imprinted at London by Iohn Daye.
         
      
   