
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  blazon or coat of arms
               
               
                  blazon or coat of arms
               
            
            
               ❧By the Major.❧
            
            A Proclamation for the prices of Tallow
and Candles.
            
               THe Lord Maior and Aldermen his Brethren, hauing taken
knowledge of the exceſſiue prices of Tallow & Candles
vttered and ſold within the City of London: and finding
vpon ſearch and ſuruey made of the ſtore of Tallow
and Candles in the hand of the Tallow Chandlers, and
Candlemakers, aſwell Engliſh as Strangers, within
this City and Liberties thereof, that diuers of them not
contented with reaſonable profit, in vttering and ſelling
of Candles and Tallow, haue engroſſed vnduly into
their hands, great quantities both of Tallow and Candles,
thereby to enhance the prices thereof: Inaſmuch as the principall ſale lieth in the hands
of few. For remedy whereof, the Lord Maior and Court of Aldermen, haue conceiued it very
expedient and needfull, to ſet prices according to former preſidents vpon Tallow and Candles
vttered within this City. And therefore do by theſe preſents, ordaine, publiſh, and declare, that
no Butcher or other perſon whatſoeuer, ſhall from henceforth vtter or ſell, or cauſe to be vttered
or ſold within this City or Liberties, any Engliſh Tallow aboue the price of twentie ſixe
ſhillings eight pence the hundred weight. And that no Tallow Chandler, Candlemaker, or
other perſon whatſoeuer, that do, or ſhall make, vtter, or ſell any Candles made of Tallow,
within this City or Liberties thereof, ſhall at any time heereafter, vtter or ſell, or cauſe to be
vttered or ſold, any tallow Candles aboue the prices hereafter mentioned: that is to ſay, good
Cotton Candles for foure pence farthing the pound, and good Weeke Candles for three pence
three farthings the pound, and not at any higher price or prices. And the ſaid Butchers, Tallow
Chandlers, Candlemakers, and ſuch other perſons afore mentioned, are hereby ſtraightly
charged and commanded, to obey and keepe the ſaide rates and prices ſet vpon Tallow and
Candles as aforeſaide, vntill further order to the contrary be taken by the Lord Maior and
Aldermen his Brethren, vpon paine and perill that will fall thereon.
            
               Giuen at the Guild-hall of the Citty of London, this 14. day of September, in the
eighteenth yeare of his Maieſties reigne of England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland the
foure and fiftieth.
                God ſaue the King.
         
      
      
         
            Printed at London by William Iaggard, Printer to the
Honourable City of London, 1620.
         
      
   