
      
         
            
            
               
               ❧ Orders to be vſed in the time of the infection of the Plague within the Citie and Liberties of London, till further charitable prouiſion may be had for places of receite for the viſited with infection.
            
               
                  THat euery Alderman call before him his Deputie, and all the Church-wardens, Conſtables, Pariſh Clarkes, Sextons and Bedles within his Warde, and giue them ſtreight and earneſt charge from time to time to inquire what houſes in euery pariſh and precinct of that Warde be infected. And that euery Conſtable doe bring euery day true, diſtinct, and plaine certificate thereof in writing to the Alderman or his Deputie. And that the AldermanInquire what houſes be infected. Certificate daily to the Alderman. Surueyers of the Pariſh. Sicke dying remoued. or his Deputie from time to time ſend the ſame certificates to the Surueyers of the Pariſhes, to whom it ſhall appertaine, to the intent that they haue vnderſtanding thereby to ſee the orders in that behalfe executed accordingly. And here is to be noted, that euery houſe wherein any ſhall bee ſick of the Plague, is to be iudged and vſed as infected, as wel as where any dyeth thereof. And likewiſe euery houſe from whence any perſon infected ſhall be remooued to any houſe or place, ſhall bee iudged infected, if any eftſoones fall ſicke in the ſame houſe.
            That in euery houſe infected, the Maſter, Miſtreſſe, or gouernour, and theHouſe ſhut xxviii. dayes. whole family and reſidents therein at the time of ſuch infection, ſhall remaine continually without departing out of the ſame, and with the doores and windowes of the hall, ſhop, or other nether part of the houſe ſhut, by the ſpace of xxviii. dayes from the death of the party dying of infection, and vntill the partie ſicke, and not dying thereof, ſhall bee fully recouered, or their ſore fully healed: and ſuch perſon recouering, or healed, to tarry ſhut vp xx. dayes from ſuch recouerie, or full healing. And that during all that time, no clothes, linnen,Sicke xx. daies after recouery. Prouiſion. or other like thing, be hanged out, or ouer into the ſtreete.
            And that none ſo to be ſhut vp, ſhal go abroad out of the ſaid houſe, during the time aboue appointed, but one certaine perſon (and not ſundry at ſundry times) to be appointed by the Surueyers of that Pariſh, for prouiſion of neceſſaries for the ſaid family. Which perſon ſo to be appointed, ſhall during all the time of his, or her being abroad out of ſuch houſe carry in their hand openly, vpright in the plaineſt manner to be ſeene, one red wand of the length of iii. foot at the leaſt,Red wand. to be deliuered to them by the Surueyers at the charge of the Pariſh, without carrying it cloſely, or couering any part of it with their cloke or garment, or otherwiſe: and in their going in the ſtreetes and lanes ſhall alway keepe the way cloſe by the chanell ſide, ſhunning as much as may be, the meeting and vſuall way of other people. And ſhall not in anyWay by the Chanell. Aſſembly. Cage. wiſe come into any throng or preſſe of publike aſſembly, on paine of impriſonment by the ſpace of viii. daies without baile or mainepriſe, in ſome of the Cages next to the houſe ſo infected.
            Prouided alway, that it ſhalbe free to the owner of any houſe ſo infected, and his ſaid family, reſidents, or any of themRemouing. at any time within the ſaid xxviii. dayes, to remoue and depart out of this Citie, and the Liberties thereof, into any other his, or her houſe, or abiding in the Country, or to any houſe in the Citie, without being ſhut vp in ſuch houſe infected,Returning. ſo that euery ſuch perſon ſo remouing, or departing, doe abſtaine from returning into the ſaid Citie, or the Liberties thereof, and from going abroad out of ſuch other houſe in the City, during the ſaid xxviii. daies, and on pain that euery perſon ſo returning, or going abroad within the ſaid xxviii. dayes, ſhall ſuffer impriſonment, as is aforeſaid.
            That the Churchwardens and Conſtable in euery precinct, prouide, and haue in readineſſe, one, or moe ſober diſcreetProuiders. Women. women, as the caſe ſhall require to be prouiders and deliuerers of neceſſaries for the infected houſes, and to attend the perſons ſick and infected, at the charge of ſuch houſeholders of ſuch houſes, if they be able: and if not, then at the chargeCharge. Houſholders or Pariſh. Red wands. of the Pariſh. And that ſuch women once entring into charge of ſuch prouiſion and attendance, ſhall carry red wands, goe by the chanell ſide, and forbeare aſſemblies, as is aforeſaid.
            That ſuch as haue Welles or Pumpes, ſhall cauſe euery morning before vi. of the clocke, and euery euening afterWelles. Pumpes. viii. of the clocke, the ſame to be drawne, and x. buckets of water at the leaſt to be powred to runne downe the Chanell. And that euery morning and euening at the ſaid houres the ſtreets and Chanels be made cleane, and ſwept by ſome oneStreets. of euery houſe againſt the chanel, but ſo as the water be not in any wiſe ſwept out of the chanel to the ſides of the ſtreets nor the ſtones wet but within the chanel, excepted onely ſprinkling for laying of the duſt at the ſweeping. And that the mud and filth of the ſtreetes be at the ſaid houres taked vp, and ſwept together in heapes out▪ of the chanell, and not at any other time of the day. And that it be ſo drawne vp from the chanell, that the water powred downe the chanels may not carry away, or be mingled with ſuch filth.
            That the ſtreetes be made cleane by the Scauenger and Raker euery day, except Sunday.Scauenger. Alderman viſit Wardes.
            
            That the Alderman himſelfe, or his Deputie, doe often viſite the Warde to view whether the ſaid orders bee duely obſerued, ſpecially touching cleaneneſſe of the ſtreetes.
            That ouer the doore of euery houſe infected, in a place notorious and plaine for them that paſſe by to ſee it, the ClarkLord haue mercy vpon 
                     〈◊〉
                  . or Sexton of that Pariſh cauſe to be ſet one Paper printed with theſe words, Lord haue mercy vpon vs, in ſuch large forme as ſhall be appointed. And that the Conſtable of the precinct, and Bedle of the Warde, ſhall daily view & ſee that the ſaid Paper remaine there during the ſaid terme of xxviii. dayes without taking away, blotting or defacing. And if any be taken away, blotted or defaced, that a new be ſet in the place thereof. And if the ſame be taken away, blotted, or

defaced, with the conſent of the inhabitant of that houſe, that then a new ſuch Paper ſhall be ſet in place thereof, and the ſhutting in of ſuch houſe with the inhabitants, ſhall continue xxviii. daies more from ſuch taking away, blotting, or defacing. And whoſoeuer ſhall take away ſuch Paper, ſhall ſuffer ſuch impriſonment as is aforeſaid.
            That in or for euery Pariſh there ſhall be appointed two ſober ancient women, to be ſworne to be viewers of the bodies2. Viewers of bodies dead. 2. Viewers of ſicke. of ſuch as ſhall die in time of infection, and two other to be viewers of ſuch as ſhall be ſicke, and ſuſpected of infection, which women ſhall immediately vpon ſuch their viewes, by vertue of their oath, make true report to the Conſtable of that precinct, where ſuch perſon ſhall die, or be infected, to the intent that true notice may bee giuen both to the Alderman or his Deputie, and to the Clarke of the Pariſh, and from him to the Clarke of the Pariſh Clarkes, that true certificate may be made as hath been vſed. And that euery of the ſaid women, Conſtable, or Clarke, failing in the premiſſes, ſhall ſuffer impriſonment as is aforeſaid. And euery woman ſo ſworne, and for any corruption, or other reſpect falſely reporting, ſhall ſtand vpon the Pillorie, and beare corporall paine by the iudgement of the Lord MaiorPillorie. Red wands. and Court of Aldermen. They at their going abroad to beare red Wands, goe neare the Chanell, and ſhun aſſemblies, as before.
            That euery woman, or other appointed to any ſeruice for the infected, and refuſing, or fayling to do that ſeruice, ſhallPenſion. Hoſpitall. not haue any penſion out of the Hoſpitall or Pariſh.
            That the Lord Maior cauſe publike Proclamation to be made, that no perſon from the ſixth day after ſuch Proclamation,Dogges, &c. ſhall keepe any Dogge, or Bitch, but ſuch as they will keepe within their owne dores, without ſuffering them to go looſe in the ſtreets not led in ſlip or ſtring, nor within their owne doores making howling or other annoyance to their neighbours. And that the common Huntſman ſhall haue ſpeciall charge to kill euery ſuch Dogge or Bitch, as ſhall be found looſe in any ſtreete or lane of this Citie or the Suburbes thereof. And for the killing of euery ſuch Dog or Bitch, and burying the ſame foure foote deepe at the leaſt in the fields, ſhall haue two pence allowed by the hands of the Chamberlayne of the Citie. And if he be remiſſe and negligent, and wittingly ſpare and ſhew fauour in not killing any ſuch Dogge or Bitch, he ſhall loſe his place and ſeruice, and ſuffer impriſonment as is aforeſaid. And if any Dog or Bitch kept within doores ſhal with howling or noyſe be noyous to any neighbour, the Alderman of the Ward vpon complaint ſhall commit the offendor to warde, till order be taken vpon his ſubmiſſion by the Alderman, and ſuch Dog or Bitch killed.
            That no Corps dying of infection ſhall be buried or remaine in any Church in time of common Prayer, Sermon, orCorps dying of infection. Church, Burial Lecture. And that no children bee ſuffered at time of buriall of any Corpes in any Church, Churchyard, or burying place, to come neare the Corps, Coffin or Graue. And that all the Graues ſhall be at the leaſt ſix foot deepe. And that at the buriall dinners, or attendance on the Corps, or other ſolemnitie of any dying of infection, there ſhall be no aſſembly of people in the houſe where ſuch perſon ſhall die, within the time of xxviii. dayes after ſuch death.
            That during the ſaid terme of xxviii. dayes: no perſon be admitted to come into any ſuch houſe infected, other then theReſort to houſes infected. perſons of the ſame family, reſiding therein at the time of the infection, or ſuch as for neceſſary reliefe of the ſame family ſhalbe appointed by the Surueyers, on paine that the houſe ſhall remaine ſhut in, and the ſame with the family be in all things vſed as infected, for other xxviii. dayes, from the time of ſuffering any other ſo to come into the ſame.
            That diligent care be had for amending of the pauements where any holes be wherein any water or filth may ſtandPauements. to increaſe corruption and infection.
            That whoſoeuer ſhall go abroad with a ſore running, ſhalbe impriſoned in the Cage for xxviii. dayes, & further grieuouſlyGoe abroad with ſore. puniſhed by corporall paine, by the iudgement of the Lord Maior and Court of Aldermen.
            That no dunghils out of ſtables, brewhouſes, or other places be ſuffered to be made in the ſtreet, or other open placeDunghils. of this Citie or the Suburbes thereof, on paine of impriſonment of the offenders, till the ſame at the offenders charge be remoued, and the offenders bound to the Chamberlaine of this Citie, neuer to commit the like offence againe.
            That reſtraint be made of Enterludes or Playes, aſſemblies of Fencers, or other prophane ſpectacles, and of goingEnterludes, Playes, &c. with Drummes, Proclamations, or calling of people to the ſame within this Citie and liberties thereof. And humble ſute be made to the moſt Honourable Counſell, that the like reſtraint be in places of other Counties adioyning to the ſaid Citie.
            That in euery Pariſh there be appointed two ſubſtantiall and diſcreet Citizens, or moe as need ſhall require, to beSurueyer, Clerkes, Sextons, Beadles ſworne. choſen monethly by the Alderman of the Ward, to be Surueyers, which Surueyers ſhall daily and diligently ſee the orders to be obſerued, as is aboue ſaid, and the Surueyers, Clarkes, Sextons, and Bedles, ſhall be ſworne before the Alderman to doe their diligence faithfully therein. And if any ſuch perſon ſo appointed, ſhall refuſe or faile to take his oth, or being ſworne, ſhall neglect his duty therein, that forthwith the Alderman commit ſuch perſon to Ward, there to remaine, vntill he be diſcharged from thence by the Court of the Lord Maior and Aldermen.
            That order be taken and treatie had with the Colledge of Phiſicions, that ſome certaine and conuenient number ofPhiſiſians. Phiſicions and Surgeons be appointed and notified to attend for the counſell and cure of perſons infected, and none to deale with the infected but thoſe: and the ſame to deale with no other patients but the infected, during the time of infection. And for their counſell and trauell to be recompenſed by and for the perſons of hability at their owne charge: and for the poore at the charge of the Pariſh.
            That whoſoeuer ſhall by any ſubtilty or inuention defraud the good intent of any of theſe orders, ſhall receiue doubleDefraud Order. as much puniſhment as he that openly or plainely offendeth.
            That the houſholders of houſes infected, be charged to aire the houſes and things therein within the ſaid xxviii.Ayring houſes, clothes. dayes, and that no clothes or other things about the perſons infected be giuen or ſold, but either deſtroyed, or well and ſufficiently purified. On paine of puniſhment by diſcretion of the Lord Maior and Aldermen.
            God ſaue the King.
         
      
      
         
            Printed at London by Iſaac Iaggard, Printer to the Honourable City of London, 1625.
         
      
   