
      
         
            
            Orders conceiued and agreed to be published, by
the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the Citie of London,
and the Iuſtices of Peace of the Counties of Middleſex and Surrey, by
direction from the Lords of his Maieſties moſt Honourable
priuie COVNCELL.
            
               WHereas in the firſt yeare of his Maieſties moſt happy raigne ouer
this Realme of England, an Acte was made, for the charitable reliefe,
and ordering of perſons Infected with the Plague: whereby
Authority is giuen to Iuſtices of Peace, Mayors, Bayliffes, and other
head Officers, to appoint within their ſeuerall Limittes Examiners,
Searchers, Watchmen, Keepers, and Buriers for the perſons
and places infected, and to miniſter vnto them Oathes for performance
of their Offices. And the ſame Statute alſo authorizeth
the giuing of other Directions, as vnto them for the preſent neceſſity, ſhall ſeeme good in their
diſcretions. It is therefore vpon ſpeciall conſideration thought very expedient, for the preuenting
and auoyding of the infection of Sickenes (if it ſhall pleaſe Almightie God) which is now
dangerouſly diſperſed into many places within the Citie and Suburbs of the ſame: that theſe
Officers following be appointed, and theſe Orders hereafter preſcribed be duly obſerued.
            FIrſt it is thought requiſite and ſo ordered,Examiners be appointed in euery Pariſh. that in euery Pariſh there be one, two or more
perſons of good ſorte and credite, choſen and appointed by the Alderman his Deputy, and
Common Counceil of euery Ward, and by the Iuſtices of Peace in the Counties, by the
name of Examiners, to continue in that Office the ſpace of two moneths at leaſt: and if any fit
perſons, ſo appointed as aforeſaid, ſhall refuſe to vndertake the ſame, the ſaid parties ſo refuſing,
to be committed to Priſon vntill they ſhall conforme themſelues accordingly.
            THat theſe Examiners be ſworne by the Alderman,The Examiners Office. or by one of the Iuſtices of the Countie,
to enquire and learne from time to time what houſes in euery Pariſh be viſited, and
what perſons be ſicke, and of what diſeaſes, as neere as they can informe themſelues
and vpon doubt in that caſe, to command reſtraint of acceſſe, vntill it appeare what the diſeaſe
ſhall proue: and if they find any perſons ſicke of the infection, to giue order to the Conſtable,
that the houſe be ſhut vp: and if the Conſtable ſhall be found remiſſe or negligent, to giue preſent
notice thereof to the Alderman, or the Iuſtice of Peace reſpectiuely.
            THat to euery infected houſe there be appointed two Watchmen,Watchmen. one for the day and the other
for the night: and that theſe Watchmen haue a ſpeciall care that no perſon goe in or
out of ſuch infected houſes, whereof they haue the charge, vpon paine of ſeuere punishment.
And the ſaid Watchmen to doe ſuch further Offices as the ſicke houſe ſhall neede and
require: and if the Watchman be ſent vpon any buſines, to locke vp the houſe and take the key
with him: and the Watchman by day to attend vntill tenne of the clocke at night: and the
watchman by night till ſixe in the morning.
            
               
               
                  〈1 page missing〉
               
company the Coarſe to Church, or to enter the houſe Viſited, vpon paine of hauing his houſe
ſhut vp or be impriſoned.
            THat no Clothes,No infected ſtuffe to bee vttered. Stuffe, Bedding or Garments be ſuffered to be carried or conuayed out
of any infected houſes, and that the Cryers and carriers abroad of Bedding or olde Apparell,
to be Solde or Pawned, be vtterly prohibited and reſtrained: and no Brokers of
Bedding, or olde Apparell bee permitted to make any outward Show, or hang forth on their
Stalles, Shop-boards or Windowes, towards any Streete, Lane, common Way or Paſſage,
any olde Bedding or Apparell to be ſolde, vpon paine of Impriſonment: and if any Broker or
other perſon ſhall buy any Bedding, Apparell or other Stuffe out of any infected houſe, within
two moneths after the infection hath beene there, his houſe ſhall be ſhut vp as infected, and
ſo ſhall continue ſhut vp twenty daies at the leaſt.
            IF any perſon viſited doe fortuue, by negligent looking vnto, or by any other meanes, to come
or be conuayed from a place infected, to any other place, the Pariſh from whence ſuch partie
hath come, or beene conuaied, vpon notice thereof giuen, ſhall at their charge cauſe the ſaide
party ſo viſited and eſcaped, to be carried and brought backe againe by night, and the parties in
this caſe offending, to bee puniſhed at the direction of the Alderman of the Warde, and the Iuſtices
of the Peace reſpectiuely: and the houſe of the receiuer of ſuch viſited perſon, to be ſhutte
vp for twenty daies.
            THat euery houſe viſited be marked with a red Croſſe of a foote long,Euery viſited houſe to be marked. in the middle of the
Doore, euident to be ſeene, and with theſe vſuall printed wordes: that is to ſay, Lord haue
mercy vpon vs to be ſet cloſe ouer the ſame Croſſe, there to continue vntill lawfull opening of
the ſame houſe.
            THat the Conſtables ſee euery houſe ſhut vp, and to bee attended with Watchmen, which
may keepe them in,Euery viſited houſe to bee watched. and miniſter neceſſaries vnto them at their owne charges (if they be
able) or at the common charge if they be vnable: the ſhutting vp to be for the ſpace of foure
Weekes after all be whole.
            That preciſe order be taken that the Searchers, Chirurgions, Keepers and Buriers are
not to paſſe the Streetes without holding a redde Rodde or Wand of three foote in length, in
their hands, open and euident to bee ſeene, and are not to goe into any other houſe then into
their owne, or into that whereunto they are directed or ſent for, but to forbeare and abſtaine
from company, eſpecially when they haue beene lately vſed in any ſuch buſines or attendance.
            And to this end it is ordered, that a Weekely Taxe be made in euery Pariſh viſited, if in the
Citie or Borough then vnder the hand of the Alderman of the Warde, where the place is viſited:
if neither of the Counties, then vnder the hands of ſome of the Iuſtices next to the place
viſited, who, if there be cauſe, may extend the Taxe into other Pariſhes alſo, and may giue warrant
of diſtreſſe againſt them which ſhall refuſe to pay: and for want of diſtreſſe or for aſſiſtance,
to commit the offenders to Priſon, according to the Statute in that behalfe.
            
               
                  ❧ Orders for clenſing and keeping ſweete of the Stteetes.
               FIrſt it is thought very neceſſary and ſo ordered,The ſtreets to bee kept cleane. that euery Houſe-holder doe cauſe the
Streete to be daily Pared before his Doore, and ſo to keepe it cleane Swept all the Weeke
long.
               THat the Sweeping and Filth of houſes to be daily carried away by the Rakers,That the Rakers take it from out the houſes. and that
the Raker ſhall giue notice of his comming by the blowing of a Horne, as heretofore hath
beene done.
               THat the Laieſtals be remoued as farre as may be out of the Citie,Laieſtals to be made farre off from the Citie. and common Paſſages,
and that no Night-man or other be ſuffered to emptie a Vault into any Garden, neere about
the Citie.
               
                  
THat eſpeciall care be taker,Care to be had of vnwholſome Fiſh or Fleſh, and of muſty Corne. that no ſtinking Fiſh or vnwholſome Fleſh, or muſtie Corne
or other corrupt fruits, of what ſort ſoeuer be ſuffered to bee ſolde about the Citie or any
part of the ſame.
               That the Bruers and Tipling houſes be looked vnto, for muſty and vnwholſome Caſke.
               That order be taken that no Hogges, Dogges or Cattes, or tame Pigeons, or Conies be ſuffred
to be kept within any parte of the Citie, or any Swine to be or ſtray in the Streets or Lanes,
but that ſuch Swine be Impounded by the Beadle, or any other Officer, and the owner puniſhed
according to the Acte of common Councell, and that the Dogges be killed by the Dog-killers,
appointed for that purpoſe.
            
            
               
                  ❧ Orders concerning looſe Perſons and idle Aſſemblies.
               FOraſmuch as nothing is more complained on then the multitude of Roagues and Wandering
Beggers,Beggers. that ſwarme in euery place about the Citie, being a great cauſe of the ſpreading
of the infection, and will not be auoyded, notwithſtanding any order that hath beene
giuen to the Contrary: It is therefore now ordered, that ſuch Conſtables and others, whome
this matter may any way concerne, doe take ſpeciall care, that no wandring Begger be ſuffered
in the Streetes of this Citie, in any faſhion or manner whatſoeuer, vpon paine of the penaltie
prouided by the law, to be duly and ſeuerely executed vpon them.
               THat all Plaies,Plaies. Bearebaitings, Games, Singing of Ballads, Buckler-play, or ſuch like
cauſes of Aſſemblies of people, be vtterly prohibited, and the parties offending, ſeuerely
puniſhed, by any Alderman or Iuſtice of the Peace.
               THat diſorderly tippling in Tauernes,Tipling houſes. Alehouſes and Sellers, be ſeuerely looked vnto, as
the common ſinne of this time, and greateſt occaſion of diſperſing the Plague: and where
any ſhall be found to offend, the penalty of the Statute to bee laide vpon them with all
ſeueritie.
               And for the better execution of theſe orders, as alſo for ſuch other directions as ſhal be needfull,
It is agreed that the Iuſtices of the Citie and the Counties adioyning doe meete together
once in tenne dayes, eyther at the Seſſions houſe without Newgate, or ſome other conuenient
place, to conferre of things as ſhall be needfull in this behalfe.
               And euery perſon neglecting the duety required, or willingly offending againſt any Article
or clauſe, contained in theſe Orders, he to be ſeuerely puniſhed by impriſonment, or otherwiſe,
as by law he ought.
               God ſaue the King.
            
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London by Iohn VVindet, Printer
to the honourable Citie of London.
         
      
   