
      
         
            
            
            Wolſtan Dixey Maior.
            
            
               
                  The Abridgement of an Acte of Common counſel paſſed at the Guildehal
                   in London the ſeconde day of July 1586. in the xxviij. yere of the raigne of our ſoueraigne Lady Elizabeth, by the grace of God Queene of England France & Ireland, defender of the faith &c. And there at the ſame time eſtabliſhed for a law, for the better ſeruice of hir Maieſtie in hir cariage belonging to hir highneſſe houſholde, and for the better gouernement of Cartes, Carters, Carres and Carre men, and the gouernement thereof by the authoritie of the ſame Act committed to the Gouernours of Chriſtes Hoſpitall.
               The ſame Acte is to take place from the xv. day of the ſaide moneth of July.
            
            
               THe gouernement of Cartes, Carters, Carres and Carremen, committed to the Gouernors of Chriſts hoſpital.
            2 The Quéenes Maieſties Purueyors are to be aſſociate with the ſayde Gouernours in all matters concerning the Queenes ſeruice.
            3 No man dwelling within the Citie of

               London or the liberties therof, ſhall haue the vſe of a long Carte, Carre, or any maner of Carte, except he be allowed and marked by the ſame Gouernours, vpon paine of forfeyture of xv. ſhillings for euerie time he ſhall occupie any ſuch long Carte.
            4 All Cartes and Carres which ſhall be allowed and marked by the Gouernours, ſhall be of the ſtandarde or ſkantling hereafter following, viz. Euerie long Carte ſhall containe in length betwéene the Tugge hole and the Eare breadth behinde xiiij. foote of aſſiſe, and in breadth betwéene the Raues in the bodie of the Carte iiij. foote of aſſiſe, and euerie Carre ſhall containe in length betweene the Tugge hole and the Eare breadth xij. foote and iiij. ynches, and in breadth betweene the Raues in the bodie of the Carre iij. foote and vij. ynches of aſſiſe.
            5 No Carters ſhall take vp cariage in London, but ſuch as dwell within the Citie and liberties, except it be at Sturbridge faire time, Midſommer faire time, and S. Iames faire time, and except the Carters and Cariers of ſuch Cities, Townes and places, as doe wéekely bring cariage to London, the Cariers of which Cities, Townes and places are by this Acte lycenſed to take vp cariage

to lade themſelues backe againe.
            6 That none ſhal take more cariage than he is able to carie in his Carte at one iourney, vpon paine of forfeiture of xx. ſhillinges for euerie ſuch offence.
            7 That none ſhall ingroſſe cariage and ſende it out of London to meete with other Cariers by the way to take it at their hands. And that no Carreman ſhall bring cariage to ſuch Cariers lodging, vpon paine to forfeit for the firſt offence xx. ſhillings, for the ſecond xl. ſhillings, & for the third offence to be ſecluded from vſing a Carte or Carre in or about London. It is prouided in this Artide that a Carren: an may carie to any Carters iodging, reſorting within a mile of London, as much cariage as the ſaide Carter brought to London, or as much as the ſaide Carter or Carier can carie away in that Journey.
            8 All Cartes in London and all Carters reſorting to London, ſhall ſerue the Quéene foure turnes in the yeare in her cariage béeing thereto appointed, vpon paine of forfeyture of xx. ſhillings for euerie time refuſing or not ſeruing beeing appointed or warned.
            9 That no Oxe Waines ſhall be charged with cariage of her Maieſties ſtuffe, or other

cariage whatſoeuer.
            10 There ſhall be a booke kept of all the names of them that dwell in London and the Liberties that are charged with long Cartes, by which booke the ſaide Gouernours and the Yeoman Purueyor ſhall limit and apportion the turnes and courſes of ſeruice of the long Cartes in ſome certaine order, which order béeing knowen, euery one may prepare himſelfe for to goe his turne againſt the courſe ſhall come to him by the ſaide order.
            11 No man ſhall kéepe a great Woodwharfe, except he kéepe a Long Carte and ſeruiceable Horſes and furniture thereto belonging▪ vpon paine of forfeyture of all the wood which ſhall be taken vp vpon his Wharfe, or xx. ſhillings for euerie loade, and that no Woodmonger ſhall hyre any other mans Carte or Carre than his owne for cariage of his woode.
            12 Euerie two pettie Wharfes to kéepe betweene them a long Carte.
            13 Euerie Brickeman, Sandeman, Loameman, and euerie owner of the Placarde Cartes ſhall ſerue the Queene foure times in the yeare with a Long Carte, vpon paine of forfeiture of xx. ſhillings for

euerie default.
            14 He that hath two long Cartes ſhall ſerue the Quéene his double turne vpon the like penaltie.
            15 None ſhal lay down his long Cart, except he giue thrée moneths warning in writing to the Gouernours at a Court by them holden, vpon paine of forfeyture of xl▪ ſhillings.
            16 The Gouernours and Purueyors ſhall elect the Officers called the Cart takers.
            17 The Carte takers ſhall from time to time report to the Gouernours who ſerued his turne laſt, that it may appeare to the Gouernours where the courſe of ſeruice lyeth, and howe it is kept vpon paine of forfeyture of vi. ſhillinges viij. pence by the ſaide Carte takers.
            18 The Carters ſhall bring backe their emptie Caſkes to the place where they ſhall be appointed, and ſhall not kéepe the caſke in their cuſtodie aboue one night, vpon paine of forfeyture of iiij. ſhilllings for euerie of the Caſke.
            19 That all Waynes, Cartes & Carres ſhall pay quarteridge quarterly, viz. euerie quarter xij. pence.
            
            20 That all Carremen which haue the vſe of a Carre or Carres ſhall ſerue one turne with a long Carte, vpon paine of forfeyture of xx. ſhillings.
            21 That no Carremen ſhall put aboue one Horſe in his Carte at one time, vpon paine to forfeite ij. ſhillings vj. pence for euerie offence.
            22 That the Carremen in London ſhall ſupplie all kinde of cariage for her Maieſties ſeruice, whileſt ſhe is reſident at White Hall, S. Iames, or Sommerſet houſe, or elſewhere in the Citie or Suburbes.
            23 The Countrey Cartes to be warned to ſerue when the Cartes of London & ſuch as reſorte to London to ſerue haue ſerued their foure ſeuerall turnes.
            24 Euerie long Cart ſhall haue a Carre roume.
            25 He that kéepeth two long Carts ſhall haue two Carre roomes.
            26 The Raker of euerie Warde ſhall haue a Carre roome.
            27 The Chamber of London ſhall haue two Carre roomes.
            28 That no Wharfe kéeper ſhal denie or diſturbe any Carreman to come vpon their Wharfe, Hyue or Docke for cariage, paying

ſuch duetie as is due to the place, vpon paine of forfeyture of vi. ſhillings viij. pence.
            29 That no Carreman ſhall ſet ouer or lende his Carre without licence of the Gouernours, vpon paine of forfeiture of vj. ſhillings viij. pence.
            30 That the braſen roomes ſhall not be ſet ouer without licence vpon the like penaltie.
            31 That no Carremans ſeruaunt goe with a Carre before he be allowed and preſented to the Gouernours, vpon paine of forfeiture of ij. ſhillings vj. pence for euerie day that he ſhall goe with the Carre.
            32 That no Carreman ſhall ſet ouer his ſeruant without licence, vpon paine of forfeiture of vj. ſhillings viij. pence for euerie ſuch offence.
            33 That all Forrainers to whom Carre roomes be admitted, ſhall goe with their Carres in their owne perſons, except they be lame, or doe ſeruice to the Quéene with a long Cart, vpon paine of forfeyture for the firſt offence v. ſhillinges, for the ſeconde offence x. ſhillings, and for the third to be ſecluded from the vſe of a Carre.
            34 That no Cart or Carre ſhall ſtand in the ſtréet by night, vpō paine of forfeiture for

euerie ſuch offence xij. pence.
            35 There ſhall not ſtande in the ſtréete aboue the number of Carres hereafter mentioned, viz. At or néere the litle Conduite in Cheape at all times foure Carres. At or néere Friday ſtréete ende in Cheape when market is doone thrée Carres. At or neare Bred ſtréete ende when market is doone thrée Carres. At or neare the great Conduite in Cheapeſide when market is doone tenne Carres, and in the market time at or neare that place foure Carres. At the Stockes neare Cheapeſide at all times two Cars. On the weſt ſide the Conduit in Corne hill next to Cheapeſide when the Exchange is doone thrée Carres. On the other ſide the ſame Conduit towards Burchen Lane ende when the exchange is doone foure Carres. At Burchen Lane ende thrée Carres. At or neare Leaden Hall in the market time ſixe Carres, and when market is doone twelue Carres. At Lymeſtréete ende at all times thrée Carres. At the pumpe at Aldegate at all times two Carres. In Fanchurch ſtréete neare Fanchurch at all times thrée Carres. At Grace Church when market is doone foure Carres. Betwéene the Conduit at Grace Church & Eaſtcheape at all times

two Carres. At the backe gate at Leaden Hall at all times thrée Carres. At or neare the Cardinall Hat without Newgate thrée Carres. In Newgate market when market is doone three Carres, vpon paine to forfeit for the firſt offence xij. pence, and for euerie other offence Impriſonment at the pleaſure of the Lorde Maior for the time beeing.
            36 That no Carreman ſhall run his Horſe a trotte in the ſtréete, vpon paine of forfeyture of two ſhillings for euerie ſuch offence.
            37 That euerie Carreman ſhal leade his horſe by the head, vpon paine to forfeite xij. pence or his Horſe collor.
            38 That no Cartes or Carres that are occupied in this Citie, ſhall be ſhodde with yron, vpon paine of forfeiture of vj. ſhillings viij. pence by the Owner for euerie day ſuch a Cart is ſo occupied.
            39 That no Cart or Carre ſhall pipe or creake in the ſtréete for want of greaſing, vpon paine of forfeiture of ij. ſhillings for euerie day it is hard ſo creaking.
            40 That al Carmen reſort to the Gouernours vpon lawfull ſummons, vpon paine of forfeyture for the firſt offence xij. pence, and

for the ſecond ij. ſhillings, without a reaſonable let or excuſe.
            41 A generall ſuruey of all Cartes, Carters and Carremen, and a generall ſeale of all Cartes and Carres ſhall be had once a yere, at which time ſhal be preſent one of her Maieſties purueyors.
            42 As often as any contention or quarrell ſhall ariſe by reaſon of the méeting and contrarie courſe of Cartes, Drayes or Cars, that ſuch Carter, Carreman or Drayman as ſhall bée found wilfull  and will not doe his indeuour to cleare the paſſage, ſhall be taken by the next Conſtable to the place next adioyning, and ſhall be brought and committed to one of the Counters, and there ſhall remaine vntill the Lorde Maior for the time being ſhall ſée good to diſcharge him. And if ſuch offence be giuen and committed by any Carreman allowed by the ſaide Gouernours, that he ſhall not onely receiue impriſonment for ſuch his diſorder, but ſhall haue his Carre taken vp, and not for to vſe it for the ſpace of one moneth then next following.
            43 That the Preſident, Treaſurer, and any two Gouernours, or the Treaſurer and any thrée Gouernours may execute any ordinance

in this booke, except ſuch ordinances which doe ſpecially concerne the Quéenes ſeruice, to which one of the Purueyors is to be preſent.
            44 That all fines, penalties and profites ariſing out of this gouernement, ſhall goe to the vſe of the Children of Chriſtes Hoſpitall.
            45 Remedie by the way of diſtreſſe for the leuying of the paines, forfeitures and dueties riſing out of this gouernement.
            46 The diſtreſſe to be redéemed within ten dayes, or elſe to be ſolde.
            God ſaue Queene Elizabeth.
         
      
   