
      
         
            
            To the moſt Honorable Aſſembly of the Commons houſe of Parliament.
            The humble Petition of the Artizan Cloth-workers of the Citie of London.
            Moſt humbly ſhewing,
            THat in the times of his Maieſties moſt noble Progenitors, Kings and Queenes
of England, the State haue from time to time had an eſpeciall care for the imployment
and ſetting on worke of the ſaid Artizans, and thereupon haue made diuers
good prouiſions for their reliefe. Notwithſtanding which, the Petitioners do not
at this preſent enioy or reape any or very ſmall benefit by thoſe former prouiſions,
but by reaſon of their multitude and their great charge of children (being in London
and the Liberties thereof 12000 perſons & vpwards) ſome of them are enforced for
want of worke to betake themſelues to labour in the Citie as Porters, Waterbearers,
and in other ſuch like meane callings; others to returne home into their Countries,
and there to be either chargeable to their friends, or to follow husbandry and dayly
labour; others to depart the Realme to diuers remote parts in the world, where the
ſecrets of their Art are diſcloſed, to the preiudice of thoſe Artizans that remaine at
home; and others for lacke of imployment are fallen to idleneſſe and begging, and
betake themſelues to other euill courſes, to the great ſcandall of the gouernment of
this Commonwealth. And if the Petitioners ſhould not in ſome meaſure get worke
from the Drapers of London, they might for the moſt part of them periſh for want
of food.
            That diuers complaints haue bin made as well to his Maieſtie and to the Lords of
his Highneſſe moſt honorable priuie Councell, as to the Lord Maior and Aldermen
of London, for ſome courſe to be taken for their reliefe and imployment, who haue
ſhewed a great deſire and willingneſſe to relieue them, and taken much paines to
effect the ſame.
            That the Lord Maior, Aldermen and Common Councell in London, taking into
conſideration that one principall cauſe of the miſery of the Petitioners, was their retaining
of exceſſiue number of Apprentiſes, and the too ſpeedy ſetting vp of Iourneymen:
wherefore at a Common Councell holden 24. Septembris, 16. Iacobi Regis,
an Act of Common Councell was made, containing diuers wholeſome prouiſions
for the remedy thereof, which doth not produce that good effect which was expected,
by reaſon that diuers obſtinate perſons will not conforme themſelues thereunto,
vnleſſe the ſame be confirmed by authoritie of Parliament.
            The Petitioners do further ſhew, that of late time a great number of the petitioners
and their families were relieued by the rowing and ſhearing of Fuſtians made
within his Maieſties Dominions; but now by reaſon of the tranſportation of great
quantities of Fuſtians vnrowed and vnſhorne, the miſery of the Petitioners is increaſed,
and they are thereby depriued of a great part of their maintenance.
            That the Petitioners haue exhibited a Bill in this preſent Parliament, as well for
confirmation of the ſaid Act of Common Councell, as alſo for the redreſſe of ſundry
other inconueniences; The which Bill they do moſt humbly pray may be enacted
and eſtabliſhed by this moſt honorable Aſſembly, to the reliefe of ſo many thouſands
that depend vpon the welfare of the Petitioners.
         
      
   