
      
         
            
               
               A. 18. Iacobi Regis. 1620.
                The briefe Contents of the Bill exhibited against Logwood, and abuſes in dying.
            1 THis Bill vtterly prohibiteth, not onely the importation into this Realme of all Logwood alias Blockwood, Saint Martins wood, and Campecha wood, and all mixtures to dye withall, thereof or therewith made; but alſo the buying, ſelling, vſing, dying with, occupying and keeping the ſame: vpon paine of forfeiture of 40 pounds, whereof a third part to the King, another third to the poore of the Pariſh, and another third to the Informer; beſides ſuch corporall puniſhment as by the Statute of 39. Eliz. is to bee inflicted on ſuch as vſe Logwood in dying,
                  Penalty. 
                
               viz. To bee ſet on the Pillory all the market time, one or more dayes, at the diſcretion of the Magiſtrate.
            
            
               Reaſons.
               
                  1 The former Lawes extend not to the prohibition of the importation, and Logwood being licenced to be imported, Dyers will ſecretly get and vſe the ſame, which cannot bee preuented, vnleſſe the importation be vtterly prohibited.
                  2 Theſe woods are all of one or like deceitfull nature and qualitie, yet of different names, deuiſed to defeate the Lawes, which extend only to Logwood alias Blockwood.
                  3 Notwithſtanding all the Art and cunning that can be vſed in the mixture of theſe woods, yet the colours therewith all dyed, are very falſe and deceitfull.
                  4 By the prohibition of the importation of theſe woods, his Maieſties Cuſtomes will exceedingly increaſe: for by the booke of Rates no Cuſtome is paid for Logwood (the King not tollerating the importation) and euery Tunne of theſe woods ſpent in dying, ſaueth the ſpending of ten Tunnes of woad, or the value of ſo much in Indico, for which Cuſtome is paid, ſo that it is manifeſt, that by the licence granted for importation of fiftie Tunne of Logwood yearly (if vnder colour thereof no more be brought in, as it is to be doubted the contrary) yet the King loſeth yearly the benefit of the Cuſtome of 500. Tunnes of woad, or of the value thereof in Indico.
                  5 By the vſe of theſe woods the Subiect is deceiued, the art of dying both at home and abroad much ſcandalized, and the ancient Trade of clothing in this Realme greatly decayed.
               
            
            2 This Bill authoriſeth all perſons by warrant of the Major or head Officer of any Citie or Towne corporate, or of two Iuſtices of peace of the Countie, to ſearch in all ſuſpected places for the ſaid woods and ſtuffe to die withall, and finding the ſame, to ſeize and deliuer to the ſaid Majors, &c. who are to cauſe the ſame to be ſpeedily burned.
            
               Reaſons.
               
                  1 Vnleſſe they bee ſo authoriſed, they cannot finde where the ſame woods ſhall be hidden.
                  2 Vnleſſe the woods may be ſpeedily burned, the keeping of them may proue very hurtfull.
               
            
            3 This Bill authoriſeth any perſon by like warrant, to ſearch for Clothes deceitfully dyed.
            
               Reaſons. Which being found, the puniſhment for the ſame is prouided by former Statutes.
            4 This Bill authoriſeth the Wardens of the company of Diers in London, to make the like ſearch in all places in London and the Liberties, and within three miles thereof.
            
               Reaſons. Otherwiſe many Dyers in thoſe places, not free of the Company of Dyers, will not permit ſuch ſearch to be made.
            5 This Bill forbiddeth all perſons vſing dying in London and the Liberties, or within three miles thereof, to woad any Clothes or Stuffes of a lighter or leſſer woad then the ſtalls or ſamples ſhalbe of, which ſhalbe deliuered to them by order of the Wardens & Aſſiſtants of the company of Dyers in London, 
                  Penalty. 
                on paine to forfeit fiue pounds for euery peece of broadcloth, & fiftie ſhillings for euery peece of other cloth or ſtuffe ſo inſufficiently woaded, which forfeitures, as aforeſaid, are to the King, to the Poore, and to the Informer.
            
               Reaſons. The Free-men of the Company of Dyers in London, are by their Ordinances ſtrictly bound to obſerue this good order; but many perſons in thoſe places vſing dying, ſome free of other companies, and ſome ſtrangers, not being bound to performe this order, doe daily commit many notable deceits to the abuſe of the Subiect, and ſcandall of the Art or myſterie of Dying.
            6 This Bill appointeth the Wardens and Aſſiſtants of the company of Dyers in London, within ten dayes after Midſommer, yearely to nominate, at the leaſt foure perſons expert in dying, which ſhall bee Searchers for woaded colours, which Searchers are to be ſworne before the Lord Major and Aldermen in London, for the due execution of their office: and the Wardens and comminalty of Dyers, 
                  Penalty. 
                for neglect of ſuch yearly nomination to forfeit twenty pounds to the King and Informer.
            
               Reaſons. This Company beſt knowing who are moſt expert in that Art, are fitteſt to haue the nomination of the ſaid Searchers.
            7 This Bill authoriſeth the ſaid Searchers ſo named, and ſworn to ſearch in al places within the limits aforeſaid, where dying is vſed, all clothes and ſtuffes woaded before they ſhall bee turned out of the woad into other colours, and ſhall ſeale ſuch clothes and ſtuffes which they ſhall find well and truely woaded with ſeales of lead, ſtamped with ſuch ſeuerall ſtamps for ſeuerall colours, as are prouided for that purpoſe by the Wardens of the companie of Dyers: and ſuch clothes and ſtuffes which the Searchers ſhall find or ſuſpect to bee inſufficiently woaded, to bring the ſame to the Dyers Hall in London, there by a court of Aſſiſtants to be adiudged whether the ſame ſhalbe ſufficiently woaded or not, and then to be redeliuered to the Dyer from whom the ſame was taken.
            
               Reaſons.
               
                  1 By ſight of the clothes and ſtuffes in the woad, expert pe
                        •
                     ſons may the better diſcerne whether they are ſufficiently woaded for th
                        •
                      
                     
                        ••
                     lours appointed for them, or not.
                  2 The like ſeale is appointed by diuers Statutes for diuers things, to the end that the Subiect might not be deceiued.
                  3 The Free-men of the Companie of Dyers vſing dying, haue many yeares paſt obſerued this good order, which for preuention of deceit is alſo neceſſarie to bee done by all others vſing dying, though not free of their Companie.
                  4 Sometimes the deceit may bee ſo much ſhadowed by Art that the Searchers may bee doubtfull thereof, in which caſes the triall thereof cannot more eaſily be made then by a court of Aſſiſtants of that Companie.
               
            
            8 This Bill impoſeth a forfeiture of 20 pounds to the King and Informer, vpon euery perſon which ſhal not ſuffer ſearch to be made, according to the tenor of this Act.
            
               Reaſons.Diuers preſentiments there are of the like, as 3. Ed. 6. c. 2. & 4. & 5. Ph. & M. cap. 5.
            9 This Bill alloweth (towards the prouiſion of ſeales and lead, and recompence of Searchers) ob. to bee taken for the ſealing of euery peece of cloth and ſtuffe well woaded, and that for non payment thereof, the Wardens of the Company of Dyers may diſtraine: The taking of which ob. cannot bee termed a Monopoly, for theſe reaſons, viz.
            
               Reaſons. 
               
                  1 The ſame is taken of the Dyer only, who therefore doth not in any wiſe enhance his prices of dying, and therefore not preiudiciall to the common-wealth in generall.
                  2 It is doubtful whether 
                        •
                      ob. vpon the peece wil defray the charge for lead, ſeales, & ſearchers.
                  3 If the profit ſhould ſurmount the charge, yet the ouerplus being reſerued to the Company of Dyers, is there to lye in ſtocke for the diſcharge of all extraordinarie payments and taxations, which otherwiſe are to be leuyed vpon euery particular perſon by the Pole, which ſtocke being ſo maintayned, euery member of that Company is partaker of the benefit thereof, and therefore not to be thought vnneceſſarie to be paid.
                  4 Preſidents there are diuers of receits vpon ſealing, as by Statute of 5. Ed. 6. c. 6. for ſealing of cloth well dreſſed &c. 35. Eliz cap. 10. ſor ſearching and marking of Carſies, 1. Ia. cap. 22. for ſealing of leather, &c.
               
            
            10 This Bill alſo impoſeth a forfeiture of 20 pounds to the King and Informer, vpon euery Major, Iuſtice of peace, head Officer, Conſtable, &c. which ſhall bee negligent in the due execution of this Act, for ſo much as appertayneth to them.
            
               Reaſons. This is not vnneceſſarie, becauſe the life of the Law is in the execution thereof.
            All former Lawes not repealed, made for preuention of deceits in dying and againſt vſing of Logwood, for ſo much as are not repugnant to this Act, to ſtand in force, this Act notwithſtanding.
         
      
   