
      
         
            
            
            
               The Printer t
                     〈◊◊〉
                   Reader.
            
            Hearing that many are deſirous to ſee the London miniſters petition, and fea
                  •••
               g leaſt
ſome corruptions might be ſpread, in ſundry written copies: I thought it m
                  ••
               te to
prevent the one, and to remoue the other, by giuinge the
                  •
                a true and faithfull copie
therof in print, hoping that none wilbe offended by p
                  •••
               ting it, ſeeing that 
                  •
               o|
thing was meant by the firſt penning of it, neither is, by the preſent publiſhinge
of the ſame, but that which is good and duetifull.
         
      
      
         
            TO THE KINGES MOST EXCELLENT MAIE
                  •••
               E.
            The humble Petition of two and Twentie Preachers, in London and the ſub
                  •
               rbs thereof.
            VVouchſafe (moſt gracious Soueraigne) a fauourable and pitifull eare, vnto the humble petition, of many
your diſtreſſed ſubiects. Preachers of the goſpell, now called vpon in your Maieſties name, to approue by
ſubſcription and practiſe, fiue ſeuerall bookes, with certayne Ceremonies therein preſcribed. If any thinge were
commaunded vs by your Maieſtie, which we might doe, without offence to the higheſt Maieſtie, there is not
a man amonge vs, that would not willingly obey the ſame, though it were to the loſſe of all he hath, yea, of his
very life. But being perſwaded▪ that the ſaide ceremonies, and many thinges elſe in thoſe bookes, are repugnant
to the word of God, we moſt humbly beſeech your Highnes: to ſpare our conſciences in the ſame, eſpecially ſeing
hetherto, neither our exceptions (a view wherof we haue to ſhew) haue bin anſwered, nor any one ſufficient
reaſon giuen, according to your Maieſties proclamation, to proue the lawfulnes of the thinges impoſed, we
haue heard and doe beleeue, that your Maieſtie hath often ſaide, that if any can ſhew the things required to be
vnlawfull, your Highnes will not haue them vrged. And except we be able, by the evidence of holy ſcripture,
to proue the ſame, we will preſently yeld to conformitie requyred. In the meane tyme, it might pleaſe your
Maieſtie in your princly wiſdome to conſider, that howſoeuer theſe thinges haue not heeretofore, bin by authoritye
remooued, yet haue they neuer had quyet poſſeſſion in this Church vnder the goſpell, ſince the firſt
aboliſhyng of popery, that our late gracious Queene of famous memory, at the humble ſuite of the Commōs
in Parliament, ſygnified her expreſſe will and pleaſure, yet vpon record. That no preacher or Miniſter, ſhould be impeached,
or otherwiſe moleſted or troubled, for the rites and Ceremonies in queſtion, that the common Iudgment, of
almoſt all the painfull & reſiant miniſters of the land, is againſt them: that they haue bin long diſvſed in many
places, & generally diſtaſted, with the people of better 
                  •
               cate, as hath appeared in many parliaments of former
tymes, and alſo in this laſt. In regard whereof, we humbly beſeech your Highnes, to take this burthen from
our conſciences, and to vouchſaue the continuance of our miniſtry, at the leaſt, vntill the ignorant and ſcandolous
Miniſters be remoued, non-reſidentes reformed, and all the Churches of this kingdome, be prouided of
able, godly, and reſident preachers, that popery and Atheiſme gett not the head amonge vs, to the ruyne of
this famous Church and common wealth. And this we verily hope, your Maieſtie will not deny vs, the rather
for that we are the ſeruantes of your God, Preachers of that faith, whereof your Highnes is both profeſſor,
and defendor: we haue alwayes ſyncerely, fauoured and to our power furthered, your iuſt and lawfull
clayme vnto this kingdome: we are aduerſaryes to them, that are aduerſaryes to your ſoule and body, ſupremacie,
Crowne, and Kingdomes. We haue bin brought vp, and taken degrees in the vniuerſities: we are many
of vs become greay headed in the ſeruice of God, and of his Church, hauyng preached the goſpell, ſome of vs
ten yeares, ſome twenty, ſome thyrty, and ſome more, and diuers of vs in this Cittye adventured our lyues
by preachinge, in the tyme of the late infection: neither are we ſo fewe, as is pretended: to ſay nothing of our
brethren, which yeeld with much greife and ſorrow of harte: we haue wyues and children, kinſfolkes & frend
depending on vs, who are all vndone, if we be diſplaced. God forbid, that euer it ſhould be ſayd or written, in
ſucceeding ages▪ that in the dayes of ſo religyous, and learned a Kinge, ſo many learned and paynfull paſtors and
preachers, were caſt out, as vnſauery ſalt: and that for refuſynge ſuch a ſubſcription, as in no age of the Church,
was euer vrged, and is more then the law of the land requireth, and for not vſinge ſuch ceremonies, as are prof
                  •
               
               table
to none, Prince or ſubiect, and (to ſpeake the leaſt) haue bin and continue, to be polluted with Idolatry:
and in the meane tyme, ſo many dumbe Miniſters, ſo many ſcandolous Miniſters and non-reſydents (the ſhame
and bane of the Church of God) keept in, and that ſo many learned, godly, and (many of them) aged men,
were expoſed to ſuch reproach and miſery, as nether the dumbe and ſcandolous miniſters with theirs of late,
nor Monkes, Fryers and Nunnes, in former tymes haue bine. Oh that your Maieſtie did knowe, the reproach
that is already fallen vppon vs, yea vpon the goſpell which we haue preached, the inſulting of Papiſtes and prophane
perſons, the diſcouraging of younge ſtudents, the pitifull cryes of many thowſandes moſt faithfull ſubiects
throughout the land, and cheifely in your Highnes chamber, and famous Citie of London. If your Maieſtie
did but heare and ſee, theſe wofull effectes, your royall and compaſſionate harte (we are perſwaded)
would not be able to indure the ſame. But your Maieſtie is, as an Angell of God, to diſcerne more than is
meete for vs to ſpeake. And therfore forbeareyng to proceed further heerein, we humbly caſt our ſelues, at
your Maieſties feete, for the continuance of our miniſtrye, to the glory of God: and ſaluation of his people,
thorough Ieſus Chriſt, whom we dayly beſeech to bleſſe your Maieſtie, and poſteritie foreuer.
         
      
   