
      
         
            
            
            By the Maſter, Wardens and Aſsiſtants of the
Companie of Ship-wrights.
            VVHereas the remiſneſſe of former Gouernors in executing the ordinances eſtabliſhed for
the well gouernment of the Corporation, and their forbearance to leauy the fines impoſed
for breach of orders, according to his Maieſties charge, and the ordinances thereupon made,
makes many perſons, eſpecially of the better ſort, inſolent in their cariage and remiſſe in their duties:
and notwithſtanding that we who are now Gouernors, with a ioynt conſent are in hand to
redreſſe thoſe grieuances which themſelues complained of, and that many of them are eyewitneſſes
what good entrance we haue already made, in reforming of many diſorders, and particularly
for reliefe of the poore, and reſtraining the abuſe of keeping exorbitant numbers of ſeruants, yet
many do ſtill perſiſt in their obſtinacie, ſuppoſing and reporting that our paines and preſent induſtrie
is but a blaze which will ſoone vaniſh.
            But we thinke it fit to let all men know, that forſomuch as a courſe is now ſetled by order of law
for diſcharge and paiment of the Companies debts, which did heretofore hinder and diſtract all
good proceedings, we do intend by Gods aſſiſtance (according to our dutie and oath) to go on
in the effectuall ſetling of his Maieſties charge and ordinances within the riuer of Thames and
Medway, and in reforming of all abuſes and diſorders contrary thereunto. And becauſe the common
workmen are wholy freed from paiment of the Companies debts, and are neuer henceforth
to be charged or burthened with any more taxes or other impoſitions beſides the ordinary duties
of quarterage, admittance, preſentments, and fines for breach of orders (according as is vſuall among
all other Companies:) we are to let them know, that from henceforth a more ſtricter account
ſhall be taken of their irregular courſes then hath been heretofore, and that we will proceed
in managing the truſt committed to vs without partialitie or ſparing of any perſon whatſoeuer;
and therefore we do hereby ſignifie vnto them and all others whom it concernes, that whoſoeuer
from the firſt day of May next comming, ſhall offend in the wilfull breach of any ordinance of the
Companie, ſhall be ſure to be cenſured and his fine leuied, without any fauour or conniuence; and
hereof it is that we would haue euery one to take notice, for which purpoſe this order is printed
and appointed to be ſet vp in euery mans Yard, that no man may pretend ignorance, eſpecially in
theſe ſix points following.
            
               1. That whoſoeuer hath formerly bound or enrolled his Apprentice at London or elſewhere, and brings
not his Indenture to the Clerke of the Companie to be regiſtred according to his Maieſties charge betwixt
this and the firſt day of May next comming, ſhal be ſure to pay his fine.
            
            
               2. That whoſoeuer from the ſixt of Ianuary laſt (at which time it was ordered and publike notice giuen)
hath retained or ſhall hereafter keep or retain aboue the number of two Apprentices, limited in the ordinance
for that purpoſe, ſhall pay his fine of 5 l. without any further fauour.
            
            
               3. That whoſoeuer comes not to the Hall or place of meeting, vpon the firſt or ſecond warning or ſummons
by the Beadle or Officer of the Company, ſhall be ſent for by a meſſenger, and pay his fine and the meſſengers
fees before he be diſcharged of his arreſt.
            
            
               4. That whoſoeuer bindes his Apprentiſe any where elſe then at the Hall, ſhall pay his fine of 40 s̄
                  
without fauour.
            
            
               5. That whoſoeuer goes to Sea, and comes not firſt to the Hall to haue his ſufficiencie approued and to
regiſter his name according to the ordinance in that behalfe, ſhall be fined accordingly.
            
            
               6. That whatſoeuer Yard keeper or other ſhall ſet any ſtranger to worke, contrary to the ordinance in
that behalfe, or ſhall imploy or continue in worke any perſon whatſoeuer or his ſeruant that is refractory to
the Company, after warning giuen, ſhall pay the fine limited for that offence.
            
            For the better keeping of good order, it is thought fit, that whoſoeuer ſhall be from henceforth
made free of the Companie, ſhall take out a copie of his freedome vnder ſeale, without ſhewing
whereof no man to ſet him aworke.
            Alſo, that whoſoeuer from henceforth ſhall take any ſeruant, ſhall haue a warrant vnder ſeale,
limiting how many apprentiſes he ſhall keepe, and his apprentiſes names to be endorſed vpon the
warrant, to the end we may be ſure to keepe all men within compaſſe.
            We deſire the ſecond Aſſiſtants, and euery man elſe that heares of any ſtranger ſet to worke, or
any one that keepes aboue the number he ought to keepe, or of any man that works for himſelfe
and hath not ſerued his time, or marries before his time be expired, or of any other abuſe or diſorder
fit to be redreſſed, to giue notice to the Beadle or Officer of the Companie, who for that
purpoſe is appointed once euery fortnight to go through all the Yards in the Riuer.
            Laſtly, if any perſons of the Company do find themſelues agrieued in any thing, let them come
in an orderly faſhion and preſent their grieuances in writing, and they ſhall expect we will be ready
to do them all the right and iuſtice that can be reaſonably required.
            God ſaue the King.
         
      
   