
      
         
            
            
            Nouember the 29.
            THE TRVE ORIGINALL EDICT OF NANTS, as it was enacted by Henry the third, and confirmed by the laſt French King Henry the fourth of famous memory.
            
               And reeſtabliſhed by Lewis the thirteenth, for the better aſſurance of thoſe of the Reformed Religion, as appeareth by the Kings Edict of Peace, dated in the Campe at Mompellier the ninteenth of October 1622. and proclaimed throughout all his Dominions for a finall ending of all ciuill troubles.
            
            Cum Priuilegio.
            
               LONDON, Printed by R. F. for William Garrat. 1622.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE COVRTEOVS READER.
            
               THe powerfull God of Armies, who onely giues true ſtrength vnto the arme, and courage vnto the heart, to fight the battels of his holy name and truth, euen in the midſt of hopeleſſe perils, hath in all ages ſtood for the miraculous deliuerance of his afflicted Church, when prepoſterous and maleuolent minds vrged the finall ruine and extirpation thereof. This cannot in any thing more euidently appeare, then in the bloudie and fearefull agitations of the French Church, vnder the troubleſome reignes of Henry the third and Henry the fourth, of indelible memorie: when priuate maſſacres and open hoſtilitie had almoſt extinguiſhed the chiefe Nobilitie and gentrie of France, and yet in the very inſtant of diſpaire, God with his mightie finger toucht the Kings heart the third Henry, and opened the eyes of his royall vnderſtanding, which produced this happie Edict of Nants now here publiſhed, for a faire pacification of all former troubles and combuſtions. Yet was not this fire ſo cleare extinguiſhed (omitting the deuaſtations of armes, during the reigne of the laſt renowned Henrie) but that the oppoſite ſpirits of theſe times found out ſome vnquenched ſparkes, whereof to kindle a new flame of cruell warre and bloudſhed, euen in the young and ambitious yeares of this preſent Lewis the thirteenth, the which notwithſtanding after ſome ſenſible feeling of his heauie hand and diſpleaſure, it hath pleaſed

God to moderate and qualifie, by informing his Princely mind, that an externall vnion and formalitie of Religion, cannot ſupplant the ſeeds of thirſtie and inſatiable ambitions, which do but attend ciuill and inteſtine diſſentions, the better to propagate their haughtie and imperious deſignes. As proceeding from one and the ſelfe ſame cauſe, theſe instant French troubles haue bene accorded with one and the like effect, the Articles of this preſent Peace being drawne and extracted from the modell and frame of the former Edict of Nants in this Treatiſe diuulged, which being at leaſt more large and copious, by diligent comparing the one with the other, the beſt vnderſtandings may more abſolutely iudge, both of the forme and ſubſtance of the preſent conditions. And to this end onely (courteous Reader) I haue with ſome charge cauſed this originall Edict of Nants to be tranſlated and publiſhed, being deſirous herein to gratifie thee, as he that expects no other reward then thy acceptation and loue, and that thou wilt ioyne with me, and all thoſe well affected to Religion, in heartie deſire and prayer, that this happie accord may ſtand firme and permanent. And thus I recommend my trauell and labours to thy loue, and remaine as I will euer perſeuere,
            
               Thy very louing and well affected: W. G.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE KINGS EDICT, AND A DECLARATION VPON THE PRECEDENT Edicts of Pacification.
            
               HEnrie by the grace of God, King of France and of Nauarre, To all thoſe preſent or hereafter to come, greeting. Amongſt thoſe infinite graces which it hath pleaſed God to impart vnto vs, this is one moſt notable and remarquable, that he hath giuen vs the conſtancie and power, not to be ſhaken with thoſe terrible confuſions, troubles, and diſorders, which were on foote at our comming to this kingdome, the ſame being diuided into ſo many partialities and factions, that the ſame moſt lawfull, was as it were the leaſt in power: and yet neuertheleſſe we bore vp ſo ſtifly in the midſt of all this ſtorme, as in the end we ouercame it, and are now entred into the harbour of ſafetie & repoſe within this State. The abſolute and whole glorie whereof were downd onely to him, and the grace and bounden dutie therefore to vs, in that he was pleaſed to make vſe of our labour and trauaile, for the performance of this ſo good a worke: wherein it hath bene apparent to the whole world, whether we

haue not diſcharged therein, not onely our dutie and power, but further ſomething more alſo, then in ſome other ſeaſon had bene correſpondent to the dignitie we hold; the which we haue not bene afraid to hazard and expoſe, ſeeing we haue ſo mauy times ſo freely aduentured, and endangered our owne life. And in this great concurrence of ſo weightie and perillous affaires, not being able to compound them all at one time, we were tyed to obſerue therein this order: firſt to vndertake thoſe differences which could not be determined otherwiſe then by force; and rather to defer, and hold in ſuſpence the other for a certaine time, which were or might be diſcuſſed by equitie and iuſtice: ſuch as were the generall differences betweene our good ſubiects, and the particular aggrieuances of the more ſound parts of our State, which we ſuppoſed might more eaſily be cured by remouing the principall cauſe thereof, which was the continuance of the ciuill warre. Wherein (by Gods ſpeciall grace) hauing had good and happy ſucceſſe; and hoſtilitie and armes being layd apart in all the interiour parts of the kingdome, we hope it will ſucceed no worſe alſo in other affaires which yet remaine to be compounded: and that by this meanes we ſhall obtaine the eſtabliſhment of a good peace, and quiet repoſe, which was euer the butt and ayme of all our vowes and intentions, and the onely prize and reward we looke for after ſuch wonderfull trauaile and paines wherein we haue paſſed the courſe of our life. Among the ſaid affaires which required our patience, and one of the moſt principall, was the complaints we daily receiued from many of our Catholicke Prouinces & Townes,

in that the exerciſe of the Catholicke Religion was not generally reeſtabliſhed, as the Edicts heretofore made for the Pacification of troubles through the occaſion of Religion imported. As alſo the Supplications and Remonſtrances exhibited vnto vs by our ſubiects of the pretended reformed Religion, both for the execution of that accorded vnto them by the ſaid Edicts, as further for that they deſired there might be added for the practiſe of their ſaid Religion, the the libertie of their conſciences, and the ſecurity of their perſons and goods: preſuming they had iuſt occaſion of new and more fearefull apprehenſions, by reaſon of theſe laſt commotions and inſults, the principall pretext and foundation whereof was for their ruine. Wherefore not to ouercharge our ſelues with too many buſineſſes at one inſtant, and likewiſe that the furie of Armes might not interrupt the eſtabliſhment of lawes, how good or behoouefull ſoeuer, we deferred from time to time the prouiſion and care hereof. But now ſince it hath pleaſed God to giue a beginning for our enioyance of ſome better repoſe and quiet, we eſteeme that we cannot better employ it, then in proſecuting and intending that which concerneth the ſeruice and glorie of his holy Name, procuring that it may be adored and prayed vnto by all our ſubiects: and though it yet ſtand not with his pleaſure, that this ſhould be vnder one and the ſame forme of Religion, notwithſtanding that it might be at leaſt with one intention and meaning, and with ſuch gouernment that no vprores or tumults might accrew betweene them: and that our ſelues and this kingdome might alwayes deſerue and preſerue the

glorious title of Moſt Chriſtian, which was purchaſed ſo long time ſince, and with ſo many worthy demerits: and ſo by the ſame meanes to ſupplant the cauſe of all moleſtations and troubles which might enſue hereafter vpon the point of Religion, which hath euer bene the moſt preualent and penetrant of all others. For the ſame occaſion, obſeruing this affaire to be of ſuch high conſequence, and worthie of deepe and waightie conſideration, after a reuoluing of all Regiſters of the complaints of our Catholicke ſubiects, and hauing alſo permitted our ſaid ſubiects of the ſaid pretended reformed Religion, to aſſemble by deputies for the exhibiting of their aggrieuances, and for reducing together all their ſaid Remonſtrances: and hauing conferred with them diuers times vpon this point, & reuiewed the precedent Edicts; We haue thought is conuenient to enact at this time generally for all our ſubiects a Law vniuerſall, cleare, plaine, and abſolute, by which they ſhall be limited & gouerned in all differences that haue heretofore growne betweene them in theſe points, or that may hereafter happen, and wherein both the one and the other may remaine ſatisfied, according as the quality of the preſent times doth permit: Our ſelues being entred into this deliberation, for no other end but out of the zeale we beare to the ſeruice of God, and that from this time forward there may be ratified and confirmed betweene our ſaid ſubiects a firme and perpetuall Peace. Wherein we both inuoke and attend from his diuine Maieſtie, the ſame protection and fauour which he hath euer moſt euidently conferred vpon this Kingdome from the erection thereof, and during the many ages it hath continued:

and that he will beſtow the grace vpon our ſaid ſubiects, truly to apprehend, that in the obſeruation of this our ordinance and Decree, (next to their immediate duties towards God and Our ſelues) conſiſteth the maine foundation of their vnion and concord, tranquillitie, and repoſe, and the reſtauration of this whole Eſtate to her originall ſplendor, opulencie, and power. Euen as We on our part promiſe to procure it moſt exactly to be performed, without permitting it in any ſort to be diſanulled or broken. For theſe reaſons, hauing by the aduice of the Princes of our bloud, of other Princes and Officers of the Crowne, and of other eminent and remarquable perſons of our Counſell and Eſtate neare about vs, maturely and diligently wayed and conſidered this whole buſineſſe: by this perpetuall and irreuocable Edict we haue denounced, declared, and ordained, and do denounce, declare, and ordaine.
            
               I.
               Firſt, that the memoriall of all things paſſed, both of the one ſide and the other, from the begnning of the moneth of March 1585. till Our comming to the Crowne, & during the other precedent troubles, or by meanes of them, ſhall remaine extinguſhed and razed out, as matters that neuer had happened. And it ſhall not be permitted nor lawfull for our Procurors generall, neither for any other perſons whoſoeuer, publike or priuate, at any time or vpon any occaſion whatſoeuer, to make mention thereof, or to commence any proceſſe or ſute thereupon in any Courts or Iuriſdictions whereſoeuer.
            
            
               
               II.
               We forbid all our ſubiects, of what eſtate or qualitie ſoeuer they be, to renew any memorie, to aſſaile, vrge, iniurie', or prouoke one another by way of reproach for what is paſt, vpon any cauſe or pretext ſoeuer: to debate thereupon, to conteſt, quarrell, outrage, or offend either in word or deed: but to forbeare and liue peaceably together, as brethren, friends, and fellow citizens: vpon penaltie, for the delinquents to be puniſhed as breakers of the peace, and diſturbers of publike quiet.
            
            
               III.
               We Enact, that the Catholicke, Apoſtolicke, Romaine Religion, ſhall be reeſtabliſhed and reſtored in all the places and parts of this our Kingdome and countrie vnder our obedience, where the exerciſe thereof hath bene interrupted, there to be peaceably and freely put in practiſe, without any hinderance or diſturbance. Forbidding expreſly all perſons, of what eſtate, quality, or condition ſoeuer they be, vpon the penaltie aboue mentioned, no wayes to trouble, moleſt, or diſturbe Eccleſiaſticall perſons in the celebration of diuine Seruice, the enioyance or taking of tithes, the fruits and reuenues of their benifices, with all other rights and inmunit
                     ••
                  s to them appertaining; and that all they who during the troubles ſeized on the Churches, houſes, goods, or reuenues belonging to the ſaid perſons Eccleſiaſticall, or that detaine & poſſeſſe them, ſhall ſurtender vnto the ſaid Eccleſiaſtickes, the entire poſſeſſion and peaceable enioyance thereof, with ſuch title, liberties, and ſecuritie, as they had before they were diſſeized thereof. We

alſo expreſly forbid thoſe of the ſaid pretended reformed Religion, to make any Sermons, or performe any other exerciſe of the ſaid Religion in the Churches, houſes, or habitations of the ſaid Eccleſiaſtickes.
            
            
               IIII.
               It ſhall remaine at the choiſe of the ſaid Eccleſiaſtickes, either to buy ſuch houſes & buildings erected in places prophane whereof they were diſpoſeſſed during the troubles, or elſe to conſtraine the owners of the ſaid buildings to purchaſe the ground, euen conformable to the valuation made thereof by experienced men, which both the parties ſhall bring together: and in caſe they do not agree, the Iudges of the places ſhall giue order herein: reſeruing euer vnto the ſaid poſſeſſors their peculiar remedie to whom ſoeuer it ſhall belong. And where the ſaid Eccleſiaſtickes ſhall conſtraine the poſſeſſors to purchaſe the ground, the eſtimate money ſhall not be put into their hands, but the ſaid poſſeſſors ſhall remaine charged with it, to yeeld profit therefore after the twentieth penny while it hath bene thus let out for the benefit of the Church: and this ſhall be in the compaſſe of a yeare. And the ſame tearme being paſt, if the purchaſor will no longer continue the ſaid rent or profit, he ſhall be thereof diſcharged, by aſſigning ouer the money to the partie to whom it is due by order and courſe of Iuſtice. And for ſacred places courſe ſhall be taken by the Commiſſaries that are ordained for the execution of this preſent Edict, being by vs conſtituted for the ſame end.
            
            
               V.
               Notwithſtanding no ground nor places occupied

for the reparation and fortification of townes, and places within our kingdome, nor the materials therein vſed, can be chalenged or recouered by the ſaid Eccleſiaſtickes, or any other publicke or priuate perſons, but then onely when the ſaid reparations and fortifications ſhall be demoliſhed by our Ordinances.
            
            
               VI.
               And that there may remaine no occaſion of difference or contention betweeue our ſubiects, we haue and do permit thoſe of the ſaid pretended reformed Religion, to liue and reſide in all the townes and places of this our Kingdome & countrie vnder our obedience, without being vrged, moleſted, troubled, or conſtrained to performe any thing in matter of Religion contrarie to their conſcience: neither by reaſon thereof to be ſearched or ſought after in houſes or places where they would inhabite, in all other things bearing themſelues according as it is comprehended in this our preſent Edict.
            
            
               VII.
               We haue alſo permitted all Lords, Gentlemen, and other perſons, as well inhabiters within the Kingdome, as others making profeſſion of the pretended reformed Religion, enioying within our Kingdome and the countrie vnder our obedience, high Title (or full fee of the Halbard) as in Normandie, being in proprietie, or Vſe-fruict, in the whole, or in the moyetie, orLike our tenor of knights ſeruice. for a third part, to haue in any ſuch of their houſes or mannors of high Title, or fee of the Halbard aboue ſpecified, which they ſhall be bound to deliuer before our Baylifes and Stewards, euerie one within his limits for their principall habitation, the exerciſe of the ſaid

Religion, while they are there reſident; and in their abſence, their wiues or their family, or any part of the ſame. And though the right of Iuſtice in this caſe, or the full fee of the Halbart be yet in controuerſie, yet the exerciſe of the ſaid Religion may there be performed, prouided that the aboue-named be then in actuall poſſeſſion of the ſaid high Iuſtice or Tytle, though our Procuror generall be departed. We permit them alſo to haue the ſaid exerciſe in their other houſes of this high Iuſtice, or fees aboue mentioned of the Halbart, while they are there preſent and not otherwiſe; the whole, as well for themſelues, their familie and people, as alſo for others that would repaire thither.
            
            
               VIII.
               In the houſes of ſuch infeoffed or thoſe of the ſaid Religion, they ſhall not haue the ſaid high Iuſtice or fee of the Halbart, neither ſhall they performe the ſaid exerciſe but onely for their familie. And yet we do not meane that if any other perſons chance to come in, to the number of thirtie aboue their proper familie, whether it be by occaſion of baptiſme, viſitation of their friends, or otherwiſe; that they ſhould be proſequuted or ſought after: ſo in like manner; that the ſaid houſes be not within any Townes, borroughes, or villages, belonging to any Chatholicke Lords, high Iuſticers, beſides our ſelues, wherein the ſaid Lords Catholicke haue their manſions. In which caſe thoſe of the ſaid Religion ſhall not within the ſaid Townes, borroughes, or villages performe the ſaid exerciſe, except by permiſſion and leaue of the ſaid high Lords, high Iuſticers, and not otherwiſe.
            
            
               
               IX.
               We permit alſo thoſe of the ſaid Religion, to diſcharge and continue the exerciſe of the ſame in all the Townes and places vnder our obedience, where it was eſtabliſhed and performed by them publickely ſundrie and diuers times, in the yeare a thouſand fiue hundred foureſcore and ſixteene, and in the yeare a thouſand fiue hundred foureſcore and ſeuenteene, till the end of the moneth of Auguſt; notwithſtanding all Decrees and iudgements to the contrarie.
            
            
               X.
               The ſaid exerciſe in like manner may be eſtabliſhed and reeſtabliſhed in all the Townes and places where it hath or might be eſtabliſhed by the Edict of Pacification made in the yeare threeſcore and ſeuenteene, the particular Articles & conferences of Ne
                     •
                  ac, and Flex: without that the ſame reeſtabliſhment ſhall be diſturbed in the places within the Demaine granted by the ſaid Edict, Articles and Conferences, for places of Bailiwickes, or that hereafter ſhall be, though they haue bene ſince alienated to Catholicke perſons, or hereafter ſhall be. And yet we intend not that the ſaid exerciſe ſhall be reeſtabliſhed in the parts and places of the ſaid Demaine which haue bene heretofore poſſeſſed by thoſe of the ſaid pretended reformed Religion, whither it ſhall haue bene brought in conſideration of their preſent perſons, or by reaſon of the priuiledge of their fees, if the ſaid fees at the ſaid preſent be poſſeſſed by people of the Catholicke, Romane, Apoſtolicke Religion.
            
            
               XI.
               Moreouer in euery one of the ancient Bailiwickes,

Stewardſhips, and Gouernments holding the place of a Bailiwicke, hauing meere reference and without mediation to the Courts of Parliament: We ordaine and conſtitute, that in the ſuburbes of a Towne, beſides thoſe accorded vnto them in the ſaid Edict, particular Articles, & Conferences, and where there are no great Townes, in a borrough or village, that the exerciſe of the ſaid pretended reformed Religion may publickly be performed for all ſuch as will thither repaire, though in the ſaid Bailiwickes, Stewardſhips, and Gouernments there may be many places where the ſaid exerciſe is at this preſent eſtabliſhed: euer excepted for the ſaid place of Bailiwicke newly granted by the preſent Edict, the Cities wherein reſide any Archbiſhop, or Biſhop: and yet thoſe of the ſaid pretended reformed Religion ſhall not for all this be depriued of the meane to demand and nominate for the ſaid place of the ſaid exerciſe, the Borroughes or villages neare to the ſame Cities: excepted alſo places and Seignories belonging to Eccleſiaſticall perſons, where we do not intend, that the ſaid ſecond place of Bailiwicke may be eſtabliſhed; we hauing by ſpeciall grace and fauour reſerued and excepted them. We conceiue and vnderſtand vnder the title of ancient Bailiwickes, thoſe which were in the time of the late King Henrie, our moſt honourable Lord, and father in law, held for Bailiwickes, Stewardſhips and Gouernments, hauing immediate reference to our ſaid Courts.
            
            
               XII.
               We meane not by this preſent Edict to derogate from the Edicts and Accords heretofore made for the reducing of any Princes, Lords, Gentlemen, and Catholicke

townes vnder our obedience, in that which concerneth the exerciſe of the ſaid Religion, the which Edict and Accords ſhall be entertained and obſerued for this reſpect, according as it ſhall ſtand with the inſtructions of ſuch Commiſſaries as ſhalbe appointed for the execution of this preſent Edict.
            
            
               XIII.
               We expreſly forbid all thoſe of the ſaid Religion to performe any exerciſe thereof, either in the behalfe of the Miniſterie, Gouernment, Diſcipline, or publicke inſtruction of children and others in this our Kingdome and countrie vnder our obedience, in that which concerneth Religion, in any other places, but thoſe permitted and granted by this preſent Edict.
            
            
               XIIII.
               As alſo to performe any exerciſe of the ſaid Religion in our Court or Attendance, nor likewiſe in our lands or countries which are beyond the mountaines, neither in our Citie of Paris, nor within fiue miles of the ſaid Citie: notwithſtanding thoſe of the ſaid Relion remaining in the ſaid lands and countries beyond the mountaines, and in our ſaid Citie, and fiue miles about the ſame, ſhall not be ſearched nor ſought after in their houſes, nor conſtrained to do any thing in reſpect of their Religion againſt their conſcience: bearing themſelues in other matters according as is comprehended in this preſent Edict.
            
            
               XV.
               Neither ſhall the publicke exerciſe of the ſaid Religion be performed in Armies, but only in the quarters of ſuch Chieftaines as make profeſſion thereof, neuertheleſſe,

not where our proper perſon ſhall belodged.
            
            
               XVI.
               Conformable to the ſecond Article of the Conference of Nerac, we permit thoſe of the ſaid Religion to build places for the exerciſe thereof, in townes and places accorded vpon: and thoſe ſhall be reſtored to them they haue heretofore built, or the ſoile and ground of them in the ſame eſtate it is in at this preſent, that is to ſay, the places where the ſame exerciſe is not inſtantly permitted, except they haue bene conuerted into ſome other nature of edifices. In which caſe, there ſhall be giuen them by the poſſeſſors of the ſaid edifices, places and buildings of the ſame price and value that they were of before they were built, or the iuſt eſtimation of them, by the iudgement of men expert in thoſe things. Reſerued alwayes for the ſaid proprietaries and poſſeſſors, their remedie againſt whomſoeuer it ſhall lie.
            
            
               XVII.
               We prohibite all Preachers, Lecturers, and others that teach publickely, to vſe any words, ſpeech or diſcourſe which may tend to excite the people to ſeditiō: but contrariwiſe we haue and do enioyne them to containe and beare themſelues modeſtly, and to vtter nothing which ſhall not be for the inſtruction and edification of their auditors, and to the maintenance of that tranquillitie and peace by vs eſtableſhed within our ſaid Kingdome; vpon the penalties enacted by our precedent Edicts: Moſt expreſly enioyning our Procurors general and their ſubſtitutes, to enforme out of their office againſt thoſe who ſhall herein offend, vpon penaltie of anſwering for it in their proper and

peculiar perſons, and by the priuation of their offices.
            
            
               XVIII.
               We alſo forbid all our ſubiects, of what qualitie or condition ſoeuer they be, to draw by force or any other manner of induction againſt the parents conſent, children of the ſaid Religion, to cauſe them to be baptized or confirmed in the Catholike, Apoſtolicke, Romaine Church: as likewiſe the ſame prohibition is made to thoſe of the ſaid pretended reformed Religion, and that vnder penaltie of ſuffering exemplarie puniſhment,
            
            
               XIX.
               Thoſe of the ſaid pretended reformed Religion ſhall no wayes be conſtrained, nor remaine bound by reaſon of any abiuration, promiſe or oath formerly made, or cautions by them giuen, concerning the practiſe of the ſaid Religion, neither ſhall they hereupon be moleſted or troubled in any ſort whatſoeuer.
            
            
               XX.
               They ſhall alſo be bound to obſerue all feſtiuall dayes bidden and diuulged in the Catholicke, Apoſtolike, Romaine Church, neither ſhall they worke on thoſe dayes, ſell no
                     •
                   retaile in open ſhop, neither ſhall trade or handicrafts men worke out of their ſhops, or in cloſe chambers or houſes on feſtiuall dayes and other prohibited dayes, in any profeſſion or myſterie, the noiſe whereof may be heard without by neighbours or thoſe paſſing along: which neuertheleſſe ſhall not be ſought or looked into, but onely by officers of Iuſtice.
            
            
               XXI.
               Neither ſhall the bookes touching the ſaid pretended

Religion be imprinted or publickly ſold, but in Townes and places where the publicke exerciſe of the ſaid Religion is permitted. And for other books which ſhall be printed in other places, they ſhall be viewed and peruſed, as well by our officers as by diuines, as our Ordinances therin do import. We expreſly forbid the impreſſion, publication, and vent of all bookes, libels, and defamatorie writings, vpon the penaltie ſet downe in our Ordinances, enioyning all our Iudges and officers to haue a ſpeciall care therein.
            
            
               XXII.
               We enact, that there ſhall be no difference or diſtinction made in reſpect of the ſaid Religion, to entertaine ſchollers to be inſtructed in Vniuerſities, Colledges and ſchooles, and the ſicke and poore in hoſpitals, gueſt-houſes, and publicke almes houſes.
            
            
               XXIII.
               They of the pretended reformed Religion ſhall be bound to obſerue the lawes of the Catholicke, Apoſtolicke, Romane Church receiued in this our kingdome, in the point of marriages contracted and to be contracted, within the degrees of conſanguinitie and affinitie.
            
            
               XXIIII.
               In like manner thoſe of the ſaid Religion ſhall pay the rights of entrie, as hath bene accuſtomed for the charges and offices appointed for their vſe, without being vrged to be preſent at any ceremonies contrarie to their ſaid Religion: and being cited by oath, they ſhall be bound to do it no otherwiſe then by lifting vp their hand, by ſwearing and promiſing vnto God that they will ſpeake the truth, neither ſhall they be conſtrained

to diſpence with the oath by them made in paſſing of contracts and obligations.
            
            
               XXV.
               We will and ordaine, that all thoſe of the pretended reformed Religion and others who haue followed their partie, of what eſtate or qualitie ſoeuer they be, ſhall be bound and obliged by all due and reaſonable meanes, and vnder the penalties comprehended in the Edicts hereupon made, to pay and cleare the tenthes to Curates and other Eccleſiaſticall perſons, and to all others to whom they appertaine, according to the vſe and cuſtome of the places.
            
            
               XXVI.
               All diſinheriting and priuations, whether by diſpoſition of thoſe liuing, or teſtamentaries, made only in hatred, or by reaſon of Religion, as well for the time paſt as that to come, ſhall take no place.
            
            
               XXVII.
               The better to reunite the wills of our ſubiects according to our intention, & to preuent all cōplaints hereafter to come, we denounce all thoſe that do or ſhall make profeſſion of the ſaid pretended reformed Religion, capable to hold & diſcharge all eſtates, dignities, offices, and publicke charges whatſoeuer, Royall, Lordly, or of the Cities, Lands, Countries, and Seigniories within our obedience, notwithſtanding all oathes to the contrarie, and to be indifferently admitted thereunto: and our Courts of Parliament and other Iudges ſhalbe pleaſed to enquire and take notice of the life, manners, Religion, and honeſt conuerſation, of thoſe who are or ſhall be inueſted into offices, as well of the one as of the other Religion,

without taking any other oath of them, then well and faithfully to ſerue the king in the diſcharge of their functions, and to obſerue the Ordinances as they haue bene obſerued in all times. And when any vacancie of the ſaid eſtates, places, and offices ſhall happen, for thoſe that lye in our diſpoſitiō, we wil indifferently furniſh them, & without any diſtinction, with perſons capable, as a thing that concerneth the vnion of our ſubiects. We intend alſo, that they of the pretended reformed Religion ſhall be admitted and receiued to all counſels, deliberations, & functions which depend on the aboue ſaid matters; without that for cauſe of Religion they be reiected or hindred from enioying this priuiledge.
            
            
               XXVIII.
               We ordaine, for interring of the dead of thoſe of the ſaid Religion within all the Townes and places of this Kingdome, that in each place (by our Officers and Magiſtrates, or by the Commiſſaries whom we ſhall depute for the execution of this preſent Edict) there be as commodious a place allotted them for this purpoſe as may be. And ſuch Churchyards as heretofore they had, and whereof they were depriued by reaſon of the troubles, ſhall be reſtored them, except they be at that preſent built vpon, of what qualitie ſoeuer they be, in which caſe they ſhall be prouided of others at free coſt.
            
            
               XXIX.
               We moſt expreſly enioyne our ſaid officers to haue a care, that at the ſaid interments no ſcandall be committed: and they ſhall be bound within fifteene dayes after requeſt made, to prouide thoſe of the ſaid Religion of a commodious place for their ſaid burials,

without vſing any delay or protraction therein; vnder penaltie of fiue hundred crownes, to be ſeiſſed on their proper names and perſons. The ſaid officers alſo as well as all others are prohibited to execute nothing for the conueyance of the ſaid dead bodies, vpon penaltie of ſeuere puniſhment.
            
            
               XXX.
               To the end that iuſtice may be yeelded and miniſtred to our ſubiects without any partialitie, hatred, or fauour, as being one of the principall meanes to maintaine them in peace and concord: we haue and do ordaine that in our Court of Parliament of Paris ſhall be eſtabliſhed a Chamber or Counſell of eſtate, conſiſting of one Preſident and ſixteene Counſellours of the ſaid Parliament, which ſhall be called and entitled the Chamber of the Edict: and it ſhall examine not onely the cauſes and proceſſes of thoſe of the ſaid pretended reformed Religion which ſhall be within the iuriſdiction of the ſaid Court, but alſo of thoſe depending on our Courts of Normandie and Brettaine, according to the immunitie conferted vpon it by this preſent Edict; and this to go current vntill in each of the ſaid Parliaments there be eſtabliſhed a Chamber to miniſter iuſtice in their proper precincts. We alſo ordaine, that of the foure offices of Counſellours in our ſaid Parliament of Paris, being of the laſt erection by vs made, there ſhall be preſently receiued and entertained into the ſaid Parliament foure of thoſe of the ſaid pretended reformed Religion, ſufficient and capable, who ſhall be thus diſtributed; the firſt receiued into the ſaid Chamber of the Edict, and the other three in order as they haue bene receiued into three of the

Chambers of Inqueſts: and moreouer that of the two firſt offices of lay Counſellours of the ſaid Court which by the death of any one ſhall grow vacant, they ſhall be furniſhed with two of the ſaid pretended reformed Religion, and they thus receiued to be diſtributed into the two other Chambers of Inqueſts.
            
            
               XXXI.
               Beſides the chamber heretofore eſtabliſhed at Caſtres for a reference to our Court of Tholouſe, which ſhall continue in the eſtate it now ſtands, we haue and for the ſame conſideration do ordaine, that in each of our Courts of Parliament both of Grenoble & Bourdeaux, there ſhall be likewiſe a Chamber conſiſting of two Preſidents, the one a Catholicke, and the other of the pretended reformed Religion, and of twelue Counſellours, whereof ſixe ſhall be Catholickes, and the other ſixe of the ſaid Religion: which Preſidents and Catholicke Counſellours ſhall be ſelected and choſen by vs out of the bodie of our ſaid Courts. And as for thoſe of the ſaid Religion, there ſhall a new creation be made of a Preſident and ſixe Counſellours for the Parliament of Bourdeaux, and of a Preſident & three Counſellours for that of Grenoble: who with the three Counſellours of the ſaid Religion which are at that preſent in the ſaid Parliament, ſhall be employed in the ſaid Chamber of the Daulphiney. And the ſaid offices of the new creation ſhall be lyable to the ſame penſions, honours, authorities, and preheminences as the other of the ſaid Courts. And the ſaid Seſſiō of the ſaid Chamber of Bourdeaux ſhall be in the ſaid Bourdeaux or at Nerac, and that of Daulphiney at Grenoble
            
            
               
               XXXII.
               The ſaid Chamber of Daulphiney ſhall determine the cauſes of thoſe of the pretended reformed Religion with reference to our Parliament of Prouence, without hauing need to take letters of ſummons or other citations then in our Chamber of Daulphiney: as alſo they of Normandie and Brettaine of the ſaid Religion ſhall not be vrged to take letters of ſummons or other citations, then in our Chancerie at Paris.
            
            
               XXXIII.
               Our ſubiects of the Religion of the Parliament of Burgundie ſhall haue the election and choice to pleade in the Chamber erected in the Parliament of Paris or in that of Daulphiney. And they ſhall not alſo be tyed to take letters of ſummons or any other citations, but in the ſaid Chanceries of Paris or Daulphiney, according to their owne opinion and liking.
            
            
               XXXIIII.
               All the ſaid Chambers diſpoſed as aforeſaid, ſhall determine and iudge in ſoueraigntie and ſentence definitiue, by finall decree before all other, of ſuites and differences moued and to be moued; in which they of the pretended reformed Religion ſhall be principall parties or warranties in caſes of plaintiffe or defendant, in all matters, as well ciuill as criminall, whether the ſaid proceſſe be by writ or verball appeales: and that if it ſo ſeeme good to the parties, or that one of them requireth it, before any Plea in the cauſe, in reſpect of ſute to be commenced: alwayes excepted matters of benefices, and the poſſeſſors of tenthes not enfeoffed, Eccleſiaſticall patronages, and cauſes wherein the rights & Demaine of the Church are queſtioned:

all which ſhall be ended and iudged in the Courts of Parliament; without that the ſaid Chambers of the Edict ſhall haue any thing to do to determine therein. As alſo our pleaſure is, that to iudge and recide criminall cauſes, which ſhall happen between the ſaid Eccleſiaſtickes and thoſe of the pretended reformed Religion, if the perſon Eccleſiaſticall be defendant in this caſe, the iudgement of the criminall cauſe ſhall belong priuatiuely to our Soueraigne Courts of the ſaid Chambers, and where the Eccleſiaſticke ſhall be plaintife, & he of the ſaid Religion defendant, the iudgement and determination of the criminall cauſe ſhall belong, by appeale and in the laſt reference, to our ſaid eſtabliſhed Chambers. The ſaid Chambers alſo in vacation times, ſhall determine of matters referred by the Edicts and Ordinances to the Chambers or Courts eſtabliſhed in times of vacation, each one in his proper prerogatiue.
            
            
               XXXV.
               The Chamber of Grenoble ſhall from this preſent be vnited and incorporated to the body of the ſaid Court of Parliament, and the Preſidents and Counſellors of the ſaid pretended reformed Religion entitled Preſidents and Counſellors of the ſaid Court, and held in the rancke and number of them; and for theſe ends they ſhall be firſt diſpoſed of in the other Chambers, and then culled and drawen out from them, to be employed and to ſerue in that which we inſtitute anew; with iniunction notwithſtanding, that they ſhall be preſent and haue a voice and ſeſſion in all deliberations made, and Counſels aſſembled; and ſhall enioy the ſame penſions, preuiledges, and preheminences

which the other Counſellours and Preſidents of the Court do.
            
            
               XXXVI.
               Our meaning and pleaſure is, that the ſaid Chambers of Caſtres and Bourdeaux ſhould be reunited and incorporated into thoſe Parliaments in the ſame manner as the others, when need ſhall be, and that the cauſes which haue moued vs to make any eſtabliſhment thereof, may ceaſſe and haue no more place among our ſubiects: and the Preſidents and Counſellors of the ſame for theſe endes, being of the ſaid Religion, ſhall be held for Preſidents and Counſellors of the ſaid Courts.
            
            
               XXXVII.
               There ſhall be alſo newly created and choſen in the Chamber ordained for the Parliament of Bourdeaux, two Subſtitutes of our Procuror and Aduocate Generall, whereof he in deputation to the Procuror ſhall be a Catholicke, and the other of the ſaid Religion: who ſhall diſcharge the ſaid offices for competent penſions.
            
            
               XXXVIII.
               Neither ſhall the ſaid Subſtitutes take vpon them any other qualitie then of a Subſtitute, and when the Chambers ordained for the Parliament of Tholouſe and Bourdeaux ſhall be vnited and incorporated into the ſaid Parliaments, the ſaid Subſtitutes ſhall be prouided of Counſellors places in the ſame.
            
            
               XXXIX.
               The expeditions of the Chancerie of the Chamber of Bourdeaux ſhall be performed in the preſence of the two Counſellors of the ſame Chamber, whereof

the one ſhall be a Catholicke, and the other of the ſaid pretended reformed Religion, in the abſence of one of the maiſter of Requeſts of our Hoſtell, and one of the Notaries and Secretaries of the ſaid Court of Parliament of Bourdeaux, ſhall make reſidence in the place where the ſaid Chamber ſhall be eſtabliſhed, or elſe one of the ordinarie Secretaries of the Chancerie, to ſeale the expeditions of the ſaid Chancerie.
            
            
               XL.
               We will and cōmand, that in the ſaid Chamber of Bourdeaux there be two Cōmitties of the Greffier of the ſaid Parliament, the one ciuill the other criminall, which ſhall exerciſe their charges by our Commiſſions, and ſhall be called Committies of the Greffe Ciuill and Criminall, and therefore they cannot be reuoked nor diſplaced by the ſaid Griffiers of the Parliament: and yet they ſhall be tied to yeeld the emoluments of the ſaid Griffiers to the ſaid Griffiers, the which Committies ſhall be hired by the ſaid Griffiers according as it ſhall be aduiſed and arbitrated by the ſaid Chamber. Beſides there ſhall be ordained certaine Catholicke Deputies: which ſhall be appointed by the ſaid Court or otherwhere according to our good pleaſure: beſides which there ſhall be newly erected two of the ſaid Religion, and freely hired: and all the ſaid deputies ſhall be gouerned by the ſaid Chamber, both in the execution and diſcharge of their places, as in the profits they do receiue. A Commiſſion alſo ſhall be diſpatched for a payer of penſions, and a receiuer of fines for the ſaid Chamber, to be prouided therein as ſhall be pleaſing to vs, if the Chamber be eſtabliſhed in any other place then in the ſaid Citie.

And the Commiſſion heretofore agreed vpon to the Payer of penſions of the Chamber of Caſtres, ſhall take full authoritie and commiſſion: and the Comiſſion for the receipt of fines in the ſaid Chamber, ſhall be enioyned to the ſame charge.
            
            
               XLI.
               There ſhall be prouided ſufficient Aſſignements for the penſions of the Officers ordained by the ſaid Edict.
            
            
               XLII.
               The Preſidnts, Counſellors, and other Catholicke Officers of the ſaid Chambers, ſhall be continued as long as poſſibly may be, and as we ſhall finde it moſt expedient for our ſeruice, and the good of our ſubiects: and in diſmiſſing ſome, others ſhall be conſtituted in their places before their departure; and they ſhall not depart during the time of their ſeruice, nor abſent themſelues from the ſaid Chamber, without their leaue, which ſhall be iudged by the procedings of the Ordinance.
            
            
               XLIII.
               The ſaid Chambers ſhall be eſtabliſhed within ſixe monethes, during which (if the eſtabliſhment continue ſo long a ſetling) the ſu
                     •
                  es moued or to be moued, wherein thoſe of the ſaid Religion ſhall be partie, from the authoritie of our Courts of Parliaments of Paris, Roan, Dion, and Rhemes, they ſhall be called to the Chamber eſtabliſhed preſently at Paris by vertue of the Edict of the yeare a thouſand fiue hundred three ſcore & ſeuenteene, or elſe to the grand Counſell at the election and choice of thoſe of the ſaid Religion, if they demand it: thoſe that are of the Parliament of Bourdeaux, into the Chamber eſtabliſhed at Caſtres,

and into the ſaid grand Counſell at their choice: and thoſe that are of Prouence into the Parliament of Grenoble. And if the ſaid Chambers be not eſtabliſhed within three monethes after preſentation there made of this our preſent Edict, he of our Parliaments that maketh refuſall, ſhall be prohibited to iudge or determine of cauſes touching thoſe of the ſaid Religion.
            
            
               XLIIII.
               Sutes not yet determined hanging in the ſaid Courts of Parliament and grand Councell of the qualitie aboue-mentioned, ſhall be returned, in what ſtate ſoeuer they ſtand, into the ſaid Chambers, each cauſe to his Court of reference, if one of the parties of the ſaid Religion require it, within foure moneths after the eſtabliſhment thereof: and as for ſuch as ſhall be diſcontinued and are not in ſtate to be iudged and determined, the aboue-mentioned of the Religion ſhall be bound to make a declaration to the firſt intimation and ſignification of the purſute which ſhall be made vnto them: and the ſaid tearme being once paſt, they ſhal no more be admitted to demand the ſaid Returnes.
            
            
               XLV.
               The ſaid Chambers of Grenoble and Bourdeaux, as alſo that of Caſtres, ſhall obſerue the forme and ſtyle of Parliaments in the precincts where they ſhall be eſtabliſhed, and they ſhall iudge in equall number both of the one and other Religion, except the parties agree on the contrarie.
            
            
               XLVI.
               All Iudges who are ſought vnto for the execution of iudgements and commiſſions of the ſaid Chambers, or letters obtained out of the Chanceries thereof:

and alſo all Officers and Sergeants ſhall be bound to put them in execution, and the ſaid Officers and Sergeants to performe all their executions in euery part of our Kingdome, without demanding placet, viſa, ne pareatis, vpon penaltie of ſuſpenſion of their places, and paying the dammages, charges, and intereſts of the parties: the cenſure whereof ſhall belong to our ſaid Chambers.
            
            
               XLVII.
               No reuocation of cauſes ſhall be agreed vpon, the triall whereof is referred to the ſaid Chambers, except in the caſe of Ordinances, the reuocation whereof ſhall belong to the neareſt Chamber eſtabliſhed according to our Edict: and the iſſues of ſutes of the ſaid Chambers ſhall be tried in the next Chamber, obſeruing the proportion and forme of the ſaid Chambers from whence the proceſſe proceedes: except for the Chamber of the Edict in our Parliament of Paris, where the proceſſes depending ſhall be diſpoſed of in the ſame Chamber, by the Iudges which by vs ſhall be nominated by our particular letters to this effect, except the parties had rather attend the renouation of the ſaid Chamber or Court. And if it happen that the ſame proceſſe be commenced in all the Chambers ſeparately, the iſſue thereof ſhall be returned to the ſaid Chamber of Paris.
            
            
               XLVIII.
               Refuſals brought in againſt the Preſidents & Counſellours of the Chambers diſtinctly, may be determined by the number of ſixe, to which number the parties ſhall be reſtrained, otherwiſe it ſhall go forward without any regard had to the ſaid Refuſals.
            
            
               
               XLIX.
               The examination of Preſidents and Counſellors newly choſen in the ſaid Chambers by equal numbers, ſhall be made by our priuie Counſell, or by the ſaid Chambers, each one within its precinct, when they are met in ſufficient number: and yet the accuſtomed oath ſhall by them be exhibited in the Courts where the ſaid Chambers ſhall be eſtabliſhed, and vpon their refuſall, in our priuie Counſell; except thoſe of the Chamber of Languedoc, who ſhall take their oath from the hands of our Chancellour, or in the ſaid Chamber.
            
            
               L.
               We will and ordaine, that the reception of our Officers of the ſaid Religion, ſhall be iudged in the ſame ſeuerall Chambers by the pluralitie of voices, as is vſuall in other iudgements, not being requiſite that the voices ſhould differ two thirds, according to the Ordinance, the which in this reſpect remaines abrogated.
            
            
               LI.
               All propoſitions, deliberations, and reſolutions, pertaining to publicke peace, and for the particular eſtate and policie of Townes, ſhall be made in the ſaid ſeuerall Chambers, and in the ſaid Townes where the ſaid Chambers reſide.
            
            
               LII.
               The article of the iuriſdiction of the ſaid Chambers ordained by this preſent Edict, ſhall be followed and obſerued according to forme and tenor thereof, eſpecially in that which concerneth the execution, omiſſion, or violation of our Edicts, when thoſe of the ſaid Religion ſhall be parties.
            
            
               
               LIII.
               The ſubalternate royall Officers or others, the reception of whom belongs to our Courts of Parliaments, if they be of the ſame pretended reformed Religion, may be examined & receiued in the ſaid Chambers: that is to ſay, thoſe of the dependant Courts of the Parliaments of Paris, Normandie, and Brettaine, in the ſaid Chamber of Paris: thoſe of Daulphiney and Prouence, in the Chamber of Grenoble; thoſe of Burgundie in the ſaid Chamber of Paris or Daulphiney, at their choice: thoſe of the Precincts of Tholouſe, in the Chamber of Caſtres; and thoſe of the Parliament of Bourdeaux, in the Chamber of Guyenne; and no other to oppoſe their admiſſions or make parties, but our Procurors generall and their Subſtitutes, and thoſe placed in the ſaid offices: yet neuertheleſſe the accuſtomed oath ſhall by them be exhibited in the Courts of parliaments, which ſhal haue no iuriſdiction in their ſaid receptions: and vpon the refuſall of the ſaid Parliaments, the ſaid Officers ſhall miniſter the oath in the ſaid Chambers; which being ſo miniſtred, they ſhall be bound by ſome Clerke or Notarie, to preſent the act of their receptions to the Greffiers or Regiſters of the ſaid Courts of Parliaments, and to leaue a compared copie thereof with the ſaid Greffier or Regiſter: who are enioyned to regiſter the ſaid acts vpon penaltie of paying all the charges, dammages, and intereſts of the parties; and if the ſaid Regiſters refuſe to do it, it ſhall be ſufficient for the ſaid Officers to bring the act of the ſaid reception drawne by the ſaid Regiſters or Notarie, and to cauſe the ſame to be regiſtred in the greffe or rowle of their iuriſdictions,

there to be viewed when need ſhall require, vpon penaltie of annihilating their proceedings and iudgements. And as for thoſe Officers whoſe reception was not accuſtomed to be made in our ſaid Parliaments, in caſe they whom it concerneth make refuſall to proceed in the ſaid examination and reception, the ſaid Officers ſhall repaire to the ſaid Chambers, to be furniſhed as they ought.
            
            
               LIIII.
               The Officers of the ſaid pretended reformed Religion which ſhall hereafter be choſen to ſerue within the bodies of our ſaid Courts of Parliaments, Grand Counſell, Chamber of Accompts, Court of Aydes, Receiuers for the Treaſurers generall of France, and other Officers of the Exchequers, ſhall be axamined and receiued in the places where they vſe to be: and in caſe of refuſall and deniall of iuſtice, they ſhall be conſtituted in our priuie Councell.
            
            
               LV.
               The reception of Officers made in the Chamber heretofore eſtabliſhed at Caſtres ſhall remaine in force, notwithſtanding all Iudgements or Ordinances to the contrarie: the reception alſo of Iudges, Counſellours, and other Officers of the ſaid Religion made in our priuy Counſell ſhall be validious, or thoſe choſen by Commiſſaries by vs ordained vpon the refuſall of our Courts of parliament, of the Aydes, or Chambers of Accompts, euen as if they had bene made in the ſame Courts and Chambers, and by the other Iudges to whom ſuch receptions appertaine; and their penſions ſhall be allowed by the Chambers of Accompts without ſcruple: and if any haue bene

diſmiſſed, they ſhall be reeſtabliſhed without any further command then this preſent Edict, and the ſaid Officers ſhall not ſtand bound to preſent any other reception, notwithſtanding all Decrees paſſed to the contrarie, which ſhall remaine inualidious and of no effect.
            
            
               LVI.
               Vntill meanes be procured to defray the expences of the Iuſtice of our ſaid Chamber out of the monies of fines or confiſcations, we will aſſigne a valuable and ſufficient proportion to diſcharge the ſaid expences, without leuying monyes out of the goods of thoſe condemned.
            
            
               LVII.
               The Preſidents and Counſellours of the ſaid pretended reformed Religion heretofore receiued into our Court of Daulphiney, and into the Chamber of the Edict, incorporated into the ſame, ſhall continue, and hold their Seſſions and places there, that is to ſay, the Preſidents, as they haue and do enioy at this preſent, and the Counſellours according to the Iudgements and Decrees which they haue obtained in our priuie Counſell.
            
            
               LVIII.
               We further declare, that all ſentences, Iudgements, Decrees, Seizures, Vents, and Orders ſet downe and eſtabliſhed againſt thoſe of the pretended reformed Religion, as well liuing as dead, ſince the departure of the late King Henrie the ſecond our moſt honourable Lord and Father in law, by reaſon of the ſaid Religion, troubles, & tumults ſince happened, together with the execution of the ſame Decrees, from this preſent to be

razed, reuoked, and nullified. We ordaine that they ſhall be razed and wiped out of our Regiſters of the Stewards of Courts, as well ſoueraigne as inferiour: as likewiſe our pleaſure is, that all markes, foot-ſteps, and monuments of the ſaid executions, bookes, and Acts defamatorie to their perſons, memoriall and poſterity, ſhall be remoued and defaced: and that the places whe
                     •
                  e vpon theſe occaſions, any ruines, or demolitions haue bene made, ſhall be reſtored in the ſame condition they were, to the proprietaries of the ſame, to enioy and diſpoſe of them at their pleaſure. And generally we haue reuoked, caſhiered, and annihilated all proceedings and informations made for any enterpriſes whatſoeuer, pretended crimes of treaſon, or others: notwithſtanding the which proceedings, Iudgements, and Decrees, comprehending, reunion, incorporation, and confiſcation, our meaning is, that thoſe of the Religion, and others who haue followed their partie, and their heires, ſhall reenter into the reall and actuall poſſeſſion of all and each of their goods.
            
            
               LIX.
               All procedings made, Iudgements an decrees giuen during the troubles againſt thoſe of the ſaid Religion that haue borne armes, or withdrawne themſelues out of our Realme, or within the ſame, into townes and countries by them held for ſome other occaſion then that of Religion & the troubles, together with all exemptions of inſtances, preſcriptions, as well legall & conuentionall, as thoſe vſuall and cuſtomarie, and feodall ſeizures accrewing during the ſaid troubles, or by lawfull impediments ariſing thereof, and whereof the cenſure remaineth in our Iudges, ſhall be eſteemed

as not performed, hapned, nor granted, and ſuch we haue and do declare them to be, and haue and do annihilate, and the parties ſhall haue no aide nor authoritie herefrom: but they ſhall be reſtored to the ſame eſtate wherein before they ſtood, notwithſtanding the iudgements and executions of them, and the poſſeſſion ſhall be reſtored to them wherein they were, for this reſpect. That aboue mentioned ſhall likewiſe take place, in reſpect of others who haue followed the partie of thoſe of the ſaid Religion, or that haue abſented themſelues out of the Kingdome by reaſon of the troubles. And for the yonger children of thoſe of the condition aboue mentioned, which died during the troubles, we reſtore the parties to the ſame eſtate wherin they were before, without paying charges, or being bound to bring in any forfaites: but yet we do not meane, that Iudgements denounced by Preſidentall Iudgdes or other inferior Iudges, againſt thoſe of the ſaid Religion, or that haue followed their partie, ſhould remaine inualidious, if they haue bene denounced by Iudges keeping their Seſſions in townes by them held, and whither they had free acceſſe.
            
            
               LX.
               The Iudgements denounced in our Courts of Parliament, in matters the deciſion whereof belongeth to the Chambers ordained by the Edict of the yeare 1577. and the Articles of Nerac and Flex, in which Courts the parties procecded not voluntarily, that is to ſay, they haue alledged and propounded ends declinatorie, or which haue bene denounced through defaut or miſpriſion, as well in matters ciuill as criminall, notwithſtanding the which ends, the ſaid parties haue

bene conſtrained to go forward, ſhall likewiſe be annihilated and of no worth. And in reſpect of Iudgements giuen againſt thoſe of the ſaid Religion, who haue proceeded voluntarily without propounding declinatorie endes, thoſe Iudgements ſhall remaine in force: and yet without preiudice to the execution of them, they may if they thinke good, take ſome courſe by way of ciuill requeſt before the Chambers ordained by this preſent Edict, and the time runne ſet downe by the Ordinancies, ſhall be no preiudice to them: and vntill the ſaid Chambers and their Chanceries be eſtabliſhed, verball Appeales, or thoſe by writing, propounded by thoſe of the ſaid Religion, before the Iudges, Regiſters, or Committies, executors of Sentences and Iudgements, ſhall take the ſame effect as if they had bene procured by letters patents.
            
            
               LXI.
               In all inquiries made vpon what occaſion ſoeuer, in ciuill cauſes, if the Inquiſitor or Commiſſarie be a Catholicke, the parties ſhall be bound to appeare with one conſent: and if they appeare not, one ſhall be taken by vertue of his Office by the ſaid Inquiſitor or Commiſſarie, who is of the ſaid pretended reformed Religion: and the like courſe ſhall be taken, when the Commiſſarie Inquiſitor is of the ſaid Religion, for the partie which ſhall be Catholicke.
            
            
               LXII.
               We will and ordaine, that our Iudges ſhall determaine of the validitie of Teſtaments, wherein thoſe of the ſaid Religion ſhall be intereſſed, if they demand it, and the Appeales of the ſaid Iudgements may be taken out of the ſaid Chambers, ordained for poceſſes of

thoſe of the ſaid Religion, notwithſtāding all cuſtomes to the contrarie, yea euen thoſe of Brettaine.
            
            
               LXIII.
               To preuent all differences which may happen betweene our Courts of Parliament and the Chambers of thoſe Courts ordained by our preſent Edict, we will ſet downe an ample and plaine order betweene the ſaid Courts and Chambers, and ſuch as thoſe of the pretended reformed Religion ſhall haue entire benifite of by the ſaid Edict, which order ſhall be ratified in our Courts of Parliament, and obſerued and kept, without hauing reſpect to thoſe precedent.
            
            
               LXIIII.
               We prohibit and forbid all our ſoueraigne Courts and others within this Kingdome, to determine or Iudge the ciuill or criminall cauſes of thoſe of the ſaid Religion, the triall whereof by our Edict is referred to the ſaid Chambers, ſo any returne be demaunded, as was expreſſed in the fourth Article aboue mentioned.
            
            
               LXV.
               Our will alſo is, by way of care and circumſpection, and till we haue otherwiſe ordained, that in all ſutes moued or to be commenced, wherein thoſe of the ſaid Religion ſhall ſtand as plaintifes or defendants, parties principall, or warranties in ciuill cauſes wherin our Officers Preſidentall tribunes haue power to Iudge for a laſt triall, they be permitted to demād that two of the Chamber where the cauſe is to be tried, abſtaine from the Iudgement of them, who without alledging any cauſe, ſhall be bound in this caſe to abſtaine, notwithſtanding the Ordinance by which the Iudges cannot be excepted againſt without iuſt cauſe, there remaining

vnto them beſides this, Refuſals of right againſt the others: and in matters criminall wherein alſo the ſaid Preſidents and other royall Iudges ſubalternate, iudge with peremptorie triall, the conuented being of the ſame Religion, may demand that three of the ſaid Iudges abſtaine from iudgement of their cauſes, without any expreſſion of cauſe. And the Prouoſts of the Marſhals of France, Vicebailifs, Vicemarſhals, Lieutenants of the ſhort Robe, and other Officers of ſuch like qualitie, ſhall iudge according to the Ordinances and Rules heretofore ſet downe in reſpect of vagabonds: and as for houſholders charged and ceaſſed with maintenance of Prouoſts, if they be of the ſaid Religion, they may demand that three of the ſaid Iudges abſtaine from iudgement of their cauſes; and they ſhall be bound to abſtaine, without any expreſſion of cauſe, except when in the companie where the ſaid cauſes ſhall be iudged, there be to the number of two in matters ciuill, and three in matters criminall of the ſaid Religion, in which caſe they ſhall not be permitted to refuſe without allegation of cauſe: the which ſhall likewiſe be common and reciprocall to Catholickes in manner and forme aboue mentioned, in reſpect of the refuſall of Iudges, where thoſe of the ſaid pretended reformed Religion ſhall be in greater number. But yet we do not meane, that the ſaid Preſidentall Tribunals, Prouoſts of Marſhals, Vicebailifs, Vicemarſhals, or other which iudge with abſolute triall, ſhould take vpon them by vertue of that which hath bene ſaid, the iudgement of tumults and troubles paſt: and as for crimes and inſolencies growing vpon other occaſions then about matters of the

troubles, from the beginning of the moneth of March in the yeare a thouſand fiue hundred foureſcore and fiue, till the end of the yeare 1597. in caſe they do proceed in triall of them: Our pleaſure is, that they may haue an appeale from their Iudgements before the Chambers ordained by this preſent Edict, as ſhall in like manner be obſerued to Catholicke complices, wherein thoſe of the ſaid pretended reformed Religion ſhall be parties.
            
            
               LXVI.
               We alſo will and ordaine, that from this time forward, in all inſtructions other then criminall proceſſes in the Stewardſhips of Thoulouſe, Carcaſſonne, Rouergue, Loragais, Beziers, Montpellier, and Niſmes, the Magiſtrate or Commiſſarie deputed for the ſaid inſtruction, if he be a Catholicke, ſhall be bound to take an Aſſociate of the ſaid pretended reformed Religion, whereupon the parties ſhall meete; and if it ſo fall out that they cannot meete, one by authoritie ſhall be taken of the ſaid Religion by the aboue named Magiſtrate or Commiſſarie: as in like manner, if the ſaid Magiſtrate or Commiſſarie be of the ſaid Religion, he ſhall be bound in the forme aboue mentioned, to take a Catholicke Aſſiſtant.
            
            
               LXVII.
               When any occaſion of criminall triall groweth by the Prouoſts of the Marſhals or any of the Lieutenants, againſt any one of the ſaid Religion an houſholder, who ſhall be charged and accuſed of any publicke crime, the ſaid Prouoſts or their Lieutenants, if they be Catholickes, ſhall be bound to call to the proceeding of ſuch a matter, an Aſſiſtant of the ſaid Religion:

the which Aſſociate ſhall alſo iudge in iudgement of the offence, and in the iudgement definitiue of the matter: which offence ſhall not be tried in any other place but at the next Preſidentall Tribunall, in open aſſemblie, by the principall Officers of that circuit who are then in place, on paine of being put out of office, except the conuented require to haue the ſaid offence tried in the Chamber or Courts ordained by this preſent Edict: in which caſe, for thoſe inhabiting in the Prouinces of Guyenne, Languedoc, Prouence, & Daulphiney, the Subſtitutes of our Procurots Generall in the ſaid Chambers, at the requeſt of thoſe inhabitants, ſhall cauſe the inditements and informations made againſt them to be brought in, to diſcerne and trie whether the matters be liable to Prouoſts courts or not, that afterwards according to the quality of the crimes, they may be returned to the ordinarie, or Prouoſtall Iudges, as they ought to do by reaſon, in obſeruing the contents of this preſent Edict. And the Preſidentall Iudges, Prouoſts of Marſhals, Vicebailifs, Vnderſtewards, and others that haue definitiue authoritie to iudge, to obey reſpectiuely, and obſerue the commandements impoſed on them by the ſaid Chambers: euen as they vſed to do in the ſaid Parliaments, vpon paine of forfait of their eſtates.
            
            
               LXVIII.
               The outcries, publicke ſales by writing, and venditionA cuſtome in France. of inheritances by the Speare, ſhall be performed in the places and at the houres accuſtomed, if it may be, according to our Ordinances, or elſe in the open market places, if in the place where the ſame inheritances be ſeated there be a market place, and

where there is none, they ſhall be made in the next market place within the precinct of that Seſſion where the iudgement ſhould be paſſed: and the paper of notice ſhall be faſtened on a poſt in the ſaid market place, and at the entrie of the Auditorie of the ſame place: and ſo by this meanes the ſaid publicke outcries ſhall be good and validious, and ſo to go forward to the interpoſition of a Decree, without depending on ſuch nullities as may be alledged in this reſpect.
            
            
               LXIX.
               All titles, papers, inſtructions, and informations that haue bene taken, ſhall be rendred and reſtored of the one ſide and the other, to thoſe to whom they appertaine, although the ſaid papers, or the Caſtels or houſes wherein they haue bene reſerued, were taken and ſeized vpon, whether it were by ſpeciall Commiſſion from the late laſt King deceaſſed, our moſt honourable Lord and father in law, or the commandements of the Gonernours and Lieutenants generall of our Prouinces, or by authority of the Heads of the other part, or vnder what pretext ſoeuer it were.
            
            
               LXX.
               The children of ſuch as haue retired themſelues out of our Kingdome, ſince the death of the late King Henrie the ſecond, our moſt honourable Lord and father in law, by reaſon of Religion and the preſent troubles, though the ſaid children were borne out of the Kingdome, ſhall be held for true French men, and ſubiects, and ſuch we haue and do declare them to be: and they ſhall not need to ſue out letters of naturalitie, or other warranties from vs then this preſent Edict; notwithſtanding all conſtitutions to the contrarie, the

which we haue and do abrogate, vpon condition that the ſaid children borne in forreine Countries, ſhall be bound within ten yeares after the publication of this Edict to come and reſide within the Kingdome.
            
            
               LXXI.
               Thoſe of the ſaid pretended reformed Religion, and others that haue followed their partie, who ſhall haue farmed before the troubles, any Offices or other Demaines, cuſtomes, forreine impoſitions, or other prerogatiues to vs appertaining, the which they could not peaceably enioy by reaſon of the ſame troubles, ſhall remaine diſcharged, as we diſcharge them, of that which they haue not receiued out of the ſaid farmes, or that without fraud they haue payed otherwiſe then into the Receipts of our Exchequers, notwithſtanding all obligations entred into by them in this reſpect to the contrarie.
            
            
               LXXII.
               All places, Townes, and Prouinces of our Realme, Countries, Lands and Seignories vnder our obedience, ſhall vſe and enioy the ſame priuiledges, immunities, liberties, enfranchiſements, faires, markets, iuriſdictions, and ſeates of Iuſtice, which they did before the troubles begun in the moneth of March in the yeare 1585. and others preceeding; notwithſtanding all letters to the contrarie, and the remouing of the ſaid ſeates, ſo they were made onely by reaſon of the troubles, which ſeates ſhallbe reſtored and reeſtabliſhed in the Townes and places where before they were.
            
            
               LXXIII.
               If there be any priſoners yet detained by authority of Iuſtice or otherwiſe, yea euen in the Galleys, by reaſon

of the troubles, or of the ſaid Religion, they ſhall be enlarged and ſet at free libertie.
            
            
               LXXIIII.
               Thoſe of the ſaid Religion ſhall not hereafter be ſurcharged nor oppreſſed with any charges ordinarie or extraordinarie more then the Catholikes, and according to the proportion of their goods and ſubſtance: and the parties that pretend themſelues to be ſurcharged, may haue remedie before the Iudges to whom the ordering thereof belongs: and all our ſubiects, as well of the Catholicke Religion, as of the pretended reformed, ſhall be indefferently diſcharged of all charges that haue bene impoſed on the one partie and the other during the troubles, vpon thoſe that were of the contrarie partie, and not cohering together, of debts credited and not payed, and expences disburſed without their conſents: but ſo, not to recouer thoſe profits which haue bene employed in the payment of thoſe charges.
            
            
               LXXV.
               Neither do we meane, that they of the ſaid Religion, and others who haue followed their parties, nor the Catholickes who dwelt in the Townes and places by them occupied and detained, and who haue contributed to them, ſhall be proſequuted for the payment of taxes, aydes, grants, increaſe, ſeſſments, waſtes, reparations, or other impoſitions and ſubſidies, accrewing and impoſed during the troubles happened before and ſince our comming to the Crowne, whether it were by Edicts and commandements from the late Kings our Predeceſſors, or by the counſell and aduice of the Gouernours and States of Prouinces, Courts of Parliament

and others, whereof we haue and do diſcharge them, forbidding our Treaſurers generall of France, and of our Exchequers, and Receiuers generall and particular, their Committies, Intermedlers, and other Ouer-ſeers and Commiſſaries of our Exchequers, to ſeeke after them, neither to moleſt or trouble them, directly or indirectly, in any ſort whatſoeuer.
            
            
               LXXVI.
               All Commanders, Lordes, Knights, Gentlemen, Officers, corporations of Townes and Communalties, and all others who haue aided & ſuccoured them, their widowes, heires and ſucceſſors, ſhall be quitted and diſcharged of all monies which by them and their Ordinances haue bene leuied and taken vp, as well royall debts to what ſumme ſoeuer they amount, as of Townes and Communalties, and the particulars of rents, reuenues, plate, Vents of Eccleſiaſticall moueable goods, and other woodes of high growth, whether of Demaine or other forfeitures, booties, ranſoms, or monies of any other nature, by them raiſed by meanes of the troubles begunne in the moneth of March, a thouſand fiue hundred foureſcore and fiue, and other precedent troubles, till our comming to the Crowne: neither they, nor thoſe by them authorized for the leuie of the ſaid monies, or that haue giuen and furniſhed them by their Ordinances, ſhall be any waies troubled for it, either now or hereafter: and both they and their Committies ſhall be diſcharged of all the managing and disburſements of the ſaid moneys, bringing in for a full diſcharge within foure moneths after the publication of this preſent Edict made in our Court of Parliament of Paris, acquittances duly taken

from the Heads of thoſe of the ſaid reformed Religion, or from thoſe who by them ſhall be deputed to the heating and clearing of Accompts, or from the Communalties of the Townes which had authoritie and power during the ſaid troubles. They ſhall in like manner be quitted and diſcharged of all acts of hoſtilitie, leuies and conducts of men of warre, enhauncing and raiſing of monies, raiſed according to the Ordinance of the ſaid Heads; the melting and taking of artilleries and munitions, making of powder, and ſaltpeeters, ſurpriſals, fortifications, diſmantellings and demolitions of Townes, Caſtles, boroughs, or villages; of any enterpriſe vpon them, combuſtions, and ruining of Churches or houſes, eſtabliſhments of Iuſtice, iudgements and executions by them, whether in matter ciuill or criminall, of any policie or gouernment inſtituted amongſt them, of voyages and intelligences, of negotiations, Treaties, or any Contracts made with all forreine Princes or Communalties, and introduction of the ſaid ſtrangers into Townes or any other part of our Kingdome, and generally of whatſoeuer hath bene done or negotiated during the ſaid troubles, from the death of the late King Henrie our moſt honourable Lord and father in law, for thoſe of the ſaid Religion, or others who haue followed their partie, though it be not particularly ſpecified nor expreſſed.
            
            
               LXXVII.
               Thoſe alſo of the ſaid Religion ſhall be diſcharged from all generall and Prouinciall aſſemblies by them called or held, as well at Mants as ſince elſewhere till this preſent; likewiſe of Counſels by them eſtabliſhed,

and ordained in the Prouinces, of deliberations, Decrees, and Ordinances made in the ſaid Aſſemblies, and Counſels, of the eſtabliſhment or augmentation of garriſons, aſſemblies of armed men, leuies and taking vp of our moneys, whether in the hands of our Receiners generall or particular, Collectors of Pariſhes, or otherwiſe in what manner ſoeuer, the cuſtome of ſalt, the continuation or new erection of treaties, impoſitions, and receipts thereof: that is to ſay, at Roan, and vpon the riuers of Charante, Garonne, of Roſne & Dordone, fights and incounters by ſea, and of all accidents and violences happening in procuring the payment of the ſaid treaties, and taxes, and other monies, of fortifications of Townes, Caſtles and places, of the impoſitions of moneys and tolles, receipts of the ſaid moneys, of the ſupplantation of our Receiuers, Farmers and other Officers, of the eſtabliſhing of others in their places, and of all vnions, negotiations and diſpatches made, as well within as without the Realme: and generally of whatſoeuer hath bene done, deliberated, written, & enacted by the ſaid Aſſemblies and Counſell: and they who haue giuen their aduice, ſealed, executed, or cauſed to be ſealed and executed the ſaid Ordinances, Orders and deliberations, ſhall not be queſtioned herein, nor their widowes, heires, nor ſucceſſors, at this preſent nor hereafter, as well as if the particularities were here amply ſet downe and declared. And perpetuall ſilence ſhall be impoſed euery where vpon our Procurors general, their Subſtitutes, and all thoſe who may challenge any intereſt therein, in what manner and forme ſoeuer it be, notwithſtanding

all Sentences, Decrees, Iudgements, Informations, and proceedings made to the contrarie.
            
            
               LXXVIII.
               We further approue, allow, and authoriſe the accompts which haue bene taken, cleared and examined by the Deputies of the ſaid Aſſembly. We will, that they together with acquittances & ſeuerall diſcharges which haue bene brought in by the accomptants, be brought into the Chamber of the Accompts of Paris three monethes after the publication of this preſent Edict, and committed to the hands of our Procuror generall, to be deliuered to the cuſtodie of him that keepeth the bookes and Regiſters of our Chamber, there to be conſulted with vpon any neceſſitie whatſoeuer: & the ſaid accompts neuer to be reuiewed, nor the accomptants bound in any appearance or rectifications, but in caſe of omiſſion of receipt, or falſe acquittances; we impoſing ſilence on our ſaid Procuror generall, for the ſurpluſſage which might be alledged as defectiue, or that formalities were not well obſerued: forbidding all men of our accompts, as wel in Paris as in other prouinces where they be eſtabliſhed, to take any notice thereof, in what manner or forme ſoeuer.
            
            
               LXXIX
               And as for thoſe accompts which haue not yet bene broughtin, our pleaſure is, they ſhall be heard, cleared, and examined, by the Commiſſaries which by vs ſhall be thereunto deputed; who without difficultie ſhall paſſe and allow of the ſaid parcels paied by the ſaid accomptants, by authority of the Ordinances of the ſaid Aſſemblie, or others hauing power and force.
            
            
               
               LXXX.
               All Collectors, Receiuers, Farmers, and all others well and duely diſcharged of all the ſummes of money which they haue well and truly paied to the ſaid Committies of the ſaid Aſſemblie, of what nature ſoeuer they be, vntill the laſt day of this moneth, we will haue them all paſſed and allowed in our Accompts, which ſhall be giuen vp in our Chamber of Accompts, ſimply and ſincerely by vertue of the acquittance brought in and deliuered, and if any were afterward diſpatched or deliuered, they ſhall remaine voide, and thoſe who ſhall deliuer or accept of them, ſhall be condemned in a penaltie of falſe demeanor and cheuiſance. And if there be any accompts alreadie brought in, by which there remaineth any reckonings or charges due in this reſpect, we haue accquitted and cleared them, we haue and do reeſtabliſh the ſame parties abſolutely by vertue of theſe preſents, they being no wayes required for any thing aboue mentioned, to obtaine particular letters, or any other teſtimonie of diſcharge, then the copie of this preſent Article.
            
            
               LXXXI.
               The Gouernors, Captaines, Conſuls, and perſons authorized for the gathering in of monyes to pay the garriſons held by thoſe of the ſaid Religion, whom our Receiuers and parochiall Collectors ſhall haue furniſhed by way of lone vpon their bils and obligations, whether by conſtraint, or to obey the commandements impoſed on them by the Treaſurors Generall, the neceſſarie monies for entertainment of the ſaid garriſons till the publication of that which was inferred in the Proclamation, we cauſed to be diſpatched in

the beginning of the yeare 1596. and the addition thereunto by vs granted, ſhall be held acquitted & diſcharged of that which was payd for the effect aboue mentioned, although in the ſaid bills and obligations expreſſe mention be made thereof, which ſhall be returned to them as voyd. And to giue ſatisfaction herein, the Treaſurers Generall in each generalitie, ſhall cauſe the ſaid Collectors to haue quittances from the particular Receiuers of our taxes, and ſo from the Receiuers Generall quittances to paſſe to the Receiuers particular: for diſcharge of which Receiuers Generall, the ſummes which they haue to demand by way of account, as formerly was ſaid, ſhall be endorſed vpon the mandates preſented by the pettie Treaſurer of the wars, vnder the names of the Treaſurers Generall extraordinarie of our wars, for the payment of the ſaid garriſons. And if the mandates amount not to ſo much as our Proclamation and addition of the yeare 1596. imported, We ordaine that for the ſupplying of the ſame, new mandates ſhall be diſpatched, to furniſh what is wanting for the diſcharge of our accomptant, and reſtitution of the ſaid promiſes and obligations, ſo that nothing may hereafter be demanded of thoſe that paſſed them, and that all letters of allowance requiſite for the diſcharge of the accomptants be granted, by vertue of this preſent Article.
            
            
               LXXXII.
               They alſo of the ſaid Religion ſhall deſiſt and giue ouer from this preſent, all practiſes, negotiations and intelligences, as well within as without our kingdome, and the ſaid Aſſemblies & Counſels eſtabliſhed in the Prouinces ſhall preſently diſſolue, and all leagues and

aſſociations made or to be made vnder any pretext whatſoeuer, to the preiudice of this our preſent Edict, ſhall be voide and annihilated, We expreſly forbidding all our ſubiects to make hereafter any collections or leuyings of money without our permiſſion, any fortifications, enrolement of men, congregations or aſſemblies, other then ſuch as are permitted them by our preſent Edict, and that without armes: the which we abſolutely prohibit, and forbid them, vpon paine of being ſeuerely puniſhed, and as contemners and infringers of our commandements and Ordinances.
            
            
               LXXXIII.
               All prizes which haue bene taken during the troubles, by vertue of licences or letters of Mart, and thoſe that haue bene taken by land from them of the contrarie partie, and which haue bene examined by Iudges and Commiſſaries of the Admiraltie, or by the Heads of thoſe of the ſaid Religion or their Counſell, ſhall lye dead by the benefite of this preſent Edict, and no proſecution thereof to be made, neither the Captaines and others that haue taken the ſame repriſals, or boot, their pledges, and the ſaid Iudges, their widowes or heires, ſhall not be troubled or moleſted in any ſort whatſoeuer, notwithſtanding all Decrees of our priuie Counſell and the Parliaments, and all letters of rapine and ſeizures hanging in queſtion, and not being decided, whereof we would haue them to be fully and clearely diſcharged.
            
            
               LXXXIIII.
               Neither ſhall they of the ſaid Religion be moleſted or troubled for oppoſitions or diſturbances by them made heretofore, yea though ſince the troubles, vpon

the execution of ſentences and Decrees diuulged for the reeſtabliſhment of the Catholicke, Apoſtolicke, Romane Religion.
            
            
               LXXXV.
               And as for that which hath bene done or taken during the troubles, either with or beſides the way of hoſtilitie, againſt the publicke or particular Orders of the Heads, or of the communalties of Prouinces who had authoritie, it may be proſecuted by courſe of Iuſtice.
            
            
               LXXXVI.
               But neuertheleſſe, in reſpect that if the ſame which was performed againſt the Orders both of the one part and the other, be indifferently reſerued and excepted out of the generall abolition inferred by our preſent Edict, and is ſubiect to be called in queſtion, there is not a ſouldier which may not be brought within the compaſſe of it, whereupon tumults and troubles may be renewed. For this cauſe, We will and ordaine, that only execrable caſes ſhall be excepted out of the ſaid abolition: as rauiſhing and enforcing of women and maides, combuſtions, murders, and thefts felloniouſly acted by lying in priuie waites, beſides the courſes of open hoſtilitie, and to compaſſe particular reuenges, contrarie to the proceedings of warre, breaking vp of Paſſeports and ſafe conducts, with murders and pillages, without any iniunction or command, in reſpect of thoſe of the Religion and others who haue followed the partie of the Heads, who had authoritie ouer them, grounded vpon particular occaſions, which moued them to command and ordaine ſuch things.
            
            
               
               LXXXVII.
               We alſo ordaine, that puniſhment be inflicted for crymes and delicts, committed betweene perſons of the ſame partie, except it be in actions commanded by the Heads of the one part and of the other, according to the neceſſitie, lawes, and orders of warre. And as for leuies and exactions of monies, bearing of armes, and other exploits of warre, performed out of priuate authority, and without auouchment, it ſhall be proſecuted by way of Iuſtice.
            
            
               LXXXVIII.
               In townes diſmanteled during the troubles, the ſame ruines and diſmantelings may by our permiſſion, be reedified and repaired by the inhabitants at their expence and charge, and the prouiſions heretofore ſet downe in this reſpect ſhall hold and take place.
            
            
               LXXXIX.
               We will, ordaine, and are pleaſed, that all the Knights, Gentlemen, and others, of what condition or qualitie ſoeuer, being of the pretended reformed Religion, and others who haue followed their partie, may reenter and really enioy all and each of their goods, rights, titles, claimes, and actions, notwithſtanding the Iudgements denounced during the ſaid troubles, and by reaſon of them: the which ſentences, ſeizures and Iudgements, and all that enſued thereof, we haue to this end declared and do declare void and of no effect nor value.
            
            
               XC.
               The purchaſes which they of the pretended reformed Religion haue made, and others vpholding their partie, vnder the prerogatiue of any other then of the

late Kings our predeceſſors for ſtable poſſeſſions belonging to the Church, ſhall take no place nor effect: but we both will and ordaine, and are well pleaſed, that the ſaid Eccleſiaſticks reenter incontinently and without delay, and that they ſhall be maintained in the actuall poſſeſſion and enyoiance of the ſaid goods ſo alienated, without being bound to reſtore the price of ſuch ſales; and this notwithſtanding the contracts of vendition and ſale, the which for this effect we haue abrogated and made voide: and that the ſaid purchaſors ſhall haue no remedy againſt the Heads by whoſe authoritie the ſaid goods haue bene ſold. And yet neuertheleſſe for the disburſement of moneys by them truely and without faud layed out, letters patents of permiſſion ſhall be granted to thoſe of the ſaid Religion, to ſeſſe, and equally lay the ſaid ſummes vpon them, whereunto the ſaid ſales ſhall amount: and the ſaid purchaſors ſhall not pretend any action for their dammages and intereſts for defaut of enioyance, but they ſhall be contented for the disburſement of thoſe moneys by them furniſhed for the price of the ſaid acquiſitions or purchaſes: making good vpon the ſame price the fruits and benefites by them receiued, in caſe that the ſame vent and ſale was made at too meane and vnequall a price
            
            
               XCI.
               And to the end that as well our Iuſtices and Officers, as other our ſubiects, may be clearely and with all certaintie aduertiſed of our will and intention, and to remoue all ambiguities and doubts which may be caſt by meanes of the precedent Edicts, by reaſon of the diuerſitie of them, we haue and do cleare all precedent

Edicts, ſecret articles, declarations, moderations, reſtrictions, interpretations, Iudgements, Regiſters, as well ſecret as other deliberations, heretofore by vs or the Kings our predeceſſors made in Courts of Parliaments or otherwhere, touching the matter of the ſaid Religion, and troubles happened within our ſaid Realme, to be of no effect and validitie: the which, and all abrogations therein contained, we do by this our preſent Edict annihilate and abrogate, and and from this preſent, as then, we do reuoke, caſhire, and annihilate, declaring expreſly how our pleaſure is, that this our Edict ſhall remaine firme and inuiolable, to be obſerued and held not onely by our ſaid Iuſtices and Officers, but alſo by other ſubiects, without depending or hauing reſpect to whatſoeuer may be derogant or contrarie to the ſame.
            
            
               XCII.
               And for the greater aſſurance of the obſeruation and keeping thereof, which we ayme at, we will and ordaine, and it ſtands with our pleaſure, that all the Gouernours and Lieutenants of our Prouinces, Bailiffes, Stewards, and ordinarie Iudges of the Townes within our ſaid Realme, incontinently after the receiuing of this Edict, ſhall ſweare euery one within their peculiar iuriſdictions to obſerue and keepe it: as alſo Mayors, Shiriffes, Deputies and Conſuls, and Iurours of the Townes, whether annuall or perpetuall. We further enioyne our ſaid Bailiffes, Stewards, or their Lieutenants and other Iudges, to cauſe the inhabitants of the ſame Townes both of the one and other Religion, to be ſworne to the embracing of this preſent Edict, preſently after the publication thereof;

taking all thoſe of the ſaid Townes into our protection and ſafegard, and one to the protection and ſafegard of another: charging them mutally, and by publicke acts, to anſwer in comely manner to all oppoſitions that ſhall be made within the ſaid Townes to this our ſaid Edict, by any of the inhabitants of them, or elſe to commit into the hands of Iuſtice the ſaid oppoſites.
               We commaund our faithfull and beloued, thoſe that keepe Courts of Parliament, Chambers of Accompts, and Courts of Aides, that preſently after this Edict receiued all things ceaſſe; and vpon paine of annihilating the acts they ſhall otherwiſe performe, to miniſter the like oathes as aboue mentioned, and to cauſe our ſaid Edict to be publiſhed and inrolled in our ſaid Courts, according to the forme and tenor of it, plainely and ſincerely, without vſing any qualifications, reſtrictions, declarations, or ſecret Regiſters, nor attending any other iniunction or command from vs: and ſo we will our Procurors generall preſently and without delay to require and proſecute the ſaid publication.
               In like manner we impoſe our command vpon the ſaid people keeping our Courts of Parliament, Chambers of our accomtps, Courts of aides, Bailiffes Stewards, Prouoſts, and other our Iuſtices and Officers to whom it ſhall appertaine, and their Liuetenants, that they cauſe to be read, publiſhed, & enregiſtred this our preſent Edict and Ordinance, in their ſeuerall Courts and iuriſdictions, and the ſame to embrace, obſerue & keepe, from point to point, and to cauſe all ſuch whom it any wayes concernes, fully and peaceably

to enioy the benefit of the contents thereof, ceaſſing and cauſing to ceaſſe, all lets and hinderances to the contrarie. For ſo our pleaſure is. In witneſſe whereof, we haue ſealed theſe preſents with our owne hand: and to the end it may euer continue for a firme and ſtable Act, we haue ſet and put to our Seale. Giuen at Nantes, in the moneth of Aprill, the yeare of our Lord a thouſand fiue hundred foureſcore and eighteene. And of our reigne the ninth.
               
                  Signed,
HENRY.
And vnderneath,
By the King ſitting in Counſell.
FORGET.
And on the ſide. VISA.
And ſealed with the great Seale, in greene wa
                     ••
                  , vpon labels of red and greene ſilke.
            
         
      
   