
      
         
            
            
            
               THat the Statute of 17. Edwardi 4. made to preuent the abuſes in
making of Tyles, not prouiding ſufficient remedie againſt the
great miſchiefes ariſing by the great increaſe of building. And
there being no Law at all touching the making of Brickes.
            Thereupon Queene Elizabeth Anno 10. did incorporate the
Mr. Keepers, or Wardens of the Tylers and Brick-layers of
LONDON, and to haue the gouernment and ordering of that
Art and Myſtery, and all things pertayning thereunto, within LONDON, or
fifteene miles compaſſe thereof, with power to make Ordinances: which Charter is
ſithence confirmed by his Maieſtie.
            The Maſter and Wardens (among other things) did ordaine that it might be
lawfull for them twiſe euery yeere, or oftner, to enter into any place, where any
earth or clay ſhall be digged, within fifteene miles compaſſe of LONDON, to make
any Tyles or Bricke; or where any Chalke or other ſtone ſhall be digged, to be vſed
with the laying of Bricke or Tile, or for making of Lyme, to view the ſame to be
good and well done. And whether euery Bricke intended for ſale, be in length nine
Inches, in bredth foure Inches and a quarter, in thickneſſe two Inches and a quarter;
euery plaine Tyle in length ten Inches and a halfe, in bredth ſixe Inches and a quarter,
in thickneſſe halfe an Inch and a quarter; euery Roofe-Tyle in length thirteene
Inches, in thickneſſe one Inch, with conuenient depth; euery Corner-Tyle or
Couer-Tyle, in length ten Inches and a halfe: That euery Sand-Cart ſhould containe
eighteene Buſhels at the leaſt, and euery Lime-Sacke a Buſhell of burned lime,
being knit together, and that it be well burned; with diuers other Ordinances: All
which were confirmed by Sir Nicholas Bacon Knight, Lord Keeper of the great Seale;
William, Marques of Wincheſter, Lord Treaſorer of England; Sir Robert Catline
Knight, Lord chiefe Iuſtice of England, vnder their Hands and Seales.
            But ſeeing the abuſes of this kinde increaſe 
                  ••
               ily, to the great labour and expenſe
of the ſaid Maſter an
                  •
                Wardens:
               They humbly pray,
               
THat it may be Enacted, that the Aſſize of Bricke and Tyle, and the meaſur
                  •
               
of Lyme and Sand, may be obſerued in LONDON, and in all places within
fifteene miles compaſſe thereof, according to the ſaid Ordinances.
            And that the Maſter and Wardens, or their Deputies, may enter and ſearch for
any defaults and offences, and finding any, to make entry thereof, and of the certainetie
thereof, in ſome Court of their Company, to be held within one Moneth
after.
            And that euery perſon offending in making, ſelling, or offering to put to ſale any
Bricke, Tyle, Lime or Sand, contrary to the ſaid Ordinances, ſhall forfeite as followeth
(viz.) for euery 1000. of Bricks iijs. iiijd. For euery 1000. of plaine-tyle iijs. iiijd.
For euery 100. of Roofe-tyle xiid For euery 100. of Gutter-tyle, or corner-tyle, xijd.
For euery Load of Sand iiijd. And for euery 100. of Lyme ijs. vjd.
            And that in lieu of their great paines in ſearching and viewi
                  •
               g, they may haue
for Brickes, Tyles, Lyme and Sand, put to ſale in LONDON or 
                  ••••
               hin fifteene miles
compaſſe as followeth (viz.) for euery 1000. of Bricke jd. For euery 1000. of
Tyles jd. For euery Load of Sand ob. For euery 100. of Lyme jd.
            And that they may diſtraine for the ſame. The one moyetie to the King, the
other to the Maſter and Wardens: And they to pay the Kings moyetie yeerely in
Michaelmas Tearm
                  •
                into the Exchequer.
         
      
   