
      
         
            
            
            THE LETTER
OF THE FRENCH
King, to the Parliament of Roan,
concerning the death of the
Marſhall D'Ancre.
            
            Together with an Act of the ſaide
Parliament thereupon.
            
            
               COR VNVM VIA VNA
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            
               LONDON
Printed by H. L. for Nathanael Newbery; and are to
be ſould at his Shop vnder St. Peters in Cornehill,
and in Popes-head Alley.
1617.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  COR VNVM VIA VNA
               
            
            THE
KINGS LETTER
ſent to the Parliament of
Roan.
            By the King.
            
               OVR Truſtie & Beloued: Wee
doubt not, but that in the ſequel
of thoſe proceedings vvhich
haue paſſed, ſince the death of
the late King Our moſt honored
Lord, and Father, you haue euidently obſeru'd,
how Marſhall D' Ancre and his wife, abuſing
Our minoritie, and the power which of
long time hee poſſeſſed with the Queene our

moſt honoured Lady and Mother, did practice
to vſurpe the whole authoritie of our State, to
diſpoſe abſolutely of all affaires, and to remooue
all meanes, from our comming to the
knowledge or vnderſtanding thereof; A diſſeigne
which they ſo wrought and effected,
that hitherto Wee carried but onely the bare
Name, and title of a King: They condemning
it as a capitall crime in any of our Officers or
Subiects (when they did viſite vs in particular)
to entertaine vs with any ſerious diſcourſe.
Which God of his infinite bountie giuing Vs
the grace at laſt to diſcerne, and pointing out
vnto Vs as it were with his omnipotent finger,
the imminent perill that hung ouer Our perſon,
and State, through ſuch an inſatiable and
irregular ambition; Wee gaue teſtimonie at
length of our apprehenſion in this point, and
of the ſingular deſire Wee had, to take requiſite
and due order for the ſame: Yet were Wee
enforced in all our exterior actions, to diſguiſe
and couer that, which inwardly in heart Wee
determin'd and reſolued vpon, while it might
pleaſe the ſame our good GOD to open Vs a
fit way, and conuenient opportunitie, to apply
thereunto ſome preualent remedy. Vpon

theſe intentions, not many daies ſince, it fel out,
that ſundry perſons, both of Our capitall Citie
of Paris, as alſo others of diuerſe parts of Our
Kingdome, taking occaſion, of the ſaid Marſhall
D' Ancre his abſence (who was gone into
Normandie, vvith a deliberation there to ſoiourne
for ſome time) addreſſed them-ſelues
to the Queene Our ſaid Lady & Mother, and
to ſuch Miniſters as the ſaid Marſhall and his
wife had eſtabliſhed, (who vnder them, at their
will and pleaſure, ſhould carry and ſway all proceedings
within this State) and effectually layd
open their reaſons to them, why it was moſt
neceſſary and expedient, that Wee our ſelfe
ſhould readily and ſeriouſly aſſume the ſole
Adminiſtration of our weightie affaires; otherwiſe,
that our Realme which now began to riſe
and reuolt in all parts by meanes of this vvant
and defect, could not auoyde an abſolute and
lamentable ſubuerſion.
            Whereof Marſhall D' Ancre hauing been aduertiſed,
and returning with all expedition, began
to employ his power and policy, not onely
to ſtop the courſe of theſe prouident propoſitions
and ouertures, as repugnant to his
owne ends, but further he reſolued to depriue

Our ſelfe of all meanes to put them in practice,
by certain counſells and courſes, which I think
yet more fit to conceale, than publiſh. All
which being comne to Our perfect vnderſtanding
and notice, and conſidering that beſides
the danger of Our perſon, the mortall hatred
that almoſt all our good ſubiects and ſeruants
did beare towards the vſurped and inſolent authority
and gouernement of theſe people,
would in ſuch ſort exaſperate, and obdurate,
the mindes of men within Our kingdome, as it
would be in danger to growe to an vnquenchable
flame and combuſtion:
            Moued I ſay, by theſe iuſt, and moſt weightie
conſiderations, & by the heauenly inſtinct,
that God vpon this occaſion put into Our
heart: Wee reſolued to ſecure Our ſelfe of the
perſon of the ſaide Marſhall D' Ancre, giuing
expreſſe charge to Sieur de Vitry Captaine of
Our Guards, to apprehend and arreſt him
within Our Caſtle of the Louure. The which
Our pleaſure hee intending to put in execution,
the ſaid Marſhall (who according to his
accuſtomed manner, had many followers about
him) himſelfe with ſome other of his company,
made offer to reſiſt: wherupon, certaine

bullets were diſcharged; of which ſome light
on the ſaid Marſhall, ſo as hee remain'd dead
vpon the place.
            Afterwards, Wee cauſed his wife to be arreſted,
and alſo his aboue mentioned Miniſters;
hauing furthermore entreated the Queene
Our ſaide Lady and Mother, to bee content
that from thenceforward, We might take
the gouernement of Our State into Our owne
hands, and ſo labour to diuert from it thoſe
extreamities and miſeries, whereinto it hath
beene plunged, by the ſiniſter counſels which
ſhee formerly had made vſe of. The accompliſhment
of which buſineſſe Wee hope, God
of his gratious goodnes will the more readily
grant Vs, in that all our intentions haue no other
ayme or ſcope, but his glorie, and the
good of Our ſubiects. Which We thought good
to aduertiſe you of, to the end you may make
it knowne through all your precincts; adding
to theſe formerly ſpecified, any other reaſons
you ſhall thinke fit and conuenient, for containing
euery man within the bounds of obedience
and dutie; Taking vigilant care, that
none may riſe, or mutine, within Our ſaid territories,
& that nothing may diſturb the peace,

and quiet, which We deſire to haue maintain'd.
But if there be any that haue Complaints, or
Requeſts to make, let them bee aſſured, that if
they repaire to Vs, by thoſe mediations and
waies, that ſubiects ought to vſe, when they
would petition to their King, they ſhall alwaies
find Vs enclining to whatſoeuer ſtandeth
with reaſon, or iuſtice.
            This Action hath here beene ſo approued
and allowed, that here is nothing but applauſe,
and euery mans benediction vpon Vs for the
ſame, becauſe We attempted it in ſo due and
neceſſarie a time: and We hope it will receiue
no leſſe approbation in other places. In the
meane while, Wee haue writ to all our Lieutenants,
and Generalls of our Armies, to keep
them ſtill afoot, that if occaſion ſerue, We may
imploy them againſt thoſe, that will not acknowledge
Our ſoueraigne Authoritie. Wee
will ſhortly diſpatch vnto you Letters of inſtruction
more at large.
            
               Giuen at Paris, 
                  this
xxiiii. of Aprill. 1617.
               
Signed: Lewis.
And vnderneath: Pottier.
            
         
         
            
            The Act of the Court Parliament of
Roan, heerevpon enſuing.
            
               THE vvhole Court, and the
ſeuerall Houſes therof aſſembled,
doe moſt expreſly enioyne
and commaund, conformably
to the Kings moſt
excellent Maieſtie his vvill
and pleaſure, ſignified in his Letters bearing
date the xxiiij. of this Moneth; that thoſe of the
Garriſons, within the Caſtles of Pontdelarch,
Caen, and Quillebeuf, doe preſently make ouer
thoſe places into the hands of thoſe exempt,
now deputed by his Maieſtie, to eſtabliſh therin
ſuch order, as He hath appointed. And they
haue, and doe prohibite all the Kings ſubiects,
either by themſelues to worke or to cauſe any
other to labour in the fortifications of the ſaid
places, or to bring in any victuall or munition,
vpon the vtmoſt paine and perill of their liues;

All the Iudges, and Officers of the ſaid places
beeing heereby enioyned to ſee this executed,
and to aduertiſe the ſaid Court of their proceeding
heerein. To which end, we haue cauſed
this preſent Act to be ſent vnto them, by the
Kings Attorny Generall, there to be publiſhed
where need ſhall require.
            
               Giuen at Roan in the
ſaid Court of Parliament, the xxvj. of Aprill.
1617.
               
               Signed: 
               De Bois leveſque.
            
         
         
            
            A further Aduertiſement.
            
               KNow alſo good Reader, that it is
credibly reported, that the dead
corps of the Marſhall D' Ancre hath
vndergone the greateſt Indignities
and Shame, that can bee inflicted, or proceed
from the fury of a vulgar multitude, prouoked
to hatred by his Tyranny: viz. that being
buried obſcurely, befitting his baſeneſſe, hee
was taken vp againe, and dragged through the
ſtreets of Paris with his face on the ground,
vnto the gallowes: where being disfigured and
diſmembred in moſt ſhamefull manner, he was
as ſhamefully hanged, and his priuie members
nayl'd thereunto. But that ſatisfied not their
rage, vntill they had taken downe his miſerable
body, and diuided it into many parts (burning
ſome) and diſperſing them into diuerſe
places; that ſo his ſhame, and their indignation
towards him, might bee publiſhed into thoſe
parts that had felt his tyrannous inſolencie in
the time of his former greatneſſe and potencie.
            And withall, that his Wife beeing impriſoned,
hath had her haire ſhorne off her head,
for ſome probation and triall of her witchcraft:
but the effects of that are not yet certified.
            FINIS.
         
      
   