
      
         
            
            
            THE
Prouerbes of the noble
and woorthy ſouldier
Sir Iames Lopez de Mendoza
Marques of Santillana, with the
Paraphraſe of D. Peter Diaz of
Toledo: Wherin is contained
whatſoeuer is neceſſarie
to the leading of an
honeſt and vertuous
life.
            Tranſlated out of
Spaniſhe by Barnabe
Googe.
            ¶Imprinted at London
by Richarde
Watkins. 1579.
         
         
            
            
            To the right honourable
Sir William Cecill, of the moſt
honourable order of the Garter Knight, Baron
of Burghley, maiſter of her Maieſties
wardes and liuereis, and
Lord high Treaſurer of
England.
            
               WHen I had (right
honourable and my
eſpecial good lord)
thorowly peruſed
and cōſidered theſe
Prouerbs, or rather
Aphoriſmes of the marques of Santilliana.
I thought it not amis to beſtow
ſome trauaile in turning them
into Engliſh: albeit I found them in
ſome places ſo darkly written, and
ſo corrupted by the Printer, as I
could ſundrie times hardly attain to
the authors meaning. The gentlemā
(if but in reſpect of his eſtate and
calling deſerueth of all men to be
welthought of. But conſidering the

matter wherof he entreateth (which
is chiefly to traine his readers to honeſtie
and vertuous life) he meriteth
at the handes of euerie good man
with double honour to be receiued
and welcomed. For there is nothing
aſſuredly more acceptable to God,
nor that in deede better beſeemeth
man, then an vpright and honeſt
conuerſation. And although the
chiefe intent of his writing was for
the inſtitution and behauiour of a
Prince, yet are his rules and inſtructions
ſo generall, as they may verie
well ſerue for guides in good demeanour,
to euerie man of what degree
ſoeuer he be. My ſimple tranſlation
(for the Authour himſelf needeth
no defender) I moſt humbly
commend to the protection of your
Lordſhip, as to him that is perfectly
able to iudge, whether I haue truly
and faythfully followed my paterne,

or no. As for ſuch faults as
haue paſſed, as well in the title as in
the notes, being as they were committed
in my abſence, & without
my knowlege, I truſt your lordſhip
wil diſcharge me of the blame. God
ſende your Lordſhip with long and
happie life to attaine to the end
of your good and honourable
deſires.
            
               Your Lordſhips faythfull
ſeruaunt Barnabe
Googe.
            
         
         
            
            The life of Sir Iames Lopez
de Mendoza, Marques of
Santilliana.
            
               SIr Iames Lopes de
Mendoza, Marques of
Santilliana, & Earle of
the Realme of Mancanares,
Lorde of Vega,
ſonne of the Admirall
Don Diego de Hurtado, and nephewe to
Peter Goncales de Mendoza, Lord of Alua,
was a man of a meane ſtature, verie well
limmed and proporcioned, and of a gracious
countenance, diſcended of great parentage, a
Caſtilian and verie ancient. He was a man
of a quicke iudgement, and diſcrete, and of ſo
great a minde, that neither could the weightieſt
matters that were diſmay him, nor the
dealing in matters of ſmal moment any whit
delight him. In the ſtaiedneſſe of his perſon,
and the grauitie of his ſpeach, he ſhewed him
ſelfe to be a Gentleman, and of a noble mind.
He was a man, as they vſe to ſay, verie well
ſpoken, ſo as hee was ſeldome heard to ſpeake
any thing that was not woorth the noting:
whether it were in matters of learning, or of

diſport. He was courteous and of great interteinment
to all ſuch as came vnto him,
ſpecially learned men. After the deceaſe
of the Admirall his father, and the Ladie
Eleanor of Vega his mother, being left verie
yong and within age, he was diſſeiſed of
the Aſturies of Santilliana and a greate
peece of his liuing beſide. But comming to riper
yeares, & perceiuing himſelf to be greatly
abuſed, verie want and neceſsitie, which
many times awaketh a good wit, & his great
mind that could not abide to be conſined, made
him to vſe ſuch diligence, as partly by lawe,
partly by ſwoorde, hee did ſhortly recouer his
owne. Hee was both in his meate and his
drinke verie temperate, hauing herein a ſingular
and ſpeciall grace. Touching his inclination,
he gaue himſelfe in his life time vnto
two notable exerciſes, the one the feates of
armes, the other ſtudie and learning, neither
did his warlike exerciſes anie whit hinder his
ſtudie, nor his ſtudie was anie impediment to
the conference which he had with the Souldiours
and Gentlemen of his houſe: about the
trampe & faſhion of their armour & Inſtrumentes
of defence, howe to offend the enimie,
how to order his battails, & how to encampe,

how to aſſault, and how to defend fortreſſes,
and other like actions belonging to martiall
affaires, wherin hee tooke a great deale the
more pleaſure, becauſe he had therwith been
brought vp from his youth. And to the ende
that ſuch as ſerued vnder him might haue
experience of ſuch things as they had hearde
him ſpeake off, hee had alwayes in his houſe,
Tilt, Turney, and Barriers, with ſundry other
exerciſes belonging to the fielde, to the ende
that his people being alwayes accuſtomed to
ſuch martiall exerciſes, might better away
with the paines of a ſouldier, whē they came
to it. Hee was a gentleman of great nobility
and valour, beeing in his determinations very
wiſe and temperate, and in his execution
ſpeedy and reſolute: ſo as there could neither
be founde any raſhneſſe in his courage, or any
iot of cowardiſe in his deuiſes. He had been
Generall in many fought Battailes betwixt
the Chriſtians and the Sarazens, wherein he
both wan and loſt. But the greateſt and of
moſt account, was a battaile that was fought
with the Aragoneſes, and one other at the
riuer of Torotto. And theſe two Battailes
were indeed every hot and blooddy. For fighting
without any retire on either ſide, there

were ſlaine an infinite number on both ſides:
at which ſeruices, becauſe this worthy gētleman
happened to be preſent, though hee ſawe
his owne forces all to weake, and very vnmeete
to match with the enimie, yet becauſe
the enemie was in ſight, he thought it a greater
ſhame and reproche to turne his backe
without Battaile, then to looſe his life or the
fielde in fighting. Wherevpon he determined
to try the battaile, wherein hee fought with
ſuch egerneſſe and courage, that although
he was his ſelfe ſore hurt, and all his company
defeated, yet for his own perſon he gained
the name and reputation of a worthy & valiant
Captaine. The ſufficiencie of this noble
gentleman beeing thorowly knowen to King
Iohn, he was ſent Lieutenāt general againſt
the Sarazens, which charge he toke vpō him
with a verye glad and willing minde, continuing
a long time vpon the frontiers. During
which ſeaſon he fought diuers battailes, and
had many ſharpe encounters, both with the
king of Granada & others of his captaines,
wherin he had alwayes the better. He made
many roades into the Country, where he wan
by fine force the towne of Huelma, & draue
the Moores to ſuch a ſtreigt, that hee

he woulde haue wonne a number of townes
more, & haue done diuerſe worthie exploites
had not the king (being by matters of more
importance at home enforced) commaunded
him to make an ende of the warres, and to
conclude a peece vpon the receyt of which cō
               miſsion
he bare ſuch a hand vpon them as he
brought them in ſubiection, and cauſed them
to pay for yearely tribute a great quantitie of
golde, ſuch as neither the king did euer looke
to receyue, nor the Sarazens did euer thinke
to haue payed. And beſide this yearely tribute,
he compelled them to ſet at libertie all
ſuch Chriſtian priſoners as remained in their
cuſtodie, all which this good Marques redeemed
out of captiuitie, and brought them
home to their Countrey. He gouerned with
great wiſedome all ſuch ſouldiours as were
vnder his regiment, behauing himſelfe amongſt
them both as a captaine and a companiō,
being neither inſolent in authoritie, nor
baſe minded in his familiaritie. For he was
alwayes in heart of ſuch humilitie and
mildneſſe, as made him to be beloued of God,
and outwardly of ſuch grauitie and countenance
as cauſed him to be reuerēced of men.
He bountifully beſtowed vpon his ſouldiers,

what ſo euer belonged vnto him in right of
his generallſhip of al ſuch ſpoyles and booties
as were taken, beſides that which he gaue thē
in their neceſſities out of his owne purſe: and
to ſuch as ſhewed themſelues thankefull for
his bountie, he vſed to ſay, that if we wiſh wel
to him that doth well vnto vs, wee ought to
giue well to him that wiſheth well vnto vs.
and thus maintayning his credite by the
meanes of his great liberality, he was of all
his ſouldiours greatly beloued, who fearing to
offend him dyd alwayes obſerue a perfect diſcipline
in the fielde. His rare and ſingular
vertues beeing knowen to the king, and how
woorthy he was of honor & dignity, he forthwith
aduaunced him to the Marqueſhip of
Santilliana & created, him Erle of the Real
of Mancenares, addorning him with great
lands & reuenues. Sometimes he committed
vnto him the charge of his owne perſon, and
many times the gouernment of al his dominions.
Who had ſuch a ſpecial grace in his gouerning,
as the Poets of that age accounted him
for his noble behauiour in court, an other Apollo:
& for his great valour in the field a 2
Hanibal. He was a great obſeruer of al ſuch
things as belōged to perfit māhood, & ſo great

a reprehender of cowardiſe and faintneſſe of
heart, that ſeeing on a time a Gentleman to
weepe, for the great miſhappes that had happened
vnto him, breaking foorth into ſome
choler, he ſayd vnto him: Oh what a ſhame
is it to ſee a Gentleman to ſhedde teares for
anie thing, howe grieuous ſoeuer it be, ſauing
onely for his offences towardes GOD?
He was a man of a great minde, which nobleneſſe
of minde was an ornament & beautie
to all other his vertues. A couetous
worldling comming vnto him, and telling
him that hee let his landes farre vnder the
value, and promiſing to make him a much
greater reuenew, as one not willing to giue
eare to any ſuch matter, hee made him this
aunſwere: My friend I doe not vnderſtand
thy language, goe ſpeake it, I pray thee, to
ſome other that can better vnderſtand thee.
He vſed alwayes to ſay to thoſe that ſought
to liue in pleaſure and delight, that much
more delightfull ought to bee vnto vs a
vertuous trauaile, then a life without
vertue, howe pleaſaunt ſoeuer it ſeeme. He
was of ſuch a pitifull minde, that whoſoeuer
came to him in his extremitie, being either
perſecuted, or any wayes troubled, ſhoulde

finde reliefe and defence in his houſe, not regarding
any daunger that might happen him
for ſo dooing. Hee did euermore meaſure
bothe the partyes, and the cauſe according
as in deede they were, and not as they were
ſuppoſed to bee: and in this thing hee had a
moſte ſingular and almoſte heauenly vertue,
for he was neuer knowen to make any acception
of perſons, nor to regarde the riches,
the wealth, or mightineſſe of any man, but to
regarde euery man according to the equitie
of his cauſethe wrote in verſe the Prouerbs
that begin, My Sonne whom I doe dearely
loue. &c. In which Prouerbes are contained
almoſt all the precepts of Morall Philoſophy,
whatſoeuer appertaineth to a vertuous
life. He had a very great Library, and
gaue himſelfe chiefly to the ſtudy of Moral
Philoſophy, Hiſtories, and Antiquities, hee
kept alwaies about him Doctours and men
of great learning, with whom he vſed to conferre
of ſuch thinges as he read. Hee wrote
beſides diuerſe other treatiſes, aſwel in verſe
as proſe, tending all to the aduauncing of
vertue, and aboliſhing of vice, & in ſuch exerciſes
he ſpent the moſt parte of his leaſure.
He was of great fame & renowme in many

other Countryes beſide Spaine, but alwayes
made more account of the eſtimation of a
fewe wiſemen, rather then the praiſe of the
multitude, nd becauſe that for the moſte
parte wee ſee that the conditions of men are
anſwearable to their complexions and that
they are moſt times euill dyſoſed that are
euyll complexioned, wee neede not to
doubt but that this Gentleman was greatly
in fauour with GOD, who gaue him
ſo good a teacher as hee was of ability to receaue
euery kinde of vertue, and to reſiſt
without any greate paine, euery euill motion
of ſinne. I will not deny but that hee was
touched with ſuch temptations, as our fraile
fleſh doth many times aſſail the ſpirit withal,
and that he was ſundry times ouertaken, as
well with anger as with the delight of
the fleſh, and that he did ſometimes offend
aſwel in doing more then was mete, as in fayling
to do that which he ought to haue done,
For being as he was continually cōuerſant in
the warres & dayly employed in ſundry many
matters. It ſhould haue beene a matter
of greate difficultie liuing among ſuche a
number of errours, to carry him ſelfe

cleane without any errour. But if it be true,
that vertues doe make a mery hearte, as
on the other ſide vices breede heauineſſe and
ſorrowe, ſeeing that this gentleman was the
moſt parte of his time diſpoſed to pleaſantneſſe,
it is a greate deale more likely that
he was rather accompanyed with vertues
that bring forth pleaſure, then ſubdued with
vices, that continually doe vexe men with
griefe. And notwithſtanding that he receiued
many miſfortunes in the warres, and
that hee ſuſtained diuers griefes, as well for
the death of his Children, as of others
his neere kinſemen, yet he did alwayes beare
them with ſuch a noble minde, as he ſerued
for an example to all others how to behaue
thēſelues in the like caſes. He ended his life
with great honour & proſperitie, at the age of
lxv. yeers. And if it may be thought that mē
may after their departure haue any felicitie
in this world (as ſome ſuppoſe they may) we
may aſſuredly thinke that this gentlemā had
it: for he left behinde him vi. ſonnes, wherof
the eldeſt increaſed his inheritance with the
eſtate of a dukedome: his ſecond ſonne was
Earle of Tendilla the thirde was Earle of
Curunna: the fourth was Cardinal of Spain,
               
Archbiſhoppe of Toledo, Biſhop of Ciguenca,
& one of the greateſt Prelates that
was in his time: To theſe foure and to the
two others, Don Iohn, and Don Hurtado,
he left ſuch Lordſhippes,
rents, & reuenewes, as made
fiue great houſes, beſides
his owne principall
houſe.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ❧The firſt Chapter, of
Loue, and Feare.
            
               1.
               My ſonne, whom I doe dearly loue,
               Vnto my wordes geue eare▪
               
               Seeke not by rigour for to rule,
               Nor gouerne men by feare▪
               
               Loue, and thou ſhalt beloued be.
               And by the ſame ſhalt doe
               Such worthie things, as hated thou
               ſhalt neuer attaine vnto.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  
                     EVery wyſe Oratour,
as Tullie in his booke
de Oratore teacheth,
ought principally▪ in
whatſoeuer matter he
dealeth, to conſider
three things: That is,
to make all thoſe that ſhall eyther heare
his ſpeach, or reade his workes, to be well
willing, vnderſtanding, and mindefull.
The ſpeaker ſhall make his audience well
willing, when he laboureth to obteyne their

fauour and good wil towardes him. For no
man wil gladly geue eare to ſuch a man, as
he is afore euil perſwaded of: he maketh
his hearers to vnderſtād, when he declareth
the matter, that hee meaneth to entreate off,
in ſhewing that it ſhal be profitable & commodious,
he cauſeth them to be attentiue, or
mindeful, when he mooueth or ſtirreth them
vp by good meanes & inductions to be readie
to heare, not hauing their minds caried
away with anie other matters. All theſe
points hath this learned gentleman (folowing
this inſcription) obſerued in al his diſcourſe.
But eſpecially in this firſt Prouerbe
he hath obſerued ye firſt, in making him that
ſhal reade him, wel minded towardes him,
procuring his fauour & goodwil, in calling
him by ye name of his ſōne & beloued. For as
the Ciuil law ſayth, we can name no man by
a more ſweet or better name, thē to call him
our ſonne. He maketh him to vnderſtand, in
ſhewing him howe to direct or order his life
amōgſt the people: he maketh him attētiue,
in theſe wordes, where he ſaith, Geue eare.
And the meaning and matter of this Prouerbe,
is the moſt ſweet & gracious behauiour,
that men of all degrees ought to vſe in

their conuerſation. And if ſo be, that men of
gret eſtate & calling, ought to vſe this gētle
behauiour, much more ought they that are
of meane degree to do it. And therfore Seneca
in the ſpeach that he hath with the Emperour
Nero (as he bringeth in, in his 9.
Tragedie) when the Emperour did ſtriue
to gouerne rather by feare then by loue, and
commaunded ſundrie things to be done by
force and diſorder, to the ende the people
ſhould feare him: becauſe Seneca did therefore
greately blame him, the Emperour
tolde him, that whatſoeuer he did, he ought
by reaſō for to do, for the ſword was it that
defēded the Prince. Seneca anſweared, that
the faith and true allegiance of his ſubiects
would better defend him.The prince that is feared, is neuer beloued The Emperour
replied, That it is good that the Prince bee
feared. Seneca anſweareth: it is better that
he be beloued. The naked ſword (ſaith Nero)
ſhal make them doe what I wil haue thē.
Beware, ſaieth Seneca, you neuer fall into
ſuche an errour. The Emperour anſwereth,
I wil force the people to feare mee. Surely
ſaith Seneca, that which you force and compell
the people to doe, they will verie hardly
ſuffer. And therefore it is not meete

that anie perſon (as is ſayde) eſpecially
ſuche gouernours as are vertuous and
iuſt, ſhould vrge or force any thing agaynſt
the good will of the people, much leſſe that
priuat perſons ſhould in their conuerſation
one with an other doe it. For (as Seneca in
his thirde Epiſtle ſayeth, whereas hee
ſheweth the deliberation that a man ought
to haue in the getting and keeping of his
friende) If thou wilt be beloued, loue, or
as the Prouerbe ſayeth, By loue thou
ſhalt doe, that hated thou ſhalt neuer attayne
vnto. For there is nothing in the
world that is ſought wt loue, either by the
prince of his ſubiecte, the Lorde of his tenant,
or the friend of his familiar, but it is
eaſily obteined. For as Virgill ſaith in his
Bucolikes. Loue ouercōmeth al thinges,
inſomuch is for the great loue that the Almightie
bare vnto mankinde, hee ſent his
only begottē ſonne, to take our fleſh vppon
him, and to die for vs, that he might
beare our faults and infirmities (as Eſai
ſaith,) and ſuffer for our offences. And
therefore if loue coulde cauſe God to abaſe
himſelfe to be conuerſant with man, and to
doe that, which might chiefly auayle vs,

being euerlaſting and moſt perfect, and we
mortall, and imperfecte: what ſhall it not
doe in the companie and conuerſation of
one man with an other? Whereuppon
Valerius in his thirde booke in the title of
Loue and delight, writeth that Damon and
Pithias, two of Pythagoras his ſchollers,
bare ſo great loue and affection one to the
other, as when Dioniſius of Sarragos
would haue put one of them to death, he ſeeyng
that there was no remedie but needes
he muſt dye, required that hee might haue
libertie to goe home to diſpoſe & ſet in order
ſuche thinges as hee had, promiſing to
put in ſureties for his returne, at what day
ſoeuer he woulde appoint him. Dioniſius
ſuppoſing that none ſo faithfull a friēd could
be found, that in ſuch a caſe woulde become
ſuretie, to the hazard of his life, and all that
he had, aunſweared, that he was content to
giue him leaue & time to goe to his houſe, ſo
that he put in ſuch ſuretie as hee promiſed:
whereuppon he left him for ſuretie his other
friende. And as the laſt day was now
come, wherein the condemned perſon was
bound to returne, & to ſuffer his determined
death, all thoſe that were preſent did count

a great follie in him that woulde in ſuche a
caſe become ſuretie, & hazard his life for an
other, how great ſoeuer the friendſhip was
betwixt them. But the partie that was
ſuretie did no whitte diſtruſt the fidelitie of
his friende, nor repent him any whitte of
his ſuretyſhippe. Nowe as they were all
gaping and gaſing to ſee the ende of the
matter, at the laſt day, and euen in the laſt
houre, commeth the condemned man, wherat
Dioniſius was greatly aſtoniſhed, and
for the great faithfulnes & loue, that he ſaw
betweene them, pardoned the partie that
he had condemned, and deſired them both,
that they woulde vouchſafe him for a third
into their friendſhip. Wherby it is euident,
that loue is of ſo greate a force, that it forceth
ſuch men as be true friends, to venter &
giue their liues the one for the other. So
that very well ſaith the Prouerbe: Loue,
and thou ſhalte beloued bee. For Seneca
in his thirde Epiſtle affirmeth,
that nothing doeth more trouble a man
in his proſperitie and wealth, then to
thinke that they can neuer bee to him good
and faithfull friendes, to whom he himſelfe
hath neuer been good. Howe manie

kindes of Friendſhippes there bee, and
howe ſome bee friendes for Commoditie
ſake, others for pleaſure and delight, others
for vertue and honeſtie, howe ſome
bee ſworne friendes, and what difference
there is betweene Loue and Friendſhip,
becauſe I will make no long proceſſe, I
leaue here to ſpeake of. Of all which both
Ariſtotle in his eight booke of his Ethickes,
Tullie
                      in his booke of Friendſhippe,
and Seneca in his nienth Epiſtle, do
largely and thorowly diſcourſe. I ſhould alſo
here declare, how we ſhoulde behaue our
ſelues in getting of friendes, and hauing
once gotte them, howe to continue them.
Whereof Seneca intreateth in his 3. Epiſtle:
whyther, for auoiding tediouſnes, I
referre the Reader.
               
            
            
               2.
               Who can aſſoile the man thats dread
               from care and deadly feare?
               If any reaſon, minde, or witte
               in him that dreads appeare?
               Eſteeme, and thou ſhalt be eſteemed:
               for feare is to the ſenſe
               A griefe that cannot be expreſt,
               a deadly peſtilence.
               
                  
                  The Paraphraſe,
                  IN this prouerbe the Marques his minde
is, to prooue by natural reaſon, that which
he hath written in the former prouerbe, that
is, that men ought to be gētle and eurteous
in their conuerſations, and that they ought
not to doe anie thing by force or feare, but
rather by loue and gentlenes. He alſo ſetteth
down the inconuenience that foloweth
to him that had rather be feared then loued,
ſaying: Who can aſſoyle the man that is
dread from care and deadly feare, &c.
For if he that feareth, haue not altogether
loſt his diſcretion and vnderſtanding, he wil
not feare him that he feareth: For he may eſily
vnderſtand, that he, that liueth in dread,
will ſeeke by all the meanes to be deliuered
of him yt he feareth. For feare (as Ariſtotle
ſaith in the 3. booke of his Ethiks) is a continuall
looking for the harme that ſhal happen.
According to which, ſuch as feare others,
do continually looke to receiue harme
at the handes of thoſe whom they feare, or
to eſcape the euill that they looke for. They
imagine how they may preuent, in doing of
euill, them of whom they thinke to receiue

euill: And therefore in the ſpeache that
Thyeſtes the Sonne of King Pelops hath
with his ſonne Philiſtines, where his ſonne
requireth him to forſake the place of his
baniſhment, and to come and gouerne and
liue together with his brother Araeus (as
Seneca ſheweth in his ſeconde Tragidie)
where Thyeſtes doth ſhew the reaſons, that
moueth him rather to liue in a poore eſtate,
then to be a man of greate place & authority,
ſaying, While I liued in princely ſtate
and maieſtie, I was neuer free from fearing
of thoſe that feared me, yea and many
times I was afraide of the very ſword that
hung by mine owne ſide, leaſt in the ende I
ſhould come to be ſlayne with it. And afterwarde,
Oh what a great happines is it, not
to be feared of anie, to ſleepe ſoundly vpon
the grounde, and to eate in ſafety the meate
that is prouided. Poiſon is preſented in
golden cuppes: meaning, that it is not geuen
to the poore labourer that drinketh in
earth or wood, but to great eſtates, that
drinke in golde geuen by thoſe that feare
them, and by ſuch as they haue good cauſe
to feare. And therefore Tullie ſaieth, in his
booke of Friendſhip, that in the life of Tyrantes,

which be ſuch as gouerne by force
and feare, more then by loue, there can be
neither faith, loue, nor ſtedfaſt friendſhippe.
To the Tyrant all thinges are ſuſpicious,
and euerie thing miniſtreth, vnto him occaſion
of ſorrowe and care. And it followeth:
Who can loue him whom he feareth, or him
of whō he knoweth he is feared? With this
agreeth that, which Boetius in his third
booke of Comfort writeth, that ſuch as are
guarded with men of warre, ſtand in dread
of thoſe, whom they ſeeme to make affraide.
And therfore wel ſayth the Prouerbe, That
feare is a deadly griefe vnto the ſenſe.
Which is verified as well in the perſon
that feareth, as in him that is feared. It
is written of Dioniſius, as Boetius in his
3. booke of Comforte witneſſeth, that hee
was a great Tyrant, and ſuch a one as by tyranny
and crueltie ſubdued many countries,
and did manie harmes and miſchiefes, who
as he ſought to gouerne by tyrannie and
force, it is moſt like hee was rather feared
then beloued. It is written, that a ſpecial
friende of his comming to ſee him, told him,
that he had great cauſe to thinke him ſelfe
happie, in that he had atteyned to ſo greate

and ſo hygh eſtate as hee was in: Dioniſius
made no anſwere at all, but bad him to dinner,
where ouer the chaire where his gheſt
ſhould ſit, he cauſed to be hanged, by a verie
ſmal thred, a weightie and a ſharp pointed
ſword, in ſuch ſort as his friend being ſet, the
ſword hung directly ouer the crowne of his
head, ſo as if the thred brake, it was ſure to
run thorow him, & thus cauſed him to ſitte
down to dinner: who al the while that he ſat,
ſweat for feare, leaſt the thread breaking, the
ſword ſhould fal vpō him & deſtroy him. Dioniſius
cauſed him with ſundrie diſhes to
be deintily and delicately ſerued: the borde
being taken vp, he aſked his gheſt if hee
had not pleaſantly dined? Who anſweared
him: what pleaſure coulde I haue at mymeate,
ſeeing the ſwoorde by ſo ſmall a ſtay
hanging ouer my head, and ſtill looking
for the loſſe of my life, whenſoeuer the thred
ſhould breake? Loe ſaith Dioniſius, ſuch
is the life of all tyrantes, who for the miſchiefes
and tyrannies that they have doon,
and for feare of thoſe whom they haue offended
and wronged, doe liue continually
in feare and in dread, and doe looke euerie
howre for eyther death, or ſome great danger,

touching ye which I haue made a more
large diſcourſe in my Commentaries vpon
the Prouerbes of Seneca, in the Prouerbe
that beginneth, He that alwaies feareth, is
euerie day condemned. To the which becauſe
I wil not be long, I referre the reader,
ſince the Marques hath well concluded in
this Proueth, where he ſayth, Eſteeme, and
thou ſhalt be eſteemed: meaning, that it
lyeth in thine owne power to be feared, or
to be loued, and that feare is a deadly grief
to the ſenſe, of which euerie man will ſeeke
to ridde him ſelfe with as much ſpeede as
he may.
               
            
            
               3.
               Great Caeſar as the ſtories tell,
               moſt cruelly was ſlaine,
               And yet the woorthieſt conquerour,
               that in the world did raigne.
               Who on the earth ſo mightie is,
               that when he is alone,
               Can of himſelfe doe any more,
               then can a ſeely one?
               
                  
                  The Marques.
                  
                     CAeſar (moſt woorthie prince) he that is
heere mencioned, was called by the
name of Iulius, and of others Caius, the
ſelfe ſame that paſſed the Rubicon againſt
Pompey, as Lucan writeth in his booke
of the Ciuill-warres, who after the death of
Pompey and Cato, triumphing with great
pomp in the citie of Rome, and taking into
his handes the common treaſurie, behaued
himſelfe with ſuch pride and outrage towarde
the Citizens, that they coulde by no
meanes abide him: and as his hautineſſe
was thought of them intollerable, they
conſpired to kill him, which treaſon of
theirs they did no long time delay. The
chiefe of this conſpiracie, were Brutus and
Caſſius, as is more at large ſet foorth by
Eutropius in his booke of the Emperours
of Rome. Valerius Maximus doeth alſo
recorde the ſame, and Iohn Boccace in his
booke of Ladies, where he entreateth of the
vertues of women, commending Porcia
the daughter of Cato, and wife of this
Brutus.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The Paraphraſe of the doctour.
                  IN this Prouerbe the Marques proueth
by familiar example, that which hee hath
ſhewed in the Prouerbe before by naturall
reaſon. For as Ariſtotle ſaith in the ſecond
of his Rhethorikes: In the workes and actions
of men, that which commeth after,
doeth commonly reſemble that, which hath
been done before, & therfore it is a cōmon
vſe with writers, when they woulde perſwade
or haue their doinges well thought
of, to bring in examples of thinges that
in the like caſe haue happened. And for the
ſame cauſe the Marques hath in this Prouerbe
made mention of that which happened
to Iulius Caeſar, whoſe doinges are
largely ſet out by Lucan, in his booke that
hee wrote of the ciuill warres. This Iulius
Caeſar by force and tyrannie ſought
to aſpire (which nothing appertained vnto
him) to the gouernement of Rome, and
ſubdued and ouercame both Pompey, and
all his fauourers, who fought for the lawes
and liberties of their countrie. In the proſecuting
whereof Caeſar ſlue manie, diſinherited
a great ſorte, and iniuried a number.

And for the mainteining of this his
tyrannicall iuriſdiction, hee was forced to
make himſelfe to be feared, to the intent hee
might keepe them from rebelling. But for
al that euer he could doe, two gentlemē citizens
of Rome, whoſe names were Brutus
and Caſſius, conſpired againſt him, and
in the Parliament houſe where he miſtruſted
no ſuch thing, ſette vpon him, and ſiue
him, giuing him, as it is written, foure
and twentie woundes, whereof he preſently
died: and therefore the Prouerbe ſayeth.
Great Caeſar as the ſtories tell: and ſo ſaieth
Lucan, moſt cruelly was ſlayne. Although
hee was a mightie Prince, and
had a ſtrong and a puyſant garde: yet at
the time that Brutus and Caſſius trayterouſly
murdered him, they found him without
anie of his friendes or ſeruantes all alone.
It followeth. Who on the earth
ſo mightie is, that when hee is alone,
can of him ſelfe doe anie more, then
can a ſeelie one? That is to ſay, though a
man be neuer ſo mightie, yea, though he be
a king of many landes and countries, yet
is he but a man, and for his owne perſon
can doe no more then a man maie

doe. And although we reade in the ſecond
booke of the Kinges, that the perſon of a
King in an armie, is of more value then a
thouſand ſouldiers: and that the death of
a Prince or a Captaine, is more hurtfull to
an armie, then ye death of a thouſand others,
becauſe of the worthineſſe of the Prince or
Captaine: yet, as S. Hierom in one of his
Epiſtles affirmeth, though in the ordering
of a battaile, the worthineſſe of a Prince or
a Captaine is chiefly conſidered, when
it comes to the fight, not the degree, but
the dooinges of euerie partie, is reſpected:
for when it commeth to the ſhout, the force
and proweſſe of euerie one is his ſafegarde,
be he King or Emperour: If he fight not
as he ought to doe, he is of none account.
And though he be neuer ſo valiant, being
but one man, he can, as the Prouerb is, do
no more then an other man.
               
            
            
               4.
               Howe many haue I ſeene,
               by loue aduaunced hye?
               But many more I haue beheld
               caſt downe for tyranny.
               
                  
For vertuous minds in bōdage brought,
               will ſlacke no time, but trie
               By all the force and meanes they can,
               to come to libertie.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  FOr the proofe and confirmation of that
which goeth before, the Marques affirmeth,
that he hath ſeene in his time great
numbers aduaunced and ſet vp by loue, and
manie ouerthrowne and tumbled downe,
that haue ſought to rule by feare, which
proofe in hauing had the experience, is the
trueſt and certaineſt that may be. For eaſier
ſhall we be deceiued by olde recordes, or
ſooner erre in truſting our owne naturall
reaſon, then faile in knowledge of the truth,
in a thing that we haue had experience of.
And therefore is it commonly ſayd, that experience
is the mother and miſtreſſe of all
things: and as Ariſtotle in the firſt of his
Phiſickes ſayeth, If any that be wiſe doe
erre, touching their opinions in learning,
they may well be called backe againe, and
brought to the knowledge of the truth, by
natural reaſon and perſwaſion. But he that

denieth that which he ſeeth with his eyes,
heareth with his eares, and knoweth by
the triall of his other ſenſes, with ſuche a
one we ought not to diſpute: For he that
denieth his ſenſes, is altogeather without
ſenſe. And therfore the proofe that is made
by experience, is moſt ſtrong and aſſured.
The Marques ſaieth, that in his time he
hath ſeene many aduaunced by loue. Loue
bringeth with it, vnitie, Peace, & concorde:
where feare alwaies cauſeth hatred, as is
witneſſed afore by the teſtimonie of Tullie,
in his booke of Friendſhip, howe great the
force of friendſhippe and concorde is, may
eaſily be knowne, by the harmes that ariſe
of diſcention and diſcorde. Which
our Sauiour in the Goſpel expreſly ſheweth,
where he ſaith, That euery kingdome
diuided within it ſelfe, ſhalbe deſtroyed.
and come to nothing: & ſuche as liue in
peace and amitie, do proſper and encreaſe.
And Saluſt in the conſpiracie of Cateline
ſaith, that by loue and concord the ſmalleſt
thinges that be, encreaſe, and growe
to be great, where by diſcorde, great and
mightie thinges decay, & come to nothing.
For vertuous minds in bōdage brought,
will ſlacke no time to trie by al the force

and meanes they can, to come to libertie.
It is lawful for euery man by the lawe
of nature to defend his life, his goodes and
his good name, by al the meanes & waies
that he may: Inſomuch as if any man will
kill me, it is lawful for me for the ſafegard
of my lyfe, to kill the partie, that doth ſo aſſault
me, neither ought I to forbeare (as
the lawiers ſaie) till I be ſtricken or hurt,
for it is yenough for me the feare yt I am in
to be murthered, and that yf I kill him not,
I am ſure to be ſlaine my ſelfe. In ſo much
that it hath been the opinion of ſome Doctours.
That if I ſtande in feare of a mightier
man then my ſelfe: and knowe that
wherſoeuer he meete mee, he will kill me,
and am not able to ſtand vppon my guard,
nor to bande with him, in this caſe I am
not bounde to forbeare, but may kill him,
at the beſt aduantage that I can take him.
The lyke opinion is of ſome Doctors that
yf I be wrongfully deteyned in priſon,
and ſtande in feare of ſome violence
or vniuſtice, that in this caſe I may
lawefully breake priſon, and if a
iudge ſhall wrongfullie condemne me,

whereby I ſhall greatly bee damnified in
my perſon, and that the execution be out againſt
me, it ſhall be lawfull for me to aſſemble
my friendes and my kinſmen, and
to reſiſt the officer, vſing all the meanes
I maye to ſaue my bodie and my goodes:
yea, I may hurt the other in the defence of
my goodes, and the ſauing of my credite.
For as the Doctours ſaye, if I remaine
in anie place, and knowe that mine enemie
is comming to doe me ſome miſchiefe,
and that it ſhall bee greatly hurtfull and againſt
my credite, to go from the place, that
I neede not to depart, but maye well tarie
there: and if the other aſſault mee, if
I kill him, I am not to bee puniſhed. And
the reaſon is, that for the greate feare
that I am in, it is lawfull for mee to ſaue
my ſelfe, and my credite, as well as I
may. And this is it, that the Prouerbe
meaneth, that vertuous mindes in bondage
brought. And therefore hee ſayeth,
Vertuous or good men: becauſe the iniurie
is not ſo great that is done to a raſkall,
or a lewde perſon, as that which is done to
a vertuous or a godly man. And though
ſuch a man of a vertuous minde, will

beare as much as maye bee, yet beeing
vniuſtly wronged, and euill dealt withall,
and put in feare, hee ſlackes no time to
trie by all the meanes and wayes he can, to
come to libertie.
               
            
            
               5.
               O ſonne, be milde and amiable,
               lay loftie lookes aſide:
               The hautie and diſdainfull man
               the Lorde can not abide.
               Of wicked and malicious men
               auoide the companie,
               For all their doings tende to ſtrife,
               and ende with villanie.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  IN this Prouerbe, the Marques goeth
aboute to beate downe all manner of hautineſſe
and pride of minde, ſhewing the
greate miſliking, that the Lorde hath of
all ſuch, as are prowde and diſdainfull: As
Dauid in his Pſalme ſayeth: That the
Lorde reſiſteth the prowde, and giueth
grace to thoſe that bee humble and
meeke. And Solomon in his Prouerbes
affirmeth, that after pride commeth alwaies

a fal, & he that hath an humble heart,
ſhal come to great honour: & this is it that
the Prouerbe meaneth, That euery man
ought to be amiable. That is gentle and
lowly in his ſpeach, & not hautie, not proud,
nor diſdainful: It is writtē in a booke of the
commendations of Caeſar, that he neuer ſaid
to any Gentleman, get you away. But come
you hither. And in the firſt booke of the worthie
acts of Philoſophers, it is written, that
the great Caeſar paſſing by a court of iudgement,
where haply was arrained an ancient
Gentleman that had ſomtime ſerued him in
his warres, which Gentlemā when he perceiued
the Emperour, cried vnto him, & beſeeched
him to alight & to helpe him that he
might be deliuered frō his falſe accuſers, the
Emperor willed a learned aduocate yt ſtood
by, to take his cauſe in hande, & to do the vttermoſt
he coulde for him for his ſake. The
poore Gentleman ſeeing the matter ſo put
of, ſaid with a loude voice: Caeſar, when you
were in the field, & like to be troden downe
of your enimies, I did not in your danger
ſerue you by a Proctor: but with ye great hazard
of my own life, I fought for ye defence
of your perſon, at which bāquet I receiued
theſe wounds for you: & there withal ſhewed

his woūded body.Hard for a ſouldier in theſe daies to finde a Caeſar.
                      Which words when Caeſar
had heard, without any pride or diſdain,
he preſently alighted, & cōming himſelfe to
the barre, defēded his cauſe. For he thought
it a part not onely ſhamefull, but moſt vnthākful,
if he ſhould not haue done as he did?
And when the whole aſſembly did greatly
wonder at this noble & worthy deed, he ſaid,
that the Prince that ſought not to bee beloued,
of his ſubiects, did neuer truly loue thē,
and to this end the Prouerb ſheweth, what
great good it bringeth to be louing and not
high minded, & how greatly God doth hate
the proud and the diſdainful, who much diſpleaſeth
our Lord, as is ſaid before. And Seneca
in his firſt Tragedie ſaieth, That the
gracious & righteous God doth alwaies
hunt & perſecute the proude.
                     Proude Princes hateful to God. The Prouerbe
ſaith, Forth of wicked & malitious
men auoide the cōpany: For al their doings
tend to ſtrife, and ende with villanie.
There is, nothing that more diſquieteth and
troubleth the cōpanie & conuerſation of one
man with an other, then a brauling or a contētious
perſon, neither doth any thing more
alure men to company one with another, thē
curteſie and gentle behauiour, and therfore
Chilo that was one of the vii. wiſe men of

                     Athens, demaūding whether of the twaine
were beſt for a man to be, wrangling and
contentious, or milde and quiet: It was anſwered
him, that the better was he that was
milde and quiet: For the friends and neighbours
of ſuch a man did rather honour him,
then feare him.
               
            
            
               6.
               And let your anſweres ſtill be ſuch,
               as may procure good will,
               As beſt beſeemes a gentleman,
               not froward, rude, nor ill.
               O ſonne, howe little doth it coſt,
               at all times well to ſpeake,
               Howe little againe doth it auaile,
               with wordes thy wrath to wreake?
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  IN this Prouerbe, the Marques ſheweth
the order that men ought to haue in their
anſweres, when they be ſpoken to, and that
howſoeuer it goeth with vs, we ought continually
to bee curteous and gentle in our
ſpeach. And it is one of ye principall graces
that men can haue of God, as Dauid in his
Pſalmes witneſſeth, Thy mouth is full of

grace, & therefore the Lord hath bleſſed
thee. And though a man fal out & wrangle
with thee, yet if thou anſwereſt him gently
and mildly, not proudly nor frowardly, thou
ſhalt a great deale ſooner pacifie him. For
as Solomon in his Prouerbs ſaith, A ſoft
vorde wil breake the bone, and a ſweete
peach doth pacifie wrath. As Seneca in
its firſt boke yt he wrote of Anger & Wrath,
ſhewing that great Princes, ought to bee
gracious & gentle in their anſweres, bringeth
for example the King Antigonus, who
hauing cauſed his men to march an vnreaſonable
iournie in a day,Princes ought to bee gentle in their ſpeeches. when that they all
weery and ouerlaboured, were come to the
place where they ſhould encampe, he made
them, without giuing them any reſt, euery
man with great and heauy burdens to
marche, whiche was a great way farther,
cloſe to the wall of a towne, that he ment to
beſiege: and as the poore men, beeing ouerladen,
went rayling and curſſing of the
King, becauſe hee had made them to take
ſuch an vnreaſonable iournie, and after had
cauſed them to marche with ſo extreame
burdens, not ſuffering them any whitte to
reſt: the King perceiuing it, chaunged

his apparell, and keepeing company with
thoſe that were ſcarſe laden, and thoſe that
did moſte reuile him, he helped them to carry
their burdens, and as the ſouldiers felt
themſelues greatly eaſed by his company,
they muſed what he was that was amongſt
them, and ſo buſy to helpe them, for the
knewe him not, by reaſon he had ſo diſguiſed
him ſelfe, at the laſt being importunate
with him, to tel what he was: You
haue hitherto ſaith he, curſed and rayled at
the king Antigonus, for whoſe ſake a day
and night you haue taken ſuche paines.
Now ſpeake wel of him, that hath made
one amongeſt you and helped you,
in bearing part of your burdens, this
gracious anſweare made the king to be a
thouſande times better beloued of his ſouldiours
then he was before, and therfore the
Prouerbe ſaith, Here well that the anſweare
ſhoulde alwaies be gentle, ſince
good woordes coſte but a litle. It auoideth
quarrelling and fighting, when
any man falleth out with them. In
the Cronicle of the Philoſopers, wee
read, that one of Athens was alwaies quarelling
and falling out with an honeſt quiet

man one Anacharſis a Scithian, which
countrey was of all others of leaſt eſtimation.
When the Athenian for the more
deſpite called him a Scithian, Anacharſis,
anſwering him gently again, and ſmiling,
ſaide vnto him: my countrey is a ſhame to
me, and thou art a ſhame to thy countrey.
The Prouerbe goeth farther and ſaith, It
litle doeth auaile with words thy wrath
to wreake, that is: hee that threatneth
with woordes, and hath a will to be reuenged,
and to threaten, ſhalbe counted but for
a vaunter and a pratler, and if he haue a
minde to reuenge, he looſeth the oportunity
of it by his boaſting and threatning. In a
Tragedie of Seneca, Medea vitterly threatening
Iaſon, becauſe he had caſt her of,
and maried an other, the Nurſe reprehendeth
her, and blameth her, telling her that
it is not ſeemely for vs to be preſumptious,
highminded, nor enraged with thoſe,
with whome wee deale, neither oughte
we on the other ſide ſo muche to abaſe our
ſelues as we come therby to be counted for
outcaſtes and perſons of no value. Among
all the vertues and vices that Ariſtotle
doeth entreate of in the fourth Booke of

his Ethycks, he ſpeaketh of the vertue of
Magnanimitie, whiche is for a man to
ſtand vpon his honour that he knoweth, for
his vertues and qualities he deſerueth, and
to keepe his eſtimation, in ſuch ſorte as it
decay not: and to this ende ſaith the Prophet,
My honor and my glory will I giue
to no other. This vertue hath two extremities
and vices, the one is, as Ariſtotle
ſaith, for a man to be vaineglorious, proude
and diſdainfull: which is, when hee taketh
vpon him, more then of right to him perteineth.
In the other extremitie and vice,
are thought to offend all ſuch, as by reaſon
of their baſe minde are nothing accounted
of, nor eſteemed: and if they happen to
come to any honor or preferment, they behaue
them ſelues like ſheepe or mecockes.
Of this vertue and the vices, the Marques
ſpeaketh in the Prouerbe where hee ſaith,
Let not vnwoorthy honors pleaſe thee.
For, thoſe that are therewith all delighted,
are vaunters, vainglorious, and fooliſh, as
Ariſtotle ſaith, where he ſheweth the inconueniēces
that follow to thē, that make more
of them ſelues, then there is cauſe why, ſaying
that ſuch honor commeth quickly to the

ground. So that the man that taketh more
vppon him then hee may, is of others by
great good reaſon ſoone put from it. Of
theſe proude and vaine vaunters ſpeaketh
Iob. The vaine man exalteth him ſelfe in
his pride, and thinketh that he is borne
free from ſubiection, as the Colte of a
wilde Aſſe. And before hee ſaith, I would
not haue thee ſo to throwe downe thy
ſelf, as to be counted an outcaſt. For this
is not humilitie, but baſeneſſe and weakeneſſe
of minde, and this is it that Ariſtotle
prooueth in the authoritie aforeſaide. And
the Apoſtle ſaieth, that foraſmuch as hee
was ordained the Apoſtle of the Gentiles,Humilitie ſpringeth of Nobilitie.
hee would honor and eſteeme his dignitie
and office, and yet for all that he left not to
be humble and meeke: for humilitie ſpringeth
not of baſeneſſe and feebleneſſe of mind,
but of vertue and nobleneſſe of nature. And
that which the Marques doeth heere diſalowe,
is onely the baſeneſſe and vileneſſe of
the minde, in what ſort the conuerſation of
men ought to be. Iſocrates in his Admoniſhments
writeth in this ſort, Be not hautie
nor diſdainefull to thoſe that bee in
thy company, for euen the very ſeruants
                     
will hardly away with their maiſters that
are proude and diſdainful. The modeſt and
temperate behauiour, is that which al men
delight in, & that is neither to be to hautie
nor to baſe, to hie minded nor to abiect.
               
            
            
               7
               Flee Taletellers and backbiters,
               that ſtriue to pleaſe the eare:
               As greedy rauening wolues, that ſeek
               the ſeelly Lambes to teare,
               Whoſe traiterous traines and pathes
               do nothing elſe at all,
               But ſerue for ſnares and ſubtle traps,
               Where heedeleſſe men doe fall.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  IN the Prouerbe before, the Marques
hath ſhewed, what order men ought to obſerue
in their ſpeech: in this and thoſe that
folowe, he teacheth howe we ſhould behaue
our ſelues in hearing. For as the tongue
ought to be bridled in ſpeaking: ſo ought
the eare to be temperate in hearing, for
ſuch as are wiſe and vertuous ought not to
giue eare to euery worde that they heare,
but only to ſuche as are good and honeſt.
For as Salomon in his Prouerbe ſaith,
The Prince that is contented to heare

lies and tales, ſhall haue his court repleniſhed
with naughtie perſons. For when
the reſt of his ſeruantes perceiue that he
delighteth in a tatler or a taleteller, the
whole company will ſtraight addict them
ſelues to be liers and ſlaunderers, & pickethanks,
for as ſaint Gregorie in the .xiiii.
chapter of his booke of Moralls ſaith, That
ſuche as delight in hearing of ſlaunders
& accuſations, are counted to be eaters
and deuourers of men, as Salomon ſayeth,
Be not preſent at the banquets
of ſinners, nor eate thou with thoſe
that come togeather to feede of fleſhe.
To come togeather to eate fleſhe is as S.
Gregorie ſaith, To gather, them ſelues
togeather, to ſpeake euill of their neighbours.
And therefore the Prouerbe ſaith,
that we ſhould flee taletellers as thoſe that
hurt & anoy Innocentes, For he that commeth
to diffame or ſlaunder his neighbour,An euill prince maketh an euill Court.
commeth clothed with a ſheeps ſkin, but is
in very deede a rauening Woolfe. For his
intent is to infect and mooue the minde of
him that heareth him againſt him whō hee
ſlandereth. Valerius ſheweth a way, how to
reiect & rid away ſuch ſlanders, & picthanks,
& ſaith that there was 2 very deare friends

hauing great enuy, and ſeeking to ſet diſcorde
betweene them, came to the one of
them, and tolde him, that he had heard his
freend ſpeake very euill of him Quoth the
other, I cannot beleeue it, for hee is my
frende, and I knowe he will not ſpeake euill
of me. The ſlaunderer beeing very earneſt,
and the other not ſeeming to credite
him, hee confirmed it at laſt with a greate
oathe, that the thing was true, that he had
tolde him. I now beleeue you, quoth the other,
ſince you ſweare that my freend hath
ſpoken euill of me: but be you well aſſured,
it was ſomething, that hee thought ſhould
benefite mee, that made him to ſpeake
as he did. With which aunſwere the ſlaunderer
was cleane out of countenance, perceiuing
that the partie, whom he would haue
abuſed, was to hard for him. For the traines
and pathes of pickthankes, are not for wiſe
men to fall in, but for groſſe heads and ſimple
people. Tullie in his Inuectiue that
he made againſt Saluſt hath theſe wordes,
I haue ſeene (ſaith he) many that in telling
of other mens faultes, haue more
offended the hearers, then did they that
committed the faultes. And therefore

Backbiters, whether their accuſations bee
falſe or true, are not to be ſuffered. Since as
Tullie ſaieth, They more offende the
mindes of ſuch as heare them, with their
ſpitefull and euill ſpeech: then doe thoſe
that commit the euill in deede. And therfore
wiſe men ought greatly to ſhunne & to
ſtop their eares, againſt all Clawbackes,
taletellers, and backbiters, and not only to
baniſh them, but all vaine and idle talke, as
Saint Bernard writeth in an Epiſtle, touching
the gouernment of a houſe, to a gentleman
called Raymond, wherein he ſheweth,
what wayes hee ought to vſe to auoyde
all Paraſites and geſters,Geſters to be auoyded. ſaying: Whenſoeuer
thou art troubled with Coxecombes,
counterfaits, or geſters, make
as if thou diddeſt heare them, and let
thy minde be vpon other matters, for
if thou once anſwere them, and ſeeme to
take pleaſure in them, thou ſhalt neuer
be rid of them, thou ſhalt ſhewe thy ſelfe
to be but a light fellowe, in ſeeming to
take pleaſure in any ſuch follyes, & ſhalt
be forced to giue them rewards, looſing
and caſting away (in ſo doeing) whatſoeuer
thou giueſt.
                  
               
            
            
               
               8.
               Aſſuerus, if he had not heard,
               eche part with equall eare:
               Had greatly abuſde the ſword, that he
               for iuſtice due did beare.
               And into errour fallen, which ſtraight
               he would haue wiſht vndone:
               So had the guiltleſſe creature died,
               that no offence had doone.
               
                  The Paraphraſe of the Marques.
                  
                     ASſuerus was a man of ſo great power
amongſt the heathen, that he was
accounted for a Monarch, or ruler of the
world: and as it is written in the Booke of
Heſter, Haman beeing in ſpeciall fauour
with the King, taking a diſpleaſure againſt
the Iewes (who liued vnder the gouernmēt
of Aſſuerus) procured the Kings diſpleaſure
greately againſt them, but eſpecially
againſt Mardocheus, ſo as hee appointed
him to be hanged. And as it was a cuſtome
that Aſſuerus alwayes vſed, to haue many
times read vnto him a Booke, wherein was
contained the ſeruices that any of his ſubiects
or any other had done vnto him, where
happely he chaunced to heare a ſpeciall ſeruice

that Mardocheus had done vnto him,
(what ſeruice it was I leaue here to ſpeake
off, beeing a matter commonly knowne to
all ſuch as haue beene ſtudious in the ſcriptures).
This being vnderſtood of the king,
and at the earneſt requeſt of Heſter, hee
commaunded that Haman ſhould bee truſſed
vppe vpon the ſame Gallowes that hee
had prepared for Mardocheus, whereby
according to the ſaying of Dauid, Hee fell
into the ſame pitte, that hee had digged
for other. With this Prouerbe agreeth
the ſaying of Solon, That euery well guyded
common wealth, ſtandeth vppon twoo
feete, the one & the right foote, is the bountifull
rewarding of thoſe that haue doone
good ſeruice: the other the left foote, is the
puniſhment and correction of all diſordered
perſons and offenders. What Prince
ſoeuer wanteth either this bountie in rewarding,
or iuſtice in puniſhing, his common
wealth ſhall alwayes be lame and halting,
and the good deedes and ſeruice of the
ſubiectes, ought euermore to bee recorded,
and many times read to the Prince, and
the parties them ſelues continually to bee
examined.
               
               
                  
                  The Doctour.
                  IN this prouerbe the Marques ſheweth
by examples, that which he hath taught
in the prouerbe before, and to this intent he
bringeth in ye ſtory of king Aſſuerus, which
ſtory is written at large in the Booke of
Heſter, which is one of the Canonicall
bookes of the holy Scripture. Of which to
make you here a ſhorte relation, you ſhall
vnderſtand, that this Aſſuerus was one of
the greateſt & mightieſt Princes that was
in the world, and as it is written, was Lord
of an hundred and xxvii. Prouinces, who
toke to wife Heſter, a Iewiſh woman, and
of the linage of the Iewes, whom hee very
entirely loued. This Queene had an vncle
with whom ſhee had been brought vp, called
Mardocheus, who vſed to come dayly
to the Court, to learne and vnderſtande how
the world wēt with the Queene his Neece:
and as the ſtory telleth, the Que
                        •
                     ne beeing
ſo aduiſed by Mardocheus, did not diſcouer
what country man he was, neither was it
knowen that he was her vncle. This King
Aſſuerus had one that was very great about
him, called Haman, who bare all the ſway

in the Kings houſe, and as the whole company,
aſwell the greateſt as the meaneſt,
gaue honor and reuerence to Haman, beeing
ſo commanded by the King, only Mardocheus
would neither honor him, nor doe
him any reuerence, notwithſtanding that
the Kings ſeruaunts had many times blamed
him, for not honouring of Haman, nor
making obeiſance to him, as the reſt of the
Court' both did, and the king had commanded:
and becauſe they ſawe, that he would
take no warning, they complained to Haman
of him: who caſting his eye vpon the
Iewe, and perceiuing plainely, that he vſed
no reuerence towardes him, conceiued a
great hatred againſt him, and for the diſpleaſure
that he bare him, deuiſed howe he
might procure the deſtruction, aſwell of all
the Iewes, as of Mardocheus, and therevpon
tolde the King, that throughout all
his dominions, there ſwarmed a lewde and
a contemptuous kinde of people, beeing
authors of new ſects and Ceremonyes, and
diſpiſers of his Maieſties lawes and ordinaunces,
which was a thing not before
ſeene, that ſuch a kinde of people ſhould be
ſuffered to liue within his dominions, made

humble requeſt to the King, that hee might
haue licence and authoritie from him, to
deſtroy them, promiſing thereby, to bring
to the Kings cofers, an infinite maſſe of
treaſure. The King anſweared him, that he
freely gaue him the treaſure that he ſpake
off, and for the people, hee bad him doe with
them what he thought good, and gaue him
his ring from his finger, that he might ſend
out letters, for the execution of his commaundement.
Whervpon Haman in great
haſte cauſed letters to be directed to all the
Prouinces and Cities within the Kinges
dominions, yt they ſhould at a day appointed,
ſet vpon the Iewes, and deſtroy them,
taking all their goods, and not leauing one
of thē aliue: which newes, when they came
to the eares of Mardocheus, were not very
pleaſant vnto him: whereupon he hied to the
Queene, and perſwaded her to goe wt great
ſpede to the King, and to ſue for pardon for
her woful countrymen: which at the firſt ſhe
refuſed to doe, by reaſon of a law, that if any
ſhould preſume to enter the Kinges chamber,
without licence or ſpeciall commaundement
(except the King did holde out, in
ſigne of clemencie, the goldē ſcepter that he

held in his hand) ſhould preſently dye for it.
Notwithſtanding, at the earneſt requeſt of
Mardocheus, after that ſhe & al the Iewes
in the Citie had faſted three dayes & three
nights, ſhe got her to the king, whom when
the King perceiued, in token of his fauoure
towards her, he held foorth his golden ſcepter,
and ſaide vnto her, Queene Heſter,
What haue you to ſay to mee? Demaunde
the one halfe of mine Empire, and I will
giue it thee? Who humbly beſeeched the
King that it would pleaſe him & Haman,
to come to a Banquet that ſhe had prepared
for him, at which banquet ſhe would declare
what petition ſhe had vnto him. At the
later end of the banquet, when the king had
well fed, and demaunded of Heſter what
her petition was, promiſing that if it were
the halfe of his kingdome, hee would preſently
graunt it: She aunſweared, O King
if I haue found fauour in thy ſight, graunt
me my life, & the life of my people, for both
I and my people are betrayed and appointed
to dye: if it had ſo been, that wee
ſhoulde haue been ſolde for ſlaues, it had
been farre more tollerable, and with my
ſorrowe I ſhoulde haue ſatiſfied my ſelfe.

when the King had hearde her, hee was
greately diſquieted, and aſked who it was
that durſt preſume to attempte ſo great a
matter, and what authoritie he had. The
Queene aunſwered this great enemye. Of
me and my nation, is this Haman that is
heere preſent. Which when Haman heard,
he was ſuddainely nipped in the head, and
as the King flang foorth in a fury, towards
the garden, Haman came to the bed where
the Queene ſat, to beſeech her to haue mercy
vpon him, becauſe he perceiued that the
King was determined that hee ſhould dye.
The King returning from the Garden, and
finding Haman vppon the bed, where the
Queene ſat, ſuppoſing that he had been too
familiar with her, began to conceaue a
great hatred againſt him, and then ſome
that were aboute him, tolde him that Haman
had made a paire of Gallowes for
Mardocheus: wherfore he commaunded,
that both he and his ſonnes ſhould bee hanged
therevpon. Which ſhortly ſet downe,
ſheweth the meaning of this prouerbe, that
if Aſſuerus had not giuen eare to Heſter,
ſhewing him, yt 
                     Haman againſt all order of
iuſtice had determined to deſtroy the people

of the Iewes, he had vndoutedly abuſed the
ſword, that he for iuſtice due did beare: &
which he was bound as a King and a good
Iuſticer wel to vſe. And into error had he
fallen, & wiſhed it ſtreight vndone: ſo had
the guiltles creature died, that no offence
had done. Which had been a great blotte
vnto him. For as the ciuill law ſayeth: It is
a better deed to leaue a fault vnpuniſhed,
then to puniſh an innocent.
                  
               
            
            
               9
               For verie ſeldome ſhalt thou finde
               the abſent to be cleare,
               And guiltie ſeldome ſhalt thou ſee
               the man that doeth appeare.
               Heare well the cauſe, and ſodainly
               do no man thou acquit:
               Yet take good heed that in thy pauſe,
               thou vſe both skill and wit.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  IN this Prouerbe, the Marques meaneth
to prooue by naturall reaſon, that which
in the other Prouerbe he ſhewed by example:
and the reaſon why we ſeldome find the

                     abſent to be cleare, and that we ſeldome
guiltie ſee the man that doth appeare, Is
becauſe he that ſpeaketh euil of him that is
abſent, maketh his tale to ſeeme as true as
may be, and perſwadeth him that heareth
him, to giue credite to his wordes, & though
perhaps ſome ſpeake in his defence, yet the
partie that is abſent, is alwayes thought
to be faultie: and ſo likewiſe of the other,
that the preſent is not founde to bee guiltie,
becauſe he is able to anſwere to whatſoeuer
is ſpoken againſt him, and whatſoeuer his
aduerſarie hath ſet downe for certaine, by
his deniall of it, he bringeth it to be doubted
of. And as Tullie in his new Rethorike ſayeth,
If any man be accuſed of any crime
or treſpaſſe, if he bee not guiltie, hee may
flatly denie it: and if he be guiltie, he may
alledge what great cauſe and reaſon hee
had to do, as he did, and ſo ſhal he cleare
himſelfe of the fault that is laide againſt
him.
                     No proceeding againſt him that is abſent. And therefore it is a principal ground
in the lawes, that whatſoeuer is done in
iudgement againſt him that is abſent, if he
doe not abſent himſelfe vpon contempt, ſhal
be nothing preiudiciall to him: & the greateſt
barre that may be to anie proceſſe that

is brought, is to ſay, that he was not willed
to appeare. And therefore when Adam offended,
and God was to condemne him for
his diſobedience, and contempt: the Text
ſayeth, that the Lord called and ſommoned
him to anſwere (if any anſwere hee coulde
make) for himſelfe, when he ſayde, Adam,
where art thou? For the Lorde knew well
enough, in what place he was, but becauſe
he ſhould not ſay, that God had proceded againſt
him, without hearing him, or calling
him, being abſent, & not contemptuous, he
both called for him, & heard what he coulde
ſay, and finding his anſwere not ſufficient,
condemned him, although he ſought to leſſen
his fault as much as he could, when he
ſaid, The woman, that thou gaueſt me,
gaue me the apple that I ate. Vpon this
ground alſo ſtood Medea, (as Seneca in his
vii. Tragedie ſheweth) in the ſpeach that
ſhe had with king Creon, the father in law
of Iaſon, that would haue baniſhed her his
realme: when ſhe aſked, for what cauſe and
fault ſhe ſhould be baniſhed? And that they
ought not to proceede againſt her, without
hearing her cauſe, affirming that ſhee
was readie to proue her innocencie, and to

purge hereſelfe of any crime, that coulde be
layde againſt her. And becauſe Creon ieſting
at her, ſayde: The poore innocent
woman requireth to knowe the cauſe of her
baniſhment, meaning that ſhe was ſo lewde
and ſo wicked, that her lewdneſſe, and her
naughtineſſe beeing ſo openly knowne, it
was not needefull to arraigne her, becauſe
ſhe was knowne to all men to bee guiltie.
She anſwered:A notable anſwere of a woman. If thou, being a King, takeſt
vpon thee to be a Iudge, thou oughteſt
to heare me: If thou take vpon thee to be
a tyrant, and an vniuſt man, thou mayeſt at
thy pleaſure take my life from mee. And
when the King would by no meanes be intreated,
but that ſhe muſt depart his realme,
ſhe made this notable concluſion: that whoſoeuer
he be, that commaundeth any thing
without hearing of the partie, though the
thing be iuſt that he commaundeth, yet he
himſelf is vniuſt in the commaunding of it.
And the reaſon of this notable ſaying of
Medea, is that which is before ſayde, That
according to the lawes both of God, of nature,
and of man, no Iudge ought to proceed
againſt any man, without hearing the
partie: and the Prouerbe ſayeth, You muſt

heare the partie, and giue no iudgement,
till you haue well weyed the matter. For
there muſt information be had, and proofe,
whether it be trueth, that the contrarie part
alledgeth, and the proofe and the witneſſe
well examined by good foreſight and aduiſe:
and this is it that of right ought to be
done in a caſe of iudgement, and one of the
greateſt defeatings, or auoydings, as the
Lawyers ſay, of any proces, is, if iudgemēt
haue been prooued or done without deliberation.
And therefore the Prouerbe ſayth,
See that you take good deliberation in
iudgement.
                  
               
            
            
               10.
               The deed thats done by good aduice,
               doth alwayes firmely ſtand,
               And ſeldome ſeene to craue amendes
               at any ſecond hand.
               Be ruled by counſaile euermore,
               whatſoeuer thou doſt intend,
               And from thy ſide let neuer goe
               thy faythfull aged friend.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  THe Marques in this Proueth concludeth
two things. The firſt is, the effect

that followeth, when a thing is done with
good deliberation, and brought to paſſe by
good aduiſe and counſaile: the ſeconde is,
whoſe aduiſe and coūſaile in our doings we
ought to follow. Touching the firſt, Solomon
in his Prouerbes ſaith, The determinations
of a man neuer come to good,
where counſaile is not afore had. The deuiſes
that are executed by good aduiſe,
are alwayes perfect & good. And Seneca
ſaith, Do al thy things by good aduiſe, &
thou ſhalt neuer repent them. For a man
not taking coūſaile nor aduiſe in that which
he intendeth, it is not poſſible for him, that
he ſhould foreſee the errours that he ſhal fal
in. And falling therein, for want of good
foreſight & counſaile, it muſt needes be, that
he muſt repent himſelfe, and ſay, I had not
thought ſo great a miſchiefe woulde haue
folowed. And as Valerius writeth, that
Scipio of Affrica was wont to ſay. It was
an euill fauoured, & a ſhameful thing, for
a man in any matter (eſpecially in ſuch as
belong to a man of warre) to ſay, I would
not haue thought it. For ſuch things as
are to be done with the ſword, ought well to
be thought of before. For the errours that in

warres are cōmitted, can neuer, as Scipio
ſaith, be amended. And as Vegetius in his
booke that he made Of the knowledge of the
Warres affirmeth, There is no other reaſon
to be yeelded why the Romanes did ſubdue
the whole worlde, & conquered whereſoeuer
they came, but becauſe they did al that they
did by great deliberation & aduiſe, being verie
ſkilfull & well trained in ſuch things as
belonged to the warres. For what (ſaith he)
was a handful of poore Romanes to the infinite
numbers of the Frenchmen? or what
could ſo ſlēder a power preuaile againſt the
great forces & puiſſance of the Germanes?
Certaine it is, that ye 
                     Spaniards were more
in nūber, and of greater ſtrength & force, thē
were the Romanes.
                     The ſkill of the ſouldier the only aduauncement of Rome. They were alwayes
behind the Affricanes, both in wealth & policies.
And no mā doubteth, but the Greeks
were farre beyond them in grauitie & wiſedom.
Yet alwayes did the ſouldier of Rome
preuaile, becauſe of his ſkill, being continually
trained & daily exerciſed in the warres.
For there could nothing hap in any ſkirmiſh
or battel, wherewt they had not long time afore
been acquainted. Certaine it is, as the
Prouerb ſaith, yt that which is done by deliberation,
cōmeth not to craue amendment

at the ſecond hande, and that from this counſaile
and aduiſe, the olde ſtager ought neuer
to be ſhut out. For as Ariſtotle ſayth in the
firſt of his Ethickes, The yong man by
reaſon of his ſmall experience, can haue
no great knowledge in anie matter, and
therfore not able to giue anie good coū
                           ſaile.
                     
And beſide in his booke of Rethorike,
In mans affaires and actions, the thinges
that haue paſſed, be cōmonly like to the
thinges that after happen: and as the
young man hath had no experience of
ſuch thinges as haue happened before, ſo
can hee neuer bee able to iudge of the
things that ſhall after fal out, & therefore
the auncient mē are alwayes able to giue
better counſaile.
                      And therefore Roboam
the ſonne of Solomon, for taking the aduiſe
of yong men, and refuſing the olde and
expert fellowes, did verire worthily forgoe
tenne partes of twelue, of his kingdome,
as ſhal hereafter be more at large declared.
And though young men are by reaſon of
ſtrength and luſtineſſe, more able and fitte
for the fight, than are the olde men: yet as
Tullie in his booke of Age ſaith, The great
and notable exploites are neuer done by

force nor agilitie of body, but by counſaile,
aucthoritie, & ſecreſie, And among
the principal cauſes that we reade, why
Alexander had alwaies the victory and the
better hand, it was the chiefe, that he went
alwaies accompanied with graue & auncient
counſellours. For as Trogus Pompeius
in his eleuenth booke writeth, That Alexander
whenſoeuer he was in any iourney
of great daunger, he neuer called to
counſel, nor made priuie to his doinges
the young and luſty Gallantes, but the
olde expert ſouldiers, that had folowed
the warres with his father, and with his
vncle, whom he vſed not ſo muche for
ſouldiers, as for gouernours. And it is
ſaide that thoſe whom he put in his battailes,
were commonly of the age of threeſcore
yeeres & vpwarde, to the entent that
none of them ſhould thinke to run away,
but to ouercome, and truſting more to their
handes then their feete, ſhoulde ſet their
whole mindes vpon the victory. And when
diuers of his old ſouldiours deſired him,
that they might depart, to reſt and refreſhe
them ſelues, offering him their ſonnes, that
were young and luſtie to ſerue in their places.

It is ſaide that he anſwered, I had rather
to haue about me the well experienced
grauitie of aged men, then the frowardeneſſe
and vnaduiſed raſhneſſe of young
men. And thus did Alexander attaine to
whatſoeuer he deſired, and was in all his
doinges, honourable and vertuous, becauſe
he neuer ſuffered, as the Prouerbe ſayeth,
The olde man to depart from his ſide.
                  
               
            
            
               11
               So long the common wealth of Rome
               Did flooriſhe ſtrong and glad:
               As they their aged ſenatours,
               At home in honour had.
               But when that Tirantes once began,
               To rule and beare the ſway,
               They neuer any conqueſt made,
               But loſt from day to day.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  IN this Prouerbe the Marques ſheweth,
and prooueth by good example and
greate experience of thinges before paſſed:
That which before he declared, that
as long as the Romanes gaue credit to the
aduiſe and counſaile of their aged Fathers,

ſo long they proſpered, and did
well: and when they once ceaſſed ſo to doe,
their honour preſently ceaſſed and came
to nought. They were gouerned in thoſe
dayes by a certaine companie of men
called Senators, which woorde and name
commeth of the Latine woorde Senex,
which ſignifieth aged. In what ſorte and by
what meanes the Romanes proſpered,
is plainely declared by Iudas Machabee,
in the firſt boke of the Machabees: where
he ſaith, The Romanes by their wiſedome
and ſober behauiour poſſeſſed the whole
worlde, and ouerthrewe the Princes that
rebelled againſt them, and made Tributaries
Galacia, and Spaine, ſubdued and overcame
the king of the Perſians, and Antiochus
the king of Aſia, hauing in his
company a hundred and thirtie Elephants,
ſacked al their cities, and made Tributarie
vnto them all their Dominions, and
brought into ſubiection al the countries
rounde about them, as wel farre as neare:
So that their very name was a terrour to
all that hearde of it. And the only cauſe of
this their proſperitie, was the great wiſedome
and foreſight, the which they had,

and the great loue that they bare to their
countrey, they were gouerned by three hundred
and thirtie Senatours, which euery
yere elected one to haue the chiefe auctoritie?
amongeſt them there was neither enuy
nor ielouſie, and therefore ſaith the booke,
Iudas the Machabee,
                     The Romanes prefer the common profite before their own. 
                     did enter frendſhip,
and make a perfect league with them.
For al their ſtudie & care was to maintaine
their cōmon welth, not hauing any regard
of any priuate cōmoditie: For as Tullie ſaieth,
Two things they ought to doe, that
wil profite their countrey. The firſt is,
that leauing apart al priuate commoditie,
they beſtowe all that that they do vpon
the cōmon wealth. The ſecond, that
they be not forward in ſome one thing,
and backward in an other. And whileſt
the Romanes obſerued this order, their
common wealth increaſed ſtill greater and
greater, according to the ſaying of Cato,
whoſe wordes are witneſſed by Saint Auguſtine,
in the ſeuenth booke of the citie of
God, the .ix. Chap. Doe not think: (ſaith
Cato) that our forefathers brought the
common wealth of Rome from a ſmall
thing to be greate, only by the ſworde.
                     
For if that were the matter, our company
at this time is greater, our ſouldiers more
in number, and our furniture a great deale
better. No, it was other matters that aduaunced
our aunceſtours, whereof wee be
cleane without:What made the Romanes to flooriſhe. they being at home, were
alwaies careful for matters abrode, and
gouerned vprightly and iuſtly, their hartes
were alwaies free, and were continually
faithful counſellours, they were neither entangled
with riot nor vices, but we by our
diſordred luſtes, haue brought our common
wealth to be poore, & our ſelues to be riche.
The offices and rewardes that were to be
giuen, as recompenſes, and the encouragementes
of vertue, are ſolde for money, or
geuen for fauour. Our anceſtours to enrich
the common wealth; dyd make themſelues
poore: But in theſe corrupt times of ours
the caſe is quite altered: The treaſures of
our owne common wealth are ſmall and
poore, & we our ſelues are become wealthy
& rich, which is a thing moſt monſtruous,
and the ouerthrowe of all goodneſſe. In
whiche ſaying is verified and concluded
whatſoeuer is conteined in this Prouerbe:
When Tirantes once began to rule and

beare the ſway. Which Tirants be thoſe,
that more regarde their owne priuate commoditie
then their countries, they not only
ceaſſed their conqueſtes, but ſhortly loſte
that, which they had wonne.
               
            
         
         
            The ſecond Chapter.
of Knowledge and Wiſdome.
            
               12
               Apply thy ſelfe with all thy force,
               Some knowledge to attaine:
               Procure the ſame with ſtudie great,
               With diligence and paine▪
               
               But ſeeke not to be learned thou,
               For fonde deſire of praiſe:
               But ſkilfully to reprehende
               The vnſkilful ſinners waies.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  THe Marques in this Prouerbe ſheweth,
with what care and diligence
we ought to ſeeke for knowledge
and furthermore, to what ende wee
ought to trauaile and ſeeke for it. For as Ariſtotle
in a boke that he made of the Soule
                     
ſaith: Our ſoule or minde at the time of our
birth, is as a blanke, or a cleane peece of
paper that hath nothing vpon it, but is redy
to receiue any perfectneſſe, knowledge,
or maners and therefore if it ſo be that: the
very perfection of the ſoule, is knowledge.
the Marques doeth to good end admoniſh
and exhort vs to ſeeke for this knowledge,
by al the meanes that we may. Cato ſaith,
Seek to get knowledge or Art: For when
fortune is fickle & wil faile, yet Art and
ſcience wil neuer forſake thee. And therefore
it is written in the ſixth booke of Policrates,
That the Emperour Octauian, as
great a Prince as he was, cauſed his children
to be ſo brought vp, that if euer fortune
ſhoulde faile them, yet they ſhoulde haue
a meanes to get their liuing. And therefore
he cauſed his ſonnes to be trained vppe in
knowledge of the warres, to learne, to
runne, to leape, to ſwimme, to caſte the
dart, to throw the ſtone, both with the hand
and with the ſling, and his daughters to
woorke all maner of linnen woorkes, and
woollen woorkes: So that yf euer it
ſhoulde chaunce them to fall into pouertie,
they ſhoulde yet be able with their handes

to get their liuing, and the Prouerbe ſaith
more, That a man ought not to ſeeke
learning for fonde deſire of prayſe,
                     Learning to what end it ought to be ſought.
                     but ſkilfully to reprehende the vnſkilfull
ſinners waies. For the intentes of ſuche as
ſeeke to be learned are diuers: Some, to
the end they might be counted wiſe & great
learned men, and for ſuche reputed and
cōmended in euery place, not for any good
that they meane to do to others therby: and
the ende of this is vanitie: Others, not for
to doe anye good withall, nor for any deſire
of praiſe, but for their owne pleaſure: the
ende of whiche is fooliſhe curioſitie. Some
againe ſeek to be learned, to come to riches
and promotion: the ende whereof is couetouſneſſe:
Others ſeeke to attaine to knowledge,
to profite & benefite their neighbours
withall: And the ende of that is charitie:
Others to be inſtructed and edified them
ſelues: And the ende of that is wiſedome:
And theſe two laſt be they, that ſeeke not to
be learned for vaineglory, but to be ſkilfull
reprehenders and admoniſhers of others.
               
            
            
               
               13.
               By learning ſhalt thou vnderſtande,
               What God hath doone for thee:
               And what he dayly bringes to paſſe,
               For all in eche degree.
               And howe to loue and honour him,
               This dreame forgotten quiet:
               Whereof within a litle time.
               Thou ſhalt forgoe the ſight.
               
                  The Paraphraſe
                  HEere doeth the Marques declare
what profite & commoditie commeth
by knowledge,The commoditie of learning. ſaying, that by learning we
come to knowe what GOD hath doone,
and what he doeth for vs. The knowledge
whereby we may knowe GOD, and what
he hath doone for vs, is to be had by peruſing
the olde and newe Teſtament, wherin
we ſhall finde, how God is the creatour
of al the whole worlde and how he created
it only of his owne goodneſſe & mercy, and
how he hath giuen vs lawes and commaundementes,
by the which we may ſerue and
obey him, & that though a man haue of long

time liued vertuouſly and godly, yet if in
the ende he offende God, and die without
repentance, that God wil neuer remember
his righteouſneſſe nor good life, that went
before: Againe, yf a man hath been a greeuous
ſinner all his lyfe time, and yet in the
ende repent and turne vnto GOD, and
die with vnfaigned repentance, the mercifull
Lorde will neuer lay to his charge
any ſinne that he hath committed: According
as the Prophet Ezechiel from the
Lordes owne mouth teſtifieth, We ſhal alſo
therein ſee that all the race and poſteritie
of man, for the offence of our firſt father
Adam, are adiudged and condemned to euerlaſting
damnation: And howe GOD,
for the great loue that he bare to mankinde,
hath ſent his only begotten ſonne
Ieſus Chriſt, to take our fleſh vpon him, &
to ſuffer moſt cruel death for our ſaluation:
And to pay, as Eſay ſaith, The price of our
redemption. Alſo by the Scriptures wee
know, what other benifites ſoeuer the Lord
hath doone for vs. Beſide, the ſcripture teacheth
vs how we ought to loue God with al
our hart, with all our minde, & with all
our forces, & that we ought rather to die a glorious

death, then to offend him with a ſinfull
life: & this he meaneth when he ſaith,
The dreame is forgottē quite that ſoone
thou ſhalt forgoe. For our life is compared
to a ſleepe, which we ſhal leaue before
we be aware, as Innocentius ſaith in a
booke that he wrote of the wretchednes of
the ſtate of man, where he hath theſe words:
Tel me my brother,The vanitie and miſerie of this life. what goodneſſe doeſt
thou finde in theſe worldly delights? What
doeth thy glory profite thee? What doeth
thy pleaſures auaile thee? Theſe be not
they that can deliuer thee from death, nor
defend thee from the wormes: For he that
late was luſtie and glorious in his Pallace,
lieth nowe dead and ſtinking in his
Sepulchre: he that late was tickled with
the delightes of the bed, lyeth nowe torne
a ſunder with the wormes in his graue
What meaneſt thou to be proude, being
but wormes meate and aſhes? Why moyleſt
thou for riches, that ſhall ſhortly be diſtributed
to the poore? As the Prophet
ſaith, They ſlept their ſleepe, & thoſe that
were lately riche,The great good that commeth by reading the ſcriptures. haue nowe nothing in
their handes. There true wiſdome,
knowledge of God, and ſkill in the ſcripture,
bringeth vs to this vnderſtandyng.

by this a man knoweth how to ſerue God,
not regarding this tranſitorie life, which
paſſeth as a ſleepe or a dreame.
               
            
            
               14.
               To Gentlemen it doeth belong.
               To knowe the artes diuine,
               Where knowledge chiefly flooriſheth,
               And learning beſt doeth ſhine.
               Aſſuredly he well deſerues
               To haue the vpper ſeate,
               That garniſhed with wiſedome is,
               And deckt with learning great.
               IN this Prouerbe the Marques ſheweth
what maner of men ought to ſeeke for
learning and vnderſtanding, and for the
better vnderſtanding hereof, we muſt conſider,
that there be artes Mechanicall and
arts Liberal. Artes Mechanical are thoſe,
that are vſed by men of baſe condition, as
Shoemakers, Taylours, Carpenters,
Smithes and all other that are handicrafteſmen:
Arts Liberal are thoſe learnings,
and ſciences, wherunto liberal or free men,
that is, noble men or Gentlemen applie

them ſelues, as ye ſeuen Liberal ſciences, &
therfore they are called liberal, or free, that
beſtow their time in theſe knowledges, becauſe
they be not of baſe minde nor eſtate,
neither are they ſubiect or bounde to anie
vyle occupation: And therefore in the olde
time there were none brought vp in learning,
but onely the children of noblemen
and Gentlemen: and therefore ſaith the Prouerbe,
To Gentlemen it doeth belong,
to know the artes diuine, That is to ſay,
to ſuche men as are of good eſtate and condition.
Traian (as Policrates in his ſixth
booke writeth) who was a Spaniarde and
Emperour of Rome, in a letter that he
writeth to the Frenche king, perſwadeth
him, to bring vp his children in the knoweledge
of the liberall artes, ſaying, that a
kinge without learning, is like an Aſſe with
a crowne, & therefore the kinges and Emperours
in the olde time did commit their
children to the beſt learned men, that they
coulde get. Traian was brought vp with
Policrates: The emperor Nero with Seneca:
& great Alexander with Ariſtotle. To
whom (as Policartes in the forſaid booke
ſaith) King Phillip vppon the birth of his

ſonne Alexander wrote his letters in this
ſort: Phillip the king, ſendeth greeting to
Ariſtotle the Philoſopher. I vnderſtande
that I haue a ſonne borne, for which I
geue thankes to the Gods, not ſo much for
his birth, as that he hapned to be borne in
thy time, by whom I truſt to haue him ſo
brought vp, that he ſhalbe woorthie to ſucceede
me in my kingdome and dominions,
The Prouerb ſaith further, That he deſerueth
preheminence, that is garniſhed
with wiſdome and learning. And aſſuredly
looke what difference there is betwixt
perfection and imperfection,The diuerſitie betwixt the learned and the ignorant. and betwixt
darkneſſe and light, ſo great is the diuerſity
betwixt a learned man and an ignorant, &
becauſe we ſhould vnderſtande what great
honour he deſerueth that is beautified with
learning and wiſedome, both Daniel in
his ſeconde viſion, and S. Ierome in his
preface to the Bible doe witneſſe, that
the learned and the wiſe ſhall ſhine, as the
brightneſſe of the firmament, and thoſe
that haue inſtructed many in godlyneſſe,
ſhall gliſter like the ſtarres for euer and
euer. And therfore great preheminence
doeth he deſerue, that is garniſhed with

wiſedome and learning.
               
            
            
               15
               The head and ſpring of goodneſſe al,
               Is wiſedome, that doeth ſhewe
               The meanes for to diſcerne the trueth,
               And vertue pure to knowe.
               Who ſo beginneth in his youth
               In vertue to delight,
               No doubt, but when he comes to age,
               Will leade his life aright.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  IN this Prouerbe the Marques ſheweth
that one of the principall cauſes of wiſedome
and knowledge, is to feare God, as
Salomon in his prouerbes ſaith, The beginning
of wiſdome, is the feare of God,
and wiſedome & knowledge the fooliſh
doe abhorre, and therfore he ſaith, That
wiſedome is more woorth then the weapons
of the mightie, of greater value then
precious ſtones, & more fine thē pure gold.
For by wiſedome we are able to diſcerne
betwixt good and euill, betwixt vertue

and vice, to which ende leauing to ſpeake
of the doctrine and rules of the holy
Scripture, whereby we are taught to flee
from all ſinne and wickedneſſe and to embrace
and followe vertuouſneſſe) Ariſtotle
hath written three bookes: In the one of
them he entreateth of the rules and orders
that are requiſite for the guiding of a countrey
and citie, which booke is called the
Politiques: In the other he ſheweth howe a
man ought to gouerne his houſe, his wife,
and his children, & this booke is called the
Aeconomikes. The thirde, teacheth how a
man ſhoulde gouerne him ſelfe, wherein
there is a medlie of rules & obſeruations,
by which a man may knowe the vertuous,
and diſcerne and ſeuere them from the vices.
And ſpecially in this booke he ſheweth,
that all maner of vertues are gotten
by vſe and cuſtome, and that a man
by vſing a long time to liue vertuouſly, it
commeth at length to bee naturall vnto
him, and although a man be naturally
enclined to vice, yet yf he accuſtome
him ſelfe to vertue, he ſhall leaue his
euill inclination and become vertuous.
And this is it that the Prouerbe ſayeth,

                     Who ſo beginneth to liue well in his
youth, it is a ſigne that he ſhall not doe amiſſe
in his age. But it is not one vertuous
act alone, that can be called a beginning, as
Ariſtot. ſaith, no more then can one ſwallow
ſhew a ſpring. And the greateſt preſumption
by which we may cōiecture (as Ariſtotle
in the ſecond of his Ethickes ſayeth)
whether a man ſhall proue vertuous or
no, is the pleaſure or the heauineſſe that
he taketh in his well doing. For if he be
ioyfull, & take delight in the vertuous actes
that he doeth, it is a token that he wil proue
well in his age, and be verie vertuous. But
if he goe about them, with an euill will, and
ſeeme to take no delight therein, it is a
ſigne that his vertues will not long endure.
And therefore as the wiſe man ſayeth: By
the pleaſauntneſſe and heauineſſe of a
child in his youth, we ſhall eaſily gheſſe
what he will be in his age.
                  
               
            
            
               16.
               That moſt renowmed Solomon
               for wiſedome chiefely ſought,
               Whereby his Empire and his ſtate
               to order good he brought.
               
                  
He gouernd of himſelfe alone,
               and neuer did debate,
               Nor counſaile callde for anie thing,
               that longed to his ſtate.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  AS it is written in the thirde Booke
of the Kinges, Solomon the
ſonne of Dauid, after the death of his Father,
was choſen to be King. And the firſt
thing that euer he did, becauſe he would lay
a good foundation, he went to a hie Mountaine,
that was neare about him, called Gabaon,
to offer ſacrifices to the Lord. And
that night the Lorde appeared to him in
his ſleep, and ſaid vnto him, Aſke what thou
wilt, that I may giue it thee. And Solomon
ſayd. Thou haſt ſhewed vnto thy ſeruant
Dauid my father great mercie, in
that thou haſt giuen him a ſonne to ſit vpon
his ſeate, and to ſucceede him in his kingdome:
And now, O Lord my God, it is thou
that haſt made thy ſeruant king, in ſtead of
Dauid my father, and I am but yong, and
know not how to goe out and in, and thy ſeruant
is in the middeſt of thy people, which

thou haſt choſen, and verely the people are
ſo manie, as can not be tolde, nor numbred
for multitude: Giue therefore vnto thy ſeruant
an vnderſtanding hart, to iugde thy
people, that I may diſcerne betwixt good
& bad. And this pleaſed the Lord well, that
Solomon had deſired this thing. And God
ſaid vnto him, Becauſe thou haſt aſked this
thing, and haſt not aſked long life, neither
haſt aſked riches, nor the ſoule of thine enemies,
but haſt aſked vnderſtanding and diſcretion
in iudgement: Beholde I haue done
according to thy petition, for I haue giuen
thee a wiſe & an vnderſtanding hart, ſo that
there hath been none like thee before thee,
nor after thee ſhall anie ariſe like vnto thee.
This ſtorie ſerueth here for this Prouerbe,
that ſheweth, how Solomon ſought chiefly
for wiſedome, by which without debating
of anie matters, or calling of any counſaile,
hee was able ſufficiently to gouerne his
kingdome and dominions.
               
            
            
               17.
               If thou be eloquent, great praiſe
               thereof to thee will riſe,
               But much more commendable it is
               to be diſcrete and wiſe.
               
                  
For he that wiſedome hath, will all
               his life obedient be
               Vnto the rules, he learned hath
               in ſweete Philoſophie.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  THe Marques here ſheweth in this
Prouerbe, what is the marke that a
man ought ſpecially to ſhoote at, and ſayth,
that although it be a goodly thing for a man
to be eloquent, and to haue a good tongue,
yet it is a great deale more worthie praiſe,
to be wiſe. Eloquence is a fine and ſweete
kinde of ſpeaking, by the pleaſantneſſe
whereof, it draweth men to the opinion of
the ſpeaker: The figures, and rules whereof
are ſet foorth by Tullie in his Rethorike:
And if this eloquence be ioyned with wiſedome
and knowledge, it is a ſpeciall ornament:
but if a man haue more wordes then
wit, he ſhall be counted a vaine iangler and
a pratteler. And therefore ſayeth Tullie,
That farre better is wiſedome voyde of
eloquence, then fooliſh pratteling without
diſcretion. Wiſedome among all the
moral vertues, that Ariſtotle in his Ethicks
                     
intreateth of, is the moſt principall vertue,
or rather, as he ſaith, the onely vertue, meaning
that all the vertues are chained and
linked together in one. And therefore the
Philoſophers commonly ſay, that whoſoeuer
hath one, hath al. For if he haue one vertue,
he muſt needes haue wiſedome thorowly,
he that hath wiſdome thorowly, hath all
vertues: therefore hee that hath one vertue,
hath all vertues. Wiſedome, as the Philoſophers
ſay, conſiſteth of three partes: the
firſt is memorie, to remēber ſuch things as
hath paſſed: the ſecond knowledge, to know
ſuch things as are preſent: the thirde, prouidence,
to foreſee ſuch thinges as are to
come. And he that hath theſe three partes,
may be counted wiſe, and a ſeruant obedient
to morall Philoſophie. For as I ſayde
before, wiſedome conteineth in her ſelfe all
morall vertue: And as Ariſtotle ſayeth, It
is a thing vnpoſsible for a man to bee
wiſe, and not to be good. And therefore
the Prouerbe ſayeth, The wiſe man is all
his life obedient to morall Philoſophie.
                  
               
            
            
               18
               Roboam being one that had
               no skill, but did aſſay,
               
                  
In euerie thing to ſtriue againſt
               the ſtreame, did ſoone decay:
               For vexing and moleſting of
               his ſubiects kept in thrall,
               Whē leaſt he look'd for ſuch a change,
               they quite forſooke him all.
               
                  The Paraphraſe of the Marques.
                  
                     ROboam was the ſonne of Solomon,
and King of Iſrael, who after his fathers
deceaſe, did vſe ſuch tyrannie ouer his
ſubiectes, that verie woorthily hee was depriued
of the moſte parte of his gouernment.
               
               
                  The Doctour.
                  TO proue the harmes and miſchiefes,
that he that wanteth wiſedome runneth
into, the Marques here bringeth in the
Storie of Roboam, the ſonne of Solomon:
Of whom it is written in the thirde
Booke of the Kinges, that after the death
of Solomon, the people aſſembled togither
to make him King, and ſpake vnto
him, ſaying, Thy Father made our yoke
grieuous, nowe therefore make thou the

grieuous ſeruice of thy father, and his heauie
yoke, that he put vpon vs, lighter, & we
will ſerue thee. And hee ſayde vnto them,
Depart yet for the ſpace of three dayes, and
then come againe to mee. And the people
departed. And King Roboam tooke
counſaile with the olde men, that ſtoode before
his Father, while hee yet liued, and
ſayde, What counſaile giue you, that I
may haue matter to aunſwere this people?
And they ſayde vnto him, If thou be a ſeruant
to this people this day, and folow their
mindes, and anſwere them, & ſpeake gently
vnto them this day, they wil be thy ſeruants
for euer. But he forſooke the counſaile that
the olde men had giuen him, and called vnto
his coūſaile yong men, that were growne
vp with him, and waited on him, & ſaid vnto
thē. What coūſaile giue you, that we may
anſwer this people? And the yong men, that
were growne vp with him, anſwered him,
ſaying, Thus ſhalt thou ſay vnto the people:
My little finger ſhall bee weightier
then my fathers whole bodie, and where as
my father did lade you, and put a grieuous
yoke vpon you, I will make it heauier. At
which words the people greatly diſdaining,

ten tribes of them preſently forſooke him,
and choſe Ieroboam for their king. Wherby
is concluded, that Roboam, becauſe he
was not wiſe, nor aduiſed, nor carefull, to
preuent ſuch miſchiefs as might happen, ouerſhooting
himſelfe ſhamefully in his fooliſh
anſwere, was worthily forſaken and reiected
of his people: as is mencioned in the
Prouerbe.
               
            
            
               19.
               My ſonne, ſerue God with all thy heart,
               for why, his wrath from hie
               Doth fall, and whiske through all the worlde
               in twinkling of an eie.
               For when he liſt, he caſteth downe
               ſuch as he bleſſed late,
               And doth aduaunce the godly man
               to great and hie eſtate.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  THe Marques ſheweth in this Prouerbe
the profite and commoditie that
commeth of ſeruing and fearing God, and
the hurtes & inconueniences that follow to
ſuch as offende him according to the dayly

leſſons of the church. The ſoueraign power
of God is ſhewed, in caſting downe the
mightie out of their ſeate, which are thoſe
that heape to them ſelues his diſpleaſure,
and in exalting the humble and the meeke,
which are thoſe that feare him. For as Dauid
in one of his Pſalmes ſayth: The Lord
throweth downe one, and lifteth vp an
other, for the veſſell is in the hand of
God: And of ſuch as ſerue and feare God,
he ſayth, I haue not ſeene the iuſt forſaken,
nor his ſeede begging their breade:
And of thoſe that offende, and fall into his
diſpleaſure, he ſaith, I haue ſeene the wicked
in proſperitie, and flouriſhing like
the Cedars in Libanus, and within a
while I went by the place where he was,
and beholde, he was periſhed, and not to
be ſeene. And therefore well ſaith the Prouerbe,
The Lord bringeth the mightie to
the ground, that offendeth him, & prouoketh
his diſpleaſure, & aduaunceth to
honour the poore man that feareth him.
And vpon this is the whole Scripture in a
maner grounded: that is to wit, that God
promiſeth euerlaſting ioy, & ſufficiencie of
worldly goods to all thoſe that ſerue him,

and euerlaſting deſtruction both of life and
goods, to thoſe that offend, and prouoke his
wrath.
               
            
            
               20.
               Be conformable to the time,
               and ſeaſon that dooth fall:
               For otherwiſe to be, is cauſe
               of griefe and loſſe of all.
               Abhorre preſumption as a monſter
               and an enimy
               To knowledge, that is onely light
               and lampe of mageſtie.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  IT is written of Dauid the King, that for
feare of falling into the hands of Saule,
he fled into an other countrey neere adioyning,
where they well vnderſtood that hee
was annointed king ouer Iſrael: And when
they had taken him, and brought him before
the King of the countrie, whoſe name
was Achis, becauſe they ſhould not detaine
him in priſon, nor gratifie Saule with the
deliuery of him, hee fayned him ſelfe to bee

mad, and wryed his mouth, as one that had
been poſſeſſed with a ſpirite, and fomed at
the mouth: & this was counted for a great
wiſedome and diſcretion in Dauid, becauſe
he framed him ſelfe according to the time
and ſeaſon, whereas if he had doone otherwiſe,
he had caſt away him ſelfe. And Cato
ſaith, That it is a great pointe of wiſedome,
to counterfaite follie in ſome
place: and in an other place, It is good for
a man to ſeeme half out of his wit & enraged,
when time and reaſon requires.
As Ariſtotle in his third Booke of Ethicks
witneſſeth, where he ſpeaketh of Fortitude:
At ſome time againe it ſhall behooue him
to ſhew him ſelfe to be humble and meeke,
yea and alſo fearefull, as Ariſtoſtle in the
very ſame booke writeth. The like is to bee
obſerued in the vertues of Temperaunce,
Liberalitie, and all other vertues, in knowledge
of which circumſtances, Wiſedome
doth chiefly conſiſt. Againe the Prouerbe
ſayeth, That a man ought to abhorr preſumption,
as the enemy, and contrary
to the cleare Lampe of Knowledge.
VVherevpon Sainct Hierome in one of
his Epiſtles writeth after this ſorte.
                  
                     
Amongſt all other things, that the Romaines
wiſely deuiſed, this was one, That
whenſoeuer any of their Captaines returned
with victory to Roome, leaſt he ſhoulde
be puft vp with pride and vainglory, for the
worthyneſſe of his perſon, or brought into
a fooles paradiſe, forgetting himſelfe, for
the great honor and triumph that was done
vnto him, they thought good, that as they
honoured him three maner wayes, for the
ouerthrowe that hee wan: ſo the ſelfe ſame
day, to make him remember him ſelfe, and
to let fall his Pecockes taile, they likewiſe
diſhonored him with thre notable diſpights.
The honor (which was doone to all conquerours)
that they did vnto him was in three
manners: The firſt was, that all the people
of the Citie, came out to meete and receiue
him, with great ioy and gladneſſe: The ſeconde,
all the Priſoners that he had taken,
went before his Chariot, with their hands
bound behinde them. The third, they put vpon
him a ſhert of the God Iupiters, and ſet
him in a Chariot of Golde, which was
drawen with foure white Horſes, in which
ſorte they caried him to the Capitoll, with
great honor, ioy, and ſhowtes of the people.

And with theſe three ſortes of honor, they
ioyned theſe three reproches, to the end hee
ſhoulde not wax proude nor inſolent. The
firſte was, they placed by him cheeke to
cheeke, a ragged and an vnſeemely knaue:
and thus they did to ſignifie, that any man
though his ſtate were neuer ſo baſe nor miſerable,
might by vertue attaine to the like
honour: The ſecond, this beggerly companion,
did nowe and then buffet him, to the
ende, he ſhould not be too proude of his honour,
and euer as he ſtrake him, badde him
to remember that hee was a man, and
ſhould dye: The thirde diſhonour was, that
it was lawfull for euery man to giue him
the ſhamefulleſt woordes they coulde deuiſe.
And this the Romaines did as I
ſaide before, to the ende the Conquerour
ſhould abhorre preſumption, which is the
aduerſarie of the Knowledge, that clere and
comfortable light.
               
            
            
               21.
               For time is it, that all things makes,
               and time doth all things marre:
               And when dame Fortune pleaſed is,
               ſuch things as hurtfull are,
               
                  
Fall out to our commoditie,
               and many times doe pleaſe:
               While ſuch things as cōmodious are,
               doe turne to our diſeaſe.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  THis is the onely difference betwixt
euerlaſting thinges, and tranſitory
things: The euerlaſting things, endure for
euer: the tranſitory thinges, as with time:
they come, ſo with time they decay, & therefore
in the proueth before, the Marques giueth
vs aduice, and exhorteth vs to bee conformable
to the time & ſeaſon; And that reaſon
that maketh him ſo to ſay, is, that as a
thing is in one time wrought & done, ſo is it
in an other time vndone & deſtroied. For as
Solomon in his Eccleaſtes ſaith, There is
a time to be borne & a time to die, a time
to build, & a time to pluck downe: neither
ought we as ye prouerb ſaith, to be offended,
if things fal not out according to our deſire,
for when it pleaſeth Fortune, ſuch things as
ſeeme diſpleaſant vnto vs; ſhall redound to
our commoditie. For the better vnderſtanding
wherof, we muſt conſider what is the
true ſignification of this word (Fortune) of

which there be many & ſundry opinions. For
ſome, thoſe yt be heathen people, as Boetius
in his firſt booke Of Conſolation ſaith, will
needs haue this Fortune to be a Lady, and
a great goddeſſe, vnder whoſe gouernment
and at whoſe diſpoſitiō, are all the treaſures
and riches of the world: & farther they ſay,
that ſhee hath all maner of perſons in the,
worlde vpon a wheele, & that her condition
and nature (for ſhe is a woman) is, neuer to
be long of one minde, but ſomtime of great
and honourable perſonages, to make poore
and miſerable creatures, & againe of poore
& miſerable caitiues, to make hye & mightie
Princes, ſtil whirling about her vnſtedfaſt
wheele, as pleaſeth her. Ariſtotle hath
alſo the like maner of ſpeach in his Booke
Of good Fortune, where he affirmeth, that
there are diuerſe and ſundry opinions aboute
Fortune. But all their opinions are
farre differing from our Chriſtian faith.
For as Boetius in his firſte Booke Of
Conſolation, And Saint Auguſtine in the
fourth Booke Of the Citie of God, doe
vnite, this Fortune & deſtinie, are no other
things, then the prouidence of God, & therfore
to ſpeake like a good Chriſtian, that

which the Prouerbe heere ſaith: When as
it pleaſeth Fortune, &c. is as much to
ſay, as when it pleaſeth the prouidence of
God, the thinges that bee hurtfull vnto vs,
ſhall turne to our profit, and ſuch things as
are profitable, to our hurt and deſtruction.
Whereof there is a very good example in
the holie Scriptures, in the firſt Booke of
Moſes, where it is written, that the Children
of Iacob, for the malice that they
bare to Ioſeph their brother, threw him into
a deepe pitte, and after ſolde him to certaine
Merchants, who ſolde him to an officer
of King Pharaoes, that vpon the vnfull
accuſation of his wife, kepte him a long
time in Priſon, from whence hee was ſent
for by King Pharao, and after that hee
had declared the meaning of his dreame
and foreſhewed the comming of the deare
and the barren yeares, he was made the
greateſt man aboute him, which was the
cauſe that the patriarch Iacob with all his
houſe eſcaped the great famine, & came to
liue honourably in Aegypt and thus did it
pleaſe fortune, that is to ſay, God, that the
hurtfull things, that is, the impriſonment
of Ioſeph, and all the other harmes and miſeries

that he ſuſtained, ſhould turne to the
profite of himſelf, his father, and his brethren.
So likewiſe doe the things that
appeare good and profitable, many times
fall out to bee hurtfull and euill vnto vs, as
to haue great ſtore of monie, is a profitable
thing, and yet it often falleth, that their
throates are cut for it, that haue it: and ſo doeth
a profitable thing become hurtefull.
               
            
            
               22.
               My ſonne, the wiſeman and his life,
               ſtill ſet before thy face:
               And ſpeake no euill of thy Prince,
               in anie ſecret place;
               Looke that thy toung & iudgement both
               ſuch nets do warily ſhun:
               For why, the very walles them ſelues,
               Will witnes what is doone.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  THE Marques in this Prouerbe
ſheweth, that if a man be not able of
him ſelfe to rule and order his life, hee
ſhould ſeeke out, and ſet before his eyes,
ſame wiſe and notable man, according to

whoſe doings he ſhuld in euery point frame
his life, as Seneca writeth to Lucilius, & it
is one of the chiefeſt leſſons that hee could
deuiſe to giue him, for the framing of his life
aright. He willeth him, that he ſhuld alwaies
imagine him ſelfe to bee in the preſence of
ſome good man, for example ſake either
Cato or Lelius, for ether of them were both
vertuous & wiſe: and that he ſhould frame al
his thoughts, and direct all his deedes, according
to the life and vertues of them, and
ſo ſhould he neuer do amiſſe, and this is it,
that is ment in ye prouerbe, Follow the wiſe
man and his lawe. The law of the wiſeman
is his diſcretion, for as Ariſtotle ſaieth,
The iuſt and the vertuous man is a lawe
vnto him ſelfe, for hee meaſureth the
times, & diſpoſeth his things, according
as the time and reaſon doth require. And
the Prouerbe ſaith more, Speake thou no
euill of thy Prince: according to the doctrine
of the Apoſtle Sainct Paule, We are
bound to feare God, and to honour the
King. We ought to ſerue the King as our
naturall Lorde, and wee offende God grieuou
                        •
                     ly,
in diſſobeying of him: In ſo much
as ſome Doctors of law are of opinion, that

whoſoeuer obeyeth not the Kinges commaundement
findeth deadly, according to
that is written in the ſecond of the Kings,
Hee that obeyeth not the Prince, ſhall
dye for it. And therefore as it is a grieuous
and greate ſacriledge, to blaſpheme
the name of God: ſo is it a damnable and
horrible offence to ſpeake euill of the King:
and againſt ſuch as ſhall ſo offende, it is very
well prouided, bothe by the conſtitutions
of the Emperours, and by the lawes
and ſtatutes of Spaine. And the Marques
ſayth, That wee ought not onely to
forbeare to ſpeake euill of the Prince abroade
and in company, whereby it may
come to his eare, but alſo wee ought not to
do it in ſecrete. For Solomon ſayth in his
Prouerbs.The Prince not to be euill ſpoken of. 
                     Speake no euill of the Prince
iu any wiſe, for if thou doeſt, be ſure the
verie birdes of the ayre will diſcloſe it.
The Byrdes of the ayre, as ſome Doctoures
teache, are the Spyrtes and
Diuelles, according to the ſaying of our
Lorde and Sauiour in the Goſpel, where
hee telleth the parable of the ſeede,
that fell by the highe waye, and the
Byrdes of the ayre deuoured it. The

The birdes of the Aire ſaith our Sauiour,
are the lewde and wicked ſpirits, that take
out of the heart of man the worde of God.
And in this ſorte is the aforeſaide allegation
to be vnderſtoode, that the birdes of the
aire will diſcouer it, that is to ſay, the wicked
ſpirites, who ſhall reueale the treaſon
that thou haſte ſpoken in ſecret, and this is
it, that the Prouerb meaneth, when it ſaith.
The very walles will witnes beare.
                  
               
            
         
         
            The third Chapter
of Iuſtice.
            
               23.
               From Iuſtice ſee thou varrie not,
               for duetie, loue, nor feare:
               Let no good turne at any time
               procure thee to forbeare.
               Or for to ſwarue in any point,
               from ſentence iuſt and right:
               In giuing dewe correction to
               the faithleſſe fautie wight.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  
                     
AS Ariſtotle in the firſt Booke of his
Ethicks affirmeth, that the cleereſt &
moſt bewtifull vertue of all others,The duetie of a Iuſtice.
is Iuſtice, whoſe brightneſſe doth
farre exceede either the day ſtarre, or the euening
ſtarre: and therefore he ſaith, That
Iuſtice comprehendeth in it ſelf all other
vertues. And Saint Auguſtine ſaith in his
fourth Booke Of the Citie of God, that Iuſtice
beeing taken away, the kingdomes of
the earth are nothing elſe but greate companyes
of theeues, nor the companyes of
theeues any other then ſmall kingdomes.
And therefore ſaith the wiſe man in his Eccleſiaſtes,
Follow iuſtice, all you that are
Iudges on the earth.
                      Whoſoeuer is a
Iudge, ought to bee as a Balance, and iuſt
weight, in all his doinges, and neither for
feare, friendſhip, nor any other reſpect, to
forbeare the executing of vpright Iuſtice.
And therefore Valerius ſheweth in his
ſixth booke, that where as a certaine Iudge
forbare to do iuſtice, becauſe of the loue that
he bare to ye partie that was accuſed,A good example. 
                     Cambiſes
cauſed his ſkin to be plucked ouer his
eares, & to be nayled to the bench where hee
ſat, commaunding his ſonne to be ſet in the

place, and to giue the ſentence, that his father
ſhould haue giuen: which was ſuche a
terror to all thoſe that came after, that frō
that time forwarde, they could neuer bee
brought by feare or friendſhip, to giue any
other iudgement, then that which was iuſt
and vpright. And ſo hath God in his lawes
commaunded, Thou ſhalt doe Iuſtice to the
pore aſwel as to the mightie, neither ſhalt
thou haue any reſpect of perſōs. One of the
ſeuen wiſe men of Athens, as it is written
in the liues of the Philoſophers, was wont
to ſay, that the lawes, where good Iuſticers
wanted, were like vnto Eobwebs, where
flyes and ſuch weake Creatures doe hange
and ſtick faſt: but the great and the ſtrong
doe breake thorow without any ſtop. Who
ſoeuer wil deale in iuſtice as he ought to do,
muſt haue no reſpecte of perſons, but muſt
puniſh aſwel the euil doeings of the great
ones, as the offences of the meaneſt ſort.
               
            
            
               24.
               This is the iuſt and certaine line,
               that ſafely vs doth guide:
               And ſhewes the true and perfect path,
               by meaſure truely tryed.
               She choſen was by God him ſelfe,
               ſent downe from heauen hye,
               
                  
The Prophet doth confirme▪ that ſhe
               deſcended from the ſkye.
               
                  THe Marques here ſheweth how great
the excellency of Iuſtice is: and Tully
writeth in the dreme of Scipio, that for ſuch
as haue well gouerned in the cōmon welth,
and vprightly & truely adminiſtred Iuſtice,
there is prepared in an other worlde more
hyer and glorious places then for vs, becauſe
of the labours & toyles that they haue
ſuſtained, for the preſeruing of their country.
And as Ariſtotle writeth in his Ethicks
Iuſtice is an externall good, and is properly
to giue to euery man that whiche
is his.
                      There are many that can vſe them
ſelues well in ſuch matters as touch their
owne cōmoditie, but not in things that are
to the behoof of others. And therfore Iuſtice
is a moſt excellent vertue, and the very line
and ſtraight path yt leadeth vs to heauen, &
as the Prophet ſaith, Righteouſnes (which
is God) loketh cōtinually downe from heauen,
for to giue euery man according to his
deſerts: glory & rewarde to ſuch as do wel,
and correction & puniſhmēt to ſuch as haue
done euil. And y• al men are bound to do Iuſtice,
Elianus proueth by a prety tale in his

ſtory of the Romanes, where hee ſheweth
that Traian the Emperour, going with a
great armie againſt his enimies, there meeteth
him a widowe, that with piteous cryes
and lamentatiōs, falling downe at his fete,
beſought him that ſhe might haue Iuſtice
of certain that had ſlaine her ſonne. Traian
made her aunſwere, that as ſoone as he returned
from his iourney, hee would doe her
iuſtice. And what, ſaith ſhee, If you neuer
returne, who ſhall doe mee iuſtice? That
ſhall, quoth Traian, my ſucceſſor. The widdowe
anſwered, What is that to thee if thy
ſucceſſor doe wel: when thou art to receiue
the rewarde of thine owne doings, and are
bounde to doe me iuſtice: thy ſucceſſor ſhalbe
bounde to doe Iuſtice to ſuch as ſuffer
wrong in his time, neither ſhall the iuſtice
of an other man bee an excuſe for thee. The
Emperor being touched with theſe words,A good Emperour.
alighted from his horſe, & departed not frō
thence, till hee had thorowly ſatiſfied the
poore woman. For the continuall remembrance
of which his worthy deed, the people
ſet vp his image in braſſe in the middeſt of
Rome, becauſe he ſhewed the true and perfect
Iuſtice, that was elected by God.
               
            
            
               
               25.
               Howe worthie was the famous act
               of Lentus noble knight,
               Who all affection ſet aſide,
               and loue forgotten quight,
               Contented was (though guiltleſſe he)
               of anie treſpaſſe donne,
               The cruel torturs of the lawe
               to ſuffer with his ſonne?
               
                  The Marques.
                  
                     LEntus, as Valerius in his ſixth booke
declareth, was a Senatour of Rome,
by whom the citie was ſtrengthened with
good and profitable lawes. Amongſt a number
of others, he made a law, that whoſoeuer
was taken in adultrie, ſhould loſe his eyes.
It happened that a ſonne of his was taken
for the ſame offence. Vpon whom when the
father obſeruing the lawes that hee had
made, would without qualifying or diſcharging
of any point, preſently haue executed
the puniſhmēt: the whole citie being moued
with compaſſion towardes the yong man,
did earneſtly ſue for his pardon, with whoſe
importunate and inſtant requeſts, the father

being ouercome, graunted. Yet becauſe the
offence ſhould not remaine vnpuniſhed, he
firſt cauſed one of his owne eies to be plucked
out, and after one of his ſonnes: which
both is and ought to be a great example to
all ſuch as beare the ſworde of Iuſtice.
               
            
            
               26.
               Frondinus to the ende he would
               preſerue the lawe he made,
               Without delay did caſt himſelfe,
               vpon the piercing blade.
               And therefore ought we to enforce
               our ſelues to liue vpright.
               If that we will correctours be
               of others ouerſight.
               
                  The Marques.
                  
                     FRondinus was a Citizen of Rome, as
Valerius in his ſixth booke, and Iohn
Galenſis in a Breuiate that he made of the
foure principall vertues, writeth: Contentions
& quarellings ariſing many times amongs
the Citizens of Rome, about the debating
of their matters, there was a law
made amongeſt them, that whoſoeuer

ſhould come to the Capitol with a weapon,
ſhould ſuffer death. Frondinus forgetting
himſelfe, comming from the felde with his
ſworde about him, came into the Capitoll,
which when one of the ſtanders by perceiued,
he blamed him, and tolde him, that he
had broken the lawe that hee made. Nay,
quoth he, thou ſhalt ſee that I will confirme
the lawe that I made, and ſodainly thruſt
himſelfe thorowe with his owne ſwoorde,
whereas hee might well with ſome colourable
reaſon haue eſcaped the puniſhment.
               
            
         
         
            The fourth Chapter of
Pacience and moderate
Correction.
            
               27.
               Be not to haſtie nor to quicke,
               in rage without reſpect,
               But beare a tēperate hand, when thou
               the offender doſt correct.
               For moderate correction
               is good, and free from blame:
               Where crueltie, that doth exceede.
               deſerues reproch and ſhame.
               
                  
                     
THe Marques doth ſhewe the moderation
that a man ought to haue in giuing
of correction, and ſayth, Whenſoeuer
we puniſh the euill doings of any man, wee
ought not to doe it furiouſly, nor haſtily, but
with temperance and reaſon, whereof Valerius
hath diuers notable examples, but
ſpecially in his fifth booke, he writeth of one
Archita of Toranto, a man of great poſſeſſions,
that hee was a long time abſent from
his Countrey, about the ſtudie of Pythagoras
his doctrine. And when hee returned
home, & had ſurueyed his manours and poſſeſſions,
he found thē to be greatlie ſpoyled
and decayed: wherevpon calling to him his
ſteward, he ſaid vnto him. Surely if I were
not at this preſent furiouſly bent againſt
thee, I woulde puniſh thee according to thy
deſertes, and make thee an example to all
vnfaythfull varlets. So that Archita choſe
rather to leaue the greate negligence and
euill dealing of his Stewarde vnpuniſhed,
then haſtily and furiouſly to correct
him in his wrath. The ſame Valerius
doeth alſo in the ſame booke tell vs, that
this Archita beeing extreeme angrie with
one of his ſeruantes, for a villaynous part

that hee had played, woulde not in anie
wiſe puniſhe him himſelfe, but committed
the puniſhment of him to Spenſippus a
friend of his, to the ende that he, not mooued
with wrath, ſhoulde vſe meaſure and
temperance in the corecting of him. Seneca
writeth alſo of the verie ſame Archita
in his thirde Booke of Anger, that being
on a time greatly offended with one
of his ſlaues, hee cauſed him to bee ſtripped
ſtarke naked, thinking to haue ſcourged
him: and as hee was readie to ſtrike
him, hee plucked backe his hande, and reſtrained
himſelfe, wherewith a friend of
his happening to come in, and aſking
what the matter was, I thought (quoth
hee) to haue ſcourged this fellowe, but
feeling my ſelfe to bee in a rage, I
thought it no meete thing to puniſhe anie
man in mine anger. And this is the meaning
of the Prouerbe, where it ſayeth,
That moderate Correction is good, and
free from blame: And when it is out of
meaſure, deſerues reproch and ſhame.
                  
               
            
            
               
               28
               The man that ſeekes to make amends▪
               
               refuſe not to relieue,
               Nor let it euer thee delight,
               the wofull wretch to grieue.
               A baſe and beaſtly minde it is
               to follow him that flies,
               And valiant is it, to aſſaile
               the tyrant that deſtroyes.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  IN this Prouerbe, the Marques ſheweth
how men ought to behaue themſelues towards
ſuch as haue offended, and are ſorowfull
for it. For according to the ſaying of
the Prophet, God deſireth not the death
of a ſinner, but to haue him to turne and
be ſaued. And the chiefeſt leſſon that olde
Anchiſes (as Virgil in the ſixth book of his
Eneados writeth) did will his ſonne to take
heede vnto, was to ſeeke in all his exploites
to mainteine peace, as much as he might, to
pardon ſuch as were ſorrowful for that they
had done, and to vſe the ſwoorde againſt
proude and diſdainfull tyrants. And to ſay
true, it is not the part of a man, to perſecute

any man that is in miſerie, to followe
him that flieth, nor to ſtriue with ſuch as
are weake and vnable. And therefore Iob
ſayth vnto God, Wilt thou ſhew thy power
againſt a leafe, that trembleth with the
winde? And perſecute a ſtraw that is drie
and withered? Meaning, that it was not
a thing beſeeming the maieſtie of God, who
was almightie, to perſecute ſo miſerable a
creature, as he was. And the Prouerbe ſayeth,
That it is a point of manhood, to aſſaile
him, that mindeth to doe miſchiefe,
And to inuade with the ſworde, as Anchiſes
ſayeth to Enaeas, the proude and contemptuous
perſons, not ſuffring them to vſe their
tyrannous minde in doing of euil, as the Ciuill
lawe teacheth, touching the duetie and
behauiour of a Conquerour or gouernour,
that they ought to take ſuch order in euerie
Prouince, that the wealthie & the mightie
oppreſſe not the poore & the needie, and that
they hinder not ſuch as go about to defende
and cheariſh them. And this is the verie
meaning of the Prouerbe, where it ſayeth,
That it is the ſigne of a valiant minde, to
reſiſt all ſuch, as ſeeke to doe wrong.
                  
               
            
            
               
               29.
               It doth declare a noble minde,
               for to forgiue a wrong,
               And with a perfect pacience, to
               forbeare and ſuffer long,
               The mercie that with meaſure meetes
               is vertue great to praiſe,
               Reſtorer of thy ſtate with life,
               and lengthner of thy dayes.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  AMong the reſt of the vertues that Ariſtotle
in the fourth Booke of his
Ethickes ſpeaketh of, Magnanimitie, or
greatneſſe of minde is one. And the ſpeciall
grace of this vertue is, that ſuch as
haue it, can not bee touched with anie iniurie
or reproche. For if iniurie bee offered
vnto them, a noble minde maketh
no accompt of it, but rather diſdaines
him that offereth it, as a vile and an
vnwoorthie perſon. Tullie writeth in
his Booke of the vertues of Caeſar, that
hee was of ſo greate a courage, and ſo
noble a hart, that where hee was verie

mindefull of all other thinges, hee neuer
would remember any iniurie doone vnto
him. And Saint Auguſtine, in one of his
Epiſtles ſaith, that he that hath a greate
minde, and a noble and gentlemanly heart,
doeth not onely, not beare in memorie, an
iniurie doone vnto him, but alſo denieth,
that he receiued anie iniurie. And Seneca
in one of his Epiſtles ſayth, that if a man
of a noble and valiant minde, be at anie
time iniured, he ought to behaue himſelfe
as Plato did, who when one had giuen him
a blowe in the mouth, neither ſought for amendes,
nor laboured to reuenge, but denied,
that anie iniurie was done vnto him.
The ſame Seneca in his booke of wrath telleth,
that the Atheniens hauing ſent their
Ambaſſadours to king Phillip: the king, after
their meſſage declared, required of them
to knowe what thing he might doe, that
might be moſt acceptable to the people of
Athens. Wherwith one churliſhe knaue
amongſt them, called Democritus, ſtepped
foorth and tolde him, that the greateſt pleaſure
that he coulde doe to the citie of Athens,
                     The great modeſtie and magnanimitie of king Phillip.
                      was to goe hang him ſelfe, and
when all the companie that ſtood by, were

greatly offended with this lewde anſwere,
and were about to haue torne him in pieces,
the king woulde by no meanes that
they ſhould hurt him, but let him alone, and
ſayd vnto the Ambaſſadours, Goe tell your
maiſters of Athens, that much more proude
are they that doe vtter ſuch woordes, then
thoſe that heare them, and not reuenge
them: neyther is there any other cauſe of
this, but the modeſt clemencie and vertue.
               
            
            
               30.
               What man is there aliue, that may
               So great offender be,
               But if that he be iudged by rules
               of loue and charitie:
               His treſpaſſe ſhall appeare ſuch as
               May pardon well deſerue?
               For mercie is the ſhield, that doeth
               The guiltie onely ſerue.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  SAint Iſidorus ſaith, Euill is that iuſtice
that pardoneth not the frailtie of man:

And a little after, Doe not deſire to condemne,
but to correct and amende. Beware
of rigour in the executing of iuſtice, and
thinke of mercie in geuing of ſentence. And
Saint Gregorie in his Paſtorall ſayeth,
That iuſtice without mercie, and mercie
without iuſtice, are both vnperfect. And
therefore although a man haue offended
and done amiſſe, if he be not frowarde, obſtinate,
and without grace, being iudged
with loue and charitie, his offence ſhall
be founde tollerable, and the ſeueritie of iuſtice,
beng tempred with pitie, ſhall bring
the offendour to repent and amende.
               
            
            
               31.
               I alwayes iudge him worthy prayſe,
               that pardoneth gratiouſly:
               For mercie doubtleſſe is to man
               a crowne of honour high.
               On the other ſide I doe miſlike,
               the ſworde with blood to ſtayne,
               The ſtroke whereof vniuſtly dealt,
               cannot be called agayne.
               
                  
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  TO forgeue, and ſhew mercie to ſuch
as offend, we are ſtirred vp both by the
lawe of nature, the holie Scriptures, and
the gracious admonition of our Sauiour.
The lawe of nature doeth moue vs to bee
mercifull, as Seneca in his firſte booke of
Mercie writeth, and hereof we haue a naturall
example in the king of Bees, whom
nature hath framed without a ſting, hauing
taken away his weapon, to the ende hee
ſhoulde be neither fierre, nor cruell, nor a reuenger
of iniuries, and that men might
take examples of theſe little poore creatures.
The Scripture mooueth vs to mercie,
as it appeareth in the Epiſtle of Saint
Iames, where he ſaith, that iudgement ſhal
                        •
                     
be geuen without mercie, to ſuch as ſhewe
no mercie. Our Sauiour exhorteth vs to
mercie, where hee ſaieth: Bleſſed are all
thoſe that are mercifull, for they ſhal obteine
mercie. The Prouerbe ſaith, That
the puniſhment of the ſword is miſliked
for if it bee once done, it is paſt all redreſſe.
And therefore Saluſt in the Conſpiracie
of Catiline ſayeth, that wee ough
                        •
                     
to trie euery way, that may be, before we

come to the ſworde, euen as the Phiſitions
doe, who vſeth all the medicines that may
be, before they cut of the member. And if
ſo be that Princes may geue ſufficient correction
without the death of the offendour,
they ought to doe it. For if it be once done,
it is to late to ſay, I woulde it were not.
               
            
            
               32.
               I do not meane that lothſome crimes,
               and hainous pardon craue:
               Or that the wholſome lawes, or good
               decrees reſtraint ſhoulde haue:
               For ſuch a man ought not to liue,
               as murdereth wilfully:
               True iuſtice alwaies doth commaund,
               that he that killes, ſhal die.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  IN this Prouerbe are limited and interpreted
the Prouerbes that goe before.
For ſuch as ought to forgeue, are either
priuate perſons or officers, in the common
wealth. As they be priuat perſons, they are
boūd to releaſe the extremity, but not the iniurie,
for they may require a recompence
at the law: But if they doe not, their reward

ſhalbe the greater. According to the ſaying
of our Sauiour in his Goſpel, Forgiue,
and you ſhall be forgiuen. And touching
the examples that are in the prouerbs
that goe before: if they be officers and in
authoritie, they cannot pardon an offence
that is doone againſt a common wealth, nor
treſpaſſe, that is done betwixt neighbours:
But they may vſe a moderation and diſcretion,
according to the circumſtances of the
matter, as if the partie grieued be a ſlaue, or
free born, if he be a gentleman, or a cōmon
perſon, if the offence were in words, or vpō
propoſed malice, or ignorātly, & not wilfully
done, if he murdered with poyſon, or with
the ſwoord. In ſuch caſes the Iudges and
thoſe that be in authoritie are woont to haue
great conſideration: for he that killeth with
poyſon, by treaſon, or ſecretly, his offence is
more horrible thē his that killeth by chācemedlie.
And therefore it is prouided by
the lawes of Spaine, that if the Prince vppon
ſpeciall conſideration doeth pardon a
man that hath killed, ſuche caſes are alwayes
excepted: for hee that murdereth after
anie of the aforeſaide manners, is not
to be ſuffered, nor pardoned: and this is the

effect of the Prouerbe.
               
            
            
               33.
               To pardon ſuch a kinde of man,
               were verie crueltie:
               And quite contrary to the rule,
               of all humanitie.
               Nor name of pitie doeth deſerue,
               that ſuffers vilannie.
               But is the ouerthrowe of lawes,
               and all authoritie.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  THe meaning of this Prouerbe, is declared
in the Prouerbe that goeth
before. For it is a greate crueltie, and
contrarie to al humanitie, to pardon ſuch a
one as murdereth by treaſon, or villanouſly,
and it woulde be the decay and deſtruction
of all iuſtice and authoritie. For as
S. Auguſtine in his booke Of the citie of
God ſaith, Iuſtice is of ſuch an excellencie,
as the lewdeſt people that be, cannot liue

without it, much leſſe thoſe that be good
& vertuous. Likewiſe Saint Auguſtine,
as hath been alleaged before, ſayth, Take
iuſtice away, and your kingdomes
are nothing elſe but greate companies of
theeues, and therefore it is ordayned in the
ſtatutes of Spaine, that if there be in anie
Prouince or Countrie, great numbers of
euill diſpoſed perſons, and if they happen
to take one of them, though the partie deſerue
not to die, yet it ſhall bee lawfull for
the Iuſtice to hang him, for a terrour and
example to the others. And if he otherwiſe
do, it deſerues not the name of pittie, But of
euill ſufferance, and the hinderance and
ouerthrowe of lawes and authoritie.
                  
               
            
         
         
            The fifth Chapter
of Temperance.
            
               34.
               As much as it deſerueth praiſe,
               with temperance to feed.
               Which doth our mortall life ſuſtaine,
               and ſerueth for our need:
               So much abhorred ought to be
               the greedy glutton great,
               
                  
That thinkes there is no other life,
               but for to drinke and eate.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  IN this Prouerbe, and certaine others
that followe, the Marques ſheweth
the order that we ought to obſerue in eaeating
and drinking: and theſe two, being
the chiefeſt ſuſtainers of our life, a man
hath as much a doe as may bee, to vſe a moderation
and temperance in them. For as
Ariſtotle in the ſecond boke of his Ethicks
ſaith, Theſe two do onely ſuſtaine our mortall
life, and are alwayes deſired as things
of moſte pleaſure: and becauſe wee haue ſo
great delight in them, as the things wherewith
wee haue been accuſtomed from our
birth, it is very hard and painefull to be reſtrained
of them. But thoſe that exceede and
obſerue no meaſure therein, are counted of
Ariſtotle in the firſt of his Ethickes, to liue
like Dogges, and to chooſe the life of monſters.
The ſame Ariſtotle in his Ethicks,
telleth vs of a great glutton, that was called
Philoxenus, who put all his felicitie in
eating and drinking: and the earneſt requeſt
that hee made to the Gods, was that they

would make his neck as long as a Cranes
necke, to the ende his delight might be the
greater, in the long goyng downe of his
meate, and his drinke. For he tooke
that for the chiefeſt pleaſure that was.
                  
               
            
            
               35
               Great honour doth this temperance,
               deſerue at all aſſayes,
               Sith it a vertue alwayes is,
               of great and ſpeciall praiſe:
               For heate and furie great it doeth
               by honeſtie aſſwage,
               And ſtayes the frantike flame, that in
               the youthfull yeares doth rage.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  VVE do read, that many haue greatly
offended more by exceſſe in eating
& drinking, then for any other offence.
For example ſake, let vs looke vppon our
firſt Father Adam, who for a gluttonous
deſire of eating, brought both himſelfe and
al his poſterity to deſtructiō. Lot, the brother
to Abraham, by too much drinking,
as it is writtē in Geneſis, ſhamed not to lye

with two of his daughters. And therfore is
Temperance & ſobrietie worthie of greate
honour, being a vertue of greateſt commēdation.
The maides of Rome that were appointed
to attend vpon their Gods, to the
ende they ſhoulde be ſober & temperate, did
neuer eat more thē three meales in a weeke:
and Valerius writeth in his firſt booke, that
the women of Rome, to keepe themſelues
chaſt and ſober, did neuer drinke wine. Of
ſuch ſobernes & temperance was the greate
Alexander (as Vegetius writeth in his
booke Of the art of warres) that he was ſo
farre from ſetting his delight in eating &
drinking, that he neuer vſed to eate but as
he trauailed. We likewiſe reade, that hard
by the campe of Hanniball, there grew an
appletree, being as ful of apples as it might
hang: And ſo great was the continence and
temperance of the ſouldiers, that the tree
after their departure remained as full of
fruite, as it was when they firſte encamped.
For they counted it a greate
ſhame and diſhonour, to eate any thing
that was deyntie, while they were in
the fielde. And of Iulius Caeſar the
Emperour, wee reade that his dyet

was groſſe and common, as herringes,
ſprattes, cheeſe, and greene figges, & that
he did eate at all times, and in all places,
whenſoeuer he was hungry, and with this
temperance and modeſtie, he bridled the furie
and diſorder that followeth of to much
eating and drinking.Gluttonie prouoketh Lecherie. For the bellie, being
ſtuffed with good meates and wines, doeth
preſently yeeld to the rage of riot and Lecherie.
And therefore ſayeth Solomon in
his Prouerbes, That wine ought not to
be geuen to Princes: For where drunkenneſſe
hath place, no ſecrete can bee kept,
And therefore the Prouerbe ſayeth, Temperance
ſtayeth the raging luſt of youth,
and of ſmall and temperate feeding, there
ariſeth neither diſordinate luſt, nor other euill.
Saint Auguſtine did euer vſe to ſaie,
that he liued not to eate, but did eate
for to liue, and this is the Temperance
which, as the Prouerbe ſayeth, is woorthie
of honour.
               
            
            
               36.
               But ſeeldome pouertie is ſeene,
               ſuch perſons to moleſt:
               
                  
As are of heedfull gouernement,
               aud ſlouthfulneſſe deteſt,
               But idlenes and gluttonie
               where once they doe infect,
               No vertue euer doe regarde,
               nor honour doe reſpect.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  SAint Bernarde in an Epiſtle that hee
writeth of the ordering and gouerning of
a houſe, to one Raimond a gentleman, doth
ſpecially amongſt other things exhort him,
to haue a careful eye to his liuing, and to his
expenſes, and to take heede that his receits
be greater then his charges. For if his expenſes
and his reuenues be one as much as
the other, hee ſhall bee ſure to bee ouerſhoes
and vndone before he be aware: and therefore
his counſell is, that he that is wiſe,
ſhoulde alwayes ſet his bellie and his purſe
at diſcorde, and vppon their ſtrife be taught
to knowe whoſe parte he ſhoulde take. The
belly proueth his purpoſe by the preſent delight
that he feeleth, and the purſe prooueth
his by the trial of the preſent harme and the
miſerie to come: and farre better is it for

a man to prouide and be carefull before hee
come in neede, then to ſeeke for helpe, when
hee is in miſerie. And this is it that is
meant by the Prouerbe, That pouertie is
ſeeldome knowne to come to a perſon of
good gouernement: And gluttonie, and
ſloth, where they once come, haue neuer
regarde to Nobilitie. For as Sainte
Bernarde ſaieth, The negligence and
pouertie of the Maiſter of the houſe is, as
it were, a burning and conſuming fire in
the toppe of it.
                  
               
            
            
               37
               His time he may not idlely ſpend,
               that ſeeketh for to gaine.
               For knowledge is not gotten, but
               by induſtrie and payne.
               So oughteſt thou for to rule thy life,
               and order ſuch to keepe:
               As thou preferre a gaineful watche,
               before a harmefull ſleepe.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  
                     SOlomon in his Prouerbes willeth the
ſlugard & the loyterer, that he go to the

Emoth, and conſider her order and her tratrauayls,
which hauing neyther Captaine,
nor gouernour, ſeeketh and prouideth in
Sommer for her liuing, and gathereth and
layeth vp in the Harueſt time, as much
as ſhall ſuffiſe hee to liue by in the winter:
And ſayth, that if a man will take paynes &
be diligent, his harueſt ſhal flow like a foū
                     tayne,
and pouertie ſhal preſently flie from
him, and therefore doth the Prouerbe bid,
To preferre a gaynefull watche before a
harmeful ſleepe. For learning is not to be
got without trauell, for all men haue not
knowledge by the inſpiration of the holy
Ghoſt. But he that will atteine to knowledge,
muſt ſeeke and take paines for it, and
he that will come to be able to liue, muſt
as the Prouerbe ſaith, preferre a good
watching, before an euil ſleepe.
                  
               
            
            
               38.
               For procreation onely, and
               encreaſe of mortall kinde,
               
                  
Forſake the chaſt virginitie,
               with wiſe and ſober minde.
               Conſider that this vaine delight
               was once the wofull fall
               Of Solomon, for which he loſt
               both wit, and grace and al.
               
                  The Paraphraſe of the
Marques.
                  THe perfection and profoundneſſe of
Solomon the king of Iſrael, as
wel in natural iudgement, as in knowledge
of the lawe, is both at this day ſufficiently
knowne, and ſhalbe alwaies hereafter manifeſt,
who in his latter age being waxen effeminate,
and altogether ruled by women,
laied aſide his obedience to GOD, and became
an idolatour, as may be ſeene at large
in the booke of the kinges.
               
               
                  The Doctour.
                  THe Marques hauing in his Prouerbs
before, declared the inconueniences
that men fall into by gluttonie, and exceſſe
in eating and drinking, doeth ſhewe vs in

this Prouerbe, and a fewe that folowe, the
inconueuiences and harmes that proceede
of carnall and fleſhly luſt: For where as
men cannot liue for euer, nor alwaies
continue, and that it is incident and common
to them, that ſome be borne, and ſome
die: it is therefore of neceſſitie prouided
by nature, that men ſhould haue the company
and vſe of women, and ſo breake the
bondes of virginitie: And this ought to be
doone with great modeſtie and conſideration,
as the Prouerbe heere ſheweth: For a
man to lie with any other then his owne
wife, though it be with intent of encreaſing
the worlde, is hainous and deadly ſinne,
Yea, yf a man lie with his owne wife vpon
a fleſhly deſire, and not for procreation, hee
doeth offend: For a man ought not to haue
the vſe of a woman for any other end, then
for the encreaſing of poſteritie: Or for auoiding
of whoredome, he may vſe his own
wife. And thoſe that doe otherwiſe, doe
fal into that filthie ſenſualitie, that brought
Solomon to all his miſerie, wherof the
Marques hath partly ſpoken aboue.
               
            
            
               
               39.
               And for the ſelfeſame greeuous ſinne,
               Was Dauid brought full lowe:
               And in the midſt of mortall plagues,
               was taught his fault to knowe▪
               
               The loftie Tarquin in his pride,
               Was puniſhed therfore,
               And from the ſtately gates of Rome,
               Was thruſt for euermore.
               
                  The Paraphraſe of the
Marques.
                  
                     DAuid that moſt holy Prophete, and
king of Iſrael after Saul, was a man
that did many woorthie and notable acts,
and a man of great wiſedome, hee doeth
greatly ſet foorth the glory and Maieſtie
of GOD in his Booke of Pſalmes.
Notwithſtanding hee dyd greeuouſly fall
and offende in fleſhly and beaſtly affection,
committyng moſte horrible adulterie:
howbeit hee afterwardes turned to GOD
with great repentance, and with great

griefe and mourning bewailed his offence.
Hee committed adulterie with the wife of
Vrias, who was mother to Solomon, for
the which greeuous offence, the Lorde
was more offended with him, then for all
that euer hee did, as is to be ſeene at large
in his life.
               
               
                  The Doctour.
                  
                     SExtus Tarquinius was the ſonne of
Tarquinius the King, as Liuie in the
firſt of his Decades writeth. The like is
affirmed by Saint Auguſtine in his boke
of the Citie of GOD, Valerius Maximus,
                     
and many other auncient writers.
No leſſe was Lucretia famous for her
vertue, then was this Tarquine to be abhorred
for his wickedneſſe. Amongſt many
that haue written of the woorthineſſe
of this Ladie, none doeth ſo greatly delite
me, as M. Iohn Galenſis, in a booke that
hee wrote of the foure principal vertues,
whō I only determin to folow. His words
as I haue tranſlated thē out of the Tuſcan
                     
tongue are theſe: Well woorthie of immortall
and euerlaſting remembraunce, is
the noble & vertuous Lady Lucretia: Who
refuſing to liue any longer, did rip out the
ſtain of the villany and violence done vnto
her, with the death of her owne perſon: The
maner wherof S. Auguſtine telleth in his
boke of the citie of God, ſaying, that Sextus
Tarquinius came with Collatinus the
huſbande of Lucretia, to a houſe of his, called
Collatinū, where they found Lucretia
vertuouſly diſpoſed amongſt her maidens
and women: the only Paragon of her time,
& moſt commended of all others, was this
Lucretia: Whom when the ſonne of Tarquinius
king of the Romans had throughly
behelde, he was preſently inflamed with
diſordinate and wicked loue towardes her:
whereuppon within a fewe dayes after, accompanied
only with one man, he returneth
vnknowne to Collatinus, vnto the aforeſaide
place, where he was honourably
entertained and receiued of Lucretia: who
made him great cheare, and lodged him according
to his eſtate, ſuppoſing that ſhe
had had her friende, and not her enimie in
her houſe. Tarquinius being now a bed,

& al a fire with the flames of beaſtly deſire,
perceiuing that they were all faſt a ſleepe
in the houſe, taking his ſwoorde in his
hande, leapeth out of his bed, and goeth directly
to the chamber of Lucretia, whom
he founde faſt a ſleepe: where laying his
hande vpon her breſt, he ſaid vnto her, Lie
ſtil Lucretia, I am Sextus Tarquinius,
yf thou makeſt any noiſe, thou ſhalt die for
it. Wherewithall the Lady beeing with
great feare awaked, and ſeeing no ſuccour
about her, nor any waye too eſcape death,
Tarquinius beginneth to diſcloſe vnto her
his great affection, and ſomtime with faire
woordes, intreating her, and ſometime againe
terribly threatning her, aſſaieth all
the waies that he can deuiſe to bryng her
to graunt to his deſire: But when he ſaw
that ſhe was by no waies to be remooued
from her ſtedfaſt and chaſte minde, and that
the terrour of death coulde nothing preuaile,
he caſteth about againe, and thinkeeth
to boorde her on an other ſide, and ſaith
vnto her, I will tel thee what I will doe, if
thou wilt not conſent vnto me, I wyll firſt
kill thee, and afterwards kill an euil fauoured
knaue that I haue heere in the houſe,

and laye him in bedde with thee, whereby
it ſhalbe reported to the worlde, that
thou wert taken in ſhameful and filthie adulterie.
And with this feare he ouercame
the chaſte minde of the vertuous Ladie,
and hauing obteined his deſire, with great
diſdaine departed. Wherewith the poore
Lucrecia, beeing now ouerwhelmed with
ſorowe and penſiueneſſe, for her great and
greeuous miſhappe, ſendeth with al ſpeede
poſſible to her father, her huſbande and all
other their friendes at Rome, earneſtly
deſiring them to come vnto her with as
muche haſte as they coulde. VVho when
they were come, Lucrecia, all heauie and
ſorowfull in her bedde, at their entring into
the houſe, fell into a great weeping, and
when her friendes began to ſalute her, and
to bid her bee of good comfort: Alas, quoth
ſhe, What comforte can there be to a woman
that hath loſt her chaſtitie? and lookeing
ſtedfaſtly vppon her huſbande, ſhee
cried out, and ſaide, O Collatinus, the
feete of a ſtraunger hath been in thy bed:
But I ſweare vnto thee of a trueth, only
the body is defiled, for the mind was neuer
conſenting, and that ſhal my death preſently

declare: And therefore I require you all
to ſhewe your ſelues men, and not to ſuffer
this horrible act to remaine vnpuniſhed.
Sextus Tarquinius was he, whom I receiued,
not as an enimie, but as a ſuppoſed
friende, who hath this laſte night depriued
me (and you alſo, yf you be men) of al
ioy. VVhen ſhee had vttered theſe wordes,
they all beganne to comfort her, and to tel
her that her offence was nothing, beeyng
forced and conſtrained thereunto, and that
where there was no conſent, there coulde
be no offence. VVhereunto Lucrecia replied,
and ſaide, As for that, looke you to
thoſe thinges that concerne your ſelues, I,
though I dooe cleare my ſelfe of beeing
guiltie of any offence, yet doe I not diſcharge
my ſelfe of puniſhment. There ſhal
neuer chaſte woman take occaſion to be euyll
by the example of Lucrecia: And with
theſe wordes, plucking out a knife that ſhe
had ſecretly hidden, and thruſting it to her
hart, ſhe fell downe dead, whereat both her
huſbande and Brutus her father, makyng
great lamentation, preſently drewe out the
knife out of the wounde, being al ſtained &
embrued with blood: which knife Brutus
                     
takyng in his hande, ſware to reuenge the
iniurie and the death of his daughter, and
to deſtroy both Tarquin the king, his wife,
and his children, either by fyer, by ſwoord,
or by al the waies that he might, and neuer
to ſuffer any of the kindred to reigne in
Rome. VVith which he gaue the knife to
Collatinus, and ſo from one to another:
Whereby this mourning chaunged into
wrath, and deſire of reuenge: they all made
promiſe to folowe Brutus, and taking with
them the body of Lucretia, they brought it
to Rome, and laide it in the middeſt of the
market place, to the ende that the horrour
of ſo ſtrange a facte, might ſtirre vppe the
people to reuenge it. At the ſight wherof,
the people were ſtraight in armes, and folowing
Brutus, they thruſt out of Rome
Sextus Tarquinius, who after miſerably
died in priſon.
               
            
            
               4
                     •
                  
               
               No leſſe was worthie Scipio,
               Commended for the deede:
               That from his chaſte and worthie mind,
               Did worthily proceede.
               
                  
Then for his valiant manly actes,
               Eſteemed in his daies,
               By which he to his Countrey got,
               A neuer dieyng praiſe.
               
                  The Paraphraſe of the
Marques.
                  
                     COrnelius Scipio, as Valerius rehearſeth
in his thirde booke, hauing taken
the Citie of Carthage, was tolde by his
ſouldiours that in the ſacke of the Towne
there was taken a young maiden, of woonderful
beauty & great parentage, who was
affianced to a Gentleman of the nobilitie:
which as ſoone as he vnderſtoode, he commaunded
that the Damſel, her huſbande,
and her parentes, ſhould be brought before
him, and cauſed the young maide ſafe and
vntouched to be deliuered vnto them, giuing
with the maide in marriage, a great
maſſe and quantitie of Treaſure, that was
offered for their raunſome.
               
            
            
               41
               Shunne idleneſſe, and giue thy ſelfe
               To honeſt exerciſe.
               
                  
That neither wicked vice, nor lewde
               Alurementes of the eies,
               Haue power or force at any time,
               To bring thy hart in thrall:
               For to ſubdue the raging fleſhe
               Is (ſure) no matter ſmall.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  SAint Hierome ſaith, in a certaine aduice
that he giueth to a friende of his,
Be alwaies buſie in ſome labour or other,
that the Deuil may finde thee occupied.
And the reaſon is, becauſe idlenes is
the roote and groundwoorke (as the Prouerbe
ſaith) of all maner of ſinne, ſpecially,
of lecherie, which ſpringeth ſooner of idle
imaginations, then any ſin beſide: VVhervpon
Seneca in his fourth Tragedie, bringeth
in the olde Nurſe, who ſeeketh to diſſwade
Phaedra from the beaſtly loue that
ſhe bare to her ſonne in law Hippolytus,
where Phaedra ſaith that there was no
blame nor fault in her, ſince Cupid the
God of loue had ſo mortally wounded her,
and that there was none to be blamed for
it, but the God himſelfe. The Nurſe

aunſweareth, That brainſicke and wicked
perſons, the better to cloake and coloure
their naughtineſſe, and that they might
the freelier attaine to their letcherous purpoſes,
haue vainely imagined a God-head
to be in loue, ſaying that there
is a GOD of loue, whoſe power extendeth
not only to men, but euen to the verye
Gods: which, ſaith the nurſe, is a falſe and
ſhamefull deuiſe. For whoſoeuer hath abundance
of wealth, & liueth at pleaſure,
giuing him ſelfe to idleneſſe, banqueting,
and ſurfeiting, paſſing his life in dalliaunce
and diſport, ſuche a one doeth loue
continually torment: yf it be not ſo, aſke
of the Ladie Venus, howe chaunce ſhee
hath ſo colde entertainement in the
poore labourers houſes, where you ſhall
ſeldome or neuer ſee any of them goe mad
for loue? And the only reaſon of it is,
that they are continually painefully labouring
and trauailing to get their liuing,
not hauing any time to be idle or euill occupied.
To liue in the fleſhe, as the Diuines
ſay, and not to folowe the fleſhe, is
a woorke more proper to God then to man,

and cannot poſſibly be done without great
labour and vertuous exerciſes: And therefore
the Prouerbe ſaith, It is no ſmal matter
to ſubdue the fleſhe: That is to ſay,
for a man to conquere him ſelfe. And therefore
thoſe that firſt deuiſed Monaſteries,
and religious orders, did aboue all other
things ordeyne, that they ſhoulde neuer be
idle, nor haue any thing to occupie their
mindes withall but vertuous exerciſes, and
this is the effect of the Prouerbe, where it
ſaith: Shunne idleneſſe, and giue thy
ſelfe to honeſt exerciſe.
                  
               
            
            
               42.
               For not yenough it is, to flee
               From actions lewde or il,
               But alſo from the motion to
               offende in thought or wil.
               So muche we ought for to eſchewe,
               The foule and wicked thought:
               Becauſe it is the only ſeede,
               And roote of doeing nought.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  
                     
THE faultes that we heere committe
are of two ſortes, either they are
doone by chaunce, and vnwittingly, or they
are doone vppon knowledge, which cannot
be without imagination: Alſo our thoughts
and imaginations are, as the Doccours
ſay, of two ſortes. One is the firſt motion
that we haue to offende, and this becauſe
it is not in our power, being, as we be naturally,
inclined to deadly ſinne, is not to
be reckoned for ſinne: But if wee take
pleaſure in our euill thoughtes, and continuing
in them, determine to put them in
execution as ſoone as wee may haue time
and place, this is as great an offence as
yf we had alredy doone it, according to
the ſaying of our Sauiour in the Goſpel,
Whoſoeuer looketh vppon a Woman,
to luſte after her, hath alredy committed
adultrie in his hart. For the euill
thought was the ſeede and cauſer of
the ſinne, and would, yf time hadde ſerued,
haue perfourmed the deede. And therefore
Seneca in his fourth Tragedie, bringing in
the Nurſe, that diſſwadeth Phedra from
her euill pretence that ſhe had to play the
Whoore with her ſonne in lawe, maketh

her to ſaie thus, O woorthie and moſte
renowmed Ladie, deſcended of the woorthie
Stocke of Iupiter, and wife vnto
Theſeus, baniſhe ſpeedely from thy noble
and chaſte breſt this moſte hainous and
ſhamefull imagination, quenche quickly
the raging flames of this vnnatural deſire,
make not thy minde to be the woorker of
ſo wicked and Diueliſhe a deuiſe: whoſoeuer
reſiſteth this franticke and fond affection
of loue, the ſame may be well aſſured
that hee ſhall conquere and ouercome it:
But he that nouriſheth the ſweete poyſon,
that is, the wicked thought, and delighteth
in it, it is very harde for ſuche an one to refuſe
the yoke, to which they haue once ſubmitted
their necke. And this is it that the
Prouerbe heere ſaith, That wee ought
not onlie to flee from doeing of euill:
But alſo from thinking of euill, for of
euil thoughtes, there neuer ſpringeth, as
is ſaid, good ſeede.
                  
               
            
            
               43
               A goodly ornament to man,
               I doe account the wife,
               
                  
Where as ſhee is obedient,
               To reaſon all her life.
               In marriage looke thou be not led,
               By fancy or opinion:
               But in thy choyſe beeware and wiſe,
               With heede and great diſcretion.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  
                     SOlomon ſayth in his Prouerbes, that
the man that hapneth vppon a good
wife, is bleſſed of the Lorde, and the tale of
his yeeres ſhalbe doubled, that is, he ſhall
liue twiſe ſo long as he ſhould haue doone.
And in an other place, hee ſaith, That no
better lot can happen to a man, then a
good wife. And this is it that the Prouerbe
ſaith, That the wife is an ornament
to her huſbande, when ſhee will be ruled
by reaſon. In what ſort this obedience
ought to be, the Apoſtle teacheth, ſaying,
Let the huſband be the head of the woman,
and as the head hath the preheminence and
principalitie ouer all the reſt of the members,
ſo ought the huſbande to haue ouer
his wife, who as Ariſtotle in his Oeconomikes
doeth ſay, ought not to be vſed

of her huſbande like a Slaue, but as his
companion, and his felowe: And the huſbande
according to the doctrine of the Apoſtle,
Is bounde to vſe her wel, and to
loue her, and ſhee to honour and feare
him. Feare (as Ariſtotle in the boke aboue
mentioned ſaith) is of two kindes. The
one is called a ſeruile feare, the other a
ſonnely feare. The ſeruile is that, which
is hadde for feare of puniſhment, and not
for any loue: and this is the feare that the
Slaue hath of his maiſter, who as hee
ſerueth againſt his owne will and by force,
hee doeth it more for feare, then for loue.
The Sonnely feare, is a meddlie of feare
and loue togeather: And this is the feare
that the ſonne hath of his father, and that
the wife ought to haue of her huſband, for if
the wife feare her huſband, and doeth what
ſoeuer he commaundeth her, ſhe ought not
to doo it for feare of any puniſhment that
ſhee ſhoulde haue yf ſhee did it not, but
for feare of diſpleaſing & offending her huſband,
and to the end her huſband ſhould
thinke well of her, in ſeeing her willingneſſe
in doeing whatſoeuer he cōmaundeth
her. And this is the meaning of ye prouerbe

                     A godly ornament to man, I do accompt
the wife, where as ſhe is obedient to reaſon
all her life. That is, when ſhe ſhall loue
and reuerence her huſband, and while ſhee
keepe her ſelfe honeſt and chaſte, looking
carefully to ſuch thinges as bee aboute the
houſe, as Ariſtotle at large diſcourſeth in
his ſaid booke of Oeconomykes, and Solomon
in the ende of his Prouerbes, whither
becauſe I would be ſhort, I referre the reader.
The Prouerbe ſayth further, That in
mariage a man ought not to followe his
fanſie.
                     The choiſe of a wife. Wherein there are two things to be
vnderſtoode. The firſt, that he take a wife of
a good & vertuous kindred, according as a
Philoſopher once anſwered, whē it was aſked
of him, what maner of wife were beſt to
be choſen. Marie, quoth he, ſuch a one whoſe
mother & grandmother thou kneweſt to be
honeſt & chaſt: for as the parents haue been,
ſuch will cōmonly the daughter be. So likewiſe
in marying, a man ought to chooſe a
wife of like degree & ſtate to him ſelf, & ſuch
a one as is anſwerable to his yeeres, according
to the olde Prouerbe, Like good, like
blood, like age, maketh a good mariage.
And as Ouid ſayeth, The Oxen that are

vnequally matched, will neuer draw well
together. And therfore the Prouerbe ſaith,
Chooſe thy wife with heed, and great diſcretion.
                  
               
            
            
               44.
               For ſuch as ſeeke a wife for goodes,
               and do not greatly way
               Her vertues, nor her honeſtie,
               do ſeeke their owne decay.
               A harme it is that hath no helpe,
               ſuch mariage for to make,
               Wherefore, my ſonne, let neuer ſuch
               a fault thee ouertake.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  IT is generally agreed vpon amongſt the
Philoſophers, that good is deuided into
two kindes, the one of them profitable and
commodious, the other honeſt. And where
profite on the one ſide, and honeſtie on the
other ſide meeteth, we ought alwaies to preferre
honeſtie before profite. And as their opinion
is, the vertues are cōteined vnder the
kind of honeſt goodes, and worldly goodes,
vnder the kinde of profitable goods. And he
that refuſeth a vertuous wife for her want

of worldly wealth, and taketh a wife for riches,
not regarding her vertues, treſpaſſeth
againſt reaſon, and ſeeketh his owne diſquietneſſe
and harme; that will neuer be recouered.
For the goodes that hee hath, ſhall
quickly be conſumed, & he ſhall be plagued
at home with a froward foole. For as the
wiſe man in his Prouerbs ſaith, A wiſe and
a vertuous wife, raiſeth and ſetteth vp the
houſe, but a fooliſh woman bringeth it to
ruine: for ſhee will waſte and conſume the
goods that ſhe brought with her, and whatſoeuer
her huſbande beſides by his traualle
getteth: neither is it good to take a wife of
greater parētage then he himſelf is, but only
to regard, that ſhe be vertuous, and equal
in degree to himſelfe. For as it is written
in the Chronicle of the Philoſophers, Cleobolus
one of the ſeuen wiſe men of Athens,
did euer ſay, that the wife ought to bee of no
greater blood than her huſbande. For if
thou takeſt a wife of hier degree then thy
ſelfe, thou ſhalt alwayes bee ſure to haue
thy wiues kindred to bee as Lordes ouer
thee. And therefore the Prouerbe ſayeth,
My ſonne, beware thou neuer commit
ſuch a follie.
                  
               
            
            
               
               45.
               The beautie and the fauour ſweete
               of women could I praiſe,
               If them I found accompanied
               with wiſedome anie wayes.
               But verie hardly or by happe,
               they agree togither right,
               And many times they are the markes
               of perſons that be light.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  MOſt certain it is, that the more good
things do meete together, the better
it is. As to haue a wife that is honeſt,
beautifull, and wiſe, is farre better then to
haue one that is honeſt, and neither wiſe nor
well fauoured. But becauſe they ſeldome
happen togither, nor are not farre diſtant
from looſeneſſe, you ſhall verie hardly ſee
a verie faire woman to be verie wiſe, and as
Ouid ſaith, hautineſſe, and diſdaine, is naturally
incident to faire women. Pride is
alwayes the cōpanion of beautie. And herein
is verified that which the Poets in their
fables haue written, and alſo Seneca in his
ſeuenth booke declareth, that the Goddeſſe

                     Venus the better to hide her whordome, encloſed
herſelfe and her mate within a verie
darke houſe, and yet not ſo cloſe, but the iealous
Sunne was peping in with his bright
beames at the ſmall cranies & holes, where
he diſcouered all. Whereat the good Ladie
taking greate diſpleaſure with the Sunne,
becauſe he had ſo vncurteouſly handled her,
laide her heauie curſſe vppon him, cauſing
that all the womankinde that were diſcended
from the Sunne, ſhould be as good as
euer twigged. Now of the linage and kinred
of the Sunne, are all welfauoured and
beautifull Dames, and therefore, becauſe
you ſhall hardly find a faire woman, that is
not fooliſh and diſhoneſt, it is ſaid, that the
curſe of Venus did light vpon them. And
this is the ſignification of this tale. And
Solomon ſaieth in his Prouerbes, That
beautie in a woman without wiſedome,
is like vnto a ring of golde in the ſnoute
of a ſowe. And this is it, That beautie
and wiſedome ſeldome meete, nor are
farre diſtant from lightneſſe.
                  
               
            
            
               46.
               Yet here withall I do not count
               the kinde of women all,
               
                  
To be vnprofitable, or
               of vſe or value ſmall:
               For why, I know they haue been praiſd
               of diuerſe worthily,
               And that their vertues haue been pende
               in manie an hyſtorie.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  
                     PYthagoras, and his followers, were of
opinion, that there were two chiefe
heades, the one the authour of all goodneſſe,
the other the authour of euill. And vnto theſe
two they referred al things yt were wrought
in the worlde, and ſayd, that of the God of
goodneſſe, proceeded and came the light,
and all things that were good and perfect:
of which number they accounted Man. Of
the God of euill, ſprang darkneſſe, and all
vnperfect things: amongſt which they reckened
the woman. And in verie deede, hauing
reſpect to man, the woman is an vnperfect
creature, although not ſo vnperfect▪
but by teaching ſhee may bee brought to
ſome perfection, and to be profitable in her
kind. For as Ariſtot. ſaith in his Oeconomikes,
and they be alſo the wordes of ſaint

                     Iſidore, that to bring things to a perfection,
it behoueth to haue the man, the woman,
& the oxe that ploweth. And in the
name of the woorking oxe, hee includeth all
maner of Inſtrumentes that are neceſſarie
about an houſe. And further, he ſayth, that
it proceeded of the great wiſedome and diſcretion
of nature, that man was made of
more perfection then the woman, becauſe he
was to commaund, and ſhe to obey, and that
man was of more actiuitie and abilitie then
the womā, becauſe his office was to trauail
in matters abroad, & without doores, & hers
only to ſit at home, and to keepe that which
is brought in. And therefore the Prouerbe
ſaieth, that the woman is not vnprofitable,
nor vnperfect. Neither ought we to thinke,
that becauſe ſome women haue been to
blame, therefore they are all to be condemned.
For as the nurſe ſayth to Hippolytus,
as Seneca in his fourth Tragedie ſheweth,
where Hippolitus ſaith, that if there had neuer
been other euill woman but Medea, the
wife of Aegeus, her onely villanies were
ſufficient to cauſe all other women to be abhorred.
Wherto the nurſe anſwereth, that it
were greatly againſt reaſon, that the offence

of one or two ſhould be the blame of all the
reſt: And therefore ſayeth the Prouerbe,
that notwithſtanding the faultes of a fewe,
the vertues of women haue been highly
commended and ſet out with the pen.
               
            
            
               47.
               For, ſetting here aſide that ſweete
               and bleſſed worthie roſe,
               That ouer all the reſt doth ſhine,
               and farre beyonde them goes:
               The daughter of the thundring God,
               and ſpouſe vnto the hieſt,
               The light and lampe of women all,
               who bare our ſauiour Chriſt:
            
            
               48.
               Manie Ladies of renowne
               and beautifull there bee,
               That are both chaſt and vertuous,
               and famous for degree.
               Amongſt the bleſſed holy ſaintes,
               full many a one we find,
               That in this cōpaſſe may be brought,
               for liues that brightly ſhinde.
            
            
               
               49.
               What ſhould I of Saint Katheren
               that bleſſed martyr tell:
               Among the reſt of Virgins all,
               a flowre of preecious ſmell?
               Well worthy of remembrance is
               her beawty, and her youth:
               And eke no leſſe deſerueth praiſe
               her knowledge in the trueth.
               
                  The Marques.
                  SAint Katherin was a virgin, and a holy
Martyr, and among the whole company
of Saintes of ſpeciall commendation, touching
whoſe life and death, beeing a thing
ſo commonly knowne, I refer the Reader
to the booke called The Flower of Saints.
                  
               
            
            
               50.
               We finde that Heſter wanted neither
               beawtie great, nor grace:
               Whoſe noble minde was ioyned with
               the fauour of her face.
               Of Iudith likewiſe doe we reade,
               the bewtie great to bee:
               
                  
And how ſhe vertuouſly behaude
               her ſelfe in eche degree.
               
                  The Paraphraſe of the Marques.
                  
                     HEſter the Queene, was the wife of
King Aſſuerus, of whom it ſhall not
bee needefull to ſpeake much, conſidering
that in the Paraphraſe to the prouerbe of
Aſſuerus, in the beginning of the Booke,
there hath been enough ſaide. It is ſufficient
to knowe that ſhe was a holy woman,
and a deuout ſeruaunte of God, as appeared
by her vertuous life, and by the earneſt
Prayers that ſhee made vnto God, in the
caſe of Hamon and Mardocheus. Iudith
(as her Booke teſtifieth, which is one
of the 24 bookes of the Bible) was reputed
among the Iewes, for a woman of ſingular
wiſdom, and of great honeſtie in life:
who ſlewe the great Holofernes, that being
ſent by the King Nabuchodonoſor
with a great and puiſant Campe, had beſieged
the Citie of Ieruſalem, as her
Booke at large declareth, where it alſo appeareth
by what great policicie (after ſhee

had ſlaine him) ſhee conueyed his hed, paſſing
thorowe the watch of the Camp, to the
aforeſaid Citie. This only fact (renowmed
Prince) ſtrake ſuch a feare and terrour to
the harts of the enemies, as they ſpeedily
and without order, to their great loſſe, brake
vppe their ſiege. So as ſhee is greatly
commended in the Scripture, for her
beautie, and for her noble and valiant ſtomacke.
               
            
            
               51.
               The famous worthy women, that
               among the heathen warre,
               No reaſon that of good reporte
               among the reſt we barre.
               For why? their valure and renoume
               was woundrous in their dayes:
               And therefore not to be depriude
               of due deſerued praiſe.
            
            
               52.
               In Athens and in Thebes too
               wer Ladyes great of fame.
               The Troians, Sabynes, Greeks & Arge
               had many a worthy dame.
               
                  
The Laurentines, the Amaſons
               may triumph for the ſame.
               And Rome of vertuous women can,
               remember many a name.
            
            
               53.
               No fairer creatures coulde be ſeene,
               then Vagnes and Diana:
               Daphnes, Dido, Anna, and
               the vertuous Lucretia.
               Nor vnrembred let wee paſſe
               Virginia, the ſame
               Whoſe paſſing chaſtitie procurde
               her euerlaſting fame.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  
                     VAgnes as Statius in his Booke of
the Warres betwixt the Thebanes
and the Argians reporteth, was the cheefe
among the Argian Ladies, that went altogether
to King Creon with humble petition,
for the deliuery of the dead bodyes of
their huſbandes and kinſemen, that were
ſlaine at the battaile of Thebes, fighting
againſt Ethiocles the Sonne of Oedippus,
and nephew to King Layus, who was

of the linage and ſtock of Cadmus: Who
hauing receiued a flat denyal, went altogither
to Theſeus, that then was Duke of
Athens, declaring vnto him with great exclamation,
the great crueltie and extremitie
that was ſhowed vnto them. Theſeus
who was then newly come from the warres
of the Amaſons (as Iohn Boccace the poet
of Florence, in his Booke of Theſeus, at
large diſcribeth) vowed, that before he entred
the Citie, he would go out of hand with
his whole forces againſt Creon, requiring
him yet before by his Embaſſadours, to
graunt vnto the poore Ladyes, this their
ſo iuſt and reaſonable requeſt: which when
he diſdainfully refuſed to doe, hee made
warres vpon him, and ſlew him, wherby the
gentlemen of Argos, by the induſtrie and
diligence of the vertuous Vagnes, came in
the ende to bee honourably buryed. At the
ende of this battaile, wherin Creon was
ſlaine by the handes of Theſeus, beginneth
the ſtory of Arcyt and Palemon, the ſeruants
and great louers of Emilia the ſiſter
of Hypolitus, which becauſe of the tediouſnes,
and that the matter maketh nothing to
our purpoſe, I heere paſſe ouer. Diana was

counted the goddeſſe of Chaſtitie, a Lady
that ſet all her delight vpon the feeld in the
chaſe and hunting of wilde beaſtes. Lucretia
and other the famous Ladies of Rome,
are ſufficiently mencioned, as wel by Lyuy,
and Valerius in their ſtoryes, as by Saint
Auguſt. a man of more credit, in his Boke
Of the Citie of God, and Iohn Boccace
in the fall of Princes, and commendation
of woorthy women, where it is ſhewed
how ſhe, beeing the wife of Collatinus,
was violently forced by Sextus Tarquinius,
wherevpon with a knife, or a ſwoord,
ſhee ſlewe her ſelfe, ſaying, I free my ſelfe
from the faulte, but not from puniſhement:
which I heere but briefely touch, becauſe
I haue writen thereof before in the ſtory
of Sextus Tarquinius. Daphnis was
daughter to Peneus, a Virgin, dedicated to
Diana the Lady of Chaſtitie, who as Ouid
writeth, beeing greatly deſired of Phebus,
and not conſenting nor able to withſtande
the force of her furious louer, commending
her ſelfe to all the gods, but ſpecially
to Diana whom ſhee ſerued, was
(as the Poets faine) tranſformed into the
Laurell, a tree of continuall greeneneſſe,

ſweete of ſauour, and of a delectable ſhadowe.
The morall whereof beeing declared
by diuers Authors, as Fryer Thomas
of Capua in his Moralls vpon the Metamorphoſis,
Iohn Boccace,
                      in his Genealogie
of the heathen gods, and Maiſter Iohn
the Engliſhman, commenting vppon the
ſame Booke, I heere leaue to declare, as a
thing to long to entreate off. It may ſuffice
that ſhee was counted among the heathen
for a mayden of ſingular beawtie. Anna
was mother to the Virgin Mary, and wife
to Ioachim, a woman of great ſanctitie and
vertuouſneſſe of life. An other of the ſame
name was ſiſter to Queene Dido, a woman
of great commendation among the
heathen, both of them as wel ſhe of the Hebrues
as the Heathen, were worthy to be
had in continual memory. Dido as appeareth
by her true ſtory, was the daughter of
King Belus, ſiſter to Pigmalion, & wife of
Sichaeus, who after the death of her huſband
made a vowe neuer to marry againe, & forſooke
the countrie where her huſband was
murdered, by the meanes of her traiterous
brother Pigmalion, & comming into Affrica,
founded the ſtately Citie of Carthage.
                     
Where while ſhee purpoſed to liue a ſole
and a chaſte life, beeing required in marriage
by the King Hiarbas, and vtterly refuſing,
ſhe was by the ſaide Hiarbas ſtrongly
beſieged, and brought to ſo hard a poynt,
that ſeeing no other way to eſcape, and to
preſerue her chaſtitie, choſing rather to die
then to liue thus violated, threw her ſelf, into
a great flame of fire, & ſo ended her daies.
This ſtory although Virgill doe otherwiſe
declare, yet is he not, conſidering the liberty
of a Poet, greatly to be blamed. Virginea
with what earneſtneſſe ſhe was required by
Appius Claudius, to conſēt to his diſhoneſt
and vnlawfull luſt, is ſufficiently declared
by Liuie in his ſecond Decade, and likewiſe
by Iohn Boccace in his Booke Of the fall
of Princes, where it is at large declared,
with howe great conſtancy the chaſte mayden
preſerued her virginitie.
               
            
            
               54.
               Prefer a life with libertie,
               aboue all other things:
               A vertue great it is, and worthy
               of the paines it bringes.
               
                  
A ſhamefull great reproch it is,
               without it for to flye:
               An honourable thing it is
               for ſuch a good to dye,
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  THe auncient Philoſophers were of opinion,
that all the Vertues were to be
reduced into the number of foure, which
they named Cardinall or principall vertues,
whereof they accounted to bee chiefe
Fortitude or manhood, which as Ariſtotle
in the thirde of his Ethicks teſtifieth, is ſo
much the more excellent and praiſeworthy,
as the ſubiect and matter wherwith it dealet,
his dreadful and difficult: for manhood
hath for his obiect or contrary, Death,
which is, as Ariſtotle ſaith, the laſt of all
dreadfull and terrible thinges, beſide the
great dangers, and ſharp and cruell aduentures:
So as by reaſon of the difficultie
or hardneſſe of the obiect, there are but few
that happen to attaine to this vertue. And
as it is written in the Ciuil lawe, thoſe that
loſe their liues for the libertie of their countrey,
are counted to liue for euer: for muche

better is it for a man to dye freely in fight,
for the libertie of his Countrie, then eſcaping
to liue with a ſhamefull and cowardly
flight. And as the Prouerb heere ſaith, and
they be the very words in effect of Ariſtotle
in the 3. of the Ethicks, The death that
is honourable, is to be preferred before a diſhonourable
life, which the Marques doth
plainly ſet foorth by examples following.
               
            
            
               55.
               Oh, what a death had Cato dyed
               if it had lawfull beene:
               And had not by the iuſt decrees
               of God beene made a ſinne.
               No leſſe doe I the worthy fact
               of Mucius heere commend:
               That Lyuie in his ſtory hath
               ſo eloquently pende.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  AFter that Pompey was ouerthrowen
by Caeſar at the battail of Pharſalia, &
had retired him ſelfe to Leſbos, where his
wife Cornelia lay, & paſſing from thence to
Aegypt, was ſlaine by ye hands of Photinus
                     
and Achillas, at the cōmaundement of king
Ptolomei, who was at that time his ſeruant.
Cato, who ſaw that the ſide of Pompey
went in ſuch ſort to wrack, as was not by any
meanes to be recouered, fled vnto the citie
of Vtica: where, fearing by ſome miſaduenture
to fall into the handes of Caeſar his
mortall enemie, he preſently diſpatthed him
ſelfe. Mucius Sceuola was a man of great
courage among the Romanes, who when
Porſenna the King had with a great power
beſieged the Citie, determined with a
noble minde to raiſe the ſiege: and to bring
his matter to better effect, went ſecretly alone
out of the Citie, with full intent to kill
the Kinge, and happening to ſpye in the
Campe, a Secretary of the Kings appareled
in Princely roabes, ſuppoſing that it
was the King, thruſt him thorowe the body
with his ſwoorde, wherevpon beeing
preſently taken by the Guarde, and ſuch as
ſtoode by, hee was ſhackeled and brought
before the King, who demaunding of him
what fooliſhe preſumption had brought
him to this miſery? he aunſwered, that not
onely hee, but diverſe others, to the
number of an hundred more, had profeſſed

by ſolemne othe, for the deliuerance of the
Citie, to doe their vttermoſt indeuour in
killing of the king: Whervpon Porſenna,
giuing credite to the words of Mucius
Sceuola, preſently rayſed his ſiege, commaunding
that Sceuola ſhould foorthwith
be burned: who when hee was brought vnto
the fire, thruſting out his hand with a valiant
courage into the flame, there held it, til
ſuch time, as the whitenes of the bones, the
fleſh beeing ſcorched away, appeared, and
when he was aſked, what made him to vſe
ſuch crueltie to his owne fleſhe: he aunſwered,
that ſince his hand had failed of his vertuous
purpoſe, it was good reaſon, that it
ſhould ſuffer ſuch puniſhment for ſo greate
an offence.
               
            
            
               56.
               For (ſonne) if thou do much eſteeme
               thy ſelfe, and ſeekſt to liue,
               Thou neuer ſhalt receiue the crowne,
               that mightie Mars doth giue:
               But if thou dooſt abandon all
               faint hart and foolish feare:
               Thou ſhalt not want the honour, nor
               the ſtate thou ſeekeſt to beare.
               
                  
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  ACcording to the true opinion of both
the Aſtronomers and the Catholike
diuines, we are not in ſuch ſort conſtrained
by the ſtarres to doe any thing, as we bee
thereby depriued of our owne will, to doe of
neceſſitie that which they foreſhowe, but by
inclining vs to doe certaine actions, they
moue al our bodyly forces to do ſuch things
as they ſignifie. Which doth not ſo farre
inforce vs, but that as Ptolomy ſaith in his
Centiloquium, A wiſe and a vertuous
man, may rule & reigne ouer the ſtarres.
                     
That is, though the ſtarres doe ſtirre and
moue a man to doe euill, yet the partie him
ſelfe hath ſufficient power, if he will, to doe
wel. But the olde people, beeing ignorant
of this vertue, and ſeeing the Planet Mars
did mooue men to be venterers and ſouldiers,
held opinion, that he was the onely god
of battailes, and that hee aduaunced and rewarded
all ſuch as were valiant and venterous:
which olde maner of ſpeaking, is here
by the Marques at this time followed. And
moſt certaine it is, that ſuch as make much
of them ſelues, doe ſhunne as much as they

may, the comming into any perill or daunger.
Of which ſort of people Seneca in his
firſt tragidie ſpeaketh, where he ſaith, That
great yeeres and gray heares, happeneth
to faintharted, and ſuch as loue to ſleepe
in a whole ſkin. For ſuch manner of perſons
will be ſure to commit themſelues to
no haſard nor danger, wherby they are vncapable
of any vertue or honor. For Honor
as Ariſtotle in the fourth of his Ethicks
ſaith, is a reuerence, that is giuen to men
in rewarde and recompence of their vertues.
And therefore the Marques ſaith, That
whoſoeuer is ſo valiant, as not to regarde
his life in any vertuous attempt, ſhal be
ſure to receiue the crowne of Mars: that
is, the renowme & rewarde of a vertuous
minde, which he ſhall quickly attaine vnto
if he repreſſe feare. And where as there are
in the vertue of Fortitude two extreames
or vices, the one in ventering to farre, the
other in fearing to much: the Marques
hath not here ſaid, If thou reſtraineſt boldneſſe,
as hee ſayeth, If thou abandoneſt
feare: becauſe as Ariſtotle in the thirde
of his Ethicks affirmeth, and as dayly experience

teacheth, the nature of man is
more inclined to fearfulneſſe then to boldeneſſe,
and therefore thoſe that ſeeke to bee
valiaunt and vertuous, ought more to trauel
in the repreſſing and abandoning of feare,
then in the reſtraint or temperaunce of
boldeneſſe. And therefore to good purpoſe
ſayeth the Marques in this Prouerbe, If
thou abandoneſt or forceſt feare, and not
corrage, and becauſe as it is ſayde abooue,
it is in euery mans power and will to bee
vertuous, it is heere well ſaide of the Prouerb,
Thou ſhalt not want the honour,
nor the ſtate thou ſeekeſt to beare.
                  
               
            
            
               57.
               Deteſt an euill life, thats led
               with foule reproch and ſhame:
               And alwayes ready be to dye,
               with honorable name.
               For life cannot be lent for loane,
               nor let from day to day:
               Nor can the appoynted houre bee ſhund
               nor ſkaped any way.
               
                  
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  THE Emperours did in their lawes
carefully prouide for the behoofe and
good eſtate of their Subiectes, to ſette
downe rewardes and encouragements, for
ſuch as were honeſt and vertuous, and to deuiſe
puniſhments and corrections, for ſuche
as were wicked and euill diſpoſed. And it
is very wel thought, as hath been ſaide before,
that ſuch as valiantly loſt their liues,
either in defence of their faith, or for the libertie
of their countrie, are rewarded with
euerlaſting life: or if any man dye in the
defence of his owne honeſty, he ſhall continually
be well thought of, and commended.
But ſuch as cowardly forſake the feelde,
and run away from the warres, the lawes
haue appointed to dye, and are accounted
for wretches and villaines, whether they
dye or liue, and their ſhameful and reprochfull
life, is more griefe to them then any
death that can bee deuiſed, eſpecially an
honeſt death, & this is the meaning of the
Prouerbe, Deteſt an euill life &c. For as
Ariſtotle in the 3. of his Ethicks ſaith, A
man is borne to honor & libertie, which
two things, we ought alwaies to keepe and

maintaine, and to couet by all meanes we
can, to diehoneſtly, & to liue vertuouſly. The
Prouerb ſaith further, that life can not be
borrowed. For as Iob ſayeth, The Lord
hath rated the dayes of our life, which
can not bee lengthened: And therefore
no man may ſhunne the appointed houre
that God hath determined. And herevpon
ariſeth the tale among the Poets, of the
three ſiſters of deſtinie, whereof the one of
them called Clotho, carieth the diſtaffe, the
other named Lacheſis, ſpinneth, and draweth
out the threede, which the thirde ſiſter,
Atropos, windeth vppe vpon the reele. And
as Seneca in his firſt Tragedie ſayth, Theſe
three ſiſters are ſo cruell and hard, that it
was neuer ſeene, that the threede which
they had once wounde vppe, could euer bee
got backe againe. Theſe ſiſters of the Deſtinie
doe ſignifie in deede the poſting time
of our tranſitorie life, whereof the day once
paſt, can neuer be called backe againe. And
therefore ſayeth Seneca, theſe three vnliberall
Ladies doe rule by aſſured order, and
may neither ſhorten nor lengthē, otherwiſe
then is appointed. Therefore ought euerie
man to applie himſelfe to die well, ſince the

time of his death can by no maner of
meanes be altered.
               
            
            
               58.
               King Codrus rather choſe to haue
               the conqueſt then to liue,
               And neuer did his noble minde
               refuſe his life to giue,
               To ſaue a valiant companie
               of ſuch as him did ſerue,
               The life is alwayes well beſtowed
               that doth ſuch praiſe deſerue.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  
                     COdrus beeing (as both ſaint Auſtine
& Valerius report) the king of Athens,
when as he was to fight with Pelops duke
of the Lacedemonians, and had anſwere of
his Idols, to whom he ſacrificed, that the
ſide whoſe captaine was ſlaine ſhould haue
the victorie, preferrin, glike a worthie gentleman,
the liues & proſperitie of his poore
ſubiects farre aboue his owne, apparailing
himſelfe in a baſe and ſimple habite, and ruſhing
into the thickeſt of the enemies, was
preſently ſlaine. Of whom Virgil writeth,

that he choſe rather to die with the victorie,
then to liue with the ouerthrow.
               
            
            
               59.
               Take no delight to heare thy deedes
               commended to thy face,
               A thing that wiſedome alwayes hath
               accounted for diſgrace,
               And if thou doeſt reprochfull wordes
               of anie man ſuſtaine,
               It is no commendation, to
               to report the ſame againe.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  VNder the vertue of Fortitude is takē
and included all maner of vertuous
and godly actions, that are done without reſpect
of praiſe. For a man ought not to look
for the praiſe of the people, as a recōpence
for his good deed, and ſpecially if it be done
in his owne preſence, which for two cauſes
is to be diſliked. The one, becauſe that glorie
nor praiſe is no perfect recompence
or rewarde for anie vertue: For as Boecius
ſayeth, Praiſe or glory is nought elſe
amongeſt the multitude, but a tickeling
and bewitching of the eares. The other

reaſon is, that praiſes and commendations
before the face, doth rather ſeeme a kinde of
flattering and clawing, then a praiſe. The
Prouerbe ſaith further, That if thou doeſt
reprochfull wordes of any man ſuſtaine,
It is no cōmendation, to report the ſame
againe. The meaning of it is, that no man
that is of great minde or courage, ought to
ſpeake of the iniurious and euill words that
hath been offered him, but ſhall rather bee
counted both wiſer and valianter, if he diſſemble
them, and ſeeme not to wey them, as
it is writtē in the third booke Of the liues of
the Philoſophers: where a Philoſopher being
railed at, and reuiled, made this anſwer,
Thou, quoth he, haſt learned to ſpeake euill,
and I haue learned, to make no accompt
of lewd ſpeech. And more is he to
be commended, that beareth euill wordes,
then he that offreth them.
               
            
            
               60.
               Likewiſe the praiſing of thy ſelfe,
               thine actes and ſpeciall grace,
               Doth neuer thee aduaunce, but all
               thy doings doth deface.
               For if the deedes that here thou doſt,
               be onely done for praiſe,
               
                  
An errour great thou doſt commit,
               and walkſt the croked wayes.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  
                     SOlomon is his Prouerbes ſayth, Let a
ſtranger cōmend thee, and not thine
owne mouth. And Cato ſaieth, Neither
praiſe nor diſpraiſe thine owne doings:
for thy praiſe in thine owne mouth is a
great diſgrace vnto thee. And thoſe that
praiſe themſelues, becauſe as Tullie ſayth,
it ſeemeth to proceede of pride, doe thereby
bring themſelues into hatred and euill will.
So as if any man ſhall ſet ſoorth his owne
doings, to the ende to bee commended & honoured,
and ſhall thereby be reputed to bee a
man of great vanitie and folly, his errour as
the Prouerb ſaith, ſhal appeare to be great.
               
            
            
               61.
               Such things as wonderfull do ſeeme,
               but ſeld or neuer tell,
               For all men haue not heades alike,
               To iudge thy credite well.
               And many wordes to vſe doth ſhew,
               no great perfection,
               Tis better for to ſhew thy deedes,
               and let thy tongue alone.
               
                  
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  THe chaunces that are wonderfull, are
thoſe that doe ſeldome happen, which
though a man hath ſeene with his own eies,
yet will not the common people (who neuer
beleeue more then is ſubiect to their groſſe
ſenſes) giue credite to him that ſhall report
them, but ſhall bee counted a liar and vaine
prater for telling of them. And therefore if
a man be not driuen by neceſſitie to tell it, it
is much better for him to keepe his tongue.
For as Iſocrates ſayeth, I haue manie
time repented for woordes that I haue ſpoken,
but for keeping ſilence, neuer. And euerie
mans perfection doeth rather ſtande in
the proofe of his workes, then in his words,
according as Saint Luke writeth in the
beginning of the Actes of the Apoſtles,
touching our Sauiour, where he ſayeth,
that our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt beganne to do
and to teach: where he placeth his workes
before his woordes, which is the meaning
of the Prouerbe, And manie woordes to
vſe doeth ſhewe no great perfection, tis
better, &c.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            The ſixth Chapter of
Liberalitie and Frankneſſe.
            
               62.
               Be franke and free at all aſſayes,
               with ſpeede beſtowe thy gift:
               The goodlieſt grace in giuing, is
               to be ſhort and ſwift.
               Well vnderſtand the qualitie
               of that thou doeſt beſtowe,
               Which ſeene, thou ſhalt be able ſoone
               the quantitie to knowe.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  AS Seneca ſayeth in his booke of Benefites,
wee are not borne to liue onely to
our ſelues, but to benefite and profite our
kinſmen, our friendes, our neighbours, yea,
and euerie other perſon that we can. Sith
nature, as the ciuill law ſaith, hath linked all
men in a conſanguinitie and duetie eche to
other. And therefore we are bound being of
abilitie, to be liberall and bountifull to ſuch
as liue in wante and neceſſitie, though as
the Doctours ſay, it ought to bee done

by order and degrees, as firſt to conſider our
parents, next our children, then our kindred,
and after them our friends, and ſo thorowout
as they be in degree. And if ſo bee
we haue ſome of our kindred that be of the
houſeholde of fayth, and others that be not,
the Apoſtle willeth vs (if our power be not
ſufficient to ſerue them both) rather to relieue
thoſe that be of the fayth, then the others,
and this great vertue, Liberalitie
hath, as Ariſtotle writeth in the fourth of
his Ethickes, certaine circumſtances: As
that hee that giueth ought, to conſider to
whom he giueth, and to what end he giueth,
and to looke that the things which hee giueth,
be not of the baſeſt of his ſubſtance, as
Caine did, who offered vnto God the verie
worſt and vileſt of his flocke, whereas Abel
offring the beſt that hee had, his Sacrifice
was accepted, & Caines refuſed. Likewiſe,
he is to conſider, to whom he giueth. For to
giue to ſuch as haue no neede, is to caſt away
that, which is giuen. It muſt alſo
be knowne, whether the partie to whom we
giue, be able to woorke, and can by his labour
ſufficiently maintaine himſelfe. For to
giue to ſuch a one, were to rob another, that

is not able to labour, nor hath any meane
to gette his liuing, and yet, as the lawiers
ſay, if a man be well borne and deſcended of
a good houſe, ſo as he cannot, conſidering
his parentage, without great ſhame & diſparagement,
giue himſelf to anie baſe trade
of life, although he be of abilitie for bodie
to trauell and labour, yet is it a good turne
to relieue him, becauſe he is in the ſame caſe
with him that can neither labour nor hath
means to get his liuing,A right Spaniſh ſtomacke. for with his honeſty
he cannot abaſe himſelfe to any vile occupation,
and therfore is to be conſidered. Moreouer
we ought to regard the manner and intent
of our liberalitie, which ought not to
beſtowed for anie vaunt or vayneglorie,
as appeareth by the exāple in the Goſpel,
where our Sauiour, beeing preſent in the
temple, there cōmeth in together, to offer,
a proude wealthy Phariſey, and a poore vertuous
widdowe. The riche Miſer offereth
of his great ſubſtance, great and precious
preſentes: the poore widowe turneth out of
the bottome her purſe, and her hart, a poore
ſillie Farthing. Our Lord demaundeth,
which of the twayne had offered moſt, and
gaue ſētence with the poore widow, becauſe

the mind of the giuer, who onely gaue it in
reſpect of the ſeruice of God, & not for anie
vaunt, or vaineglory, as the riche man did.
Beſide al this, we ought to geue that, which
we geue, with a willing & a cheerful minde,
as the Apoſtle ſaieth, For the Lorde doeth
loue a cheerfull giuer, and ſuch a one, as is
not ſlacke nor ſlowe in the beſtowing of
his benefites. For he giueth double, as the
cōmon prouerb is, that giueth ſoone: & as Solomon
ſaith in his prouerbs, Say not vnto
the pore man, go, & come againe to morrow,
when it is in thy hand to helpe him
preſently. For as Ariſtotle in the fourth of
his Ethicks ſaith, Liberality ſtandeth not in
the giuing of many & ſumptuous gifts, but
in the habit of him that giueth, whatſoeuer
it be that is giuē: that is to ſay, in the cheerfull
& bountiful mind of the giuer, which all
are here briefly comprehended by the Marques:
Be franke and free. &c.
                  
               
            
            
               63.
               By worthy liberalitie
               great Alexander wan
               His fame and high renowne, when all
               the worlde he ouerran.
               
                  
And likewiſe Titus for his frankenes
               great, and actes of fame.
               Amongſt the worthy conquerours
               obteind a woorthy name.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  
                     ALexander king of the Macedons, and
one of the 3. monarchies of the world,
was a Prince of great liberality and franknes,
of whom Seneca writeth in his Booke of
Benefites, That when as a poore minſtrell
came vnto him, & beſeeched him to beſtowe
a pennie vpon him, the king preſently gaue
him a whole towne, and when the poore
felow, halfe aſtonied, tolde that ſo greate a
gifte was not fitte for him: Alexander anſwered
him, hee did not regarde what was
meete for ſuche a fellowe to receiue, but
what was ſeemely for ſo greate a Prince
to geue. Titus was Emperour of
Rome, a Prince of a noble minde, and
of greate liberalitie, who as it is reported
by Eutropius in his life, and
other auncient Authours had proclaimed,
that whoſoeuer had anie ſute vnto him, what
ſoeuer it were, it ſhould be graunted, & when

ſome of his counſell miſliking it, had tolde
him, that it woulde bee a meanes to diſcredite
him, when hee ſhoulde not be able to
performe that which he promiſed. He aunſweared
them, that it was not conuenient,
that any perſon ſhoulde departe from the
face of a Prince with a diſcomforted and
heauie hearte. It is alſo reported of him,
that beyng ſet at Supper, and calling to remembrance
that he had not beſtowed any
thing vpon any man that day, looking with
a diſcontented countenaunce, hee ſaide vnto
thoſe that were with him, Alas my friends,
I haue vtterly loſt this day: meaning that
the time is neuer well ſpente of Princes,
wherin they are not geuing to ſome bodie.
               
            
            
               64.
               But Midas with his maſſe of golde,
               was had in great diſdayne,
               And he and al his treaſures thought
               to be but fond and vayne,
               The fowle vnprincely anſweare of
               Antigonus the king,
               With ſtayne vnto his ſtate, his name
               to infamie did bring.
               
                  
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  
                     MIdas, as Ouid in his Metamorphoſis
declareth, was king of Phrigia,
who receiued with great interteinement the
Gods, Iupiter, and Mercury, as they happened
to come by him, who willing to
make him ſome recompence for his good
will towardes them, bade him to aſke of
them whatſoeuer hee moſt deſired. Midas
being a moſt miſerable wretch, and couetous
as the Diuell, deſired of them, that
whatſoeuer he touched, and whatſoeuer touched
him, might preſently turne into golde:
which was by and by graunted him, whereby
he became in a ſhort time to bee wonderfull
riche, but when the foole was in the
middeſt of his Paradiſe, the very drinke
and meate that ſhould ſuſtayne him, turning
into gold, he died, (as it is reported) of famiſhment.
The moral of this tale, I here
meane not to meddle with, becauſe it hath
been touched by many greate and learned
Philoſophers and Poets. It ſuffiſeth to
knowe, that it noteth and reprooueth
the ſhamefull and moſt wicked vice of couetouſneſſe
and filthie auarice. Antigonus
                     
the king is greatly blamed of Seneca, in
his booke of Benefites: of whom he writeth,
that when a poore man deſired of him a
great quantitie of golde, he made anſwer,
that it was a great deale too much, and not
meete for him to require: and when the poore
ſoule deſired him to giue him but a pennie,
he anſwered againe, how that was too ſmall
a thing for a king to giue. And thus not regarding
how foully this diſhonorable niggardlines,
& pinchpining doth blemiſh the
name of a Prince, the couetous Antigonus
made theſe anſwers to the poore miſerable
felow, which deſerue for euer to be recorded,
as a foyle & counter ſhewe to the noble Emperours
Alexander and Titus.
                  
               
            
            
               65.
               I lyke not him thats prodigal,
               nor ſuch I liſt to prayſe:
               And yet the man that well deſerues,
               I hurt not any wayes.
               The troth is, that I much miſlike
               to liue in neede and want:
               But ten times more a miſer, that
               is couetous and ſcant.
               
                  
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  THE Prodigall man, as Ariſtotle
in the fourth booke of his Ethikes
ſayth, is he that ſpendeth more then
is needefull, & where it is needeleſſe.
Who, perceyuing the vertues of the liberall
man, that ſpendeth that which is
meete, and where it behoueth, and that
the couetuous miſer is condemned, for not
ſpending that, which hee ought: taketh
himſelfe ſtraightwayes for a liberall and
a vertuous Gentleman: and ſayeth, that
hee vſeth monie, as it ought to bee vſed.
And this is a vice greatly to bee auoyded,
for the meane betwixte theſe two
extremes of Prodigalitie, and Couetuouſneſſe,
is the vertue Liberalitie. Howebeit,
true it is, as Ariſtotle ſayeth, the
leſſer vice of the twayne, and more to bee
borne withall, is Prodigalitie. For the
prodigall man profiteth thoſe to whom
hee geueth, although hee hurteth himſelfe:
But the Churle and the miſer neither
profiteth himſelfe, nor anie man els.

Beſides hee that is prodigall, will ſooner
come to be vertuous, and liberal, thē the couetous,
for two reaſons. The one is, that by
reaſon of his greate expenſes falling in to
neede and want, he will quickely ſee what
hurt he receiueth by too much ſpending, and
will from that time forwarde learne to bee
wiſer, and to keepe his money the better.
The ſeconde is, that with the time of his
ſpending, hee waxeth aged, and people in
their olde yeeres be more ſparing and thriftie,
then in their youth, becauſe the hope of
gaming is nowe taken from them, whiche
in youth doeth alwayes encourage them.
But, the couetous perſon cānot be brought
to the vertue, by neither of theſe reaſons.
For the older he waxeth, the more miſer he
waxeth, and therefore if wee miſlike a man,
that by reaſon of his prodigalitie commeth
to be poore, we ought a great deale more to
deteſt a Miſar that by couetouſnes groweth
to be rich. For as Saluſt ſaith in his booke of
Catiline, Couetuouſneſſe hath vtterly baniſhed
both faith and honeſtie, and
cleane deſtroyed all artes and knowledges.
                     
Whereby it hath brought in pride &
crueltie, contempt of God, and a generall

Merchandiſe of ſuche thinges as ſhoulde
freely bee geuen. Couetouſneſſe is alwayes
infinite, and neuer ſatiſfied with abundaunce,
nor diminiſhed with want.
And therefore Though the prodigall bee
to bee miſlyked in neceſſitie, and want:
yet ten times worſe, a miſer that is couetous
and ſcant.
                  
               
            
            
               66.
               The great Darius eaſllyer was,
               deſtroyde for all his might,
               And of his valiant aduerſary
               ſubdued, and put to flight:
               Then might Fabricius moued be,
               with couetous deſire,
               Whoſe hart with filthy auaryce
               coulde not be ſet on fire.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  
                     FRabricius, beſide a number of other
his noble, vertuous, and worthie actes,
excelled in the vertue of liberalitie, of whō
it is reported by Valerius in his nienth
booke, that when he was preſented by the
ſtate of Beneuento, with a great maſſe

of monie, hee returned the embaſſadoures
with their treaſure home agayne, as one
that contented himſelfe with the benefite
of his Temperance, and helde himſelfe
ſatiſfied with that ſmall wealth which hee
had, ſuppoſing it to bee a ſufficient riches:
For hee did alwayes ſaie, that riches conſiſted
not in much hauing, but in little coueting.
               
            
            
               67
               To helpe a man in miſerie,
               our dutie vs doeth binde:
               And not to doe it when we may,
               is odious and vnkinde.
               A noble minde will neuer ſtayne
               it ſelfe with ſuch a blotte,
               Nor ſuffer ſuch a great offence,
               nor ſuch a filthie ſpotte.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  
                     THE Prophet Dauid ſaieth in his
Pſalter: Bleſſed is that man, that
hath compaſſion vppon the poore and

the needie: For in the time of his neceſſitie,
the Lorde ſhall deliuer him. And
Solomon in his Prouerbes ſayth, That
who ſo hath pitie vppon the poore, and
relieueth, them lendeth vppon vſurie to
GOD, who ſhall reſtore him with great
gayne, that which hee hath diſburſed.
And therefore the Prouerb ſaieth, To helpe
a man in miſerie, our dutie vs doth bind.
Where Duetie is taken for a woorke of
Mercie, as Seneca accounteth it in his
Booke of Dueties, and farther it ſaith,
                      Not
to ſuccour when we may, is odious and
vnkind. For as Solomon in his Prouerbs
ſaith, Whoſoeuer ſtoppeth his eare at the
crie of the poore, ſhall crie for helpe himſelfe,
and not be hearde. And therefore
it is not to bee thought of a noble minde,
but if hee ſee a man in miſerie or diſtreſſe,
hee will followe the aduiſe of the Prophet
Eſaie, who ſaith: Breake thy breade to
the hungrie, and carrie home to thy
houſe the ſorowfull and the poore,
where thou ſeeſt a man bare and naked,
cloth him, and deſpiſe not thine own
fleſh, Solomon ſaith in his Prouerbes, He

that hath pitie vpon the poore, ſhalbe happie.
And this is the meaning of this Prouerbe.
A noble minde wil neuer ſtaine,
&c.
               
            
         
         
            The ſeuenth Chapter
of Truth.
            
               68
               Truth honour thou, & alwayes loue,
               ſtep not from her aſide,
               But frame thy friendſhip after her,
               that euer may abide.
               The Image faire of holy life,
               and daughter true is ſhe,
               As faithful ſiſter vnto vertue,
               chiefe is honeſtie.
               
                  
                     TRuth is of ſo great a worthines and
excellencie, that God himſelfe, as it
appeareth in the Goſpel, is called
the Truth. This truth hath two extremities.
The one, called vayne boaſting,
which is when men brag of thēſelues, more
then they are able to performe: the other is
named Ironia, when men publiſhe of themſelues,
that which is not in them. Men

ought to loue and honour the trueth after
one of theſe two manners, eyther where it
concerneth onely them, and therein men
ought to beware, that they neither exceede,
nor doe leſſe then that which is reaſon. The
other is, when it toucheth an other, & in this
caſe, to reuerence the trueth, is as much to
ſay, as to performe whatſoeuer is promiſed,
and to bee true of our worde, as well to our
enimies, as to our friends, as we are bound
by the Ciuill lawe: for there is no greater
duetie betwixt man and man, then to keepe
their faith and promiſe iuſtly one with the
other, without the which, all trafficke and
dealing amongſt men muſt of neceſſitie
ceaſe. And therefore the Prouerbe ſayeth,
Truth honour thou, and alwayes loue,
ſteppe not from her aſide. And farther,
that we ought to frame our friendſhippe
after truth. Friendſhippe, according to the
minde of Ariſtotle in his Ethickes, is in one
of theſe three ſortes, eyther for profite, for
pleaſure, or for honeſtie. Friendſhippe for
profite, as Seneca ſayeth, is Merchantes
friendſhippe, which neuer endureth longer
than there is hope of gayne. Friendſhippe
for pleaſure, laſteth as long as delight and

pleaſure laſteth, and as delightes doe alter
with yeeres, and ſuche thinges as ſeemed
pleaſant at ſome age, are thought diſpleaſant
in an other: Therefore this Friendſhippe
can neuer long continue. Friendſhip
for honeſtie, is that which is grounded vppon
truth and vertue: and as vertue, truth, &
honeſtie, are thinges euerlaſting & vnchangeable,
ſo the friendſhip that is grounded
vppon them, cannot but continue for euer.
This friendſhippe flooriſheth in the time of
proſperitie, and continueth and remayneth
in the time of miſfortune and aduerſitie,
and therefore hee ſaieth: That ſhee is the
daughter of holineſſe, & that honeſtie is
the faithfull ſiſter vnto the moſt ſoueraigne
vertue. Honeſtie, (as Plato reporteth,
& as it is brought in by Tullie in the
beginning of his offices) is of ſuche an excelling
beauty, as if ſhe might be ſeene with
mens eyes, the whole worlde woulde bee
in loue with her. Who becauſe ſhee is
ſtedfaſt, aſſured, ſounde, and euerlaſting,
is ſaide to bee The faithfull ſiſter to ſoueraigne
vertue.
                  
               
            
            
               
               69.
               Attilius knowing well before,
               That he ſhoulde ſurely dye
               If vnto Carthage he returnd,,
               Obſeruing faithfully
               His troth and woord, deferd no time
               For to returne againe,
               Where as he ſuffred tormentes great
               By death and deadly paine.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  
                     MArcus Attilius, as S. Auguſt. writeth
in his 1. booke of the Citie of God, and
alſo Tullie in his Booke of duties, beyng priſoner
among other Romanes, in Carthage,
& ſent vnto Rome, to perſuade an exchange
of priſoners: when he came to the citie, and
hauing declared his meſſage, was demaunded
to geue his opinion what hee thought
beſt to bee done, after that he had thorowly
cōſidered that the Roman priſoners were
olde, & impotent men, and that the Carthaginians
were all young and luſtie fellowes:
his aduiſe was, that they ſhoulde in no
wiſe make anie exchaunge, and when
his friends, vnderſtanding that his counſell
was allowed, laboured by all meanes they

could to keepe him from goyng agayne.
He told them that hee had geuen his faith
and his woorde to the Carthaginians, that
he would returne himſelf with the anſwere,
and therfore notwithſtanding that he knew
& was ſure that his goyng thither ſhould be
harmefull & dangerous, comming into the
handes of his cruell & dealy enimies, yet cō
                     ſidering
that he had promiſed, he would performe
it, and ſo in deede did, whereas he ſuffered
moſt cruell death, with greate torture
and tormentes.
               
            
         
         
            The eight Chapter of
Continence in coueting.
            
               70
               Of worldly goodes poſſeſſe no more,
               nor farther ſeeke to haue.
               Then may ſuffice thy neede, & cleare
               thy conſcience after graue.
               All ouerplus with heede auoyde,
               for more then meete is nought,
               And nothing can continue long,
               that on the earth is wrought.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  
                     
                     SOlomon ſaith in his Prouerbs, that
the praier which euery man ought to
make vnto God, is this Pouertie nor
riches lord giue thou vnto me, but only
that wt is ſufficient for my maintenance,
leaſt by hauing to muche, I be tempted to
forget God, and to ſaie, Who is the Lord?
and hauing on the other ſide to litle, I bee
forced by miſerie and want, to blaſpheme
the 
                        •
                     ame of my God. And this aucthoritie
of Solomon is in a maner the full Cōmentarie
of this Prouerbe. Likewiſe Ariſtotle
in the tenth of his Ethickes ſaith, To ſeeke
to poſſeſſe a meane & moderate wealth, is
the perfection that a man attaineth vnto.
And Seneca in a booke that he made of the
quietneſſe and ſatiſfyng of the minde, moueth
this queſtion, What quantitie of the
goods of fortune a man ought to enioy to,
and what is the meane & temperate ſtate of
riches? That a man ought to ſeeke for and
poſſeſſe ſo muche as may keepe him from
pouertie, and yet to be not farre from it:
And this is it that preſerueth a man from
falling, as the piller, which is the conſcience,
being the greateſt reſt and quieteſt
that a man can carry with him. The Prouerb

ſaith, Nothing can continue long,
that on the earth is wrought. The world
it ſelfe muſt ende, and all thing that therein
is created: wee ſee that nothing endureth
long, beautie decayeth, fauour faileth,
ſtrength abateth, and life it ſelfe but a ſmal
time laſteth. The greateſt princes that be,
muſt away, and though the whole world be
ſubiect to them, yet are they them ſelues
but ſubiectes to miſerie, to caſualtie, to ſorowe,
to ſickneſſe, and to death, and muſte
die as an other man: all our pompe, our vanities
and follies muſte haue an ende, wee
haue no continuall abiding place, as ſaint
Paule ſaith, but muſt al away, ſome to heauen,
ſome to hell, according as they haue
heere behaued them ſelues: And therfore
is it a great madnes for any man to ſet his
felicitie in ſo fickle an eſtate, that he knoweth
can not long time endure, & to behaue
him ſo fondly for the ſmall time that he is
heere, as to liue hereafter in torments, that
ſhall neuer ende.
               
            
            
               71
               The more thou getteſt continually,
               the more thou ſtill doeſt craue,
               
                  
Nowe iudge (of twaine) which is the beſt,
               if that thou reaſon haue:
               To be a Lorde of riches great,
               with griefe and toile and care,
               Or quietly to liue content
               with ſmall and decent ſhare?
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  SVbſtaunce and riches doe neuer ſatiſfie
the appetite nor deſire, but as Caſſiodorus
writeth in an Epiſtle, as in a dropſie,
which is a diſeaſe that cauſeth cōtinuall
thirſte, the more a man drinketh the thirſtier
he remaineth: So yf couetouſneſſe be
not bridled, the more riches we get, the
more wee deſire: and therfore the Prouerb
heere willeth, that a man ſhoulde waie with
himſelfe, whether it be better to poſſeſſe
great riches with trouble and tormente, or
to enioye a reaſonable liuing with contentation
and quietneſſe. For as Seneca in his
Epiſtle to Lucilius ſaith, There is no man
that is loued or fauoured of God, but
he that contemneth and deſpiſeth riches.
The poſſeſſion whereof, ſaith Seneca,
I doe not take from thee, but would

that thou ſhouldeſt enioy thē without feare,
which to attaine vnto, thou haſt no other
way, but to liue happily & quietly with thē,
eſteeming them as thinges tranſitorie, that
ſoone may be forgone. And he that poſſeſſeth
them in ſuche ſort poſſeſſeth them
with quietneſſe and contentation.
               
            
            
               72.
               The riches that we heere poſſeſſe
               With haſt away doe flee:
               And as the tides with floods and ebbes,
               They mooue continually.
               Seeke thou the treaſures of the minde,
               Which ſtande like braſen walles,
               Both firme and ſure, a ſafe defence
               Whatſoeuer thee befalles.
               
                  THe riches & wealth of the worlde, are
the thinges that are moſt accounted
of amongſt the goodes of fortune, which do
ſometime encreaſe, & ſometime decreaſe,
as Boetius in the perſon of Fortune ſpeaketh,
ſaying, that the ſeruantes (which are
theſe temporall goodes) doe ſtil attend vppon
their miſtres, which is Fortune, with
whom they do alwaies both come and goe,

and therfore ſaith Boetius, that Fortune
hath the whole worlde vpon her tottering
wheele, bringing whom ſhee liſt aloft, and
caſting others downe, making poore men
of ſuche as were riche, and riche men of
ſuche as were poore. And therefore the
Marques heere warneth vs, that we apply
all our forces to the obteining of morall
goodes, that is to ſay, Vertues, which are
in deede the perfection of the Soule, as
Ariſtotle in his boke of the Soule, writeth.
And theſe, ſaith the Prouerbe, ſtande like
braſen walles, both firme and ſure, a ſafe
defence, whatſoeuer thee befalles, as
muche to ſay, as they neuer leaue nor forſake
a man: As Tullie declareth in his
Paradoxes, where he bringeth in Bias the
Philoſopher, one of the ſeuen wiſe men
of Athens, who, when the Citie was taken
by a Tirant, and the people fleeing, hadde
taken with them as muche as they coulde
carry, only Bias medled with nothing, and
when one of his neighbours did aſke him
howe chaunce he tooke none of his goodes
with him: he anſweared him, that all which
was his, he carried about him, not counting
any thing to be his, but the vertues of

the minde, eſteeming the goodes of the
worlde to belong as wel to any others. And
this is the meaning of this prouerb, Seeke
thou the treaſures of the minde, &c.
                  
               
            
            
               73
               Seeke not ambitiouſly to reigne,
               nor rule with tirranny,
               But both her woorkes and waies ſee that
               thou ſhunne aduiſedly:
               And chooſe the meane eſtate, among
               the which tis beſt to liue:
               So ſhalt thou paſſe with pleaſure all
               the time that God doeth giue.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  
                     A Tyrant is he, as Ariſtotle in the ſeuenth
of his Politiques ſaith, that commeth
to the Crowne by force or by pollicie,
who endureth no longer then he is of force
or power, as Medea ſaide vnto Creon in
the ſeconde Tragedie of Seneca, Tyrantes
and euil gouernours doe not endure for euer,
and as Agamemnon ſaith vnto Pyrrus
in the ſpeache that they had about the death
of Polixena, Their gouernmēts that are by

force, continue no long time, but the gentle
& mild gouernmēt is that which endureth.
And therefore the Prouerbe ſaith, Seeke
not ambitiouſly to raigne, nor rule with
tyranny, and that we ought to forſake
her pathes, and her workes, and chooſe
to liue among the meaneſt ſort, which
is the beſt and the quieteſt life. Which
is that which is ſaide in the Prouerbe before,
that Seneca wrote in his Epiſtle to
Lucilius, That there is no man eſteemed
or accounted of GOD, but thoſe that
deſpiſe & contemne the pompe and wealth
of the worlde.
               
            
            
               74
               For thinke not that the loftie ſtate,
               nor throne of high degree
               Doeth make a man the perfecter,
               or hapier to be.
               It rather doeth his cares encreaſe,
               and giues him griefe and paine,
               And on his necke, that erſt was free,
               doeth caſt a careful chaine.
               
                  
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  NOworldly wealth, but ſpecially no tyrannicall
gouernment, can bring a
man to perfection, or to liue happily, but
rather draweth with them feare, daunger,
vexation, and cares, and as Boetius ſaith,
The Tirants that are alwaies waited vpon
with their guard, to terrifie and amaſe
others, are alwais afraide them ſelues of
thoſe, whō they ſuppoſe to feare. And Tullie
in his booke of Friendſhip ſaith, that in
the life of the Tirant, there is neither faith,
loue, nor any long enduring goodwill, of euery
thing is he ielous, and eche thing
miniſtreth vnto him cauſe of care, and diſquietneſſe.
And further he ſaith, Who can
euer loue him, whom he feareth, & of whom
he knoweth that he is feared? And this is
the meaning of the Prouerbe, The loftie
ſtates, nor throne of high degree, doeth
make a man. &c. Touching the which,
Boetius in his thirde booke of Conſolation
writeth of Dioniſius of Sarogoſi, who
from a meane man was aduaunced to the
Crowne, to whom, when his friende came
vpon a time to ſee him, and greatly praiſed

the happineſſe of his eſtate, telling him
that he ought to account him ſelf moſt happy,
that had attained to ſo high a dignitie:
Dioniſius bidding him to a dinner, cauſed
him to ſit downe, where ouer his head was
hanging a terrible Sworde with the point
downewarde, who with the feare and agonie
that he was in for falling of the ſworde,
made but an vnpleaſant dinner, ſitting all
the time vpon thornes: After he was riſen,
Dioniſius aſked him, yf his dinner were
not pleaſant vnto him: Suche a pleaſure
(quoth the poore fellow) GOD keepe me
from, that euery moment looked to haue a
Swoorde vppon my pate: and ſuche
(quoth Dioniſius) is the life of euery Tyraunt,
euen as full of pleaſure as hath been
thy dinner: for the highneſſe of his ſtate encreaſeth
his miſerie, and chaineth him
with the chaine of thraldome, touching the
which I haue ſpoken at large before in the
ſecond Prouerbe.
               
            
            
               75
               Seeke that which thou maiſt eaſily haue,
               and care not for no more,
               
                  
For thou ſhalt ſee from time to time,
               if that thou watch therfore,
               The loftie ſtates and mightie powers,
               come topſie-turuy downe:
               And he that late a Miſer was,
               with ioy to weare the crowne,
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  
                     BOetius in his ſecond booke of Conſolation
ſaith, that nature contenteth her
ſelfe with a very ſmal thing: and yf you ſhal
at any time ouercharge her with thinges
that are ſuperfluous, the more you charge
her, the more hinderance, hurt, and diſpleaſure
you doe vnto her. And therefore the
Prouerb ſaith, that we ought to ſeeke that,
which we may honeſtly and eaſily attaine
vnto, and no more. For if wee will well
marke it, as Boetius in his firſt booke of
Conſolation ſaith, We ſhall ſee a man in
one houre hoyſed vppe a lofte, and in the
ſelfe ſame houre caſte downe againe, and
an other aduaunced in his place: for ſolace
and ſorowe ſucceede one the other. And as
Seneca in his ſeconde Tragedie ſayth, haue

their turnes. And this is it, that the
Prouerbe ſaith, That loftie ſtates and
mightie powers, come topſey turuy
downe. &c.
                  
               
            
            
               76
               Truſt not vnto the ſtate of thoſe,
               that haſtilie mount a hie:
               But looke to ſee them fall as faſt
               as euer they did flie.
               For be thou ſure the wicked man,
               ſhall neuer long endure:
               His happy fortune ſhall him faile,
               when moſt he thinkes her ſure.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  
                     SOlomon ſayth in his Prouerbes, That
the goodes which are haſtilie gotten,
will as ſwyftly be gonne. So that the
ſodayne riſing aloft, hath alwaies his fall
and great miſchiefe at hande: For as
Dauid ſayth in his Pſalmes, Neuer trouble
nor frette thy ſelfe at the proſperitie
of the wicked, nor at the aduauncement
of the vnrighteous, for they ſhall ſodaynly

be plucked vppe by the rootes, and
thoſe that faithfully abide in the Lord, ſhal
inherite the land. And againe, I haue ſeene
the wicked flooriſhing like the Cedar of
Libanus, and within a while after there
was no remembraunce of his beeing. And
therfore ſaith the Prouerbe, Be ſure, the
wicked man, ſhal neuer long endure.
                  
               
            
            
               77
               If that thou wilt abundance haue,
               liue to thy ſelfe content
               With only that which nature findes,
               to be ſufficient.
               I haue not ſeene men troubled much
               their liuing for to get:
               But many for to mount alofte,
               Their hartes aſunder fret.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  
                     SEneca ſaith, in an Epiſtle to Lucilius,
that he is not poore that hath but a litle,
but he that deſireth muche. For great riches
is it to nature, to haue a litle with contentation
and ioy, for a very ſmall thing
doeth nature require, and a litle ſuffiſeth

her: And therefore the Prouerbe ſaith, I
haue not ſeen men take any great paine or
trauaile to liue in the worlde, but miſerably
doe they moile and toile, and fret their
hartes aſunder, that ſeeke to clime aloft.
               
            
            
               78
               Then let vs well the matter waie,
               what if thou doeſt poſſeſſe,
               Great ſtore of goodes obteined heere,
               by fraude and wickedneſſe?
               What great aſſurance haſt thou nowe,
               that thee may certifie
               Thou ſhalt not come by chaunce or hap
               to begge before thou die?
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  
                     TVllie ſaith in his Philippicaes, that the
goodes which are wickedly gotten,
will euil fauouredly be ſpent: And therfore
there is nothing that can aſſure a man of ye
cōtinuance of his ſtate, for a thouſand miſfortunes
maye happen that may make a
riche man a begger. And therefore Seneca
ſaith, that we ought to poſſeſſe thoſe riches
we haue without care, ſo as it may neuer

greeue vs, though wee looſe all we haue, taking
them not for our owne, but as ſtraungers
and thinges lent vnto vs, and for the
time that we haue enioyed them, we ought
as Boetius ſayth, to giue thankes that wee
haue been benefited by them as by external
goodes, neither ought we to complaine yf
we looſe them. And this is the effect of the
Prouerb, where it ſaith, What great aſſurance
haſt thou nowe, that thee may
certifie? &c.
                  
               
            
            
               79
               How many riche men haue we ſeene,
               in litle time decay,
               And from their great & loftie ſtates,
               ſlipt downe and fallen away?
               How many haue been laught to ſcorne,
               For putting of their truſt
               In this fonde fickle honour heere,
               nowe tumbled in the duſt?
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  WIth great wiſedome ſaith Dauid
in his Pſalms, If riches happen
to abounde, ſet not thy hart vpon them, leaſt
yf we fortune to forgoe them, we ſhoulde ſorowe

and torment our ſelues for them: For
whatſoeuer happen vnto vs, it is alwaies
beſt to ſay with Iob, The Lord hath giuē,
the Lorde hath taken away: Bleſſed be
the name of the Lorde for euer. And ſo
ſhall no man be ſcorned nor derided, for any
thing that he hath loſt, or may looſe.
               
            
            
               80
               And thus if I haue tolde the trueth,
               In theſe preceptes of mine:
               Seeke not for riches nor deſire,
               the thing that is not thine.
               And if thou doeſt demaunde of me,
               to whom they doe belong:
               To fortune: thus I anſweare thee,
               that liſt not to be long.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  OF goods there are two ſortes, outwarde
and inwarde. The outwarde
goodes be ſuch as fortune giueth, and theſe
be none of our owne, according to the
ſaying of Bias before alleaged: but our
owne goodes are thoſe, that be within vs,
which are the Morall vertues, which are
not ſubiect to anye change of fortune:

For when al the giftes of Fortune fayleth,
yet learning and vertue remaineth, which
neuer leaue nor forſake a man, but mainteine
and accompany him all his life time,
according to the opinion of Cato in his
Philoſophie. This beeing, as it is very
true, wee ought not ſo with carke and
care, to heape, to regarde, and ſcrape vppe
riches, which belong not vnto vs, and may
many waies be taken from vs, doe what
we can to keepe them. And therefore our
Sauiour hath warned vs, that we ſhoulde
lay vp our treaſures in heauen, where neither
ruſt nor mooth can come, and where
no theeues can breake in, to ſteale it.
This can we not doe with our goodes of
the world, but howſoeuer wee diſpoſe them,
they are ſubiect to chaunce and caſualties,
that may happen.
               
            
         
         
            The nienth Chapter.
Of Enuie.
            
               81
               Let not the enuious man in life,
               a paterne be to thee,
               
                  
Nor walke thou in his froward paths,
               nor keepe him companie.
               It is not for a vertuous minde,
               ſuch errour to commit:
               Nor doth a noble hart beſeeme
               ſo ill to vſe his wit.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  ENuie, as Ariſtotle in the ſeconde of
his Rethorikes ſayeth, is a ſullenneſſe
and griefe of that men haue, to ſee either
honour or any good thing to happen
to anie that is of the ſame calling that
they themſelues are, and it is one of the vileſt
natures that can be in a man: ſo as manie
times the enuious perſon, without anie
iuſt cauſe at all, becommeth a mortall enemie
to his neighbour, according to the
ſaying of Saint Gregorie in his Paſtorall,
where hee ſayeth, That the enuious
man, beeing not able to cleare his hart
from the venim that is there congealed,
diſcouereth himſelfe, and falleth to working
of miſchiefes openly. Wherevpon
our Sauiour Chriſt ſayeth in his Goſpel,
That there is no Prophet without honour

but in his owne Countrey. For his
owne kindred and companions, for the
great diſdaine they haue of his eſtimation,
doe ſeeke by all the meanes they can to diſcredite
and deface him, which is not for a
vertuous minde, nor doeth a noble hart
beſeeme. For it is for a noble and gentlemanly
hart to behaue himſelfe as the good
Moyſes did, who when certaine enuious
perſons, to moue him to diſpleaſure, came
vnto him, and tolde him that two of the
common people did propheſie in his tent,
Moyſes verie graciouſly anſwered them,
that he wiſhed to GOD, that euerie one
of the people were able to propheſie, which
milde ſpeech proceeded from a noble and a
valiant minde.
               
            
            
               82.
               Nought elſe doth enuie bring to paſſe
               nor other ſeede doth ſowe,
               Then murders, miſchiefes, cruelties,
               and ſuttle ouerthrowe.
               As by the Scripture doth appeare,
               where curſed Caine did kill
               Poore Abel (that offended not)
               vpon malicious will.
               
                  
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  
                     ABel and Caine were brothers, as Moſes
in the firſt of his fiue bookes writeth.
The cruell murther of Caine done
vppon Abel, and the cauſe thereof, is in the
ſame Booke at large deſcribed. And therefore,
to make anie, long Paraphraſe vpon
it, were but a thing ſuperfluous. And it is
well knowne, that enuie, the roote of miſchiefs,
was the firſt deuiſer of that ſo ſhamefull
and horrible a fact.
               
            
         
         
            The tenth Chapter of
Thankefulneſſe.
            
               83.
               Good turnes that haue been done to thee,
               haue ſtill before thine eie,
               And when to recompence the ſame
               it in thy power doth lie,
               Require them with a cheerefull hart
               And waying well in minde
               What friendſhip hath been ſhewde to thee
               be neuer thou vnkinde.
               
                  
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  SEneca in his Epiſtle to Lucilius writeth,
that the vnthankefull man is he,
that returneth a good turne without
intereſt: in whoſe opiniō we are bound
not barely to returne the benefite which we
haue receiued, but to do it with recompence.
For as Valerius in his fifth booke writeth,
Hee that doeth not thankefully recompence
a good turne, doeth clearly bereaue
men of the doing and receiuing of
pleaſures, without the which, the life of
men is rather a death, then a life. And this
is it that the Prouerbe ſaith, Good turnes
that haue been done to thee, haue ſtil before
thine eie. &c.
               
            
            
               84.
               O what a ſhamefull ſtaine it was,
               to Ptolomei the king,
               The noble Pompey traiterouſly
               vnto his death to bring.
               And Ezekias, for his great
               vnthankfulneſſe did pay,
               When by the wrath of God he ſhould
               haue died before his day.
               
                  
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  
                     PTolomey was king of Egypt, who as
Lucan writeth, was ſeruant to Pompey
the Emperour of Rome, at whoſe handes
he receiued his kingdome. And as the Ciuill
warres beganne to waxe hot betwixt
the two mightie Princes, Ceſar, and Pompey,
(after the battaile of Pharſalie) Pompey
retired from the fieldes of Philippos,
to a place in Leſbos where hee had appointed
his wife Cornelia to lie: but perceiuing
the people of the Countrey not to
bee ſuch as hee might truſt, hee went by
Sea from thence to Egypt, where he committed
himſelfe to the handes of Ptolomey,
who conſpiring with Photinus, and Achillas,
(two miſchieuous perſons) betraied
him, and after they had ſlaine him, preſented
his head vnto Caeſar, at the ſight whereof,
Caeſar, as the ſtorie telleth, could not refraine
from ſhedding of teares. Whervpon
maiſter Frances Petrarch in one of his Sonets
thus writeth.
                  
                     Caeſare poiche'l traditor d'Egitto,
                     Lifece il don de l' honorata teſta.
                     Celando l'allegrezza manifeſta,
                     Pianſe pe gliocchi fuor, ſi come è ſcritto.
                  
                  
                     
Which in our vulgare ſpeech is thus,
                  
                     Caeſar, when as the falſe Egyptian had
                      
Preſented him with worthie Pōpeys hed,
                     Hiding his ioy with coloured coūtnance
ſad,
                     His fained teares foorthwith, they ſay, he
ſhed.
                  
                  Of the reproches of this Ptolomey, all
hyſtories are full. And becauſe as I haue
ſaid, Lucan ſetteth out this matter more at
large, it is needleſſe to make any long diſcourſe
thereof, ſince this Booke requireth
no ſuch exquiſiteneſſe, nor intreateth of anie
forraine ſtorie. Ezechias being of the tribe
of Iudas, was king of Ieruſalem, the ſeruāt
and greatly beloued of God: who, when Senacharib
king of the Aſsirians had beſieged
the Citie, & fent Rabſacah his meſſenger
vnto him, and to the reſt of the people,
willing them to yeeld themſelues, and promiſing
them their liues, threatning them,
that if they otherwiſe did, he would aſſuredly
put them all to the ſworde, and that neither
their God, nor any other God beſide,
ſhould be able to deliuer thē, as they might
ſee by the experience of a number of other
mightie countreys that he had conquered &

brought in ſubiection: Ezechias being afrayed
of the hugeneſſe of the armie, and of
the great power of Senacharib, ſhewed vnto
Rabſacah the temple of Ieruſalem, with
all the veſſels and ornamentes thereof, and
all the Iewels of his owne houſe, which had
been gottē together, and laid vp by his predeceſſors:
but the Lord knowing the weakneſſe
and faintnes of Ezechias, and foreſeeing
that he was determined to yeeld himſelf
into the handes of Senacharib, or at his appointment
to Rabſaces, being greatly offended
with him, ſent vnto him the Prophet
Eſay, to let him vnderſtande, that he ſhould
preſently die: but ſuch and ſo great was his
ſorowfull lamentation and mourning, as it
pleaſed the almightie to reuerſe the ſentēce.
               
            
         
         
            The eleuenth Chapter
of Friendſhip.
            
               85.
               The man that councell good can giue
               and will thee reprehend,
               And warne from euery euill act,
               chooſe thou to be thy friend.
               
                  
And thinke thy ſelfe thriſe happy, whē
               
               thou ſuch a friend canſt haue,
               That will thee well inſtruct, and from
               all ill aduiſes ſaue.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  FRiendſhip, as Ariſtotle in the eight of
his Ethikes, ſayeth, and as hath been
ſayde afore vpon one of the Prouerbes, is
of three ſortes, for delight, for profite, and
for honeſtie. Friendſhip of delight, is the
friendſhippe of flatterers, and ieſters
which endureth but a ſmall while: for when
the pleaſure ceaſſeth (as teſters are not at
all times, nor of all men liked) this friendſhippe
ſtraight wayes endeth. An other
friendſhippe there is, grounded vpon profit,
and is, as Seneca termeth it, merchaunt
friendſhippe, for it endureth no longer then
there is hope of profite: And thoſe that
vſe this kinde of friendſhippe, doe it, as
Seneca ſayeth, more vpon the profite, then
in reſpect of the perſon. The Flye alwayes
attendeth vppon the honie, and the
Woolfe vpon the Carion. Which kinde of
people are more in loue with the praye,

and the ſpoyle, then with the man. The
third kinde of friendſhip ſetieth it ſelfe only
vpon honeſtie, and groundeth her ſelfe vpon
vertue, and this endureth as wel in aduerſitie,
as in proſperitie. This is the allonely
true friendſhip, which the Prouerbe counſelleth
vs to chooſe, and this is that which
Ariſtotle ſayeth cauſeth in friendes but one
hart and one minde: and this friend, whoſe
friendſhip is grounded vpon honeſtie, is he,
that wel reprehendeth, and is no flatterer,
nor will conſent to any wickedneſſe nor euill,
but giueth counſaile with out affection,
iuſtly and vprightly, perſwading alwayes
to vertue and godlineſſe of life,
and all the actions and doinges of ſuch
friends as are knit in this friendſhip, doe
ground them ſelues as the Prouerbe ſaith,
vpon goodneſſe and honeſtie of life.
                  
               
            
            
               86.
               And he that is thy friend, I wiſh
               and warne in any caſe,
               Thou keepe and vſe him as a friend,
               in euery time and place.
               I ſpeake not of the flatterer,
               who vnder colour ſweete:
               
                  
Of ſugred ſpeeche and pleaſant ſhewn
               with gift of gall doth greete.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  IN this Prouerb is mention made of the
diuiſion of friendſhip, before ſpecified,
and it ſheweth that the friendſhippe that is
vpon profit, which is the diſſembling and
flattering friendſhip, is not in very deede
the true friendſhip. For there is no perfect
friendſhip, but that which is grounded vpon
vertue and honeſtie, which friend aboue
all others we ought to eſteeme: and of ſuch
a friend ſpeaketh Ariſtotle, where he ſayeth,
What pleaſure hath any man in his
life, though hee haue all the felicities in
the worlde, if he want a friende? For, to
liue happyly and quietly, it behoueth a man
to haue one, to whome he may ſafely open
all his doings, and with whom he may bee
as bolde as with him ſelfe. We reade in the
Cronicle of the Philoſophers, that Ariſtotle
beeing demaunded what hee accounted
a friende to be: made anſwere, that it was
one minde in two bodyes. Of this aſſured

and perfecte friende doeth the Prouerbe
heere ſpeake.
               
            
            
               87.
               If thou conceale thy thoughts, and that
               thy minde in ſecret lyes:
               Thou ſhalt be ſure to be eſteemde
               and taken to be wiſe.
               Ofte haue I found my ſelfe by ſpeache
               in thrall and trouble brought:
               But neuer yet for keeping of
               my toung, I ſuffred ought.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  
                     CAto in his morrall Philoſophie ſaith,
That the firſt and principall vertue
that a man ſhould haue, is to haue a ſober
and a modeſt tongue, for much is he in fauour
with God, that is able to holde his
tongue, when time and cauſe requireth. Iſocrates
in his Oration ſayeth, that in two
thinges onely, ſpeache is to bee preferred
before ſilence: the one is, in ſpeaking
that, which is to a publike commoditie: the
other, in vttering that, which neceſſitie
forceth. In all other thinges hee ſayeth:

that ſilence is farre to bee preferred before
ſpeech: but ſpecially a man ought to keepe
his owne ſecrets. For as Seneca ſaith, If
thou art not able to keepe thyne owne
ſecrets, how canſt thou require an other
man to doe it? And therefore the Prouerb
ſaith, Thou ſhalt be counted diſcrete and
wiſe, if thou kepeſt thy ſecrets to thy ſelf,
and that a man bringeth him ſelfe in
ſubiection by ſpeech, but ſhall neuer bee
harmed by ſilence.
                  
               
            
            
               88.
               But yet I would not haue thee heere,
               to be ſo ſtraightly tyed:
               That from thy deere & ſpeciall friend
               thou ſhouldſt thy doings hide.
               For why? it were to great offence,
               t'abuſe his friendſhip ſo:
               And euen the redyeſt way it were,
               to make thy friend thy foe.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  
                     SEneca in his third epiſtle ſetteth downe,
the way and meane how to get freends,
and being gotten, how to kepe them, ſaying

to Lucilius, Way with thy ſelfe a long time
the worthyneſſe of the partie whom thou
doeſt chooſe for thy friend, and when thou
haſt founde him to be meete for thy friendſhip,
commit all thy doings and all thy deuiſes
vnto him, and be as bolde of him as of
thy ſelfe. With thy friende ſaith Seneca,
imparte all thy cares and all thy thoughts,
and in ſo doeing thou ſhalt haue him faithfull
vnto thee: but if thou groweſt once into
ielouſie, and hideſt any thing from him,
thou giueſt him cauſe to be vnfaithfull, for
diuers in fearing to bee deceiued, haue
taught others to deceiue, and therefore the
Marques ſaieth, The readieſt way it were
to make thy friend thy foe.
                  
               
            
            
               89.
               See thou thy life be alwaies ſuch,
               in deede and eke in ſhowe:
               As thou regardeſt not a whit,
               though all the worlde did knowe.
               Vnto thine honour and thy name,
               haue alwaies ſpeciall eye:
               To ſhunne the thing thou oughteſt to ſhunne
               and all offence to flye.
               
                  
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  
                     SEneca in the aforeſaid Epiſtle ſayeth,
That he which dare not truſt his friend
as much as him ſelfe, hee is greatly deceiued,
as one that knoweth not perfectly the
force of freindſhip, howbeit hee ſayeth beſide,
Liue thou in ſuch ſorte, that thou committeſt
nothing, neither in deede nor
thought, that thou ſhouldeſt be aſhamed to
ſhewe thy friende: meaning, that a man
mighte to haue no filthy nor diſhoneſte
thoughts in his minde, but ſuch as can miniſter
no cauſe of offence to any man, not
though it were to his very enemie.
               
            
         
         
            The twelfth Chapter
of Duetie to Parents.
            
               90.
               Great reuerence to the parents
               euermore we ought to giue:
               And with obedience honor them,
               as long as they doe liue.
               The Lord him ſelfe hath promiſed
aſſuredly that hee
               
               That doth the ſame, with long & happy
life, ſhall bleſſed bee.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  SEtting aſide the lawes both of God
and man, we ſee that euen by very nature
men are moued to honour, loue, &
feare their parentes, and that we ſhun
to offend them, for the benefite of nature that
by them we haue receiued, as we are taught
by the Ciuil law. Beſides, our Sauiour Ieſus
Chriſte intreating of the Commaundements,
hath not promiſed long life for the
fulfilling of any of them, ſaue onely for this,
where he ſaith, Honor thy father and thy
mother, that thou maiſt liue long & many
daies vpon the earth: As it is alſo written
in Eccleſiaſticus, He that honoreth his
father, ſhall receiue ioy and comforte
of his owne children, and ſhal liue a long
and an happy life. And againe, The bleſſing
of the father maketh ſtedfaſt the
ſtate of the children, but the curſe of the
mother bringeth them to diſtruction,
Whervpon ſaith the Prouerbe, The Lorde
him ſelfe hath promiſed, &c.
                  
               
            
            
               
               91.
               By motherly perſwaſions
               Veturia did aſſwage
               (And with her preſence pacifie)
               the Roman in his rage.
               On th' other ſide the beaſtly luſt
               of that ſame monſter vile,
               With inceſt and with murder did,
               his hatefull hart defile.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  
                     VEturia was an honourable Matrone
of Rome, and mother to Coriolanus,
a man of great wiſedome and valure, to
whom for his great deſeruings, the common
wealth of Rome was not a little beholding,
howbeit as it is no newe thing amongſt
men, to haue their good deedes requited
with vnthankfulneſſe, he was moſte
vnkindely & vniuſtly baniſhed by his owne
Countrey men: the cauſe why, I finde not
apparant, for malice neuer mindeth reaſon,
neither doth euill will at any time regarde
Iuſtice. But to returne to the matter of Coriolanus,
beeing thus baniſhed, goeth
ſtraightwayes to the Volſcians, who at

that time were in armes againſt the Romanes:
and as vertue in all places getteth
eſtimation, ſo was he receiued and interteined
with great honour amongſt them,
and for his valour, within a very ſmall time
choſen to be their general. Wherby it came
to paſſe (as Valerius writeth) that euē him,
whoſe profit and good turnes his Citizens
could not away with, nowe were they, the
caſe beeing altered, driuen to dreade as
their mortall enemy, and beſieger of their
towne: And beeing thus by the ſiege ſore diſtreſſed
(which is alwayes more grieuous
to great and populous Cities, then to ſmall
townes) they were conſtrayned to ſend vnto
Coriolanus, moſte humbly requiring him
to leaue his ſiege, and to departe from the
Citie, and whereas their Embaſſadors, beeing
the chiefe and principall men of the
Citie and of the Capitoll, with colde entertainment,
were neither heard nor anſwered,
they continued their ſute, and with humble
ſubmiſſion ſent out their prieſtes and clergie,
beeing araied in their deuouteſt veſtures:
but as the other were returned, ſo
were theſe ſent back, with very harde ſpeeches
and euel entertainment, whervpon the

whole Citie bewayling their miſerable
caſe, and crying out for the cruel aunſwere,
that (iuſtly deſerued) they had receued. Venturia
the mother of this Coriolanus ſtaudeth
vp, and taking with her Volumnia hee
ſonnes wife, with her and her Children ſhe
goeth directly to the Campe of the Volſcians,
whom when Coriolanus a farre of
perceiueth, hauing in his company a galant
company of Gentlemen, he commeth
foorth to meete her, though not a little diſquieted,
becauſe his minde gaue him that
their comming was onely to mooue him for
the rayſing of his ſiege, and as ſoone as he
came neere vnto them, alighting from
his horſe, hee came towardes his mother
to embrace her. But ſhee, putting
him a little backe from her with her
hand, with a heauie countenaunce ſaide
vnto him theſe woordes, Before thou
commeſt neare mee, and before I receiue
thine embracinges, let mee vnderſtande
whether I bee come vnto my
ſonne, or to my enemie? or whether I
ſhall enter into thy tent as a mother, or
as a ſorrowfull captiue? Alas, to what
extremitie is my wretched Age come, to

ſee thee firſte banniſhed and expulſed thy
Cittie, and nowe a cruell enemie and
ſpoyler of thy Countrie that nouriſhed
thee? howe couldeſt thou come into theſe
partes with ſo deadely and reuengefull
a minde? howe couldeſt thou enter into
theſe territories, and not let fall thy furious
diſpleaſure and threatnings? Howe
happened it, that at the ſight of Rome
thou ſaydeſt not vnto thy ſelfe, Loe heare
within theſe walles is encloſed my natiue
ſoyle; my patrimonie, my mother,
my wife, and my children? Vnhappie
woman that I am, who am well aſſured,
that if I had neuer borne thee, Rome
had neuer by thee been beſieged: And
if I had neuer beene deliuered of a ſonne,
I had happily dyed both free and at home
in mine owne countrie. I ſpeake not
theſe woordes, becauſe I am not able to
ſuffer anie thing that ſhall be more reprochfull
to thee, nor for the griefe of
myne owne captiuitie, whoſe miſerie can
not be long by reaſon of my age, but
onely for theſe, that be heere preſent, thy
miſerable wife & poore diſtreſſed infants.

When Ventruria had thus ended her ſorowfull
complaint, Coriolanus imbracing
her wt teares in his eyes, ſaid theſe wordes:
Mine owne ſweete Mother, my rage and
fury is conquered & appeaſed, and is turned
at your requeſt from this mine vnnatural &
vnthankful countrie: wherwith he preſently
diſcamped, & brake vp his ſiege. Wherevpon
Valerius in the ſame Chapter ſayeth,
That the hart, that was full of wrath & reuenge,
for the iniurie that he had ſuſtained,
and was now in aſſured hope of preſent victory,
vpon the onely ſight of his mother, and
vpon his vertuous compaſſion, chaunged
his intent of bloody warres, into a ſweete
and healthfull peace. Long were it to
write, how greatly vertuous children haue
alwayes beene gouerned by duetie and reuerence
to their parents. Touching Nero
of whom mention is made in this prouerb,
where hee ſayeth, The beaſtly luſt of that
ſame monſter vile &c. Howe lothſome
and horrible the lecheryes of this ſhamefull
tyrant was, and what, and howe greate
his diſobedience was to his owne natural
mother, is to bee ſeene in the ſtory of his
life, where who ſo liſte may reade it. And

therefore I meane to ſtand no longer vpon
this prouerb, but to conclud, affirming that
reuerence ought of bounden deutie to bee
giuen to the Parents, for which the Lorde
hath promiſed in the fourth of his Commaundements,
a long and bleſſed life vpon
the earth. I could heere bring in, if I were
diſpoſed, a great number of teſtimonies, as
wel from the Philoſophers, as from the
holy Patriarches and Prophets. But becauſe
the olde ſaying is, The tedious tale
offends the eare, and briefeſt words wee
gladieſt heare. And therefore let this that
I haue ſaide, ſuffiſe the Reader, which I
take to be inough for the vnderſtanding of
the Prouerbe.
               
            
            
               92.
               And heere we may not ouerſlip
               the wicked Abſolon,
               But call to minde his froward hart,
               and fond preſumption.
               For neuer haue we ſeene nor ſhall,
               that he that is vnkinde,
               Doth any grace with GOD aboue,
               or any fauour finde.
               
                  
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  
                     ABſalon was the ſonne of Dauid, a
man of paſſing beautie and ſingular
proportion, who found the meanes by certaine
of his ſeruants to murder his brother
Amon for the deflouring of Thamar his
ſiſter, & turning her diſhoneſtly out of his
houſe. For which murder Dauid was
greatly offended, howbeit vppon fatherly
compaſſion, and at the humble ſute and requeſt
of Ioab, who was a ſpeciall friende to
Abſalon, he pardoned him. But Abſalon,
whether it were becauſe he found not
the like countenaunce at his fathers hande
as he was woonte to doe, or that hee was
ſet on by ſome wicked ſeruauntes and leude
Councellers, or whether it was the motion
of his owne euill diſpoſed minde, he preſently
withdrue himſelfe (as if he wont with
his fathers fauour) from Hieruſalem, and
came to Hebron, and with the ſounde of
the Trumpet, calling togither the people
of Iſrael, without any regarde of his duetie
to his father, he made him ſelfe King,
with preſumption to depoſe him, and to ſet
vy him ſelfe, & to that intent he allured vnto

him a great number of the tribes of Iſrael,
and entred into open armes againſt his
father. But God, who could neuer away
with the diſobedience of the childe to his
father, turned all his deuiſes, force, and power
to his owne confuſion, for at the ioyning
of the battailes, the fight being fierce,
there was ſlaine to the number of twentie
thouſand, and Abſalon him ſelfe galloping
vp and downe, and paſſing thorowe a thick
wood, was hanged by the heare of the head
vpon the bough of an Oke, his Moyle running
from vnder him, and beeing found ſo
hanging, was ſlaine by Ioab and certaine
of his ſeruants: wherby the good father obtained
the victory of his diſobedient ſonne,
where it plainely appeared, that God him
ſelfe, abhorring his rebellious fact, fought
againſt him, as is more largely declared in
the ſeconde Booke of the Kinges, which
I haue heere but briefely touched, to ſhewe
that the diſobedience to the father, is greatly
diſpleaſing of God.
               
            
         
         
            
            The thirtienth Chapter,
of Age.
            
               93.
               Let not olde age thee diſcontent,
               ſince that it is the race,
               And moſte approued perfect path,
               of goodneſſe and of grace.
               O milde and honourable Age,
               that doeſt abate the fire
               Of vicious youth, and doeſt reſtraine,
               eche lewde and fond deſire!
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  THE bleſſed Apoſtle telleth vs, that
as long as wee liue in this worlde,
we are Pilgrimes and ſtraungers
to the Lorde, meaning that our true
and naturall countrie is that, of which Dauid
ſpeaketh ſaying, I truſt to ſee the glory
of the almightie in the land of the liuing.
The land of ye liuing is the glory of
Paradiſe, where who ſoeuer remaineth doe
liue without any dread or daunger of death.

And as the Apoſtle ſayeth, all the while
that we are abſent from that place, wee are
aptly here called ſtraungers and pilgrims,
meaning, that as the pilgrim wandreth
here and there forth of his Countrey. So
we are alwayes abſent and out of our countrey,
as long as wee liue in this tranſitorie
life. And becauſe that by the meanes of age
we draw neare to our owne countrey, when
we drawe neare to death: by which death,
as Plato ſaieth in his Phedro, the ſoule atteineth
vnto libertie, and breaking out from
the Gaole of the bodie, being deliuered frō
ſorrow and miſerie, commeth to her owne
quietneſſe, ioy and ſolace. And therefore we
ought not to be diſpleaſed at our olde age,
ſince that it is the race of goodneſſe, that is
to ſay, the plaine path & way, by which wee
paſſe from ſorrow and trouble to quietneſſe,
and to reſt. And this is onely to be vnderſtood
of the modeſt and well gouerned age,
for that is ſhee that abateth the luſtes and
outrages of youth. For there is an age, as
Ariſtotle ſayeth in the firſt of his Ethikes,
that being deſtitute of all vertue and good
behauiour, is altogether doting and childiſh:
For there is no difference, as Ariſtotle
                     
ſayth, betwixt him that is yong of yeeres,
and him that is young in behauiour, ſo that
the age which ſhall not be diſpleaſant, muſt
be modeſt and furniſhed with good behauiour
and vertuous exerciſes, and that is the
age, that doeth abate the fire of vicious
youth, and doeth reſtraine eche lewde
and fonde deſire. This age (as Tullie in
his booke de Senectute writeth) doeth alay
both luſt, pride, & preſumption, and doeth
ſo enfeeble the force of the fleſh, as it bringeth
a man to bee lowly, milde, and modeſt.
Of this kinde of age alſo ſpeaketh the
Pſalme, where it ſayth, When the time of
meeknes & mildnes ſhal come, then ſhal we
be reformed, which time of mildnes is from
the age of threeſcore, to threeſcore and ten,
which ſeaſon ſuffreth not a man to be prowd
or diſdainful, but lowly, milde, and diſpoſed
to vertue. And therfore the Prouerbe ſaith,
It doeth abate the fire of vicious youth,
&c.
                  
               
            
            
               94.
               This to the vertuous man alone,
               doth giue authoritie,
               And makes him perfite in the pointes
               of grace and honeſtie.
               
                  
For who is he that in his youth
               can keepe the perfite way?
               Or meaſure in his life obſerueth?
               or runneth not aſtray?
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  IT is commanded in the lawe of God, that
whenſoeuer we ſee an old ancient man, we
ſhould riſe and reuerence him. And we finde
in the Ciuil law, that in the Citie of Rome
in the olde time, they vſed to worſhip and
reuerence their aged perſons, and the people
of thoſe dayes did yeelde the ſame honour
to ſuche as were olde, as they did
to their Iudges and Magiſtrates: and this
onely they did in reſpecte of the honour
that their olde yeeres doeth giue them, for
no young man, though his wit be neuer ſo
pregnant or quicke, is able to attaine to
that vnderſtanding, that the olde man
by his experience hath gotten. For as Ariſtotle
in the firſt and ſixteenth of his Ethikes
witneſſeth, the number of yeeres is
it that giueth knowledge & experience. And
therefore he ſayeth, that the yong man can

neuer giue anie perfect iudgement of anie
thing, becauſe he neuer hath had anie great
experience. And although that in naturall
Philoſophie, and in the liberal artes & learnings,
there needeth nought elſe but a ſharp
and quicke conceite and vnderſtanding: yet
in morall Philoſophie, which is the knowledge,
by which we learne to liue vprightly
and honeſtly, it is not onely enough to haue
a good wit & capacitie to, but alſo to haue
the experience and knowledge of time: and
ſuch thinges as are done by men of ripe
yeares, we alwayes preſume that they bee
done vppon great aduiſe and deliberation,
which is nothing ſo with yong men. And
therefore vppon great conſideration, our
Sauiour being perfect God and man, although
in the verie inſtant that he was conceiued,
he was perfect in all knowledge &
vnderſtanding, & did not grow with ſpace of
time to more ripe knowledge & ſkill, would
neither preach nor publiſhe his doctrine in
his yong yeares, but at ſuch time as he was
come to his perfect age, neither doeth the
Church receiue for trueth and certaintie anie
other things, then thoſe, which we read
to bee done at his full age. Wherevpon

all ſuch Bookes as are written of ſuche
thinges as hee did in his childehoode, and
youngeſt yeares, the Church doeth take
for Apocripha, and counteth them not in
the Canon of holy Scriptures. And it is
good reaſon that the thinges that are done
in vnripe yeares ſhould be of no authoritie,
ſince our Sauiour Chriſt himſelfe woulde
neither preach, nor publiſh his doctrine, till
ſuch time as hee was of ripe and perfect
age.
               
            
            
               95.
               This made the Catoes ſo renoumed
               for wiſdome great and graue:
               this made the valiant Scipioes,
               ſo great a name to haue.
               This onely gouernes in the field,
               and giues the victorie,
               And this in peace doth coūtries keepe
               from all hoſtilitie.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  THere is no man, as hath bene ſaide before,
that attaineth to anie perfection
in his doinges and deuiſes, but onelie

by long experience of manie yeeres. And
therefore ſaieth Ariſtotle in the ſixth of his
Ethikes, that young men ought alwayes to
haue about them olde and auncient men,
whoſe counſaile they may vſe, and whom
they ought in al things to beleeue, and therfore
age is of great account and eſtimation,
for it maketh, as the Prouerbe here ſayeth,
men to be wiſe, meete to iudge, and diſcrete
in gouernment. And therefore Trogus Pō
                        peius
in his eleuenth Booke writeth, that
Alexander whenſoeuer hee happened vpon
anie deſperate aduenture, or ſawe himſelfe
in great daunger in the field, woulde neuer
haue about him anie yong blooddes or hewſters,
but olde men that were of experience,
ſuch as had ſerued his Father, and his
Grandfather in their warres, to the end hee
might haue in his companie, not onelie
Souldiours, but directers: he ſayeth beſide
that, when his old Souldiours had required
of him leaue to goe home to reſt,
and refreſh their olde and weeried bodies,
and that they woulde ſende in their places
their ſonnes that were yong and luſtie, and
better able to doe him ſeruice: He anſwered
them, that he made a great deale more account

of the wiſe and ſkilfull grauitie and
authoritie of ſuch auncient men, then he did
of the vnexpert actiuitie and ſtrength of
thoſe couragious and luſtie gallants. For
age is onely it that maketh a man wiſe,
and woorthie of reuerence. Neither ought
anie man to miſlike it, ſince it is the thing
that euerie man deſireth. And as Tullie in
his De Senectute ſayth, As the fruite is not
in ſeaſon, nor to be eaten, till it bee perfectly
ripe, no more is man to bee accompted
in his wiſedome and perfection, till ſuch
time as hee bee olde, for then is hee onely
come to his ripeneſſe, though as the
fruite is, hee bee neareſt his corruption:
For then, as the Prouerbe ſayeth, he gouerneth.
&c.
                  
               
            
         
         
            The fourtienth Chapter,
of Death.
            
               Suppoſe thou not at any time
               that death is farre from thee,
               But alwayes thinke that he is nie,
               and ſtreight at hande will bee.
               
                  
great madneſſe were it for a man,
               to thinke this fooliſh life
               Should euermore continue with
               ſuch miſerie and ſtrife.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  
                     SEneca, as hath bene ſaid before, ſayth
in his ſecond Tragedie, that no man
could euer yet haue the Goddes ſo fauourable,
that they might be able to aſſure
themſelues, to liue till the next day. For
although we bee moſt aſſured, that we ſhall
die, yet is neither the houre nor the time of
our death certaine, but rather, if we conſider
the great daungers and caſualties that
our wretched life is ſubiect vnto, wee ought
euerie houre, yea euery moment to looke
for it, according to the warning of our Sauiour,
who willeth vs to watch and pray,
for we knowe not the day, nor the houre of
our viſitation. And therefore as the Prouerbe
ſayeth, it is a great follie, to thinke
that Death is not alwayes at hande, & that
he ſhall not, as he came into the world, goe
out of it. For as the Apoſtle ſayeth, there is
a lawe ouer all fleſh, that they ſhal once die.

                     Valerius telleth vs in his fifth booke, that
when there was woorde brought to Anaxagoras,
that his ſonne was dead: Hee anſwered
the meſſenger, that it was neither
newes, nor a ſtrange thing, that hee tolde
him, but that it was ſuch as he alwayes loked
for. For hee knewe that there was nothing
could come from him, that ſhould liue
for euer, and that it was a generall matter,
that whatſoeuer receiued the ſpirite of life,
muſt agayne reſtore it, and that as no man
died, but that firſt he liued, ſo no man liued,
but at laſt he died: And therefore well ſaieth
here the Prouerbe, Greate madneſſe were
it for a man to thinke this fooliſh life. &c.
                  
               
            
            
               98.
               If it ſo were the bleſſed ioyes,
               that we doe hope to ſee,
               Should all in vayne and to no end,
               of vs deſired be.
               Ne ſhoulde the glorie great of that
               almighty Lorde on hye,
               Our Sauiour Chriſt be looked for,
               that laſts continually.
               
                  
                     
AFter that our firſt Father had tranſgreſſed
the commaundement of God,
our life became ſtraight to bee ſubiecte to
death, and fulfilled with all kindes of calamitie,
and miſerie. For as the Apoſtle ſayeth,
Through the offēce of our firſt father
Adam, wee are all borne the children of
wrath. And neuer ſhall we be without trouble,
griefe, and miſerie, during our mortall
life, untill ſuche time, that our ſoule bee
free and deliuered from the dungeon of the
bodie: And this maketh the Apoſtle to ſaie:
I deſire to be looſed and to be with Ieſus
Chriſt. For the Apoſtle, being vexed with
many ſorowes, griefes, and miſeries, deſired
to be diſſolued, to the ende he might reſt
from all his trauayles, and Saint Iohn in
his reuelation, ſaieth, Bleſſed are all thoſe,
that die in the Lorde, for they ſhall reſt
from their laboures. So as by a good and
happie death, wee are ſure to be made partakers
of the euerlaſting glorie of our Lorde
and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt.
                  
               
            
            
               99
               Then tel me, wherfore ſhould we feare
               this death, why ſhould it grieue?
               
                  
Since that it is ſo good a lot,
               if that we doe beleeue,
               That after our departure here
               we goe to perfect reſt,
               Attending for the glorious day,
               wherein we ſhall be bleſt.
               
                  The Paraphraſe.
                  DEath as Ariſtotle in the thirde of his
Ethicks ſayth, is the laſt of al horrible &
dreadfull things: which being, as Tully in
his Tuſculans ſayeth, a thing that naturally
happeneth, we ought not to thinke that it
can be euill, ſince nature hath appoynted it.
And Seneca in his Epiſtle to Lucilius ſayeth,
that life is geuen vnto vs, with condition,
to looke for death. The path is playne
and aſſured that leadeth vnto it, and to dye
well, is to die willingly. And therfore death
is neuer to bee feared of thoſe that bee good
and vertuous: But of the wicked the Pſalm
ſayeth, The death of the vngodly is hurtfull
and euill, but the death of the godlie
is life, becauſe they paſſe from tranſitory
death, to euerlaſting life. According to the
ſaying of our Sauiour vnto the theefe, This

day ſhalte thou bee with mee in Paradiſe:
which happened into him, becauſe hee beleued,
according to the Prouerbe here, That
after his departure here, he went to perfect
reſt, attending for the glorious day
Wherein he ſhoulde be bleſt.
                  
               
            
            
               100
               And heare to make an end, I ſay,
               the onely remedie
               In all extreames, is for to keepe,
               the perfect meane with thee:
               Which if thou takeſt for thy friend,
               a long and happie life
               Thou ſhalt be ſure to leade, and liue
               without offence or ſtrife.
               
                  
                     ARiſtotle in the ſeconde of his Ethickes
ſayeth, that in all ſciences, the woorke
is brought to perfection, by hauing reſpect
vnto the meane, neither adding nor taking
from it more then is reaſon: meaning that
the ouerplus and the defect, doe marre the
whole matter, and that the meane doeth only
ſaue and preſerue it, which ſuche as are
ſkilfull maiſters doe chiefly conſider. For
ſeeing that vertue is the moſt certeine and

beſt of all other artes, and that hir woorke
and actions differ not from the actions of
nature, it were greatly againſt reaſon, that
ſhe ſhould not (as wel as al other arts) ſerch
and finde out the meane: and further hee
ſayth, that the vertue morall conſiſteth as
well in paſſion as in action, and that in all
thinges that be, there is an extremitie of too
much, and an extremitie of too little, and
a meane betwixt both: As for example, in
feare, in boldeneſſe, in coueting, in crueltie,
in pittie, and of all thinges that concerne
either pleaſure or ſorrowe, the meane,
as Ariſtotle ſayth, is to be commended, and
the extreames doe alwaies bring ſhame and
diſhonour. And like as it happeneth, that to
the perfection of any thing, there are a great
number of thinges required, as likewiſe to
make an imperfection, ſuffiſeth that anie
one of thoſe thinges be wanting: euen ſo
for a man to atteine vnto the very meane of
vertue, there are a great number of thinges
required, but to the not attaining therevnto,
ſuffiſeth the want of anie ſuche thing as is
needefull. And hereof Ariſtotle putteth a verie
familiar example of ſuch as be Archers,
that to hitte the white, is a matter of greate

cunning and hardneſſe, and none is able to
ſay that hee can doe it but hee that is a perfect
Archer: but to miſſe it, is a very eaſie
matter, and euerie man that will, can doe
it. So likewiſe is it of the vertuous meane,
for euerie man that liſt, may auoyde it. And
therefore is the number a greate deale more
of the wicked, then of thoſe that bee good,
neither doth it followe, as Ariſtotle ſaieth,
that of euerie thing the meane is alwayes
beſt. For ſome things there are, that aſſoone
as they bee named, they are mingled and
wrapped in miſchiefe. As for example, for
a man to reioyce in an other mans harme,
not to be aſhamed of anie euill that he hath
committed, to beare a repining ſpite at an other
mans good happe, to commit adultery,
to murder, to ſteale: of theſe things, and ſuch
like, there is no meane that may bee called
vertuous. For howſoeuer a man doe them,
they carrie with them miſchiefe and offēce,
but in all other thinges that may bee well
done & euil done, there are both extreames,
and a meane. And of ſuche meaneth the
Prouerbe, where it ſayth, The onely remedie,
in all extreames is, for to keepe the
perfect meane with thee, which if thou takeſt

for thy friende, (that is: if ſo be a man
in the order of his life ioyne himſelfe with
vertue, which is the meane:) A long & happy
life, thou ſhalt be ſure to leade, and liue
without offence and ſtrife. In what ſorte
we ought to ſeeke out this meane, and how
we ought to order our ſelues for the obteining
of it, Ariſtotle at large declareth
in the ſeconde of his Ethickes,
whyther for auoyding of tediouſneſſe,
I referre
the Reader.
               
               FINIS
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
                  ❧Imprinted at London
by Richarde Watkins.
1579.
            
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
            
         
      
   