
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  
                     ❧VICESIMO OCTAVO
Ianuarij, 1611. Nono Regni Regis IACOBI.
               
            
            Preſent, The Master, Wardens, and Aſsistants of the Company of Stationers.
            
               FOraſmuch as this Company out of their zeale to the aduancement of
Learning, and at the requeſt of the Right worſhipfull Sir THOMAS BODLEY Knight, Founder
of the preſent publique Librarie of the 
                  Ʋniuerſitie of Oxeford, being ready to manifeſt their
willing deſires to a worke of ſo great pietie, and benefit to the generall ſtate of the Realme, did
by their Indenture vnder their common Seale, dated the twelfth day of December, In the eighth
yeere of his Maiesties raigne of England, France and Ireland, and the foure and fourtieth yeere of his
Raigne of Scotland, For them, and their ſucceſſors, graunt and confirme vnto the Chauncellour,
Masters, and Schollers of the 
                  Ʋniuerſitie of Oxeford, and to their ſucceſſors for euer, That of all Bookes, after that,
from time to time to be Printed, in the ſaid Company of Stationers, being new Bookes and Copies neuer Printed
before, or though formerly Printed, yet newly augmented or enlarged, there ſhould be freely giuen one perfect
Booke of euery ſuch Booke (in quiers) of the firſt Impreſsion thereof, towards the furniſhing and increaſe of the
ſaid Library; NOW therefore to the intent the ſaid Grant may take due effect in the orderly performance and
execution thereof, And that ſo good and godly a worke and purpoſe may not be diſappointed or defeated by any
meanes, IT IS ordeined by this Company, That all and euery Printer and Printers, that from time to time hereafter,
ſhal either for him, or themſelues, or for any other, Print or cauſe to be Printed any new Booke or Copie neuer
Printed before, or although formerly Printed, yet newly augmented or enlarged, ſhall within Tenne dayes
next after the finiſhing of the firſt Impreſsion thereof, and the putting of the ſame to Sale, bring and deliuer to
the yonger Warden of the ſaid Company of Stationers for the time being, one perfect Booke thereof, to be deliuered
ouer by the ſame Warden to the recited vſe, to the handes of ſuch perſon or perſons, as ſhall be appointed by
the ſaid Chancellour, Masters and Schollers for the time being, to receiue the ſame.
            AND it is alſo ordeined, That euery Printer, that at any time or times hereafter ſhall make default in performance
hereof, ſhall for euery ſuch default forfeit and pay to the vſe of this Company, treble the value of euery
Booke, that he ſhall leaue vndeliuered, contrary to this Ordinance; Out of the which forfeiture, vpon the leuying
and payment thereof, There ſhalbe prouided for the vſe of the ſaid Library, that Booke, for the not deliuery
whereof, the ſaid forfeiture ſhalbe had and payed.
            AND to the intent all Printers and others of this Company whom it ſhall concerne, may take notice of this Ordinance,
And that any of them ſhall not pretend ignorance thereof, IT IS ordeined, that once in euery yeere
at ſome generall Aſſembly and meeting of the ſaid Company vpon ſome of their vſuall Quarter dayes, or ſome other
time in the yeere at their diſcretion, this preſent Ordinance ſhalbe publiquely read in their Hall, as other their Ordinances
are accuſtomed to be read there.
            
               
                  
                     Iohn Norton, Maſter.
                     
                        
                           Wardens.
                           Richard Field
                           Humfrey Lownes
                        
                     
                     Iohn Hariſon.
                     Robert Barker.
                     Thomas Man.
                     Thom. Dawſon.
                     Edward White.
                     Humfrey Hooper.
                     Simon Waterſon.
                     William Leake.
                     Iohn Standiſh.
                     Thomas Adams.
                     Iohn Hariſon.
                     Ri. Collins, Clerke of the Company.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               HAuing lately beene intreated, as well by the ſaid Sir THOMAS BODLEY Knight, as by the
Maſter, Wardens, and Aſsiſtants of the foreſaid Company of Stationers, to take ſome ſpeciall
notice of this their publike Act and Graunt, and (in regard of our being of his Maieſties
high Commiſsion in Eccleſiasticall cauſes) to teſtifie vnder our hands with what allowance
and good liking, we haue thought it meete to be receiued: wee doe not onely as of merit
commend it to poſteritie, for a ſingular token of the feruent zeale of that Company to
the furtherance of good Learning, and for an exemplarie Gift and Graunt to the Scholers and Students of
the Vniuerſitie of Oxeford: But withall, we doe promiſe by ſubſcribing vnto it, That if at any time hereafter
occaſion ſhall require, that we ſhould helpe to maintaine the due and perpetuall execution of the ſame, wee
will be readie to performe it, as farre as either of our ſelues through our preſent authoritie, or by any whatſoeuer
our further endeauors, it may be fitly procured.
            
               
                  
                     G: Cant.
                     Io: London.
                     R: Cou. & Lich.
                     Jo: Roffens.
                     John Benet.
                     John Boys.
                     George Montaigne.
                     Thomas Ridley.
                     Char: Fotherby.
                     Robert Abbott.
                     Tho: Edwards.
                     Henry Hickman.
                     G: Newman.
                     Martin Fotherby.
                     Iohn Dix.
                     John Spenſer.
                     John Layfield.
                     William Ferrand.
                     Richard Moket.
                  
               
            
         
      
   