
      
         
            
            
            THE
FRENCH
KINGS DECLARATION
AGAINST
the Dukes of VENDOSME
and MAYENNE,
The Marſhall of Bouillon, the
Marques of Coeuure, the Preſdent
le Iay, and all who aſſist
them.
            
            Verified in the COVRT of PARLEMENT
the 13. of February,
1617.
            Stilo Nouo.
            LONDON
Printed for WILLIAM BARRET,
1617.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE
FRENCH KINGS
DECLARATION AGAINST
the Dukes of Vendoſme, Mayenne,
and the Marſhall of
Bouillon.
            Verified in the Court of Parlement the
13. of FEBRVARY 1617.
Sti. Nouo.
            
               LEWIS, by the
grace of God
King of France
and Nauarre,
To all Men
preſent and to
come, Greeting.
            The bounty,
and clemency We haue vſed, and
the fauours and benefits We haue beſtowed

on ſome Princes, Dukes, and
Peeres of this Realme, as likewiſe on
other of our Subiects, made vs hope
with good reaſon, that they would
cōtaine themſelues within the bounds
of that reſpect and obedience, which
they owe vnto Vs by the bond of Nature,
euen they to whom We had not
only pardoned the crimes which they
had committed, but alſo augmented
Our bounty by new fauours.
            But this notwithſtanding, it is come
to paſſe, that poſtpoſing all theſe conſiderations,
and forgetting their promiſes
made at the laſt Treaties of Loudun,
and Soiſſons, whither they retyred
at the very time, when We gaue order
that the perſon of Our Couſin the
Prince of Conde ſhould be ſeized on
by Arreſt, they haue in ſuch ſort declared
themſelues againſt Vs and Our
State, by new Leagues and Combinations,
both within and without the
Realme, that We may truely ſay, they
haue no other deſſeigne then to procure

the total ruine thereof, if We prevent
it not by a ſpeedy courſe: & their
inducement hereunto proceeds from
impunity, and from thoſe profits they
haue receiued therby heretofore, and
the hope they haue to draw frō thence
in ſtead of puniſhment the ſame aduantages,
for the future.
            Now, whereas the Dukes, 
                  Ʋendoſme,
and Mayenne, and the Marſhall
of Bouillon, with whom the Marqueſſe
of Coeuure hath ioyned himſelfe, are
they, who contrary to all the proteſtations
of loyalty, which they had made,
and cauſed to be made vnto Vs, ſince
the ſaid Treaties of Loudun and Soiſſons,
neuer to depart from Our obedience,
and from that naturall duty, wherein
they are oblieged vnto Vs: neuertheleſſe,
to Our exceeding griefe, notwithſtanding
the exhortations which
We haue cauſed to be vſed vnto them
by many, rather to make further triall
of the effects of Our clemencie, then
of the force, and rigour of Our Armes,

are anew reioyned, confederated, and
combined, or rather haue continued
in the ſame League, Faction, and Aſſociation,
which to the preiudice of
Our ſeruice, they had together with
the Duke of Neuers, whom for like
faultes Wee haue declared guiltie of
Treaſon; and in committing al kinds
of Actions, which are contrary to the
duetie of Subiects and Officers of the
Crowne, moſt neerly obliged to their
King: The ſaid Duke of Mayenne, in his
particular, hauing not only barred the
Lieutenant Generall, and other Officers
of Soiſſons, who were turned out
by his commandement, during the
laſt troubles, from reentring into the
Towne, and cauſed our Letters of Declaration
againſt the Duke of Neuers,
to be forcibly and violently taken out
of our ſaid Officers hands, in thoſe other
Townes, where he hath authoritie;
with prohibition, that they ſhould
not publiſh them, as they were commanded
by Vs: but which is more, to

cloake his euill carriage, vented publikely
a rumor of a practice againſt his
life, whereof, when he had written vnto
Vs, We, to be fully informed of the
truth, cauſed our Court of Parlement
to decree, that the Offender ſhould
haue his trial at Soiſſons, and afterwards
be brought to Our ſaid Court, to receiue
ſuch puniſhment as the enormity
of the crime required: the execution
whereof, the ſame Duke hath hindered,
ſeeing that the offender did not
perſiſt in his accuſation, but contrariwiſe,
acknowledge before all the Officers,
that hee had bin induced thereto
by ſome of his part: ſo that the ſaid
Duke, to keep men frō further knowledge
therof, was enforced to cauſe the
Archers, whom the Court had ſent
thither for the bringing of the Offender,
to be kept by ſome of his People,
that by reaſon they had not ſeene the
Officers of the Preſidial Court there,
at their returne, they might not be able
to enforme the ſaid Court of Parlement,

how the whole buſineſſe had
paſſed. Moreouer, the ſame Duke, and
all the reſt ioyntly, to the preiudice of
Our Inhibitions, ſo ſtrictly & ſolemnly
publiſhed, haue made leuies of ſouldiers,
and quartered them in thoſe
Townes, and places, the guard whereof
wee haue committed to their truſt;
haue likewiſe, and doe daily compell
a great number of Our poore ſubiects
to worke and toyle in the fortifications
they make there; detaine and ſeize
on Our moneyes within the Coffers
of Our receits, and, labour all they can
to debauſh and alienate from Vs, and
conſequently, from their duety, the
Captaines and Gouernours of Our
Townes and Caſtles, being ayded and
aſſiſted in theſe violences and contempts,
by the aduice and counſell of
le lay, Preſident in Our Court of Parlement.
Which courſes, if we ſhould
endure with patience, and diſſemble
Our notice thereof, vntill they be ioyned
together in Armes, and take the

Field, it would not but tend to the
ruine & ſpoile of Our Subiects: wherupon
they conſtraine Vs, contrary to
the benignity and mildeneſſe of Our
nature, to take order that they be proceeded
againſt, by due and lawfull
wayes, to the end, that through a iuſt
chaſtiſement, We may ſtay the continuance,
and progreſſe of ſuch crimes;
for which otherwiſe We ſhould ſtand
anſwerable to GOD, who hath put
Iuſtice and Power in the hands of
Soueraigne Princes, that they ſhould
oppoſe themſelues againſt ſuch violences,
and preuent the ruine of the
People, ouer whom GOD hath eſtabliſhed
them: for theſe cauſes we giue
to vnderſtand, that after deliberation
taken hereupon by Our order, in this
Our Councel, where the Queene, Our
moſt honored Lady and Mother was
preſent, with ſome Princes of our
bloud, other Princes, Dukes, Peeres,
Officers of Our Crowne, and principall

Lords of the ſame Counſell; by
the aduice thereof, We haue pronounced
and declared, pronounce and declare
by theſe preſents, ſigned with
Our hand; The ſaid Duke of 
                  Ʋendoſme,
and Mayenne, the Marſhall of Bouillon,
Marqueſſe of Coeuure, and Preſident
le Iay, and all other who do, or will aſſiſt
them in their diſobedience, and
who are, or will be their adherent to
them in their deſſignes, haue forfaited
all their Honors, Dignities, States, Offices,
Power, Gouernments, Charges,
Penſions, Priuiledges, and Prerogatiues,
which they haue receiued either
from Vs, or from the Kings Our Predeceſſors;
and that we haue, and doe
reuoke the ſame, from this preſent, declaring
the ſaid Dukes, Marſhall, Marqueſſe
and Preſident, and all their adherents,
to bee diſobedient, Rebels,
Perturbers of the publike Tranquillitie,
and guiltie of Treaſon, and in that
qualitie, Our wil is they be proceeded

againſt, as wel in their perſons, as their
goods, memory and poſterity: as likewiſe
all thoſe who ſhal aſſiſt or fauour
them directly, or indireclty. We giue
charge & commandement to all Gouernours
and Lieutenants Generall
of our Prouinces, Captaines, Chiefes,
and Leaders of our Forces, to ſet vpon
them; and to all Our Officers,
Mayors, Conſuls, and Sheriffes of Our
Townes, to ſeize on their Perſons, if
they be there, that they may put them
into Our hands, and purſue them by
all the courſes and ſeuerities of Our
Conſtitutions, made concerning like
crimes; but with this exceptiō, if within
fifteene dayes after the publication
of theſe preſent Letters in Our Court
of Parliament, the ſaid Dukes of 
                  Ʋendoſme,
and Mayenne, Marſhall of Bouillon,
Marqueſſe of Coeuure, and Preſident
le Iay, do not acknowledge their
fault, nor acquit themſelues effectually
and perſonally, before Vs in that which

is their dutie towards Vs; and if they
doe not cauſe thoſe ſtrangers to voide
our Realme, whom they haue drawne
into it; and doe not diſmiſſe all the
Forces they haue leuied, and diſſolue
the Garriſons which haue beene placed
by them or their adherents, without
any order or commiſſion from
Vs: And for ſo much as concerneth
the Gentrie and other of Our Subiects,
the exception ſerues likewiſe, if
within the ſaid time they doe not preſent
themſelues at the Tribunalls of
Our Bayliwicks, and Seneſhall-ſhips,
within the iuriſdiction whereof they
hold their reſidence, to make due declaration
and proteſtation to be regiſtred
within the Secretaries Offices
thereof; and doe wholly deſiſt from
all actions and enterprizes, preiudicial
to Our authority and ſeruice, and to
Our Conſtitution, Declarations, and
Inhibitions.
            Now, in caſe the ſaid Dukes, Marſhall,

Marques, and Preſident, and all
other who ſhall haue aſſiſted them,
doe conforme themſelues, they ſhall
remaine exempt and diſcharged from
all penalties, contayned in this Declaration,
and ſhall be receiued into Our
fauour: We will and command Our
truſty and welbeloued Counſellors,
ſuch as hold Our Courts of Parlement,
Our Bayliſs, Seneſhalls, or
their Lieutenants, and all other Our
Iuſtices and Officers, to whom it ſhall
appertayne, each in his particular, that
they regiſter or cauſe to be regiſtred,
kept and obſerued theſe Our Letters,
according to their forme and tenor:
And doe in like ſort will and command
Our Atturneys Generall of the
ſaid Courts, to make all purſuits, and
vſe al diligence for the execution hereof,
and for the puniſhment, and chaſtiſing
of all thoſe who ſhall infringe the
ſame. For ſuch is Our pleaſure. In
teſtimony whereof We haue cauſed

Our Seale to be put to theſe preſents.
Giuen at Paris in the Moneth of February,
the yeare of our LORD 1617.
and of Our Raigne the ſeuenth.
            
               Signed Lewis, and ſomewhat lower,
By the King.
de L'omenie.
            
         
         
            
            A
REMONSTRANCE
OF THE PRINCES,
TO THE FRENCH
KING.
            Dated the Fourth of
FEBRVARY.
            
               SIR,
            
            
               YOur moſt Humble
and moſt Faithfull
Subiects and Seruants,
the Dukes,
Peeres, ancient Officers
of your Crown,
and principal Lords
of your Kingdome; ſeeing the dangers
which inviron you, and the euills
which threaten your State with an inevitable

ſubuerſion, if ſpeedy order
be not taken, and that they are denied
all acceſſe vnto your Perſon, wherewith
they might freely, and ſecurely,
diſcouer the cauſes, and propound the
remedies thereof; doe in all humilitie
beſeech your Maieſtie to take in good
part, this their moſt humble Remonſtrance,
which cannot but well befit
their mouthes, ſithence it doth teſtifie
nothing but fidelitie and affection vnto
your ſeruice, to the conſeruation of
your Sacred Perſon, and the good of
your States. And it is by ſo much the
more conuenient, becauſe they are
thereunto obliged, both by Diuine
and Humane Lawes, by the Oath
which they haue taken, and the dutie
which they owe vnto your Crowne.
We are not ignorant, that the euill is
diſguiſed by thoſe who doe it, and
who labour by all poſſible meanes to
couer it, as well as commit it, ſtill indeuouring
to make thoſe diſtaſtfull

vnto your Maieſtie, who complaine
thereof. And the vnhappineſſe of
France is ſuch, that they hauing all the
power of your Eſtate in their hands,
they cauſe you to hold your faithfulleſt
ſeruants for Enemies. But the violence
of their Tyrannicall carriage is
growne to that exceſſe, that it cannot
longer be indured; The complaints of
it are generall; euery one ſeeth it, and
feeles the miſerable effects; And their
Artifices can no longer hinder the
cryes, and publique griefe from ſtriking
your Maieſties eares, and from
mouing your compaſſion to releeue
your People; and your iuſtice againſt
the Authours of ſo great miſeries;
which euery one knoweth, and openly
deteſteth; And by a common vow
of your faithfull Subiects are deſtined
to iuſt puniſhment, according to their
demerits.
            The inſatiable ambition, and auarice,
of the Marqueſſe of Anchre, and

his Wife is the only cauſe of the euils
we are ſenſible of; of the diſorders we
ſee, and of that wee feare moſt.
            This is the vlcer which hath feſtered,
yea, ſpoyled the whole body of
your State. It is of him only that men
doe complaine, and of the Miniſters
and Executors of his violent and raging
paſſions, and no other.
            This is the complaint of the greateſt
part of your Subiects, who as yet
haue true French hearts: who ſeeing
themſelues compaſſed about with
feare and apprehenſions, and expoſed
to all manner of dangers, by the inteſtine
conſpiracies which ayme at the
ruine of your State, doe implore your
Iuſtice, to protect them from the oppreſſion
and ſeruitude, vnto which
thoſe perſons would make them ſubiect;
and for to free your Crowne
from the many diſaſters, which now
increaſe to the ouerthrow of the ſame.
            The remedy (SIR) is in your own

hands, and in your power, which if
you doe not make vſe of, the diſeaſe
will ſhortly grow incurable: And
therefore to ſhunne it, the cauſe muſt
be taken away, which being knowne
vnto you, there needeth now no other
thing then your word only; to giue
order that the Marqueſſe of Anchre,
with his Wife and Adherents, be chaſed
from your Sacred Perſon, and
from the Queene your Mother: And
to giue way vnto Iuſtice, that it may
duly puniſh them for thoſe crymes
whereof they are culpable touching
your State.
            Euery man well knoweth what
deceit hee hath vſed, ſince the death
of the laſt King of moſt happy memory,
to draw vnto himſelfe th' entire
and abſolute Adminiſtration of your
Kingdome; to make himſelfe Maſter
of your Councels, of your Treaſure,
of your Armes, and of your Fortreſſes,
to diſpoſe of your publique Offices,

and Charges, your Fauours, and
Pardons; becauſe hee would bee the
ſole Iudge of Honours, and Dignities,
and diſpoſe of the life and death of
your Subiects. The courſes hee hath
taken to baniſh the Princes of the
Bloud from the Court, and to breed
diſcord betweene them, are not vnknowne;
and likewiſe of the reſt of
the Princes, Officers of your Crowne,
and principall Lords of the Kingdome:
The practizes and corruptions
which he hath vsed to weaken and
depresse the authoritie of your Parliaments,
and violently to choke the
lawfull freedom of their Remonſtrances,
impriſon your chiefe Officers, and
make a diuision through all the orders
of your Kingdome; that hee might
haue the whole diſpoſing of them,
and raigne alone within the State, as
he doth now with an inſupportable
preſumption and inſolency, ſuppoſing
that nothing can reſiſt his ambitious

Deſſignes, ſeeing that, through extreme
wrong and iniuſtice, hee hath
impriſoned the firſt Prince of your
Bloud; and by this audacious Action
violated the publike faith of the Treatie
of Loudun;' vpon the obſeruation
of which did depend the repoſe and
tranquillity of your State, which he
had rather plunge into the calamities
of a Warre, then to haue the maske
of your Royall Authority taken from
him; whereof hee makes his benefit,
and vſeth it as an Inſtrument, for the
deſtruction of your moſt faithful Subiects.
            Theſe things are ſo manifeſt, & his
proiects & guile ſo plainly discouer'd,
that no doubt can bee made hereof.
And the ſtrange proceedings, and violence,
which he vſeth euery day vnder
your Maieſties name, againſt the
Duke of Neuers, vpon ſo notorious
pretexts, and forged imputations, that
euen the voice of the people ſerueth

for proofe enough to refute them; do
witnes ſufficiently, that the conſpiracy
is generall, againſt all the Princes and
Nobles of your Kingdome, who will
not ſtoupe to his tyranny, and can reſiſt
his plots, which he continually
puts in execution, thereby to ſubuert
the State.
            For what offence is the ſame Dukes,
ſauing only, that he is a Prince of the
moſt renowned Houſes of your Kingdomes,
one that loues his Countrey,
ſeekes the peace of it, and who hath alwaies
teſtified his zeale vnto your ſeruice,
and acknowledgeth no other
Authority lawfull then your Maieſty?
            Hee complaineth of ſome iniurie
done him by one of his Tenants; and
that in contempt of the dignity of his
Office, he cannot freely exerciſe his
charge in his Gouernment.
            He hath proſecuted an execution
of ſome feodal rights within his owne
poſſeſſions, by the ordinary means of

Iuſtice, as vnwilling to loſe that which
his Predeceſſors left him: Perceiuing
ſome ſecret enterpiſes, ready to bee
executed vpon his Houſes, he prouided,
as indeed he ought, for the ſecuring,
defence and keeping of them vnder
your Authority, and for your ſeruice.
            Theſe lawfull and neceſſary cauſes
are wreſted to his rebuke; nay, are imputed
to him as a haynous crime and
Rebellion.
            We haue ſeen the Declaration that
hath bin publiſhed againſt him, vnder
your Maieſties name, and the reaſonable
conditions vnto which hee doth
ſubmit himſelfe for his triall, and make
his innocencie appeare, which being
knowne vnto vs, we moſt humbly beſeech
your Maieſty to be pleaſed to
protect the ſame, and not to ſuffer it to
be oppreſſed & violēced by the Marqueſſe
of Anchre, whoſe outrages and
offences we can no longer diſſemble,

becauſe our long patience hath not
hitherto ſerued for ought elſe, then for
to render it more audacious, and inſolent;
that we be no more vpbraided,
that our affection is ſo ſmall vnto your
Maieſty, that we are ſo ingratefull to
out Country, ſo diſloyal and vnprofitable
vnto our ſelues and to our Poſterity,
as to be ſilent, when we behold
the prodigious fauour of this Stranger,
trampling thus inſolently on the
throate of your State, holding priſoner
in his hands the firſt Prince of
your Bloud, treading vnder foot both
Lawes and Magiſtrates, emptying
your Coffers by his profuſions, conſuming
your people with exceſſiue
charges, and cauſing your Subiects to
be trecherouſly murthered, without any
puniſhment at all. And for recompence
of ſuch trechery and diſloyalty,
conferring vpon them the Gouernments
of your places; depoſing and
diſcharging the chief Officers of your

Councels and Parlements, bereauing
them of thoſe Titles & Honors, which
their Age, their Vertue, and their Deſerts
haue purchaſed them; for to eſtabliſh
in their places his creatures, who
are perſons altogether vnworthy, and
vnexperienced for the manageing of
your State, being men borne in bondage,
and therefore enemies to all honeſt
men, and moſt proper to execute
his paſſions, what detrement ſoeuer
may enſue thereby to your ſeruice,
holding nothing vnlawful which may
aduance his paſſionate deſſignes.
            This is that which hath induced vs,
thus humbly to beſeech your Maieſty
to conſider the miſerable eſtate wherinto
your Kingdome is now brought,
and to apply, by your Wiſdome and
Authority, the neceſſary remedy,
which dependeth vpon your own wil,
and not to ſuffer either your name, or
your Armes to be employed to the
effuſion of your Subiects bloud, and

oppreſſion of your Domeſticall ſeruants,
for the maintaining of Strangers
to their preiudice, but to baniſh them
for euer from you: and by the chaſtiſement
and due puniſhment of
the guiltie, reeſtabliſh confidence
and ſecurity in your Kingdom, repaire
the publike Faith, which hath
bin broken, and ſet the Prince of Condé
at liberty. And to the end that order
may be taken by conuenient meanes,
againſt the diſorders of your State; to
cauſe the Treaty of Loudun to be obſerued;
call againe vnto you, and into
your Councels, the Princes of your
Bloud, with the reſt of the Princes,
Dukes, Peeres, and the ancient Officers
of your Crowne, and Counſellers
of State, whom the deceaſed King
vſed during his Raigne, who alſo by
naturall affection, and as being particularly
intereſſed, as ſtrictly oblieged
to the conſeruation of your State. And
then we ſhall haue the happineſſe to

render you in all ſecurity, euery man
according to his Ranke, Dignity, and
Place, that moſt humble ſeruice, and
faithfull obedience which wee owe
you, and which whileſt we liue we wil
yeeld you, as being
            
               
                  
                     Soiſſons, the fourth
of February 1617.
               
New Style.
Your moſt humble, moſt loyall, and
moſt obedient Subiects
and Seruants,
Signed,

                  
                     
                        Caeſar de Vendoſme.
                     
                        Henry de Lorraine, Duke of Mayenne.
                     
                        Henry de la Tour, Duke of Bouillon.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
            A
RELATION
OF THE VICTORIES
OBTAINED BY
the Prince of PIEMONT, from
the 27. of Ianuary, to the laſt of
the ſame Moneth.
            
               ON the 27. of Ianuary at
night, the Prince of Piemont
departed from Maſſerano,
with eight thouſand
Foot, and foure hundred Horſe,
hauing left the reſt there, being as
many as made vp together, the
number of a thouſand Horſe, with
a thouſand Foote: and hee went
with a purpoſe to attempt Creuacore;
where being arriued before day, hee

cauſed thoſe ſtations and paſſages
of the Mountaines to be taken, which
border on the Valley of Seſia, ſpecially
thoſe of Guardabuzon and Guardella,
which are the moſt commodious for
the Spaniards ſending of fuccours; and
this was performed without the receiuing
of any loſſe, or hurt, from thoſe
of thé Towne and Caſtle. So ſoone
as it was day, our Men tooke a little
Hill fortified, which commaundeth
the Towne within Musket-ſhot, enforcing
thoſe that held it, to flie and
retire into the Towne. The whole
day was ſpent in skirmiſhing, and they
within, being ſummoned by a Trumpet,
that we might ſee whether they
would yeeld, returned Musket-ſhot
for anſwere, belike, to giue vs to vnderſtand
thereby, that they ſtood in
little feare. In the euening before Sunſet
the Canon arriued, accompanied
by the 
                  Ʋaldoſtans; two Regiments of
French, and foure Companies of Carabins:
a thing almoſt incredible, that it

was brought in ſo ſhort a time, in regard
of the incommodious, hilly, and
difficult waies thorow which it paſſed.
All night long great diligence was vſed
in planting a Battery, ſo that on the
29. day in the morning it was ready,
within halfe a Musket-ſhotte of the
Towne, and we began to batter a little
Towre that flanked two cortines,
which within few houres was beaten
to the ground, and beſides, a breach
made in the wall. Whereupon our
Men aduanced couragiouſly to the
aſſault; whoſe reſolution being ſeene
by thoſe within, did ſo affright them,
that they retired, flying to the Caſtle;
though they could not be ſo quick of
foot, but that about threeſcore were
killed in the throng, as they ruſhed
out of the gate, and as many taken priſoners.
            The Prince not willing to loſe time,
the rather becauſe he knew, that there
were arriued in the Valley of Seſia two
thouſand Foote, and three hundred

Horſe, ſent to the reſcue of this place;
diſpatched immediatly certaine Companies
of Cuiraſsiers and Carabins, to
ſeize on a place, by which they who
were retired (as is touched before)
might haue fled, and gone to their ſuccours,
cauſed the Canon to play on
them that withdrew themſelues to the
Caſtle, and whereas ſome part of them
made a ſtand on a little Hill, in the
mid-way from the Caſtle, which did
much annoy our Men, they were beaten
thence, it being not yet noone,
when all this ſeruice was performed.
From the ſame place of the batterie,
we began, without loſing any time, to
beate the Caſtle, wherwith they within
being terrified, ſeeing themſelues
brought to ſuch a ſtreight, made a
ſigne that they would parlee, and render
the place; and to that purpoſe, the
Sergeant Maior 
                  Ʋertua, who commanded
there, ſent his Ayndante to
treate, whoſe demand was to depart
with life and Armes: whereto hee was

anſwered, that his Highneſſe was content
to grant it, the ſaid Ayndante hauing
firſt declared, that he was authoriſed
to make a compoſition, and that
they treated in their owne names, and
not in the name of the Princeſſe of
Maſſerano; to whom alſo his Highnes
was willing to ſhew fauour, commanding
ſhee ſhould haue no diſpleaſure
done her, but bee permitted to goe
whither ſhee would. With this reſolution
the Ayndante returned, and in
the meane while his Highneſſe gaue
order for the appointing of thoſe ſouldiers,
who ſhould haue the guard of
the Caſtle; but the Sergeant Maior,
who hauing bin made acquainted by
the Ayndante, with that which he had
concluded, ſhewed himſelfe not contented
therewith, but that hee would
depart with match in cocke lighted,
though the Ayndante replied, that hee
had fully capitulated in the aforeſaid
manner, fell to ſhooting anew. Euery
one maruailed at this ſtrange courſe,

the newes of the Compoſition being
now ſpred through the Campe; and
his Highneſſe commanded the batterie
ſhould bee continued, which was
done throughly till dark night; during
which, our Men wonne ground by little
and little, and made themſelues
Maſters of certaine Houſes and Barricadoes,
which they within held in the
Mountaines. His Highneſſe on the
other ſide, made foure Peeces of Canon
to be drawne in all diligence to
the toppe of a Hill that was neere,
which by breake of day were readie
planted, to gall and offend the enemie
more; hauing obſerued, that from the
place where they were before, they
could not worke that effect which was
neceſſarie for the giuing of an aſſault.
At which inſtant, they within did againe
demand Parle; and although
his Highneſſe, in regard of the Sergeant
Maiors bad dealing the day before,
had iuſt cauſe to ſtoppe his eeares,
and ſeeke to vſe him, as he deſerued,

as hee was likewiſe perſwaded and
counſelled by euery one, neuertheleſſe,
to ſhew that hee makes good
warre, & to preuent any diſaſtrous accident
which might fal vpon the Princeſſe,
who was within, thought not
good to reiect the demand, whereupon
they treated a new, and agreed as
followeth.
         
         
            
            ARTICLES FOR
THE RENDRY OF THE
CASTLE OF CREVACORE, ACcorded
by FRA. GALEAZZO PIETRA,
Knight, Commander of the Forces which
iſſued out of the Towne, and retired vnder
the Caſtle, aſſiſted by Lewis Albertazzo
Ayndante, to Francis Bernardin
Vertua, Sergeant Maior;
aſwell in the name of
the Princeſſe of Maſſerano,
as of themſelues and
their Troupes.
            
               FIrſt, the ſaid Knight & Ayrdante,
with all their men,
yeeld themſelues to the
Prince, vpon this only condition,
that they ſhall haue their liues
and Armes, without match, powder,
or bullet, leauing all other things that
they haue, aſwel within, as without the
Caſtle, to their Highneſſes.
            Beſides, in the name of the Princeſſe,

they render to his Highneſſe the Caſtle
of Creuacore, to diſpoſe therof, with
all that is within the ſame, as he ſhall
thinke good.
            And their Highneſſes by D. Antonio
Bobba, principall Eſquire and Gentleman
of the Chamber, promiſe to
giue the ſaid Knight, Ayndante and
their men, free & ſafe paſſage for their
retreate. Thus agreed in Creuacore, the
30. of Ianuary, 1617. Signed, D. Antonio
Bobba, Era. Galeazzo Pietra, Ludouico
Albertazzo, Franceſca Ferrera Fieſca,
Franceſco Bernardino Ʋertua.
            
            In this action muſt not be ouerpaſſed
in ſilence, the praiſe due to the
French, eſpecially to the Chiefes, who
haue ſhewed great valour and courage.
            Of our men, I do not beleeue there
are ten ſlaine, but ſome few were hurt,
and amongſt others, Monſieur de Limogion,
Lieutenant of the Prince Thomas
his Troupe, hurt in that foote
which was ſound, hauing loſt the other

in Asti: and the Sergeant Maior
of Monſieur d'Eguebon, who is of the
Marſhall des Deſguieres his Troupes.
            As the Enemy was ready to depart
out of the Caſtle, becauſe ſome difficultie
was made about their carrying
of powder in their Flaskes, contrary to
the agreement, ſome of them threw
downe their powder, others their
Flaskes, and one of them hauing by
chance let fall a burning match, the
powder that lay on the ground was
thereby fired, and that likewiſe gaue
fire to the powder in the Flaskes, and
to certain barrels, from whence it paſſed
to the Muskets and Harquebuſes,
which ſome of them carried charged;
whereupon followed very lamentable
diſaſters; for many loſt their liues, many
were burnt, of which fortune ſome
of our men taſted, being amongſt
them, and many for feare caſt themſelues
downe from the wall.
            While the reſt marched away, accompanied
with foure Companies of

Horſe, which his Highneſſe had giuen
them for their conuoy, according to
the agreement, that they might not be
moleſted by our Men; there came
one of our Light-horſe, with a Horſeman
of the Enemies, who was hurt,
and had beene taken priſoner by him.
The newes he brought, were, that a
a good number of the Enemies Muſkettiers,
with ſome three hundred
Horſe, comming from the Valley of
Seſia, by the way of Guardella, to ſuccour
Creuacore, and the Horſe being
paſt the water, our Horſe, who were
there in guard, charging them reſolutely,
did breake and put them to
flight, ſlew twenty, tooke priſoners the
like number, and hurt many; and it is
not vnlikely ſome Chiefe hath laid his
bones there, becauſe there were taken
two Cornets, one of a Spaniſh Captain
called Auila, another of the Marqueſſe
of Santa Lucida.
            
            The Princes hereupon marched
inſtantly that way, with a greater force

of Horſe, and Foote, to giue a greater
blow, if the occaſion had ſerued, but
they found the Enemie alreadie retired.
The next day the Prince going
to take view of the lodgings and quarters
of his Men, and being come to
thoſe of Guardella, and Guardabuzone,
the one being quarter of the Baron of
Diguoyne, and the other of the Marqueſſe
of 
                  Ʋrſe, when he ſaw the Enemies
Trenches within a good Musket
ſhot, determined to trie with fiftie
Muskettiers, what countenance hee
would make: who aſſaulting him with
great reſolution and valour, wonne
the firſt ſtations, wherupon the Prince
ſent a renfort of an hundreth more to
paſſe further, who comming thither,
fought ſo ſucceſſefully, that they became
Maſters of all the Enemies other
quarters & trenches, where Don
Sancho de Luna was ſlaine, who was
Gouernour of the Caſtle of Milan,
and Generall in that part; with many
other Captaines, and fiftie Souldiers:

there was taken Priſoner the Colonel
or Camp-maſter, Carlo di Sanguine, & a
Nephew of his: now there remaining
no more to doe, the troupes had order
to retire to their firſt ſtations. But in
their retreate, they of Seſia, who were
come forth at the noiſe, followed
them in groſſe as far as the firſt trenches
which they had wonne, neuertheleſſe
wee loſt onely one Captaine,
and ſix Souldiers in the fight we had
with them.
            There was found the Caſſocke of
D. Sancho de Luna, & his Sword, which
was ſent by the Prince to the Duke his
Father; and amongſt diuers Letters
written to the ſaid D. Sancho, aſwell
from the King of Spaine, as from Don
Pedro de Toledo, were theſe two which
follow, worthy to be knowne to euery
man; that men may ſee the charitie of
Don Pedro towards thoſe who are allied
in bloud, or recommended to the
Crowne of Spaine.
            
         
         
            
            DON PEDRO DE TOLEDO
TO D. SANCHO
DE LVNA.
            NO great account is to bee made of the
Prince of Maſſerano's newes: neither
is your Lordſhip the man that
needs to attend my order touching that
which may occurre, and bee iudged conuenient.
For I referre my ſelfe wholly to that
which you ſhall thinke good, and am content
that the Pontons be made. When the
troupes of the Territorie of Alexandria
ſhalbe come, who are to be here to morrow,
we will ſend them forward with the Germans.
I am told this morning, that the
Duke of Sauoy goes toward 
                  Ʋilla-noua:
but I am not aſſured of it. I will giue your
Lordſhip aduertiſement of all things. Alonſo
Perez Roſales put a Conuoy into
Saint German. At Quinto hee lighted
on a Conuoy of the Enemy: each of them
fled his owne way, ſeeking to carry away his
Conuoy in ſafetie. The Companies that are
to goe to Satinara will march along, I ſuppoſe,

tomorrow, or the day after, as the
Count Tauerná writes me. Don Alonſo
drawes our men from the lodgings that
are neere, and ſayth, that if the Duke of
Sauoy paſſe Seſia, he will ſeeke to giue
him a blow; and the Dukes ſpeeches tend
to ſuch a conſtruction. Neuertheleſſe, I am
deſirous to lodge our men, and refreſh them
againſt the good ſeaſon, becauſe France
is in Armes; God continue it ſo, by meanes
whereof, wee ſhall compaſſe our buſineſſe
here, both happily and ſpeedily by GODS
helpe, through which I wiſh you may cut
off ſome of the Enemies forces, and worke
vs a diuerſion. Then let vs ſee how GOD
will farther aſsiſt vs in our intentions, to
whoſe protection, I commit your Lordſhip;
from Nouara, the eight day of Ianuary
1617.
            Monies are leauying for you, and your
Nephew is vpon the point of his diſpatch.
            
               Don Pedro of Toledo
and Oſorio.
               
            
         
         
            
            DON PEDRO DE
TOLEDO TO DON
SANCHO DE LVNA.
            I Wrote to your Lordſhip by the
Prince of Maſſerano, but it may be
this Souldier wil be with you ſooner,
& this Letter haue ſafer conueyance;
whereof being confident, I tell
you, that I cannot be at quiet, vntill I
know that the Troupes are come to
you, and that you haue reſcued Creuacore:
for if it be loſt after ſo many daies,
in which the loſſe might haue beene
preuented: it is good to conſider how
our Enemies (for yours and mine are
all one) will gird at vs. I hold it more
conuenient to hazard ſomewhat, and
to fight, then to make good the Valley
of Seſia. For if the men which are in
Creuacore were two hundred, as at the
firſt, it were not a matter ſo conſiderable,
as now it is: but if ſo many men
ſhould miſcarrie, it were enough to
loſe all reputation in Italy.
            
            
               
This ſtrange man, the Prince of
Maſſerano hath embroiled vs herein.
For if hee had put our men in time
within Maſſerano, and laſtly, in Creuacore,
neither had the firſt action ſucceeded,
nor ſhould we be now in this perplexitie:
but ſith wee are in it, we muſt
commit the iſſue to GOD and our
hands. The Count Tauerna tels mee,
there is ſo much bread, that the one
halfe would ſerue. I ſend you tvvo
thouſand crovvnes more, for ſpeedie
exigences, which cannot be managed
vvithout money. I hope GOD vvill
cleare vs happily, to vvhoſe protection
I commit your Lordſhip. From Nouara,
the 29. of Ianuary 1617.
            
               Don Pedro of Toledo
and Oſorio.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   