
      
         
            
            
            THE KINGS DECLARATIONS VPON HIS Edicts for Combats, Importing the confirmation and enlarging of the ſame. Publiſhed in a Parliament holden in Paris, the 18. day of March. 1613. Herevnto is alſo adioyned the ſaid Kings Edict, Importing an order for apparell, therein prohibiting all his Subiects from vſing vpon the ſame, any Gold or ſiluer, either fine or counterfeit; all Embroderie, and all Lace of Millan, or of Millan faſhion: either to make any guilt workes in their houſes, vnder the penalties therein contained. PVBLISHED IN A PARLIAMENT holden in Paris the 2. of Aprill. 1613. Hereunto is alſo annexed, A Letter from the Lord Roſny, Treaſurer of France, to the Queene Regent.
            
               Faithfully tranſlated into Engliſh by E. A.
            LONDON Printed by Tho: Creed for William Wright, and are to be ſold at his ſhop on Snowe-hill, at the ſigne of the Harrow neere Holborne Conduit. 1613.
         
         
            
            
            TO ALL WORTHIE AND GOOD LAW-MAmakers, Rulers, Iudges, Obſeruers, Pleaders, and keepers in generall, paſt, preſent, and to come, greeting; vnder fauour, hereby not to offend any, but euer to respect and honour all of them, as moſt especiall Instruments in any Commonwealth vnder God.
            
            HErein may Fully, Effectually, and plainly appeare, the iuſt and true intent of LEWES, the (Now French King,) in the behalfe, and for the generall good of his Common-wealth, and all his loyall and true harted Subiects therein: Whereby he earneſtly, with a full and well intended Reſolution, doth deſire, aime at, and intend, the happie & moſt flouriſhing Eſtate of that moſt Chriſtion Kingdome, and well-gouerned people: To the great comfort of them in generall, and aſſured hope of his moſt happie Raigne ouer them. To his timely (Infant beginning, Honour;) by intending of their Eternall benefites: For which cauſe, let vs looke home with a ſpeciall eye, vnto the well & due intended Reformation and Execution of theſe Lawes and Edicts, lately made in Paris, by their hopefull King, That hath (as you may hereafter ſee) not onely renued diuers olde Lawes and Edicts concerning Combats, and other lawes, with ſpeciall remedie for offenders therein: But alſo hath inlarged and declared the ſame in Parliament, the 18. day of March laſt. Wherein hee hath alſo ſet downe and publiſhed for generall good, the very Law of Lawes, or abſolute cauſe and directeſt meanes of true continuance, and due performance and keeping of theſe, or other lawes fit for any worthy Prince in any Common-wealth, made for
generall 
good, to be performed and kept according to their true intents, which is performed in this King, Queene Regent, &c. Aſſembled in Parliament, fully, freely, firmely, and effectually ſet downe and made knowne within all that kingdome, to all perſons, that they ſhall be duly iuſtly, abſolutely and effectually performed and kept, by all perſons whatſoeuer within their iuriſdictions, without exceptation of any perſon, For byrth, kindred, affiance, or any other cauſe whatſoeuer, wherein he alſo taketh away all hopes of graunts, fauours, pardons, remiſſions, or any meanes whatſoeuer. To be diſcharges to any of the Tranſgreſſors of the ſaid Lawes; So that thoſe wilfull perſons that will preſume notwithſtanding thoſe good lawes, with ſo due and effectuall declaration thereof, are well worthie (in my opinion) by the lawes of God and man, for their great preſumption therein, to vndergoe and endure the penalties in thoſe, or any other good Lawes contained. Theſe are true, iuſt, and direct meanes, to ſhew that God gaue not vnto men lawes in vaine, but that if they would preſume to breake or offend againſt thoſe good lawes by him or his Deputies in any Common-wealth made and ordained, That then thoſe perſons ſo offending, ſhould ſuffer or forfeit, according to the true intent and meaning of thoſe good lawes, what, when, or whereſoeuer, that without any manner of hope of fauour (to imbolden them therein) they might make and be examples to other to beware to ſinne, or offend any iuſt lawes contrarie to their true intents, for which they weare and are made and ought to be duly and truly performed and kept, for the vpholding of peace, plentie and vertuous actions in generall: And the auoyding and beating downe of ſinne and vice in generall, according to the diuine founding, and true intent of good lawes in generall, which God grant may hereafter be well eſtabliſhed, redreſſed, renewed, declared, performed and kept, within theſe lands: To the honour and glorie of God, The honourable and perpetuall memorie of our King, The euerlaſting memorie of all the

good inſtruments therein. The beating downe ſinne, the rewarding of vertue, the ſpeedie doing of true iuſtice betweene partie, and partie, the moſt good of this great and flouriſhing Cōmon-wealth, And happy comfort of all his Maieſties true hearted ſubiects therein in generall. Blame me not in being long herein, for in ſome lawfull, and ſome law leſſe proceedings, which ſome too many, too well knoweth, in many cauſes, is to great length: All which, I will leaue nowe to touch: And ſo proceede to the other Lawes and Edicts lately made in Paris, herein mentioned againſt the generall wearing of gold and ſiluer lace, and diuers other ſortes of gilt workes, &c. With many other things which they haue found as harmefull weedes or inſtruments of pride, moſt idle and vnfitting to be ſuffered longer amongſt them, to hurt and abuſe their people and Common-wealth. And I truſt in Cod our worthie King and his honorable priuie Councell, with the Lords, Biſhops, and Iudges, and other good members of this Common-wealth; will (in due time) of themſelues, and by good example from other Princes, make, amend, renew, declare, and publiſh, (to a vertuous end) our good and holeſome lawes in this Common-wealth, whereby to baniſh and beate downe (as in their good diſcretions ſhall 
                  •
               eeme beſt) all, and all manner of vanities, vices, idle toyes and abuſes in generall, according to the true intent and meaning of our good lawes in generall, the rather for that 
                  •
               e ſeldome finde loue, Charitie, vertue, and honeſt dea
               
                  •
               ing, Now in that meaſure vnder many of thoſe ſuperfluous garniſhes of apparell, as formerly was ordinarily to be 
                  •
               ound vnder a Friſe Ierkin, or other abilliments ſutable. So that I wiſh there were vpon many (ſeeming) Gentlemen in theſe our daies leſſe vitious coſt, & in them more 
                  •
               auſe of truely vertuous, Honour, and Worſhip, which in word would become them better, and be a good meanes 
                  〈◊〉
                caſt off pride, whereby vertue might increaſe, (which 
                  •
               ride keepes lowe,) and to beate downe vice which it ex
               
                  •
               lts, to the generall good of all theſe kingdomes, ouer

which it hath pleaſed God by his mercie and grace many dangers paſt) to make his Deputie & Seruant, our King and gouernour, and we to be his faithful loyall Subiects duely to obey him, which I deſire m
                  •
                long continue, to Gods will and pleaſure, and the co
                  ••
                of all his faithfull ſubiects ſoules, ſo to liue here, as to chaſe with Gods mercie in their departing hence, eternall.
            Farewell.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE KINGS DECLARATIONS VPON HIS Edicts for Combats; As alſo an order for Apparell: Therein prohibiting all his Subiects from vſing vpon the ſame, any Golde or Siluer, either Fine, or counterfeit; All Embrodery, and all Lace of Millan, or of Millan Faſhion: Either to make any Guiltworkes in their houſes, vnder the penalties therin contained. Publiſhed in a Parliament holden at Paris the 2. of Aprill. 1613.
            The Kings declaration vpon his prohibition of Combats.
            
               
                  
                     LEWES, by the grace of God, King of France and Nauarre; To all to whom theſe preſents ſhall come, Greeting: With extreame ſorrow and griefe doe we daily ſee our Edicts and Drdinances, concerning Quarrells, Combats of méetings, and others, ſo ſlenderly obſerued and kept, contrary to the holy intents of our late King: our moſt honored Lord and Father, [who God pardon] and ours; That our Subiects doe beare themſelues in a maner, in as great licentiouſnes in matter of Quarrels, Combats, Chalenges, Enquiries, and méetings, as aforetime: which yet would procéed further

to the contempt and moſt grieuous preiudice of our authoritie, and grow to a meer and publique diſobedience, were it not ſpeedily and ſeriouſly preuented.
               In this regard, Wée are reſolued with the good aduiſe, and diſcréet Counſell of the Queene Regent, our moſt honored Lady and Mother, in ſuch ſort to prouide, that cutting vp this miſchiefe in the very roote▪ our Subiects may reape the fruit which we deſire, and our Conſcience reſt diſcharged. But as wée cannot bring it to paſſe with greater foreſight and better order then the ſame which our ſaid late Lord and Father, by his Edicts of the yeares 1602. and 1609. had enacted and ordained, and the ſame which ſince (after his imitation, and for the effecting of his will and reſolutions) we haue determined, as well by our Letters of Declaration, of the 4. of October, 1610. as of the firſt of July, 1611. Wee are now onely to prouide, by confirming of them, for a more ſeuere and aſſured puniſhment of the Repugnances, and diſobediences there againſt committed: Alſo to cut off all ſorts of Excuſes, Recommendations, Supports, and Fauours, which not without great grieſe of conſcience, we acknowledge to haue bene ſought out, to delude the iuſt chaſtiſements of thoſe, who vnto this day (falling into ſuch offences) haue not bene puniſhed as they ought.
               In theſe conſiderations, hauing cauſed very diligently and carefully to peruſe in our Counſel, The Queene Regent, our moſt honored Lady and Mother being preſent, with the aſſiſtance of the Princes of our blood, other Princes, and the Officers of our Crowne, with ſundrie others, the moſt notable of our Councell about vs, all the ſaid Edicts and Declarations, as well of our ſaid Lorde and father, of the moneth of Aprill, 1602. June, 1609. and our Declarations confirmatiue of the ſame, of the ſaid fourth of October, 1610. and of the firſt of July, 161
                     •
                  . Wée haue againe ſaide, Decréed, and Declared, and doe Say, Decrée, and declare by theſe preſents, Signed with our hand, that they all ſhall take place; That to that end it ſhalbe againe read

and publiſhed in our Courts of Parliament, and throughout all our iuriſdictions within the extent and reſort of the ſame, yea euen within our Court and traine: So as hereafter none of our Subiects of whatſoeuer ſtate, condition or recommendation ſoeuer they be, may hope by vs, as likewiſe we neither will nor meane that they ſhall by others, to be diſpenſed withall, or diſcharched from the entire and abſolute execution of our ſaid Edicts, and declarations: As to the end to take away the meanes, and to put them out of all hope, to obtaine at our hands any thing that may be contradictorie to the ſame. We for our entire diſcharge before God and man, and that the diſcharge of the ſaid Quéene Regent our mother, and for the common acquite of our conſciences: doe declare with a firme and irreuocable reſolution: That we will, and doe entend hereafter, to maintaine and preſerue the ſaid Edicts and declarations in their full force for euery man, without exception or acception of any perſon, merite, or other fauourable conſideration whatſoeuer, ſo to cauſe them to be kept, procéed and grow to their full effect according to their forme and Tenure, throughout the Extent of our Realmes, Countreyes, and Landes of our Obedience, without ſwaruing hereafter, or for our parts dooing any thing to contrary the ſame: neither to permit or ſuffer it to be diſobeyed, contradicted, or any thing to be attempted, directly or indirectly, vpon any cauſe or pretence, or by any perſon whoſoeuer. This with our reſolution and determination, we will, and ordain to be knowne to all the ſaid Princes of our Blood, other Princes, Officrs of our Crowne, of our courts of Parliament, and other our Officers, ſeruants, and ſubiects, and that wee neither will nor purpoſe hereafter, to giue or graunt, or cauſe to be diſpatched, deliuered, or recorded, any fauours, pardons, abolitions, remiſſions, or whatſoeuer diſcharges to any the tranſgreſſors, or diſobeyers of the ſaid Edicts and declarations, to the end that all men may be out of hope to obtaine them of vs: and that none preſume to be ſo holde as to require

vs thereof, in reſpect of any néerenes in Blood. Obligation, or other Recommendation and fauourable conſideration, that he may pretend to haue. Which we haue at this preſent forbidden them, and doe forbid them, that they ſhall neither pray, interpoſe, intreat, or become mediators and interceſſors for this, to our ſelues, or to our ſaide Ladie and Mother; vnder paine of incurring our indignation.
               Likewiſe moſt expreſſely forbidding them) to receiue or conceale in their houſes, or in any other place, any the trāſgreſſors, or to yéeld them any Retreat, ſupport, or aſſiſtance whatſoeuer▪ But rather to the contrary, we enioyne them (vpon the like penalties) to accuſe & bewray them, but eſpecially, to deliuer them into the hands of Juſtice, if by the officers they be ſo required. Alſo, to miniſter all aide, force, and aſſiſtance to that Effect, if they be in place where they may doe it. Alſo that we may the more aduance and make eaſie the effect of the ſaid Edicts, in the courſe and execution of that which our ſaid Lord and Father did parcicularly ordaine by that of the moneth of Iune, 1609. We ordaine, that ſuch as ſhall haue receiued any hurt, ſhall doe their endeuours, within one moneth after the ſaide hurt receiued, to frame their complaint, and to prouide themſelues for the reparation of the ſame, before our déere and welbeloued Couzins, the Conſtable and Marſhalles of France, or other the Judges to that purpoſe ordained, and eſtabliſhed by the ſaide Edict. Otherwiſe, the time of the moneth ouerpaſſed, the ſaide parties cannot be tryed by them, but ſhalbe bound to prouide themſelues, and to vndergoe the iuriſdiction for the ſaid offences.
               Alſo, in regard of that which may after enſue in conſequence of the ſame, before the Ordinary Judges, and by Appeals into our courts of Parliament. Alſo, in reſpect of the parties that may be pretended to haue done the Offence, If after due calling and ſummons, in vertue of the Oidinance of the ſaide Judges, eſtabliſhed by the ſaid Edict twiſe pronounced, they make default, they ſhall haue iudgement according to the extremity of the ſaid Edict.
               
                  And ſhall likewiſe be bound to prouide themſelues, and to vndergoe the iuriſdiction for the Offence and Quarrell, and for all that ſhall thereof depend, in our ſaide Ordinary Courts of Juſtice, and Courts of Parliament, in euery of them, accordingly as it ſhall appertaine: ſo as the ſaid Judges ordained by the ſaid Edict, ſhall take no further notice thereof, which as well in the one, as in the other caſes, wée haue euen at this time, for that cauſe forbidden and prohibited, and doe forbid and prohibite, in paine of Nullitie of all that may by them be committed or done to the contrarie.
               And the ſaide knowledge is attributed, and wée doe attribute it to our ſaid Ordinary Judges, and by Appeale, to our ſaide Courts of Parliament, except in ſuch caſes, as may fall out in the ſame Townes or Cities, where our Courts are eſtabliſhed: Of the which our meaning is, that they ſhall directly take notice. Moſt expreſſely enioyning them to proceede in one or other of the ſaid Courts, as is aforeſaide, by the courſe, and with the ſeueritie of our Ordinances, and therin to execute Juſtice, without the ſupport or acception of any perſon whatſoeuer. Alſo to our Atturnies general, and their ſubſtitutes, in the ſaid ordinary Juriſdictions to aſſiſt them, and by the ſaid ſubſtitutes, to certifie our Courts of their diligence, ſo ſpéedily as they may, according to the diſtances of the places, & generally from 2. moneths to 3. moneths, to aduertiſe them of all that ſhall paſſe in this reſpect throughout the extent of their charge: And this vpon the Declarations that ſhall be made by the Judges ordained by the ſaid Edict, of the yeare 1609. who ſhall be bound, as we doe alſo now expreſly enioyne them to the ſaid ſubſtitutes, in the iuriſdictiōs that ſhall lie neéreſt to the place of their ahead: the Abſtract copie of ſuch records as they are to make of their Judgements, importing how they haue Declared to the parties, that they are no longer their Judges. Wée will alſo, doe Decree, and Declare them to bee vnworthie, and incapable to be Admitted in their complaints, and to be tried before our ſaid Couzens,

Gouernours, or Lieutenants generall, for quarrells, iniuries, or offences, or other matter, cōcerning the ſaid Edicts: But all ſuch ſhall be preſented and tryed in our ſaid ordinay Seaz of Judgement, or courts of Parliament, in like forme as Offenders aforeſaid, who before they haue ſought remedies by the wayes aforeſaid, ſhall either by chalenges, or in open Act, maintaine their Quarrels & controuerſies. And moreouer ſhall, euen as the aforeſaid offenders, be depriued of their Pentions, if they haue any, and of all Offices, Charges, or Eſtates whatſoeuer: & beſides, to be condemned by our ſaid ordinary Judges, and courts of Parliament, to whome the knowledge thereof is (as is aforeſaid) attributed, according to the rigor of our ſaid Edicts & Ordinances, wherein they ſhal procéed with all poſſible diligence. And the rather to take from them all occaſiōs of default or delay, our intent is, that all the charges of Juſtice ſhall be leauyed of the goods of the ſaid offenders and tranſgreſſors.
               We therfore doe command our beloued, and truſty Councellors, the People holding our courts of Parliament, that theſe preſents, together with the former Edicts & declarations, they cauſe to read, publiſh, and enroull, that they kéep, holde, maintaine, & obſerue them, and that they cauſe them to be holden, maintained, & obſerued inuiolably throghout the ertent of their Reſort wt out contradiction: neither that they ſuffer any attempt or reſiſtance, directly or indirectly: for any cauſe or pretence, or by any perſon whoſoeuer: ceaſing, and incontinently cauſing to ceaſe, repaire, and reſtore all things to the contrary heereof. For ſuch is our pleaſure. In witnes whereof, we haue cauſed our ſeale to be affixed to theſe preſents. 
               
                  Giuen at Paris, 
                     the 28. of Ianuary, in the yeare of grace, 1613. and of our Raigne, the third:
                   
                  Signed, LEWIS.
                   And vpon the fould, By the King in his Councell The Queene Regent his Mother being preſent. DE LOMENIE. And ſealed vpon a double Labell, with the great ſeale, in yealow Waxe.
            
            
               
               
                  LEWES by the grace of God, king of France and of Nauarre. To our beloued and truſtie Councellors, the people holding our Court of Parliament at Paris, Gréeting. By our Letters Patents of declaration of the 28. of Januarie laſt, wee haue in confirmation of the Edicts of the late King our moſt honoured. Lord and father (whom God pardon) and other our declarations vpon matter of combats, largely enough giuen to vnderſtand our pleaſure and intent, concerning the execution of the ſame, and the puniſhments of the tranſgreſſions and diſobediences daily committed, hauing with the aduice of the Quéene Regent, our moſt honoured Ladie and mother, the Princes of our blood, other the Princes Officers of our Crowne, and the moſt notable perſonages of our Counſell added thereto the premiſſes, we thought it fitting for ſtay of the courſe of ſuch wretched accidents and inconueniences as haue but too often fallen out, and doe ſtill daily happen, which we preſumed ſhould haue ceaſed after the publication of our letters, had the ſame bene performed. Now ſince vnderſtanding, the reaſons and conſiderations, whereupon ye haue hitherto delayed the ſaid publication, we with the like aduice of our ſaid Ladie and mother, of the Princes of our blood, other Princes and Officers of our Crowne and Councell, haue againe, and moreouer ſaid and declared, and doe ſay and declare by theſe proſents, ſigned with our owne hand, that we will not, neither doe meane vpon any cauſes or conſiderations that are or may be, to grant any pardons, remiſſions or abolitions to ſuch as ſhall vnder whatſoeuer colour, pretence, or occaſion, tranſgreſſe the ſaid Edicts and declarations in matter of Combats and quarrels, Chalenges, or other heads therein contained and ſpecified, but will, that they be extraordinarily procéeded againſt, and according to the rigour of our Edicts and declarations againſt the tranſgreſſors, and thoſe that ſhall harbour, conceale, aſſiſt, or haue them in their powers: who vpon the like penalties,

and other more grieuous, if it ſo happen, ſhall be bound and forced to bring thée into tryall. We alſo forbid all Judges, that they vndertake nothing to the preiudice of theſe preſents: Namely, the Prouoſt of our houſe, and great Prouoſt of France, that they take no knowledge of all ſuch tranſgreſſions as may be committed againſt our ſaid Edicts and declarations in matter of combat, and of all that may depend thereof, vnder paine of defacing, and reuocation of all procéedings, and of all expences, damages, and intereſts in behalfe of the parties that may haue bene purſued. Moreouer, we will, and it is our pleaſure, that if to the preiudice of theſe preſents, the ſaid Prouoſt of our houſe, or other Judges ſhall haue taken knowledge of ſuch cauſes, yet notwithſtanding our Atturneys generall, their ſubſtitutes, and parties diminiſhed, their widowes and heyres ſhall be admitted to ſée the guiltie and their complices, who ſhall be debarred, as alſo their widowes and heyres to pretend extinction of crime by lapſe of twentie yeares, or any other time.
               We alſo doe commend and ordaine, that our ſaid letters of declaration, and theſe preſents, together with the ſaid Edicts and declarations precedent, you cauſe to be read and publiſhed ouer the contents of the ſame inuiolably executed, kept and obſerued from point to point, according to their forme and tenure: Alſo that of the fines to vs adiudged, the third part be applied to the ſuſtenance, and maintenance of the poore ſhut vp in this our Towne of Paris, and the Suburbes of the ſame. Enioyning our Atturney Generall, in our ſaid Court, to vſe all requeſts and diligence neceſſarie for the ſaid publication and execution. For ſuch is our pleaſure.
               
                  Giuen at Paris, 
                     the 14, day of March, 1613. and of our raigne the third.
                   
                  Signed, LEWES. 
                  By the King in his Councell, the Quéene Regent his mother, being preſent. DE LOMENIE.
                   And ſealed with the great ſeale, in yealow waxe, vpon a ſingle Labell. 
               
                  
                  Read, publiſhed and recorded, in the hearing, and at the requeſt of the Kings Atturney generall. The court doth ordaine, that Copies examined, ſhall be ſent to the Baylywickes and Stewardſhips, there to be read, publiſhed, recorded, and executed, by the diligence of the ſubſtitutes of the Kings Atturney Generall, who are thereof to certifie the Court within the moneth: Likewiſe, if to the preiudice of the ſame, any letters of abolition haue bene directed to the Prouoſt of the houſe, or iudgements by him pronounced, notwithſtanding the ſaid letters, his iudgements, and all other proceedings ſhall be voyd, and as ſuch defaced: and proceſſe ſhall paſſe againſt the guiltie according to the Kings Edicts and declarations, wherein the obſtinate ſhall not be admitted his purgation, vnleſſe he pay the third part of the fine aſſeſſed vpon him, appliable to the poore, ſhut vp, without repetition.
                  
                     
                        At Paris in a Parliament, the 
                        18. of March. 1613.
                      
                     Signed, Voiſin.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
            A LETTER FROM THE LORD OF ROSNY, GREAT Treaſurer of France. TO The Queene Regent of France, Concerning the Reſignation of his offices.
            
               MADAME,
            
            
               AMong all the honourable Conditions of a French Gentleman, I alwaies held that to be of the moſt eſtéeme, which was employed in the Important Affaires of his Countrey, in the happie Adminiſtration of the ſame: and in obeying the Commaundements of his Prince: Throughout the courſe of manie yeares, I haue managed the principall of this Eſtate, with vnexpected ſucceſſe: vnder my king, from a bottomleſſe Gulfe of miſerie, I haue guided them to the toppe of all glorie.
            
               At this day (MADAME) I doe obey the deſire and expreſſe will of your Maieſtie, I remit into your hands the two faireſt Tokens of the benefites and rewards of my good Maiſter, The Baſt
                     ••
                  c, and the Treaſurie, which (ſo long as he liued, I poſſeſſed;) Now that he is deceaſed, I reſtore them to you: and well content my ſelfe, that the Effects of my ſeruices may remaine ingrauen in the hearts of your people. An other not ſo faithfull as my ſelfe, might fill all France, with his complaints: But my perpetuall deuotion to the place of my Natiuitie, and to my King, doe reſtraine and bridle my Tongue, and maketh me to ſeeke rather in mine owne incapacitie, then in any other conſideration, the cauſe of ſo great an alteration.
            In one onely point is my ſpirit impatiently tormented: that is; Of that more then abſolute reſolution of your Maieſtie, to vrge me to take money in recompence for my Offies: Not that I doe not ſufficiently iudge how neceſſarie this courſe is, for the good of your ſeruice: But on the other ſide, it is to my ſelfe ſo preiudicall, and ſo contrarie to my demands, that whatſoeuer power I haue ouer my ſelfe to content you, yet haue I not ſufficient to accept it. But contrariwiſe (MADAME) I am forced to refuſe it, and contrarie to my dutie in this occaſion, to preferre my particular Intereſt, before that of your Maieſtie: of all the meanes prouided to wade through this buſines, this muſt néedes be to me the moſt odious: and indeed I doe abhorre

it, and holde it as proceeding not from your goodneſſe, but from the malice of mine Enemies.
            For (MADAME) wherefore doe they not rather laye this pretence vpon my ouerwild humour, an incompatible eſtrangement from all gratification of whatſoeuer ſocietie, and diſſimulation, vpon the weake order that I may paradueture haue taken in the affaires of my Offices: vpon my bad Huſbandrie, in matter of the Treazurie: vpon the euils that haue procéeded of ſuch ſtrong intelligences as I haue practized, as well within as without the Realme: and vpon ſuch extreame care as I tooke to eſtabliſh my ſelfe in the preſeruation of my Fortunes: Wherefore (I ſay Madam) haue they not rather choſen this foundation, rather then any other: neither ſo faire in ſhewe, and yet farre more vnlikely? For, ſo publiſh or giue out, that I neuer craued any other recompence, then for my Office of the Treaſurie, neither yet any other reward then the Office of a Marſhal of France. It is a matter that cannot bee truely maintained; The impudencie of mine Enemies, and the complaint of ſome of my Friendes, ſhall neuer be of force ſufficient, otherwiſe to teſtifie it.
            But if your Maieſtie doe accuſe me, that of my ſelfe I haue offered you all that I did poſſeſſe, I confeſſe it: Neither doe I denie, but that many times I haue aſſured your Maieſtie, that all that was mine depended vpon you; yea, euen my very life it ſelfe.
            
               But ſurely (MADAME) I will alſo aduow, that at that time I could not imagine that ſuch Offers to a mans Soueraigne, could be offence ſufficient to be therefore depriued and put from his Dignities. So as if now you doe ſo take it, it is a principle in my opinion, very new: Yet ſhall not this noueltie neuertheles euer make me to repent that I haue done my dutie.
            But contrarywiſe (MADAME) at this preſent, I doe againe offer to your Maiſtie, not onely my honors, my goods, but alſo my very life, with the liues of my Children: Neither doe I preſent them vnto you vppon any condition, but to vſe them according to your pleaſure; Yea, euen to honour my very Enemies with them, if to take them from me ſimplie be not matter of content.
            If my paſſed Actions haue tended to the aduancement of this Crowne, I will alſo that my obedience ſhall bee the firſt to ſhewe the meanes to preſsrue it. And whatſoeuer my Enemies doe publiſh of my loue to that I poſſeſſe, or whatſoeuer other mens humors may helpe to bréede beliefe, yet is it true (MADAME) that I will abandon all that my ſeruices haue purchaſed me, with more conſtancie, yea, with a thouſand times more reſolution, then an other ſhall poſſeſſe them with pleaſure. It ſhall ſuffize me in my ſolitarines, to learne how your Maieſtie doth daily make your Scepter to flouriſh, and preferring in theſe Affaires a goodly Order, and in your Coffers Treaſure ſufficient to ſupport this Eſtate, which principally ſubſiſteth vppon the ſupport of theſe two Pillers.
            This is it wherein I will moſt quietly

entertaine my idle cogitations, and comforte my ſelfe ouer the loſſe of my good King, without being conſtrained (if it may ſo pleaſe you) to accept or reſerue any other recompence for my Offices, then my contentment to receiue none, and the honour of your expreſſe Commandements▪ But if neuertheleſſe, for a finall Reſolution, and that I may not ſhew my ſelfe diſobedient to your willes, your Maieſtie doe abſolutely enioyne me to the contrarie.
            This then (MADAME) is the greateſt fauour, and that which I moſt deſire, wherewith I doe moſt humbly beſeech you to recompence me, that it may pleaſe your Maieſtie (MADAME) immediately to command my greateſt enemies to goe into the ChamberThe Millions are of Crowns and not of Pounds. of Accounts, there to verifie & take view of the profites or detriments of my 12. yeares watchings. Then if it be not foūd, that during the ſaide time, vnder the power and aucthoritie of my great King, I haue by my dexterity and by my trauails, rooted out the greateſt confuſion that euer was in the Treaſuries of France: that beſide the ſparing of eight Milliōs euery yéere: whereof hée yerely became indebted to his Officers, beſides the payment of all charges, and of all the ordinarie Expences of the Eſtate, of all the wages of the ſoueraigne Courts, of all the wages of the men of Warre, of all the Garriſons, Embaſſages, the Kings houſe, the Voyages & Marriag
                     ••
                   giuing of Rewards & Recompences, with a thouſand other expences, too tedious to be here ſet downe, beſides alſo the Guardes ordinary ſummes, without augmenting either Taxes or Impoſitions in the Realme.
            
            
               Yea contrariwiſe, If they finde not that I haue yet for the entertainment of three great Armies, whereof the one recouered Amiens, an other reduced Bretaigne, and the third conquered Breſſe, and Sauoye: found meanes extraordinarily to furniſh aboue twelue Millions: for the diſcharge of the debts of France, growen by Treaties, aboue fiue and twenty Millions: for the payment of thoſe of Switzerland, Germanie, Italie, and England, aboue thirtie Millions: For the payment of Penſions, both within and without the Realme, aboue foure and twentie Millions: For the ſuccour of forraigne Prouinces, aboue eight Millions: For the refurniſhment of the Artilleries, Fortifications, High-wayes, and Buildings, aboue eight Millions: For the reliefe of the poore, aboue ſixe Millions: To lay vp in the Treaſurie, in the Coffers of the Bastille, or to leaue in Depoſito, in the hands of the Treaſurer of the Espa
                     ••
                  ne, aboue ſeuētéene Millions: To ſatiſfie many other Expences, which may eaſily be verified, aboue twenty Millions: If I haue not alſo beſides procured Contracts for the redéeming of the Demaynes of France, that were engaged, wherof the greateſt part is daylie put in Execution; Such Redemptions, amounting to aboue fortie Millions.
            Finally, (MADAME) If I haue not in my great care, by my onely Vigilancie, put in practiſe theſe ſparings: If alſo to continue the ſame duty to Frāce, I haue not at all times offred to your Maieſtie, to looſe my life, or to ſupport the affaires, & that in the ſame eminencie, yea, euen to preſent them in a higher degrée.
            
               If I ſay, I haue not preferred all theſe things and more, then doe I ſubmit my ſelfe (MADAME) to any puniſhment for my preſumtion, to receiue ſuch odious recompence, that you ſhall appoint me, as the price of my honors & of my offices: But if alſo (MADAME) there be not any one of theſe Articles found falſe, (vnleſſe it be that they ſpeake too little) & that my former affection hath receiued no other alteration, but to be growne more ardent and ſtrong, ſuffer me (MADAME) for my more worthy ſatiſfaction, to endure the harme that you doe me, without accepting the good that you offer me. Reuoke and call in my offices without this gratious charge. Or if neceſſarily (MADAME) you will vouchſafe yet to honor me with ſome fauour, Let it be onely, if it may ſo pleaſe you, a perpetuall remembrance of my fidelitie: A fauour which I deſire of your Maieſtie: not that hereafter I might be recalled to the painefull trauell of the affaires: but onely to leaue me in reſt, that I may ſtill liue in the remembrance of her, who is this day the Regent of my country: the liuing ſoule of my maiſter, and the mother of my King. And ſurely (MADAME) it is alſo an honor, and laſt acknowledgement which you Madame cannot iuſtly denie me: for ſith all they whom in my offices I may haue offended, doe labour to ſee me depriued, much more may they remember my ſeruices that doe triumph in them.
            Farewell houſe, farewell fortreſſe, which I haue had in kéeping and gouernment aboue

twelue yeares. Farewell Temple of the Goddeſſe Mon
                     •
                  ta Mony, who haue procured me ſo great enuie: Let me now goe, now that I am wearie of theſe affaires; Returne me to a priuate life, wherein I may no more haue ſuch cares. I am he, who ſtrong in ſpirit and courage, hauing comprehended the very ground of the riches of the King and Kingdome, haue gouerned them: I am he, vnto whom the felicitie of this eſtate, augmented in new reuenewes, and the coffers of our yong maiſters, repleniſhed by iuſt and lawfull meanes, ſtand bound for that plaine and aſſured order that I haue eſtabliſhed; I haue reaped great honors and large recompēce for that induſtrious care that I tooke vnder a great king. I was of great power, & had great authoritie, but euen in the turning of a hād, in his bloody fall, I haue ſéene all fallen and ruined. In the ſame miſhap, haue I ſéene extinct, all that enuie, that made diuers many times to threaten my vndoing and vtter ruine, whiles I procured the good of the eſtate, and that I ſought nothing but to purchaſe onely my maiſters fauours, without any regard of the great ones, and neuer knowing what it was to ſéeke the fauour and good will of the people, euermore bending my ſelfe wholy to this purpoſe.
            But now in the end, depart from me all troubleſome carking care, I am now reſolued to mew vp my ſhip in a calme, and ſafe hauen: peraduenture the ſtate hauing loſt me, ſhall better acknowledge wherein I haue bene profitable vnto it, and the people ſhall finde it, albeit

ouerlate, when fauour and affection ſhall ſuccéed hatred: but I doe not ſo highly eſtéeme my owne grace and good, as that I ſhould deſire to obtaine it, by the diſaſters and calamities of my countrey: But contrariwiſe, grant O God, that the fortune of this Realme, may euermore continue in good eſtate, that I may neuer ſée it ouerthrowne, and that it may neuer haue cauſe to be ſory for the loſſe of me, or to wiſh for me againe.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
            THE KINGS Edict, Importing the ordering of Apparell: with prohibition to all his Subiects: not to weare vpon the ſame any gold or ſiluer, pure or counterfeit: Embroderie, Lace of Millan or of Millan faſhion: neither to make in their houſes any guilt worke, vnder the penalties therein contained.
            
            
               
                  LEWES, by the grace of God, King of France and Nauarre, To all people preſant, and to come, Gréeting.
            The late Kings our Predeceſſors, to the end to reſtraine the great and exceſſiue expences, growing of the exceſſe and ſuperfluity of Apparell; haue Enacted ſundry iuſt and commendable Ordinances; Yea, euen the late King, our moſt honored Lord and Father (whome God pardon) by his Edicts of the moneth of Julie, 1601. and of Nouember, 1606. Did forbid all manner of men whatſoeuer, generally to weare in their Garments, any Gold or Siluer: which notwithſtanding, the moſt part of our Subiects haue ſuffered themſelues to be led away with this vaine and vnprofitable expence, and that with ſo much licentiouſneſſe, and exceſſe, that were there no prouiſion made to the contrary, themſelues would remaine either vtterly vndone or brought into ſuch diſcommodities, that they could haue no meanes to ſerue, if any important occaſion ſhould fall out for the good of our

Eſtate. Vpon theſe conſiderations, with the aduice of the Queene Regent, (our moſt honoured Ladie and Mother) of the Princes of our Blood, and of other Princes, Officeers of Crowne, and principall of our Councell: and of our owne full power and auctoritie Royall, by this our perpetuall and irreuocable Edicts, haue Decréed and Ordained, and doe Decrée and ordaine as followeth.
            
               
                  I.Firſt, wée doo enioyne all Church▪ men (euer hereafter to continue, as now they doo) in wearing of modeſt Apparell, decent, and conuenient for their profeſſion: Alſo all other our Subiects, to abſtaine from all thoſe ſuperfluities, whereinto in time paſt they haue bene carryed away: vnder paine of ſuch penalties, as the ordinances of the Kings our Predeceſſors, for ſuch cauſes doe import.
               
                  II.
                  Wée doo expreſſely forbid all perſons whatſoeuer, generally within our Kingdomes, Lands, Countreys, and the Dominions of our obedience, of whatſoeuer Sexe, Qualitie, Calling, or condition ſoeuer they be; Not to weare any Garments enriched with Gold or ſiluer, Fyne or counterfeit, whether woollen or Linnen, Pur
                        •
                     ileurs, Embroderies, Laces, Stripedſtuffs, or any thing equiuolent, which may ſerue their bodies, in whatſoeuer ſort or manner: vnder paine of fifteene hundred Francks fine: one third part appliable to our vſe, an other third part to the poore, ſhut vp in this our good Towne of Paris, and the Suburbes of the ſame, and the other third parte to the Enformer.
                  Alwayes excepted, the Harneſſe and Saddles for Horſes, allready made, wherein wee are content for ſixe Moneths, to Tollerate the workemanſhip of Golde and ſiluer.
               
               
                  III.Wée alſo forbid, in whatſoeuer kinde of Garments, all Embrodery of Golde, Siluer, or Silke, as alſo the vſe of Laces of Millan, or Millan-faſhion, vnder paine of a thouſand pounds Fyne.
               
                  
                  IIII.Nowbeit, wee meane not in theſe Prohibitions, to comprehend the vſe of Golde, Siluer, or Embroderie, in Gyrdles, Hangers for Swordes, Hat-bands, Garters, Knots, Irons, Tagges, and Supporters, and Collers, for Women and Maydes, Ladies and Gentlewomen. Neither alſo the guilding of Sword Hiltes, or Chapes, at the ende of the Skabberds in Armours, Spurres, Bittes for Horſes, and Stirrops.
               
                  V.We alſo forbid all workemen hereafter not to guild, or cauſe to be guilded, any Carroches, vnder paine of a thouſand-pounds, to employed as it is aforeſaid.
               
                  VI.We alſo forbid from henceforth, the making of any guilt worke, in any of the houſes of our ſubiects, either vpon the lead, ſtone, timber, plaiſter, or other thing whatſoeuer, vnder paine of the like fine.
               
                  VII.We alſo forbid all Lords, Gentlemen and others, of whatſoeuer calling, hēceforth not to cloath their Pages or Laquies, in any garments of ſilke, whom we will haue to be apparelled in ſtuffes of wooll, with a paſſement lace vpon the ſeames and outward edges onely.
               
                  VIII.We moreouer forbid all Taylors, Embroderers, doublet makers, Hoſiers, and other workemen, as well of our owne Traine, as dwellers in any Townes elſe where, not to make, or cauſe to be made, any garments or other thing heretofore forbidden: vnder paine if they be found tranſgreſſors againſt this our ordinance, to be condemned in the ſomme of thrée hundred pounds Fine, for the firſt time, and for the ſecōd, in an other fine double the former, to be employed as before, and for the third, in corporall puniſhment.
               
                  IX.We will and ordaine, that this our preſent ordinance be ſtrictly obſerued by all perſons of whatſoeuer calling or condition, the ſame to take place at the day and feaſt of Eaſter at hand.
               
                  
                  X.And the better to preuent ſuch tranſgreſſions as may be made to the preiudice of our ſaid prohibitions, we will and ordaine, that all Judges royall, by preuention, all Commiſſaries, Guardes, and all other Officers, ſhall take notice, Execute, and cauſe to be kept, and obſerued, theſe our preſent Prohibitions, and that the Fines be aſſeſſed as well againſt the proper Owners of the things forbidden, as againſt all concealers, and paide notwithſtanding any Oppoſitions, or Appeales whatſoeuer, and without preiudice of the ſame.
            
            Wée alſo do command all our truſty and beloued Councellors, All ſuch as holde our Courts of Parliament, and all our Bayliffes, Stewards, Prouoſts, Judges, and other our Juſtices and Officers, to whome it may appertaine, that theſe our ſaide Inhibitions, and Prohibitions, they cauſe to be Red, Publiſhed, and Recorded, in all parts and places of their Reſorts, Juriſdictions, and Liberties, and the ſame (from point to point) to maintaine, kéepe, and inuiolably obſerue.
            Expreſſely enioyning out Atturneyes generall of our ſaid Parliaments, and their ſubſtitutes, in euery of our ſaid Bayliwickes, Stewardſhips, Prouoſtſhips, and other Juriſdictions, to aſſiſt the ſaid Executions, and to make out all Proceſſes and Inſtances, thereto requiſite and neceſſarie: Our Receiuers of Fines in their Accounts, to make actuall Receipt of all ſuch, as vpon this cauſe ſhalbe aſſeſſed: Alſo, to all gouernors of Hoſpitalls, and Maſters of the Fyles or Records of the poore, vpon their loyalties and conſciences, to employ the ſaid money vpon the ſuſtenance and maintenance of the ſaide poore: For ſuch is our pleaſure.
            And for that in ſundry and many places, they may ſtand in neede of theſe pre
                  ••••
               s, Wée will, that vpon the Vidimus of the ſame, being duely collationed and examined, faith ſhalbe giuen thereto as to this preſent Originall.
            Whereto in witnes hereof, wee haue cauſed to ſet our Seale.
            
               
               Giuen at Paris, 
                  in the moneth of March, the yeare of Grace, 1613. and of our Raigne, the third:
                
               Signed, LEWIS.
                And vnderneath 
                  By the King in his Councell. The Queene Regent being preſent. Signed DE LOMENIE.
                And on the ſide, VISA. And ſealed with the great Seale, in greene Waxe, vpon Laces of Red and gréeeene, and lower Written, 
            
               Read, Publiſhed, and Recorded, in the hearing of the Kings Atturney generall, requiring that it might take place, to beginne the fiftéenth day of May, in the ſame yeare, and Decr
                     ••
                  d, that Coppies examined ſhould be ſent to the Bayliwickes and Stewardſhips, there to be Read, Publiſhed▪ Recorded, and put in Execution, by the diligence of the ſubſtitutes of the Kings Atturney generall, who ſhall monethly certifie the Court.
               
                  At Paris, in Parliament the ſecond day of Aprill, one thouſand, ſixe hundred, and thirteene.
                   
                  Signed VOISIN.
                  
               
            
         
      
   