
      
         
            
            
            THE
BEGINNING,
CONTINVANCE,
AND DECAY OF
ESTATES:
VVherein are handled many notable Questions concerning
the eſtabliſhment of Empires
and Monarchies.
            
            Written in French by R. de Luſing, L. of Alymes:
and tranſlated into Engliſh
by I. F.
            
            LONDON,
Printed for Iohn Bill. 1606.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE MOST REVEREND
Father in God, RICHARD, Lord
Archbiſhop of Canterbury his Grace,
Primate and Metropolitane of all
England, and one of his Maieſties
moſt Honorable Priuie
Councell, &c.
            
               MOst reuerend Father, it pleaſed
your Graces right woorthy predeceſſor,
to vouchſafe my vnwoorthy
letters ſent him in
my trauailes, a gracious acceptance.
The greatest trouble they
put him to, was to peruſe them;
ſo were the proofes he gaue of
his vertue, and the ſignes of his
loue towards me, the onely end
and vſe I euer had or made of them. Your Grace hath had the
happines, with the merit, to ſucceed him in his dignities: his
vertues were already yours in proprietie. Of his loue I may
ſay, as of your Graces; that I then did, as I now doe, rather
deſire to deſerue it, then deſeruing it, deſire to make bold vſe
of it. Loue that deſcends on vs from men of vertue and eminencie,
is it ſelfe both hope and reward, hire and paiment.
That to-boote which we call doing good, or a benefit, as it is

an effect that true loue matched with ability, will euen ſtriue
to produce, ſo is it then moſt welcome when it cōmeth ſooner
imparted then expected. With this freedome of minde, and
dutie of reſpect, I preſent to your Grace this new apparelled
diſcourſe: It hath alreadie put on the habit of three ſeuerall
languages, and if my iudgement erre not, our Engliſh faſhion
will not ill become it. I met with it in my wandrings, and
brought it along with me, with an intent, for my priuate exerciſe
of that tongue it first ſpake in, to tranſlate it: that performed,
my determination to recommend it to your Graces
patronage, fell to be at this late dangerous time, when the diuell
(arch-enemie of trueth) and his execrable miniſters held
their generall counſaile how they might make but one fireworke
of our whole estate: but the conſideration of your Graces
most iust imployments in ſo weightie a buſineſſe, withheld
me with a reuerend feare of their diſturbance, till I
weighed that euen this ſubiects handling might perhaps doe
good to ſome bad that had a head, if not a hand (for ſo great a
clock could not ſtrike without many wheeles) in ſo damnable a
proiect: ſince if they will needs out-ſtrip former ages, or forreine
countries in ſtrange plots of ruining kingdomes and cō
               mon
wealths, they may by this diſcourſe be drawen to practiſe
them vpon the common enemie of Chriſtendome, and not
vpon vs that acknowledge with them one Ieſus, one Bible,
one Baptiſme. Your Grace ſeeth the reaſons and ſcope of theſe
my well intended endeuours, which ſubiect their allowance or
diſallowance to your Graces moſt graue cenſure, ſo doth my
vnworthy ſeruice with my ſelfe, to your much deſired imployment,
as
            
               Your Graces moſt ſeruiceably deuoted,
IOHN FINET.
            
         
         
            
            The Epiſtle Dedicatorie of the
Author to the Duke
of Sauoy.
            
               OF all we admire in theſe times there
is nothing comparable to the fortune
of the Ottomans, and the increaſe
of their greatneſſe; if we examine
their beginning and meanes,
for they are by nation Tartarians,
ſprung from the moſt baſe and remote
parts of Aſia, in former times
as vnknowen as vnworthy: If we
conſider their conditions, they bewray no feeling of ciuility
or curteſie: If we regard the parts of their minde, where
ſhall we ſee ought more rude, and rough hewen then the
ſpirit of that people? What haue beene the ſouldiours
they haue had through whoſe valor they haue aduantaged
themſelues by ſo many memorable victories? No better
then ſlaues haled in their infancy from the breaſts and laps
of their mothers, children of tribute tythed euery yeere
from amongſt the miſerable Chriſtians ouer whom they
command and domineere. Yet we ſee that with theſe feeble
meanes they haue, in leſſe then three hundred yeeres,
conquered Aſia as far as Tigris, and the Gulfe of Perſia,
poſſeſt themſelues of Aegypt, Numidia, and all the red ſea.
More, hauing atchieued theſe glorious cōqueſts they haue
beene ſeene to march, as they ſay, with colours flying thorow
Europe, to ouerrun large countries, ſeaze themſelues

of kingdomes and moſt puiſſant Eſtates, finally to become
Monarches of Greece, and to haue caried the Empire of
Conſtantinople; whoſe neighbours haue not bene exempt
from the hauocke of their forces, ſo many armies ouerthrowen,
ſo many Princes ruined, ſo many rich cities and
townes ſackt and raſed. Their power, ouerflowing in happineſſe,
is at this day the ſcourge of the Eaſt and the terror
of the Weſt: In ſum, they are feareful to the whole world.
But the greater is the aſtoniſhment, when we conſider, that
naked and vnarmed, they haue marched victorious ouer
the bellies of the moſt warlicke nations vnder the heauens,
the beſt prouided of forces and all munition neceſſary for
the wars, that ſuch a people as they vnskilled in nauigation
ſhould become maſters almoſt of all the ſeas. Many haue
gone about to ſearch out the cauſe of this thriuing greatneſſe,
and I amongſt others haue for my part with no ſmall
diligence peruſed ſuch authors as haue written their hiſtory;
but when I haue narrowly ſifted all they haue ſaid of
that matter, I finde not this my honeſt appetite and curioſity
as I would contented; rather as one ill ſatisfied with
the diuerſity and negligence of their Hiſtoriographers, all
of them nothing neere approching the courſe and knowledge
of the firſt and eſſentiall cauſe of this their ſo raiſed
fortunes, I haue ſought to pleaſe my ſelfe with ſetting down
as I haue, the many acts and obſeruations I haue thereof
collected, and which well deſerue to be publiſhed: not
that I ſo far forget my ſelfe as to thinke my ſelfe able to flie
a higher pitch then others whom I much honour and eſteeme;
but becauſe I haue taken cleane an other way; with
this hope neuertheleſſe, that huely repreſenting and diſtinguiſhing
by order as I doe, the eſtabliſhment of this Monarchy
(anſwerable to what may be vnderſtoode thereof)
the apparence and truth of my diſcourſe wil ſomwhat
inlighten this ſubiect & affoord me an honeſt excuſe vpon
the defects which may be diſcouered in my opinion.
The argument then of this book conſiſteth of three points,

whereunto the order of the whole diſcourſe hath reference:
In the firſt place I ſummarily handle the meanes
they haue practiſed for their aduancement and greatneſſe;
ſecondly with what cunning and deceit they maintaine
what they haue gotten: and laſtly how we may be able to
aſſaile them, and turne the chance of their victories and
powers. This my trauaile (moſt mighty Prince) taketh
his flight ſtraight to your Highneſſe to range it ſelfe vnder
the ſhelter of your protection, armed with the allowable
opinion, that your Aighneſſe as a generous Prince cannot
but take eſpeciall pleaſure to heare, ſee, & waigh ſuch ſpeculations.
To ſay the truth, the ordinary diſcourſes of
your Highneſſe table are no other but ſundry queſtions,
which it pleaſeth your Highneſſe vſually to propound to
all thoſe noble ſpirits that attend you; but aboue all, when
any one awaketh matter cōcerning either Eſtate affaires, or
the atchieuement of deedes of armes; then is the time your
Highneſſe lendeth an attentiue eare to ſuch as diſcourſe
thereof, and to all mens admiration reſolueth the moſt difficult
points of the matter in handling, wherein you diſcouer
a iudgment ſo far beyonde the vulgar and ſurpaſſing
your age, as we cannot but confeſſe that the propoſitions
you make are ſo many proofes and reſolutions which you
deliuer, and pleaſe to draw from out the capacity of your
ſeruants. Which conſidering often with my ſelfe, I finde
forthwith allaied in me the heat of the intention I had to
dedicate this my booke to your Highneſſe, but at the ſame
inſtant finding repreſented before mine eies; the excellency
of your iudgment, together with your noble and gentle
diſpoſition, which knoweth how to accommodate your
greatneſſe to the honeſt deſignes of your ſubiects, ſuch
eſpecially as reuerence you like me, feare immediatly vaniſheth
and my deſire gathereth ſtrength, with aſſurance
that you wil be ſo gratious, as, though I be the leaſt of your
ſeruants, you will not ſpare to entertaine and honour this
my little labour with your iudgment: practiſing vpon me

what the Sunne (common father of generation) doth on
the earth, beſtowing his beames indifferently as well vpon
the low plants as high trees. It may pleaſe your highneſſe
then to vouchſafe to receiue this treatiſe with the like coū
               tenance
as you would ought elſe eſpecially labored, in imitation
of the diuine Maieſty (only Idea of all perfection)
which as well excepteth the offering of the poore
widow, as the preſents of great Princes. Againe, it may
pleaſe your highnes not to thinke amiſſe ſo farforth to protect
the whole diſcourſe, that it may, ſupported by your
authority, paſſe with that credit as I wiſh among men, and
remaine free from the many cenſures of ſuch as take no other
delight then in reprehending other mens inuentions.
This aſſurance will make me lift my head higher then otherwiſe
I would, for two cauſes: The one for the honour
and particular contentment I ſhall receiue hauing performed
ought pleaſing to your Highneſſe, the other
for the teſtimony I ſhall heereby haue of the
participation of your fauour beyond
my merit and expectation: for
which I offer vp my ſelfe
not to die vngratefull,
as
            
               Your Highneſſe moſt humble
Subiect and vaſſall,
R. de LVSING.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               THe world had neuer more Bookes,
Bookes neuer leſſe woorthy matter:
learned, vnlearned, all will be writing,
and of theſe the most affecting the glorious
names of Authors, become the
authors of their inglorious names.
            
               Pro captu lectoris habent ſua fata libelli.
            
            
               The Readers skill,
               Makes Bookes thriue well or ill.
            
            But the true life of a worke, and ſound diſcretion of the writer,
appeere not more in the well handling, then wiſe choice of a
ſubiect. I know diuers courſes may meete with one end, as
many waies leade to one citie, ſo may one theame entertaine a
world of inuentions; but of theſe (like the ſame meate ſerued in
in ſeuerall faſhions) ſome few onely ſhall carry the true pleaſing
reliſh and temper; the rest (as knots in names) ſtand rather for
ornaments or flouriſhing differences, then matters regardable or
of conſequence: well may the will or appetite for a time tranſport
vs, but reaſon as ſoueraigne muſt in the end controle and checke
vs. In the compaſſe of my obſeruations, I haue ſeene diſcourſes
and ſtiles, otherwiſe hollow and vnſound, ſway euen the beſt
iudgements, not alone to allowance, but imitation. Whether this
were the infection of ignorance, that ſeaſing the most might
ſpread to the beſt; or the tyrannie of faſhion, which muſt, howſoeuer
monſtrous, (if our ſelues will not ſeeme monſtrous) be
followed, I know not: one thing I am ſure of; time hath diſcouered
their weakneſſe, and trueth his concealed daughter is come
to light, when ſuch light owles liue (or to ſay better) die confined

to perpetuall obſcuritie. This worke ſeemes to haue paſſed
the pikes of ſuch dangers; it hath for a ſufficient time vndergone
the view and cenſure of the beſt diſcerning nations of Europe: it
hath beene taught to ſpeake both their and the old Roman language:
if England ſhould not now affoord it kind entertainment,
I ſhould thinke it in an error (not to ſay of iudgement) of cuſtom,
as being not yet cleere of the imputation it carries of harſhneſſe
towards euen woorthy ſtrangers; but ſince I finde (as doe themſelues
that ſuffer) that this diſcourteous fault is laid vpon the
common ſort, and the contrary extolled in the gentrie & perſons
of more eminent quality, Vilia miretur vulgus: We will appeale
from their ignorance, to the more generous and better bredde vnderſtandings.
And to awake theſe, let me tell them, they ſhall
finde it a diſcourſe not faint or languiſhing, but ſuch as like a wel
breathed runner, gathers more ſtrength towards the end of the
race, then was bewraied in the beginning. Now to others which
ſhal perhaps obiect, that the ſcope hereof lying out of our diſtance,
asketh as ſmall heede, as it ſmally concerneth vs; I anſwere, that
then the gout or gangrene is not to be regarded becauſe the great
toe onely hath it. Time and ſinne may one day (which God turne
from vs) make vs more ſenſible, and this ſubiects debating more
neceſſary: ſuch as it now is, or may prooue (Reader) I heere expoſe
it to thy view and cenſure. I know ſome acquainted with me
and my courſes, will expect rather matter of mine owne, then others
inuention. They haue reaſon in this, howſoeuer I haue abilitie:
but I cannot yet forget an honeſt learned Phyſician I once
obſerued, who (it ſeemes) to ſpare others, ſo ſpent his owne ſpirits
in the perſonall practiſe of his medicinall concluſions, as his bodie
yet ſuffers the iniuries of ſuch ſelfe-offered violence. I am not ſo
charitable; neither hold I him the vnwiſeſt, that out of others
triall frameth his owne confirming. It is time that begets iudgement
and aſſurance. And to this purpoſe I will cloſe with a ſaying
of that euer moſt reuerenced Maſter of moralitie Seneca, Non
ignoro etiam quae in ſpeciem laborant, dignitatem dico
& eloquentiae famam, & quicquid ad alienum ſuffragium
venit, mora conualeſcere.
            
            
               I. F.
            
         
         
            
            
               The Table of the Chapters of
the first Booke.
               THe Turke hath applied his thoughts wholly to the warres. Chap. 1.
               He hath alwaie
                     •
                   ſought to make offenſiue war. Chap. 2.
               He hath made no account of fortreſſes. Chap. 3.
               He hath trained vp his ſouldiours to valour and hardineſſe. Chap. 4.
               He hath maintained his ſouldiours in military diſcipline. Chap. 5.
               He hath made no reckning of other forces then his owne. Chap. 6.
               He hath to power ioyned cunning and deceit. Chap. 7.
               He hath beene alwaies ſerued in his warre by good and valiant Captaines.
Chap. 8.
               He hath made no skip in his enterpriſes. Chap. 9.
               He hath not ſpent time vpon enterpriſes of ſmall importance. Chap. 10.
               He hath laide hold on occaſion. Chap. 11.
               He hath behaued himſelfe with nimbleneſſe and celerity vpon his
occaſions. Chap. 12.
               He hath gone himſelfe in perſon to the warre. Chap. 13.
               He hath euermore gone well appointed to the wars. Chap. 14.
               He hath neuer fought out of ſeaſon. Chap. 15.
               He hath neuer diuided his forces. Chap. 16.
               He hath not long held warre with one alone. Chap. 17.
            
            
               The Table of the Chapters of the
Second Booke.
               OF religion. Chap. 1.
               Of the direct dependency of the Turkes ſubiects vpon their ſoueraigne.
Chap. 2.
               How he hath depriued his ſubiects of ſtrength. Chap. 3.
               The cauſes that may moue a people to fury. Chap. 4.
               The common remedy applied by the Turke againſt the force and
fury of the people. Chap. 5.
               How the Turke curbeth the power of the great men of his Eſtate. Chap. 6.
               
                  
How he confoundeth the practiſes of forraine Princes his neighbours.
Chap. 7.
            
            
               The Table of the Chapters of the
Third Booke.
               THe cauſes of the fall and ruine of Eſtates. Chap. 1.
               From what coniectures the continuance of Eſtates may be gathered.
Chap. 2.
               That the Monarchy of the Turke is comprehended within the number
of great Eſtates. Chap. 3.
               Whether the Empire of the Turkes draw towards an end. Chap. 4.
               By what kinde of cauſes the Empire of the Turke might moſt eaſily
faile. Chap. 5.
               That it is not an impoſſible thing for the Chriſtians with open force
to vanquiſh the Turke. Chap. 6.
               Why the leagues amongſt Chriſtian Princes are commonly of ſmall
effect. Chap. 7.
               The defects which may be obſerued in the leagues of the yeeres
1537. and 1571. Chap. 8.
               A league which may be treated without danger of the former defects.
Chap. 9.
               Wherein conſiſteth the greateſt forces of the Turke. Chap. 10.
               Where the Turke might be moſt eaſily aſſailed to ouercome him, either
by ſea or by land. Chap. 11.
               Of the inward cauſes whereby the Empire of the Turke may come
to ruine. Chap. 12.
               Of the mixt cauſes. Chap. 13.
               How particular perſons may be gained. Chap. 14.
               How the people of the Turke may be wrought from his obedience. Chap. 15.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            CONSIDERATIONS
VPON THE GREATneſſe
of the Turkiſh
Empire.
            Wherein are handled the manner how it is
become ſo great, the meanes whereby it is
maintained, and how it would
be eaſie to bring it
to ruine.
            
               1 The ſumme of this diſcourſe.
               2 The diuiſion thereof into 3. principall parts.
               3 The argument of the firſt booke.
               4 Steps to the Turkiſh greatneſſe.
            
            
               FIrſt: My purpoſe is to examine
in this treatiſe how
the Empire of the Turke is
growne to that height and
greatneſſe. 2: And the better
to effect it I will diuide
the whole diſcourſe into
three principall parts. The
firſt, what way he hath taken
to attaine to the top of ſuch a
raiſed greatneſſe as his now
is. The ſecond, with what meanes and arre he behaueth
and maintaineth himſelfe therein; and finally I will declare

how the pride of this Tyrant may be abated; his greatneſſe
diminiſhed, and his Empire ruined. 3: The ſubiect
then of the firſt booke ſhall be to examine what haue beene
his courſes in his conqueſts; and though they haue beene
without any order, reaſon or faith: yet will it be no hard
matter to diſcerne, by the ſucceſſe of ſuch counſailes as he
hath put in practiſe in his moſt difficult enterpriſes, the
good from the bad, and alſo to ſeparate in the courſe of
his actions all whatſoeuer hath beene profitable; from
what hath beene hurtfull and ill vndertaken: heerin imitating
the Bee which from bitter herbes ſucks moſt ſweete
hony. Theſe are in my opinion the ſteps and deſſignes
he hath followed to attaine to his greatneſſe, wherby as by
degrees he hath built his ſtrange fortune which makes vs
at this day ſo much to feare him.
            
               1 Firſt he hath applied himſelfe wholy to the wars.
               2 His war hath beene alwaies offenſiue.
               3 He hath made ſlender account of fortreſſes.
               4 He hath faſhioned his wiſdome to valour and hardneſſe.
               5 He hath maintained his great and mighty armies in
military diſcipline and policy.
               6 He hath made no reckoning of other forces then of his
owne.
               7 He hath to power ioyned cunning and deceipt.
               8 He hath beene ſerued by excellent Captaines.
               9 He hath not made any skip in his enterpriſes.
               10 He hath not ſpent time vpon matters of ſmall importance.
               11 He hath laid hold on occaſions.
               12 He hath ſpeedily put in execution his deſſignes.
               13 He hath gone in perſon to the war.
               14 Well appointed.
               15 In a fit ſeaſon.
               16 He hath not diuided his forces.
               17 He hath not long continued war with one alone.
            
            
               
               CHAP. I.
               That he hath applied his thoughts
wholly to the wars.
               
                  1 Bookes held by the Gothes a let to armes.
                  2 Charles the 8. his expedition to Naples.
                  3 Chriſtians held vnfit for wars, becauſe ſo intent to ſtudie.
                  4 The Turkes wholly addicted to the wars.
                  5 The Romans moſt martiall.
                  6 Barbarous nations most warlike and prompt in their attempts.
                  7 The Turks deſpiſers of Liberall arts.
                  8 They inuade Italy.
                  9 Their military vertues.
                  10 Whether liberall artes diſable their followers for the wars.
                  11 The vſe of Hiſtory and the Mathematikes.
                  12 Letters and armes fitly maried together.
                  13 Learning and valour neceſſary in a Commander, obedience
in a Souldier.
               
               1 AT the time that the Gothes made a
moſt fearefull ſacke of Greece, and
as a violent ſtreame ouerflowed her
fruitfull plaines, ranſacking her many
cities and rich townes; amongſt other
ſpoiles there fel into their hands
a great number of bookes of all ſorts
of profeſsions; wherewith not knowing what to doe, as
vnprofitable ſtuffe, they would haue burnt them, if one
amongſt the reſt had not oppoſed himſelfe: who ſtepping
foorth cried out; it was requiſite they ſhould carefully preſerue
them, and leaue (quoth he) this poiſon amongſt the
Grecians, ſince in time they will bereaue them of all martiall
courage, as ordinarily they do all ſuch as apply themſelues
too much to the like learning and knowledge, making

them become tender, effeminate, and altogether vnfit
for the vſe of armes; ſo as failing of courage they will
prooue more eaſily the pray of our fortunate conqueſt.
               2 When Charles the eight of France with ſo ſmal an army
made his way thorough Italy,1494. Guicciard. li. 1. and that without vnſheathing
his ſword or couching his lance, he became maſter of
the kingdome of Naples, and of the greater part of Thoſeany;
the French Nobilitie reaſoning among themſelues
whence ſuch a baſe cowardlineſſe, as they had founde amongſt
the Italians, ſhould proceed, imputed the cauſe
thereof to the ſtudie of learning, as that which ſofteneth
the courage, and is not fit for ought but to make a man
fearefull, vnapt, and of a weake reſolution for the wars.
               3 Heeretofore and at this day, the Turkes haue and doe
eſteeme the Chriſtians of little valour in martiall affaires,
becauſ of the varietie of Arts whereunto they vſually addict
themſelues; and though a man be ſo ſmally durable
as he cannot attaine to perfection in diuers ſciences, nor ſo
inable himſelfe to the attention of ſundry matters as hee
may game the maſtery for which he ſtriueth; yet all men
will buſie themſelues about knowledge, and intermeddle
with all Arts and practiſes, not heeding that in ſtead of forwarding
themſelues, they recoile from that perfect knowledge
which is requiſite for them, and ſo remaine vnfurniſhed,
or but weakely grounded in one onely profeſſion.
               4 On the contrarie, the Turkes faſhion their whole deſſignes
to the war, and bend all their thoughts and ſtudies
to the exerciſe of armes, reiecting all other courſes, and
pleaſing themſelues onely in what may ſtand them in ſtead
for that profeſſion.
               5 There is nothing more true (and we finde it in hiſtories)
then that the Romanes were moſt excellent Souldiers,
but eſpecially before they opened their gates to Arts
and Sciences preſented them by the Greeks, and that they
gaue themſelues ouer to the pleaſures of the Eaſt. Then
were they at the beſt for true cariage of marſhall affaires
when their Conſuls ſcorned not to hold the plough; when

Phyſicians, Surgeons, & men of ſuch like profeſſion were
in no credit amongſt them. And to ſay the truth, we finde
that if afterward they did atchieue any worthy enterpriſe, it
was not by meanes of any valour which was remaining with
them, but by the reputation & ſtrength they had formerly
gotten. For proofe heereof we may plainly perceiue that
as ſoone as they had giuen entertainement to forraine ſciences,
made tender by ſtudy, they receiued notable and diſhonorable
ouerthrowes, as well at the hands of Iugurtha,
Mithridates, the Cimbrians, Numantins, Spartans, the Parthians,
as of others.
               6 For confirmation whereof we obſerue in ancient hiſtories,
that the moſt warlike people, & withal ſuch as haue performed
the memorableſt acts, haue beene the moſt groſſe,
rude and inured to paine and hardneſſe, far from all ciuility;
free from ſuch delicacy and wantonneſſe as is corruptly
ſtept in amongſt vs; ſuch as had no learning or taſte of
any knowledge or action which might allay or neuer ſo litle
ſhake their couragious reſolutions and warlike deſſignes.
Of this compoſition were long ſince and are at this daie
the Scythians, who ſometimes made their worthy armes reſound
as far as the moſt remote parts of the Eaſt, as far as
the Danow and the bankes of Nilus. It is not long ſince
that they,Zingis. conducted by Quingus their King, ouerran all
the Eaſt, harrowed the plaine country, and repleniſhed
all with miſery and deſolation. The memory of the famous
acts of great Tamberlane is yet freſh, who only hitherto
may vaunt that he hath in a ranged battel vanquiſhed
the Turkiſh armies, & led their Cōmander captiue, making
him ſerue as his footſtoole.1397. In our time the Mogores,
a groſſe and ignorant people ſprung out of Scythus (or to
ſay better) out of Tartaria, haue atchieued great conqueſts
towards India. Euery man alſo knowes that the great
Cham, as rude & rough hewen as theſe, is neuertheleſſe one
of the moſt mighty potentates of the world, ruling ouer
a people of the leaſt ciuilitie that can be imagined. But
not to wander out of Europe, let vs behold the Swizzers, &

we ſhall finde that for knowledge and ciuility they are no
better then theſe, yet haue they performed many worthy
exploits as well at Nancy,
                  1477. 
                  Dijon, Nouare, Marignan, Dreux,
as elſe where:1513. In ſuch ſort as, not infected with our vanity,1515.
they giue (as a man may ſay) the law to the mightieſt
Princes that ſeeke their aſſiſtance.
               7 Now the Turks aboue all nations haue euer profeſt to
follow this courſe of life ſo barbarous and rude, and euen
at this day they contemne all knowledge and profeſſion of
whatſoeuer arte, be it neuer ſo noble or induſtrious; among
the reſt they abhor painting and ingrauing, neither
make they any account of architecture: and in very deede
we ſee that they haue euer held it an eſpeciall offence towards
God, to ingraue or paint him. As for learning they
recken it as meere foolery: In a word, there are none amongſt
them ſo ſlenderly eſteemed as men learned and
ſeene in any kinde of knowledge. In their garments they
affect not ſtuffes wrought, imbroidered or curiouſly cut
and faſhioned, but ſuch as are whole and laſting; laces,
fringes and other ornaments are by them reiected: beaten
and maſſie gold is only in requeſt amongſt them. In the
wars they ſeeke rather to appeere fearce and terrible, then
gallantly ſet forth and apparelled: their whole delight is ſet
vpon war and armes; inſomuch as it is hard to finde any one
of them who will not manifeſt by his faſhion of liuing that
he is rather borne for the wars then ought elſe: ſo as when
there is any leuying of Souldiours, ſuch as are left at home
hold themſelues highly iniured; ſo honorably doe they
eſteeme of the life of a ſouldier. Whence it proceedeth,
that they are ſo feared in all their attempts, either for beſeeging,
battering, or forcing of places of greateſt ſtrength;
for skirmiſhing on foote or on horſebacke, in ſet battailes
by ſea or by land, or for fortifying and defending.
               8 Whereof they gaue ſufficient proofe when hauing
gotten Ottranto they valiantly made it good againſt the
forces of all Italy;1480. euen till the death of their maſter Mahomet
the 2.1482. leauing behinde them, trenches, bulwarkes,

ramparts and all other ſorts of fortifications, ſo well contriued
and diſpoſed, as they haue ſerued ſince for patterns
and models to our Commanders of Chriſtendome.
               9 Such is their laborious vertue in the wars, as there is
no place ſo ſtrong, or enterpriſe ſo difficult which will not
prooue eaſie at the enforcing of their powers.
               10 Returning now to that I ſaid concerning knowledge:
I expect that ſome one ſhould ſay: And what I praie, is
learning a let to military vertue, or a meanes to hinder a
man from becomming a perfect ſouldier? ſurely no: I am
of a contrary opinion, and I ground it in part vpon the
experience of ſuch Captaines as I will heere reckon.
Alexander the great and Caeſar who were of the principall
moſt aduenturous, and politicke Maſters of the wars were
moſt excellently ſeene in all ſorts of knowledge; for my
owne part I hold it very difficult for any without the aide
of Hiſtorie or the Mathematiques, to deſerue the name of
a great Captaine and ſage conductor of armies:
               11 Since Hiſtorie by the variety of examples both of
good and bad ſucceſſe furniſheth a man with heedfulneſſe
and diſcretion, with reſolution and aduice in all occurrents,
and makes him more conſiderate in what he vndertaketh;
like as the Mathematikes refine his knowledge and iudgement,
as well in engines of war as in fortifying.
               12 In concluſion, it is not to be denied but that learning
is moſt proper to mould and perfectly faſhion a heart and
courage borne and diſpoſed to armes: for this cauſe they
would in old time, that Pallas armed ſhould ſignifie vnto
vs the marrying of letters with armes. Now to come againe
to the Turkes rudeneſſe, we ſhall finde (examining ſome of
their Princes) that ſomewhat muſt be abated. Let vs conſider
what were Mahomet the 2. and Selim and Soliman his
ſonnes (the moſt valiant Princes of the race of the Ottomans)
and we ſhall ſee that they delighted in reading Hiſtories,
and in ſtudying the Mathematikes: ſo as though
nature diſpoſe a man to hardineſſe and magnanimitie, it is
ſure that if he be wholy vnfurniſhed of artes and learning,

he will be of a diſpoſition doubtfull, vnaſſured, vnreſolued
and without any true ſtomacke or valour; parts eſpecially
required in a Souldier. This hath beene ſeene in thoſe of
the Ottomans which wanted the vertues of the three aboue
named; and amongſt others Baiazet the ſecond and Corcas
his ſonne can witneſſe it. Theſe indeed had in ſome meaſure
the knowledge of good letters, but theſe performed
no valiant act, becauſe they had not hearts and courages
borne to the wars.
               13 Whence it followeth that the ſtudy of learning auaileth
much to the forming of a wiſe and diſcreet Captaine,
and to helpe him to attaine to the perfection worthy his
name; nature withall diſpoſing him to valour and generoſitie.
               As for the priuat Souldier I hold that he needes not
know more then to obey it, not being neceſſary he ſhould
be inſtructed in ſo excellent an vnderſtanding of matters
as the Commander, conſidering that humaine Sciences and
the liberall arts in an vnſetled minde make it embrace ciuility,
wantonneſſe and eaſe in ſtead of trauell; make vs loue
quietneſſe; feare death, flie hunger and thirſt, with other
paines and periles of the wars: In ſum, they imprint in a
man rather a deſire to husband his life then to lauiſh it for
the glory and good of his country, and for his particular
honour: which is more dangerous in a ſouldier then in a
man of any other profeſſion: for this reaſon ſuch an one
neede know no more then to obey, goe well armed, and
valiantly defend himſelfe againſt his enemy.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               That he hath alwaies ſought to make
offenſiue war.
               
                  1 Of offenſiue and defenſiue war.
                  2 The authors opinion thereof.
                  3 Others opinions.
                  
                     
4 Reaſons in behalfe of the offenſiue, and inconueniences of the
defenſiue war.
                  5 Commodities of the offenſiue war.
                  6 Spoiles in our enemies or our owne countrie: their difference.
                  7 Machiauel confuted.
                  8 The chiefe cauſe of the Turkiſh greatneſſe hath beene the
Chriſtians idleneſſe.
                  9 The war vpon the Turke muſt be offenſiue.
                  10 Examples of good ſucceſſe in that kind.
               
               1 IT is a doubt often diſputed, and not yet
reſolued, whether it be better to aſſaile
the enemy at his own home, or to attend
till he aſſaile vs: The Lord of Langei,
Machiauell, and others of our times
haue diſcourſed heereof to the full.
               2 For my part I am of opinion (as alſo the worthieſt captaines
haue beene) that it is alwaies better to aſſaile, then
ſtay till we be aſſailed: Alexander the Great, Hannibal, Scipio,
Caeſar, and many other Romans ſerue to approue it; and
all theſe would haue laughed at ſuch as ſhould haue otherwiſe
counſelled them.
               3 Yet ſome there are in our times which haue endeuored
to proue the contrarie by demonſtrations ſubtill enough
(but vnſound) and to this very purpoſe of the Turke, to
wit, that it were better to attend him then to ſeeke him out
vpon his owne dunghill: Theſe are counſailes more curious
then well grounded, whereof conſequently enſue few
effects of moment: we may couple ſuch men with thoſe
vaunting Ingenours or Artiſts, who diſcourſing vpon ſome
worke of their inuention promiſe of it wondrous effects,
and ſet foorth ſome ſimple module which ſerueth but for
demonſtration only; but when it commeth (as they ſay)
to the puſh, and that they muſt put their inſtrument to his
true triall and vſe, then is it that they are far to ſeeke, and
that they confeſſe the difference betweene an eſſentiall effect

and a ſuperficiall flouriſh, ſuch as their firſt module
afforded. Iuſt in this manner theſe contemplatiue ſtate-Philoſophers
will attend the Turke at their owne home,
whom they dare ſcarce looke in the face neither in nor out
of his country.
               4 It is moſt certaine that hee which aſſaileth hath alwaies
more reſolution and courage then he that attendeth. For
he hath already formed his determination and prouiſion
when the other goeth by heereſaie and likelihoods: moreouer
in aſſailing, the war is vndertaken with more aduantage,
and commodity then otherwiſe it would be; and he
which mindeth to force a country or prouince may make
his vſe of all ſuch aduantages and commodities as he findeth
may ſerue his turne in the country he intendeth to
conquer. As among others, if he haue ſet on foote ſome
practiſe, or hatched ſome treaſon in the minds of two or
three, ſuch of the ſubiects of the prince he aſſaileth as he
knoweth offended or malecontent. Or if he haue plotted
ſome matter of purpoſe for an vniuerſall rebellion. All
which incountring with the deſſignes of the ſuppoſed conquerour,
he makes them ſerue his turne with more aduantage
in going to ſeeke out the enemy; then he ſhould doe
in ſtaying for him at his owne home. By theſe meanes
Charles the eight King of France found the way open to the
conqueſt of Naples;
                  1494. and Lewes the 12. poſſeſt himſelfe of
the eſtate of Milan:
                  1499. by the like occaſion alſo the Empire
of the Mamelucks ſubiected their neckes to the yoake of Selim
the firſt.1516.
               
               5 But of all this we may collect a more ſure proofe of my
propoſition then when the enemy is at our doores, and
that the aſtoniſhment ſurpriſeth vs, ouerthroweth and confoundeth
all counſaile and courage; at ſuch a time vnexpected
diſorders hem vs in on euery ſide; neceſſitie
preſſeth vs; all things become ſuſpected and difficult, ſo
as moſt commonly we know not to what Saint to recommend
vs; nor what courſe were beſt to be taken; for ſince
we muſt haue an eie, miſdoubt, make prouiſions in ſundry

places, beſtowe garriſons where moſt need requireth; we
ſhall finde that applying remedies on the one ſide our affaires
will grow deſperate on the other. Moreouer by diſtributing
garriſons in this ſort, it muſt needs follow that
we ſo much the more weaken the body of our armie, and
that through this conſtraint we quit the field to the more
ſtrong; which diſaduantage commonly drawes with it
the ruine of our whole eſtate.
               If contrariwiſe we will preſerue all our forces in one bodie,
we leaue to the aſſailer many paſſages and places where
he may ſet downe and fortifie himſelfe there to hold vs
play and traine vs on at his pleaſure; but if it ſhould ſo happen
that the aſſailer were encountred by him which attendeth
with equall force, with as braue a countenance, and
like courage, the retraict and defence reſt at his election,
ſo he be a Captaine wiſe, and aduiſed, ſuch as was Solyman
when he marched into Hungarie, and when the Emperour
Charles the 5. went couragiouſly to meet him.
               6 And becauſe the Diſaſtrous chance of war may ſometimes
light vpon the aſſailer be he neuer ſo warie and valiant;
it is to be preſuppoſed (that being granted) that he
will ſell his skin at ſo deare a rate, as the forces of the aſſailed
ſhall remaine thereby ſo diſordred, as he will not be
able to offend the vanquiſhed, or diſturbe his affaires,
notwithſtanding that his countrey be farre diſtant from
the countrey aſſailed: this may be ſeene by the example of
the ouerthrow the French receiued, and the taking of their
King priſoner before Pauye inſomuch as that loſſe (beſides
that of their Prince) did not afford ought to the
victorious whereby he might aduantage himſelfe vpon
the kingdome of France.1524. Alſo it is much more eaſie to ſet
a foote againe an armie diſcomfited, abroad then at home;
becauſe if fortune haue ſhewed her ſelfe aduerſe and our foe
at our home, then is the time that ſuch as are malecontents
and mutinous lift vp their heades, and that our people
ſtand amazed and for the moſt part vntractable. Then
muſt we trauaile amaine to put our men in hart, then muſt

we make much of thoſe few good men, the remaines of a
battell to beſtowe in our Townes and truſt them with the
gouernment thereof. On the other ſide if theſe loſſes betide
vs far from our home and in another country, the feare
and the ſtoniſhment will be the leſſe amongſt our ſubiects,
and they more pliable and forward to ſuccour vs, were it
but to keepe the danger aloofe from themſelues.
               7 Me thinkes Machiauel much abuſeth himſelfe when he
ſo opiniatiuely mainteineth,Mac. diſput. lib. 2. c. 12. that if the Romans had receiued
out of Italy the blowes Hannibal gaue them by the ouerthrow
of * three armies,At the riuer of Trebia, where Sempronius was ſlaine, at the lake of Thraſimenus where Flaminius was ouercome, and at Cannas where Terentius Varro and L. Paulus loſt the field. that they had neuer beene able
more to haue held vp their head or re-eſtabliſhed their
affaires as they did: Machiauel laieth this ground; That
they had neuer found meanes againe to ſet a foote ſo ſoone
as they did the reſidue of their forces, had it beene out of
Italy. Marke I praie how he erreth; for it is well knowen
that the ouerthrowes they had in their owne country made
them loſe, beſides their ſouldiours, many good townes,
and bred reuolt in their Colonies which followed the fortunes
of the victorious, with diuers other accidents that
ſhooke their eſtate; all, which had not ſucceeded with ſuch
diſaſter if the loſſe had befell them far from Italy: for in
this caſe both heart and meanes had ſerued them more abundantly
then they did, to aſſemble new forces and as
great as they had loſt.Maharbals ſaiing to Hannibal, was, Vincere ſeu Hannibal, ſed victoria vti neſcis. Liu. Dec. 3. l. 2. It is alſo certaine that if Hannibal
had knowen how to make good vſe of his victory the Romans
had beene vtterly ouerthrowen. It muſt needes be,
that their meanes and power were very great, and that God
had an eſpeciall hand in their affaires, ſeeing that in ſuch
diſorder they ſhould recouer themſelues; & that with ſuch
corage, as they refuſed to ſerue their turns with thoſe which
had by flight eſcaped from their ouerthrows, neither made
they any account of redeeming thoſe which were taken priſoners,
nay rather in ſtead of doing this they depriued ſome
of them of all honour and confined others into Sicily. It
ſeemeth to me that theſe reaſons may ſerue to confute thoſe
of Machiauel, and that it is high time we returne to that

principall point concerning the fortune of the Turke.
               8 We will ſay then that the faint-hearted ſlackneſſe of the
Chriſtians hath made way to the Turke for the inlarging
of his limits, ſo as they abut almoſt of all ſides vpon Europe,
and hath beene a meanes that he can now not only attend
the enemie (as Machiauel ſaith) but goe to rowſe
him at his owne home. It is the courſe he hath obſerued
and taken; to ruine his neighbours round about him, and
increaſe his power, which he hath ſo doone as he hath
cleane bereaued vs of all ſtomacke to aſſaile him, yea or
once to dare to attempt it. For though there be Princes
enow which hold it neceſſary for the good of Chriſtendome
to ſet vpon him at his home, yet to this day we ſee
none that will begin to ſtrike the firſt ſtroake, or ſet firſt
hand to the breaking of this ice.
               9 But if euer God gaue vs the courage vertuouſly to attempt
this enterpriſe in reuenge of the oppreſſion and
wrongs Chriſtendome hath endured at his hands; we muſt
not thinke to vndertake it by other meanes then thoſe he
hath himſelfe put in practiſe againſt vs, & that is to ſeeke
him out at his owne home and nobly to embrace the deſſignes
himſelfe hath obſerued; which doing, and hauing
God to guide, we ſhall doubtleſſe obtaine thoſe victories
of him which he hath had of vs. Admit he haue beene for a
time our Schoole-maſter, and that we haue learned of him
to our coſt, it is now high time that wee ſhew how we
haue profited by his inſtructions, and that we know how
to put them in practiſe and pay the intereſts of our damages.
               10 Now to make it appeere that it is not a matter of that
difficultie and danger that ſome imagine, let vs note theſe
examples which are in a maner familiar vnto vs. Had not
Andrew Dorea the courage with a ſmall number of ſhips to
enter into Greece where he got Patras and Coron?
                  1532. 
                  Don
Iohn of Auſtria, did he not affoord a notable proofe hereof
in the yeare 1571. when being Generall of the league, he
ſought the enemie out in the inmoſt parts of the Leuant
                  
where he gaue him battaile with that courage, that though
he were inrferior to him in men & galleies, yet failed he not
(aſsiſted by God) to ouerthrow the moſt puiſſant & great
armie that the Ottomans euer ſet foorth by ſea againſt the
Chriſtians: There is nothing the Turke ſo much feareth,
as to be ſet vpon by the Chriſtians, both becauſe he knowes
they haue valor in them, as alſo for the iealouſie he conceiueth
of the great number of them vnder his obedience:
All which would without queſtion riſe in armes if
they might but once ſee the Chriſtians Coulours flying,
and ſo accompanied, as that they might to ſome purpoſe
make head againſt the Ottamans.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               That he hath made no account
of Fortreſſes.
               
                  1 We must endeuour as well to keepe as conquer.
                  2 The reaſon and vſe of Colonies amongst the ancient.
                  3 Their diſcommodities.
                  4 The cauſes of rebellions.
                  5 An other diſcommoditie of Colonies.
                  6 The Portugals manner of planting Colonies.
                  7 Their benefite.
                  8 Fortreſſes the ſecond meanes of preſeruing an eſtate.
                  9 Their vſe and neceſſitie.
                  10 Machiauels vaine opinion confuted.
                  11 Forces euer in readineſſe, the third meanes of preſeruing an
Eſtate.
                  12 Whether is better to maintaine Fortreſſes vpon the borders,
or to haue an armie euer ready.
                  13 How the Turks cuntries liue in peace by means of the latter.
                  14 In keeping the ſecond meanes, in getting the third is most
approoued.
                  15 Whence the power of the Turke doth grow.
                  16 Wars abroad beget peace at home.
               
               
                  
1 PRinces generally ſtriue by all meanes
to preſerue not onely their own eſtates,
but ſuch prouinces alſo as they haue
conquered; obſeruing what the time,
the humour of the people, and their
meanes will permit. But becauſe each
one takes a different courſe, and of this difference hapneth
both good and euill, I iudge it neceſſarie to ſay ſomwhat
thereof by way of diſcourſe: I will ſpare to meddle
with the forme each one keepeth in the politicke gouernment
of his dominions or principalities; and will draw my
ſelfe within compaſſe of handling, in three ſeuerall points,
all that may be ſaid or alleaged vpon this ſubiect. Firſt
then we will ſpeake of Colonies, next of Fortreſſes, and
laſt of Armies, entertained for the defence of the countrey.
               2 Colonies haue beene one of the meanes which the Ancients
haue moſt ordinarily obſerued; and at this day they
are practiſed to mainteine a ſubdued people vnder the
obedience of a new ſoueraigntie. Such then as allowed of
this manner of preſeruing Eſtates, by way of Colonies beſtowed
the lands of thoſe they had conquered vpon their
naturall ſubiects, equally diſtributing them according to
their merits; ſuppoſing that in ſo doing, they ſhould ſowe
the countrey conquered with new men, which might behaue
themſelues with a like deuotion and dutifull obſeruance
towards them, as vaſſals performe toward their
Soueraigne.
               3 The Grecians vſed them firſt; and then the Romanes:
but this manner of aſſurance is not ſo commendable, as
many may ſuppoſe, inſomuch as it draweth after it theſe
two dangerous conſequents. The firſt is, that when a
Prince depriueth ſuch of their goods as are naturall owners
thereof, to beſtow them vpon his owne ſubiects, it
winneth him and his immortall hatred, accompanied with
an euerlaſting thirſt of reuenge, and of regaining their libertie,

for though ſuch as are ſo deſpoiled of their goods
be but few in number in regard of the Colony, yet it is to
be imagined that they haue many kinsfolkes and friends
intereſſed in their miſeries, and that there need but three
or foure men of reſolution to draw all the reſt to a mutinie
and reuolt. If this be held a difficult matter, yet is it a thing
naturall to become wiſe by anothers miſhaps, and to feare
and be prouident leſt we fall into the like inconuenience
as our neighbours. The apprehenſion of which calamitie
makes vs ofttimes conceiue worſe of the euill then it deſerueth,
eſpecially when the actions of the conquering
prince are grounded rather vpon force then reaſon, as ordinarily
they are.
               4 Moſt commonly the rebellions and inſurrections of
people and cities, happen not ſo much for the outrage
done to a whole communaltie, as for the iniuries particularly
receiued by ſome of thoſe which haue reuolted: but
howſoeuer, ſuch wounds alwaies breed the vniuerſall deſtruction
of a common weale.
                     
                        ••••
                     t. lib. 3. c. 8. Rer. Hiſp. Ri
                        •
                      Neap. l. 2. Reg. Hiſp. 
                        〈…〉
                      de Chriſt 
                        •
                     oem. lib 1. To this purpoſe we may
alledge the example of Roderick King of Spaine, who hauing
rauiſhed Cuba the daughter of Count Iulian, the indignity
of the fact entred ſo far into the harts of al the Nobles
of the country, as euery one took the wrong to be his,
and hauing thereupon taken armes to aide the father in
his reuenge, it grew to a worſe matter; for hereby they gaue
the Moores entrance into the Eſtate who put to death their
King: and were themſelues beholders of the ſpoile of
their country by perſecuting vengeance vpon ſo infamous
an act performed by the diſordinat luſt of him who ought
to haue reproued and chaſtiſed it in others.
               5 The other diſcommodity which they meete who will
ſettle the eſtabliſhment of their fortunes vpon the erections
of Colonies is, that in ſucceſſion of time thoſe men ſo
remoued from their owne country into another newly ſubdued,
faſhion themſelues vnto the climat, humors, and
complexions, and to the ſame minde of preſeruing their
eſtate, as thoſe amongſt whom they are ſent to inhabit.

And hauing thither tranſported their goods and begotten
children, they thenceforth make more reckoning of the
country whither they are come as Colonies, then of their naturall
country whence they were diſplaced: like trees which
planted in an other ſoile change much both of their nature
and taſte. This the more eaſily happeneth to Colonies by
how much the more remote they are from their natiue
place of abode. For proofe, finde we not that euen the
neighbour Colonies of Italy during the time of the ſecond
Punicke war would not in any wiſe contribute to the neceſſities
of Rome their originall mother?Lin. dec. 3. li. 7. 7. Annal. v. c. 545. Olymp. 144.
               
               6 The Portugals obſeruing theſe inconueniences haue
to aſſure the Indies, practiſed a manner of Colonies much
more ſure, tolerable, and leſſe enuied; which is thus:
They plant their Colonies not all at once, but few at a time
by Carauans or companies according as neede requireth,
to inhabite the countries by them newly diſcouered; yet
not throughly to people them, but after as they ſhall ſee
they thriue, and ſo accordingly they by little and little repleniſh
the Colonie. Goa is the beſt prouided of all they
haue eſtabliſhed, and there they contract alliances with the
ancient inhabitants, and take and giue their daughters in
mariages: by this meanes (which is as I haue ſaid the more
plauſible) they liue free from violence, aſſured of the good
wils of the firſt inhabitants who inrich themſelues greatly
by their trafficke and commodities. In this manner they
multiply and are ſcarcely perceiued how, growing to ſuch
a multitude of people as they ſerue to inlarge and eſtabliſh
the name and gouernment of the Portugals. From yeare
to yeare they ad to this increaſe which ſerueth them inſtead
of a fortreſſe amongſt ſuch as they ſubdue, and in ſuch
prouinces as they will people and accuſtome to their faſhions
and rule.
               7 Time and experience make it plainly appeare, that
theſe formes of Colonies are more tollerable and ſure then
any heeretofore practiſed, for in theſe the naturall inhabitants
are ſo farre from being thruſt out of their houſes, as

on the contrarie, they are therein maintained and more
confirmed in the peaceable inoying o
                     •
                   their goods. Moreouer
the vnion and commixture of blood one with another
ſoftning their naturall roughneſſe, retaineth and redoubleth
the affection as well of the auncient inhabitants,
as of thoſe of the Colony. The Spaniards do the like in the
Weſt Indies that which I finde moſt notable heerein, is,
that the one and the other reſt not ſatisfied onely with
eſtabliſhing Colonies, but further they conuert and inſtruct
the Indians in the Chriſtian faith, to Gods glorie
and theirs: It is that which the king of Spaine performeth
and continueth by meanes of ſuch religious orders as he
hath planted among them: for not being able to ſtore
ſo many and ſo large countries as thoſe are with naturall
Spaniards and Portugals, they by this conuerſion and
Baptiſme, make thoſe people become Portugals and
Spaniards.
               8 Hauing diſcourſed of the forme of Colonies, and how
the conquering Prince may profit himſelfe by them, it is
now time that we come to the ſecond thing which may afford
aſſurance to an eſtate. The meanes are many, but the
Chriſtians moſt vſually make choiſe of fortifications, as
ſeeming to them moſt ſtrong bridles to raine in and curbe
both the auncient and newly ſubdued prouinces. There
they appoint their Magazins for munition and other prouiſion
for the wars; there they beſtow gariſons of ſouldiers
for their defence; ſome places they fortifie vpon the
frontiers, where they conſtitute for Gouernors and officers,
creatures of their owne faſhioning, the better to containe
all vnder the obedience of the victorious.
               9 Yet is it that which Machiauell reproueth and reiecteth
as vnprofitable:Diſ. l. 2. c. 24. but becauſe they are reaſons or opininions
ſo weake as that like Spyders cobwebs, they are eaſily
broken, I will not ſpend time farther to confute them;
onely I will ſay thus much, that Alfonſo king of Naples, a
moſt iudicious prince, whoſe authoritie ſhould carrie credit,
alwaies eſteemed this practiſe of fortification moſt

neceſſarie and profitable, eſpecially in a countrey newly
conquered, and not to leaue it open and conſequently
ſubiect to iniurie and reuolt. The proceedings in this
kinde, of Francis Sforce duke of Milan, of the Emperor
Charles the 5. and of ſo many other Princes and Captaines
which haue woone reputation and renowne amongſt men,
are ſuch as who well conſidereth them will laugh at the
opinion of Machiauel. Without ſeeking any further, haue
we not the French for example? who made no account
of erecting cittadels in the Ile of Sicily: but after they had
conquered it,1281. 13. Ap. they aſſoone loſt it not without a moſt lamentable
ſlaughter executed on them by the inhabitants;
but contrariwiſe deriuing their wiſdome from their owne
miſerie, after they once tooke in hand to make fortreſſes in
ſundry places of Italy, there was no meanes but by peace
to diſlodge them.1516. The Mamelucks who were in the ſame
error of not truſting to Fortreſſes, found themſelues in
leſſe then two daies depriued by Selim of the moſt part of
their liues, eſtate, and powers. The Spaniard imbracing
the indifferency of this opinion, and deſirous to gratifie
the Flemings whom they thought to appeaſe by this moderation,
returned into their hands the ſtrong holdes of
their Prouinces: which they had no ſooner done, but they
were neere-hand expelled the Low-countries.
               10 And though all theſe examples are but too ſufficient
to confute the opinion of Machiauel, yet will I bring him
once more vpon the ſtage, and ſift him a little better: See
heere the ſubſtance of what he ſaith: Either thou art able
(ſaith he) to bring ſufficient ſtore of men into the field (in
which caſe fortreſſes are not any waies neceſſarie) or thou
haſt not meanes to leauie ſuch forces as are requiſite to defend
and warrant thy eſtate, and then they are vnprofitable.
Marke, I praie, the wrong courſe he taketh, walking
as he doth in extreames, without keeping the meane, moſt
neceſſarie in theſe propoſitions: to ſay the truth, he is
much miſtaken; ſince this matter as others, ſhould be diſtinguiſhed
by the portions and qualities thereof, the better

and more eaſily to vnderſtand it. In my opinion then
(which I deliuer not to exclude others) we muſt ſay thus:
Either a Prince hath meanes to leuie men out of hand by
an ordinarie continuance of armes, or elſe he muſt haue
time to doe it, be it either by leuying a ſufficient number
of his ſubiects trained vp to armes, and by the aſſiſtance of
friends and aſſociats, or of neighbours, which in regard of
their particular intereſt, will willingly ioyne with him,
that he may protect them from the ſame iniurie he may
himſelfe receiue. In theſe two firſt caſes, Fortreſſes would
prooue more profitable then neceſſarie: or elſe a Prince is
of that power as he is able at once to aſſemble ſo manie
men as he will keepe or winne the field from the enemie,
or will be able, at leaſt, commodiouſly to ſuccour the place
beſieged. In theſe two reſpects, Cittadels are neceſſarie
though not much profitable, becauſe they by their conſtant
defence, ſtoppe and intertaine the enemie, affoord
by ſuch temporiſing, meanes and leaſure to order matters;
for (as the Venetians ſay) Chi ha tempo, ha vita, who hath
time, hath life.
               11 The third meanes for a Prince to preſerue his eſtate,
is that which thoſe allow of, who not truſting to Fortreſſes,
and making no account of Colonies, doe ordinarily intertaine
ſtrong companies of horſe and foote, and in ſuch
numbers, as they may alwaies containe their ſubiects in naturall
obedience, hinder rebellions, and which moſt importeth,
repell, and oppoſe the enemy, and as occaſion requireth,
viſit him at his owne home. In time paſſed the
Mamelucks practiſed this forme of gouernment;Aemil. lib. 3. Tuicae. and the
Turkes at this day obſerue it in all points. The Viſconti
ſometime Lords of Milan, vſed this forme of preſeruing
their eſtates, and amongſt others Azzo-Viſconti ordinarily
gaue intertainment (yea euen in time of peace) to 22000.
horſe, and they did him no ſmall ſeruice.
               12 A man may yet put one doubt more of this matter,
the reſolution whereof ſhall fit very well for the courſe and
concluding of the diſcourſe. That is, which is beſt either

to erect Cittadels or alwaies to maintaine a great army.
Experience (our common Miſtres) teacheth vs that for
the conſeruation of great Princes eſtate ſortreſſes are the
beſt; becauſe they doe not ſo much incumber nor diſlike
the ſubiect as doth an army, whoſe troupes diſperſed in diuers
parts of the country waſte and diſorder all: on the
other ſide ſouldiours ſhut vp in a fortreſſe are not ſo inſolent
and licentious as thoſe commonly are which keepe
the field, yea and that oft-times with more hauocke then
if the enemy himſelfe had ranſaked and ouerrun it. The
liberty which armies diſperſed thorowout an eſtate challenge
and aſſume to themſelues, is ſuch as makes them
forget all policy and military diſcipline: the example of
the Milanois heerein will not be beſide the purpoſe. They
neuer complained of the Garriſon of the Caſtle,1765. but when it
came to that that Lewes the 12. would haue lodged his
horſe within the towne they preſently reuolted; whereupon
enſued the loſſe of the eſtate. What was it that wrought
the reuolt of the Flemings? was it not the obſtinate mutining
of only 1500. Spaniards, who crying after their paie
ouerran and made ſpoile of all the country? The ſelfe ſame
Spaniſh nation diſquieted the Eſtate of Milan vnder the
Marques of Guaſto and the Ile of Sicily vnder Ferdinand
Gonzaga.
                  1526. Paul. Iou. lib. 7. de Vita vir. ill. The Sorians and the Egyptians no ſooner ſaw Selims
ſtandards diſplaced but they rebelled againſt the Mamelucks,
whoſe armies had maruellouſly oppreſſed them,
they hauing beene conſtrained to maintaine them at their
owne charges.
               13 Whereto I know may be replied, that the Turke neuertheleſſe
peaceably holdeth his eſtate after the ſame
manner we ſpeake of, his forces being euermore on foote
and in a readineſſe: it is true, and ſo is it that to cleere
this, two principall reaſons may be alledged. The one
that he hath depriued ſuch his ſubiects as are Chriſtians
and of a different law, of all vſe of armes; and that he hath
brought them to this paſſe that they cannot vant to hold
any thing in propriety: which was not practiſed towards

the aboue mentioned; moreouer all aſſemblies vpon whatſoeuer
cauſe are expreſly forbidden them: he keeps them
vnder and makes no more reckning of them then of ſheepe
pend vp in a fould vſing them like brute beaſts, not once
vouchſafing to imploy them in the wars. The other reaſon
is that they haue no power of themſelues to oppoſe the
Turkes ſo mighty forces; and (which is worſt of all) they
neuer haue had any forraine ſuccour to incourage them to
ſuch an enterpriſe.
               14 I will forbeare to diue any deeper into this ſubiect;
me thinkes we may ſee ſufficiently by this how much more
ſupportable are Cittadels, then armies ordinarily intertained.
But if we ſpeake of conquering, I allow that armies
are more to be preferred before fortreſſes, conſidering that
we thereby inioy meanes to embrace all occaſions offered,
and at an inſtant to execute both the will and deſigne of a
Prince ſo prouided.
               15. To ſay the truth it is that which the Ottamans haue
practiſed, to aduance their Empire to ſuch greatneſſe as at
this day we ſee it; it is that which hath heaped on them
the honors of ſo many victories, and which hath endowed
them with authoritie, reputation and meanes. They haue
alwaies had (as they yet haue) their armies in a readineſſe,
and haue fought with their neighbours in a manner with
as much aduantage as a man armed againſt one that is
naked.
               16 Some I know will maruell how ſuch a number of people
ſo armed, can containe themſelues from reuolting. I
am of opinion, that if they were not ordinarily imploied as
they are, in attempts of warre, that in the end their multitudes
growen ranke with quiet, would eaſily be drawen to
rebellion or mutinies; which the ſouldiers of Alexander
the Great can witneſſe, for whileſt the enemy kept them in
doings, who were then they more hardy and valerous? but
after their victories, who more inſolent and vnſufferable?
The Roman armies, how fortunate were they whileſt they
had continuall warre, atchieuing all their interpriſes in a

manner as they could wiſh? but after their conqueſt they
became ſo turbulent and vnquiet, as they aſſumed to themſelues
the authoritie of creating Emperors, and for the
moſt part ſo licentiouſly, as euery armie made his particular
choiſe, ſo as there was no remedie but to trie by fight
who ſhould carie it; which occaſioned the ouerthrow of
the ſtate. The French, haue they not euermore faithfully
ſerued their king againſt ſtrangers? but ſo ſoone as they had
peace with the Engliſh, and after with the Spaniard, they
filled euery corner of their country with ſedition, ſackings,
cruelties, and ſlaughters; and that with ſuch obſtinate perſiſting,
as the contagion thereof hath not beene able for
25. yeeres ſpace to be remooued. But that which is moſt
to be lamented, is the ſcandall they haue brought vpon
the church. This ſelfe thing may be appropriated to
the Flemings, and the cauſe may be imputed to idleneſſe,
and the exceeding plentie wherein they liued. The example
of Bajazet the ſecond ſhall ſerue to cloſe vp this diſcourſe,
for he being giuen ouer to his eaſe; the ſoldiours,
who could not brooke ſuch idleneſſe, ſo awaked the courage
of his two ſonnes, Selim and Acomath, as all the forces
of the Empire (which had eſtabliſhed the Turkiſh ſcepter)
were diuided into two, and it lacked not much of being
vtterly ouerthrowne, euery one for his part ſeconding the
rebellions of the ſonnes againſt the father.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               That he hath trained vp his ſoldiours
to valour and hardineſſe.
               
                  1 Why the armies of theſe daies conſist not of ſo good ſouldiers
as in former times.
                  2 Principall cauſes of victories.
                  3 What care is to be had in leuying of good ſouldiers: and this
to be wrought by a fourefould meanes.
                  4 By election.
                  
                     
5 Exerciſe.
                  6 Honors and profit.
                  7 The Turkes proceeding heerein.
               
               1 IT is ſeldome ſeene that the armies of
theſe times conſiſt of good ſouldiours,
for the more we vary from the courſe
our forefathers tooke to bring them to
perfection, by ſo much the more are we
depriued of that happineſſe which were
to be deſired and ſeriouſly ſought after by Princes, and
thoſe which as Commanders would reape honor and profite
by the wars.
               2 Victory (which dependeth of the diuine will) deriueth
her ſucceſſe and principall ground from the multitude
of men, but eſpecially from the wiſdome of the Commanders
and from the valour and generoſitie of the Souldiour.
               3 It is requiſite then that we looke more narrowlie then
we doe vnto their choice, and that they be ſuch as we may
honour and profit our ſelues by them: now we muſt deliuer
how we may light vpon, or make good and hardy ſouldiours,
which is doone in my opinion by a foure fold
meanes, by election, exerciſe, honor, and profit.
               4 By election, becauſe all thoſe which we leuie for the
wars haue not that naturall inclination to valour and courage,
nor a conſtitution of bodie fit to indure the trauailes
and dangers incident thereunto. Moreouer a gallant faſhion
and ſpirite are not found in euery one, much leſſe a
reſolution to attend, defie, and aſſaile the enemy; alſo euery
mans hart will not ſerue him to enter the trenches,
throw himſelfe deſperatly into the dike, ſcall the wals, offer
himſelfe valiantly, to make good a breach in deſpite of
the Cannon, of ſtones, of wilde-fire, and of death it ſelfe:
Their complexions perhaps will not brooke that they
ſhould ſpend the whole day in continuall turmoiles without
eating, and the night without reſt, ſo as where ſome

make account that Antwerpe is able to make 30000. men,
Venice 40000. Gant 60000. Paris 100000. all fit and able
to beare armes, me thinkes they ſhould be vnderſtood
that they are ſuch as haue the age required, but not the
diſpoſition proper to ſuch a profeſſion. For proofe hereof
haue we not of late ſeene that the Prince of Parma hath
ranged vnder the obedience of the King of Spaine euen
with ſmall forces thoſe of Gant & Antwerp which had formerly
together with thoſe of the low countries rebelled againſt
their Soueraigne?1584. & 1585. The Romans held in ſuch eſteeme
this manner of making choiſe of their Souldiours
as when they would expreſſe a leuy of men they termed it
Delectum agere vel habere to make a choiſe. In our times
no man hath beene more carefull and circumſpect in the
choiſe of his ſouldiours (at the leaſt of the Captaines of Italy)
then Coſmo de Medici Duke of Florence; and indeede
he was prouided of the beſt and moſt approued ſouldiours
of his time.
               5 To election we are to adde exerciſe,Veget. lib. 1. c. 15. without the which
there is no forwardneſſe or conſtitution of body be it neuer
ſo ſtrong, able to attaine to the perfection requiſite to execute
and accompliſh, as appertaineth to a good, braue, and
noble ſouldiour.
               6 But if the Generall be ſo wiſe as to ioine to exerciſe
profit and honor,Eo enim impenditur labor & periculum apliriſque vnde emolumentum & honos ſperatur: T. Liu. then is it that there is no danger or difficulty
be it neuer ſo great which his ſouldiours will not ouercome;
no incounter which they will not force; no enterpriſe
which they will not happily compaſſe. As for a
Prince there is no mony better beſtowed then that wherewith
his Captaines whet and intertaine the courage of the
Souldiour.Plut. lib. 2. c. 5. & 6. li. 1
                        •
                     . c. 4. Gel. lib. 5. cap. 6. This was the cauſe why the Romans beſide the
ordinarie pay of their armies, ordained crownes for them
which had in the wars ſaued the life of a citizen, firſt entred
the breach, or boorded a ſhip: theſe were termed Coronae
Ciuicae, Murales, & Nauales.
               
               7 The Turkes, to our confuſion, are not inſerior to the
Romans, be it either for the choice they make of their ſouldiours,

or for rewarding them. For they chuſe from among
the nations vnder their obedience, the moſt warlike, and
take of them but the flower and ſuch as are moſt proper
for the wars, ſparing not afterwards to recompence them
at the full. It is a thing incredible with what continuall
excerciſe they inure their ſouldiours, in ſo much that euen
from the cradle (if a man may ſo ſay) they traine them vp
vnto the wars. The intertainment the Turke giueth them
is ſufficient; but as for the rewards, honours, and commodities
he ſhareth among them, it is hardly to be expreſſed:
There is not any Prince at this day liuing that may in this
regard bee compared to him; and which is more, the meaneſt
of his ſouldiers vpon his vertuous behauiour in armes
is capable of attaining to the moſt eminent charges and
dignities of his eſtate, and of inriching himſelfe with ineſtimable
treaſure. To confirme this, the goods which
Meehmet Baſſa left behinde him, (who of a Chriſtian
Apoſtate aſpired to that greatneſſe) were valued at two Millians
of Crownes. In a word they are ſure that rewarde waiteth
alwaies vpon valour. Moreouer the proweſſe of the
priuate ſouldiours cannot be ſmothered amongſt them, it
is rather immediatly diſcouered and notice taken thereof.
Of all the Ottoman Princes Mahomet the ſecond was the
moſt bountifull, for he gaue beyond meaſure, ſo as ſometime
he increaſed the ſouldiours pay a thouſand fould.
Selim the firſt did the like; and it is worth the noting, that
as thoſe two ſurpaſſed the reſidue in liberality, ſo did they
in honourable and triumphant victory.
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               That he hath maintained his
Souldiers in military
Diſcipline.
               
                  1 A very great army may be eaſily ouerthrowne by a meane
army.
                  
                     
2 The cauſe hereof, and benefit of the latter.
                  3 Care is to be had that an army be not ouercharged with
baggage.
                  4 A Generall-with more eaſe may command a meane, then too
great an army.
                  5 Souldiers are animated by the perſwaſion and preſents of
their chiefe commander.
                  6 They are in ſeruice to be well acquainted with one an other.
                  7 The incumbrance of huge and ouer great Armies.
                  8 How it commeth to paſſe that the Turkes ſo great numbers
of men proue victorious.
                  9 Defects in Chriſtian armies.
                  10 Obedience of the Turkes.
                  11 Battailes loſt through diſobedience of the Souldiours.
                  12 The military diſcipline of the Turkes notable.
               
               1 THe happy ſucceſſe of battailes by thoſe
of ancient times with ſuch wiſdome atchiued,
makes it moſt apparent vnto vs
that moſt commonly the meane armies
haue ouercome the great. Alexander
the Great, diuers Grecian Captaines, amongſt
others Miltiades and Themiſtocles, and among the
Romans Lucullus, Scylla, Pompey and Caeſar alwaies aſſailed
and vanquiſhed the barbarous people rather with vnequall
then equall numbers, if we reſpect the multitude;
but they went far beyond them if we conſider their militarie
vertue. In theſe latter times the Commanders of
the Emperour Charles the 5. and of King Philip his ſonne
haue likewiſe gained the victory of many armies greater
then this.
               2 To ſuch as demaund the reaſon of it, I wil anſwere that
it was becauſe the principall ſtrength and ſinew of an army
conſiſteth, in affection, in military Diſcipline, and in a
well diſpoſed order in the day of battell: without which
parts an army is as fraile as glaſſe. A few may be more eaſily
and orderly ranged then many. Vertue vnited is alwaies

more powerfull then ſeparated and diſiointed.
Hence is it that bodies of an indifferent ſtature are for the
moſt part more vigorous then ſuch as are ouer great and
huge, which the Poet (ſpeaking of Fidaeus) expreſly ſignifieth
in theſe words. Maior in exiguo regnabat corpore
virtus. Great vertue in a little body raignd. And Virgil
alluding to the Bees ſaith, Ingentes animi anguſto in corpore
verſantur. In ſlender bodies they haue mighty mindes:
queſtionleſſe a meane army muſt needes be more ſtable
and vnited then a great, becauſe multitude is naturally accompanied
with confuſion, commonly waited vpon by
diſorder.
               3 Moreouer, it is a thing of high conſideration to be able
to take ſuch order that a campe be not incombred with
baggage: rather that it be free and manageable, ſo as it
may be euery where commodiouſly cōducted, ranged and
euer in a readineſſe to gaine and make good dangerous &
difficult ſtraites and paſſages; that it be not tired and diſcouraged
for the long marches it muſt often vndertake;
that it doe not faint for ſuch accidents as diuerſly chance,
nor for any exploits or executions which preſent themſelues
vnexpected. All which a meane campe will be more
proper to performe then a great: for it ſhall not neede ſo
great a quantity of victuals, nor ſo great an incombrance
of baggage or cariage as the other.
               4 Moreouer ſeeing it is more profitable and neceſſary that
an army be conducted & gouerned by one only Generall;
and that it depend of no other then him; It will be more
eaſily effected in a meane then a great army, eſpecially
compounded of diuers nations. And this dependance
ſhall be better ordered if the Generall can content himſelfe
with ſmall ſtore of luggage and that well truſſed vp. The
multitude of meane cauſes ſlacketh alwaies the courſe of
the efficient, and keepeth backe the fruite thereof. A little
army hath not neede of ſo much luggage as a great.
               5 And it is much better that the Captaine himſelfe know
his ſouldiours and they him; then to rely vpon the credit

and report of ſuch as are vnder his charge; for the ſouldiour
that ſhall heare himſelfe named by his Captaine aduanceth
himſelfe ſo much the more, and becommeth more deſirous
of honor. Whereas if he ſee himſelfe forgotten and vnteſpected
of him which commandeth, he groweth diſtaſted
and out of heart, and almoſt careleſſe how matters haue
their procedings. Who doubteth that the preſence of the
Captaine or Generall of an army doth not ſerue as a motiue
to the ſouldiour to make him diligently preſerue his reputation,
and to ſhunne the reproch of cowardiſe? which he
will not ſo carefully performe, if he finde himſelfe out of
the preſence of his Commander, or that his Commander
make as if he did not ſee him.
               6 It is good alſo that the ſouldiers frequent brotherly
together, for that aſſureth them more, and maketh them
truſt to one anothers aſſiſtance in time of the moſt croſſe
fortunes. All theſe parts incounter and are intertained
more eaſily in a meane, then in a great armie.
               7 Which is often attended vpon by more inconuenienences
then the other, as by famine, plagues, contagious
mutinies and diſſentions. There is yet another dangerous
inconuenience which is moſt vſually the companion of a
multitude; that is, that they forme to themſelues a confidence
of their owne forces greater then they ought: of
this confidence followeth a contempt of the aduerſe
power, of this contempt a preſumption, author of infinite
miſchiefes.
               8 But how happeneth it then (will ſome ſay) that the
Turkes haue euery where gained the victorie by multitude?
Would you know how? Becauſe they haue betimes
trained vp and inſtructed their great armies, to keepe ſo
good an order, as well in execution, iudgement, military
diſcipline, readineſſe, as diſpoſition to armes, that they
are become as tractable, and eaſie to manage as ours
though meane and few in number.
               9 On the other ſide we haue ſuffered our armies to ſlide
into ſuch inſolencie and libertie, as we can hardly rule and

conduct them without ſo many dangers, confuſions and
luggage, as it were enough to trouble Captaines of great
policie and experience; and to ſay the trueth, ſee wee
not that the Turke more eaſily furniſheth an hundred
thouſand men with vittailes, then we fiftie thouſand? for
beſides that his ſouldiers make not, as ours, any account of
the diuerſitie of vittailes, of delicacie or of toothſome
morſels, they drinke no Wine nor Beere, which importeth
the conſideration of almoſt the one halfe of our munition
and charge.
               10 What need I ſpeake of obedience, nurſe of the order
obſerued amongſt them? ſince it was neuer ſeene that
the Turkes euer loſt battaile through diſorder, much leſſe
left off purſuing any attempt for their ſouldiers mutinies.
               11 Whereas almoſt all the battailes we haue bid them,
had not beene loſt, but by the meere diſorder and diſobedience
of our men. Whereto may we impute the miſerable
loſſe of Nicapolie,
                  1396. but to the diſordinate raſhneſſe of
the French, who ſerued at that time in the armie? Sigiſmond
king of Bohemia (afterward Emperour) ſeeing that
contrary to his will and commandement they aduanced
themſelues as couragiouſly as vnaduiſedly. What ſhall we
ſpeake of the ouerthrowe of the ſame Sigiſmond which
hapned ſome few yeeres after?1409. came it not to paſſe by
meanes of the diſordering of his infantery? which being
not yet fully ſet in battaile array were couered with a cloud
of arrowes, let flie by the enemy ſo to the purpoſe as they
were all hewen in peeces euen vnder the noſes of his horſe;
which ſeeing themſelues deſtitute of foote were ſtrooke
with ſuch a feare as they betooke themſelues to flight not
without the loſſe of many good ſouldiours and worthy
Captaines, all to the ſhame and confuſion of the Chriſtians.
Ladiſlaus King of Polonia,
                  1444. was he not ouercome at
Varna through the diſorders of the Biſhops of Strigonia and
Varadin? who to the end to chace inconſideratly the enemy,
ſhaken and flying in one part of his army, forſooke
their rankes to purſue them, ſo making way for them: who

laying hold on the occaſion came with the reſt of their army
to charge them there where they lay moſt open, in ſuch
ſort as they wan the victory moſt miſerably ſlaughtering
the Chriſtians.1541. At Buda,
                  1538. at Exechium,
                  1560. at Gerba, and in ſundry
other places where we haue bene ouercome, it proceeded
rather of our diſorders then of the Turkiſh forces.
               12 So as we muſt acknowledge that the Turke excelleth
vs both in number of good Souldiours and in all other military
diſcipline: He is followed with ſuch numbers of men
as it ſeemeth he relieth wholy on their multitude, but it is
in ſo good a manner as if he reſpected nought but order &
military diſcipline, parts (to our diſhonor) far from vs.
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               That he hath made no reckning of
other forces then his owne.
               
                  1 The wars are to be maintained by our owne ſtrength, neither
muſt we rely vpon forraine powers.
                  2 The good and ill that reſulteth of both theſe.
                  3 Conditions of confederate forces.
                  4 Other inconueniences which ariſe from aſſiſtance of forraine
powers.
                  5 Examples of Leagues againſt the Turkes.
                  6 Their defects, hindrances of their ſucceſſe.
                  7 The Turkes not accuſtomed to make Leagues with any, but
vſing their owne forces, haue ouerthrowne many armies
confederates.
                  8 With whom they might well haue ioyned in league to their
aduantage.
               
               1 ALl high enterpriſes either for preſeruation
of an eſtate, or for denouncing of
warre, haue beene ill plotted and as ill
caried when they haue relied vpon the
aſſiſtance and fauour of a third power,
and not of our owne; ſeeing that from

hopes and proiects ſo ill grounded we neuer come to inioy
the fruits which ſuch a ſuccour, the deſſeigne of him
that enterpriſeth, & his extraordinary preparation promiſed
vs; rather they are infallibly attended on by ſome lamentable
accident which vtterly ouerthroweth them.
               2 Since oftentimes it falleth out that the expectation of
ſuch ſuccour promiſed, ſerueth rather to ſlacke the courſe
of our endeauours, and leſſen the preparation of the enterpriſe,
then otherwiſe to forward or better them; were it not
for the confidence of ſuch ſuccour he that attempteth
would prepare his forces proportionable to his proiect,
and not truſt to outward helpes either of friend or confederat.
Who doubteth, when we ſo repoſe our ſelues vpon
an others forces, and that he is at charge for our loues
ſake, that he doth not make vs more backward to prouide
and disburſe of oure owne ſtore? But this is not all: the
worſt is, that while we thus expect, time waſteth vnprofitably,
and occaſion (which once eſcaped cannot be laid hold
on) is let ſlip and loſt without recouery: for whilſt we ſo
attend our aſſiſtants our practiſes are diſcouered.
               3 And who will beleeue that a friend or aſſociat will embrace
the deſſeign of him he aſſiſteth, or wiſh his good fortune
with ſuch harty affection, as he wil not be ready vpon
the leaſt occaſion he ſhall deſire to finde, to leaue him in
the lurch? And without queſtion this occaſion will offer it
ſelfe at any time whenſoeuer he hath a purpoſe to diſſolue
the league and couenants agreed vpon betweene them; eſpecially
if he be the ſtronger and more mighty, and finde
not himſelfe intereſſed in the ſucceſſe of the enterpriſe, for
which he tooke armes and became confederate.
               4 We may alſo adde another defect and imperfection;
& that is, if the ſuccour we attend be to be aſſembled from
diuers places, or, that the windes (if it be by ſea) or ſome
vnlooked for accident (if by land) hinder by ſo many
meanes the preparations for the war and intended voiage,
as that the ſeaſon fit for execution eſcapeth him that enterpriſeth;
ſo as before he begin to march or ſet forward to

the Rendeuous his opportunities of attempting or atchieuing
any memorable act, vtterly faile him in a matter which
he had before diſcreetely enough plotted and diſpoſed:
moreouer he cannot beare ſwaie as maſter of the confederate
forces, inſomuch as he which ſendeth ſuccours may
vnderhand deliuer to his Commanders memorials and inſtructions
more ſtrict and limited, then the neceſſitie of
the vndertaken affaire would permit. Alſo the leaſt diſtaſte
either of the Prince which aſſiſteth, or of the Captaine
which conducteth ſuch ſuccours, ſerueth oft-times to diſmiſſe
the promiſed forces, deceiue the others expectation,
and bring all he vndertaketh to nothing: So as he remaineth
not onely more weake by this diſappointment,
but his owne forces alſo become vnprofitable, and conſequently
himſelfe expoſed to all wrong and ruine: for as if
one only wheele of a clocke be out of temper, it ſufficeth
to diſorder the whole motion; ſo where the vndertaker
faileth but of one part of his promiſed troupes, the effects,
which in part depend thereon, likewiſe faile, and the courſe
of his warlike deſignes remaine croſſed and peruerted. I
will not forget alſo to ſay that a campe conſiſting of ſuch
borrowed peeces, hath neceſſarily need of many heads to
command it, and an armie compounded of ſo manie
heads (becauſe of the diuerſity of opinions and affections)
will moſt commonly haue the woorſe when it commeth to
handie blowes.
               5 We may illuſtrate theſe diſcommodities with examples
that touch vs neere, and are familiar vnto vs, and were
not long ſince practiſed; for this cauſe I will more willingly,
then otherwiſe I would, heere produce them. In our
time we haue ſeene two moſt memorable leagues between
the Pope, the king of Spaine, and the Venetians, conſenting
and vnited to vndertake one warre againſt the Turke:
the one was vnder Pope Paul the third,1537. and the other in
the life time of Pius Quintus. The firſt was caried with an
exceſſiue charge, yet without any effect woorthy ſo great
an aſſembly: The cauſe in my opinion proceeded of the

difficulty that was found to ioyn in one body the confederat
forces, and draw them together at the Rendeuous in due
ſeaſon: for they met not till the end of September. Although
an other inconuenience may be alledged to this
purpoſe, which ouerthrew, the good ſucceſſe of ſuch a holy
and Chriſtian attempt; yet it may appeere that to auoide the
ſhame and diſhonour that followed thereof, it had beene
eaſie to haue performed ſomewhat of more memorable
conſequence, then was the taking of Caſtle-nouo, if we had
knowen how to husband the times and occaſions fit for the
imployment of ſo combined a power. Concerning the ſecond,
which was (as I ſaid) in the time of Pius Quintus,
                  1570. the
army of the Venetians, very gallant and ſtrong, ſpent all the
ſommer in attending the Galleis of Spaine which were to
conuoy ſuccours into the Ile of Cypres then attempted by
the Turke; ſo as this ſlackneſſe of aſſembling the Galleyes
was a cauſe that the army became almoſt quite vnfurniſhed
of good ſouldiours drawen together to their great coſts by
reaſon of the plague which had made a moſt pitifull hauocke
amonge them. Notwithſtanding all this they forbeare
not to make towards Cypres ſo late, as by the way they
receiued the newes of the lamentable taking of Nicoſia:
Which made them imagine that the Turkes had, vpon that
commodity, moſt ſtrongly manned their Galleys (as it was
likely enough) with land Souldiours, and that therefore
there was more appearance of danger thē of good ſucceſſe
in aſſailing them: vpon which conſideration they held it
beſt to turne their courſe homeward and refer that buſineſſe
to an other time; hauing then thus diſhonorably behaued
themſelues: returning they incountred ſo many misfortunes,
as well weather beaten by reaſon of the Winter then
approching, they at length arriued at their home ſorely
bruſed and ſpoiled. The yeare following the army of the
conſederats met, notwithſtanding all this very late, yet vndertooke
they to incounter the enemy, of whome they got
that ſo renowned victory in the yeare 1571. if God had
permitted vs to reape thereby thoſe worthy fruits that we

had reaſon to expect. Now for all this Cypres was not recouered
but remained to the infidell as the reward and wages
of his valour. The third yeare of the league the king
of Spaine, in ſtead of purſuing his enterpriſe againſt the
Turke as he had determined, cauſed Don Iohn of Auſtria
Admirall of his fleete to ſtay at Meſſina, becauſe he then
doubted that the French would aſſaile Flanders, with ſuch
forces as they had that yeare rather ſuffered to take breath
then wholy caſed and diſmiſſed: So as the whole ſeaſon
was ſpent vnprofitably without attempting ought worthy
ſuch preparation, as the confederates had in due time ſet
forth. This was an occaſion of exceſſiue charge, and that
the armies did not once ſtirre till it was too late, attending
what their neighbours would do, who, as I haue ſaid, ſeemed
to threaten the King of Spaine with ſome attempt
vpon his country of Flanders. In the meane time the Venetians,
tired with the charge and trouble they were at to no
purpoſe, treated a peace with the Turke.
               
               6 Who will make any queſtion now (thoſe things well
weighed and conſidered) that if the leagues (both the firſt
and ſecond) had beene well caried without theſe croſſings,
iealouſies and ſuſpitions which accompanied them,
(though vainly and vpon no ground) but that they would
haue brought foorth ſome woorthie and honorable fruite,
to the glory and honour of God, the peace of his church,
the encreaſe and eſtabliſhment of the Chriſtian commonwealth?
This may be enough to prooue that forces compounded
of diuers nations, depending of many and different
heads, are in marching more ſlowe, and at a time of
need leſſe effectuall then others. It may appeere to ſome
that I heereby inferre, that leagues betweene Princes are
vnprofitable, and therefore not to be made: ſo farre is it
from me to maintaine that opinion, as I rather willingly
embrace the contrarie: but I reſerue a time to handle how
and in what manner it would be good to make ſuch a
league, (eſpecially againſt the Turke) when I ſhall arriue
at the place appointed for this purpoſe, to the end I may

diſcourſe of it at full.Vid. l. 3. c. 7. 8. 9. Now let vs returne to the argument
of diſcourſe in handling.
               7 The Ottomans neuer made league, either offenſiue or
defenſiue with any: and neuer had helpe of ſtrangers: on
the contrarie, they haue alwaies had to doe with armies
compounded of different nations confederate, and conducted
by ſundrie Commanders, all which (as ill vnited,
not vnderſtanding one another) they haue euermore vanquiſhed.
Moreouer we haue ordinarily ſeene them more
forward and deliuer about their enterpriſes being alone,
then accompanied; and conſequently more vnited in their
force, more nimble in execution, and (it muſt needes follow)
more renowned and fortunately victorious.
               8 Yet they had no lacke of whom where with to practiſe
their aſſociations (if they had approoued them as good &
neceſſarie) as among other with the Soldan of Caito, with
the kings of Carmania and of Perſia, and with many other
great princes al of their owne ſect and religion, who would
not (as it is to be ſuppoſed) haue ſet light by their league
and amitie; eſpecially then when they ſaw them ſo increaſe
in power and greatneſſe. But they haue euer made
verie ſlender account of ſuch practizes and confederacies,
eſteeming them vnprofitable for him, who of himſelfe
hath a high courage, and forces anſwerable wherewithal to
goe thorough with a conqueſt, which they iudge will admit
no ſharing or diuiſion, ſince the ambition of rule
ſtriues to be alone and brookes no fellowſhip, no not betweene
brothers; as little betweene father and ſonne. It is
true, the Turkes haue ſometime taken to their ſeruice
ſome few troopes of Allarbs paied as mercenaries, in like
manner as now a daies the French entertaine the Switzers
and other forreigne nations; but they neuer termed
them, as they now vſe, Confederates or
Aſſociates, titles inuented purpoſely
to giue colour
and applauſe to
ſuch leuies.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VII.
               That he hath to power ioyned
cunning and deceit.
               
                  1 Machiauels peruerſe opinion of not obſeruing faith, reiected.
                  2 The ground of a Princes authoritie and eſtimation laide by
the obſeruation of his faith.
                  3 Confutation of Machiauels opinion.
                  4 Breach of faith a heinous crime.
                  5 Other miſchiefes that ſpring out of Machiauels poſition.
                  6 To obſerue faith is godly, honeſt, and profitable.
                  7 What we are to conceiue of the Turkes falſhood and periury:
               
               
                  
                     MAchiauel amongſt other vertues wherewith
hee would adorne his imagined
Prince,Princ. c. 18. woonderfully commendeth diſloyaltie
in a great perſon, affirming that
he ought not to make reckoning to obſerue
his treaties of peace or ought elſe
he vndertaketh, at the leaſt when his game is faire: and
that he may at ſuch a time without ſcruple of conſcience,
or other honeſt reſpect, violate his faith, breake the lawes
of nations, and his oath. A thing queſtionleſſe vnbefitting
a magnanimous ſpirit, and which ought neuer to haue
place among the actions of a Chriſtian Prince, to the end
he may not by ſo foule and diſhoneſt a ſtaine diſgrace the
reſidue of his vertuous operations. This makes me eſteem
this axiom ſo lewd and deteſtable, that we ſhould bluſh, ſo
much as to imagine it, much leſſe to propound it as a precept
for Princes; who are not to profeſſe other then Iuſtice
and generoſitie. It is good for none but thoſe whoſe
caſe is deſperate, and who reſpect not that their poſteritie
condemne them for men of foule and cauterized ſoules.
               2 To ſay the trueth, no man can with reaſon gainſay, renowne
and a good reputation, as well at home as abroad,

to be the moſt firme foundation of all principalitie. And
what reputation can a Prince haue either among his owne
people or ſtrangers, if he be noted for a diſloyall, vnfaithfull,
and periurde perſon, one that ſtands neither to his
word nor agreement?
               3 Machiauel to conceale the fault he not ignorantly
committeth, ſaith, that this is ſometimes moſt requiſite for
the good of Princes affaires, ſince occaſion once paſſed
is irrecouerable. What more meere folly could he diſcouer
to his confuſion, then in thus concluding, that a Prince
is not to regard the bond of his faith, if the good of his
eſtate preſent an occaſion to violate it? Truely none at
all: neither were it neceſſarie according to Gods lawes, or
the carriage of humane affaires, that Chriſtian Princes were
of that minde; for it would prooue the direct courſe neuer
to ſee but fire and ſword amongſt vs.
               4 Such as are good deteſt theſe opinions,1539 as did heretofore
Frances the firſt; who profeſſing faith and honour, reiected
ſuch counſaile when the Emperour Charles the 5.
about the eſtabliſhment of the affaires of Flanders, paſſed
thorow France, and vpon the Kings word, croſſing his
country came to Paris. That word this Noble Prince preferred
before the greateſt good that could betide his eſtate,
if he would haue retained the Emperour, and conſtrained
him to forgoe the places and eſtates he held in
Lombardy and Italy, whereto the King pretended a right,
which he often vnprofitably diſputed, as did alſo Henry
the ſecond.
               5 By the ſame reaſon a man may alſo ſay that ſometimes
it is well done to ranſacke Churches, robbe Altars, oppreſſe
innocents, and ſuccour the wicked: for there is not
any vice ſo deteſtable, or crime ſo hainous that ſometime
carrieth not with it a ſhew and colour of good, and proueth
not profitable to him which in due ſeaſon performeth
it; were it for nought elſe but becauſe he attaineth the effects
of his corrupt will. If that were not, ſhould wee haue
ſo many murtherers, falſifiers, ſacrilegious perſons and

men giuen ouer to all reprochfull vices? if thereby they
did not reape ſome temporall commodity?
               6 I will yet adde further, and maintaine it to the end, that
for a man to keepe his promiſed faith, and be ſo accounted
of by the world, is a worke of God and without compariſon
much better then to violate it and embrace ſuch a damnable
opinion as that of Machiauel, yea though the profit
were immediat and ſuch as might afford wherewithall to
ballance his breach of faith and promiſe: Not to keepe
touch with one is enough to incurre the ſuſpition and ill
conceit of all; neither is there any which will not thinke he
doth God good ſeruice in performing the like towards all
ſuch Princes as ſhall take ſuch courſes; which will yet farther
adminiſter matter for an other repentance, to ſee that
when they ſhall tell or meane truth no man will beleeue or
truſt them. I could illuſtrate this propoſition with infinite
examples but I will content my ſelfe with that one of Duke
Valentine ſonne of Pope Alexander the 6. cited by Machiauel,
as a perfect Captaine; who without reſpect of
truth, his oath, reuerence of religion, or honour, which
is ſo charily to be preſerued amongſt men ordinarily, abandoned
himſelfe to all diſloialty, breach of faith, and whatſoeuer
other wicked and traiterous courſes; ſo they caried
with them ſome ſhew of preſent commodity. This man
during the life of his father went thorow with certaine his
deſignes, borne out rather by the Popes authority then
any fortunate ſucceſſe of his miſchieuous attempts. After
the death of his father it was quickly ſeene how ſmally durable
are all ſuch eſtates as are founded vpon deceit.Iou. lib 8. hiſt. For
he found himſelfe immediatly forſaken of his friends and
purſued by his enimies; ſo as more liuely to expreſſe what
he came to, after he had moſt maliciouſly hatched & atchiued
ſo high enterpriſes, he ſerued (as they ſay) but for a
cipher, and was as one that had no being, leauing nought
behind him but only the footſteps and a curſed memory of
his wickedneſſe, which made his life and name infamous to
all poſterity.
               
                  
7 Some one will tell me that the Turkes haue done the
like, and haue vſed all ſortes of cunning, deceit and trechery,
towards their neighbours, and that neuertheleſſe
they haue thriued by it. It is true, but the cauſes are different,
and yet we ſee that the moſt diſloiall amongſt them
were not the moſt aſſured in the forces of their trecheries.
Amurath the ſecond, Mahymeth the ſecond, Baiazeth the
ſecond, Selim the ſecond, were held the moſt ſubtile
Princes of their race; but we muſt grant that if thoſe their
wicked procedings thriued for a time, it was more through
the coldneſſe and diſſentions of the Chriſtians when they
ſhould haue reuenged and repelled their iniuries, then that
we ſhould therefore beleeue that it is well done to proue
periured and diſloiall. Amurath the ſecond made proofe of
it to his coſt, and hauing receiued an ouerthrow at the
handes of Ladiſlaus King of Polonia,At the Mountaine Hemus. he ſpeedily made
peace with him and turned his forces againſt Caramania,
where whileſt he was buſied, Ladiſlaus iudging (ſo perſwaded
and backt by Pope Eugenius) that hee ſhould not
doe amiſſe to falſifie his faith with a Barbarous Turke of ſo
inſolent a nature, and ſo capital an enimie of Chriſtendome
as all breach of peace might ſeeme as a true performance
thereof; reſolued to make war vpon him on the ſodaine,
which proued ſo dangerous as Amurath was neere tumbling
from the top of an high and glorious fortune to the
loweſt degree of miſery; ſo as his eſtate was neuer more
ſhaken and endangered; if the Chriſtian army (which followed
their victory) had not, as I haue ſaid, diſordered thē
                  ſelues:
Whereupon the glory and triumph fell to the Infidels
to the great miſery and confuſion of the Chriſtians.At Varna.
                  Selim the ſecond,1444. hauing vnlooked for, attempted vpon
the Venetians to the preiudice of his vowed faith pulled
vpon his necke the forces of the league,1570. & had too late repented
himſelfe if God in regard of our ſinnes had not in
ſuch ſort ſealed vp the eies of the Chriſtians as they could
not ſee nor make their benefit of the gate his diuine Maieſty
had ſet open to a more high enterpriſe then the loſſe

they receiued at Lepanto. Soliman that was held the moſt
wiſe Prince of all the Ottomans (if wiſdome be able to ſhine
where there is no light of true faith and Chriſtian beleefe)
hauing vnderſtood at ſuch time as he cauſed his army by
Sea to fall downe towards Ottranto the yeare 1537. that
Mercurin de Gatinaro and the Citizens of Castro were
made priſoners after they had ſurrendred the place contrary
to promiſe, hee foorthwith commanded that they
ſhould be releaſed, ſaying that diſloialtie to violate their
faith and word once paſſed, was not the meanes to win the
hearts and likings of ſtrange nations.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               That he hath beene alwaies ſerued
in his wars by good and valiant
Captaines.
               
                  1 Whether an experienced Commander and rawe Souldiers:
or experienced Souldiers and an vnskilfull Commander
be the better.
                  2 The firſt best allowed and the reaſons.
                  3 Examples heereof.
               
               1 IT is ordinarily diſputed amongſt Souldiers
and martiall men, which is the
better, a good Captaine emploied about
the conducting of an armie conſiſting
of raw Souldiers, or an armie of old
Souldiers committed to the command
of a raw and vnexperienced Captaine.
               2 As for me (if my opinion may carie credit amongſt ſo
many, ſufficient to decide this queſtion) I hold it better
that a worthy and valiant Captaine ſhould haue the charge
of an armie of vntrained men without experience, then that
an armie of old Souldiers trained and beaten to the wars,
ſhould be recommended to a Captaine, yet a nouice and

vnskild in the profeſſion of armes. The reaſons proper for
the maintaining of this propoſition are ſo plaine to ſuch as
without being obſtinate or paſſionate, in behalfe of either
party, will entertaine them, as they are not to be gainſaid:
for is it not much more fit and eaſie that a good Captaine
make and faſhion a campe of rawe Souldiers, then that
good and experienced Souldiers prepare and faſhion their
Captaine to the conduct of an armie? who can without
ſhame denie that an armie doth not rather obey the voice
and command of their Captaine, then the Captaine of his
armie?Male imperatur cum vu
                        •
                     gus regit duces. Senec. trag. otherwiſe it were as they ſay, to ſet the cart before
the horſe.
               3 Now we muſt come to ſuch examples as may inſtruct
and make cleere the truth of my propoſition. If we will as
we ought, examine how many times the Chriſtians haue
beene ouerthrowne by the Turkes, we ſhall vndoubtedly
finde, that it hath euermore hapned rather through want
of experience,1396. courage, ſufferance, concord, and authoritie
in the Commanders; then for any other default. So at
the battailes of Nicepolis, for that ſuch like Captaines did
ſet light by the Turkes forces, and tooke not a ſufficient
ſuruey of them, they receiued a moſt ſhamefull ouerthrow,
a woorthy reward of their weake experience, in not knowing
how to fight with thoſe barbarous nations,1526. whom they
might well thinke wanted neither skill nor valour. Did
not Lewes king of Hungary by meanes of the Biſhop of
Tomerea (who brought him almoſt to the ſlaughter) indure
the like diſgrace, at the battaile of Mogoria, for want
of experience in matter of warre, and of iudgement ſufficiently
to diſcouer the enemies forces, and the paſſages of
the countrey where he was to buckle with him? In like ſort
was not the vnskilfulneſſe of the Italians cauſe of that victorie
the Turkes gained at Grado, who had then for their
leader Homarbay, Generall of the Turkiſh armie? Alſo
the yeare 1537. at Exechium (Mahomet Iahiaoglis being
Gouernour vnder Soliman of Belgrad and the frontiers of
Hungarie in the time of king Iohn) the great Caziauer
                  
loſing his courage, did he not abandone to ſpoile, death,
and ruine a faire and ſtrong armie, which he commanded
for the Princes of Germany and Italy, ſome one troupe
excepted, which diſhonorably togither with him ſaued
themſelues by flight? Alſo before this heauie loſſe, did not
Anthony Grimani Generall of the Venetian armie faile
of courage when with great aduantage he might haue
charged the Turkes,Sabel En. 10. l. 9. and put them to the woorſe?1471. The
very like want of experience and valour was ſeene in an
other Venetian Generall, who ſhamefully left the Ile of
Negropont to the ſpoile of the enemy. To conclude, haue
not the Chriſtians beene ſo many times put to the woorſe
neere about Buda, for want of valiant and experienced
Captaines, as it cannot without griefe be related? On the
contrarie, the Ottomans haue neuer ſuffered misfortune of
warre; at the leaſt for lacke of authoritie, command, or
wiſedome in managing their armies: for they themſelues
haue in perſon conducted them, and beene preſent at all
their high exploits and important enterpriſes by them atchieued.
They haue likewiſe euermore committed the
charge of their difficult actions and affaires of warre to the
moſt valiant and experienced Captaines amongſt them,
whom they had formerly well knowen, trained vp, and exerciſed
to ſuch charges by infinite proofes of their courage
and wiſdome in moſt dangerous and difficult occaſions.
In ſumme, experience is that which perfecteth valor. The
Turkiſh Emperors haue alwaies giuen to their Captaines
ample power & commiſſion freely to diſpoſe of their moſt
important affaires, wherin they haue bene thus happy that
we cannot finde that euer ſuch Captaines loſt battaile for
lacke of command or obedience; or that they euer for want
of courage or experience in the arte military, made ſtay or
queſtion of their proceedings. Of all the Baſhas that euer
had the managing of matters of importance, & had greateſt
hand in the affaires of their Maſters, Acomet was the
chiefe (who ſerued Mahomet the 2. and added much to his
greatnes by obteining many glorious victories) inſomuch

as he was no leſſe feared then his Soueraign. To him Sinam
may be ioyned who liued vnder Selim the firſt, and being
ſlaine at the battaile of Matarea (wherein he wan the victorie
for his Maſter) Selim ſaid of him that the death of ſo
worthy a man as he, was cauſe of ſuch great griefe vnto him
as it equalled the ioy he conceiued for ſo happy a victory:
ſuch alſo was Barbaroſſa that famous pirat, who for his many
warlike acts wan the renowne of a valiant Captaine, and
was moſt highly reputed of his Maſter Soliman, for whom
he performed many memorable enterpriſes as wel by ſea as
by land. Hence we may gather that vndoubtedly a great
Prince cannot doe worſe then commit the charges of his
wars, the dignities and conducts of his armies, to them
which inioy his fauour but vnworthily: he ſhould conſider
the deſerts of others, & eſpecially of ſuch as with more
ſufficiencie would render an honorable account of ſo worthy
an imploiment. We ſee it fall out oftentimes that for
default of wel meaſured elections a Prince plungeth himſelfe
and his eſtate in a thouſand dangers and confuſions
through the inſufficiency of his vnskilful miniſters: the examples
of ſuch infortunate euents would fill this volume if
I would ſtand to relate all ſuch as my memory preſenteth
vnto me. But omitting all I will only put you in minde of
the Emperour Charles the fifth well knowen for moſt iudicious
in all his elections, meruellous in his actions, mighty
for the great number of his excellent Captaines bredde
and trained vp vnder him; all which can witneſſe
the care he had in his choice, and in very
deede they did him ſuch ſeruice as by
their meanes he enlarged his dominions
with many rich Prouinces,
adorned his ſcepter with
moſt memorable victories,
and his houſe with
triumphes to his immortall
glory.
            
            
               
               CHAP. IX.
               That he hath made no skippe in his
enterpriſes.
               
                  1 Vnited vertue ſtrongeſt.
                  2 The ſtrength of kingdomes by their ſituation.
                  3 What it is to skippe in an enterpriſe.
                  4 Kingdomes preſerued by the coniunction of their ſubiect
prouinces.
                  5 Confirmation of the Roman Empire.
                  6 The meanes of eſtabliſhing an Empire by confederacies.
                  7 The French as quicke in loſing as in conquering countries.
                  8 We are not to indeauor ſo much to conquer as to keepe.
                  9 The Portugals and Spaniards diſtracted gouernment.
                  10 Induſtrie of the Ottomans in conquering.
                  11 An admonition to Chriſtians.
                  12 Horror of the Turkes.
               
               1 NOthing would be ſo ſtrong as a poinct,
if it were to bee found in nature; at
the leaſt if the rules of the Mathematiques
be true as they be held, becauſe
being moſt ſimple, it cannot be
corrupted either by inward beginnings,
or outward cauſes; ſo is a body more induring and powerfull,
the neerer it approcheth to the reſemblance of a
poinct, that is to ſay, the more it is vnited and compact in
it ſelfe. And in very deede as nature vnable to bring to
paſſe that all the world ſhould be one only body, made it
continued and ioining one part vpon another; and as to
preſerue this continuation, ſhe in all ſhe may oppoſeth
Vacuum, which is onely able to corrupt and deſtroy her:
               2 So eſtates become more durable, and of greater abilitie
to maintaine themſelues when they are (as I may ſay)
ſowed, linked, and bound together, the one helping to

entertaine and preſerue the other. Hence we may gather
that ſuch prouinces as haue their ſituation truſſed vp together
in a round forme, are more ſtrong and mightie
then ſuch as extend themſelues in length: as for example,
one may ſay of France in compariſon of Italy, becauſe this
latter reſembling a legge ſtretched out is leſſe fit to defend
it ſelfe then France, which is round, as her prouinces lie
and are ſituate: whereby ſhe is conſequently not only more
vnited in her forces then Italy, but alſo more nimble and
able to maintaine herſelfe then the other.
               3 Now let vs come to our diſcourſe and make it appeare
what it is we vnderſtand by this diſcontinuation, and that
which we tearme to skip in our enterpriſes. It is properly
when we regard not the contiguity (if I may ſo ſay) or
neere adioyning of our eſtates; and that happeneth as often
as we leaue an enimy behind vs, at one ſide of vs, or
otherwiſe, in ſuch ſort, as he may croſſe, cut off, beſeege,
or incloſe vs when we ſo inconſideratly skip or ſtride; we
may likewiſe ſaie that he truly skips who croſſeth from one
country to another ſo far diſtant, as by that time he hath
finiſhed his voiage, his ſtrength failes him and his troopes
proue ſo out of heart and tired, as they become vtterly vnprofitable.
We may alledge for example that which befell
the Emperours of Germany, the king of France and of England
in their voiages of the holy land, for the length of the
iourny, the far diſtance of the country, the diuerſity of
the Climate, the change of the aire, and many other ſuch
like inconueniences, ſo tired and diſcouraged them by reaſon
of the trauailes and miſeries they had ſuffered vpon the
way, as they could not attempt any matter of importance,
or goe thorow with their enterpriſe according to their
proiect: not vnlike a ball which ſtirreth not from the
place where it is once ſetled, through want of that moouing
power which ſhould toſſe and raiſe it. So if theſe
Princes at the firſt arriuall did affoord any proofe of their
courage, valour, and likelihood of good fortune; the languiſhing
of the principall motiue ſuddenly made them

loſe their aduantages, and reduced the whole to tearmes
vnwoorthy the merit of their holy intentions and trauels.
               4 We muſt then allow that it is requiſite for the preſeruation
of eſtates, either that their prouinces touch and intertaine
the one the other, or that their forces be of ability
to maintaine themſelues of themſelues: for this continuation
hath of it ſelfe ſuch force and efficacie for the laſting
and preſeruation of eſtates, as we ſee that common-weales
and meane kingdomes haue thereby longer maintained
themſelues then great and rich monarchies. Wee may
alledge for example the common-weales of Sparta and of
Venice; of the kingdomes of Perſia and France, whoſe
rule hath much longer endured then that of the Sarazins,
of the Mamelucks, or of other more mighty Empires. The
cauſe proceedeth, as I haue ſaid, of the vnion of that entertainment
and coniunction of prouinces, abutting the one
vpon the other, which is of ſuch vertue and efficacie to
giue ſtrength and continuance to a monarchie, as it almoſt
exceedeth conceit and imagination.
               5 The Romans which ſaw wel enough that the inlarging
of their Empires limits, trained after it a conſequence of a
neceſſary diſperſing of their forces, endeuored by al means
poſſible to reunite this body, augmented and made huge
by their aduantageous conqueſts; reducing to their obedience
and rule, all they got both by maintaining ſufficient
forces vpon the frontiers of their Empire or garriſons
in places of importance, as alſo by eſtabliſhing Colonies,
and infranchiſing many ſtrong townes, with beſtowing on
them the like liberties as the people of Rome enioyed, by
them tearmed Municipia. In other places alſo they inſtituted
certaine fraternities and aſſemblies of people,
with prerogatiues of the Romanes priuiledges, which
they named Conuentus: Moreouer, they committed
eſtates and intire kingdoms to the gouernment of certaine
Princes held and eſteemed as friends of the people of
Rome. By theſe meanes ioyning them to their loue as well
by gratifying them with their liberty and bounty, as with

other priuiledges, honours and dignities, whereof they
did partake in their towne as in right of Citizens: They
tearmed theſe townes and people their confederates, and
the Kings their friends. As for example in Africke they
had Maſſiniſſa, and Iuba; in Aſia, Eumenes, Pruſias and
the King of Egypt. In Europe thoſe of Marſeilles, Autum,
Auerg
                        •••
                     , Rennes and others; making account more to
auaile themſelues by ſuch confederacies and amities then
by meanes more ſtrickt and ſeuere: ſo then power is eſtabliſhed
and continued either by our owne forces, or by annexing
of the forces of our friends which ſerue vs as a
continued rampart and conducteth vs out of danger euen
into the country which we intend to inuade, and that with
ſo much the greater aduantage, when vpon ſome part it
confineth with the country of our confederates.
               6 But becauſe we are neuer able with good aſſurance (eſpecially
Princes amongſt whom this is a tickle point) to
maintaine ſo good intelligence, it is requiſite if we will
make this vſe of an other, to make him confident either
through the hope of participation in our conqueſts, or elſe
by intimating vnto him (if he be our inferiour) an euident
aſſurance in our proceedings, and ſuch a plainneſſe and integrity
in all our other actions, as euen that may rid him of
the diſtruſt he might conceiue of being one day praied vpon
and brought vnder by that inſolencie which accompanieth
the proſperitie of fortune, and may ſerue to ſtretch
the conſcience of a conquering Prince. After we haue in
this manner framed an impreſſion of our integritie in the
heart of our neighbour, we may march in his countrey as
ſecurely as in our owne, and reſt aſſured that we ſhall by
him be furthered and aſſiſted.
               7 The French could neuer keepe any countrey by them
conquered abroad, vnleſſe it were Piemont and Sauoy:
for it one day they had gained a foote of land, they were
enforced to forgoe it the next, no ſooner winning it, but
they loſt it.
               8 We commonly ſay, that there is no leſſe vertue in him

that keepeth them in him that getteth.Non min
                        •
                     r eſt virtus quàm quaerere, part
                        •
                      tueri. I affirme that there
is neede of more dexterity in keeping then in getting, for
an amazement of the people we inuade, a rebellion in
our behalfe, or any other ſuch like ſturre makes vs eaſily
maſters of that whereto we aſpire; but to preſerue what we
get, we muſt maintaine a continuall counſaile which muſt
haue all the parts thereto appertaining, as grauity of iudgment,
ripe deliberation, nimbleneſſe to diſſemble, induſtry
ioyned with a daily heedefulneſſe and patience to attend
occaſions. The French (which are reputed the moſt
warlike nation vnder the ſunne,) are but too ſodaine, open,
impatient and of too ſtirring a nature; for proofe
you ſhall obſerue that what they atchieue not when they
firſt attempt, they almoſt neuer compaſſe it: all their boilling
heat is ſoone exhaled and ſpent by the ſodaine feruencie
of their courage, which moſt commonly tranſports
them beyond all moderation and aduice moſt requiſite in
what wee vndertake, without heeding the end for which
they begā. This negligence together with their impatience
hath made way to all the misfortunes which out of their
countrie they haue induced: The voyage of the Terſeras
and certaine other attempts vpon the Portugales haue not
long ſince confirmed this opinion, and made the wound
of their vnhappines bleede a freſh. Lews the eleuenth, a
prince of an approued wiſdome and cleare ſighted in matters
of eſtate, would neuer lend any eare to the perſwaſions
of ſending an army into Italie or other remote parts;
reiecting all ſuch practiſes, as well for the reaſon formerly
alledged, as becauſe of the infidelitie which he thought to
be in the Italians, and particularly in them of Genoa. If
Charles the 8. his ſonne, Lewes the 12. Francis the firſt, and
Henry his ſonne had inherited this their predeceſſors opinion,
they had not with ſuch exceſſiue charge, miſhap, and
miſery attempted Italy.
               
               9 Heere ſome one will obiect that neuertheleſſe the dominion
of the Portugals is of 90. yeares continuance or
thereabout in the Indies, ſo far diſtant from the firſt ſpring

and originall. The like appeareth in the gouernment of
Philip King of Spaine ſpread and diuided in ſo many places
aſwell in Europe as in India. Surely it is not poſſible
to imagine a greater diſtance then from Lisbon to Ormus,
Goa, Malaca, and Ternate, ſo as from Portugale to their
fartheſt Conqueſts, there are no leſſe then twentie thouſand
miles; and although they endeuour to ioyne theſe
eſtates ſo ſeuered, by the neereneſſe of ſundry fortreſſes
heere and there beſtowed in the midway (as Zofala, Mohambique,
Melinde, which belongeth to a certaine King
their Ally, beſides other like meanes) yet all theſe are but
weake ſinewes long to ſuſtaine the vnion of ſo far ſeparated
members. But it is Gods pleaſure that by how much the
foundations of this rule are more feeble and ſubiect to be
ſhaken, by ſo much the more we ſhould admire the omnipotency
of his diuine Maieſty, whereby they are maintained,
fortified, and protected. The dominion likewiſe
of the King of Spaine is ſpread into ſo many parts of
Aſia (eſpecially by meanes of annexing the crowne of
Portugale) of Afrike, of Europe, and of the new found
world, as there appeareth in this preſeruation a greater miracle
then counſail or humane prouidence, for in very deed
to rule ſo many and ſo ſeuered nations differing in religion,
manners and tongues without ſtirring from home, is it
not a worke of heauen rather then of humane policy or diſcourſe?
God therefore which hath of his goodneſſe made
him owner of ſo many and ſo goodly countries, hath not
denied him wiſedome and counſaile to know how to order
and maintaine them, as he doth, vnder his obedience.
               10 The Ottomans haue ordinarily behaued themſelues
more iudiciouſly in this one part of conquering (without
inconſiderat skipping) then in any other of their actions.
For neither couetouſneſſe of inriching or inlarging their
eſtate, nor the eaſineſſe of attempting, nor the inticements
of peoples inſurrections, nor the thirſt of reuenge
(which commonly makes Princes mighty in men and

mony, forget themſelues when the maintenance of their
authority & credit is called in queſtion, eſpecially perceiuing
the law in their hands to execute more readily then
can particular perſons) nor any ſuch like motiues haue
beene able, as I ſaid, to induce the Turkes indiſcreetly to
skip or to ingage themſelues in any enterpriſe far from
home. Rather on the contrary they haue marched faire
and ſoft from country to country, and deuoured (as they
continue ſtill to doe) all ſuch as confine and are neighbours
vnto them. Hence hath growen the conſequence
of ſo many happie victories, the benefite of ſo great and
rich conqueſts; the courſe of ſo eaſily preſeruing what
they haue gotten.
               11 I haue ſaid that for the moſt part they haue not inconſideratly
skipped or ſtrid in their enterpriſes, as the
Chriſtians doe and haue done: and as we ſee, when any
of them haue taken ſuch waies to greatneſſe, the fruits and
effects haue not prooued anſwerable to their proiect and
promiſed fortunes. This vnhappineſſe, common with the
error founded vpon the reaſons formerly alledged, ought
hencefoorth to ſerue as an inſtruction to make vs become
more wiſe and regardfull then we yet are, to the end that
after we haue by an holy and vniuerſall amendment appeaſed
the wrath of God, we may war againſt them with
the ſame policies and aduantages as they haue practiſed
in raiſing themſelues to our coſt and confuſion. Theſe
examples alſo ſhould admoniſh vs of what is to be feared,
to wit, leaſt failing to chaſtice & humble our ſelues, his diuine
Maieſty inflict vpon vs a more ſeuere puniſhment,
then that we haue hitherto indured, and for this cauſe open
a more large gate to thoſe infidels vtterly to ruine and deſtroy
vs.
               12 Now leſt any one ſhould thinke I haue againſt reaſon
held that the Turkes haue not, as we, forgotten thus
inconſideratly to skip, I will recite certaine examples to
that purpoſe. The firſt then that did it, was Mahomet the
ſecond, which vnfortunatly attempted Italy, Soliman performed

the like againſt the ſame country, after the interpriſe
of Diu in the Indies, which was vndertaken the yeare
1537. then that of the yeare 1542. that of Ormus 1552.
and finally vpon good grounds the attempting of Malta
which was ſo valiantly defended by the Knights of the order,
as (next the honour due vnto the diuine Maieſtie) all
thoſe braue Gentlemen, who with their grand Maſter
Pariſot, made it good againſt the Infidels, deſerue to be
conſecrated to all praiſe, and to a moſt glorious and eternall
memory.
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               That he hath not ſpent time vpon
enterpriſes of ſmall
importance.
               
                  1 Get the greater, the leſſe will follow.
                  2 The beſieging of ſome ſmall holde, may be the hinderance
of the whole expedition, this exemplified.
                  3 The Turkes diſcretion in their expeditions and ſieges.
                  4 The beſt courſe is, to become maſters of the field.
                  5 Error in the ſiege of Malta.
               
               1NAture as wiſe and prouident, doth not
buſie her-ſelfe about the birth of euerie
particular thing, but rather ſetteth her
hand to the generation of the ſubſtance,
which without any further paine, is afterward
attended on by the accidents
euery where inſeparably accompanying her. In like ſort a
good and diſcreet Captaine in the carriage of his enterpriſes,
ſhould not aime at ought elſe but to conquer the places
of importance; for of their conſequence other inferior
parts of the eſtate come tumbling in (as it were) of
themſelues, which as vnſeparable accidents or qualities,

vndoubtedly follow the firſt examples of greater moment,
whereon dependeth and ſubſiſteth the others being.
               2 We haue often ſeene, that a paltrie Sconce (either becauſe
of the naturall ſtrength of the ſituation, thickneſſe of
the wall, goodneſſe of the matter, couragious obſtinacy of
the defenders, or ſome other accident not foreſeene or
dreampt of, hath ſtopt the proceeding of a royall armie,
and hath prooued it ſelfe as able to withſtand the force
thereof, as a citie greater, richer, and more peopled. And
though we become after maſters of ſuch blocke-houſes
and ſmall fortes, yet that is no furtherance to a more important
conqueſt; or helpe to the enterpriſe begun. We
finde written that the Emperour Maximilian, becauſe he
to no purpoſe ſpent ſo much time about Aſola (which he
ſtriued to ſubdue by the way, for the reputation and credit
of the armie, he conducted to Milan) inconſiderately loſt
the occaſion offered him to become Lord of that Dukedome;
and performed not any thing after to the good of
his affaires. The French alſo, after they had paſſed the
Alpes in the time of Lewes the 12. thriued not in their attempts
of the kingdome of Naples; hauing vpon an ill
ground vndertaken Rocca-Secea, where they engaged
both their honors and liues; for hauing beſieged it certaine
daies, and giuen the aſſault in vaine, they lent leaſure
and courage to the Spaniards, to bethinke themſelues:
made their powers leſſe valued for ſo badde a beginning,
and diſcouraged the people for euer attempting any thing
in their behalfe, as no doubt they had done if they might
haue ſeene a fortunate and better digeſted proceeding
then theirs was, the name of the Spaniard being then odious
amongſt them. This fault made the Spaniards ſo bold
as to ſay, that the reſt of the kingdome was reſerued for
them, and not for the other, who had ſo ill husbanded
their opportunities. In the yere 1556. holding on the ſaid
deſigne for the conqueſt of Naples, did they not vainely
ſpend time, money, their forces, and paines at Ciuitella,
to the ruine of that goodly armie which Henry the 2. of

France ſent thither vnder the command of the Duke of
Guyſe: who was neuertheleſſe a valiant and diſcreet Captaine,
and who had perhaps done better if his particular
intereſt, or the ouermuch truſt he repoſed in the Popes
Nephewes, had not blinded him: Other reaſons may be
alleaged for the ſmall good this armie did the king, who
had conceiued of it great and honorable hopes; but I will
referre them to ſuch as write that Hiſtorie. The Spaniards
alſo haue thrice attempted the Ile of Gerbes,1560. and euerie
time loſt a goodly and floriſhing armie, able to haue performed
a farre greater matter then they could hope for
by getting the henrouſt (if I may ſo tearme it.) The yeare
after the battell of Lepanto the armie of the confederates,1572.
which was then in the Leuant, hauing their forces augmented
by the arriuall of Don Iohn, made Ochiallo Generall
of the Turkiſh armie, retire to Modon, as fearing thoſe
of whom he had made triall the yeere before. If they had
put him to it as they ſhould haue done, no doubt but they
had found him diſmaide, and hardly beſtead how to defend
as well the fortreſſes as his armie by ſea: for he had
not left aboue 60. gallies, to garde the hauen, and had beſtowed
the reſt of his forces one yeare. But when he ſawe
they went to beſiege Nauaria neere Modon, and that they
had no ſaying to him at his landing, as he feared they
would, he tooke heart at graſſe, and after made a ieſt of
the deſignes of the Chriſtians armie, which he in ſuch ſort
held plaie and entertained, as it performed nothing woorthie
ſuch a power aſſembled immediately vpon the good
ſucceſſe of a former victory.
               3 The Turkes in what concerneth the ordering, commoditie,
and aſſurance, in their enterpriſes, ſurpaſſe (to ſay
the very trueth) all other nations for well managing of warlike
affaires: for they neuer attempted place that the deſigne
thereof was not farre more woorth then the paine
they emploied about it; or that the enterpriſe did not deſerue
the like or more expence: carying themſelues thus,
they are by the effect of their enterpriſes growne mightie,

for force and meanes, and haue opened the way to the
encreaſe of their greatneſſe and ſucceſſe of their affaires:
which in ſuch ſort aſſuring (wherein they haue aimed principally
at profit) they haue more and more weakened our
forces, not without an euident conſequence of extreame
danger: when they tooke in hand the conqueſt of Cypres,
they were wiſe enough not to beſtow time in taking Cerynes
a fortres almoſt impregnable. They foreſaw that it
was of ſmall moment, at the leaſt not to import much in
that they intended to compaſſe, but they rather directed
their courſe and indeuours againſt Nicoſia, as againſt the
principall place of all the Iland, whereabouts they ſo well
imploied their paines as they caried it. By which conqueſt
it was found that Cerynes ſoone followed, (as of a neceſſary
conſequence) the diſaſter of their capitall towne.
               4 In all the executions of their hardy deſſignes they
haue alwaies at the very firſt beene Maſters of the field,
which hath ſo furthered them as thereby the ſtrongeſt
holds of the country, which they could not otherwiſe
haue gotten but by force of armes, haue beene ſurrendred
vp vnto them. Such fortreſſes being vnable long to hold
out when all hope of ſuccour is caſt off by the oppoſition
of ſo ſtrong and mighty armies as theirs are.
               5 At the war of Malta it ſeemeth God did dull them,1560.
ouerthrowing the policies and practiſes which are ordinary
with them. For the Baſſa (who would needes begin
with S. Hermes becauſe it ſeemed commodious to ſtop vp
the hauen and after to get the ſuburbs where the knights
made their aboade) conſumed much time about it, and
loſt the better part of his beſt ſouldiours. In the meane
ſpace the ſeaſon of the yeare ſpent ſo faſt, and the reſolutions
and valour of them in the towne prooued ſuch, as in
the end he grew confounded, perceiuing too late how
flenderly he had preuailed, and that he muſt neceſſarilie
begin a new with the principall place, which he ſhould
haue at the firſt attempted, if God (as I ſaid) for the good
of Chriſtendome, had not blinded him in his enterpriſe.

                  Dorgut Raiz Vice-roy of Argiers, who was to ſecond this
Baſha in all his warre, and to whom he was commanded to
communicate his deſignes aſſoone as he ſhould arriue,
(which he did ſome few weekes after his firſt ſetting downe
and beginning to batter) ſoone diſcouered his error, and
could vpbraid him with it, telling him he ſhuld haue gone
right on to the fountaine, without ſtooping to the ſhallow
ſtreames. So as after the taking of S. Hermes, they did not
performe or attempt any matter of importance, but as
men tired and diſcouraged, they truſt vp bagge and baggage
to be gone aſſoone as the ſuccour appeared before
Malta; theſe leauing behinde them the memorie and
teſtimonie of their ſhame, and ill grounded aduiſe, and
the knights of their honour and valour.
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               That he hath laid hold on occaſions.
               
                  1 Occaſion pourtraied.
                  2 It is to be obſerued.
                  3 Examples of the Ottomans diligence in laying hold on occaſions
offered by the Chriſtians.
                  4 The difficulties of a defenſiue and offenſiue league.
                  5 The falſe gueſſe of the ſelfe-ruine of the Turkiſh Empire.
                  6 The weaker Princes are eaſily ſubdued by the mightier.
                  7 Other occaſions offered by the Chriſtians to forward the
Turkiſh greatneſſe.
               
               1 THe ancient Romans ſignified vnto vs by
the picture of occaſion (whom they
adored as a goddeſſe, putting wings to
her feete, ſupported with a bowle, behinde
bald, and before hairie) that we
muſt bee diligent to apprehend her
when ſhee preſenteth her-ſelfe, and not in any caſe to let
her ſlippe: conſidering that if ſhe once eſcape vs, ſhe leaueth
vs nought but a vaine and vexing repentance.
               
                  
2 And to ſay the truth, in all a mans actions. There is
nothing more commendable then to be able to make the
beſt vſe of occaſion and eſpecially in mater of war. In as
much as he that knoweth his aduantage, how to take it and
to carry the time before him is furniſhed with the principall
adorning vertue of a Captaine, occaſion being no other
thing, then an opportunity that the time more by accident
then prouidence offereth vnto vs, for the well performing
of what we haue in hand, and for the abſtaining and well
comming off from a deſſine vnſeſonably attempted, as the
euent of the aboue mentioned interpriſe may ſufficiently
witneſſe. This is that theſe Infidels haue ſtudied at ſuch
times as God hath made them his inſtruments to afflict
and chaſtice vs, and this is that we ought to doe againſt
them, for the glorifying of Gods diuine Maieſty, not yet
for ought I ſee pleaſed with vs. In a word all ſuch as haue
inlarged their eſtates haue either inioyed or hammered
out ſome notable occaſion which they wiſely laid hold
on, and haue conſequently reaped the fruites of an vnuſuall
aduancement. The Grecian and Romane hiſtories can
teach vs this, but I omit them as too far from vs, to betake
my ſelfe to ſuch as are more familiar and neere vnto vs.
Pepin and Charlemaine were by the Romiſh church called
into Italy:735. the like was Charles of Aniou into the kingdome
of Naples.
                  800. Thoſe of Aragon were inuited to Sicily
by the people and to the conqueſt of the kingdome of
Naples by Queene Ione the ſecond:1263. The houſe of Auſtria
is at this day inriched with many goodly kingdomes
brought them by their alliance and mariages: one whereof
ſubiected vnto them the Lowe countries,1476. the other
gaue them Spaine with her apurtenances, the third for a
perfect raiſing of this howſes gretneſſe, annexed vnto it
the crowne of Portugale and the eaſt Indies,1579. ſo as if we
neerely conſider humaine caſualties, we ſhall finde that
force without occaſion is fruitleſſe or ſmally auaileable.
               3 The Ottomans haue not attained to the height of ſo
mightie an Empire but by ſuch occaſions as we haue too

careleſly,The Christians miniſtred occaſion to the Ottamans of their owne ouerthrow vnworthily, and as of our free bounty, preſented
vnto them. The firſt ſprang from the negligence and
cowardice of the Emperors of Greece, who through their
extreame laſciuiouſneſſe and ſloath (Sardanapalus and Heliogabalus
like) became deformed monſters of all looſenes
and riot:1 The firſt occaſion: the ſloth of the Emperours of Greece. So as abandoning themſelues to all voluptuouſneſſe
and exceſſe, that martiall vigor which had till then
honored and preſerued them, began by little and little to
decline amongſt them, and next amongſt their people,
(theſe framing their manners after their gouernours) which
prepared meanes and occaſions for the Turke to ſet foote
one while into ſome inferiour prouince, and ere long into
a mighty kingdome.2. Occaſion: enuie of the Emperours of Greece. The ſecond occaſion which ſhewed
it ſelfe fauorable and proper for the Turkes, was, when the
Grecians vpon a malicious enuy began to disfauour and
oppoſe the deſſignes of the Chriſtian Princes which had
by league vnited themſelues for the conqueſt of the holy
land, and ſo ill aduiſed they were as inſteade of ſeconding
them they croſſed them in all they might, to the end to ſtop
the fortunat proceeding of their woorthy armies, not heeding
poore ſoules that they thereby befriended the Turke;
who did but watch his opportunities. For they well obſeruing
this fault, and temporiſing the occaſion which after
appeared, failed not to ſpie when they might ſurpriſe them
(as they did) all beaten, tired, and diſunited in force and
meanes, whereupon it finally inſued that the Chriſtians
were vtterly expelled Iury,About anno 1290. by the Turkes, who after turned
their armies againſt the Greekes themſelues and bereaued
them of their Empire. Theſe were miſchiefes and
wounds by them well deſerued, neither are they to be pittied,
but ſo far forth, as they haue bread the calamities and
ruines which haue and doe ſtill continue to afflict Chriſtendome.3. Occaſion: the ciuill wars of the Emperors of Greece.
               
               The iarres and diuiſions of the Princes of Greece miniſtred
the third time an occaſion to the Turkiſh thriuing
greatneſſe:Iohn Paleologus. This hapned at ſuch time as the Emperour of
Conſtantinople was ſo ill aduiſed, as to craue the aide of

                  Amurath the firſt to defend him. This Prince which lay
ſtill in waite, willingly ſent his troupes, not to ſuccour, but
to diſcouer the country for the better aduancement of his
deſignes; and in very deed the ſouldiers returning from
that voiage, deliuered ſo aduantageous reports of the riches,
pleaſantneſſe, and fruitfulneſſe of that country, painting
it out vnto him ſo abounding in all commodities neceſſarie
for the life of man, as he foorthwith reſolued to attempt
it,1363. ſo as not long after without bidding, he in perſon
paſſed the Streight, and ſo well husbanded the occaſion
to ſettle himſelfe in Europe, as ſince his ſucceſſors haue
there made the principall ſeate of their Empire. The diuorce
and ſeparation of the Greeke church from the Romaine,4. Occaſion: the ſeparation of the Greeke Church from the Roman.
prepared a large way for the fourth occaſion, embraced
by the Turks, more aduantageouſly to ouertop vs:
ſince this diuiſion was a meane to diſtaſte and allay the
courage of the Princes of either partie, neither hath it
euer ſince beene poſſible to reconcile or vnite them by any
good or firme intelligence, ſo as remaining in this ſort
diuided, they haue neuer beene able to enterpriſe ought
woorthy Chriſtian pietie, or the greatneſſe of their powers
and monarchies; thereby to cut off and ouerthrow (as
they might and ought) the proceeding of the common
enemie of Chriſtendome; who getting by his negligence,
ſcope and libertie, is growne greater to our vniuerſall
hurt, which thoſe princes haue euermore foſtered; a diſeaſe
now by their obſtinate diuiſion growen remedileſſe.5. Occaſion: the Turkes aide called into Italy. This
euill hath prooued the more lamentable becauſe of the
diſcord amongſt other Chriſtian Princes which refuſe to
make their benefit of others calamities, or to acknowledge
them as corrections comming from the hand of God.
               This miſchief grew greater at ſuch time as ſome Potentates
of Italy inconſiderately called the Turke to their ſuccour,
ſhewing him the way into our ſeas farther then was
conuenient. In this regard our portes ſtood open vnto
them, they entred and conuerſed with vs as with friends
and aſſociats, a thing moſt abhominable before God and

man, and of moſt dangerous conſequence. And to the
end I be not held an outlaſher, I will reckon ſome of thoſe
that haue ſo ouerſhot themſelues. Alfonſo the ſecond king
of Naples,1498. and Lodouick Sforſa duke of Milan, were thoſe
that brought in Baiazet the ſecond: that againſt the
French, this againſt the Venetians. Iſabell Queene of
Hungarie craued aide likewiſe of Soliman,
                  1540. againſt Ferdinand
king of the Romans.1543. 
                  Francis the firſt of France, and Henry
the ſecond that ſucceeded him, d
                     •
                  d not onely let in the
Turkiſh power into our ſeas, but ſuffered them alſo to
land at Nice and in Corſica, leading captiue at their returne,
an infinite multitude of poore Chriſtians, (without
reſpect of amitie, age, or ſexe, which they ſnatched vp in
thoſe places and along the Adriatick coaſts.
               The ſixt occaſion obſerued and embraced by the
Turkes,6. occaſ. the plurality of the Chriſtian Princes. may be ſaid in my opinion to proceed from the
conſideration they haue had of the pluralitie of Chriſtian
Princes, ſuppoſing (as it is true) that it could not be without
that iealouſie and ſuſpicion which ech man particularly
conceiueth of his owne eſtate, ranke, and dignitie, and
and ſo the whole being deuided into diuers gouernments,
it muſt follow the parts ſhould be more feeble and ſcanted
of meanes to vndertake againſt him: ſince (as we haue
ſaide) vertue vnited in one entire body, is alwaies more
ſtrong then ſeparated into many parcels. That which is
woorſe, is, that in this diuiſion of Monarchies, the ambitious
thirſt of greatneſſe, hath taken dangerous footing
amongſt Princes, and hath bred (as by a neceſſarie conſequence)
diſcord, ſeparation of willes, diuerſitie of deſignes,
and varietie of pretences, of all which partialities,
hath ſprung ſuſpition, the common plague amongſt princes.
This ſuſpicion like a canker hath contaminated the
vnion and rid the meanes how to knit and eſtabliſh a holy
league and confidence amongſt them for a defenſiue or offenſiue
war.
               4 Now to make a defenſiue league againſt the Turke is
in theſe daies a hard matter in ſo much as the princes of

Chriſtendome are ſo far from one another, and ſome eſpecially
from the enemy, as like men out of danger they
weigh it not eſteeming themſelues moſt aſſured: And to
vndertake to eſtabliſh an offenſiue league is no leſſe difficult
ſeeing the profit of their conqueſt cannot be drawne
to a proportionable equality, it may be alſo euery man
feares the greatneſſe of his companion (although neuer ſo
much his partner for aide and common aſſociation) but
aboue all he that hath the moſt commodious hauens or his
Prouinces moſt proper for the mannaging of the war. Or
elſe he who can better maintaine his conqueſts would
proue the moſt ſuſpected and maligned. Theſe conſiderations
hinder them from vniting and aſſembling themſelues
as they ought for the common good.
               5 Moreouer euery one flattereth himſelfe that time and
the worlds ordinarie change will breede ruine and alteration
in the eſtate of the Ottomans, and ſettle their affaires
without being conſtrained to expoſe themſelues to danger,
trauell, and charge.
               6 Another reaſon and inconuenience may yet be alledged
that each of theſe princes being weake in reſpect of the
other they cānot ſo couragiouſly reſolue to vndertake what
were profitable and neceſſary for them; whence it groweth
that the feebleneſſe of their ſtrength is yet made more feeble
by this irreſolution; ſo as a mighty power charging
them they ſhal remain ſubiect to the diſcretion of the indiſcreet
enemy: by theſe means the lords of the ſeueral parts
of Lombardy became the pray of the Venetians who ſubdued
them with as much facility as reſolution; But had
the repulſe when they attempted the ſtate of Milan, vtmoſt
limit of their power, dominion, and conqueſts. After
the ſame ſort alſo the French in time paſt brought vnder
all the Prouinces of Gaull, but when they would enter the
confines of Spain, the oppoſition of that neighbour-greatneſſe
ſtopped their courſe and was a rampart to defend
them from further proceedings. In the very like manner
the Turkes hauing deuoured all the Princes of Greece,

                  Macedonia,
                  1408. 
                  Bulgaria, and Seruia attempting the inuaſion of
Hungaria,1412. they had their hands full, ſince the valour of
theſe Kings and people (ſo faſhioned,1438. hardned and enured,
of a long time to the wars, as they were the better able to
make head againſt them) diſcouered it ſelfe to be greater
then the conſideration of their indifferent eſtate could well
beare, as witneſſe the exploits of Ladiſlaus and Mathias
Coruin, who found the Turkes play to their coſt. But ſo
ſoone as thoſe Kings and people did forgoe this firſt valour
and ſuffered the exerciſe of armes to degenerat,1521. 
                  Soliman
ouercame them both at Belgrade and at Mogacia.
                  1526. After
the Turks had gone thus far, they met with that bar of
the houſe of Auſtria ſeconded by the German forces, and
ſupported by the power of the king of Spaine; who ſhewed
himſelfe alwaies feareleſſe of the Turkiſh forces: As for the
Venetians they haue euermore (backt with the Popes and
the Spaniards power) behaued themſelues moſt honorably:
one happineſſe there is that thoſe places of Chriſtendome
which border neereſt vpon the Turke were neuer in
more mighty hands, nor had euer ſo few Princes to rule
them, as at this day: whence groweth an infallible conſequent
that they are more eaſily defended and maintained,
eſpecially hauing that particular coniunction of the power
of Spaine, which is ſuch as the Turke cannot ſtur without
incurring an apparant danger; It being manifeſt that beſides
that the king of Spaine is of ability without feare to
reſiſt him, he can alſo with his owne forces curbe him and
bring him to reaſon. So as the Turke awed by ſo mighty a
king, will not, as he was wont, ſo ſo one bend his forces againſt
the Chriſtians his neighbours. The Muſcouit on
the one ſide, and the kings of Polonia and Perſia on the
other, are of ſuch power and courage, as they will alwaies
make the fame of their particular forces, to be both reſpected
and feared.
               7 The diuerſitie of opinions in matter of religion, haue
made way to the ſeuenth occaſion,7 Occaſion: the diuerſity of opinions in Religion. haue diſunited the
courages, ſpent the forces of the Chriſtians, & haue made

them riſe vp in armes one againſt an other. In the meane
time the Turke getteth footing, groweth great in ſight of
all men, and is become a terror to Chriſtian Princes.
               Diſloyall and traiterous Renegades or Apoſtates,8 Occaſion: treaſon and diſloialtie. are
thoſe which haue diſcouered to the Turkes the Chriſtians
ſecrets, haue acquainted them with the aduantages of
landing and inuading, haue beene guides to their armies
into the very hearts of our richeſt countries, and haue
opened the doore of the eight occaſion.
               But for the ninth,9 Occaſion: the Turkes peace with ſome Chriſtians, to warre with others. let vs conſider what ſubtilties they
haue practized, and whereon that hath beene principally
grounded. I am of opinion, that the better to order their
affaires, and ſeize vpon the Chriſtians with more ſecurity,
their leagues, treaties of peace, and ſuſpenſions of armes,
paſſed betweene them and our Princes, haue beene their
greateſt furtherances: for the Turkes neuer warred with
anie Chriſtian Prince or Infidel either to defend their
owne eſtate, or with hoſtilitie to aſſaile an others,
but they firſt of all made their countrey ſure againſt
the power of their neighbours, but aboue all, ſuch as (ſeeing
them elſewhere buſied) had meanes to diſquiet their
affaires, inuade their territories, and aſſaile them at vnawares.
The peace they haue ſo long maintained, with the
Polonians can teſtifie as much: Againe the quiet they
haue ſuffered the Venetians to inioy for theſe many yeares
ſufficiently bewraieth with what care they handle this buſineſſe.
The continued peace they keepe with the French
teacheth vs likewiſe with what prouidence and wiſdome
their matters are caried; to the end not to receiue any incombrance
or interruption by meanes of ſtrange enmities,
at ſuch time as they proceed in their enterpriſes; They take
truce with the Emperour alwaies to their aduantage; and
lately intending to war vpon Perſia they dealt for a ſuſpenſion
of armes with the King of Spaine, ſo as making all ſure
on one ſide they in a trice aſſaile the other, heereby ſo
well playing their parts, as hauing the law in their hands
they remaine as arbitrators of peace and war, purſuing alwaies

the courſe of their deſſines with an aduantage too
great vnworthy and preiudicious to the Princes of Chriſtendome;
whoſe greater part is ſo awed by their forces,
as they haue often choſen to enter into conditions of a diſhoneſt
peace or truce though neuer ſo vnaſſured, rather
then to expoſe themſelues to the danger of their mighty
armies: not heeding that thereby they haue loſt many faire
occaſions of doing good vpon them: whereof we neede
not ſeeke farther for examples then now that the King of
Perſia keepeth them in continuall war (at leaſt if ſuch newes
as comes thence be true) and that he hath lately giuen them
an ouerthrow neere Taurijs of aboue foure ſcore thouſand
men. Which if it be ſo, what better occaſion can you deſire
(ô ye Princes of Chriſtendome) to ſet vpon them and
reuenge the diſhonour of our paſſed iniuries? Can it be otherwiſe
but that in their former incounters and in this laſt
they muſt haue loſt the flower of their captaines and choice
ſouldiours, and is it poſſible that the ſwelling pride of their
command and greatneſſe ſhould not ſhortly vndergoe
ſome change and decreaſe if you will intertain the occaſion
which God offereth you? ô but you ſleepe and are altogether
vnprouided to aſſaile them. They are our ſins that
hinder vs and haue bred the diſorders of ciuill wars which
diſquiet France and the Low countries, with ſuch obſtinacie
and cruelty as theſe Princes haue worke enough to order
their owne affaires: their neighbours in the meane time
hauing their eares filled with the noice thereof, looking
what will become of ſuch ſturs and fearing leſt the fire
which ſo cruelly burneth their neighbours houſe, ſhould
faſten vpon theirs, which makes them ſtand vpon their
guard to keepe out ſuch broiles & diſorders. In the mean
time the Turke wanteth no time to recouer his loſſes; and
to laugh at oure inconſiderate follies; follies indeede for
vs, but wiſdome for him. It is a maruelous matter to conſider
with what ſucces and aduice he hath quieted his
neighbours, in ſuch ſort as he hath beene neuer knowen to
haue had two quarrels in hand at one time. Imitating

heerein the wiſdome of the Romans who had an eſpeciall
care not to haue two enemies to deale with at once, but if
they aſſailed one, they tooke order by deuice and friendly
meanes that the other were lookers on, or aſſociats in their
trauailes. Selim the firſt, which warred with the Perſians,
ſo ordered the reſt of his eſtate, as during all the time he
was imploied that way,1514. the Souldan of Egvpt neuer diſturbed
him: his ſonne Amurath continuing the ſame enterpriſe,
neuer receiued let of any Chriſtian potentate.
               The deſſignes of the Princes of Europe,1536. & the wars they
haue ſo long and ſo wilfully maintained one againſt the other,
haue affoorded the Turks a large paſſage for the tenth
occaſion to benefit themſelues by their obſtinacies & diuiſions;10 Occaſi
                        •
                     n: Chriſtian Princes warring one vpon an other.
neither haue they omitted nimbly to lay holde on
it to ſome purpoſe for the good of their affaires. What
enmities were euermore cruelly exerciſed with fire and
ſword then thoſe our anceſtors and we our ſelues haue
ſeene betweene France and Spaine? What malice was euer
more deepely rooted then that of the two Kings?
What nations are there in the world more mighty or more
valiant then theſe are; and hence let vs conſider what profit,
what comfort would haue redounded to Chriſtendome,
and what fearefull ruine to the Turke, if by ſome holy
league they had beene vnited; ſuch vndoubtedly as there
ſhould haue beene no memory of them, whereas they are
now moſt mighty, and moſt dreadfull. If we will deſcend to
particulars, was there euer Prince that had better meanes to
conquer the Turke then Charles the fifth? For beſides his
valour, inuincible courage, and other notable parts which
ſhined in him, he had ſufficient force to execute his enterpriſes:
he was followed by Captaines of incomparable
vertue, his ſouldiers were moſt reſolute, his people and
Prouinces were all moſt deſirous of ſo holy a war, he had
hauens and roades fit wherein to harbour his ſhips, and in
a word he had whatſoeuer was neceſſary, but how? He
was alwaies conſtrained to haue an eie behinde him, to
ſtand vpon his gard, becauſe of his neighbours who ſpared

not to moleſt him as ſoone as he did but once aime at ſo
holy an interpriſe. King Philip his ſonne hath met with the
like incombrances: ſo as we may well ſay our ſinnes haue
miniſtred occaſions enowe to the Turkes to aſſaile vs with
ſuch aduantage, as it hath beene an increaſe and eſtabliſhing
to his eſtate, we alwaies ſhrinking at the cruell ſhocke
of his mighty forces. Amongſt all the Ottomans Amurath
the firſt was the moſt diligent to hunt after, and embrace
occaſions, who (as we haue already deliuered) ſent his
ſupplies to the Emperour of conſtantinople,1360. paſſed the
ſtraights in perſon and got into his hands the two Caſtles.
Baiazet the firſt, his ſonne ſhewed himſelfe noleſſe politicke
and prompt to diſcouer his aduantages,1363. patient to attend
his occaſions, and diligent to gather the fruits wherewith
his hopes preſented him.
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               That he hath behaued himſelfe with
nimbleneſſe and celeritie vpon
his occaſions.
               
                  1 The fortune of warre conſisteth not in diſcerning but in the
vſe of occaſion.
                  2 Celeritie in wars moſt expedient.
                  3 The Turkes readineſſe and wiſdome in that kinde.
                  4 Furtherance of this celeritie.
                  5 Impediments of the Chriſtians in their expeditions.
                  6 Treaſure requiſite.
                  7 Exact obedience in Captaines and Souldiers and an obſeruation
of militarie diſcipline.
                  8 Strength and abilitie of men and horſe.
                  9 Examples of the Turkes celerity.
                  10 In their ſea-actions and their order:
                  11 Defects of the Chriſtians ſhipping.
               
               
                  
1 BEcauſe this Chapter, in regard of the
continuance of the matter in handling,
is but as one dependencie and coniunction
with the former, we will ſtill make
vſe of this word Occaſion, heeretofore
diſcourſed vpon, as of a table wherein
is repreſented all whatſoeuer our forefathers haue conceited
of it; and what we ought to admit thereof: following
this path we are to remember that who in time laieth not
hold on occaſion, ſhall neuer more inioy a like time to recouer
it with the like commoditie of wel doing as he once
had, if he had knowne how to entertaine it as hee ought.
To diſcouer then the opportunitie of affaires, is not al that
is required:Veg. lib. 3. c. 26. That which moſt importeth, is to ſerue our
turnes with it at an inſtant, when it preſenteth it ſelfe, to
guide our intentions to that perfection we aime at.
               2 Celeritie is an eſpeciall matter in all affaires of importance,
but aboue all in the warres, wherein it is more neceſſarie
then in any our actions. Becauſe (as ſaide Selim the
firſt) the leaſt delay we therin vſe, turneth to a groſſe error,
eſpecially ſince it bereaues vs of the commoditie and aduantage
offered to put in execution, what we had wiſely
and with ſtudie determined: Hannibal a woorthy and renowned
captaine, was noted of ſlowneſſe, not in reſoluing
but in embracing his occaſions of victory which might
haue aſſuredly eſtabliſhed his affaires. That great Pompey
was likewiſe ſubiect to the ſame imperfection, which did
vtterly vndoe him. In a word, no motion wanting ſpeedineſſe,
can be of much force, or produce woorthy effects:
Violent agitations looſe alike their force with their ſwiftneſſe,
but ſuch as are naturall attaine it, and fortifie themſelues
in it.
               3 This is that the Turkes know well enough how to practiſe,
faſhioning themſelues to quickneſſe, nimbleneſſe,
habilitie, and to a certaine ſtore of whatſoeuer may ſeeme
neceſſarie to that purpoſe, ſo as their promptneſſe and

forecaſt hath neuer omitted the occaſions preſented vnto
them without reaping the fruites and glory thereof.
               4 But ſome one will ſay, that it is requiſite for the ſuddainneſſe
of occaſion that many things relie in the power
of him that will follow this courſe. I grant it, for they indeed
who will fitly make vſe of ſuch aduantage, muſt be
alwaies in armes, and heerein alſo the Turke ſurpaſſeth vs,
for he continually entertaineth ſo many ſouldiers, as it were
hard to take him vnprouided, or to finde him (when need
requireth) without a mightie army, which ſerueth to hearten
him, and to awake his courage: but aboue all, he hath
ſo great a number of horſe ordinarily in a readineſſe, as that
is but too ſufficient to make him proudly humour his
owne will; ſo as thought and execution are in a manner
one with him. This is yet farther accompanied with a
powerfull commoditie which addeth facillititie to his
promptneſſe; and this is, that his horſe and foot are lightly
armed, and without incombrance of luggage, ſo as by
this meanes he more eaſily aſſembleth his troups, ordreth
them, and conducteth them whereſoeuer he pleaſeth,
without diſtinction of time. Againe, ſobrietie and ſparing
(familiar among his ſouldiers) make much to the aduancement
of his enterpriſes, contenting themſelues, as they do
to drinke water and eat rice and ſalted fleſh, which they reduce
into powder, ſo as euery one carrieth with him his
prouiſion almoſt for a moneth, and when that faileth, they
liue by the bloud of their horſes, which they ſalt themſelues,
like as doe the Muſcouites and Tartars.
               5 On the other ſide, when our ſouldiers march, they
muſt haue ſuch ſtore of munition follow them, to their ſo
ſtrange confuſion and hinderance, as they are neuer able
to goe thorow ſpeedily with any notable attempt. This
bringeth a twofold let to their enterpriſes. The firſt in their
prouiſion, which in the vnmeaſurableneſſe thereof is neuer
made in due time. The ſecond, in the conuoy thereof, neuer
ſo well ordered as it ought, whereof the euent of the
enterpriſe of Exechium, is but too true a teſtimonie, the

ſouldiers then ſuffering more in regard of the famine and
difficultie of conueying victuals vnto them,1538. then of-the
enemies forces.Qui frumentum neceſſariumque commeatum non praeparat vincitur ſine ferro. Liu. l. 3. c. 26. Whoſe attempt had beene vnprofitable if
the campe had not beene diſordered by this inconuenience,
whereby the ſouldiers became halfe dead for hunger,
and grew ſo feeble, as the courage to defend themſelues
vtterly failed them. Which the General of the Turkiſh
armie foreſeeing, waited till ſuch time, as the famine
had brought them low, and made them ſtrengthleſſe, that
he might vpon their enforced retrait aſſaile them behinde,
and ſo wearie them with continuall skirmiſhing as they
ſhould at length chace and ouerthrow themſelues, as indeed
it came to paſſe. I remember I haue heard one worthie
to be credited,1557. ſay to this purpoſe; that when Emanuel
Philibert Duke of Sauoy, deceaſſed, was Generall of the
armie in Flanders, he found no difficultie in the wars more
important then the diſcommoditie of proportioning and
carriage of neceſſarie prouiſion as he had oftentimes approoued.
On the contrarie, it may be ſaid to the Chriſtians
ſhame and confuſion, that neuer any of the Turkiſh armies
were knowen, through ſuch default, to ſuffer extreamitie
or to be diſordered.
               6 Let vs now come to the point of ſodaine execution,
and to the inſtruments thereof, and let vs dwell ſomewhat
thereupon. I finde the moſt neceſſarie and profitable is to
haue alwaies ſtore of money in our coffers: and that is a
hard matter, eſpecially for ſuch as are not prouident, and
that in all things ſo pamper themſelues as the Chriſtians
doe; but not for the Turke, for he hath (when and what
he will) in ſtore to ſerue his need for the warres, and for
whatſoeuer belongeth thereto. This is the ſinew of warre,
and the onely meanes to haſten forward occaſion, and attaine
(as he doth) to a happie end of his enterpriſes, but at
his returne home, he obſerueth a barbarous and inſolent
courſe of rembourſing his charge: After he hath performed
what he vndertooke, he repaieth himſelfe by new impoſitions,
whereto he enforceth his ſubiects to contribute:

This to him is eaſie: but to vs the moſt difficult materiall
point is the procuring of money: for the greater part of
Chriſtian Princes are ſo bad husbands and of ſo ſmall forecaſte,
that they haue ſcarce one croſſe in ſtore: and are alwaies
at the borrowing hand, or enforced to pawne their
lands and demaines. And though the Chriſtians be not
ſo couetous as the Turkes, yet they are of ſo good a
hold faſt, as no ſmall time will ſerue to draw money from
them, ſo as while that is doing, occaſion hath alreadie
turned her backe and left vs nought, but the ſhame and
ſorrow of our enterpriſes ill ſucceſſe and effect. And if it
chance that we hold on our courſes, it is with ſuch headlong
raſhneſſe and ill aduice in all we doe, but particularly
in prouiding of armes, horſe, munition, and other neceſſaries,
as all being performed out of ſeaſon, there is neither
the forwardneſſe, the array, the election, the aboundance,
the reſolution, nor the well diſpoſing of matters which
would otherwiſe haue beene, and which we ſee to be in our
aduerſaries.
               7 There is another thing which addeth much aſſurance
to the Turkes deſignes, and makes them more eaſily to
execute: and this is the incredible obedience of the Captaines
towards their Generall, and of the ſouldiours towards
their Captaines and ſuch is the loue amongſt them
as there is no danger or difficulty (be it neuer ſo great)
which they will not eaſily ouercome, ſo willingly they performe
what is inioyned them. It was neuer heard that any
reuolt or mutiny ſtopt or ſlacked the courſe of their conqueſt.
               8 They haue yet another moſt conſiderable aduantage
and that is the ſtrong conſtitution of their men, ſpirit and
ſpeed of their horſe. Where on the contrary our forces
dare ſcarce bouge vnleſſe they be backed and ſtrengthned
by forrain ſuccors either Almines or Switzers, people faint
and of little courage vpon a ſodaine and vnexpected action,
as being framed of a dull and ſlow mettall ſeruing for
nought but to make good the intire body of a battaile, and

be vnto it as a ſolide and vnmoueable rampart.1542. The incounters
they haue had with the Turke at Buda and elſewhere
haue taught vs how vnprofitable they are & of how
ſlender effect for the ſpeedy and happy aduancement of
the affaires of Chriſtendome in thoſe parts: Moreouer the
Turkes horſe are of more ſpeede and ſtrength then ours:
the ſpaniſh Genet is indeede nimble and full of Spirit, but
wanteth ſtrength and breath: Contrariwiſe the horſe of
Germany is able and ſtrong but tender withall and not ready
vpon the hand, ſo as he is more proper to make a ſtand
and defend then to aſſaile, skirmiſh, or giue the chace.
The Napolitane is good and ſtrong but of ſuch a nimbleneſſe
as is not held for perfect ſpeede, on the other ſide
the enemy hath the Hungarian good for ſeruice, the Barbary
horſe of incredible ſwiftneſſe, the Valachian, the Turkiſh,
and the Moore almoſt hard for induring of trauaile and
well breathed, ſo as we may conclude that he inioyeth
whatſoeuer is neceſſary for the war, better, more redy, and
in greater aboundance then we, and that this is it which
makes him ſpeedily and with aduantage, to ſerue his turne
with all occaſions which preſent themſelues.
               9 There are ſo many examples of this aduantageous celerity
in their actions as they are almoſt innumerable; but
I will only note two or three which may ſeeme in a manner
prodigious ſo admirable hath beene their ſucceſſe. Amurath
the ſecond hauing intelligence of the great forces leauied
by Ladiſlaus King of Hungary (with whom he had
formerly concluded a peace) with an intent to ouerrunne
him,1444. being then buſie in the wars of Caramania; he ſodainly
quitted that interpriſe, and with ſuch maruelous
ſpeed croſſed all the Heleſpont as in ſeuen daies he ariued at
Varna with fower ſcore thouſand men, In like manner Scheder
Baſſa imploied by Baiazet the ſecond to diuert the attempt
of the Venetians vpon Milan,
                  1498. came with ſuch extraordinary
ſpeed as he appeered in the territory of Treuiſo
before they could haue newes ſo much as of his departure,
leſſe of his arriuall in thoſe parts.1516. 
                  Selim the firſt marched ſo

ſpeedily from Ceſaria to Aleppo, croſſing the mountaine
Aman with his army and artillery, as he came vpon the
Souldan before he dreampt of him ſuppoſing him to be as
then rather vpon his way to encounter the Perſian then to
attempt him.
               10 This particular dilligence of the Ottomans is not to be
limited all only with their land wars: they haue performed
as much by ſea, ſo vigilant and wary haue they ſhewed
themſelues in exalting the honour of their names, and of
their great eſtate, by them maintained euen vnto this day:
And ſince they are ſo incredibly nimble and aduiſed in
maritine exploits, I hold it not from the purpoſe to touch
briefly the order they obſerue in aſſembling their forces.
They reiect the veſſels and ſhips of great burden as ouerheauy
and vnwealdy if the wind faile them, rather hindering
then furthering him that conducteth them. Their
Gallies and Galliots are ſpeedy, well manned and well appointed.
               11 Wee on the contrary drag with vs a great number of
ſhips and Gallions as our beſt ſtrength and choice prouiſion,
but they are in proofe the cauſe of ſuch incombrance
to the ſeruice in hand, as we for the moſt part waſte the ſeaſon
vnprofitably and ſpend our opertunities in rigging
and attending them; being alſo oft times enforced to diſorder
our Gallies, to the end theſe great cartes may keepe
with vs. Hence groweth yet another diſcommodity, and
that is, that hauing placed a kinde of hope in our ſhips, we
in forgoing them, finde our ſelues too weake and failing of
courage to aſſaile the enemy; who is not to be forced to
fight but when he pleaſe,Antiently called Nicoplu a city of Epirus. hauing too open a field to flie
and eſpy his occaſion, as it hapned at Preueza the yeare
1537. and at the battaile of Lepanto which was the yeare
1571. for then the ſhips of the league remained behind
with a good number of ſouldiours vnprofitable for that
action, in regard they could not ariue there time enough.
The yeare after they encountred the like diſcommodity:
ſince for the very ſame cauſe the army of the league, goodly

and mighty fought not at all, neither performed ought
worthy ſo great a preparation. And when the Gallies of
the Pope and Venetians met, and that they attended Don
Iohn (who aboade ſtill at Miſſina, becauſe of the then beginning
troubles of Flanders) the army of the Turk being
then commanded by Oechially,
                  1572. he once preſented battaile,
but becauſe of the aduantage of the winde which without
other helpes draue our ſhips, and fearing the incounter of
our round veſſels, he made his eſcape by meanes of a certaine
ſtratagem, which for the ſtrangeneſſe thereof put the
counſailes and iudgments of our army to a plunge. In
verie deede it is worthy the noting: for ſeeing the whole
ſtrength of our ſhips vnited with ſuch confederat Gallies
as were then there, make towards him, he gaue commandement
that in euery one of his Gallies they ſhould put fire
to a barrell of powder and row backewards (not making
for al this any ſhew of flight, the prowes of their gallies ſtill
appeering towards them) and as ſoone as the ſmoake had
couered his fleete he halled on a maine, and in an inſtant
hoiſſing vp al his ſailes ſhaped his courſe to Napolis in Romania,
our ſhips not daring to follow him.
               In regarde he had gotten the aduantage of them they
bearing but their mizen ſailes, and knowing how dangerous
it was for them being ignorant of his deſignes, to
breake company: eight daies after we comming neere together
there followed ſome light skirmiſhes, but ſo ſoone
as they perceiued vs to faint, as being depriued of our
ſhips, they charged vs with the whole army, in like ſort as
when we had them for ſuccour they retired. So as it was
then found by experience that the great ſhips ſerued but to
keepe vs from buckling with the enemy.
               I haue made mention of this incountre in my commentaries
of the notable occurrants of theſe times written in
Latine, and ſomewhat more at large then I heere deliuer,
for I was preſent in the army during all that voiage, vnder
the command of the Duke de Mayne.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XIII.
               That he hath gone himſelfe in
perſon to the war.
               
                  1 A queſtion concerning the Princes preſence in the wars:
                  2 The firſt commodity is, if the Prince be there in perſon, it
ads courage to the ſouldiour.
                  3 The ſecond is, it cauſeth plenty of all things in his army.
                  4 The third, it increaſeth the army.
                  5 The fourth, it worketh facility and ſpeede in aduice and execution.
                  6 Of the power of Lieutenant Generalls in the wars.
                  7 The fift commodity, is the Princes authority and dignity.
                  8 The firſt diſcommodity growing from the princes preſence, is,
that thereby the enemy proceedes more prouidently.
                  9 The ſecond, that his Commanders vſe leſſe diligence in diſcharge
of their places.
                  10 The third, is emulation of the leaders, whence groweth contention.
                  11 The fourth, the emulation of the Lieutenant generall toward
the Prince.
                  12 Examples to this purpoſe pro and contra.
                  13 The prepoſition defined by diſtinction.
                  14 The Ottomans wars in their perſons haue ſucceeded well.
                  15 Exhortation to Chriſtian princes to vndertake wars againſt
the Turke.
               
               1 WHether the prince ſhould in perſon goe
to the war, or elſe ſend his Lieutenant,
is a queſtion often diſputed with ſuch
reaſons and earneſtneſſe by ſundry graue
perſonages, as whatſoeuer may be now
deliuered to that purpoſe would proue
but an vnprofitable repetition of what hath bene formerly
digeſted by ſo many rare ſpirits. This then excuſing me,

I will referre the deciding thereof to men of more experience
then my ſelfe; yet will I not forbeare by way of diſcourſe
to deliuer my opinion; and cite ſuch examples as
may helpe for the clearing of theſe doubts. Firſt then we
are to recken the commodities the Kings preſence affoordeth
in his armie, and ſo in order of the other conſequences.
               2 Whereof one of the principall is, that it putteth ſpirit
and courage into the ſouldiers, it ſo neerely preſſeth them
as they muſt of force, as it were, make their valour appeare,
eſpecially when they ioine battell where the Maieſtie and
life of the Prince, yea and their owne too is in hazard.
Then is it that the honeſt deſire of preſeruing their maſters
life groweth feruent in them, and ſo much the more by
how much it is farre more pretious then the life of a captaine
or generall, either mercenary or ſubiect which the
Prince might haue ſent to command them. This occaſion
more then any other moueth them more freely to hazard
their liues and meanes for their Princes ſeruice, which they
would not ſo couragiouſly performe vnder any other that
ſhould command in his ſtead. They likewiſe expect greater
and more aſſured rewards from him then from others.
               3 Againe, the king is alwaies better followed; he is attended
on with the conſequence of farre greater prouiſions
either of victuals, munition, money, or whatſoeuer may
be neceſſary for the enterpriſe, than his lieutenant, who
hath his power limited, his allowance ſtinted, and cannot
diſpoſe but in part of the credit and authority of his maſter,
to whom he remaineth as countable. Moreouer, the
ſubiect fixeth his eies and affection vpon his Prince, and lauiſheth
his life and meanes according as the buſineſſe is,1525.
and he is addicted. Francis the firſt, King of France, being
before Pauy powred money foorth (as a man may ſay) by
buſhels, yet Odet de Lautrey his lieutenant generall, loſt the
Duchy of Millan for lacke of three hundred thouſand
crownes that were aſſigned him for his charges, but were
neuer deliuered him. Whereupon the Switzers failing of

their entertainment (whom he had till then fed with hopes
of pay) he was conſtrained to fight with ſuch diſaduantage
as hee miſcaried,1522. Guic. lib. 14. and his whole army was put to flight;
which had not happened if the King had beene there in
perſon, for either money had not failed, or elſe the credit
and authority that accompanieth the Princes preſence
had wrought them to patience and contained them in entire
deuotion.
               4 Moreouer the great train of Nobility and men of quality
that the Prince bringeth with him is a ſtrengthening to
his army, and addeth to it life and beauty, euery man ſtriuing
to appeare more gallant then other; which they would
not vouchſafe to doe nor to ſubiect themſelues, commanded
but by an ordinary Generall; for there are alwaies about
the King, by election or neceſſity, many great perſonages
equall in power and dignity, and ſome differing too
in rancke and charge, either as being Princes of the bloud,
or for honor and authority woon by deſert, al which would
perhaps doe little for the Generall, but would moſt willingly
obey and expoſe all for their King and maſter to
whom they owe a duty both of nature and benefit. Theſe
great mens followers ſerue alſo to increaſe the army.
               5 Beſide theſe conſiderations the King bringeth euermore
with him a reſolution of his enterpriſes, wherein a
Generall moſt commonly proceedeth with a reſtraint and
aduiſe, as fearing in his too forward attempting, to exceed
his commiſſion. In the meane while, time paſſeth, and occaſion
eſcapeth, moſt often to the Princes hinderance and
blot to his reputation.
               6 In this regard if the wiſedome and loyalty of the Captaine
be approued, Princes ought not too ſtrictly to limit
their charges: but if they doubt of them, it is indiſcretion
to put them into their hands, as we may ſee by theſe examples.
Don Emanuel King of Portugal hauing ſent the Duke
of Braganza General into Africke, he fortunately wan and
made ſure for his Prince the towne of Aza Azamor: but
that performed hee would not take Marocco (as at that

time he might haue eaſily done) though he were counſelled
thereto by the wiſeſt and greateſt of his army, becauſe
that (ſaid he) it went beyond his Commiſſion: Lopez
Zoares Generall for the ſame King loſt in like manner the
opportunity to take the city of Aden, of eſpeciall importance
for the affaires of his maſter (for it ſtandeth iuſt in the
mouth of the Red ſea) though the inhabitants would haue
deliuered him the keies. Inſomuch as hee ſhould haue taken
vpon him (as he ſaid) more then his commiſſion allowed
him. The thing was of that conſequence as hee might
well haue forborne the obſeruation of his faſt, to ſwallow
ſuch a morſell. Neither had the ſeruice beene one of the
leaſt, he could haue performed for his maſter.
               7 In concluſion we are to grant that the preſence of the
king bringeth with it a certaine greatneſſe, and more aweth
the enimy then his Lieutenant; as it was ſeene at the enterpriſe
of Tuniſe; for Barbaroſſa ſharply tooke vp and reproued
thoſe who ſaid that the Emperour Charles the fift was
himſelfe in perſon in the Chriſtian army, inferring heereby
that he ſhould then haue his hands fuller then he made
account, and that nothing could be lacking in the enemies
campe, when their Prince was there preſent. This is that
may be ſaide of the good redoundeth from the preſence of
the king in his army. Let vs now ſee what may be alledged
on the contrary.
               8 Firſt it may be ſaid that the King which goeth to the
wars in perſon miniſtreth greater occaſion then he would
to his enemy to prouide himſelfe of forces, meanes and
friendes: and affordeth him matter alſo of pretending a
more glorious victory, with the hopes whereof and of rich
ſpoiles, he putteth courage in his men, diſpoſing them to
attempt valiantly all things be they neuer ſo hazardous, ſo
hartning them to fight.
               9 It may be ſaid likewiſe that the preſence of the King
maketh his Captaines leſſe heedefull and diligent at all
occurrants and aduantages, becauſe they in part relie vpon
the vigilant eye of the Prince, who is to carry away the

whole honour of the enterpriſe, their valour remaining as
dimmed and eclipſed. This hapned at the battaile of
Pauie.1523. For the Commanders relying vpon the kings preſence
and diſcreet carriage of matters, had no regard but of
their pleaſures in ſtead of diligently bethinking themſelues
of the duty of their ſeuerall charges, which in the ende
turned to the ruine and diſhonor both of their maſters and
themſelues.
               10 Againe an army where the King is in perſon, is alwaies
repleniſhed with Princes and great perſonages, all
which promiſing themſelues great matters, ſeeke not but
to excel one another in place and command, whence grow
among them iealoſies, enuies, and ſundry differences breeding
infinite diſorders, to the ouerthrow or hinderance of
their Maſters affaires. Who is not without his part of
feare to diſcontent ſome in contenting others? This plague
of ambition, is ſuch as it will ſometimes ſo wreſt the conſciences
and honours of theſe great men, as they will not
ſticke to hinder the ſeruice of their Maſters only to oppoſe
the fortune and woorth of ſuch a one, as they ſee out-ſtrippeth
them in preferment; yea oft times their ambition
groweth ſo extreame, as for deſpitethey wil vtterly forſake
their Princes ſeruice: Their vertue and valour being perhaps
in the meane time not of the meaneſt, and ſuch as if
it were well imploied would gaine honour and victory to
the army.
               11 There is yet another diſcommodity, and that is, that
the king carying with him the party, whō in his abſence he
intendeth to conſtitute his Lieutenant, he in the mean time
repineth at his Maſters worthy exploites, conſidering how
the honour ſhould haue beene his, if alone he had the managing
of the army; againe, knowing that all ſuch misfortunes
or diſcomfitures, as may befall, it ſhall be attributed
to the inſufficiencie of the Prince, and not to him, he the
leſſe regardeth it. In a word, the glory we pretend, and
the iealouſie we haue of our particular honors, are two
eſpeciall powers, to ſhake and curbe generous ſpirits. The

Emperour Charles the fift, had ſufficient triall of it: for
ſome of his Captaines and Lieutenants could oft times
with ſmall ſtore of money, and few men, gaine triumphant
victories, as well at Milan and Naples as elſe where, which
perhaps in preſence of the Emperour, would not haue
beene ſo fortunately atchieued.
               Notwithſtanding all that hath beene ſaid, the queſtion
is not yet fully determined, rather it remaineth diuerſly
ballancing to and fro, as appeareth by theſe and the following
examples.
               12 Charles of France,About 1364. ſurnamed the Sage, neuer ſet foot
out of his ſtudie to command his armies, yet knew he ſo
well how to make the beſt vſe of his Captaines valour, and
manage his affaires ſutable to the time, that he finally recouered
his whole kingdome, and expelled thence the
Engliſh, who poſſeſſed the greater part thereof. On the
contrarie, the Emperour Ferdinand, who warred by his
Captaines, himſelfe not ſtirring out of Vienna, receiued
great and dangerous ouerthrowes. Charles the fift, on the
other ſide, wan more honour and victories by the valour
of his Captaines, then euer he did in thoſe warres and enterpriſes
himſelfe vndertooke in perſon.1524. If the attempt
vpon Marſeilles had taken effect, it might haue beene truly
ſaid that his Captaines had beene in all places victorious:
witneſſe Pauie, the Bicock, Landrino, Naples, Coron,
Genoua, Rome, and Africk; but where he went in
perſon, as in Saxony, at Tunis, Dura, and Vienna, his fortune
prooued indifferent betweene good and bad. But at
Argiers, in Piemont, and at Metz, he encountred on all
ſides ſuch misfortune, as it deemed (as a man may ſay) the
luſter of his renowne and victories formerly gained.
               13 Marke the effects of ſucceſſe and fortune ſo different,
as it were a hard matter to paſſe a ſound and determined
iudgement vpon this propoſition: ſo as the more I
imagine by the contrarietie of theſe examples to inlighten
it, the more obſcure me thinkes I make it; the finall deciding
thereof, may be framed thus. The King which vndertaketh

the conduct of an armie, is either a diſcreet and
aduiſed Captaine, or elſe he is altogither vnskilled in the
myſterie of warre. In this laſt caſe I ſhould thinke that it
were moſt for his good, to relie vpon an others relation
and execution, eſpecially if priuie to his owne imperfections,
he want a dexteritie to make the beſt vſe of another
mans valour, wiſedome and counſaile. But if ſo be he be
capable of the gouernment, and conduct of an armie, and
that he haue courage to execute, in mine opinion he cannot
doe better then to vndertake the warre and attempt
himſelfe in perſon: for if in all militarie vertues he equall
the moſt valiant of his armie, he will ſurpaſſe them in fortune,
credit, and authoritie, and in all the other good parts
aboue mentioned. Kings compounded of theſe excellent
parts, alwaies crowne their eminency with honourable triumphes.
Theodoſius the Emperour, Charles the Great,
and ſundrie others can witneſſe this ſufficiently; Lewes
the 12. of France, hauing beene alwaies conquerour, and
neuer conquered in whatſoeuer he vndertooke himſelfe in
perſon, was put beſides the kingdome of Naples, by means
of a battaile which his captaines loſt neere the riuer of Garillion,1503. Guicc. lib. 6.
for lacke of reſolution and aduice; which miſchance
was by that good prince ſo lamented, as he made
a vow, thence forward to command perſonally in his wars;
And to ſay the truth, if the Captaine be not diſcreet, valiant,
and of long approoued experience, it is ſtrange if he
euer performe woorthy act: in ſuch caſes the preſence of
one only Turnus is more auaileable then of a thouſand
ſuch Captaines.
               14 The Turkiſh Emperours who goe themſelues to the
wars, haue taſted the ſweetneſſe thereof by ſo many and ſo
notable victories, as we are at this day their admirers.
Selim the firſt was wont to ſay that battailes gained in the
Princes abſence were not to be tearmed accompliſhed victories,
and we ſee that they haue ſcarce euer enterpriſed
ought which hath not taken effect in the ende. Yea it hath
beene obſerued that when their Captaines haue beene

ouerthrowne, if they themſelues went afterward in perſon,
they alwaies returned victorious. Amurath the ſecond
went himſelfe after Carambeius generall of his army (who
was ouerthrowen by Ladiſlaus King of Polonia) to war vpon
that Prince,1444. whom he ouercame and cut his whol army
in peeces:1481. 1522. 
                  Mezat Baſſa was imploied by Mahomet the ſecond
in the enterpriſe of Rhodes, which he ſhamefully abandoned;
but Soliman going himſelfe in perſon, caried it by
plaine force, and chaſed thence the Knights of Saint Iohn
of Ieruſalem, who diſquieted his eſtate by their ordinary
excurſions in the Leuant.1469. & 1407. 1474. 1583. 
                  Amurath Captaine of the ſaid
Mahomet receiued a notable ouerthrow at the hands of
Vſumcaſſan King of Perſia: but Mahomet going after himſelfe
in perſon vanquiſhed the enemy already victorious,
and put him to a deſperat plunge. The Mamelucks ouerthrew
Querſeolus and Calubeius, Baiazet the ſecond Commanders:
Selim the firſt after perſonally vndertaking them,
ouercame them, and wholy rooted out both them and their
Empire. Amurath the third now raigning hath been ſo many
times beaten by Cudabenda King of Perſia in perſon, and
through the vnskilfulneſſe of his Commanders, that a man
may well ſay that neuer any of the race of the Ottomans receiued
ſo notable ouerthrowes as this hath: Whereto
may be added,1585. that he met with laſt of all before Taures;
where he loſt about 80000. men together with the Baſſa
Generall of his army; a great blot to the glory of his anceſtors,
yet the loſſe being ſo far off from his eſtate, he receiued
not ſo great a ſhake as if it had beene neere him or in
his country.
               15 But who will take hold of ſuch aduantages to doe
good vpon him, ſeeing the greateſt Princes of Chriſtendome
are turmoiled in ciuill wars and troubles of their
owne eſtates? ſurely none: Nay rather he is like to gather
ſtrength more then euer, which he would not ſo eaſily
doe, if he were to incounter the Chriſtians well appointed,
reſolute and in a readineſſe ioyntly, and with one conſent to
make their benifit of ſo goodly an occaſion.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XIIII.
               That he hath euermore gone well
appointed to the wars.
               
                  1 That our deliberations may take good effect, we muſt proue
all courſes, but vndertake nothing raſhly.
                  2 Rather ſuperfluous then but neceſſary prouiſion is to be
made of what belongeth to the wars.
                  3 Aduantages of errours committed in military prouiſion.
                  4 The wiſdome of the Romaines and Turkes in their prouiſion.
               
               1 NOthing can be imagined more contenting
the ſpirit then the happy ſucceſſe of
that euery one vndertaketh anſwerable
to his condition: much more a great
Prince when he hath reſolued vpon anie
thing, eſpeically the war, is not to forget
any one thing of what ſoeuer may perfect his deſigne,
which he ought to conceale and keepe to himſelfe all he
may. We haue one notable example hereof yet freſh in
memory, and that is of the Prince of Parma Alexander
Farneſe, who for a time had the managing of the troubles
and wars in Flanders, where he almoſt neuer attempted
any thing which according to his intent, he did not performe:
In very truth his actes were ſuch as he deſerueth to
be reckoned as one of the moſt iudicious, wiſe, and aduiſed
Princes of our age, particularly in this point of making
prouiſion of things neceſſary in due ſeaſon. And to ſay
the truth, who ſoeuer diſpoſeth his affaires, is euermore attended
on rather by ſhame, reproch, and repentance, then
honour, glory, and contentment: That Prince which once
loſeth his reputation by this default, hardly recouereth it,
but remaineth infamous; he is leſſe feared of his neighbors,
and which is more, he himſelfe entreth into a certaine ill

conceit, and diſtruſt of himſelfe, which in ſuch ſort accompanieth
him, as in whatſoeuer he afterward a new vndertaketh,
he reſteth vnaſſured, doubtfull, confounded
in all his determinations, and is vncapable of conſtant and
reſolued counſaile, carying alwaies the repentance of his
former fault with a ſorow which tormenteth his verie ſoule,
ſo much the more ſtrangely, by how much ſuch a Prince is
the greater, or is well conceited of himſelfe.
               2 This is an aduertiſment which ſhould open the eies of
all ſuch not to vndertake any thing but what is well digeſted,
and with ſuch order and forecaſt, as there be rather
abundance then neceſſity: for when the prouiſion is ſmall
and that it neuer ſo little miſcary, it depriueth the Prince,
not of courage but of confidence and aduice, of whoſe
lacke inſueth the want of wherwithall to warrant and ſhelter
his reputation, vnleſſe it be that he will ſay, I had not
thought, words moſt dangerous in the wars where he can
erre but once, and vnwoorthy euer to proceede out of
the mouth of one wiſe and aduiſed, vnleſſe he meane that
the miſſe of theſe two vertuous partes be to be borne withall.
               3 Proſpero Colonna a great Captaine proued this to his
coſt at ſuch time as he vndertooke to aſſaile Parma without
cannon or other munition of war requiſite wherewith
to take ſuch to taske as were the French ſouldiours then in
the towne.Iou. lib. 20. For they ſent him away well laden with blowes,
ſhame and diſpleaſure, vnable to performe ought of what
he too vnaduiſedly attempted. Fredericke of Boſſola met
with the like at the ſame place for want of counſaile, mony,
and other meanes which are not borne as Pompers ſouldiours
in ſtriking the ground with our foot: Guicciardin was
then within the towne and had a command within that garriſon.
               And though the Captaine be wiſe, yet if the armie
once diſcouer that their prouiſions faile them, that they be
far from ſuccours, farre from places of retrait: then is it,
loe that they become aſtoniſhed, that feare and diſobedience

ſeiſeth them, and that all theſe meete in one, make a
foule adoe; which the enemie perceiuing (as it is vnpoſſible
but he ſhould) will if he be wiſe, make his benefite of
our neceſſitie; which will ſerue him as a rampart and
bridge at his pleaſure to aſſaile and harme vs, but to preſerue
himſelfe ſafe and vntouched: It is that the Turkes
taught our men at Exechium.
               4 The Romans more wary, neuer fought but in groſſe
and anſwerable to the proportion of the enterpriſe, their
armies were either Pretorian or Conſulary: the Turke hath
alwaies ſent to the field mighty forces, and aduantagiouſſy
furniſhed; neither hath he euer quitted enterpriſe for lacke
of men, munition, or money. What was his prouiſion of
artillery at the ſiege of Malta, but in a manner infinite.
For not to reckon his other charge, he there diſcharged
threeſcore thouſand cannon ſhot. At the ſiege of Nice,
where the French were, Barbaroſſa Generall of the Turkiſh
armie, brought ſuch ſtore of artillerie, as the French that
were at their own doores had lacke of powder to continue
their portion of batterie which they had vndertaken; and
were conſtrained to borrow of the Turkes, to whom they
ſhould rather haue lent; ſince the enterpriſe was theirs, and
they brought the other thither.
            
            
               CHAP. XV.
               He hath neuer fought out of ſeaſon.
               
                  1 Eſpeciall wiſdome to be vſed in giuing battaile.
                  2 Errors of Charles the 5. and other Chriſtian Princes in
their Sea-fights.
                  3 The Turkes wiſedome in that kinde.
                  4 Sea actions vnſeaſonably vndertaken.
                  5 Aduantages that the Turke hath in ſuch caſes aboue the
Chriſtians.
               
               
                  
1 EVery man is able to reſolue that he wil fight
with whatſoeuer force ſhall preſent it ſelf,Capienda ſaepius ſeius in malis praeceps via est. &
with hopes of victory,Sencca. Agamem. or elſe to ſel his life at
a deare rate; but to perform it againſt heauē
and time, was neuer heard of; for in ſuch caſes courage, wiſdome,
and power become danted, ſo as conſequently there
followeth a deſpaire rather then any honorable fruit of a labor
& indeuor wel imploied. In a word, who ſo precipitates
his enterpriſe without attending fit time and ſeaſon, ſeeketh
nought elſe but to loſe his time, his pain, charge, and reputation
(which is the maine point) to his ruine and confuſion.
               2 The Emperour Charles the fifth might make vs wiſe,
ſince hauing obſtinatly vndertaken the ſeege of Metz our
of due ſeaſon, and without mature aduice; he was conſtrained
to riſe from before it with ſuch a diſorder, ſhame,
and loſſe, as he afterwards hardly thriued; Not long before
that, for lacke of applying himſelfe to the time when
he enterpriſed vpon Algiers, how many ſhips and men loſt
he? ſo many as it was a long time ere hee could recouer
himſelfe, learning this leſſon to his coſt, That earth cannot
force heauen. And though the valour and policy of the
Turke can challenge no part in that action, yet can he make
vſe of the Chriſtian loſſes to his aduantage. Now if tempeſts
and inconſtancy of weather oppoſed this prince both
at Algiers and Metz, they did not leſſe at ſuch time as he
attempted the voiage of Tripoli in Barbary: for the contrariety
of windes made him waſte much time at Saragoſſa,
and after by the like conſtraint and violence, as much at
Malta, during which time the moſt part of his ſouldiours
died, and in the end vtterly deſpairing to reach Tripoli in
due ſeaſon, the army a boade at Gerbes, where it was after
ouerthrowne as well by tempeſt as by the Turkes, who
knew well enough how to aduantage themſelues by this
diſorder. The firſt yeere of the war of Cypres, the armies
of the Pope and of the Venetians incountred notable loſſes
by tempeſt of ſea, euen in the mouthes of their own hauens,
and all for too late aſſembling themſelues.
               
                  
3 The Turke neuer fought, eſpecially by ſea, but when
the ſeaſon and opportunity would permit him.
               4 Some one that may perhaps long to ouerthrow this poſition
will alledge that the Princes of Chriſtendome haue
neuertheleſſe in the winter attempted voiages by ſea. It
may be, but I ſhould thinke it was either in regard of the
hope they had, not to incounter the Turke as they might,
in the ſommer, then for any aſſurance they had or might
haue in the well-ſpeeding of a voiage inconſiderately attemted.
               5 In breefe, if we muſt aduenture beyond reaſon, it were
better we did it fighting againſt the Turkes, then againſt
the windes, with the Moores then with ſtormes and ſhipwrackes.
To ſay the very truth, our Princes of Chriſtendome
haue their forces and eſtates ſo far ſeparated one
from the other, that before we can reduce them to one
conſent and body; time and opportunities are fled. But
the Turke hath his powers ſo limited and ranged, not depending
but of one only head, as he is alwaies in a readines
to repell all aſſaults almoſt before the threatning of them
can be with him. In concluſion, if all theſe reaſons ſuffice
not to cleare the propoſition, yet ſhould they teach vs at
the leaſt to proue wiſe, reſolute & aduiſed hence forward
not to enterpriſe ought ſo out of ſeaſon, as that we ſhould
be driuen to fight with time rather then men; they ſhould
teach vs to gaine rather then to loſe occaſions; to abound
rather then want; to ſeeke to be honoured and to thriue
rather then to receiue diſhonour and loſſe: but the maine
point in all is to haue God on our ſide as our chiefe ſtrength
and moſt aſſured conductor.
            
            
               CHAP. XVI.
               That he hath neuer diuided his forces.
               
                  1 Wiſdome of the Turkes in vndertaking one, not many wars
at once.
                  2 Diuiſion of forces dangerous.
                  
                     
3 Thoſe few good Commanders that are found in a confuſed
multitude are not to be farre ſeparated.
                  4 The ouerthrow of one army may breed terror in the reſt.
                  5 Prouiſion cannot be made at once for many expeditions.
               
               1 SVch hath beene the wiſdome and foreſight
of the Ottomans, as they haue neuer
almoſt had to do with two enemies
at once. Contrariwiſe they haue ſo well
ordered their enterpriſes as the finiſhing
of one hath drawen on the beginning
of an other; but when they forſooke this beaten and
ſure way,1481. then loe miſerie ouertooke them, as it hapned
to Mahomet the ſecond, who would needes warre with
three armies at one time, ſending one for Italy, at ſuch time
as he tooke Ottranto: the other to Rhodes, where his Generall
and armie were well beaten: the third he himſelfe
went to conduct againſt the Mammoelucks, if by death he
had not beene preuented. He had in theſe three armies
aboue three hundred thouſand men, beſides his armie at
ſea, conſiſting of aboue fiue hundred ſaile. The voyages
and deſignes ill digeſted, all theſe three armies were diſcomfited;
for that of Italy, though it tooke Ottranto, got
nothing by it; ſeeing that aſſoone as the ſouldiers vnderſtood
of their maſters death,1482. they quitted the place vpon
compoſition.
               2 But me thinkes this propoſition, whereby I maintaine
that it is not good at once to ſet a foote diuers enterpriſes,
may be thus impugned. That the ſucceſſe of the Turkes
death, and the commotion it wrought amongſt his people,
was cauſe that thoſe armies miſcaried, and not the ſeparation
of them and their enterpriſes. I confeſſe as I
ought, that whatſoeuer betideth vs, neceſſarily hapneth
by way of a firſt or exciting cauſe. But to come to the
ground of our principall matter; without farther ſubti
                     ••
                  tſing
this diſcourſe, it is eaſily ſeene how hard it is for a
prince to prouide ſufficiently at one time for ſundry enterpriſes,

at the leaſt vpon a ſound foundation thereby to reape
honorable fruites: ſince all diuiſion of forces bringeth
with it a debility, and becommeth rather a ſubiect of iniurie
then to be able to iniure others, to be beaten then to
beat, to be others pray rather then to pray vpon others: for
as a body diuided by parcells is not of that weight taking
it ſeuerally, as when it is reduced to the firſt vnitie: In like
ſort the forces of a prince, when they are diuided and
diſunited haue not that vertue and ſubſiſtance as they
would haue in their vnitie and well-ordered conſunction:
for proofe, who conſidereth that Mahomet had three hundred
thouſand men, will ſay that the vnitie of ſuch force
was inuincible; but diuided it proued not ſo (though indeed
each of theſe powers by it ſelf (at the leaſt in regard of
the Chriſtians) was a moſt mightie army, had it had proportion
ſquared to what it would attempt) and if this maſſe
of 300000. ſouldiours had marched in one intire body it
had beene eaſie for them to haue attained their purpoſe,
one ſeconding another as he might haue done with that of
Rhodes, Patros, and Ottranto, which he had in this caſe
vndoubtedly conquered.
               3 An other reaſon may be yet alledged, and that is, that it
is hard to finde ſuch Captaines as are fit for the conduct of
armies; that in theſe great aſſemblies of forces there are
few reſolute ſouldiours; and that they which are ſuch being
once by their diuiſion (as a man may ſay) diminiſhed, it is
a kinde of gelding the army of thoſe which may ſerue by
their example to aſſure and incourage the other confuſed
multitude.
               4 Moreouer when we vndertake three enterpriſes at once
(as Mahomet, who ſerueth to this purpoſe did) if it happen
but one of them to faile, the newes of their miſaduenture,
maketh the reſt (vndoubtedly depending the one vpon
the other) to faile of reſolution.
               5 Again, as we haue before deliuered, it is neceſſary that
the war be vndertaken in groſſe, and that aſſay be made of
our forces as ſoone as may be, that we may not be driuen

long to entertaine a great army (which for delay of execution
doth oft times disband, breake vp and ouerthrow it
ſelfe with it ſelfe, but eſpecially with anſwerable prouiſions
the better to inioy great happineſſe with ſmal charge; which
will neuer befall him that diuideth his forces and at once
attempteth in diuers places. We will then conclude that
the Ottomans for the moſt part haue not had but one enterpriſe
in hand at once, and that to atchieue it they haue ſo
well prouided for it, as the victory hath remained on their
ſide.
            
            
               CHAP. XVII.
               That he hath not long held warre
with one alone.
               
                  1 Why the Turkes haue not continued war with one alone.
                  2 A long war addeth courage and experience to the enemy.
                  3 It moueth neighbours out of the feare of their owne like miſery
to aide the oppreſſed.
                  4 The Turkes manuer of ſhifting his wars, and making peace
at his pleaſure.
               
               1 WHat more aſſured teſtimony can wee
haue of a continued wiſdome, or to ſay
better of a well caried ſubtilty amongſt
the Ottomans, then in that they haue alwaies
come off well in concluding their
wars,This was Licurgus rule to the Lacedemonians. and haue not maintained them
long againſt one and the ſelfe ſame enemy? The practiſe
of this policy hath beene moſt aduantageous vnto them;P
                        •
                     ut. vitu. Lic.
ſuch people as they haue not been able at the firſt to ſubdue,
they haue left in peace, yet haue not forborn in the
meane time to turne their armes elſewhere. I haue faſhioned
to my ſelfe two eſpeciall cauſes of this diſcreet
courſe.
               2 The firſt is the feare they haue euer had leſt they

might make good ſouldiours of thoſe againſt whom they
ſhould wilfully maintaine a lingering war. A thing ill practiſed
by the Spaniards in Flanders and the low-countries;
for continuing war many yeres together againſt them, they
haue acquainted that people (before ſoft and effeminate)
with the fearfull claſhe of their armes, they haue ſo encouraged
and imboldened them, as at this day there are few
nations more induſtrious about their fortifications, or
more reſolute in the field.
               3 The other occaſion which hath withheld the Turke
from making war long time together vpon one people, is,
in mine opinion the feare he hath to incite their neighbour
Princes to take armes againſt him. For if the compaſſion &
fire which burneth our neighbours houſe doc not mooue
vs, the feare of the like to light on vs will make vs beſtirre
our ſelues.
               4 The Turke then following theſe ſteps one while aſſaileth
the Venetians, deſpoiling them now of a Prouince,
then of a good towne or place of ſtrength. And hauing
there made vp his mouth he praieth next vpon the Hungarians,
doubting leſt he might pull vpon his necke a generall
league of the other of Italy. He euermore pretendeth
in ſhew that hee will attempt no further: rather that hee
meaneth to plant the vtmoſt of his limits at the place by
him laſt conquered: In the meane time he forgetteth not
to be watchfull where he may ſeaſe himſelfe of ſome other
place of more importance, more eaſily to incroch vpon vs.
After he hath gotten from the Hungarians ſome peece of
their country, he retireth himſelfe before their neighbours
be aſſembled, or that they haue meanes couragiouſly to
reuenge themſelues of their iniuries. In concluſion he ſo
well behaueth himſelfe as he hath neuer ſuffered vs to faſten
vpon him whatſoeuer wars he hath made vpon vs, and
he hath alwaies ſo timely made his retraite, as he hath not
enforced the neighbours of the country aſſailed to ioyne
and be in league together; he in the meane time reſting vpon
his aduantages of hauing a great number of ſouldiours

well trained and entertained in continuall wars whereby
they become more experienced in all occurrents, then
ours; by theſe meanes attaining to the triumphes of ſo
many crownes and eſtates.
               The end of the firſt booke.
            
         
         
            THE SECOND BOOKE.
            
               CHAP. I.
               Of Religion.
               
                  1 Religion the principall bridle of the ſubiects.
                  2 Excellencie of the Chriſtian religion.
                  3 The vainneſſe and abhomination of the Mahometan religion.
                  4 Diſputation of religion forbidden amongſt the Turkes.
                  5 The great Turkes example is a confirmation of his religion.
                  6 So are the calamities of the Chriſtians, and of others different
from them in opinions.
               
               
                  IN like ſort as by the diſpoſing
of what hath beene before
handled we haue made
it apparent by what wayes &
meanes the Turke is become
great; ſo are we now to deliuer
the manner how he
holdeth, and maintaineth
what he hath already gotten.
               1 All ſuch as haue gone about
to lay the foundation of
ſouerantie haue begun with religion, as that wherof princes

muſt neceſſarily make vſe, to containe their people in
obedience and worſhip of one God true or falſe; if this
were not, it were impoſſible they ſhould acknowledge one
Soueraigne in earth▪ were they without the feare & knowledge
of one Supreame in heauen: We might alleage ancient
hiſtories whereby it would appeare that all ſuch as haue
gone about the eſtabliſhment of a monarchy, haue had an
eſpeciall care to grounde it on the pretence of religion, by
whoſe myſterie and ceremonies they helde in thoſe whom
they ſought to range to their lawes, by this ſcruple making
them more tractable and pliant to receiue inſtruction; Numa
Pompilius,
                  Vid Pluit in their liues. 
                  Lycurgus, Sertorius, and others are ſufficient
proofes, whoſe credit grew from the communication they
gaue out they had with ſom Diuinity; others that could not
hit of the way to frame a new religion fortified themſelues
neuertheleſſe with a pretence of it, in reforming the old,
as did not long ſince Iſmael King of Perſia and his Cooſine
Harduellas, who performed great matters in the
partes of Aſia by introducing a new ſuperſtition of religion.About 1499.
               
               2 But to the purpoſe, we muſt auow that as there is no religion
more true, ſo is there none more fauorable to Princes
then the Chriſtian, for the quiet and preſeruation of
their eſtate and minde. In ſomuch as this by way of conſcience
ſubiecteth to the king & all other ſuperiours (howſoeuer
peruerſe and vitious) the heart, the perſon, & goods
of the ſubiect; what greater reaſon or inſtrument of ſtate
can we meete with then that which bringeth the people vnder
a full and perfect obedience? If our Sauiour Chriſt
ſubmitted himſelfe to the law of the Emperour and paid
taxe and cuſtom for himſelfe and Saint Peter, who will
doubt that his diſciples are not to doe the like as true obſeruers
of his precepts? I remember a diſcourſe written by the
Ieſuites of a certaine Prince of a country newly dſcouered
in India, who as one very politicke and wiſe perceiming the
ſimplicity and purity of the Chriſtian doctrine, though
himſelfe were an Idolater, permitted that his ſubiects

ſhould be baptized, cathechized and inſtructed in our faith;
and was preſent at their baptiſme; furthering to his power
all the actions of the Ieſuites; becauſe (ſaid he) I am aſſured
if theſe men obſerue their law as they are bound, they
will faile neither of loialty nor obedience, and will pay
me my tributes and reuenues without fraude or contradiction.
               3 Let vs now enter into the principall matter of the ſubiect
which we haue vndertaken to handle. The law of Mahomet
is full fraught with fables and groſſe abſurdities, and
ſo far from reaſon to maintaine them, as it would be an
eaſie matter by way of ſome holy manifeſtation of their errors
to alter the eſtate & gouernment of the Turkiſh Empire.
What more ſtrange impertinency can there be then
that of their Alcaron? It is impoſſible to deuiſe more abſurdities,
dreames and couſenings, then thoſe their law giuer
Mahomet hath introduced: but he perceiuing well enough
that the foundation of his falfe doctrine was ſuch as it
would be eaſie to ouerthrow it; knew cunningly how manie
ways to remedie it. Firſt he framed all the precepts of
his law according to naturall ſenſe, and made them ſutable
to the courſe of things baſe and earthly, therby to make
their obſeruation ſo much the more pleaſing and eaſie to
be admitted and maintained, as being founded vpon the
pleaſures of the fleſh and the world; he could neuer better
charm the reaſon and lull aſleepe the ſpirite of that dull and
wholly illiterate nation, then to tie them to the performance
of a law altogether ſenſuall.
               4 The other meanes he held to make his law laſting, was
the expreſſe forbidding to enter into diſputation about any
one point of it, vnleſſe it were with the edge of the ſword:
In regard whereof he tearmed it, the law of the ſword.
Thus the Prince of the Turke who hath in his hand the
ſword & force, is alſo conſequently the Arbitrator & Iudge
of the doubts and controuerſies which ariſe in his law, and
determineth them as he ſeeth good, ſo as he is wiſe enough
to ſuffer any newe opinion to take footing. For as ſoone

as that hapneth he turneth his ſword againſt the authours
thereof, and that with ſuch rigour and cruelty as he vtterly
rooteth them out not leauing ſo much as a ſeed or any parcell
of them. The troubles and diſſentions which hereſies
haue brought in amongſt the Chriſtians ſerue him for examples,
he ſeeth ſuch hiſtories daily verified; he is very
well informed of them, and turneth them to the beſt vſe
beyond the experience his predeceſſors haue had of ſuch
fruites as ſpring from a new interpretation of their law.
Harduclles in a very ſmall ſpace wan ſuch credit amongſt
that barbarous people, that by means of a certaine new interpretation
of the points of their ſect, he buſied all Aſia,
where he ſowed ſo many troubles, as he well neere indangered
the whole eſtate of Baiazet the ſecond.
               5 But that which maketh the law of this curſed race more
durable is, that the Emperour himſelfe obſerueth it with
that deuotion, honoreth it with that reuerence, embraceth
it with that religion, and preſerueth it in that credit and authority;
as it is hard to imagine a man more deuout and
affected towards it.
               6 Againe, the miſery and vexations that the Turks (depriued
of all other light but that their mother ſenſe affordeth
them) beholde other nations diſperſed thorow their
dominions and of a contrary beleefe to indure, wholy
weddeth their dull ſoules to this falſe doctrine: neither is
there that miſery which that vile Mahometane race make
not all thoſe to ſuffer who embrace not their religion, but
aboue all the Chriſtians.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               Of the direct dependency of the
Turkes ſubiects vpon their
Soueraigne.
               
                  1 Subiects muſt haue their eies chiefly vpon their Soueraigne.
                  2 Tyrants ſtrength and guard of ſtrangers.
                  
                     
3 The abſolute authority of the Ottomans.
                  4 The Princes ſeuour, the ſubiects ſafetie.
                  5 His ſubiects exact obedience and the cauſe thereof.
                  6 Rebllions whence procceding.
               
               1 THe beſt cement that can be made to
giue long continuance to an eſtate, is to
worke ſo, as that the ſubiects, of whatſoeuer
qualitie or condition they be,
may haue alwaies neede of him that is
their Commander, to the end they may
immediatly depend vpon him and reuerence him: but becauſe
it is hard to bring all the world to this paſſe, eſpecially
in a great monarchy: thoſe at the leaſt are to be drawen
to it, as farfoorth as is poſſible, who ſhould be the ſinewes
and ſupporters of the Princes power.
               2 This moued ſuch Tyrants as durſt not aſſure themſelues
of ſuch people as they had ſubdued, to haue about
them Captaines, Souldiours, and ſeruants which were
ſtrangers and had neither kinsfolkes, nor friendes in that
country, but relied abſolutely vpon them. This heeretofore
was the maner of the Soldans of Egypt; and though
they be courſes ſo violent, barbarous and vnworthy of
Chriſtian Princes, as they ſhould neuer be ſet before them,
yet may they ſomewaies aduantage them in the conſideration
of their ends and aime of their intentions, applying
them and appropriating them ſo far forth as Chriſtian policy
and the intereſt of faith may permit.
               3 Now then we will deliuer what vſe the Turke in theſe
times makes of them. He to eſtabliſh his Empire and amplifie
his greatneſſe and authority, intitleth himſelfe not
only Prince and Monarch of his eſtates, but Lord alſo and
peaceable Maſter of the perſons, habilities, goods, houſes,
and poſſeſſions of his vaſtals; neither is there inheritance
or ſucceſſion ſo aſſured, be it neuer ſo lawfull, but
it dependeth of the diſpoſition and free wil of the Turke,
ſo as if any aske of his ſubiects whoſe houſe it is wherein he

dwelleth, and to whom belongeth the land he tilleth, he
makes no other anſweare, but that they are the great Turks
his Maſter; moreouer they all tearme themſelues ſlaues of
their Prince: whence followeth that they can not any waie
maintaine the quiet poſſeſſion of their goods, nor account
of any thing as of their owne but by his eſpeciall fauour.
Much more if they aime at raiſing themſelues to any eminent
place of honour they are to beg it of the magnificence
and pleaſure of their Prince; meanes which ſerue to curbe
thoſe barbarous people, yet to be reiected of Chriſtians
and abhorred of lawfull Princes, who receiue and hold
their monarchies of the hand of God. There are more honeſt
precepts to be giuen, whereby they may purchaſe and
preſerue the loue and obedience of their people, without
vſing ſuch cruelties and tyrannies. But becauſe the argument
propounded requireth that I relate the meanes this
barbarons race hath obſerued to become great, and that I
am fallen into that matter, I will continue it: yet not as
approuing any ſuch courſe, or as indeuoring to ſet them
downe, by them to forme a receiuable example, or to induce
Chriſtian Princes to make them their paterne of gouerning
their eſtates.
               4 By this former diſcourſe then we haue deliuered how
the Turkes ſubiects haue neede of him, ſome to preſerue
what they haue gotten, others to attaine to dignities and
places of honour. And in a word, their being and life depending
indifferently vpon the Prince, their principall care
is to winne his fauour.
               5 Thi
                     •
                   dependency fortifieth it ſelfe & increaſeth by the
obedience and gouernment of great perſonages, imploied
by the Turke in his ſeruice, and faſhioned by himſelfe to
this end, who are from their infancy brought vp at the
Princes charge, and inſtructed euery one according as hee
is naturally inclined either in the excerciſes of armes or any
other laborious trade, ſo as ſuch not knowing other father
or benefactor then their ſoueraigne (from whom they receiue
both goods and honours): neuer thinke of kindred

or friends, neither haue they any touch of bloud or naturall
alliance, dedicating their body, minde and whole deuotion
to the only goood of their maſters affaires, whoſe
creatures they acknowledge themſelues to be, to whatſoeuer
degree of honour they be preferred: neither is it in
their power to amaſſe other wealth then that which is
rawght them by the hands of the great Turke. To make it
more plaine to the Reader who theſe are; they are the
Spachi, Spachioglani and Ianizzars; in theſe conſiſteth
the ſtrength and guard of the Turkiſh Empire. I hold it
not amiſſe to diſcouer in a word (as by the way) what is the
forme and condition of theſe bandes and companies:
ſo to deliuer a more cleare vnderſtanding of their manner
and power. The Spachi and Spachioglani are horſe men,
whereof there are a thouſand in number, which march
at the right hand of their Lord. The Selactari or Soluptari,
are other thouſand horſe, which accompany the great
Turke on the left hand, when he marcheth, as the Spaihioglani
on the right; of theſe two companies are choſen the
Gouernours of Prouinces, and vpon theſe according to
their merit, the Turke beſtoweth his daughters in mariage.
The Vlufezgi are other thouſand which march after the
aboue named, who in part are called out of the bands of
Ianizzars, as men noted for their eſpeciall valour: or they
are ſuch as haue beene ſlaues, and for their notable ſeruice
performed toward their maſters, or for hauing ſaued the
life of ſome Baſſa or Beglerbee in the wars, attaine to this
degree of being one of the Turkes garde. The Charipies
are of like number as the Vlufezgi, and march after them.
The Ianizzars follow after, who are foote, and appointed
for the guard of the Turke: Theſe at their firſt inſtitution
were few in number, but now they amount to 4000: In
theſe two ſorts of foote and horſe, conſiſteth the ſtrength
of the Turke, being as the ſeminarie of the Sangiaks, Baſſas,
and Liſirs. This great number we ſpeake of, giue no
armes or any other marke of hereditary gentry, being in
ſuch ſort ordained as they cannot attribute to themſelues

any thing in particular, nor attaine to any preheminence,
but ſuch as by their vertue they may inuite their Prince to
beſtow vpon them. It is the onely meanes whereby the
Turke gaineth all the obedience and loialtie he can wiſh;
obedience in regard they are (as I haue ſaid) trained vp
vnto it from their infancie, which in them turneth to a
naturall habite, placing the fruit of their labours in the
aſſurance of ſuch a ſeruitude: Loyaltie, in as much as
they expect from him their whole aduancement, and acknowledge
to receiue more benefits of him then of any
other Prince; neither hath it beene knowne that they euer
committed treaſon of importance, vnleſſe it were the reuolt
of Gazeles at Damaſco,1520. and of Acomat Baſſa at Cairo,Iou. l. 13.
in the time of Soliman. Which was but (as a man may ſay)
a fire of ſtubble extinguiſhed at the very firſt appearance
and purſute of their Maſter. Now the Ianizars, and the
other mentioned, who are the ſinewes and principall foundation
of the Ottomans greatneſſe, and who receiue ſo many
commodities by this dependencie, and doe daily expect
more; haue no more deere care, then to vphold their
Maſters ſafetie, and preſerue the greatneſſe of his eſtate,
whereunto their owne fortune is linked.
               6 To ſhew by what meanes the Turke maintaineth this
dependencie, let me ſay that all dependency of the ſubiect
vpon his Maſter and Soueraigne, may receiue an alteration
either by

                     force
                     furie

                           of the people:
                        
                     
                     authoritie, of ſome great man of the country.
by the ſupport of a for
                           •
                        en Prince.
                  
Matters thus diſpoſed (not to enquire nicely after al ſorts
of inconueniences) it reſteth that we ſee how he remedieth
theſe kinde of accidents, and preuenteth the cauſes of ſuch
like infirmities as theſe, which in time might weaken
and ruine his Empire: let vs begin
then with the ſtrength of
the people.
            
            
               
               CHAP. III.
               How he hath depriued his Subiects
of ſtrength.
               
                  1 Wherein conſiſteth the ſtrength of an eſtate.
                  2 The Turkiſh Empire maintained by the vſe of armes, as
that of the Romans.
                  3 Tithing of Chriſtian children by the Turkes.
                  4 The manner of their education: and the commodity accreweth
thereby to the Turkes.
                  5 Great aſſemblies amongſt them forbidden.
               
               1 THe ſtrength of an Eſtate conſiſteth in
the valour of the Nobilitie, loue and
faithfulneſſe of the Subiect, reputation
of armes, multitude of Souldiers, and
commodities of horſe, which may bee
therein bred or nouriſhed.
               2 The Turke then which would attaine to this poinct,
onely by armes, horſe, and Souldiers, obſerueth euermore
this rule: He taketh away all vſe of armes from ſuch Prouinces
as he hath newly reduced to his obedience, he forbiddeth
them the commoditie of horſes fit for the war, &
endeuoureth all he may to choake in them the ſpringing
vp of men proper for the exerciſes of arms; and hath an
ere that in all his dominions, not any man haue in his houſe
weapons for the warre, no not ſo much as a knife, vnleſſe
without a point; Moreouer, he alloweth not any Iewe or
Chriſtian to haue or keepe any horſe, imitating heerein
the manner of the Romanes, who obſerued both the one
and the other, eſpecially at the ſurpriſes and ſurrenders of
townes; The principall conditions were alwaies, that they
ſhould forgoe their weapons, their horſes, and deliuer
hoſtages: hence is it that we reade ſo often in Caeſar, Arma
proferri, iumenta produci, obſides dari iubet. Heereby

depriuing the ſubdued people of all meanes to vndertake
or maintaine a rebellion. Againe, Hoſtages gaue them a future
aſſurance of the fidelitie and obedience of their ſubiects:
for amongſt ſuch as they admitted, the chiefe of the
Counſaile and ſuch as were valiant men at armes, were the
firſt mentioned: but aboue all, thoſe of whom they might
conceiue any doubt or ſuſpition. We reade that Caeſar
hauing taken Auxerra (which was not one of the greateſt
not beſt peopled townes of France) drew thence ſixe hundred
Hoſtages: So as it is to be thought, that the reſt after
ſuch an abatement, could not be of any great courage or
ſtrength to reuolt.
               3 The Turke without troubling himſelfe with the care
how to traine after him an vnprofitable multitude of Hoſtages,
in an inſtant riddeth his ſubiects hands of their
beſt forces, and ſtrangely armeth and fortifieth himſelfe
with themſelues, againſt themſelues; and heerein he thus
proceedeth. He maintaineth in pay about two hundred
Commiſſaries, who as Superintendents trauell vp and
downe all the countries of his obedience, to ſee and ouerſee
all that is ſaide and done by the Chriſtians. Theſe men
goe throughout Grecia, Wallachia and Boſnia, and extort
by way of tenthes, the children from the boſomes of
their fathers and mothers, according as they eſteeme them
fit and likely to be faſhioned to the wars.
               4 Theſe childrē thus culled & aſſembled from al cuntries
of his obedience are after ſent to Conſtantinople and diſtributed
amongſt the Merchants, and Citizens by name, and
inroulement; to the ende they may be there inſtructed in
the lawe of Mahomet, and taught the Turkiſh tongue:
After (when they come to the age to beare armes) to be of
the number of Ianizzars. For during their youth they are
trained vp to all ſuch military exerciſes as may put valour
in them, and make them ſouldiours; and this by particular
Maſters appointed to teach them to ſhoote, wraſtle,
leape, vault, and ſo to harden their bodies as the tranailes
of the wars may be after held but as pleaſures and naturall

actions. Thus the Turke by this tithing of Children
aſſureth himſelfe of his people in a two-folde manner; in
deſpoiling as he doth the Prouinces of the flower of their
martiall men; and applying them to his owne ſtrengthning
both at home and abroade.
               5 Hereunto he addeth the expreſſe forbidding his ſubiects
all aſſemblies, or building of any ſtrong houſes,
which may ſtead them in time of ſedition or tumult, neither
are they allowed the vſe of bels, by whoſe ſound they
might call themſelues together to the execution of ſome
plotted reuolt, or mutiny. In a word, they are naked of
all meanes, to fortifie, to arme, to aſſemble themſelues
or to become any waies; fit for the wars; no other ſubiect
is left them to worke vpon but the tillage of the land,
whereto, as to al other mechanical artes, they apply themſelues;
ſo becomming baſe, abiect, and vnapt for the
wars.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               The cauſes that may moue a
people to fury.
               
                  1 Deſpaire armeth the weake.
                  2 How to auoid tumults and ciuill commotions.
                  3 Feare amongst ſubiects is vpheld by Iuſtice, and plentie of
thinges neceſſary.
                  4 Praiſe of peace and Iuſtice.
                  5 Execution of Iuſtice amongst the Turkes pleaſing and tollerable,
though vniuſt.
                  6 An exhortation to Chriſtian Princes to adminiſter Iuſtice.
               
               
                  IT hath oft hapned, and in our times we
haue had triall of it, that the people,
though vnarmed, haue in their deſpaire
and fury diſquieted a whole eſtate, and
brought the common-weale into an exceeding
diſtreſſe and perplexity. Furor

arma miniſtrat (ſaith Virgil) Iam
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      faces & ſax a volant. We
haue the teſtimony of the Romans time, in thoſe ciuill
wars which hapned in Italy & in Sicily, & of the miſchiefes
which followed thoſe rebellions; as much hath beene ſeene
to happen in theſe times in the Ile of S. Domingo about
the change of gouernment introduced vpon thoſe conquered
people, forced to ſubiect themſelues to a new
kinde of ſeruitude. In very deede that people is not weakely
armed which hath a heart, a good ſpirite, and a nimble
hand.
               2 This is the cauſe why the Turke to preuent theſe popular
commotions, hath depriued the people of all ſorts
of armes, to the end they may forget both the vſe and courage
to handle them, and that they may not by them take
occaſion to mutiny. Now to prouide that ſo barbarous a
yoake driue them not to deſpaire, he maintaineth a general
peace and tranquillity throughout his eſtate: he hath a
care that iuſtice be equally diſtributed: that they haue
plenty of victuals, and all other vſuall commodities, the
better to lull aſleepe their fury.
               3 By theſe meanes euery one maketh the beſt of his fortune
and liueth quietly at home, embracing that naturall
deſire of holding his owne, which to performe euery man
emploieth whatſoeuer may proceed out of himſelf: moreouer
this quiet and eaſe of minde doth ſo ſoften men, as
they reſt free from the thought of plotting or vndertaking
ſturs and rebellions: Iuſtice, quiet, and plenty, are three
things which haue for their oppoſites, the violence of ſoldiours
in time of war, the corruption of Iudges in time of
peace, and ſcartſiy and famine in both. The iniuſtice, the
abuſe, and auarice of officers and magiſtrates, are thoſe
which procure the ſubuerſion and vnauoidable ruine of a
country. I could adde to this diſcourſe many examples &
domeſticall proofes, but not to enter into too deepe a ſea
I will ſpare them, and will content my ſelfe to ſay only
that all thoſe of ancient times, and ſuch as haue had any
touch of a good minde (either Chriſtians or infidels) haue

euermore confeſſed that the ſincere execution of iuſtice is
the ſtrongeſt piller of all well ordered eſtates, as on the
contrary iniuſtice is the ouerthrow, not alone of men and
countries, but of beaſts alſo.
               To returne to our matter, it is ſure that when the common
ſubiect hath wherewith to nouriſh, cloath, and handſomely
accommodate himſelfe and family; when in the
middeſt of armes he is ſafe in his owne home; when he
ſtandeth not in feare of forged crimes, or bribery of
Iudges; then is it that he falleth aſleepe in ſecuritie, and
careth not but to entertaine that tranquillitie, reiecting all
thought of rebellions. This is it which the Turke (who
warreth continually with his neighbours) putteth in practiſe
to maintaine peace throughout his dominions, and
to be beloued and faithfully ſerued of his ſubiects, whom
he tieth to him with thoſe ſtrong bands, which are to ſay
the truth (beſides Iuſtice and tranquillitie) moſt proper
for preſeruation. A great helpe heereunto is his continuall
imploying his Captaines and Souldiers in the wars, eſpecially
out of his owne countrey, and to the ſpoile of his
enemies.
               5 Peace is the horne and true mother of abundance:
Then is it that euery man tilleth his land without diſturbance,
and quietly inioyeth and encreaſeth his owne ſtore,
ſince as the Poet ſaith, Pax arua colit: Iuſtice Queene of
vertues, is that which ſerueth as the baſe and moſt ſure
foundation to peace, which could not otherwiſe ſubſiſt,
nor the lawes likewiſe; then is it that they gaine ſtrength
and vigour.
               5 And though the forme of the Turkiſh Iuſtice be not
without much vanitie and oppreſſion, and though all matters
be determined amongſt them by way of witneſſes,
who are alike bought and ſold; and that iudgements paſſe
as gold and ſiluer is ſtirring: yet the quicke diſpatch they
receiue, maketh them forget this inconuenience; and
though the ſentence of ſuch Iudges be often pronounced
againſt all order of Iuſtice; yet is there thus much good

gotten by it; that men conſume not themſelues bodie and
goods in pleading and trotting after Lawyers and Atturnies,
which haue their conſciences as large as the other,
who are bought more deerely: beſides the delay, vexation
and vncertainety of the iudgement. And though the
ſentence of ſuch men be much diſpleaſing, yet the people
haue this to comfort them, that they many times ſee them
endure moſt notable and exemplary puniſhment: for the
Turke ſometimes vpon the leaſt complaint brought againſt
them, putteth them to death, be they neuer ſo great perſonages,
as well to inrich himſelfe with their ſpoiles, as to
manifeſt himſelfe to be a Prince moſt reſpectiue of iuſtice
and equity, and to giue alſo a manner of ſatisfaction to his
ſubiects ſo oppreſſed as Selim, left that example of Boſtand
Baſſa.
               
               6 Hence Chriſtian Princes are to fetch an aduertiſment
how to be more carefull then they are in making their miniſters
obſerue a more vpright and ſpeedy diſtribution of
iuſtice amongſt their ſubiects: not vpon the grounds and
intents of this barbarous Turke; but rather becauſe they
are one day to render an account before God, who to this
ende eſtabliſhed them in place aboue others.
               Queſtionleſſe the long delaying of ſuites is the moſt
damnable plague to be found at this day in all eſtates:
The abuſes committed otherwiſe by the miniſters of Princes
are more to lerable then theſe; where the whole is in
queſtion. For this cauſe Princes ought to looke more
neerely to this then to any other thing.
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               The common remedy applied by
the Turke againſt the force
and fury of the people.
               
                  1 Another way of preuenting popular ſeditions, by hauing alwaies
bands of foote and horſe in a readineſſe.
                  
                     
2 The Turkes ſtrength in his court.
                  3 His other ſtrengthes.
                  4 Inconueniences that grew by the Romane Legions:
                  5 Preuented by the Turke.
               
               1 THough the meanes formerly deliuered
be ſufficient to keepe the Turkes ſubiects
from rebelling, yet there are ſtronger
by him practiſed, wholly to preuent
and extinguiſh euen the leaſt ſparke of
ſedition, and to prouide againſt other
like inconueniences. He maintaineth a great number of
horſe and foot alwaies armed, alwaies in pay, and diſtributed
in garriſons thorow out his Empire, eſpecially in
places moſt proper to reſiſt or aſſaile. Theſe curbe the
people, and vpon the leaſt ſhew of rebellion lay hands on
them, repreſſe their inſolency, and ſuffer not the leaſt apparance
of ſedition to take roote, remouing the cauſes euen
at the firſt without reſpect to any. This is the reaſon that
there hath neuer beene knowen any popular rebellion in
his eſtate.
               2 The port of the great Turke, as they tearme it (as who
would ſay his courte and gard) conſiſteth chieſely and ordinarily
of foure thouſand horſe, diſtributed into foure
companies, to wit the Spahioglani, who are in al a thouſand
beſides their ſeruants, which march not in their rancke but
apart, and of theſe euery one hath ſeauen or eight. Theſe
range themſelues on the right hand of their Lord whereſoeuer
he become; and the Solaſtri (equall in place and
authority) on the left. Theſe two ſortes are accounted
as children of the great Turke, and are nouriſhed and
brought vp in the Sarraglio at his charge (as hath beene
ſaid) and there trained vp in all exerciſes of armes. After
theſe, march the companies of the Vlifezgi & Charipici,
inferiour to the other in rancke and authority. Thoſe on
the right hand, theſe on the left, either conſiſting of a
thouſand horſe. And whereſoeuer the great Turke goe,

they neuer forſake him. Theſe foure thouſand horſe together
with twelue thouſand Ianizzars are the ſtrength
and gard of the perſon and port of the Turke, with theſe
forces he is alwaies able to hold in awe and ſubiection a city
more populous then Conſtantinople, and not ſtand in
feare of any attempt againſt his perſon.
               3 In other places of his Empire he beſtowes other great
numbers of the Ianizzars to be aſſiſtant to the Gouernors
and Baſſas, beſides the ſuccours they are to haue of ſuch
horſe and foote as thoſe are bound to furniſh on whom
the Turke hath at other times beſtowed ſuch arable lands
as haue beene conquered by armes, whence he draweth
one man or more as the neceſſity of his affaires requireth,
and according as is the value of what they poſſeſſe. Theſe
are called Mozzellini. Such as are tied to this contribution
may be compared to the Feudataries of our Prince, towards
whoſe ſeruice they are to finde a light horſe or muſket,
and ſome of them two, more or leſſe according to the
imperiall inſtitutions of ſuch fees and tenures as ſo binde
them. After all thoſe we haue named, march the Alcanzi,
or Aconizij, as a man would ſay Aduenturers, which haue
no wages, & are appointed to march a daies iourny before
the campe, pilling, harrowing, and hauocking all before
them, whereof they are to anſweare the fift parte clcere to
the great Turke: of theſe there are thirty thouſand, beſides
them there are the Azapi (of meane quality) but ſuch
as ſerue his turne for Gally-ſlaues, mariners and pioners
to intrench, fill vp ditches, raiſe engines, and perform other
ſuch like ſeruill offices, their number is 40000. Ouer and
aboue theſe vnder two Beglerbees or Lientenants generall,
the one in Europe the other in Aſia; he hath neere an hundred
thouſand horſe in ordinary intertainment. The Beglerby
of Grecia or Europ (which is as much to ſay as Prince
of all Princes) hath his place of reſidency at Sophia a towne
of Seruia. That of Aſia abideth at Culhea a towne of Galatia.
Each of theſe hath vnder his obedience many Sangiacks
(as much as to ſay ſherifes or bailifs) the very children

of the great Turke which gouerne in the Prouinces
where they command are bound to obey them. This
great multitude of horſemen are ſo well mounted and armed,
as none can chuſe or wiſh a more fit or direct meanes
then their ordinary ſtrength to hinder all popular reuolts
or rebellions, be they neuer ſo great. That which hapned
to Gazeles after the death of Selim doth ſufficiently
approue it;about 1529. he thought to ſtirre againſt Soliman, and to
moue Syria to rebell; but he was preuented by that mighty
power which Soliman found euen then in a readineſſe,
wherewith he ouerthrew him. Theſe ordinary prouiſions
of war are the more terrible and effectual, in regard that all
the people of his obedience are intirely diſarmed of whatſoeuer
offenſiue weapons.
               4 The Romans obſerued this cuſtome, to diſtribute diuers
of their legions about the frontiers of Germany alongſt
the Rhene and Danowb, to the ſame end and purpoſe
as the Turke entertaineth his horſe. But it ſeemeth
that he proceedeth therein more diſcreetly then did the
Romans, for they kept all their forces together in one
place, and vnder one Generall, of whom depended the
abſolute command of the armies: whence it fell out that
to accommodate themſelues, they ouerthrew the houſes
of particular men, ruined, and famiſhed the countrey, as
well by the hauocke they made (which alwaies attendeth
ſo great a multitude) as by their large prouiſions moſt neceſſary
for an armie: The other prouinces farre diſtant
were exempt from this oppreſſion, yet not from contribution,
but thoſe which ſuſtained the armie, were ſo ouerburdened,
as their miſerie incited them to rebell, and ſhake
off their obedience. But contrariwiſe, the Turke which
diſperſeth his horſe and foote into diuers Prouinces, vnder
the command of ſixtie and ſix Sangiacks, draweth not after
him ſuch diſorder or ill ſatisfaction as did the Romans.
Their great aſſemblie in one place was cauſe of ſeditions,
debates, mutinies and other miſchiefes, moſt difficult to
be preuented. They did not perceiue how this manner of

proceeding was a means that the Souldiers grew too much
to affect their Captaines, and that the Captaines found
themſelues by them enabled to attempt (as they often did)
many things to the preiudice of the Empire. And in very
deed it oftentimes hapned that their armies made choice
of their General for Emperour, in deſpite of the Senatours
authoritie; either in regard of the valour they knew to be
in them, or of ſome pecuniarie corrupting their affections,
which the Senate could not remedy: And in trueth it was
a very eaſie matter for the Generall, ſo farre from home,
and holding his forces vnited in one body, to practiſe the
Colonels, and the Colonels to bargaine and buie the harts
and affections of the Souldiers, by them to poſſeſſe the
Empire, ſo as ſometime the armie of Spaine choſe their
Generall Emperour, and at the ſame time that of Germany
theirs: whereof we haue many examples, as alſo of the
calamities and miſeries which did thence accrew to the
Eſtate and ſubiects.
               5 It is an inconuenience whereto the Turke cannot be
ſubiect; for keeping his troups and armies ſo ſpread abroad
and diſperſt, they haue not the meanes to mutinie (eſpecially
being in no place ouer ſtrong) nor yet grow to affect
their Beglerbyes or Gouernours, whom they ſeldome ſee
or repaire to: much leſſe can the Beglerbee in his owne
behalfe eaſily winne or entice the hearts of the Sangiacks,
or affections of the Souldiers, as he might well doe if the
troupes were alwais together in time of peace, and abroad
in one and the ſame prouince.
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               How the Turke repreſſeth the power
of the great men of his eſtate.
               
                  1 The authoritie of a Prince (if his vertue be not eminent
aboue all the great men of his kingdome) is by their vertue
obſcured, whence groweth the diminution of the ſubiects
obſeruance.
                  
                     
2 From whence the authoritie of the Nobilitie doth proceed.
                  3 The detestable crueltie of the Turkiſh Emperour against
the next of his bloud.
                  4 Vſage of great men taken by the Turkes.
                  5 The vncertaine fortune and eſtate of the Turkes officers.
               
               1 TO the end the dependencie and authoritie
whereof wee haue hitherto entreated be
without alteration maintained, it is requiſite
that the Prince haue a care, that there be
none in his countrey who for their greatneſſe
may incourage the people, and embolden them to
attempt ought, backt by their authoritie, countenance and
conduct.
               2 This greatneſſe may grow from three principall cauſes:
either in regard they are Princes of the bloud, or for that
they are noted to be nobly deſcended and rich, or elſe for
the reputation they haue gotten, and a long while preſerued,
either by cunning, or by their owne valour, and merit:
things that winne credit and name amongſt the common
people. Concerning the firſt cauſe, the children, brethren,
and kinſmen of the Turke, are great by conſanguinitie.
The Barons of the country obtaine the ſecond ranke,
whereto the nobleneſſe of their family calleth them: for
the third, ſuch miniſters and officers as beare a ſtroake and
ſwaie in matters of the higheſt conſequence, are accounted
great.
               3 The Ottaman Princes, of nature barbarous and cruell,
ordinarily ſhelter themſelues from theſe inconueniences,
with courſes far from all humanity, in as much as without
all reſpect of Law, religion, or other ciuill conſideration,
they vpon the leaſt ſcruple that may be, ridde their
hands by execrable murthers, of their neereſt kinsfolkes
and friends, yea euen of their fathers and brethren, alone
to inioy and by their death to aſſure to themſelues the quiet
poſſeſſion of their kingdome. Selim the firſt murthered
two of his brethren, procured the death of all his nephewes,

yea and of his father alſo. He would often ſay
that there was nothing more ſweet then to raigne out of
the ſuſpition and ſhadow of his kindred; and that he deſerued
pardon for what he had committed, ſince it was the
ſame play and vſage he ſhould haue receiued, if any other
but himſelfe had attained to the crowne. Amurath the
third which now raigneth, made his entry by the death of
his brother, and ſearched the eſtabliſhing of his Empire,
euen in the belly of his mother, then great with childe,
making for this end, one end of her & what ſhe went withall:
theſe cruelties are monſtrous in the ſight of God and
man, and full of horror and infamie: yet hath it not beene
knowen for all this, that euer any citie, any people, or armie,
did reuolt or mutine. This inhumanitie is amongſt them
growne to that lawfull and ordinarie conſequence, as they
vſually put it in practiſe, without feare of blame or reproch.
The examples thereof are as infinite as their memories,
ſtinking and abhominable. In a word, this butchering
is amongſt them an hereditary ſucceſſion, deſcending
from one to another, which God would reuenge
with our hands if we would amend our liues.
               4 As for the Barons and Lords of the countrey, Mahomet
the firſt, deſtroied their ſeed, expelling them out of
his eſtate, as he did all the originarie Turkiſh Princes his
allies; and if by chance there remaine any of the Ottoman
race, he is ſo kept downe, as he traileth (as they ſay)
his belly vpon the ground, liuing moſt poorely without all
charge, and manage of affaires: ſo as neither valour nor
riches can make him appeere or ſhine in the worlds eie;
rather he remaineth eclipſed amongſt the vulgar ſort,
without honour, credit, or eſtimation.
               As for the Princes and mightie men of the countrey by
them ſubdued, they know well enough how to ridde their
hands of them, in ſort as we haue before declared: ſo as
neuer Empire was raiſed, or maintained with more execrable
murthers, then this hath beene in theſe daies; they
neither ſparing Princes of their bloud, nor the chiefe Potentates

of their prouinces; for they blinde them, if not
kill them.
               5 Now concerning the miniſters and officers, who by
long managing of waightie affaires, haue attained to Honorable
places, authority and reputation; there is not one,
be hee neuer ſo great, which at the leaſt winke, wrath,
and pleaſure of his Lord, loſeth not his life immediatly.
Baiazet cauſed Acomat Baſſa to be put to death, an excellent
man of armes and a woorthy Captaine, ſaying the
too much reputation of the ſeruant was a cauſe of the too
great ielouſie of the maſter. Selim likewiſe put many to
death, and amongſt others Muſtafa Baſſa, whom he cauſed
to be ſtrangled at Pruſa, and after to be caſt out to the
dogs. This was his recompence for fauoring him in the
vſurpation of the Empire againſt Baiazet his father then
liuing, and for making riddance of his two brethren Acomat
and Corcut. He ſuſpected it was he that had reuealed
his ſecret (as indeed he had) to Aladin and Amarath
children of his brother Acomat, becauſe contrary to his
expectation he ſought their death. It is in a manner
an ordinary courſe with Princes that one light offence
obſcureth and maketh them forget a thouſand good
ſeruices performed for the good of their affaires. For my
part I am of opinion that this rage, and inhumane cruelty
familiar with the houſe of the Ottomans, is but a true
and iuſt iudgment of God, who will by their parricid
handes chaſtice the Apoſtaſies and wickedneſſe of one
by another, conſidering the greater part of them are Chriſtians
who haue denied their faith, and by that miſerable
act climed vp to the height of thoſe eminent charges and
dignities they poſſeſſe. As not long ſince his diuine Maieſtie
permitted a poore ſimple ſouldiour to kill Mahomet
Baſſa, a man moſt mighty in credit and authority; but
more rich of power and meanes; yet ſuch a one as had
beene a Chriſtian and had taken vpon him the orders of
Prieſthood.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VII.
               How he confoundeth the practiſes
of forraine Princes his
neighbours
               
                  1 The diuorce of the Greeke church from the Romiſh confirmeth
the Turkiſh Empire.
                  2 What were requiſite to ſtir vp the Turkiſh ſubiects to rebellion.
                  3 The Greekes vtterly deſtitute of meanes for ſuch proceedings.
                  4 His owne ſubiects throughly curbed.
               
               1 ONe of the moſt aſſured meanes practiſed
by the Turke, as an infallible courſe
of ſetling his eſtate againſt the intelligence
which his people might hold
with Chriſtian princes, is the diuorce &
ſeparation he maintaineth betweene the
Greeke & the Romiſh church, ſuppoſing while this ſchiſme
ſhall continue amongſt them, that they will neuer eſtabliſh
betweene them a ſound amity. This made the conqueſt of
Conſtantinople eaſie vnto them; this hath forwarded the
proceeding of his victories, and as it were, put into his
hands all thoſe rich and goodly Prouinces, whereof he is
at this day the peaceable, but Tyrannicall owner: moreouer
he ſo narrowly obſerueth our vnhappie diſcord, as he
by a perpetuall counſaill endeuoureth all he can poſſibly,
that the Patriarkes render no obedience to the Pope: neither
is it long ſince Zacharias, Patriarcke of Conſtantinople,
was like to be ſtaked for hauing admitted the new Callender
and the reformation of the courſe of the yeere,
made in the time of Gregorie the 13.
               2 Now to returne to the principall point, it is to be preſuppoſed

that the proiects and carriage of popular rebellions,
cannot be vndertaken without the ſupport and direction
of the mightieſt for wealth, meanes, and authority, in
the country which we would ſurpriſe; and that Princes will
not bouge to ſet a foote theſe plots and enterpriſes, but by
offered occaſion of ſome fortreſſe which importeth the aſſurance
and conſequence of the eſtate, and may ſerue for a
refuge to recouer their decaied ſtrength: or elſe that their
deſtigne relieth vpon ſome promiſed ſuccour, or finally
vpon the conſideration that thoſe who inuite them to this
conqueſt are ſo ſtrong within themſelues, as they may hope
for an honorable iſſue of their enterpriſe.
               3 Theſe are all neceſſary particularities, but not any of
them reſteth now in the hands of the Greekes abaſed by
extreame ſeruitude, and ſo far from hauing any fortreſſe
at their deuotion, as they cannot once ſtir without being
diſcouered; and though they were diſpoſed to vndertake,
they haue at their backe ſo great a number of men at arms,
as at the leaſt breath of a rebellion, they would cut them
off before they ſhould haue meanes once to peepe forth of
their ſhels.
               4 The Turke againe maketh them ſure to him ſo many
waies, though all barbarous and vnciuill, as he ſcarcely
alloweth his ſubiects leaue to draw their breath, nor ſuffreth
his mighty men once to hold vp their heades; or forraine
Princes to be able in due time to attempt ought againſt
him.
               The end of the ſecond Booke.
            
         
         
            
            THE THIRD BOOKE.
            
               CHAP. I.
               The cauſes of the fall and
ruine of eſtates.
               
                  1 Eſtates are ſubiect to change.
                  2 Some of longer, ſome of leſſe continuance.
                  3 Great, ſmall, and meane eſtates, and their cauſes of ruine;
externall, internall, and mixt.
                  4 Leſſe eſtates come to their endes ſooneſt by externall cauſes.
                  5 The great by internall.
                  6 The meane more durable, yet ſubiect to alteration.
               
               1 THe order that nature obſerueth
in all things created
doth plainly enough
teach vs that whatſoeuer
is borne paſſeth and haſtneth
towards death; and
that all things which haue
a beginning neceſſarilie
and interchangably roule
towards their end. This
proceedeth either of an
ordinarie and naturall courſe, or of the violence and alteration
of compound bodies. Hence we drawe this conſtruction,
that eſtates change, monarchies faile, and the ruine
of one ſerueth as the raiſing to the other.
               2 Againe, as of humaine bodies ſome are more ſtrong,

vigorous, and of a better compoſition then others, and ſo
are of longer continuance; ſo we ſee the ſame difference
in kingdomes and eſtates: in as much as ſome preſerue
themſelues longer, either becauſe by their nature they are
more ſurely founded (as for example the Signory of Nobles
is more laſting then the popular eſtate, and a Monarchal
eſtate more then a common-weale, becauſe a Monarchy
keepeth the cauſes of corruption more aloofe from
her; or is policed with better lawes) or becauſe of the ſituation
which is naturally more ſtrong then the other, as we
ſee at this day in the Signorie of Venice.
               3 But becauſe this aſſertion is ſubiect to diuers obiectiōs,
we will diuide it only into two propoſitions. Firſt then of
principalities, ſome are ſmall, ſome great, ſome indifferent,
either in regard of their ſubſiſtance or firſt eſſence, or of the
compariſon which may be made betweene them and their
neighbours: Secondly, the efficient cauſes of the vtter ruine
of eſtates are either inward, or outward, or mixt: The
inward are to be fetched and conceiued in reſpect of the
negligence, ignorance, and riot of Princes which giue
themſelues ouer to all voluptuouſneſſe; whereto may be
added the factions, ſecret practiſes, ambitions, and deſperate
humors of ſubiects, with ſundrie other occaſions, all
fit to bring eſtates to their vtter ruine. The outwad cauſes
are the ſtratagemes, armes, and force of the enemie.
The mixt are ſuch as participate of both, as are the rebellions
of the people, treaſons of particular men, put in execution
by forraine ayd and force. Since then it is ſo that all
principalities are ſubiect to ruine by one of theſe three cauſes;
we are now to vnfold what maladies may infect, as
well great and indifferent, as ſmall eſtates; and draw all
within the compaſſe of inward, outward, and mixt cauſes.
               Now like as in naturall things naturall corruption is
more tolerable then violent, ſo muſt we conſider whether
the alteration and impairing of eſtates and common weales
chance by reaſon of age, or by the violence of ſome not
forſeene cauſe.
               
                  
4 Returning then to our former diuiſion and well examining
it, wee ſhall finde that ſmall Eſtates come to their
ends rather by meanes of outward cauſes (brought in by
force and violence) then otherwiſe: In as much as their
power being inſufficient to withſtand their mighty neighbours
ambitious attempts, they are at the firſt incounter ouerſet
with the ſtorm of his conqueſts; in this maner the ſeueral
Signories of Lombardy fel in ſubiection either of the
Duke of Milan, or of the Venetiās; the free cities of Thoſcany
became a pray to the Duke of Florence: The Princes
of Africke to the King of Fez-Marocco, and Algiers.
               
               5 On the contrarie, great Empires are vſually ſubuerted
by meanes of inward cauſes; either by eaſe & plenty, which
cuſtomarily makes Princes to ſwell with inſupportable
pride; by voluptuous riot (whereto people amidſt their
abundance are moſt prone) or elſe by inſolency and preſumption
ſeazing the great ones of the country when they
ſee themſelues much followed and reuerenced, all fit inticements
to diſpoſe a hart (but indifferently generous) to
plot for his owne raiſing.
               
                  Nec quenquam iam ferre poteſt Caeſarue priorem,
                  Pompeiuſue parem.
               
               Then is it (as one ſaith) that Caeſar cannot brooke a
ſuperior, and that Pompey ſtomaketh an equall.
               6 Meane eſtates vndergoe danger as well as the two former,
yet far leſſe, ſince they hold the meane as the other
the extreams, for they are not ſo vnfurniſhed of ſtrength, as
that it would be eaſie for euery one to inuade and oppreſſe
them, neither are they of that greatneſſe and wealth, as to
afforde matter to particular men to grow mighty, or elſe abandon
themſelues immoderatly to delights & pleaſures,
or to tranſport themſelues beyond the limits of reaſon.
This is it that ſo long preſerued the common weales of
Sparta & of Venice, which euermore reſpectiuely intertained
a meane and equality.
               The mixt cauſes of the ruine of Eſtates are inward treacheries
and outward force. Treaſon hatched within an

Eſtate much more indammageth a great then a ſmall or
meane Empire. For a monarke is not able to turne his eie
vpon euery corner of his Kingdome; and ſturring ſpirits
are fortified in their attempts either with the hope of impunity
(the nourſe of vices in all Eſtates and gouernments)
or with the opinion they haue conceiued of not being diſcouered
till ſuch time as their proiects meete with ſome
good ſucceſſe. Theſe things happen ſooner, when the
Prince is far off then at hand. Spaine can witneſſe it, which
was ſo vnhappily betraied by Count Iulian,
                  Anno 714. as it thereby fell
into the hands of the Moores. So was the Empire of the
Mamelucks by the treaſon of Caierbeius poſſeſt by Selim
Emperour of the Turkes.1516. Who would ſearch more narowly
into Chriſtendome ſhall finde that the ciuill wars of
France miniſter more examples for proofe of this then is
neceſſary. Thus wee ſee that ſmall eſtates are moſt to ſtand
in feare of forraine force, ſince they haue not wherewitheither
of or in themſelues to be able to reſiſt or to take breath:
That the meane eſtates are alwaies leſſe offended by outward
force then the ſmalleſt, and more free from inward
treaſon then the greateſt.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               From what coniectures the continuance
of eſtates may
be gathered.
               
                  1 Cauſes of the change of Eſtates.
                  2 The ruine of Eſtates is moſt anſwearable to their beginnings.
                  3 The rootes of common wealths how maintained.
                  4 Security eſpecially to be auoided.
               
               
                  
1 I Will no farther extend the diſcourſe of
the former chapter, nor diue into the other
efficient cauſes of the ruine of eſtates:
for ſhould I handle what might be
farther ſaid of this matter, I ſhould wander
too far frō the propounded ſubiect,
and perhaps racke the argument beyond his due pitch. I
will then tie my ſelfe only to the coniectures of the continuance
or fall of eſtates, omitting other cauſes, as alſo
all that may be referred to the iudgement of the heauens,
the influence of the ſtars, and to their vertue; ſithence
this knowledge is fraught with ſo many obſcurities and
contrarieties in what is written thereof, as I will ſpare to
ſearch too far into it: Though otherwiſe we are to imagine
that nothing is made in vaine, and that thoſe celeſtiall bodies
moue not by chance, but rather by diuine order and
diſpoſition. Againe, the errors of their Ephimerides and
the different ſupputation of the firſt maſters of their profeſſion,
make the knowledge to be vncertaine and their ſo
ſurely grounded maximes to afford contrarie reſolutions.
Let vs not meddle then with the aſpects of the ſtars, or the
natiuities of eſtates, but regard and conſider the effects of
what is at our owne home without taking ſo high a flight.
We ſay then that eſtates ſuffer either by the vnremoueable
ordinance of God, or by the naturall courſe of time,
wherewith in time they grow feeble, and change: or elſe
by the wils of men, ſo vnſtable and light, as they ordinarily
breede an vniuerſall alteration thorow out a whole eſtate
and common-weale. We will only drawe our coniectures
from naturall cauſes (not to meddle with the iudgement of
the diuine Maieſty or mans inconſtancy) nakedly and
ſimply to ſpeake of them as neere and familiar, to the end
we may not enter into the chaos of cauſes heauenly and
moſt remote.
               2 So then we are to thinke that the continuance of eſtates
is proportioned to their beginning. It is with them as with

ſenſible creatures, which the more they haſten to arriue at
the perfection of their being, the ſooner alſo they faile and
die: the contrarie is ſeene in thoſe which with a ſlow and
meaſured paſe attaine to a more faire maturity and perfection:
as for example, among beaſtes the horſe, amongſt
trees the willow are of no long indurance: but thoſe that
(as the Hart and Oliue) make by degrees and ſlowly towards
their ripenes, are likewiſe more laſting. We may ſay
the like of Empires and Eſtates: for as we ſee them ſlow or
ſwift in their increaſe, ſo are they more ſwift or ſlow in their
ruine. Haue not the French more then once conquered
the duchy of Milan and the kingdome of Naples, and that
as a man may ſay almoſt in a moment? ſo haue they many
times loſt it and all in a moment: ſuch conqueſts reſemble
Torrents tumbling downe the mountaines, which in
leſſe then an hour, by reaſon of the great ſhoutes of waters
they bring with them, become fearefull and dangerous;
when ſoone after in an inſtant, we ſee them fallen and ſhallow,
ſo as a childe may wade thorow them without trouble
or danger. Now not to leaue this conqueſt of Milan and
Naples, we muſt to this purpoſe by examples contrary to
the former make good the ground of our propoſition:
which to performe, I will ſet before you the manner how
the Spaniards conquered and held theſe prouinces.
               I finde it hath been by a long courſe of time, and
infinite trauaile accompanied with all the paines and troubles,
which thoſe who ſet vp their reſt vpon a conqueſt and
reſolue to abide out the wars, ordinarily indure. Hence
their labour hath taken ſuch roote, as nothing ſince hath
been able to eſcape their hands, howſoeuer they haue been
oft times galled and put to their plunges. It is requiſite
then that Empires haue their rootes to ſuſtaine them,
which muſt be deepe and ſound, otherwiſe it is impoſſible
they ſhould long continue. Now that they may be ſuch,
there is an eſpeciall wiſedome and many yeeres required.
               3 The true rootes of an eſtate are the loue of the people

towards their Prince, the ſincere and holy diſtribution of
Iuſtice amongſt the ſubiects; military diſcipline well policed
and obſerued by the ſouldiours; honours, rewards,
and benefits beſtowed according to vertue and merit: that
great men be not ſlightly ſet by, abaſed or contemned: that
the common ſort of people be intertained with all honeſt
ſatisfaction: neceſſary prouiſions for the maintenance
of places of ſtrength; well husbanding of the treaſure;
friendly intelligence with neighbour Princes; vncorrupt
election of officers; modeſty in their proceedings: theſe
are the very true rootes able to fortifie and make monarchies
to flouriſh and raiſe them to eternity: which rootes
can neuer proue ſetled ſpring, or ſend foorth worthy fruit,
vnleſſe they be planted in the ſoile of wiſdome, aduice and
induſtrie, and husbanded by the continuance of time.
               4 It is often ſeene that great Conqueſts and victories attained
without loſſe or labour, ſo blinde the Conquerour,
as they make him become like one of thoſe long reeds or
canes which carry outwardly a good apparance, but are inwardly
hollow and of fraile ſubſtance. They cauſe him to
contemne his companions, and thoſe who aſſiſted him in
obtaining his victories, but more the ſubdued people,
whence ordinarily followeth, that the higher is his fortune,
the neerer is his fall. Wee haue ſtraied ſufficiently. It is
now high time to returne to our principall diſcourſe: and
as we haue heretofore made it appeare that there are three
ſorts of eſtates; ſo wee are now to vnfold in what ranck of
the three the Turke is to be beſtowed.
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               That the monarchy of the Turke is
comprehended within the number
of great eſtates.
               
                  1 The ſubſtance of the enſuing Chapters.
                  
                     
2 Greatneſſe of the Turkiſh Empire.
                  3 Compared with the Romaines.
                  4 The marueilous ſucceſſe thereof inwarre.
               
               1 From the diuiſion of eſtates deliuered by
vs in the former chapter, this is to take
his foundation, and by theſe cauſes wee
are to make choice of that of the three
which is the ſureſt; by what accidents
or infirmities both the one and the other
may vndergoe a change, either outwardly or inwardly,
and in which rank of the three wee are to lodge the
Turke. Some one perhaps will iudge this queſtion ſuperfluous
and vnprofitable, ſeeing his renowne, his conqueſts,
and his long rule doe but too much teach vs what he is:
notwithſtanding all this I ſhould not thinke it beſides the
purpoſe a little to particularize the cauſes of his greatneſſe.
               2 The eſtate of the Turke is held without queſtion to bee
one of the greateſt and mightieſt, as well in regard of the
large circuit it containeth, as of his power: he is great becauſe
of ſo many Prouinces reduced to his obedience; and
though he haue not ſo great a ſhare in Europe as the Romaines
ſometimes had, he hath to counteruaile this, more
aduantaged himſelfe in Aſia and Africke: for when the
fortune of the Romaines was at the greateſt, and that they
had their armes moſt at libertie, yet went they not beyond
Euphrates: It is very true, that Traian went farther, but all
the Prouinces he ſubdued were ſoone abandoned by Adrian
his ſucceſſor.
               The Turke hath not done ſo, for he hath extended his
dominion as far as Tigris; he poſſeſſeth all Meſopotamia,
or as they terme it Diarbecke. From thence he reacheth as
far as Balſera or the Gulfe of Perſia, which the Romans
neuer ſaw, and the Gulfe of Arabia. And to ſay better, all
is his from the red ſea to the Cittie Aden, which is in the
maine continent beyond the mouth of this ſea, more then
an hundred and fiftie miles: he hath alſo inlarged his dominions

toward the South far beyond Aegypt. In Africk
all is his, except three places of ſtrength which the king of
Spaine holdeth, Pegnon de Veles, Oran, and Melila: Mauritania
alſo is his, only three fortreſſes excepted, which
are Tanger, Arſilla, and Mazagan, conquered by the Portugall:
when I name Africk, I intend that country commonly
termed Barbary, and not Ethiopia.
               3 Hauing now ſeene the largenes of his dominions, we
are next to diſcourſe of his meanes and power. I finde
that he hath better eſtabliſhed the one and the other, then
the Romans euer did whē they were at their intireſt greatnes,
becauſe in ſuch a moſt large compaſſe of his country,
there is no king or common weale beareth ſway to diſtinguiſh
his dominions: which was otherwiſe with the Romanes,
who had many ſuch wedged in, within the continent
of their Empire.
               There is not any one of his ſubiects that dareth to ſay
that the houſe wherein he dwelleth, or the land he tilleth, is
his owne. They acknowledge to hold all they haue of him:
he ordinarily intertaineth diuers great and mighty armies
both by ſea and by land. So as it muſt needes be granted
that he is greater in his eſtates, meanes and power, then euer
were the Romans, for he ſo peaceably maintaineth
what he hath conquered, as he can no waies vndergoe the
troubles and wars which the Romans endured at the hands
of Mithridate, the Parthians, Farnaces and others. Moreouer,
next Europe the Gaules are not his enemies. The
Cymbrians are his aſſociats; ſo as he foſtereth ſuch a tranquillity
and obedience on all ſides, as he amaſſeth ineſtimable
treaſure.
               4 And more, (a thing worth the noting) in three hundred
yeeres ſpace ſince he began firſt to reigne, he hath receiued
but foure notable ouerthrowes (that excepted
which he receiued the yeere paſt neere Tauris) But the
Romaines in leſſe time receiued more and greater at the
only hands of the Carthaginians. In ſum, there is not that
nation in the world which can vaunt of ſo many victories

in ſo ſhort a ſpace, or to haue triumphed of the captiuity
or death of ſo many kings and great Princes, as the great
Turke; or that haue with ſuch happie ſucceſſe and diſcipline
ſo ſoone raiſed ſo mightie an Empire as his is at this
day. Is it not a fearfull matter to heare it related that Mahomet
the ſecond (an infidel) hath had ſuch fauour of the
heauens, as to haue beene able in the ſpace of 32. yeeres
raigne, to ſubdue two Empires, vſurpe twelue kingdomes,
and take by force two hundred cities? That which affordeth
the greateſt cauſe of wonder, is, that all this hath ſucceeded
in the very time when the art of military engines &
fortifications were in their perfection, and wherewith we
might haue armed our ſelues to withſtand him. In concluſion,
what ſhal we ſay of Selim the firſt, who in leſſe then
foure yeeres ſpace vanquiſhed the Mamelucks, ſubdued all
Syria, Paleſtina, the red ſea, a great part of Arabia and all
Aegypt? Theſe are queſtionleſſe goodly and notable Tropheys
of the Turks greatneſſe, but moſt diſhonorable and
dangerous for all Chriſtendome.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               Whether the Empire of the Turke
draw towards an end.
               
                  1 The Ottaman Empire leaneth toward ruine.
                  2 The reaſons are the bordering princes vpon the Turkes
eſtate, and their prouiding for their ſafety.
                  3 Made wiſe by others harmes they ſtand vpon their defenſiue
war.
                  4 They are bridled by ſtrong fortreſſes.
                  5 Contrary arguments.
               
               1 WE haue diſcourſed as briefely as might be
of the fall and ruine of eſtates, of their efficient
cauſes, and vpon what coniectures a
man might gather them. It is now time that we ſee and examine
in like ſort whether the empire of the Turke be nere

his end, and abatement of his greatneſſe, according as a
man may draw from coniectures it leaneth towards his declining;
and though the foundation heereof be built vpon
reaſons ſo cleere and euident as they are not to be contraried,
yet will I alledge one that carrieth more apparence
then all the other; and that is, that the greatneſſe of his
empire is at the higheſt that it may be by the ruine of Princes
by him expelled, vanquiſhed and made away one after
an other, whileſt he hath in the meane time triumphed of
their eſtates and rich ſpoiles; but now that he hath none to
oppoſe him with hopes of ſo fauourable iſſue as had the other:
his ambition, heart, and courage will grow idle and
languiſh; whence in time will ſpring the ruine of his Empire;
Is he not already come to that paſſe? The Princes
that confine vpon him, though more weake then he to bid
him battaile, aſſaile, or defend, haue neuertheleſſe ſo ordered
their affaires and meanes, as they are able at this day
to ſheeld themſelues ſufficiently from his attempts.
               2 Amongſt others the King of Perſia, doth he not ſo
ballance his power as he hath giuen him many great ouerthrowes,
and one lately (as I haue ſaid) neere Tauris?
The Tartarians alſo hold him plaie and more prouoke
him then he them; and of late they got from him Caffa a
ſtrong and wealthy towne; moreouer whileſt he was buſied
about the wars of Perſia the Georgians took and ſacked
Xiſtis; but they were not able to hold it; ſo as the Turke
hath repoſſeſſed himſelf of it. The Muſcouit doth not only
defend himſelfe from the incurſions of the Turks, but
he oft times alſo skirmiſheth with them, commanding as
he doth aboue an hundred and fifty thouſand horſe. The
King of Polonia likewiſe more mighty then the Muſcouit,
is ſo ſtrong as he will not take wrong; but is able rather
at all times to repell the violence of his enemy. The
houſe of Auſtria together with the aid of the Princes of
Germanie, hath wherewithall to make their party good
and to oppoſe him: the Venetians, vnited with Italy and
Spaine (which in ſuch a caſe will not abandon them) are

likewiſe able enough to defend themſelues and hold their
owne. As for the king of Spain, he is ſo mighty by ſea and
by land, both of men and mony, as he dareth vndertake
himſelfe to incounter the Turke in battaile, much more to
defend himſelfe if aſſaulted. The King of Fez is not anie
way awed by him, and is more ſtrong then he, at the leaſt
in Africke; which he approued to the common hurt of
Chriſtendome by that ouerthrow and death of the King
Don Sebaſtian of Portugall, where ſo many Chriſtians miſerably
ended their daies. The laſt of thoſe which abut
vpon the Turke is Preſter Iohn, who hath hitherto behaued
himſelfe ſo honorably againſt him, as he hath neuer
ſhewed any token of fearing his forces. So as being now
vnable by reaſon of the concord & ſtout oppoſition of his
neighbours, to gaine farther ground; he muſt of neceſſity
(vnleſſe God in regard of our ſinnes be otherwiſe pleaſed)
begin to recoile; and that greatneſſe which he hath built
vpon others ruines muſt decay and leſſen; ſince the matter
which gaue the increaſe is on his part wanting.
               3 There is yet an other point which fortifieth this opinion,
and that is: that all ſuch Princes as confine vpon the
Turke, are by others example made more wiſe, aduiſed
and conſiderat, then they were before the ruine of ſuch as
ſerued for a pray to the Ottomans; whereby they will diſcreetly
looke to themſelues how they courageouſly hazzard
their perſons or eſtates at one battaile: they will rather
be content to ſtand vpon their defence, attending
while time beget ſome apparent occaſion, roundly and to
the purpoſe to ſet vpon him.
               4 Againe, there are at this day ſo many fortreſſes, ſo
ſtrong and ſo well appointed, as they are in a manner impregnable,
ſo as the Turke is not like to finde the way ſo open
as heereto fore he did to carry them: but if he ſhould
put himſelfe vpon that hazardous enterpriſe of forcing
them one by one, it were as much as to become the author
of his owne ruine.
               5 Neither ought any man in oppoſing this,1570. alledge the

loſſe of Cypres, ſince it hapned not ſo much through the
Turkes power, as becauſe of the diſtance of Venice, which
was to ſupply them with men and munition. A man may
by a contrary argument ſay as much of the ſauing of Malta
(ſpeaking according to humaine cauſes) for it was not protected
either by the forces within it ſelfe,1565. or by the ſuccor
ſent thither from other parts: but only becauſe the Iland
was ſo far diſtant from Conſtantinople as the army could
not in due time and ſeaſon receiue their prouiſions and bee
refreſhed as was requiſite, nor well imploie ſuch as were
ſent thither. If it would pleaſe God that the Turke might
often make ſuch voiages, he would prepare vs faire occaſions
to attempt the reuenge of the outrages Chriſtendome
hath by him ſundry waies receiued.
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               By what kinde of cauſes the Empire
of the Turkes might
moſt eaſily faile.
               
                  1 The power of the Turke not to be eaſily ouerthrowne by outward
cauſes.
                  2 The power of Princes & eſtates bordering vpon the Turke,
as the Perſians, Tartarians, Moſcouits, Polonians,
Germans, Venetians, Spaniards, &c.
               
               1 AS wee haue at large intreated in the
chapters going before by what cauſes
all eſtates may be brought to their
laſt end and ruine; ſo are we now to
come to that of the Ottomans, as one
of the greateſt; and examine by what
inconueniences it may vndergoe a change. I am of opinion
that this their ſo raiſed greatneſſe can hardly decay by
vertue of outward cauſes; ſeeing the Princes bordering

vpon their eſtate,Quae non proſunt ſingula, multa 
                        •
                     uuant. are euery one in particular weake to aſſaile
them, as they might well doe if they were peaceably
vnited.
               2 This weakeneſſe preſuppoſed, it followeth that it will
proue a hard matter to ruine him by forraine force, whoſe
ſtrength and meanes it is requiſit we examine to inlighten
this opinion.
               Firſt, thoſe that confine vpon the Turke next Africke,
are the King of Fez, of Marocco, and Preſter Iohn: next
Aſia, the Sophi and the Tartarians: in Europe the Duke
of Muſcouy, the King of Polonia, the Emperour, the Venetians,
and the King of Spaine.
               As for the King of Fez he hath men enow, but ſmall
ſtore of mony, ſo as he hath not the meanes or ability to
maintaine a laſting war: Againe, though I ſhould ſuppoſe
he were able to be at the charge, yet I finde him naked of
other things neceſſarie to aduantage himſelfe vpon the
Turke, ſuch as are places of ſtrength to forward his proceedings,
and aſſure his retrait: ſo as he is like enough to
come ſhort of his aime: and if he ſhould performe ſome
worthy exploit in Africk, doubtles the King of Spaine his
neighbour would ſoone be iealous of his good fortune.
And in very deede this is not the point, for it is all one
with Chriſtendome whether the King of Fez be too ſtrong
for the Turke, or the Turke for the King of Fez, ſince
both are the Chriſtians enemies. As for Preſter Iohn, all
the world knoweth he hath enough to doe to defend himſelfe
againſt the Turkes forces; neither is it long ſince he
wan from him all the hauens he had vpon the red ſea, and
amongſt others that of Archiech and Mazzua: now for
the Sophi, if we ſearch their hiſtories we ſhall finde that the
kings of Perſia haue alwaies had the worſe of the Turks, &
among all other Mahomet the ſecond ouercame Vſumcaſſan;
                  1474.
after him Selim the firſt did as much to Iſmael whom
he forced into the remoteſt parts of his country. Tarmas
alſo met with the like meaſure at Solimans hands: and on
the contrary we ſee that Cudabenda hath had ſuch a hand

of Amurath the third now raigning, as he hath often vanquiſhed
his armies, and now of late at Tauris: and though
he haue atchieued moſt worthy victories, yet hath he nothing
aduantaged himſelfe. In the Turkes country, he
hath not wan one fortreſſe of importance, or ought elſe
that might counteruaile the charge of his wars: This hath
ſucceeded in regard the Soph
                     •
                  is ſtrōg of horſe, but vnprouided
of foote, which ſhould be the principal force of ſuch
as beſiege or defend. Moreouer, to force places of ſtrength
there is required great ſtore of cannon & other munition,
all wanting to the Sophi, who may well meete the enemy
in the feeld and bid him battaile, but not purſue and aſſaile
him if he retire into his fortres; becauſe of the aboue ſaid
defects of foot & artillery; & though he were prouided of
them, yet wants he the skill how to vſe thē like others. The
example of Tauris approueth this ſufficiently, for after
he had this laſt yeere vanquiſhed the armie of the Turks,
and ſlaine an hundred thouſand men, he could neuer take
the Cittadell wherein the Turks had drawne all their munition
of war, and left aboue eight thouſand men; neither
is there any newes hitherto that he hath taken it & expelled
them thence. The Tartarians are as ill ſtored with
foote and artillery as the Perſians, and except that they
laſt got of the Turke, it may be truly ſaid that they neuer
did him harme. As for the Moſcouit which abutteth vpon
him (as doe alſo the Polonians) they haue in regarde
of the Turke ſmall ſtore of men, horſe and mony; ſo as
the moſt they can doe is to hold their owne. Now concerning
the Germans, they haue loſt much of their ancient
reputation by the ouerthrow they receiued of the Turke
at Exechium, Buda, and ſundry other places; ſo as they
are glad to keepe home without daring to aſſaile him. The
Venetians haue beene ſo vnfortunate, as they haue neuer
moued war againſt the Turke but it hath ſucceeded contrary
to their hopes: and which is the worſt of all, they neuer
conſented to anie treatie of peace, but they did forgoe
ſome important member of their eſtate. And to

ſay the truth Mahomet the ſecond got Negropont, Scutari,
and Groya; Baiazet tooke from them Lepanto and
Modon, and after in a treaty of peace they made with him
they parted with S. Moore; in an other treaty they left to
Soliman Napoles of Maluaſia: Selim the ſecond wan by
force the Ile of Cypres, Duleme, and Antiuari: And
though theſe be heauy loſſes, yet in regard they were far
diſtant from their eſtates they are more ſupportable then if
they had beene neere hand, ſo ought they now more then
euer aduiſe how to ſtrengthen themſelues againſt the
Turke by their braue reſolution and prouiſion, which they
may better doe now then euer, in regard their forces are
more liuely, and the members of their common-weale
more vnited and compact then heeretofore. Now we are
to come to the king of Spaine. Let vs ſay that he hath ſtore
of mony and all prouiſion neceſſary to be imploied in the
wars; that he is not without ſufficient numbers of foot
and horſe alwaie in pay; that hee hath the commodity
extraordinarily to leuy ſo many men as may make the
Turke ſtand in feare of him; that his forces by ſea are good
and ſtrong, and that he can increaſe them at his pleaſure;
that he hath ſtore of victuals, commodity of hauens, for
conuenient landing in his countries; and in a word that he
is ſo mighty, as that neither he ſtandeth in awe of the Turk,
neither dareth the Turke aſſaile him: yet this power and
hability could neuer hitherto be imploied to the purpoſe
againſt the common enemy of Chriſtendome. Not for
want of will or inclination thereto, but becauſe he is hindred
by the reuolt of Flanders. The ſuſpition alſo and
feare of his neighbours armes, would neuer permit him to
diſplay an vnited and firme power againſt the Turke: he
hath rather beene enforced to waſt his time and meanes
vpon the particular preſeruation of his eſtates ſomewhat
diſtant one from an other, in ſtead of courageouſly exploiting
them againſt the Turkes to the good and conſolation
of Chriſtendome. But our ſinnes are they eſpecially which
haue depriued vs of the glorious fruits and aduantages we

might haue gained by ſo worthy a power. In concluſion,
we muſt grant that ſince the Empire of the Turke cannot
receiue any damage or alteration by outward cauſes (which
are wont to ruine eſtates) it is neceſſary that inward cauſes
either ſeparate or mixt effect it; yet before we diſcourſe of
theſe two meanes I hold it not amiſſe a little to examine,
whether his eſtate may be by maine and open force ouerthrowne.
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               That it is not an impoſsible thing for
the Chriſtians with open force
to vanquiſh the Turke.
               
                  1 The Turke is not inuincible.
                  2 Examples of their ſundry ouerthrowes.
                  3 A compariſon of their good and ill ſucceſſe in battailes. All
proofes that they may be conquered.
               
               1 THe concluſion of the argument of the
former chapter, is, that the Turke cannot
by way of open force receiue harme
or ruine of importance; becauſe of the
mighty power and meanes he hath of
his owne. But heereby is not inferred
that therefore Chriſtian Princes ſhould faile of courage or
hope, to goe thorow with their affaires to his preiudice; rather
otherwiſe placing their confidence in the Almighty,
they are to hope better then euer, for the reaſons I ſhall
heereafter alledge; by the handling wherof I hope to proue
that ſo far is he from being inuincible, as on the contrary
he may be eaſily vanquiſhed as many experiences may
reſolue vs.
               2 We haue elſewhere ſaid that Baiazet the firſt was ouercome
and taken aliue at the battaile he fought at Mount-Stella
againſt the great Tamberlain,
                  1397. vnder whoſe hands he

died a captiue.1439. 
                  Carambeius Baſſa of Amurath the ſecond,
was diſcomfited by Ladiſlaus King of Polonia in the valley
of mount Hermus:1440. he came with an intention to reuenge
himſelfe of the loſſe and diſhonor that the Baſſa of Notalia
had receiued at the hands of Iohn Huniades, which at one
time recouered from him a part of Seruia and all Moldauia:
but inſtead of performing this he became himſelfe
priſoner of that King, and had almoſt al his army put to the
ſword. Baiazet the ſecond ſent Calibeius and Querſcogles
his ſonne in law into Aſia againſt Caitheus Soldan of
Aegypt with a great army to reuenge the intertainment the
Soldan had giuen Zizimus his brother,1482. whom he had ſuccored
with men and mony againſt him: his army was ouerthrowne
neere Adena a towne of Cilicia, where the Turke
receiued the moſt notable ouerthrow that was euer giuen
him. For of an hundred thouſand which preſented themſelues
in the battaile, the third part remained not aliue; yet
thoſe that performed this noble execution, were ſcarce one
againſt ſixe; but the aduice of two Italians and of the Mameluckes
ſo furthered the affaires of Caytheus, as he ſpied a
time to charge the Turkes when they leaſt expected it.
Soliman left the ſiege of Vienna with loſſe of 60000.1529. men
which were there ſlaine, hauing giuen twenty generall aſſaults
to the towne. The yeere following he aſſembled an
other army of 200000. men, with intention cruelly to reuenge
the harmes he had receiued; but the Emperour
Charles the fift went to meete him, with ſuch forces, as
the other fled ſo haſtily as he had ſcarce leaſure to ſaue his
baggage. Don Iohn of Auſtria naturall ſone of Charles the
fifth in the yeere 1571. got at Lepanto that ſo renowned
victory of the army of Selim the ſecond; this hath ſince
made them walke (as they ſay) with the bridle in their
hands, and confeſſe they had paſſed too raſh a iudgment
vpon the power of the Chriſtians either by ſea or by land:
I omit to ſpeake of the proweſſe & noble acts of Scanderbeg
againſt the Turkes, and how many times he ouerthrew
the Commanders of Amurath the ſecond: and valiantly

recouered Albania the place of his birth whereof he and
his predeceſſors had beene depriued by that Tyrant, neither
will I again cite the examples of Iohn Huniades or Mathew
Coruin, who in a manner with a handfull of men oppoſed
and diſcomfited the Turkiſh forces, nor of the Portugals,
though they haue at ſundry times aſſailed the Turk
neere the red ſea, barred him of paſſage, and rid him of
the meanes of farther iſſuing out of the mouth of that ſea.
What ſhould I ſpeake of the Tartarians, who but lately
tooke from him Taurica Cherſones (called at this day Perocopsky)
if the reports which come from thoſe partes be
credible?
               3 Such as haue beene curious in the ſearch of the Turkiſh
hiſtory haue obſerued, that in the ſpace of two hundred
and foureſcore yeeres they haue fought with their
neighbours thirty and ſixe battailes, whereof they haue
only gained eighteene and loſt the reſt. Theſe are all
ſignes and ſucceſſes whereby a man may conclude that
they are not inuincible, and that their fortune hath beene
ballanced betweene gaine & loſſe, ſo as we may beleeue, if
God for our offences did not buſie the forces of Chriſtian
Princes elſewhere then againſt the Turke, where he hath
had the ouerthrow once, he had had it thrice: by all theſe
foregoing examples we may collect that this proud enemy
hath not his head ſo hard as it may not be broken, or
elſe ſorely brufed. And though Chriſtian Princes are not
of power ſufficient apart and of themſelues to take him to
taske, yet may they doe it by ranging themſelues to that
vnion and concord, as that there be amongſt them but
one common fortune. This being granted (as I preſume
it ſhall) we are to vnfold how they may purchaſe his
ruine.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VII.
               Why the leagues among Chriſtian Princes
are commonly of ſmall effect.
               
                  1 Leagues are concluded for the reſpect of honour and profit.
                  2 The inequality of gaine bringeth a difficulty to the concluſion
of leagues.
                  3 Chriſtian Princes the farther they are from the Turke, the
leſſe haue they feare of dangers wherewith other more
neere him are poſſeſſed.
                  4 No man vainely expoſeth himſelfe to an apparant danger
but where an euident commodity inuites him.
                  5 While each ſtriues to protect his owne frontiers from the
Turke, others are neglected.
                  6 The inequality of aide begetteth a contention who ſhall command
moſt in the wars.
                  7 Remedies againſt ſuch difficulties and calamities.
               
               1 THere are many reſpects and cauſes,
which cuſtomarily make the leagues of
Chriſtian Princes altogether vneffectuall,
which may appeere to ſome a matter
of hard diſgeſtion, and for this cauſe I
hold it requiſite particularly to cleere it.
It is a receiued maxime that all the actions of Princes are
vndertaken for two principal cauſes, honor and profit: that
the conſideration of honor often maſqueth vnder the pretence
or good of their affaires: we will then only meddle
with profit which we may tearme intereſt.
               2 Now this intereſt (a common maske for all faces) cannot
be a like equall betweene Chriſtian Princes with one
conſent vndertaking the war againſt the Turke: for they
diuerſly confine vpon the common enemy, and this diuerſity
breedeth a difference alſo betweene their reſolutions
and intereſts; and though this be an inconuenience not in

the caſe in handling to be contemned, yet the principall
difficulty dependeth not heerein: It rather conſiſteth
wholly in the concord of the treaty of the league, and this
concorde is hard to be wrought for theſe following reaſons.
               3 All theſe Princes are not neighbours of the Turke in
the ſame equallity: ſome are more ſtrong then other: this
difference of ſtrength affordeth to ſome a commodity to
defend themſelues or offend him with their owne forces:
others are weake, and conſequently expoſed to the incurſions
and ſpoiles of the Turke. It is an infallible maxime,
that the farther Princes are from the danger, the leſſe forward
are they to ſtir, prepare for the war, or contribute to
the charge or meanes requiſite for the vndertaking thereof
with the like feruency and affection as they would if they
ſaw themſelues ſo neere to the miſchiefe, and that there
were apparant danger.
               4 Againe, that Prince which ſeeth no great profit or intereſt
in ſuch an enterpriſe doth leſſe regard it then he whō
neceſſity inforceth to ſtand vpon his garde, and feare that
tyrants inuaſion. Moreouer, if the Princes vnited to this
league and combination ſhall once know that they ſhall get
little or ſmally aduantage their eſtate, it is not to be expected
(when they enter into it) that they will bring with
them that courage, reſolution, affection, and forwardneſſe
as the buſineſſe would require. See then how the diſpoſition
of the intereſt makes the beginning difficult, the proceeding
and iſſue vncertaine, by reaſon of the diuers alterations
and varieties which accompany euery aſſociated
Prince, ſutable to his paſſion or affection; Whereupon
would vndoubtedly follow an impoſſibilitie of eſtabliſhing
this league, and vnion vpon ſo ſure foundations, as that
the beginning may be good, the middle and end better:
ſince the effect without vnion amongſt many agents remaineth
euermore as nothing or nothing woorth.
               5 We fall then farre ſhort of our reckoning, vnleſſe wee
can miniſter ſome remedy to the diuerſities of this intereſt

and profit. This inconuenience is attended on, and counterpeized
by an other of as great or greater conſideration:
And this is the intereſt and particular conſequence of the
neighbourhood that euery one indifferently hath with
the Turke; by the which indifferency, each one according
as his feare is, will deſire the warre may be vndertaken
to his aduantage. As for example, Spaine feareth the
neighbourhood of Algiers; Venice of Albania: hence will
grow that the league taking effect, the Venetians will
ſtriue that the forces of the league may be imployed in
the Leuant, the Spaniards toward the South: ſo as it will
not be poſſible to manage the enterpriſe to both their ſatisfactions.
               6 There is yet another inconuenience that our Princes wil
not be able by an equall portion to enter into the league,
inaſmuch as one wanteth meanes to contribute thereto in
money more then a ſixt part, another a fift part; others that
haue no money, will contribute men or ſhips; others more
mightie in both, will vndertake halfe or a ſecond. Theſe
are all the portions by whoſe aſſemblie a league may be
formed. Of their indifferencie groweth yet another difficultie
or inconuenience (as we liſt to tearme it) and that
is, that whoſoeuer contributeth the halfe, would likewiſe
haue in his handes (as the greateſt and mightieſt) all the
power and ſwaie. In which it will follow, that the other
ſhall not vndertake or performe ought but by his aduice,
direction, and aſſiſtance: If he will make a ſtand, they are
not to go forward; if he liſt to march elſewhere, then their
deſires carrie them, they muſt follow him: If his affaires
preſſe him to alter his reſolution and minde, and that hee
will retyre to his home, they are conſtrained to doe the
like, ſo as all their charge, paines, and holy intentions, are
vtterly ouerthrowne, and they oftentimes reſt expoſed to
the iniurie and reuenge of their dangerous neighbour, againſt
whom they iointly roſe in armes.
               7 Theſe are, to ſay the trueth, conſiderations and inconueniences
of that value and conſequence (meaſuring them

by their parts, and not by the whole) as we muſt conclude
that none but God is able to tune this league to an agreeing
harmony, which we are moſt humbly to craue at his
Almightie hands with a ſtrong faith, a true amendment of
life, and a more perfect charitie then this age affoordeth.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               The defects which may be obſerued
in the leagues of the yeere
1537: and 1571.
               
                  1 The conditions, ſucceſſe and errors of the league in anno
1537.
                  2 Of that of 1570.
                  3 How a league may be eſtabliſhed to auoide the formerly
committed errors.
               
               1 COntinuing the matter of the former
chapter, it will not be beſide the purpoſe,
by the way to touch the defects
which were found in two the moſt memorable
leagues that haue beene made
in our time betweene the Princes of
Chriſtendome. The firſt reſolued vpon in the time of
Pope Paul the third,1537. betweene him, the Emperour Charles
the fifth, and the Venetians. It was then, beſide the conditions,
agreed vpon that the Emperour and the Knightes
of Malta ſhould ſet foorth 82. Gallies, the Venetians a like
number, the Pope 36. only. Andrew Doria was choſen
Generall of the Emperours army, Vincentio Capelli of the
Venetians, and Marco Grimani Patriarch of Aquileia of
the Popes, hauing for his Lieutenant Paul Iuſtinian; and
for the maine land ſeruice Ferdinand Gonzaga was choſen
Generall. Moreouer it was concluded betweene the princes,
that whatſoeuer they ſhould get from the Turkes with

the forces of the league either in Greece or Dalmatia
ſhould be left to the Venetians as in recompence of their
ſo great expence and loſſe that they ſhould ſuffer by warring
vpon the Turke. Soliman ſeeing the forces of the
league aſſembled, made haſt to lanch his Gallies foorth into
the maine. Such was his diligence as they were within
a few daies in a readineſſe and went for Candy, where they
made ſome hauocke, but of no great moment. After theſe
roades Barbaroſſa made a ſtay of al the army in the gulfe of
Larta, there to attend the Chriſtians which came onward,
but ſo ſlowly as the ſeaſon paſſed without performing
ought, or without that they once met together, and that
which was yet worſe, our men inforced by tempeſt, retired
themſelues to Corfú whence they ſet foorth. Barbaroſſa
followed them as far as Antipaxo within an hundred
miles of Corfú, but perceiuing them to prepare themſelues
to fight he ſpeedily retired to the gulfe of Larta, ſo as our
army was reſolued for Dirachium, otherwiſe called Drazo
or la Velona, but that being a dangerous harbour for the
gallies, they turned their force vpon Caſtell Nouo which
they carried by aſſault: an exploit (to ſay the truth) of that
ſmall importance (reſpecting their charge and prouiſion)
as it wan them as much diſhonor as profit, the towne being
won the Spaniards ſeazed themſelues of it. The Venetians
diſputed it as a thing appertaining to them according
to the articles of the league; but it was to ſmall purpoſe,
wherefore quieting themſelues ſince it was not to be remedied
they tooke an occaſion thereupon to ſhift themſelues
of the league. The yeere following Soliman recouered
Caſtle Nouo with the loſſe of thoſe Spaniards which kept
it, who were all put to the ſword, thoſe which eſcaped induring
a moſt miſerable ſeruitude: and though the peace
treated by the Venetian was ſomewhat diſaduantageous,
yet they indured that more willingly, then to be otherwiſe
dealt with then was agreed vpon: other cauſes might be
alleaged, as the ceaſing of trafficke and many other diſcommodities,
beſides the impoueriſhing of their Eſtate,

all which neceſſarily attende the intertainement of armies.
               2 The laſt league of the yeere 1571.1570. yeelded not much
better fruits, for after a great charge, and the gaining of ſo
famous a victorie, no other good redounded thence to
the Chriſtians, but that the Turke made an aſſay of their
valour; and by little and little the confederate forces diuided
themſelues: the Venetians departing vpon occaſion
of almoſt the ſame iealouſies, as in the former league.
               3 It will be now time to deliuer how all theſe inconueniences
may be ſtopped, and the league become firme and
durable, without conſideration of any particular intereſt,
to the end that euery one may voluntarily in deuotion
conſent thereto to the glory of God with a free heart, and
an vndaunted magnanimitie: In which caſe, the conditions
being rather free then forced on either ſide, we may
reape thereby fruits woorthy and honorable: Theſe two
leagues heeretofore mentioned, hapned in a time ſo dangerous
for the Venetians, as it was more then neceſſarie
that the Chriſtian Princes (though not intereſſed) ſhould
vnite their forces to aſſiſt and protect the other. So the
one ſtanding in the water vp to the throat, and incompaſſed
with danger, and the other on the contrary, free from
feare of perill, they entred into the couenants and conditions
of the league, not ſuch as they ought to haue beene
to make them laſting; but ſuch as were preſented to men
ſtanding in neede of them, who inforced by neceſſitie,
might not refuſe them, to the end to cleere themſelues
of a neere threatning miſchiefe. Leagues wil then be durable
when they ſhall be ſtabliſhed at a time whē men are free
and exempt from all conſtraint; and not to attend as they
do, till the Turke affright one of the confederates, and that
he be alreadie come into the field ſo ſtrong both by ſea
and land, as the Venetians or ſome other of the confederates
are already by him aſſailed. At ſuch a time to ſeeke a
remedy by their haſtie aſſembling, is the way to imprint a
certaine feare in their people; and make them flocke together

in the fold as ſheepe in preſence of the woolfe. It
is requiſite then that the league be contracted at leiſure,
in a time of peace, and in a ſeaſon when the aſſociates may
be inuited, not by any vrgent danger, but voluntarily, and
with ſuch an alacritie of heart, as they may vnite their perſons,
their meanes, their powers, and their courages all together
to offend the common enemy.
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               A league which may be treated without
danger of the former
defects.
               
                  1 The qualities of perfect leagues.
                  2 The conditions of leagues, and what each of the confederates
is to attempt vpon the enemie.
                  3 The commoditie of them ſo concluded.
                  4 Aduiſe for a generall contribution againſt priuate gaine.
                  5 That the danger we ſtande in of the Turke, is greater then
many ſuppoſe, and that therefore thoſe that are moſt remote,
ought willingly to contribute.
                  6 What ſhould mooue vs to ioyne in league againſt the Turke.
               
               1 NOw then to reape the woorthie and honorable
fruits of a holie league & aſſociation,
we are to remooue the defects
and inconueniences which haue made
the former leagues prooue abortiue:
And the better to effect it, it is neceſſary
that their treaties be voluntarie: that Princes voluntarily
ioyne their powers & meanes to one end, though by different
courſes: ſo as growing to capitulations, the one doe
not aduantage himſelfe vpon the ſtraightning of the others
affaires. This is it which equalling the conditions, will cauſe
euery one to partake in the enterpriſe, without all ſuſpect
or particular iealouſie: It is not enough that the defects

of theſe leagues be diſcouered, if they make vs not more
wiſe in the framing of other to come: to the end we may
with all deuotion and ſinceritie builde them on a ſtrong
and vnmooueable foundation; and thus in my opinion
may be the manner of our proceeding.
               2 It is not required that to eſtabliſh this league and make
it fructifie, the confederate forces ſhould aſſemble in one
place, but at one time: my meaning is, that our Princes
muſt bee readie to aſſaile the enemie at once in diuers
places, and that euery one bende his forces towards parts
which are neereſt to him, ſo to begin the warre to ſome
purpoſe: As for example, the Spaniards ſhould inuade
the parts of Algiers: the Venetians and the Pope, of Albania:
the gallies of Sauoy, Malta, and Florence, ſhould
continue their ordinarie courſes againſt the Turke; vnleſſe
they would ioyne with the Venetians or the king of Spain:
the Polonians ſhould ſet vpon Walachia: the Emperour
and Princes of Germany vpon Hungary.
               3 Queſtionleſſe if each of theſe did in this manner aſſaile
him, their courage and force would be the greater, as
would likewiſe be their deſire to perſiſt in their enterpriſe,
without any reſpect of paines or expence, hoping all
would redound to their honour, profit, and particular ſecuritie:
which they cannot expect from the other leagues,
and this is that which hath in part made them defectiue.
The enemie that ſhould be ſo many waies ſet vpon, would
be conſtrained to diuide his forces, which conſequently
would become leſſe able to protect him, on all ſides wherſoeuer
he ſhould be aſſailed. Firſt, the gallies of Malta
aſſiſted with ſome other, and ſcouring (as they might) the
Leuant ſeas, would keepe in ſuch awe thoſe that guarde
Alexandria and Rhodes, as they would not dare to peepe
out: Againe, if Spaine would inuade Barbarie, the gallies
of Algiers would be ſure to keepe home: ſo as the ſtrength
of Venice ioyned with that of the Church, would doe
what they liſt, and would meete with no encounter by ſea
which they ſhould not eaſily ouermatch: eſpecially if at

the ſame time the Emperour and the King of Polonia,
would warre likewiſe vpon the Turke. We haue an example
of the times which verifieth our poſition. When Soliman
vndertooke the warre of Hungary,1532. againſt Charles
the 5. Andrew Doria Generall of his galleies, with a very
ſmall armie troubled all the Leuant, tooke by maine force
Coron and Patras, and harrowed all thoſe ſeas without
controule or encounter of the enemies: whence followeth,
that if the Chriſtians would as I haue ſaide, at one inſtant
ſet vpon the Turke, they would force him no doubt into a
narrow ſtraight.
               4 There is one point that would make the enterpriſe eaſie,
more forcible and laſting, but it would hardly be diſgeſted,
and that is to draw all Chriſtian Princes which confine
not with the Turke, to contribute vnto it. All theſe ſuppoſe
themſelues free from danger and make no reckning of others
ſufferings, in whoſe behalfe they thinke they ſhould
not cōtribute, as thoſe that were like to haue but the charge
and the other the profit. In a word, all catholike Princes
are ſo wedded to this particular intereſt, which is euer
more differing and vnequall among them (as hath beene
before alledged) as the league would neuer be thorowly
concluded or of long continuance, this muſt of neceſſity
be forgotten, and the only deſire of the exaltation of the
Church of God muſt be that which muſt range them to
the neceſſarie point, whereof they need not trauell to ſeeke
examples out of their owne houſes, which if they would
but imitate all would ſucceed wel, to inuite them to it I wil
alledge one.
               The principall aime of the league ſet on foote by Godfrye
of Buillion,
                  Alcut 1088. and of ſo many Princes and Nobles ſome
greater then himſelfe which accompanied him, was not
placed but vpon the particular honour of the Maieſty of
God, whereabout euery man emploied himſelfe with ſuch
zeale and deuotion, as without attending the ſuccours or
furtherance of any great King or Emperour, they drew together
an army of an hundred thouſand horſe and three

hundred thouſand foote, wherewith they ſubdued almoſt
all the eaſt.
               5 Leauing apart all theſe conſiderations let vs come to
the opinion that ſome haue of their being far from danger,
and we ſhall finde peraduenture that they are neerer
thereto then they are aware.
               When Amurath came firſt out of Aſia into Europe was
not Hungary (which is now ſubiect to the Turke) farther
off from the confines of the Ottomans Empire then are
now the countries of Saxony or of Bauiers,1363. then they of
Franconia, the Swichzers and the French? yet we ſee it now
moſt in his poſſeſſion.
               6 Shall we then ſay becauſe we haue a mountaine before
vs, or a riuer betweene vs, or ſome eſtate that ſeemeth to
ſhelter vs, that therefore we ſhould hold our ſelues happy
and in ſecurity, and not be touched with others danger and
miſery? No ſurely. For if we be Chriſtians we ought not
only to haue compaſſion of others calamities, but afforde
them alſo our good and charitable aſſiſtance: moreouer
he that meaſureth future things but by the conſequence of
things preſent, findeth himſelfe oft times beguiled; we are
to haue ſuch prouident care of what is preſent, & to come,
that we may leaue to ours the ſame aſſurance we wiſh to
our ſelues, to the end to preſerue them by this prouidence
from ſuch danger as they might incur after vs. And though
we ſhould not carry that regard of our children and poſterity,
and that the conſequence of our eſtate did not ſpur vs
on to ſuch an enterpriſe, ſhall there remaine in vs ſo little
courage and charity, loue and deuotion to the glory of
God, from whom we haue our being and of whom wee
hold our powers, as that we ſhould all forget to husband
his vineyard, and expell thence ſuch as intrude themſelues
into it and pollute it? wherefore ſerue all thoſe heapes of
treaſure which the Princes of Lombardy amaſſe, one in
enuy of an other? whereupon will thoſe ſo mighty Princes
of Germany and the Imperiall townes ſpend their reuenues
and incomparable riches? what occaſion can all of

them finde more goodly then this to attaine to an immortall
glory? It is then for the inlarging the kingdome of
Chriſt that we muſt imploy all we haue, and for the deliuerance
of thoſe ſacred places ouer which thoſe barbarous infidels
tyrannize, to redeeme ſo many thouſand of poore
Chriſtian ſlaues which ſuffer and grone vnder the yoake of
that inraged dogge, to giue life to an infinite number of
Chriſtians, to reuenge their wrongs, to puniſh the iniurires
& blaſphemies which that tyrant and his helhounds haue
breathed out againſt the glory of God, his holy name and
church. And if humaine appetite muſt needs be an actor in
this theater, it would be an eaſie matter for great Princes
that ſend their forces, to vrge this conſideration in the capitulations,
that they ſhould haue in fauour of their contributions
part of the ſpoiles and conqueſts that they might
happily obtaine. Againe, if the loue of the ſeruice of God
had a working in them, they might vndertake in perſon the
Generall conduct of the army, or command part of the
confederat troupes. Godfrey a poore Prince, in compariſon
of thoſe that now ſway Chriſtendome, alienated the Duchy
of Bouillion for ſo godly a voyage. Stephen Count of
Chartres did the like with his eſtate, as did alſo many great
men, who had no other motiue thereunto then the enterpriſe
of the holy land. Charles the ſeuenth King of France,
did he not ſuccor the Emperour of Conſtantinople with a
great number of horſe which he ſent him vnder the conduct
of the greateſt perſonages of his kingdome? And
muſt we ſit idle with croſſed armes whileſt the cruell flames
of this infidels tyranny burne and conſume the houſes of
our neighbours?
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               Wherein conſiſt the greateſt forces
of the Turke.
               
                  1 Whether the Ianizzars be the chiefe ſtrength of the Turke.
                  2 That horſe are more neceſſary in the war then foote.
                  
                     
3 The progreſſe of the Turke before and after the inſtitution of
the Ianiſſars.
                  4 Victories gotten by the horſe.
                  5 Ouerthrowes giuen by the enemies horſe to the Chriſtians.
                  6 Concluſion that horſe in ſeruice excell foote.
               
               
                  IT ſeemeth that the greateſt part of ſuch
as diſcourſe of the forces of the Turke attribute
his chiefe ſtrength to the band of
Ianizzars, as the only ſinew of his power:
and amongſt other reaſons wherewith
they ſtriue to fortify their oppinion, this
is one. It hath hapned many times that the army of the
Ottomans hath beene ſo hardly laide to, as the battaile
hath been in a manner loſt, yet haue they gathered ſtrength
and kept themſelues on foote, yea they haue gotten the
victory, and all through the vertue and valour of theſe Legionaries.
               2 Machiauel diſcourſeth vpon this point,Machiauels opinion for foote. and as one
much paſſionate holdeth himſelfe to this argument, that
foote are more neceſſary then horſe in all exploites of war,
and he laieth his principall foundation vpon the example
of certaine Romaine Captaines, which (ſaith he) to breake
into, and force the enemy on foote haue cauſed their men
at armes to alight from their horſes and fight on foote againſt
them: It is a poore argument and of ſmall importance,
ſince that for once that they made their horſemen
alight, an hundred occaſions were offered to make them
mount on horſe backe if they had the commodity of horſe;
he which is on horſebacke may when he pleaſe alight, but a
footeman cannot get vp on horſebacke when hee will.
This mony ſhall ſerue to pay Machiauel whom I leaue to
proceed forward. I affirme, that in a ranged battaile, and
in the plaine field the forces of the Turke conſiſt and principally
rely on the horſe. The proofes are cleere and at
hand, as the proceſſe of this diſcourſe ſhall diſcouer.
               3 Firſt no man is ignorant of the great victories the

Turk got long time before the inſtitution of the Ianizzars.
Amurath the ſecond the yeere 1420. was he that firſt ordained
them: yet Ottoman had before that taken Sebaſta
(a city of importance in Aſia) where he ſlew aboue an hundred
thouſand of his enemies.1305. Orcan his ſonne had diſpoiled
the Emperour of Conſtantinople and of Bithinia at
ſeuerall worthy incounters.1363. 
                  Amurath the firſt had paſſed
Aſia into Europe, with his forces tooke Gallipoli, Filipoli,
and Andrinople; and we may thinke that he did not obtaine
thoſe victories without dangerous and bloudy incounters:
he conquered alſo diuers other cities and wan
many other victories of the Princes of Seruia and Bulgaria,
whom he compelled to ſtoope vnder the yoake of his obedience.1396.
                  Baiazet the firſt ouercame Sigiſmonde King of Bohemia,
and put all thoſe French to the ſword which Charles
the 6. of France ſent to his ſuccour. Calepin his ſonne vnderſtanding
that Sigiſmond had raiſed an army, vpon the
newes of the ouerthrow giuen by Tamburlaine to Baiazet, to
ſalue his loſſes went to meete him at Salumbezza, and ſo
valiantly incountred him, as his whole army was cut in peeces,
ſo as it cannot be ſaid that the victories the Turke hath
obtained ſince the inſtitution of Ianizzars haue beene either
greater or more memorable then the former, rather
they were the ſteps to theſe other happy atchieuements.
The beginning of things containe in them the efficient
vertue of the whole. This diſputation might proue great
and might ballance on either ſide, if I did not ad waight
to one of the opinions.
               I will then ſay, that before the inſtitution and ſeminary
of Ianizzars,1397. the Turks receiued but one memorable ouerthrow
at mount Stella at the hands of Tamburlan the moſt
ſtrong enemy that euer they aſſaied, and that after their
inſtitution they receiued more and greater, as were thoſe
of Vſumcaſſan, of Iohn Huniades, of Mathew Coruin, of the
Mamelucks, of the great Scanderbag, of Don Iohn of Auſtria,
of the Kings of Perſia and others.
               4 The ſecond proofe which I will produce to fortifie the

truth of my propoſition, is, that all ſuch as haue had the
better hand of the Turkes, euer had it by the meanes of
their horſe, wherein they did exceed the enemy in number
and ſtrength, as we haue ſo often ſaide of the Perſians
and of the Mamelucks. The great Sophi 
                        ••
                     mael, had he
not vanquiſhed Selim the ſecond with the ſtrength of his
horſe, if when he did ſet vpon the rier-ward, where the
Turke was in perſon, the thunder of his Cannon had not ſo
affrighted the horſe, as they ran away with their maſters, to
the diſordering of the whole armie? The onely thing
that ouerthrew the fortune which the Perſian had almoſt
alreadie in his poſſeſſion. Cudabeuda King of Perſia, hath
many times ouercome the Turkiſh forces, by the onely
ſtrength of his horſe, whereof he hath more and is better
armed then the other. The Hungarians in like ſort haue
many times put the Turkes to the woorſe by their fight on
horſebacke.
               5 The third and ſtrongeſt proofe of my aſſertion, is, that
all the harmes we haue receiued of the Turke, haue come
by his horſe, as at Nicapolis, at Salembezza, at Varna,
at the riuer of Moraua, at Exechium, at Buda and elſewhere.
               6 And if it euer hapned that the Ianizzars recouered the
battaile halle loſt, it is to be imputed to this, that they were
reſerued for the rierward; ſo as it was eaſie for freſh men
to repell thoſe which were already weakned and tyred. But
I thinke no man but will grant, that if inſtead of the Ianizzars
they had beene as many horſe, they had performed as
much. As on the contrarie, if the other had kept in ſtore
ſome freſh troupes of horſe, as the Turkes, they had dealt
otherwiſe with them, and kept them well enough from bereauing
them of the victorie. In concluſion, the horſe are
they that defeat the enemie, and become maſters of the
field, that prepare the way for the foote to the beſeeging
of townes, and giue them time and leiſure to force and
take them.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XI.
               Where the Turke might be moſt eaſily
aſſailed to ouercome him either
by ſea or by land.
               
                  1 Examples of ſea victories.
                  2 The goodneſſe of our hauens.
                  3 The number of our skilfull mariners.
                  4 The Christians farre beyond the Turkes in maritime matters.
                  5 The Turkes horſe fearefull to the Christians, vnprofitable
at ſea.
                  6 That the Turkes are eaſily to be ouerthrowne at ſea.
               
               1 THere were much matter for doubt and
diſputation vpon this queſtion, if reaſon
and experience did not cleere it: for
experience we haue it freſh in many accidents;
which inſtruct vs that an attempt
by ſea, would be leſſe difficult to
vs, and more hurtfull to the Turke, for the reaſons and
examples which I will deliuer. As often as our forces haue
to ſome purpoſe put themſelues into the Leuant ſeas, they
haue beene euermore victorious, as at Metelin, at Cafalonia,
at Preueſa, at Scorſolari. If any one oppoſing me obiect
the ouerthrow of our armie at Gerbes,1580. which hapned
about the ſame time, let him read the diſcourſe of the Hiſtorie,
(as is requiſite) and he ſhall finde that that chanced
not through the force and valour of the enemy, but rather
through our owne fault; inſomuch as our armie could not
take their opportunitie to diſlodge in due time; but ſuffered
themſelues to be beſieged by the hardneſſe of the
ſeaſon, and by tempeſts; which ſo diſordred them as it was
eaſie for the enemie to force them. Grimani Generall of

the Venetians, let ſlippe the occaſion of a woorthy victorie,
when he knew not how to take his time to charge the
enemie, as he might well haue done at Sapienza. But on
the contrarie,Vid. 181. as often as the Emperour Charles the fift ſet
foorth an armie to ſome purpoſe, the Turke durſt neuer
looke abroad; as when he vndertooke the voyage of Tunis
and of Algiers, where neuertheleſſe he encountred
many diſaſters, he brought before Tunis ſeauen hundred
ſaile, and before Algiers fiue hundred onely. Thus much
for experience.
               2 Now we muſt ſee what reaſons we haue in ſtore to
prooue that we may more eaſily aſſaile the Turke by ſea
then by land. Among others this may paſſe, that our ſeas
are more frequented, and our ports more rich and ſafe
then thoſe of the Leuant. For firſt (ſet aſide Conſtantinople)
there is not thoroughout their obedience, any one
Porte that may be equalled to thoſe of Venice, Lisbone,
Siuill, Antwerp, London, Amſterdam, Lubec, or Danske,
&c. and very few alſo that may be compared with thoſe
of Naples, Genoua, Villa-Franca, Neſſina, Palermo,
Raguſa, Marſſeilles, Tolon, Bourdeaux, New-Hauen,
Rochelle, and Rouane, &c.
               3 It is cleere then that we ſurmount the Turke not only
in numbers of Portes and good harbers for the retraict
and ſhelter of our armies, but alſo in Mariners and men
accuſtomed and experienced in both the ſeas. Moreouer,
there is not perhaps in the world a coaſt that affoordeth
greater plentie of men then that of Genoua, Dalmatia,
Sclauonia, Venice, Candye. Againe, there is not a nation
to be found of more reſolution or better proofe for ſea affaires,
then are thoſe of Marſeilles. I omit to ſpeake of the
Catalonian, the Portugal, the Biskayan, the Engliſh, the
Norman, the Hollander, and Zelander, all people marueilous
skilfull in Nauigation.
               4 I would willingly demaund, what it auaileth the Turke
to poſſeſſe a large and ſpacious ſea bordering country, if it
remaine vnhabited; neither were it enough if it were: for

the exploits of maritime warre, it is requiſite they be valiant,
reſolute, and ſuch as can endure trauell and paine.
Alongſt all the coaſt of Africke, the Turke hath not one
Hauen of account beſides Algies. In all Egypt hee hath
only Alexandria, and Dalmatia, at the leaſt which are held
in any conſideration. In Soria, take away Saffo and Pamphilia,
thoſe neere Tirus, Epheſus, Cicize, and the reſt ſo
celebrated in ancient times, remaine at this day nameleſſe,
and buried in their owne ruines. They haue Gallipoli
which is of no great traffike: they haue that of Conſtantinople,
whereof they ſteade and vaunt themſelues moſt of
all: Moreouer, all theſe Ports are not ſo good or ſo conuenient
as ours, either if we conſider the forme, or the
commoditie of ſituation, nor ſo well ſtored with artillerie
as ours are.
               5 Againe, fighting by ſea, wee ſhall not need to feare
their horſe, whoſe encounter in regard of their multitude
cannot be but a terror vnto vs; relying as they doe vpon
them, as the principall nerue of their forces; but as for
foote, we excell them in number and valour:
               6 For concluſion, it is moſt certaine, if we could once
depriue the Turke of the vſe of the ſea, he would be ſoone
ouerthrowne by land with a ſufficient number of gallies,
which might be maintained in the Archipelago: we ſhould
cut him off from all trafficke with Egypt and Soria, as alſo
keeping certaine gallies in the Straight and chanell, we
ſhould hinder the commerce of Aſia and Conſtantinople,
which he could not be long without, ſo that by continuing
this manner of warring vpon him without intermiſſion, we
ſhould by little and little heaue him out of the whole
Empire of Greece, where there would be
enough to ſatiate the greedie ambition
of the Chriſtians.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XII.
               Of the inward cauſes whereby the
Empire of the Turkes may
come to ruine.
               
                  1 Of inward cauſes by which an Eſtate may be ouerthrowne.
                  2 The occaſions of the change of the Turkiſh Empire, are, a
defect that may happen of the Ottoman race:
                  3 The hatred, contempt, and diſobedience of the Turkes officers
and ſeruants:
                  4 The diſcorde that may ariſe betweene his children about
the ſucceſſion.
                  5 That it is hard now to ſtirre vp and maintaine diſſention
amongst them.
                  6 Another occaſion may be the Iannizzers libertie and inſolencie
towards their maſter:
                  7 Another the rebellion and reuolt of his countries and their
Gouernours.
               
               1 AS we haue before deliuered by what
outward cauſes the Empire of the
Turks may ſooneſt receiue an alteration,
ſo we are now to handle the meanes
whereby he may be inwardly weakened,
and whether by the infirmities
which are begotten in other eſtates, that of the Ottomans
may be likewiſe diſtempered and corrupted; of the inward
cauſes of this corruption, ſome concerne the Heads and
Miniſters, others are deriued from among the people. I
will then produce ſome few examples noting the errors of
ſuch as ſway a Soueraigne authority, and ſo orderly come
to the other, to collect thence what may ſerue to procure
the Turkes ruine.
               2 That which would fall moſt to our purpoſe would be if
the great Turke ſhould die without heires of the true line

and race of Ottoman. For in ſuch a caſe it is likely the Beglerbyes,
Vizirs, Baſſas, Sangiacks, and the greateſt perſonages
of the Turkiſh nation, would each one for himſelfe indeauour
to poſſeſſe himſelfe of whatſoeuer he could moſt
eaſily compaſſe.
               3 The ſecond cauſe would be, if in regard of his cruelty,
or negligence, the Prince ſhould giue his ſubiects occaſion
to hate and contemne him: but the miſchiefe would proue
yet greater if it did ariſe from the cowardlineſſe or ſloath of
the Prince. For his ſtrength conſiſting wholly in the great
numbers of his ſouldiours ordinarily intertained, how
could he poſſibly containe ſuch mighty armies in deuotion
and quietneſſe; if he did not daily buſie them in the
exerciſe of war? And leſſe how could ſo many nations be
held within compaſſe of feare and obedience without the
feare of ordinary armes? It is not to be doubted then if
they had a Prince who were giuen ouer to idleneſſe and a
looſe life, or that they diſcried him to be a coward & ſlothfull,
but they would be forward to draw their ſwords againſt
him, and thence worke their owne deſtruction. Baiazet
the ſecond had proofe of this, for abandoning himſelfe
to all pleaſures and reſoluing vpon a priuat and retired
courſe of life,1511. to ſpend his time in reading good authors;
his ſonne ſought his deſtruction, and in the end fauored by
the Ianizzars depriued him of his life and kingdome. For
though Baiazet repreſſed the firſt violence of his ſonnes
ambition, yet he was at the laſt forced by the Ianizzars not
only to pardon his rebellion, but alſo to ſend him with an
army againſt his other ſonne Accomat, who ſuppoſing his
father ment to prefer Selim before himſelfe, who was the
elder, cauſed the noſes and eares of his fathers meſſengers
moſt ſhamefully to be cut off; the enormity of this fact ill
digeſted, and worſe interpreted was that which cancelled
the greater faults of Selim, to take vengeance of this laſt &
leſſe outrage; whence it came to paſſe in the end that theſe
ſame Ianizzars poſſeſt Selim of the empire, who ſoone after
put to death his vnhappy father. Amurath the third

now raigning hauing withdrawne himſelfe from the actions
of war to liue in eaſe and quiet hath loſt much of his
ſouldiours and ſeruants ancient obedience, zeale, and obſeruance,
ſuch as they were wont to carry towards their
Soueraignes greatneſſe. The Baſſa of Cairo who had the
gouernment of Aegypt, named Raguſei, being ſummoned
(according to their Emperious cuſtome) to make his appearance
at the port, flatly refuſed to come thither and
made his eſcape with a world of treaſure which he had amaſſed
by extorſions and pilling of the people, during the
time of his adminiſtration. The Ianizzars which were at
thoſe times appointed for the wars of Perſia, would not
once moue a foote to march thitherward: but as halfe in a
mutiny ſaid plainly they would not any more go vpon any
enterpriſe vnleſſe the great Turke their Lord would vnchamber
himſelfe from among his concubines, and vndertake
the voyage himſelfe in perſon, ſo as he was conſtrained
by vertue of giftes and increaſe of pay to win them to
the war. Moreouer of late after the ouerthrow of Tauris,
the Turke hauing appointed a new generall for the ſuccoring
of his vanquiſhed army, and reenforcing of ſuch as
remained within the cittadell; all the commandements he
could lay vpon him, could not preuaile ſo much with him
as to get him to march forward, rather he grew to capitulate
with him, and that finiſhed, he made the moſt adoe
in the world to muſter vp twenty thouſand men, who refuſed
likewiſe to goe to that war, otherwiſe then vpon all the
aduantages they could deuiſe to demand: not like ſubiects
and ſlaues, but as if they had beene neighbours, allies,
and confederates. Theſe breaches already made in
the obedience they were wont to render thir lord and Maſter,
may perſwade vs that they will eaſily rebell, vpon
the firſt occaſion that ſhall preſent it ſelfe without reſpect
of their Princes greatneſſe, or obſeruation of their ancient
military policy.
               4 The third occaſion might befall, if there were many
brethren to debate the Empire after the death of their father,

as it hapned between Zizimus, and Baiazet, ſonnes
of Mahomet, and betwene Acomat and Selim, ſonnes of Baiazet.
This Baiazet was fauoured of the Ianizzars againſt
his brother. Zizimus was vpheld onely by the aid of the
Soldan of Cairo,1482. and King of Perſia. Selim likewiſe was
borne by the Ianizzars and Baſſas, and Acom
                        •
                     nt by forraine
Princes: they incountred and fought cruel battailes, whoſe
victories brought the whole Eſtate in danger: Baiazet
and Selim remained conquerours, each one his party by
meanes of the great numbers of men that accompanied
them,1513. and of the valour of the ſouldiours of the old bandes
which ſerued vnder them. Notwithſtanding all theſe opportunities
which God ſo to the purpoſe prepared, not
one Chriſtian Prince once ſtirred, or ſo much as made offer
to arme in fauour of the weaker of thoſe which contended:
which would no doubt haue entangled both of them
in a long and dangerous ſtrife, enough finally to haue ruined
or much decaied the houſe of the Ottomans, when
they ſhould haue called ſuch an one to their ſuccour as
would haue rather blowen then quenched their fires. Amongſt
all the Princes of Chriſtendome there was none
but the great maſter of Rhodes, which ſent ſome ſupplies
of artillery to Zizimus, and which after receiued and defended
him from the hands of Baiazet, when he was driuen
to retire himſelfe to his protection.
               5 Theſe domeſtique quarrels cannot now become ſo
ſtrong (eſpecially ſuch as might happen betweene brethren)
as then they might, conſidering that the Mamelucks,
who as neighbours might haue fomented and giuen
intertainment to ſuch differences, are now extinct and
their name no more mentioned. They were in their time
the only emulators of the Turkes glory: Rhodes hath made
an exchange of her fortune, and is now in the power of
this tyrant. Cypres beareth the like yoake. Theſe two
Ilands affoorded an eſpecial commodity to ſow diſſentions
among the Turks, to fauour and ſuccour one of the parties.
               6 The fourth cauſe would eaſily ariſe from the preſumption

and head-ſtrong raſhneſſe of the Ianizzars, likely enough
to attempt and execute as much as ſometime did
the Pretorian bands of the Romans, who made ſlender account
to fill the Empire with ſlaughters and maſſacres,
wherein many Emperours ended their daies: they electing
others at their pleaſures againſt the authority of the Senat,
and the loue and reuerence they ought to haue borne towards
their country. The like may we hope or expect from
the Ianizzars, that they will one day aſſume to themſelues
the ſame power and learne to performe the like, whereof
they gaue an aſſaie at ſuch time as they compelled Baiazet
the ſecond to reſigne the Empire to Selim his ſonne. They
did almoſt the like when Soliman cauſed his ſonne Muſtapha
to be murthered; for they beſieged him and inuironed
his tent for certaine daies ſpace, crying out they would
know the cauſe of that yong Princes death. In the end by
the deuiſe of the Baſſa and with ſtoore of coyne, he wan to
him foure thouſand of them, who diſengaged him of the
feare and danger wherein he was plunged.
               7 The fift cauſe may be fetched from the ambition or
diſcontent of the great ones of the countrie, or of miniſters
ſwaying the ſupreame authority & credit in places of
gouernment. Gazeles gouernour of Soria made way for
a reuolt of the like quality, as did alſo Acomat Generall of
Aegypt: Gazeles, aſſiſted by the Mamelucks, Arabians and
thoſe of Rhodes, endeuoured to ſet himſelfe vp againſt the
great Turke: but he was diſcouered by Cayembeius whom
he had acquainted with the conſpiracy. This man either
for feare (as looking into the danger of the enterpriſe) or
for enuy of his companions greatneſſe, reuealed all to his
Maſter Soliman, who preſently diſpatched againſt him Faratha
Baſſa, by whom he was vanquiſhed in battaile. Acomat
had not the leaſure to proceed far in his attempt, for as
he did inconſideratly precipitate himſelfe into the triall
thereof, ſo was he as ſpeedily diſcouered, and in an inſtant
ſuppreſſed and ſlaine, without hauing thriued ought in his
deſſignes.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XIII.
               Of the mixt cauſes.
               
                  1 What are the mixt cauſes.
                  2 How Eſtates are ouerthrowen by mixt cauſes.
               
               1 IN this third booke we haue at large diſcourſed
how by inward and outward
cauſes, Eſtates may be indangered: now
we muſt ſpeake of cauſes compounded,
of the one and the other, which, to diſcourſe
more intelligibly, we tearm mixt,
which likewiſe are of power of themſelues to alter an Empire
and to bring it, either by an vniuerſall or a particular
change, to a lamentable ruine. Theſe mixt cauſes then
are thoſe whereby both the enemy abroad, and the ſubiect
at home may by a common conſent conſpire againſt an Eſtate
and ſubuert it.
               2 One of the cauſes or meanes may be a popular inſurrection
nouriſhed by the enemy, or elſe the conſpiracy of
ſome particular men ſet on by forraine practiſes; or to
tearme it better, the treaſons which ſubiects may hatch in
fauour, and by the meanes and authority of their neighbours.
This hapneth in a twofold manner, when the ſubiect
beginneth and ſetteth on foote the practiſe, or when
a ſtranger laieth the way open vnto them vnder ſome coulered
pretence, or elſe when ſome one particular perſon or
all a whole communalty frame the occaſion thereof in regard
of ſome diſpleaſure or oppreſſion. Finally, this falleth
out alſo when the enemy abroad tempereth with one, two,
or three, of the principall men to reuolt againſt their prince
and take armes in hand to ouerturne and ruine the Eſtate.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XIIII.
               How particular perſons may
be gained.
               
                  1 How his people are to be prouoked to rebellion.
                  2 How his great men and chiefe officers are to be gained.
                  3 Theſe courſes at the firſt not ſucceeding, are to be oftner attempted.
                  4 Wary proceeding is requiſite, leſt thoſe that manage the buſineſſe
incurre danger.
                  5 To whom ſuch buſineſſes are to be committed.
               
               1 IT reſteth now that we make it appeere
how ſuch practiſes may be ſet on foote
and cheriſhed: we will then beginne
with the enterpriſe to bee plotted by
ſome particular perſon, by whoſe aſſiſtance
it may take effect. We muſt preſuppoſe
that this perſon is either priuat or publike, the
priuat perſons are thoſe which ſuffer themſelues moſt often
to be corrupted by mony, and with theſe there neede
not ſo many ceremonies or bro
                     •
                  kings, but if they be publike
perſons of rancke and authority, either in regard of the
greatneſſe of their family, or managing of ſtate affaires;
there is far greater difficulty in corrupting them then the
other: yet if we may but diſcouer in them the ſtinges of
ambition and deſire of greatneſſe, and that we propoſe to
them the aſſurance of ſpeedy ſuccours, for the execution
of the deſ
                     ••
                  gne; then is it that we bring them to dare any
thing, eſpecially if they haue neuer ſo little diſpoſition to
be reuenged of ſome receiued indignity. It is indeed a hard
matter to worke particular and priuate perſons without
great vncertaineties and dangers.
               2 But if we muſt haue to doe with the great perſons of
the Eſtate, we muſt warily make choice of our time, ſound

them whether they be male content or ill affected towards
their Prince, either in reſpect that ſome one is aduanced to
their preiudice, or for ſome other cauſe which may awake
in them a longing to ſhake off their yoake and ſeaze themſelues
of the Eſtate. Theſe are the meanes and occaſions,
which ſhould be choſen and diligently husbanded by our
Chriſtian Princes, ſmoothly and with dexterity to procure
the ruine of the common enemy; putting on (as they
ſay) the foxes skin when the lions is wanting. The diſpleaſure
and ielouſie which Faratha Baſſa conceiued againſt
Hebraim Baſſa becauſe he ſaw him raiſed by Soliman
to greater honour and eſtimation then himſelfe, ſo depriued
him of all reaſon, as ſuffering the deſire of reuenge by
little and little to tranſport him, he began to plot a rebellion,
but diſcouered he was forthwith put to death: the
ſelfe ſame occaſion was the ouerthrow of Pirrus and Muſtapha
raiſed by Soliman. In our time in the court of Amurath
the third now raigning, theſe ielouſies and hart-burnings
haue beene great betweene Mahomet and Muſtapha,
and ſince that betweene the ſame Muſtapha and Cicala
(who hath outſtript him) and all for fauour of their
Maſter. If theſe humors and ill diſpoſitions had beene well
looked into and wiſely imploied to their beſt vſe by ſome
great Prince of Chriſtendome, they had beene fit matter to
haue bred a diſſention and reuolt amongſt thoſe barbarous
people.
               3 Now though ſuch practiſes ſhould not perhaps at the
firſt be of ſufficient power to worke that vniuerſall change
which we wiſh in that tyrants Empire; yet are we not therefore
to deſiſt as men diſmaied; remembring that moſt
commonly the beginnings of innouations and commotions
ſo extraordinary, are feeble, and that that wiſdome
ſheweth it ſelfe like it ſelfe which can ſo diligently ſuckle
and nouriſh them as they may attaine to a happy growth.
I am of opinion, that when we incounter with inſtruments
that are not without ambition, courage, and a thirſt of
reuenge; after we haue felt and ſounded them once, twiſe,

or thriſe, we ſhall in the end make a breach in their loyalty
and obedience; eſpecially if we ſet before them (be it vnder
a true or falſe title) the certaintie of ſome mightie ſuccour,
whereof they may ſee the preparatiues; for ſo they
will the more couragiouſly attempt againſt the life and
eſtate of their Prince.
               4 Moreouer it is not to be forgotten, that when ſuch
practiſes ſhall be diſcouered by the Turke, and that he ſhal
ſee the Chriſtians more diligent then hitherto they haue
beene, to ſound the affections of his ſeruants and ſubiects:
he will thereupon enter into ſuch a diſtruſt of them,
as euen that will make him offer them ſome hard meaſure.
This diſtruſt will be enough to beget a thouſand ſuſpitions
and hard conceits in his ſeruants, and ſubiects, either for
the managing of affaires, or for the danger that the opinion
of loyaltie incurreth, when it hath to deale with ſuch
a diſtruſtfull and ſuſpitious Prince, as this would prooue:
ſo as by little and little it would worke vs out ſome occaſion
fitting our purpoſe, eſpecially, if whileſt this practiſe
were hatching, and on foote, the children of the Turke
ſhould take armes one againſt the other, or that during
their fathers life, they ſhould diſpute the poſſeſſion of the
Empire: for the ice being already broken, there would be
a more eaſie paſſage and better ſucceſſe, then if it had not
beene taken in hand at all.
               5 But becauſe an eſpeciall iudgement, patience, and
much wiſedome are requiſite in ſuch buſineſſes, we muſt
make choice of men furniſhed with all theſe parts, to the
end they may wiſely know when to take their opportunities
and times, to ſow theſe diſſentions, and that there
be not want of mony to diſtribute amongſt this
people, which are farther in loue
therewith, then any other
nation the world
affoordeth.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XV.
               How the people of the Turke may
be wrought from his
obedience.
               
                  1 How the Turkes Chriſtian Subiects are to be wrought to
rebellion.
                  2 A place muſt be choſen for refuge of ſuch as rebell.
                  3 The vaine fooleries of their Alkoran are to be diſcouered.
                  4 How bookes written to that purpoſe may come to his ſubiects
hands.
                  5 How ſuch bookes are to be compoſed.
                  6 What fruites are to be hoped from their reading.
                  7 Exhortation to the Ianizzars.
                  8 The concluſion of this worke.
               
               1 THe Turke hath two ſorts of people
ſubiect to his Empire; one followeth
the ſect of Mahomet; the other the
truth of the Goſpel of Ieſus Chriſt. The
Mahometanes are quiet, as thoſe which
being of one and the ſame law, haue no
cauſe to make any tumult. The Chriſtians cannot ſtirre, as
being ouer topped and awed by a greater power then their
owne, which curbeth them ſo, as there is no better way to
moue them to rebel, then to make them handle (as it were)
and ſee the aſſurance of an approching ſuccour, to prouide
them of armes and all other furniture for the wars: for
otherwiſe it is impoſſible they ſhould dare to make the
leaſt ſhew once to mooue, whileſt they haue the enemie
ouer them alwaies in a readineſſe and armed, who would
in a moment confound them, eſpecially being as they are
naked and vnprouided of armes, offenſiue or defenſiue.
Selim the ſecond doubting the woorſt, by the counſaile of
Occhially, cauſed al the Chriſtians inhabiting the ſea coaſts,

to retire themſelues farre vp into the maine land, to the
end the preſence of the Chriſtian forces ſhould not incourage
them againſt him, as it hapned at ſuch time as Andrew
Dorea atchieued the enterpriſe of Patras and Coron.
               
               2 If the Chriſtians ſhould euer vndertake the like diſſigne
they ought to take eſpeciall heede how they vnſhip
their ſuccours in thoſe parts of the continent where the
horſe are at hand, ſince they were likely enough by their
ſtrength to choake at the firſt the reuolt of the Chriſtians,
for ſo mighty are they in horſe, and of ſuch ſpeed and dexterity,
as they would in an inſtant beare downe before them
whatſoeuer ſhould oppoſe them. Wherefore it would be
better to enter by Albania and by places mountanous and
of difficult acceſſe, where the horſe are not able to ſerue,
as in the plaine. This is as much as we ment to ſay of ſuch
Chriſtians as are vnder the Turkes dominions, all which I
will imagine want not will to rebell, if the Princes of Chriſtendome
would furniſh them of meanes.
               3 Now let vs ſee what way were beſt to be taken to prouoke
the Mahometans to reuolt, and to fill their countries
with troubles, and ciuill diſſentions. If we will but conſider
how their religion is fraught with vntruthes, their Alcoran
abounding in follies, we ſhall finde it eaſie to picke
matter enough out of it to ſet them together by the eares,
eſpecially if wee doe but diſperſe among them certaine
bookes fit to conuert them, or make them doubt of the
fooliſh ſuperſtitions they obſerue, compoſing them for
Europe in the Sclauonian tongue, and for Aſia in the
Arabian.
               4 But becauſe it would be hard to conuey theſe bookes
into the countries of the Turkes obedience but that they
would ſoone perceiue the deuice and ſpeedily remedy it:
It were beſt beginning far off, in the Indies and in the parts
of Aſia and Africke held by the Portugales: for becauſe
of the trafficke which is great in thoſe parts many Turkiſh
Marchants and others ariue there from all quarters. They
come to Mozambique in Africke, to Zophala and Quiloe

in Aſia. They deſcend alſo as low as the Moluccas, Cochien,
Goa, Dia, Ormus, and ſundrie other parts appertaining
to the crowne of Portugale. Theſe bookes alſo
might be diſperſed abroad in the countrie of the Gentiles,
which are friends and confederates of the Chriſtians, as
in Calicut, Zailan, Cambeia, and others; and the like at
Oran, Arzilla, and in other parts of Arabia ſubiect to the
crowne of Spaine and Portugall, and in all other parts of
Europe which border vpon the Turkes.
               5 There muſt be a care had that the title of the booke be
ſo coloured, as it doe not at the firſt diſcouer the intent of
the author, but rather that it intice them to peruſe it with a
certaine curioſity and ſhew of pleaſantneſſe and delight.
It is requiſite alſo that the diſcourſe be not fraught with any
diſputations or ſubtill point againſt the Articles of their
beleefe, but that contrariwiſe it be full of tales and matter
fit to moue laughter; yet with ſome well conueied paſſage
which may by the way diſcouer or make them doubt of
the fables of their Alcoran.
               6 The Turkiſh Marchants or others, into whoſe hands
this booke ſhould light, would cōfidently reade it in thoſe
parts where the Turke is not obeied. And though perhaps
they durſt not aduenture to carry it with them, yet the
impreſſion and ſubſtance of what they had read would remaine
fixt in their mindes, ſo as they would after relate it
as newes to their friends and families, in ſuch ſort as it
would grow by little and little to be diuulged thereabout,
whence would ſpring a longing in others which ſhould
come and goe into thoſe countries to buy & reade them:
In this manner the Alcoran in proceſſe of time would grow
out of credit amongſt them, and thoſe things which with
ſcruple and obſeruation they collect thence, would turne
to a ieſt and ſubiect of laughter, whence there could not
but inſue ſome ſchiſme and diuiſion amongſt them, for the
moſt religious men of their ſect and the moſt intereſted
would oppoſe themſelues wilfully to maintaine it. Neither

would it make for the purpoſe to make mention in any ſort
of our Sauiour Chriſt, much leſſe to let it be knowen that
the author thereof were a Chriſtian: for the immortall hatred
they beare to that name would make it odious, and
would bring it at the very firſt to be reiected. It ſhould rather
be ſo contriued as if it came from ſome other of an other
ſect, wherein a man might borrow the hand of the
inhabitants of Cambaia, of India, of Arabia, or of Perſia. In
this manner it would be better welcome and would carrie
with it more eſtimation and authority.
               7 It were well alſo if there were framed and publiſhed a
remonſtrance to the Ianizzars in the Sclauoman tongue,
whereby might be ſignified vnto them their originall, and
howe in their infancy they were cruelly halled from the
boſomes of their Chriſtian fathers and mothers, conueyed
into Turky, and there nuſled vp in the ſect of Mahomet,
not hauing iudgement as then to diſtinguiſh of good and
euill; that they are the pillers to vphold this Tyrant which
hath ſet his foote vpon the throat of their fathers liberty,
and which keepeth them as ſlaues vnder the yoake of a diſhonorable
and barbarous ſeruitude. This would auaile
much, eſpecially if there were thereto annexed an exhortation
to take better knowledge of themſelues, and hence,
forward like good children to imbrace and free their miſerable
parents, which daily lament them; and aboue all to
perſwade them to returne to the deare boſome of the
church wherin they were firſt, regeuerate and which attendeth
with ſpread armes to receiue them, entertaine them,
and ſaue them.
               8 Theſe things well caried would in the end make the
Turke ſo ſuſpitious, and vntractable, as he would offer occaſions
enow to his people hencefoorth to rouſe vp
themſelues, and better aduiſe how to ſhake off that cruell
and vnſupportable yoake which ſo mightily oppreſſeth
them, and to faſhion themſelues to a more happy and ſecure
life for the quiet of their conſciences and ſaluation of

their ſoules. This is that whereof the Chriſtians ought diligently
to bethinke themſelues; and not to worke one an
others ruine and deſtruction, as they ſpare not to
doe againſt the expreſſe commandement of
God, which ſo often recommendeth
vnto vs loue and charitie
towards our
neighbours.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
   