
      
         
            
            
            
            
            LVCANS PHARSALIA: CONTAINING The Ciuill Warres betweene CAESAR and POMPEY.
            
            WRITTEN Jn Latine Heroicall Verſe by M. ANNAEVS LVCANVS.
            TRANSLATED INTO ENGliſh verſe by Sir Arthur Gorges Knight.
            Whereunto is annexed the life of the Authour, collected out of diuers Authors.
            Fides fortibus fraus formidoloſis.
            London printed for Edward Blount 1614.
            
         
         
            
            
            
               ❧ TO THE RIGHT NOBLE AND VERTVOVS LADY, LVCY, COVNTESSE OF BEDFORD, MY MOST HONOVred Lady and Miſtreſſe.
            
               MADAME
            
            
               THE leaſt good documents, which we learne in our youth, may in ſome part of our life ſerue vs to vſe. I remember this ſentence in my Pueriles, Voluntas, vbi deſunt vires, eſt laudanda: Where power is wanting the good will is to be accepted. Which J preſume will be my warrant in preſenting your Laſhip with this Poeme, which by chance J did ſee in my fathers ſtudy, amongſt many other of his Manuſcripts. And becauſe it lay idly there, I deſired him to giue it me. Who then asking what I would do with it, I told him that I would preſent it to my Lady my Miſtreſſe. Which humor of mine he ſeemed very well to like:

but he anſwered, that it was not faire enough written for her reading. Whereunto J replied, that if I might haue it, I would amend that fault, and get it printed by the helpe of my Schoole-maiſter, and in that ſort offer it. Whereto my father ſaid, that he liked ſo well of my deuotion to ſo noble a Miſtreſſe, as that hee would freely giue it mee. The which now (as mine owne) J do humbly recommend to your honourable acceptance, as ſome teſtimony of my deuoted zeale, vntill yeares, and ability ſhall ſecond my indeuours with parts more anſwerable to my deſire. And in the meane ſeaſon I will perſwade my ſelfe that this poore preſent is the more aptly offered, knowing that the reading of Heroicall actions do as properly belong to noble and vertuous Ladies, as the acting of them to worthy and valorous Knights. Beſides that, your Ladiſhip is an honourable louer and Patroneſſe of learning and the Muſes, an inſtinct naturally ingrafted in your excellent ſpirit, by that worthy blood of the Sydneyes, wherewith you do ſo neerely participate, and whoſe perfections did ſo eminently ſhine in that hopefull yong Lord your late brother,

one of the mirrours of our Age. Now if this may but receiue your honourable applauſe, as ſome pledge of my Deuotion, J will neuer thinke that I need to be aſhamed to flutter with my Fathers feathers. And ſo am euer ready to approue my ſelfe,
            
               Your Ladiſhips moſt humble and faithfull ſeruant, Carew Gorges.
            
         
         
            
            To the Tranſlator.
            HAD Lucan hid the truth to pleaſe the time,
            He had beene too vnworthy of thy Penne:
            Who neuer ſought, nor euer car'd to clime
            By flattery, or ſeeking worthleſſe men.
            For this thou haſt been bruiſ'd: but yet thoſe ſcarres
            Do beautifie no leſſe, then thoſe wounds do
            Receiu'd in iuſt, and in religious warres;
            Though thou haſt bled by both, and bearſt them too.
            Change not, to change thy fortune tis too late.
            Who with a manly faith reſolues to dye,
            May promiſe to himſelfe a laſting ſtate,
            Though not ſo great, yet free from infamy.
            Such was thy Lucan, whom ſo to tranſlate
            Nature thy Muſe (like LVCANS) did create
            
               W. R.
            
         
         
            
            To the Tranſlator.
            HOMER and MARO, that did Poetize,
            As much in matter, as in kinde of ſtile,
            Did thereby dimme the glorious deeds the while
            Of them, whoſe acts they meant to memorize.
            So did not LVCAN, who (in other guize)
            The geſts of two great Worthies did compile;
            S'deining their high atchieuements to defile,
            Or inter-lace with idle vanities.
            Therefore how farre from Fable Truth is ſet,
            So farre aboue all feigners LVCAN ſhines;
            While in his Muſe both faculties are met,
            That with ſweet Number beauteous Truth combines.
            And we to thee in endleſſe debt muſt dwell
            For making Lucan ſpeake our tongue ſo well.
            
               S. S.
            
         
         
            
            To the Tranſlator.
            AS Thetis famous ſonne concealed lay
            From that braue Troope of Greekiſh martiall Knights,
            Vntill Vlyſſes (quicker ey'd then thay)
            Preſented him vnmask't to Trojan fights.
            So Lucans Spaine-borne, Rome-bred, Muſe-nurc't wit,
            Lay hid in lines obſcure to moſt of vs,
            Till thou (Vlyſſes-like) with numbers fit
            Didſt happily vnclowd his Genius.
            
            And though for it that Ithac boſtingly
            Claim'd to himſelfe Achilles acts of fame;
            Thou (worthy Knight) doſt vſe more modeſty:
            Although thy worke alike deſerues the ſame.
            For who with iudgement reades thy well-tun'd Layes,
            Will iudge thee worthy Lucans Crowne of Bayes.
            
               A. I.
            
         
         
            
            To the Tranſlator.
            LVCAN, that firſt in the Imperiall tongue
            (In naked truth of acted hiſtory)
            The ciuill wounds made for an Empire ſong;
            Hath checkt precedent, taught ſucceeding Poeſy,
            
            That flatteries and fictions may delight,
            May pleaſe a Tyrant, wrong a rightfull King,
            May pleaſe an Orphan Iudgment, wrong the right,
            Enuelop Truth, proclaime an vntrue thing.
            
               Lucan, that firſt hath ſhowne the force of verſe,
            Relating onely what was ſeene, felt, donne,
            Of Conqu'rors triumphs, of the Conqu'reds herſe,
            All as it left, all as it firſt begunne.
            Not like the Trojan Theamers, fit for ſchooles,
            Fabling of this and that in Heauen, Earth, Hell,
            Sober to mad-men, turning wiſe to fooles,
            Gods to be Neat-heards, men in ſtarres to dwell,
            Hath match't the faith, that Hiſtory requires:
            Hath match't beſt Hiſtory in choyce of phraſe:
            Hath taught, that Hiſtory in nought aſpires
            Aboue the truth of deeds, it ſelfe to raiſe.
            This Lucan for his truth a Truch-man gaines
            As true to him, as he to Truth remaines.
            
               T. W.
            
         
         
            
            The Printer to the Reader.
            
               THat which no Impreſſions haue euer been free from, were now needleſſe for me to excuſe, I meane the faults eſcaped in the printing; which may appeare the more harſh, becauſe the lines be ſhort. In regard wherof, (to doe right as well to the Tranſlator, as alſo the better to ſatisfie the Reader) I haue here ſet downe the Errata, with the page and lines ſpecified where the defects are, to be amended with the more eaſe.
            
            PAge 3. line 22. for armes read harmes. pag. 4. lin. 7. for time read twine. pa. 9. li. 9. for brangling read brandling. p 11. l. 35. for fettred read feltred. p. 16. l. 31 for ſtrong reade ſtung. p. 33. l. 5. for with reade which. p. 33. l. 19. for interpoſing read interpoſed. p. 34. l. 9. for Thebans read Theban. p. 34. l. 39. for fettred read feltred. p. 36. l. 6. for that read for. p. 37. l. 39 for then r. the. p. 37. l. 40. for clothed, r. choked. p. 45. l. 14. for captiue read caitiffe. p. 46. l. 39. for they read thy. p. 52. l. 40. for ſtreame read ſtreames. p. 56. l. 8. for thy read they. p. 64. l. 19. for lawes reade ſawes. p. 66. l. 37. deeſt a. p. 82. l. 39. for it read is. p. 86. l. 12. for this read theſe. p. 90 l. 40. for eaſe read theſe. p. 91. l. 12. for euent ready bent. p. 92.22. for Hernius read Hermus. p. 105. l. 35. for coſt read caſt. p. 106. l. 39. for flames read frames. p. 110 l. 3. for fierce read firme. p. 116. l. 7. for foyle read ſoyle. p. 124. l. 11. for either, read neither. Ibid. for a read or. p. 126. l. 23. dele of. p. 126. l. 34. for To read The. p. 130 l. 13. for fight read flight. p. 155. l. 40. for the read theſe. p. 181. l. 17. deeſt our. p. 186 l. 9. for Moores read moares. p. 192. l. 24. for timeleſſe read time loſt. p. 196. l. 6. for takes delight, read takes ſo great delight. p. 212. l. 1. for parties read party. p. 215 l. 1. for a read read as. p. 225. l. 32. for place read peace. p. 226. l. 34. for ſlang read ſlaugh. p. 236. l. 28. for ſuſpected read reſpected. p. 240. l. 6. for is read tis. p. 258. l. 2. for hi read his. Ibid. l. 8. deeſt are. p. 260. l. 16. for ſhe read he. p. 262. l. 20 for no read now. p. 268. l. 14. for valley read valley. p. 280. l. 32. for affected read effected p. 292. l. 25 for world read worlds. p. 300. l. 5. for Pentheius read Pentheus. p. 305. l. 3. for were read where. p. 306. l. 14. for Achilles r. Achillas. p. 309. l. 16. dele if. p. 313 l. 18. for deſir'd r. deſeru'd. p. 319. l. 6. for None read Nor. p. 319. l. 38. for Palean r. Pelean. p. 329. l. 39. for ſucſt r. ſuch. p. 330. l. 2. for ſtitcht read ſtickt. p. 333. l. 21. for we read no. p. 333. l. 25. deest do. p. 335. l. 16. for fathers read brothers. p. 335. l. 20. for ſpirits read ſprights. p. 337. l. 15. for Thy read Fly. p. 342. l. 37. for theſe read thoſe. p. 343. l. 3. for meant read went. p. 344. l. 10. for he read had. p. 344. l. 17. for reſolues read reuolues. p. 344. l. 25. for ſip read ſhip. p. 347. l. 31. for The read That p. 348. l. 28. for yet read earſt. p. 360. in marg. for Comely read Country. p. 362. l. 23. for (O griefe) read of griefe. p. 367. l. 36. for dandling read dangling. p. 373. l 3. for for no read to. p. 378. l. 26. for bitter read better. p. 383. l. 9. for ſtreaming read ſtrange. p. 385. l. 11. for wretched read wreathed. p. 390. l. 5. for when reade whom. p. 399. l. 39. for fury read fyry. p. 409. l. 14. for he read they. p. 418. l. 40. for Pollean reade Pelean. p. 419. in marg. for enuies reade inueighes. p. 424. l. 24. for a beare, read beare a. p. 425. l. 35. for rifing reade riſing. p. 427. l. 9. for Falermums, read Falernums. p. 430. l. 18. for vnto read to. p. 431. l. 19. for Neroe read Meroe. p. 431. l. 33. for Zoylan reade Nylan. p. 434. l. 39. for Neroe read Meroe. p. 435. l. 6. for bands read bends.
         
         
            
            
               ❧ THE LIFE OF M. ANNAEVS LƲCAN.
            
               
                  ANnaeus Seneca comming from Corduba, (a Citty in the inner Prouince of Betique Spaine) to Rome, was preſently aduanced to the honour of Knight-hood; whoſe Orations (al-be-it of great fame and note) were by the iniury of Time denied to poſterity. He had by his wife Elbia three ſons, whoſe names were, L. Annaeus Seneca, Iulius Annaeus Gallio, and Annaeus Mela: who (becauſe he was yongeſt) was left behinde at Corduba. The other two (to wit) Seneca and Gallio, he committed to the tuition of Marullus Grammaticus, Ceſtius Smyrneus, and Aſinius Pollio. Mela when he came to yeares of diſcretion, was by his father made gouernour of his houſhold affaires; and being graced as well as his other brethren (by the fauour of the Caeſars) with the order of Knight-hood, he married C. Acilia, the daughter of Acilius Lucanus, a famous Orator in the Proconſuls Court, and much eſteemed for his wit among the better ſort. Bt her (about the fourth of the Nones of Nouember, in the ſecond Conſulſhip of Caius Caeſar Germanicus with Lucius Cecianus) he begat Marcus Annaeus Lucan; taking his ſur
               
                  •••
               e from his grand-father (by his mothers ſide) Acilius Lucan. At length growing weary of the care of houſe-keeping, and deſirous to liue with his brethren in more eaſe and quiet; he went with his ſonne Lucan (being then but eight moneths old) to Rome, hoping that by the well managing of his wealth which he had gathered, it would in ſhort ſpace come ſo to paſſe, that he

ſhould be choſen Conſull. Now as he was iourneying, it chanced that a ſwarme of Bees flying about the cradle wherein the childe was carried (as it is reported happened to Heſiodus) lighted and hung at his mouth; ſignifying (no doubt) the ſweet and admirable eloquence that ſhould bee in that childe, whereof his workes giue good teſtimony. His Maiſters and Tutors were Rhemnius Palemon, and Flavius Virginius, the one a famous Grammarian, the other a ſingular Rhetorician: Vnder whom he profited ſo well (the dexterity of his wit being furthered with his diligence) that within a very ſhort ſpace, he declaimed both in Greeke and Latine, to the great admiration of the Auditors. His Schoole-fellowes were Saleius Baſſus, and Au. Perſius: he held a long time in the grace and fauour of Nero (who in his yong yeares was brought vp vnder Seneca, this Lucans Vnkle) He was aduanced to the Office of Queſtor before due age; at what time he ſet out ſuch excellent ſword-playes, that by the peoples fauour, he was the next yeare called to the Office of Prieſt among the Augures, as Papinius Statius records.
            
               Romam colitur chori Sacerdos.
               
                  Lucan was held in ſuch admire,
               That he became Prieſt of the Quire.
            
            He tooke to wife Polla Argentaria (the daughter of Pollus Argentarius) of whom Papinius in Calliope ſings thus:

                  Nec ſolum dabo carminum nitorem,
                  Sed taedis genialibus dicabo
                  Doctam, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ingenio tuo decorum,
                  Qualem blanda Venus, daret
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Iuno,
                  Forma, ſimplicitate, comitate,
                  Cenſu, ſanguine, gratia, decore.
                  The purer numbers that I write,
                  Shall not with empty words be dight:
                  But to thy geniall bed Il'e bring
                  A Bride, that learnedly can ſing:
                  A wench, that Nature fram'd to ſit
                  The ſwelling torrent of thy wit.
                  And ſuch a milke-white Turtle-doue,
                  As that the Empereſſe of loue,
                  
                     Or elſe the Queene of Maieſty,
                  Might as a boone beſtow on thee.
                  She is ſo faire, ſo ſweet, ſo kinde,
                  So rich, and of ſo noble minde,
                  So match eſſe in her gracefull port,
                  So mouing to Ambroſian ſport.
               
            
            But on a certaine time there being a Poeticall Comedy to bee act
                  •
               d in Pompey's Theater; and Nero hauing promiſed by Chuius Rufus, that he himſelfe in perſon would act the Fable of Niobe: Lucan (ſtepping out vpon the ſtage) recited certaine verſ
                  •
               s extempore in the praiſe of Orpheus: for which he had a crowne of Laurell beſtowed on him. Whereupon Nero conceiuing a ſpleene againſt him, forbid him euer after to frequent the Market-plac
                  •
               , and Theater, or to make any verſes. Of which Papinius ſaith thus:

                  
                     Ingratus Nero dulcibus Theatris,
                     Et noſter tibi praeferatur Orpheus.
                  
                  
                     
                        Nero thou ſhewd'ſt thy ſelfe ingrate
                     To dulcet Theaters, for hate
                     Thou bar'ſt to him that did rehearſe
                     More pleaſing numbers then thy verſe.
                  
               
            
            Who hoping to be reuenged on Nero, he ioyned himſelfe to the Piſionian treaſon: But the plot being diſcouered, hee perſiſted not in the deniall of his fault: but crauing mercy for himſelfe, he accuſed his innocent mother to be alſo one of this conſpiracie: hoping that this empiety might bee a meanes to procure pardon at the hands of an impious Prince. But hauing receiued the ſentence of condemnation, and liberty giuen to him to chuſe what death he would▪ he writ certaine verſes vnto his father; and (after a large banquet) cauſing the veines of his armes to be opened, he dyed bleeding. But when his feet and hands began to waxe cold, and that he was now at the point to reſigne his lateſt breath, hee recited certaine verſes of his, which hee had made on a Souldier in the ſame caſe. Lib. 3.
            
            
               
                  Scinditur avulſus, nec ſicut vulnere ſanguis
                  Emicuit lentus, ruptis, cadit vndique venis:
                  
                     Diſcurſuſque animae diuerſa in membra meantis,
                  Interceptus aquis, nullius vita perempti
                  Eſt tanta dimiſſa via.
               
               
                  His body made of fennie mud,
                  Was torne aſunder us he ſtood,
                  So that his bloud dropt not ſo ſlow
                  As that which from a wound doth flow.
                  But from each broken hollow vaine,
                  A ſtreame of crimſon guſht amaine.
                  And that which wont was to impart
                  Life to the limbes from out the heart,
                  With that ſame element was mixt
                  That earth and aire lyes betwixt.
                  Neuer did any dying wight
                  So many wayes breath out his ſpright.
               
            
            He ended his life the day before the Calends of May (Atticus Veſtinius, and Nerua Silius being Conſuls) in the 27 yeare of his age. He was intombed in his owne garden, on whom might be ingraued this inſcription.
            
               
                  Bethis habet natale ſolum, eſt Annaea propago,
                  De genitore Mela, dat mater Acilia terris,
                  Vix Luna octouos coelo confecerat orbes,
                  Cum me Roma ſui, &c.
               
               
                  My natiue Countrey Betique Spaine,
                  Th' Annaean bloud I did retaine,
                  My noble father Mela hight,
                  
                     Acilia brought me to the light.
                  Eight times had ſcarſe the nightly Queene,
                  This maſsie round with full face ſeene.
                  When Rome did waſh my infant ſides
                  With moiſture that in Tyber glides.
                  Then was I from the Forum tane,
                  And conſecrate to Phoebus Fane.
                  Then I compoſed Syluaes ten,
                  And flames of Rome and Troy did pen.
                  I did declaime gainſt Sagita,
                  
                  That fouly murdred Pontia.
                  
                  
                     Then (that which moued Nero's hate)
                  
                     Orpheus praiſe I and relate.
                  Next, hauing tane the warre in hand
                  That rau'd throughout Pharſalia land,
                  The tyrant (that could not away
                  My fame ſhould grow, and his decay)
                  Did quell my Muſe with Enuies blade,
                  Before the worke was perfect made.
                  My veines in ſunder being ſhred,
                  He all beſmear'd my ſacred head,
                  With bloud which did my ſoule ſet free,
                  When from my body it did flee.
               
            
            
               Papinius ſaith, that being but a Boy, he writ the combate of Hector and Achilles: he wrot alſo the feaſts of Saturne, ten Bookes of Sylues, the Tragedie of Medea (not perfected) the iourney of Orpheus to Hell, the burning of Rome, the ſacking of Troy, with the miſery of King Priamus. Hee wrote an inuectiue Oration againſt Octauius Sagitta, that murthered Pontia, with many other Fables and Epiſtles. He vndertooke the ciuill warres of Caeſar and Pompey, but being preuented by death, he wrot but onely ten Bookes, and of them ten perfected but three, with the helpe of his wife, the other ſeuen were diligently corrected, and publiſhed after his death. Fabius Quintilian ſaith, that hee was rather to bee accounted an Orator then a Poet, as being loftie and vehement in his ſtile, full of excellent ſentences: ſo admirable and wittie in his Orations, as that hee ſeemes to expreſſe that ſingular Elegancie and Maieſty that is obſerued in Virgil. His Epitaph may yet bee ſeene in Rome, graued on a marble Monument in old Characters, thus.
            
               
                  Corduba me genuit, rapuit Nero, praelia dixi,
                  Quae geſſere pares, hinc gener, inde ſocer.
                  Continuo nunquam direxi carmina ductu,
                  Quae tractum ſerpant, plus mihi comma placet.
                  Fluminis in morem, quae ſunt miranda, citentur,
                  Haec vero ſapiet dictio, quae feriet.
               
               
                  In Corduba I firſt drew breath:
                  By Nero I was doom'd to death,
                  
                     Before I made an end to write
                  Two Riuall Romans ciuill fight:
                  Where Enſignes oppoſite did runne,
                  The Father-in-law againſt the Sonne.
                  I haue not kept a ſteady courſe
                  In powring out my Muſes ſource:
                  But where the matter large did fall,
                  A Comma pleas'd me beſt of all.
                  When wonders come, I make them ſlide
                  Like to a full-brim'd ſwelling tide.
                  But that which beares the ſtampe of wit,
                  Are well-couch't numbers ſhortly knit.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            LVCANS PHARSALIA. The firſt Booke.
            
               THE ARGVMENT
               WHat motiues did this warre incenſe,
               
                  Caeſars and Pompeys inſolence.
               Forbidden Rubicon is paſt,
               
                  Aryminum ſurpris'd in haſte.
               
                  Tribunes diſgrac'd from Rome retire:
               They Caeſars heart doe ſet on fire.
               To warres his Legions he exhorts,
               And calles from farre his old Cohorts.
               
               The wofull Citties mazed plight,
               With Pompeys baſe vntimely flight.
               A ſtowt Decree the Senate make,
               And then for feare doe Rome forſake.
               Laſtly, prodigious ſignes are ſeene,
               And what the Augures anſwers beene.
            
            
               A More then ciuill warre I ſing,
            That through th' Emathian fields did ring,
            Where reins let looſe to head-ſtrong pride,
            A potent people did miſguide:
            Whoſe conquering hand enrag'd rebounds
            On his owne bowels with deepe wounds.
            
               Where Hoſts confronting neare alies,
            All faith and Empires Lawes defies.
            A world of force in faction meetes,
            And common guilt like torrents fleets.
            Where like infeſtuous enſignes waue,
            The Aegle doth the Aegle braue,
            And Pyle againſt the Pyle doth raue.
            
               A ſharpe reprehenſion of Ciuill warre.¶ Deare Cittizens, what brainſick charmes?
            What outrage of diſordered armes?
            Leades you to feaſt your enuious foes,
            To ſee you goar'd with your owne blowes?
            Proud Babylon your force doth ſcorne,
            Whoſe ſpoyles your trophies might adorne,
            And Craſſus vnreuenged ghoſt,
            Roames wayling through the Parthian coaſt.
            Doth now your hearts ſuch warre deſire,
            As yeelds no triumphs for your hyre?
            O what a world by Lands and Seas,
            Mought you haue won with much more eaſe.
            Then halfe the bloud your weapons draines,
            In ciuill ſtrife from out your vaines!
            As farre as Phoebus firſt doth riſe,
            Vntill in Thaetis lap he lies:
            Or where his parching golde-beam'd ray,
            Doth dart downe flames at mid of day:
            Or froſtie Hyems ſhiuering ſtands,
            Glazing the Sea with ycie hands;
            Whoſe ayre benum'd with Scythian flawes,
            No Summers ſunne-ſhine euer thawes:
            The Seres, and Araxes rude,
            Not to our Empire yet ſubdued;
            Or what Barbarians elſe are bred,
            About old Nylus vnknowne head;
            All theſe might you haue vanquiſhed.
            ¶ And then, O Rome, when thou hadſt hent
            The whole worlds homage to thy bent,
            And plaid at full this maſtering priſe,
            If Enuies ſpleene thee then agrize,
            Againſt thy ſelfe, thy ſelfe oppoſe,
            For yet thou want'ſt no forraine foes:
            
               But Italy lies now aſpoile,
            Her Citties leuelld with the ſoile.
            Their loſtie walles with breaches torne,The miſerable eſtate of Italy.
            
            The vacant houſes all forlorne.
            The Markets vnfrequented beene,
            The vntrod ſtreets ore-growne with greene:
            The fruitfull faire Heſperian fields,
            That nothing now but thiſtles yeilds,
            Cries out for hands to plow and plant,
            Her labourers are growne ſo ſcant.
            ¶ This diſmall ſtate wherein ſhe ſtands,
            Proceedes not from fierce Pyrrhus hands;
            Nor yet could Hannibals deſpight
            Inflict on vs this wretched plight.
            No forraine foes could ſo preuaile,The Romans themſelues worke their owne ruine.
            
            Our ſetled ſtate to rent and quaile:
            Th' audacious ſword worne by thy ſide,
            Hath hewen in thee theſe gaſhes wide.
            ¶ And yet if Fates haue ſo decreed,
            That thou (O Nero) ſhouldſt ſucceed
            By theſe meanes to the Empires throne,
            Our fore-paſt armes the leſſe we moane.
            For Iupiter was not poſſeſt
            Of heauens ſole rule in ſetled reſt,
            Before the Gyants were ſuppreſt.
            Let then Pharſalia fields be ſpread
            With yron legions ſcorning dread.
            So to appeaſe the whining mood
            Of Punique Ghoſts with Latium blood.
            Let Munda be the fatall place
            Where Caeſar quailes great Pompeys race:
            And let as hard a ſiege betide
            As earſt Mutina did abide.
            Yea let as great a famine flow
            As euer did Peruſia know:
            And two ſuch Fleetes confronting rage,
            As did the Axium battell wage:
            With as much broyle and hammering dinne,
            As when that Vulcan did beginne
            To ſet his Cyclops to their taskes;
            
               
               It ſhould ſeem that this was written in the beginning of Neroes reigne, wch was moſt excellētly goue
                     •
                  ned for the firſt 5 yeares, with ſingular Iuſtice & temperance.Whoſe ſparkling forges Aetna ma
                  •
               kes.
            ¶ And yet thou Rome ſhalt be in debt
            Vnto theſe wrackes, that did beget
            This happy peace, wherein we liue,
            And to our toyles an end did giue.
            But when (O Nero) Atrops knife
            Shall ſhred in twaine thy time of life:
            And thou (vnto the ſtarres bequeau'd)
            With Heauens ioy ſhalt be receiu'd.
            There ſhalt thou freely take thy choyce,
            Whether thy humor more reioyce
            To ſit in the Empiring Throne,
            As ruling ouer all alone:
            Or whether thou doe more deſire
            To ſway the Carre of Phoebus fire,
            And thence (with wandring flames) ſuruay
            The earth in all her rich array:
            Whom thy milde beames will not diſmay.
            The Deities bend to thy heſt,
            And Nature yeelds thee thy requeſt,
            To be what God-head likes thee beſt,
            And where thy Empires ſeate ſhall reſt.
            
               This is meere Ironicall flattery.But I beſeech thee of high grace,
            Doe not thy Soueraigne Manſion place
            About the North or Southerne ſtarre,
            Which is from vs remote ſo farre:
            For then ſhould Rome fall to miſchance,
            If thou on her looke but a ſcance.
            But if a part of heauens huge ſphere,
            Thou chooſe thy ponderous heft to beare;
            O let the Axle-tree ſuſtaine
            
               In this he teacheth NERO how he ſhould gouerne, by an Imagination of what is.The paiſe of thy Maieſticke traine.
            Amidſt the firmament be plac'd,
            For that with brighteſt beames is grac'd.
            So Neroes ſhine ſhall ſtill ſubſiſt,
            Neuer obſcur'd with cloudy miſt.
            Then ſhall men lay aſide their Armes,
            And rue the ſhame of ciuill harmes.
            All Nations then ſhall be at peace
            With mutuall leagues, and Trades increaſe.
            
               So when all iarres doe end their dates,
            
               Ianus may ſparre his Iron gates.
            But whilſt that I ſome power Diuine
            Inuoke, to ſtrength this Muſe of mine:
            If I thy fauour can obtaine
            (O Nero) to aſſiſt my vaine;
            I will not then deſire or craue,
            
               Apollo's furtherance to haue;
            Nor yet intreat the God of wine,
            To aid this Tragicke worke of mine:
            For thou alone canſt life infuſe
            And ſpirit to my Latine muſe.
            ¶ My minde giues me the cauſe to write,
            That did this humorous rage incite:
            A taske that will much labour coſt,
            To ſhew what franticke feuers toſt
            This peoples moode, to raue in ſpoyle,
            And baniſh peace from Latium ſoyle.
            It was conſpiring Deſtiny,
               The cauſes of the ciuill war.
            
            The bane of all felicity:
            And that which is by heauenly reed,
            As doome to greatneſſe ſtill decreed,
            Not long to ſtand in ſetled ſtate:
            But, being too much eleuate,
            The owne paize muſt it ruinate:
            And Rome her ſelfe, too powrfull growne,
            With inſolence was ouer-throwne.
            So when by great reſiſtleſſe Fate,
            
            The world diſſolues to her laſt date,
            Returning to that formleſſe maſſe,
            Which was before ought formed was:
            Starres ſhall with ſtarres confuſedly,
            In cluſters meet within the skye:
            The fiery Element diſplac't,
            Shall downe into the deepe be caſt:
            The maſſy globe in this diſeaſe,
            Denie due bounds vnto the ſeas:
            
               Belphoebe will runne counter quite
            To Titan, that doth lend her light:
            And (ſcorning her owne oblique way)
            
               Would guide the Lanthorne of the day.
            So that the courſe of this vaſte All,
            
            Into confuſions lappe will fall.
            For Ioue to great things this doome left,
            
               They ſhould be cruſht with their owne heft.
            
            
               Fortune moſt triumphes ouer great eſtates.
               Fortune doth ſcorne to caſt a frowne
            On thoſe, that meane eſtate keepes downe:
            But enuies thoſe that lofty ſtand,
            Empiring ouer ſea and land.
            O Rome! then bondage preſſed thee,
            When thou wert firſt made ſlaue to three.
            
               Diuided kingdomes ſtaggring ſtand,
            
            
               One Scepter fits one ſoueraigne hand.
            
            ¶ O yee contentious Roman knights,
            Whom blinde Ambition ſo incites!
            What ſolace yeelds that Soueraignty
            That's gain'd with ſuch hoſtility
            As doth your hands and hearts diuide,
            And turmoiles all the world beſide?
            But otherwiſe it neuer ſorts:
            For whilſt the land the ſeas ſupports;
            Or that the Aire (in heats and colds)
            The Earth in her ſoft mantle folds:
            And Phoebus ſhall maintaine his race,
            Or Cinthia ſupply his place,
            So long Competitors of States
            
               No faith amongſt Competitors of kingdomes.(In iealouſie) ſhall cloke debates.
            
               Faith holds not firme twixt crowned Mates.
            
            We need not farre examples ſeeke,
            What other clymate breedes the like:
            For when Rome firſt her walles ordain'd,
            
               Romulus and Rhemus.With brothers blood they were diſtain'd.
            Yet all the whole worlds worth, that time,
            Could not requite ſo foule a crime.
            A petty ſtructure (ſcarce begun)
            Hath this fraternall outrage ſpun.
            Our two great Chiefetaines (for a ſpace)
            A iarring concord did embrace.
            And ſo an outward peace maintain'd,
            Which their ambitious hopes diſdain'd.
            
               But Craſſus power doth interpoſe,
                  Craſſus the meanes that kept Caeſar and Pompey within their bounds.
            
            And hold them off from fatall blowes.
            Like Iſtmos, that diuided keepes
            The raging concurſe of the deepes,
            And doth ſo ſtrongly part the waues,
            That each with other neuer raues.
            But if this Iſtmos breake aſunder,
            How would th' Aegean billowes thunder,
            Incountering the Ionian ſeas,
            And ſtruggle with their counterpaiſe?
            So Craſſus whilſt he was a life,
            Held theſe two worthies off from ſtrife;
            And (with perſwaſiue powerfull words)
            Within their ſheathes confin'd their ſwords.
            But when the hapleſſe Carran fight,
            Brought Craſſus to his lateſt night,
            This Parthian blow diſſolu'd the ChaineBy Craſſus death this ciuill rage brake out.
            
            That did theſe head-ſtrong Peeres reſtraine;
            And bred more ſcath vnto our ſtate
            Then it was ware (by home-debate:)
            For now the Roman Lordly guides
            Diuide themſelues in factious ſides:
            And our great fortune, that had long
            Subſiſted by a people ſtrong,
            That conquered worlds on ſeas and maine,What miſchiefe two ambitious mindes can breed in a quiet ſtate.
            
            Could not two haughty mindes containe:
            For Iulia (with like cruell fate
            Vntimely brought vnto her date,
            By Atrops life-deſtroying hands)
            Diſſolu'd the neere-allianc'd bands
            Betwixt her father, and her ſpouſe,
            Forgetting their contracted vowes.IVLIA the means to hold Caeſar & Pompey in good correſpondency.
            
            Whereas if Iulias line of life
            Had longer ſcap't the fatall knife;
            Euen ſhe had beene of power alone,
            Betwixt them two to make attone,
            And from inſulting force to ceaſe,
            With ioyning armed hands in peace;
            As did the Sabines daughters earſt,
            Who ſweetly all diſlikes diſpearſt
            
               Betwixt their Fathers and their Pheeres:
            But by thy death theſe pride-ſwolne Peeres,
            
            Shake off all leagues, and ſtraine to warres,
            
               Where vertue emulates it iarres.
            
            
               
                  Pompeyes iealouſie.¶ For thou great Pompey doſt ſuſpect,
            That new-raiſd triumphes thine deiect,
            And that thy Pyrate-Laurell falles
            Short of the conqueſt of the Gaules.
            
            Thus the remembrance of thy deeds,
            In thee ſo great impatience breeds,
            As that thou holdſt it fowle diſgrace
            Except thou runne a matchleſſe race,
            None now endures a ſecond place.
            
               
                  Popeys humor.
               For Pompey will no equall haue,
            
            
               
                  Caeſars humor.
               Nor ſupreme Lord muſt Caeſar braue.
            
            Heynous it was, but to be ſcand,
            Which of them in the right did ſtand:
            And tooke vp Armes with iuſt pretence,
            Great Iudges doe with both diſpence.
            The conquering part the Gods avowes,
            
               Cato the vanquiſhed allowes:
            Th' ambition of theſe captaines tends
            Not to the like and ſelfe-ſame ends.
            
               
                  Pompeyes diſpoſition deſcribed.
               Pompey (ſurpris'd with elder yeares)
            His courſe in quiet glory ſteeres.
            And (keeping ſtate in peacefull gowne)
            Followes not Mart for more renowne.
            He dotes vpon domeſticke fame,
            And ſo (to glorifie his name)
            To State-affaires doth frame his bent.
            And then (to giue the world content)
            With largeſſe plyes the common Rowt,
            And, on the Theaters, ſets out
            
               Popular affectation.His great exployts, and ſeruice done
            Till through the peoples eares it runne,
            Suffis'd when their applauſe is wonne.
            No new imployments he requeſts;
            But on his fore-paſt fortunes reſts.
            So Pompeyes name is like a ſhade,
            That by a ſtately Oke is made,
            
               Towring amidſt a flowring field,
            Adorn'd with many a battred ſhield,
            With Trophies hanging on his twiſts,
            (The gifts of famous Martialiſts)
            And though not rooted deepe in land,
            With his owne weight vpright doth ſtand:
            With leaueleſſe armes ſpreading his ſpraies
            From naked trunkes doth ſhadowes raiſe.
            Yet (brangling with tempeſtuous blaſt)
            Is danger'd to be ouer-caſt:
            When other trees, growne round about,
            Againſt the windes ſtanding more ſtout,
            To this old Oke doe lowly lowt,
            But Caeſars name (in mens conceit)
            Was not yet growne vnto that height,
            Nor for the warres in like requeſt:
                  Caeſars diſpoſition deſcribed
            
            And yet his vertue cannot reſt,
            But prickes him forth to thinke it ſhame,
            By valour not to winne the game.
            His dreadleſſe courage, and his hope
            Vnto his plots, gaue ample ſcope
            Neuer to ſpare his daring ſword,
            Where glory might him worke affoord,
            And his ſucceſſ-full fate purſue,
            Which in heauens fauour daily grew.
            Affecting all, daunts as him liſts,
            What force ſoeuer him reſiſts,
            Contented beſt when that he may
            Leuell out paths for Ruines way.
            Like lightning, gendred in the Clouds,
            By force of winde itſelfe vnſhroudes,
            Teares through the aire with claps of thunder,
            (Mazing the world twixt feare and wonder.)
            The Temples filles with oblique flaſhes,
            And of their lampes the lights out daſhes,
            The ſtrongeſt walles aſunder rents,
            If they reſiſt, or ſtop his vents,
            And ſpoyling all, makes Reuell-rout
            In going in, and comming out;
            Collects his parted flames againe,
            
               And with freſh force doth ſtriue and ſtraine,
            Gainſt which reſiſtance all is vaine.
            ¶ Theſe former motiues led the way
            Vnto theſe Captaines lawleſſe ſway.
            But publique ſeeds were after ſowne,
            
               The Roman Vices.From whence this banefull ſtrife is growne
            Which hath great Kingdoms ouerthrowne.
            O this was it when conquering Fates
            
            Had made vs Lords of mighty ſtates,
            And cloyd vs with aboundant treaſure,
            
               Wealth the cauſe of all exceſſe.We ſteept our thoughts in pride & pleaſure.
            Then Luxurie the State ſurpriz'd,
            And vertuous manners grew diſguis'd:
            For Auarice (that rauening gull,
            
               Who more ſhe hath, the leſſe is full)
            To ſtately manſions drawes their mindes,
            And Gluttony new dainties findes;
            The moderate dyet not regarded,
            Our appetite muſt now bee larded.
            So men from manly humors fall,
            And grew effeminate withall:
            Decking themſelues with queint attires,
            Scarce fit for womens nice deſires.
            Then Pouerty (that had of yore
            
               The great alteration of the Roman humors.Of worthy Champions bred ſuch ſtore)
            Did ſcorned creepe from doore to doore.
            And Riches (michiefes pleaſing gueſt)
            Then onely grew into requeſt
            Pamperd Delight ſpares for no charge.
            Their Territories they inlarge.
            
               Camyllus Plow eares not their lands,
            Nor Curios ſpades will fit their hands.
            Their bounds no meaſure can endure,
            And ſtrangers muſt their farmes manure:
            And yet this opulent increaſe,
            Could not containe their mindes in peace:
            But as their plenty more did flow,
            
               Ambition with it more did grow.
            And many vices more to boote,
            Which in them tooke ſo deepe a roote,
            
               That Couetyſe no crime was thought,
            What force could win, was held as bought.
            
               Oppreſsion all doth ouer-awe,
            And wrong to right preſcribeth law.Diuiſion between the Senate and the people.
            
            Then Faction vſhers on this warre,
            The Senate with the people iarre.
            
               Force doth authorize their decrees,
            The lawes their ſacred freedome leeſe,
            
               Conſuls with Tribunes now conteſt,
            Priuate reſpects their cenſures wreſt,
            All ſuffrages are bought and priz'd,
            The Conſulſhips are Merchandiz'd,
            And Bribery (the Cities bane)
            Did Campus Martius ſo prophane,
            That her braue Palmes (the Victors hire)
            The purſes vertue did acquire.
            Then Vſuryes moth-eating trade
            So rife was growne, and lawleſſe made,
            That Debters, at the payment day,
                  Honors bought and ſold, and not conferred by merit.
            
            To Creditors became a pray.
            So Banque-rupts (wanting meanes to liue)
            Their hopes to warre and ſpoyle did giue.
            ¶Now Caeſars Army marcheth faſt,
            And ore the froſty Alpes was paſt:
            But ere he ſaid, The dyce are caſt,
            
            Within his troubled thoughts he ſcand
            The boyſterous ſtormes of warres at hand:
            And (hauing led his legions on
            Vnto the Riuer Rubicon)
            In gloomy night there did appeare
                  Caeſar marching toward Rubicon, is forbidden by an apparition.
            
            (In dreames to him with trembling cheere)
            Of Italy the Image vaſte,
            With naked Armes abroad out caſt.
            And (as a woman in diſtreſſe)
            Shaking her head, and fettred treſſe,
            That was ingrain'd with aged hoare,
            In ſobbing ſpeech doth thus deplore.
            Whither (quoth ſhe) doth your march tend?
            Whither (deere ſonnes) and to what end
            My famous Standard do you ſpread?
            
               Can lawfully theſe Troopes be led
            Vnto this place prohibited?
            Therewith did Horrors heauineſſe
            This Captaines ſpirits ſo oppreſſe,
            As that his haire ſtood vp an end,
            And faintneſſe doth his pace ſuſpend.
            Then at the Riuers brinke he ſtayes,
            And with a manly voyce he ſayes:
            
               
                  Caeſars anſwere to the Apparition.
               Great Thunderer, that doſt protect
            (From thy Tarpeyan high proſpect)
            The Romane State with grace diuine,
            The Iulian and the Latine Line,
            The myſteries of rap't Quirine;
            O Iupiter the Latium guide,
            That in high Alba doſt reſide,
            Preſeruer of our Veſtall flame;
            And Rome (thou type of ſupreame name)
            From your applauſe doe not exempt
            This enterpriſe, that I attempt.
            I doe not I, with furious armes,
            
               
                  Caeſars Proteſtation to Rome.
               (Deare Citty) ſeeke thy wrackes or harmes.
            Behold thy Caeſar here doth ſtand,
            That hath (with his ſucceſſ-full hand)
            Conquer'd for thee by ſea and land.
            Let me thy Champion now be hight,
            And deeme him heynous in thy ſight,
            That me prouokes to ſuch debate,
            As muſt diſturbe thy ſetled ſtate.
            This ſaid, he ſhakes off all delay
            That might his ſpeedy paſſage ſtay:
            His armed legions he will guide
            
               
                  Caeſar wil paſſe the Rubicon with his legions.Vnto the Riuers further ſide:
            And as a Lybian Lyon dread,
            (In ſun-burnt Deſarts bloody bred)
            When Hunters neere at hand he ſpyes,
            Vpon the ſandy ſoyle downe lies,
            And doth a while amaz'd remaine,
            Till his fierce courage comes againe;
            Then rouzing vp his curled creſt,
            His beeſom'd tayle, and boyſterous breaſt,
            
               From yawning iawes (beſmear'd with gore)
            Doth bellow out a hideous rore.
            If then the Mauritanian launce
            Vpon his rugged hide doe glaunce,
            Or in his wounded bleeding ſide,
            The Hunters Iauelin doe abide;
            He careleſſe then for loſſe of blood,
            Aſſailes (with ramping fiery mood)
            The Huntſman; and (with out ſtretcht pawes)
            By force at laſt himſelfe withdrawes.
            ¶ Cleare Rubicon (that firſt is fedThe deſcription of Rubicon.
               
            
            But from a bubling fountaines head)
            During the time of Summers ſunne,
            With a low ſhallow ſtreame doth runne:
            His current through the valleys glides,
            And Italy from Gaule diuides.
            But at this time his ſource was more,
            The Winters raine increaſt his ſtore.
            The Moone likewiſe (but yong in dayes)
            His feeding ſprings doth higher raiſe.
            And that which made him moſt to ſwell,
            Were molten heapes of ſnow that fell
            From downe the Alpes in torrents great,
            Diſſolued by ſome gentle heate.
            The Horſe-men firſt the worke doe wage,Caeſar paſſeth Rubicon.
            
            And of the ſtreame the ſhallowes gage.
            And with thicke Troopes in cloſe arrayes,
            The ſwiftneſſe of the torrent ſtayes.
            The paſſage thus more eaſie made,
            The Foote doth through the riuer wade.
            
               Caeſar his Army thus at laſt
            Forbidden Rubicon hath paſt;
            And ſtanding on th' Heſperian bankes,
                  Caeſars ſpeech when he had paſt the Rubicon.
               
            
            Thus ſpake he to his filed Rankes.
            Heere doe I now all peace abiure,
            And lawes vniuſtly put in vre.
            O Fortune! I will follow thee,
            From other bonds my ſelfe I free.
            In Fate my truſt I doe affye,
            
               Warre (as a Iudge) my cauſe ſhall trye.
            
               No more he ſaid, but (with diſpach)
            At the approach of nights firſt watch,
            His well-train'd Troopes he doth prepare,
            Who in their march as ſpeedy are
            As motions of Balarian ſlings,
            That circling through the thin aire ſings.
            Or ſhowres of ſhafts at Parths let flye,
            When they retire, that dimme the sky:
            His March with ſuch great ſpeede hee plies,
            As doth Ariminum ſurpriſe.
            
               Caeſar ſurpriſeth Ariminum
               Phoebus by this, with dawning light,
            Obſcured had the lampes of night;
            And now the diſmall day begunne,
            Wherein his firſt attempt was done
            Vpon this Cittie, that doth ſtand
            A frontier of Italian land.
            And whether Fates did ſo fore-caſt,
            Or foggy-faced Auſters blaſt
            Did ſcoule vpon this wretched fact,
            The aire with miſty clouds was pact.
            The Towne thus ſuddenly poſſeſt,
            The Market-place they doe inueſt.
            Where their braue Enſignes proudly ſtands,
            Guarded with many armed bands.
            The Trumpets (with their dreadfull notes
            Drawn through their hoarſe Meandry throat
               ▪
            
            Mixt with tempeſtuous noyſe of warres)
            The Burgers with Alarums skarres.
            Their ſtate, which was ſecure at night,
            By dawne of day was in this fright.
            They outh amaz'd, their beds forſake,
            
               The amazement of the Ariminenſes.
               And to the Temples them betake.
            Where they doe arme them in a ſtownd,
            With ſuch munitions as they found,
            Which in long peace hang'd on the walles
            Idle, vn-vſd to Martiall brawles.
            The Shields, that were of ancient dates,
            VVorme-eaten to the very plates.
            Their Piles with heads blunted and bowd,
            Their glaiues the cankered ruſt did cloud.
            
               ¶ But when the Egle was diſplaid,
            And Caeſar (in bright Armes arrayd)
            Mounted vpon a Throne of State,
            
            In midſt of his ſterne Legions ſate;
            The Cittizens then ſilent were,
            Their ſenſes rap't with numming feare,
            A patient ſilence them poſſeſt,The cōplaint of the Ariminenſes.
               
            
            Whilſt theſe ſad mones boyle in their breſt.
            What diſmall Planets wrathfull frowne,
            So neere the Gaules, confin'd our Towne?
            What Deſtiny (with endleſſe toyle)
            Firſt drew vs to this fatall ſoyle?
            In peace all people liue ſecure:
            But we in peace muſt warres endure,
            To Out-rage we are ſtill a pray,
            Our ſeate ſtands ſo in Harmes high-way.
            O Fortune! more had we beene bleſt,
            In dwelling fartheſt Eaſt or Weſt:
            
            Or neere the Pole to haue our homes:
            Or elſe in Tents, that wandring roames;
            Then thus to keepe a Frontier gate
            Of Italies enuied ſtate.
            We firſt did ſee that great deluge
            Of the fierce Senons Army huge.
            VVe firſt endur'd the Cymbrian brunt,
            Er'e Marius force did them confrunt.The many wracks that Ariminum had endured.
            
            And frightfull bruted Hanniball,
            
            Did at his entrance on vs fall.
            Then ſauage Troopes of Teuton ſwarmes,
            Infeſted vs with hoſtile armes.
            And thus as oft as lowring Fate
            
            Did pleaſe to ſcourge the Roman ſtate,
            (By raiſing vp ſome powerfull foe)
            This was the way that Warre did goe.
            Theſe ſower accounts that them attaint,
            They ſwallow vp without complaint.
            And ſo their diſcontentment hide,
            
               Heart-breaking ſorrow is tongue-ty'd.
            
            But looke what ſilence doth poſſeſſe
            The aire, when Winter doth diſtreſſe
            
               The ſinging birds, and them reſtraines
            From vtt'ring their melodious vaines:
            Or elſe as calmes the billowes bindes,
            Not being mou'd with guſts of windes,
            Such ſtiffnes ceas'd their grief-bound minds.
            This dayes worke done, and ouer-paſt,
            And following night growne to his laſt,
            The Sunne his Chariot Eaſtward hies,
            And with his beames doth cleare the skies.
            
               Caeſar (that doubtfull yet remain'd
            Before this entrance he had gain'd)
            Is now, in hot bloud, fully bent
            To follow on his bold attempt.
            The Fates likewiſe his humour drawes
            Dreadleſſe to breake all leagues and lawes.
            
               
                  Caeſar the child of Fortune.
               And Fortune (whoſe he was avowd)
            His enterpriſe, as iuſt, allowd;
            And motiue reaſons doth prouide
            To truſt to Armes, leſt worſe betide.
            
               The Iealouſie of the Senate.The iealous Senate now fore-caſt
            What danger former times had paſt
            By the ſeditious Gracchian fact,
            That with the people were compact.
            And thereupon (againſt all right)
            The Court, with ouer-bearing might,
            Thoſe Tribunes preſently expell,
            Whoſe power did in the Citty ſwell,
            And with the Senate ſo conteſt,
            For Caeſars right, againſt their heſt:
            
               The Tribunes diſgraced by the Senate.The fiered Tribunes (thus diſgrac't)
            Forthwith to Caeſars campe did haſt.
            But he, that felt himſelfe moſt ſtrong
            Was Curio, that, (with bribed tongue)
            The Senate ſo much had vpbrayd,
            And peoples voyce for Caeſar ſwayd.
            And he no ſooner was arriu'd
            At Caeſars Campe (of feare depriu'd)
            To Caeſar he himſelfe preſents,
            Whom many carefull thoughts torments,
            In plotting of theſe warres euents.
            
               ¶ Caeſar, quoth he, whilſt Iuſtice,
                  Curios oration. lawes
            Gaue vpright hearing to thy cauſe;
            And that a truthfull tongue might ſpeake,
            So long my words the yce did breake:
            And durſt confront thy proudeſt foes,
            Yea though the Senate did oppoſe.
            For whilſt I might (as Tribune) pleade
            The peoples voyce ſo did I lead,
            That thou hadſt their applauſes all,
            A longer time to gouerne Gaule.
            
            But after this the Senates might
            (Againſt all law with ſcornfull ſpight)
                  Curio accuſeth the Senate.
            
            Vs as a factious party held,
            And from our natiue Rome expeld:
            Which out-rage and oppreſſiue ſcorne,
            With greater patience wee haue borne;
            In hope that thy victorious arme
            Their Dung-hill crowing ſo will charme,
            As ſhall our liberties reſtore
            Free Roman Tribunes, as before.
            Now therefore whilſt ſurpriſing frights
            Poſſeſſe thy foes, and daunts their ſprights:
            Whilſt they confuſd (twixt hope and feare)
            Know not on ſuddaine how to reare
            Such valiant Troopes, and trained Bands,
            As now are vnder Caeſars hands;
            Slacke thou no time: Fate guides thy game,
            
               To men prepar'd, delay is ſhame.
            
            And doe but to remembrance call
            The dangers paſt in conquering Gaule,
            
            Thy toyles that thou didſt vnder-goe,
                  Curio ſtirres Caeſar to attempt Rome.
               
            
            Before thou couldſt ſubdue that foe;
            And then compare it with this taske,
            Which doth but reſolution aske;
            And thou ſhalt finde this of leſſe paine,
            But greater much in glorious gaine.
            Couldſt thou ten yeares on Gallia ſpare,
            So poore to Rome in all compare;
            And canſt thou thinke leſſe time worſe ſpent,
            To win the whole world to thy bent?
            
               
               Fortune (that ſtill with thee abounds)
            When thou doſt march, her Trumpet ſounds:
            
               A ſtrong perſwaſion.Then to this worke with courage fall,
            In conquering Rome thou conquerſt all.
            But as the caſe now ſtands with thee,
            No Triumphes will allowed be
            At thy returne, for ſeruice done,
            Nor Laurels worne for Gallia wonne.
            
               Enuy (that doth at vertue ſpurne)
            Will at thy triumph rather mourne:
            And (which is more to thy diſgrace)
            The honour of thy name to baſe.
            Thy enuious foes haue plotted prankes
            
               
                  Curio perſwades Caeſar that the Senate conſpire to wrong him.To cut thy conqueſts ſhort of thankes,
            And will in lew thereof, at laſt,
            Some fowle aſperſion on thee caſt.
            
               Pompey, that matcht thy daughter deere,
            Admits thee not his equall Peere,
            The Empire muſt be ſhar'd twixt none,
            But thou mayſt haue it all alone.
            ¶ This ſpeech of Curio ſets on fire
            The minde of Caeſar, whoſe deſire
            Before to warre was fully ſet,
            But with theſe words more ſharply whet▪
            
            Like a proud Courſer bred in Thrace,
            
            
               
                  Caeſar incenſed.Accuſtom'd to the running race,
            Who when he heares the Trumpets noyſe,
            The ſhouts and cryes of men and boyes,
            (Though in the ſtable cloſe vp-pent)
            Yet, with his hoofes, doth beat and rent
            The planched floore, the barres and chaines,
            Vntill he haue got looſe the raines.
            ¶ Caeſar forthwith his troopes doth call,
            T'attend him at his Tribunall:
            And euery Enſigne to be man'd,
            And followed with his armed band.
            So in the midſt his place he takes:
            Then head and hand he beckning ſhakes,
            
               
                  Caeſars oration to his Souldiers.And therewithall deepe ſilence makes.
            ¶ Fellowes in Armes and friends (quoth he)
            
               That haue this ten yeares ſpace, with me,
            In warres endur'd a thouſand brunts,
            With many hazards, and affronts;
            And yet haue brought our foes at length
            Vnder our feet, by conquering ſtrength.
            Is this that Curio now relates,
            All the eſteeme the Roman States
            Doth make of vs, and our loſt blood,
            Expended for the Empires good,
            By conqueſt of this Northerne ſoyle?
            Is this the hire of all our toyle
            About the froſty Alpes endur'd,
            That many a Worthies bane procur'd?
            Though Rome ſo ſcorne her Martiall breed,
            Yet is ſhe now as hard beſteed,
            As when the Carthaginian ſway
            Ouer the Alpes did force a way.
            Her waſted Cohorts are ſupplyd
            With men, that warre hath neuer try'd:
            But meere Beſognios preſt in haſt.
            And now the woods are feld as faſt
            To build a Nauy out of hand:
            And Caeſar (as I vnderſtand)
            Muſt be purſu'd by ſea and land.
            But now ſuppoſe ſome man will ſay,
            What if (in one vnlucky day)
            When we doe hope to giue a blow,
            Our ſelues receiue the ouer-throw?
            And that the Gaules (to venge their wrackes)
            With furious ſwarmes come on our backes?
            Alas poore ſprights! what doubts are theſe?
            Since Fortune ſwayes which way I pleaſe,
            And alwayes proſpers my deſignes?
            And that the Gods their grace inclines
            Our glory higher to aduance?
            
               When Fortune pipes, ſhall we not dance?
            
            Let Pompey (whom diſ-vſe hath made
                  Caeſars ſcornefull ſpeech of Pompey, and ſome other Romanes.
               
            
            A ſtranger to Bellona's trade)
            Come on, with his new ſwaggering hoſt,
            Which cannot of one Skirmiſh boaſt.
            
               Let Senators (in their graue gownes)
            Brow-beat vs with their haughty frownes.
            And Marcell, that ſame pratling Iay,
            
            With Stoicke Cato, that giues way
            To nought but what himſelfe doth ſay:
            Let all this rabble ſhew their ſpight,
            We ſcorne their malice, and their might.
            Shall theſe conſorts (for money bought)
            
               Pompey to pleaſe, ſet vs at nought?
            Shall they ſo proudly vndertake
            In him a Monarchy to make?
            Muſt our great Empires ſupreme ſway,
            
               
                  Pompey taxed in diuers kindsHim onely ſerue, and ſole obay?
            Muſt he (with new inſulting pride)
            Againe in Triumphes Chariot ride?
            When no man knowes for what, or why;
            But all due courſe doth it deny?
            What, muſt he neuer quit againe
            The rule, that once he doth attaine?
            Nor ſuffer others haue their turne?
            Muſt he at all mens honours ſpurne?
            Who liueth now that doth not know
            The famine that did ouer-flow
            By publicke dearth of corne and bread,
            Whereby his auarice was fed?
            Who knowes not that (by his affront
            Contrary to the Roman wont)
            The Iudges, in the Market-place,
            Aſſaulted were with foule diſgrace?
            And with what pride he bolſtred out
            The out-rage of that raſcall rout?
            And how, by maine oppreſſing might,
            (Againſt all law and ciuill right)
            
               Milo.
               Milo, that ſo condemned ſtood,
            For fouly ſhedding Clodius blood,
            
               Clodius.By Pompeys rude preſumptious bands,
            Was reſcu'd out of Iuſtice hands?
            But now, he waxing old and craz'd,
            Yet ſtill affecting to bee blaz'd,
            And fearing that his date, farre ſpent,
            
               Will grow vnfit for gouernment,
                  Caeſar chargeth Pompey with the cauſe of this ciuill war.
            
            Lothing to lead a priuate life,
            Now makes new worke for ciuill ſtrife;
            Wherein he trained is ſo well,
            As that he doth by farre excell
            His Tutor Sylla, bloudy ſire,
            That miſchiefe-monger ruines fire.
            And as a Tyger wildly fed,
            In the Hyrcanian forreſt bred,
            Who (following of his rauening damme
            With blood of beaſts his panch doth cram)
            Can neuer afterwards allay
            His ſauage longing after pray;
                  Pompey a follower of Sylla.
               
            
            So Pompey (nuz'led in the taſte
            Of Syllas ſword, that made ſuch waſte
            Of his owne countries guiltleſſe blood)
            Cannot aſſwage his thirſting mood:
            But that his iawes (in-vr'd to gore)
            Muſt bathe in bowels, as before.
            Shall his vſurped lawleſſe ſtate
            Nor limits haue, nor any date?
            How long ſhall he (with hands vncleane)
            Support his pride, that holds no meane?
            His Maiſter Sylla might him learne
            By (his example) to diſcerne,
            That Tyranny at length ſhould end,
            And aged hopes to quyet bend.
            Muſt Caeſar needes giue vp his reſt,
            Becauſe the Pyrats are ſuppreſt,
            And Mithridates, with long toyle,
            At length receiued hath the foyle?
            Although it cannot be deny'd
            But Pontus poyſons firſt he try'd.
                  Caeſar alleageth the wrongs offered him by the Senats decree
            
            Shall Caeſar now (I ſay) be made
            A prey to Pompeys ruſty blade,
            Becauſe I ſcorned to forgoe
            My conquering Legions to my foe?
            And diſobeyd that proud decree,
            Made againſt right in wrong of me?
            But though I be deny'd my due,
            
               And that no Triumphes muſt acrew
            Vnto our conqueſt, as our hire,
            Yet (whilſt I breath with liuing fire)
            And theſe braue Troopes are led by me,
            They neuer ſhall defrauded be
            
               
                  Caeſar inſinuates with his Souldiers.Of their reward for ſeruice done,
            Nor after ſtranger Captaines runne
            To ſeeke new Fortunes at their hands,
            In forraigne warres, and vnknowne lands.
            For if that ſuch a courſe be held,
            When they be ouer-growne with eld;
            And not of force, as earſt they were,
            To broyle in warres, and armes to beare;
            Where ſhall they then their limbes repoſe,
            Weakned with age, with toyle and blowes?
            What comfort ſhould they finde at laſt,
            To recompence their trauailes paſt?
            What lands to them ſhall be alowd?
            What fields to plant, or to be plowd?
            Where they in peace may eate their breads,
            And reſt their limbes in quiet bed?
            Shall Pyrats ſo (by Pompeys grace)
            
               
                  Caeſar aleageth Pompeys prouiſion for pyrats whilſt old Roman Veterans are neglected.In fruitfull Colonies finde place,
            And Roman Veterans not haue
            That due regard their worth doth craue?
            O then reſolue (without delay)
            Your conquering Enſignes to diſplay.
            Imploy thoſe armes in battailes try'd,
            By your owne valour dignify'd.
            
               Vniuſtly to with-hold a right,
            
            
               Is to giue all to armed might.
            
            We want not higher powers to frend,
            Yet do not I this Mart intend,
            Preſt on for need, or greedy gaine,
            Or elſe ambitiouſly to raine;
            
               
                  Caeſars proteſtation againſt tyrannicall ambition.But to reſiſt that Pride that raues
            To make both Rome and vs his ſlaues.
            ¶ When he had ſaid, the wauering rout
            Did ſoftly murmur many a doubt:
            For though their fiery Martiall ſprights
            
               In warre and rapine moſt delights;
            Their houſhold Gods, and Countries loue,
            To ſome remorce their hearts did moue.
            But yet of Armes the high eſteeme,
            And Caeſars wrath they greater deeme▪
            
            Then Loelius, with vndaunted face,Loelius.
            
            (Who for his valour held the place
            Amongſt the Pyles as Enſigne chiefe,
            And (by his hardy hands reliefe)
            A Roman reſcu'd from his foes:
            For which his Oken crowne he ſhowes)
            Steps forth, and thus he doth declame.
            ¶ Conductor chiefe of Roman fame;
                  Loelius oration to Caeſar.
               
            
            If it be lawfull, and but iuſt
            To ſhew our griefes with tongues of truſt,
            We may complaine of theſe delayes,
            That with ſuch lingring patience ſtayes
            Thy powerfull armes; did our faith faile
            In ought that might thy courſe auaile?
            Will we (thinkſt thou) whilſt life retaines
            The boyling blood within ous vaines:
            Or whilſt our actiue armes haue might
            To weild the Pile with Martiall ſlight,
            Endure thus to ſubiect our State
            To Senate gownes degenerate?
            Is it a fault by ciuill warre,
            Their inſolencies to debarre?
            Nay, leade vs through Scyths yſie fennes,
            And through the Syrts vnhaunted dennes,
            Through Lybia's thirſty parched ſands;
            Heere are the ſelfe-ſame forward hands
            That holpe through deeps to tugge the Ores,
            
            When thou inuadedſt Brittaines ſhores:
                  Loelius deuotes his faith to Caeſar.
               
            
            And (with like courage ready were)
            Through ſtickle Rhene the boates to ſteare,
            Our hearts ſhall be as forward ſtill,
            As able to obey thy will.
            And whom againſt thy Trumpets ſound,
            I wiſh miſchance may them confound.
            Yea though they be right Romans borne,
            
               As deadly foes I will them ſcorne.
            And here I doe proteſt and ſweare
            By thoſe braue Enſignes (that we beare)
            Of our victorious legions ten,
            By all the conqueſts where and when
            So happily atchieu'd by thee;
            
               
                  Loelius moſt deſperate proteſtation for Caeſars ſeruice.If thou but giue in charge to me,
            To ſtabbe my brother to the heart,
            My fathers head and necke to part,
            Or to rippe vp (with bloudy knife)
            The riſing belly of my wife,
            When ſhe conceiued is with childe,
            My hands ſhould be therewith defil'd,
            Though they ſaid nay, with mood more mild
            Yea, if it were the Gods to ſpoyle,
            To raze their Temples with the ſoyle,
            Their ornaments and wealth to burne,
            Vntill to aſhes they did turne,
            Or elſe (vpon the Tyber bankes)
            To place and file our armed rankes,
            I would be firſt of all the Rout,
            That ſhould the Stations quarter out,
            There to incampe our legions ſtout.
            Nay, do but ſay, which are the walles
            That thou deſign'ſt to Ruines falles,
            Theſe hands of mine firſt hold ſhall lay
            Vpon the Ramme, and giue him ſway
            Vnto the ground, the ſtones to teare;
            Yea though the walles of Rome they were.
            ¶ When Loelius thundring peale was rung,
            The Cohorts (cluſtring in a thrung,
            With open voyce, and hands out flung)
            
               The affection Caeſars ſouldiers do beare to him.Do vow to follow Caeſars Armes,
            Through heat and cold, through haps or harms
            
            And therewithall they bellow out
            As maine a cry (with hideous ſhout)
            As doe the hurling windes from Thrace,
            
            When they the lofty Pines imbrace
            That on the mountaine Oſſa growes,
            Whoſe ſtormy guſts ſo fiercely blowes,
            
               That toppes of Trees bow to the ground,
            And with ſuch force againe rebound,
            As if they would the clouds confound.
            ¶ Caeſar, that now his Souldiers minds
            So prone to warre and willing findes,
            (Seeing withall the Fates his friend)
            Is loath more time in vaine to ſpend.
            But leaſt his Fortune ſhould be ſtaid
            For want of force and greater aid,
            Forthwith in haſte he ſends for all
            His Cohorts, garriſon'd in Gaule.
               
                  Caeſar aſſembles his forces
            
            Then flying Enſignes doth diſplay,
            And towards Rome directs his way.
            ¶ The Troopes, about Lemanus Lake,
            To Caeſars Campe themſelues betake:
            And thoſe great forces of account,
            That fortifide Vogeſus mount,
            And fierce Lingones held in awe,
            To Caeſars tents doe likewiſe draw.
            Others, that with his warres will ſhare,
            From Iſar floud to him repare,
            Which (waſhing with his water falles
            So many goodly Citties walles)
            His ſiluer ſtreames at laſt he hides
            In Rhodonus, that ſwifter ſlides,
            And there his natiue name doth loſe,
            Before that he the Ocean knowes.
            The gold-hair'd Ruthens left at large,
            Their maiſtering garriſons diſcharge.
            And ſilent Atax new ioy greeets
            Diſ-burdened of the Latium Fleets.
            The gallant Townes that bordering rankes
            On either ſide of Varus bankes
            Doe publique bone-fire-feaſting make,
            When Roman Troopes their ſoile forſake.
            The like contentment them befell,
            That by th' Herculean port do dwell;
            Vpon which ſhores (in rowling flockes)
            The boyſterous billowes ſweepe the rockes;
            Not ſtird with rage of Weſterne flawes,
            
               But by whirle-windes that thither drawes.
            From off the Narbonenſian coaſt,
            Where ſhippes ſo furiouſly are toſt,
            As that no harbour can ſuffiſe
            To ſhelter them from thoſe fierce skyes,
            So ioy'd the people of that land,
            That euermore doe doubtfull ſtand
            To be orewhelm'd with flowing ſeas;
            As oft it haps to their diſeaſe:
            Which flouds, the ebbes againe appeaſe.
            Now whether this deluge proceedes
            From Northerne winds, that high ſeas breeds
            During their powerfull whirling whiffes,
            That raiſe the waues aboue the cliffes,
            And being layd, the ſtilled maine
            Reclaimes her mounted waues againe:
            Or whether Cynthias influence
            Do with this breach of bounds diſpence:
            Or elſe the Sunnes attractiue beames
            Exhale vp vapours from thoſe ſtreames,
            Thereby the watry clouds to feede:
            Or elſe from whence it doth proceede,
            I leaue it to their better reede
            
               Opinions of ebbing and flowing of the ſea.That diues into the hidden cauſe
            Of Heauens courſe, and Natures lawes.
            And as for me I will ſubmit
            The cenſure of my humble wit
            To that great God-head, that beſt knowes
            The reaſon why it ebbes and flowes.
            Now were the Nemetes releaſt
            Of all the bands vpon them ceaſt:
            Where the Tarbellians bound at large
            A calmed ſea, with crooked varge.
            Then, to the Santons turne it fell,
            To bid their Latium gueſts fare-well.
            The Bituriges doe the ſame,
            And the Axones that beare fame
            With their long bowes, ſo fit for Mart,
            
            The Rheni, trayn'd to throw the dart.
            The Sequani, that rankly ride
            
               And skilfully their horſes guide.
            The Belgi, that ſo well can ſteere,
            And turne their Coach in maine careere.
            Th' Auverni, that themſelues do grace
            For their deſcent from Troian race,
            And Roman parentage embrace.
            The Neruij, that with faithleſſe words
            In Cotta's bloud did bath their ſwords.
            The Vangiones, that deſire
            To weare the Sarmatan attire.
            The ſtout Battaui, that delight
            VVhen Trumpets call them forth to fight.
            And all thoſe people that are bred
            And harbour about Cyngaes head,
            VVhere Rhodonus ſo ſwiftly fleets,
            VVith whom the Riuer Arar meets,
            And Neptune with their tribute greets.
            Or what inhabitants beſide
            About Gebenna's mount reſide,
            All theſe to mirth conuert their meane,
            That Latine Garriſons are gone.
            And Treuers turne to ioy their teares,
            To ſee the Romans by the eares.
            And you Lygiers the reſt among,
            That vſd to weare your lockes ſo long,
            For which of old the common fame
            
               Comated Gaules gaue you the name:
            (Though now you changed haue that guiſe)
            From Garriſons were freed likewiſe.
            So all thoſe Nations that did vſe
            
               Mercurius Altars to infuſe,
            And ſprinkle round with humane blood.
            And you (that with like ſauage mood)
            To Mars make cruell ſacrifice.
            And yee, that do mens hearts agriſe
            VVhen you to Ioue your offrings make,
            And fires with humane bloud do ſlake,
            VVhoſe Altars therewith you diſtaine,
            As deepe as Scythians vſe to baine
            
               Diana's Altars, and much more,
            
               So doe they ouer-flow with gore.
            And yee O Bards, that (with your rimes)
            Record their fame to future times,
            That valiantly expoſe their blood
            For honour, and their Countries good.
            And Druides high Prieſts of hell,
            That in all barbarous Rites excell,
            Who (by your vncoth Sorc'rous ſpell)
            Pretend that you alone can tell
            The influence of the ſtarres that ſhine,
            And natures of the powers diuine;
            Now may you freely, at your willes,
            Solace your ſelues in woody hilles,
            And build your boothes on topps of Trees,
            And preach your Doctrines and Decrees,
            Whereof you Authors are alone;
            For now the Roman Rites are gone.
            Now you may ſilly fooles perſwade,
            That (when death hath his conqueſt made)
            Mens ſoules deſcend not to the ſhades
            Of ſilent darke Eraebus glades,
            Nor where the horrid manſion is
            Of lothſome deepe-indungion'd Dis:
            But (when that this worlds life is done)
            Their ſoules into new bodies runne.
            So loſſe of life to them brings gaine,
            That would eternity attaine.
            For in another world to liue,
            You ſay Death onely meanes can giue▪
            
            
               The great reſolution of the Druides.
               Yee that in this opinion dwell,
            In happineſſe doe farre excell
            All Northerne nations that are knowne:
            For where you haue this errour ſowne,
            All feare of death is caſt aſide,
            Which terror moſt the heart doth gryde
            And from this confidence proceedes
            Your valour, and your ventrous deedes.
            Whoſe dauntleſſe braue ennobled ſprights,
            Meetes deaths approches without frights.
            And holds it baſe for to adiurne
            
               Life, that (ſo loſt) will ſoone returne.
            Laſtly, thoſe maſtring braue Cohorts,
            
            That ſhagge-heard Caicos tam'd with forts,All that Caeſar had conquered in ten yeares warres was hazarded to be loſt.
            
            The bankes of Rhene vnguarded leaue,
            And Caeſars hoſt doth them receiue.
            Loe what a world, wonne with long paine,
            Is at an inſtant loſt againe.
            ¶ Caeſar (with theſe collected ſwarmes
            Of valiant Souldiers, bred in Armes)
            His haughty courage doth aduance
            At greater game to try his chance.
            His ranging Troopes, with ſpirits fierce,
            Through Latium fields he doth diſperſe:
            And all the Townes he doth ſurprize,
            VVith garriſons he fortifies.
            Then Fame (that doth falſe rumors blaze)
            His foes with true feares doth amaze.
            The Citizens in generallThe feares that the rumors of Caeſars approach breedes at Rome.
               
            
            Into deſpairefull humors fall:
            And in their daunted mindes debate
            The fortunes of a conquered ſtate.
            Like fearefull Scowts, that ſet a broach
            Falſe Larums of a foes approach:
            So Romes imaginary feares
            VVith her owne tongues affrights her eares.
            Then from Meuania tidings came
            (A Towne ennobled by the fame
            Of that rich ſoyle wherein it ſtands)
            That Caeſar (with huge armed bands)
            Had ouer-runne, and pray'd their lands.)
            And many of his men of warre
            VVere come vnto the bankes of Nar,
            
            (VVhich Riuer into Tyber falles)
            And thence would march vnto the wallesThe fame of Caeſars comming to Rome.
               
            
            Of Rome itſelfe, without delay:
            And that they did, at large, diſplay
            Their Banners, and their Egles braue:
            That ſuch a mighty hoſt they haue
            As neuer yet (the rumor ran)
            VVas ſeene in memory of man.
            
               Yea much more fierce and truculent
            Then thoſe (that were moſt bloudy bent)
            Of all the people ruthleſſe rude,
            That Romans euer yet ſubdu'd.
            Others againe gaue out reports,
            That daily to this Campe reſorts
            Thoſe Nations (that do dwell betweene
            The frozen Alpes and Northerne Rhene)
            And that they all with one accord,
            From out their Countries did diſ-bord,
            
               Caeſar to follow, and to ayd;
            And from theſe warres would not be ſtayd:
            So as it cannot other be,
            But that with griefe they ſoone ſhall ſee
            
               Rome ſeiz'd and ſackt by forraine fone,
            (A Roman Chiefe-taine looking on)
            Thus euery one (rap't with amaze)
            Doth theſe approching perils blaze.
            And yet no certaine Authors knowne,
            By whom this frighting newes is blowne:
            But what their weake conceits ſuggeſt,
            With that their ſences are oppreſt.
            Neither did this vnmanly doubt
            Onely appall the common rout;
            But euen the Senate, drownd in dread,
            Leauing their homes, the Citty fled.
            Yet they decreed at their adiew,
            The Conſuls ſhould with force purſue
            
               Caeſar, from whom the Senate flew.
            
               The Senate flie from Rome
               To ſafeſt places then they runne,
            And where is hazard, that they ſhunne.
            The giddy people they exhort
            To ioyne themſelues in their conſort,
            And with them ſuch aduentures bide,
            As meanes and fortune could prouide.
            ¶ Loe thus (with many heauy hearts)
            Huge numbers inſtantly departs.
            He that their ſudden flight had ſeene,
            Would thinke all Rome on fire had beene:
            Or elſe ſome Earth-quakes fearefull rage
            
               Their tottering houſes did ingage.
            For (with ſuch boyſterous preſſe and cry)
            Out at the Citty gates they flye:
            As if no better hope remain'd
            To men (whom froward fates conſtrain'd)
            Then to forſake their natiue home,
            To ſeeke for refuge where they roame.
            Like as a ſhippe with tempeſts toſt,
            Driuing vpon the Lybian coaſt,
            Intangled with Sirts wracking ſands,
            The crazed maſt in danger ſtands,
            With ſailes and cordage rent and torne,
            All ouer ſhip-boord to be borne:
            The Pylot, whom diſpaire doth ceaze,
            Firſt head-long leaps into the ſeas,
            And after him (with madding vaine)
            The Saylers plunge into the maine:
            And ſo themſelues to death betake,
            Before the veſſell ſhip-wracke make.The Roman frights and flying.
            
            So out in droues the Romans flye
            Before that Caeſars Campe was nye,
            And left Rome for her ſelfe to try.
            ¶ No parents counſaile could aſſwage
            Their head-ſtrong childrens flying rage.
            Nor louing wiues lamenting teares
            To pitty turne their husbands feares:
            Nor awe of Gods, nor Countries loue
            Their parting humor could remoue;
            Through brutiſh feare, with baſe neglect,
            All Natures bonds they did reiect:
            The place where they were bred and borne,
            They fled with ſhame, and left forlorne.
            In their owne houſes, where they dwell,
            They ſtay no time to bid fare-well:
            Nor any ſuch affection ſhew
            To their deere Citty, ere they goe,
            As with full ſight her to deplore,
            Whom they perchance ſhold ſee no more,
            All flye in haſt from Tybers ſhore.
            ¶ Yee Gods with bounty fortunes lend
            
            
               
               But niggardly doe them defend.
            
            This Citty, that did ſo abound
            With Citizens, for warres renownd,
            Obey'd with many conquered ſlaues,
            Now euery flying rumor braues.
            And (as a ſpoyle and open pray)
            Abandoned to Caeſars ſway.
            The valiant Romans, that were wont
            
               The Roman Citizens fall from their old wonted valor.(In forraigne warres) to beare the brunt
            Of many mighty barbarous foes,
            Did in their Armes ſuch truſt repoſe;
            That ſlender trenches did ſuffiſe,
            To hold them ſafe from all ſurpriſe.
            And by ſuch meanes ſecurely kept
            Their guarded Tents whilſt that they ſlept.
            But thou, O Rome, from this art farre,
            Daunted but with the name of Warre.
            
            Thy walles not deem'd to be of might
            To lodge thy people ſafe one night:
            So faint of courage all and ſome
            Are thy inhabitants become.
            But yet thy Commons may defend
            Themſelues, and for excuſe pretend,
            
               
                  Pompey taxed for flying frō 
                  Rome at the bruite of Caeſars approch.That they were not poſſeſt with dread
            Before they ſaw great Pompey fled,
            By whoſe example they were led.
            ¶ Then (that no hope of future chance)
            Their baſed courage ſhould aduance)
            Apparant ſignes they doe deſcry
            Of worſe euents approching nye.
            The ſupreme pow'r wrath-threatning wills
            The Aire, the Earth, and Ocean filles
            With Prodigies, foretelling illes.
            In ſilent nights, that darkeſt beene,
            Many ſtrange vncoth ſtarres are ſeene.
            
               Many prodigious ſignes ſeene before theſe ciuill warres.The Element all flaming was,
            And through the aire did flying paſſe
            Obliquous ſtreames, like torches bright,
            And tayled Comets ſhew by night,
            With Blazing ſtarres, that doe preſage
            
               Of changing ſtares the future rage.
            Then fearefull lightning flaſhes breake
            A thwart the clouds, and thundring ſpeake:
            With ſundry ſhapes of fearefull fires
            The aire is fild with all admires.
            Sometimes like lampes, ſomtimes like darts,
            And ſo to ſparkling gleames conuerts,
            Which ouer all the skies doth blaze.
            And (that which bred no leſſe amaze)
            Strange lightnings oftentimes did hap,
            (Not ſeconded with thunder-clap)
            When as no clouds the Sunne did wrap.
            And Rome it ſelfe (to wracke deſign'd)
            Was ſcorcht with blaſting Northerne winde.
            The leſſer ſtarres (ſeene but by night)
            At midde of day appeared bright.
            The Moone at full (that with round face
            Should repreſent her brothers grace)
            The interpoſing earth obſcures.
            
               Tytan likewiſe this change endures,
            That when at Noone-ſteed, in his pride,
            Ouer the earth his ſheene ſhould ſtride,
            His face was maskt with ſable vayle,
            And day-light through the world doth faile.
            So as men greatly ſtood in doubt,
            That ſuch a time was come about,
            As when Thyeſtes babes were ſlaine:
            Which guilt the Sunne did ſo diſdaine,
            That (loathing to adorne that day)
            Backe to the Eaſt he poſts away.
            And cole-ſmeer'd Vulcan doth the varge
            Of Aetna's forge ſo much inlarge:
            As that the ſparkes, wont vp to hye
            With rowling ſmoke into the skye,
            Now to Italia ſhores doe flye.
            
               Charybdis (like a glutted wolfe)
            So ſpues vp bloud from her vaſte gulfe,
            As that the ſanguine dye doth ſtaine
            The waues of the Cicilian maine.
            And Scylla's Dogges ſo lowd did yell,
            
               As they had beene the hounds of hell.
            Then did the ſacred Veſtall fire
            Diuide it ſelfe with forked ſpire
            Vpon the Altars, where it burnes:
            Whoſe parted flames, preſaging, mournes
            The proud diuiſion and debate
            That ſhould confound the Roman ſtate.
            As did that flame diuide in twaine,
            Which burnt the Thebans brothers ſlaine.
            Then followes on ſuch huge Earth-quakes,
            
            That from the lofty Alpes it ſhakes
            The ſnow, that tumbles downe in flakes.
            And Atlas mount (whom ſome conceit
            To ſhoulder vp the heau'ns whole weight:
            And Calpe, that high hill in Spaine,
            
            Were well-nye couered with the maine.
            The Temple Images withall,
            From out their eyes did teares let fall.
            The Houſhold Gods did likewiſe ſweate,
            To witneſſe Romes diſtempered heat.
            And all the ſacred gifts downe falles,
            That hung about their Temple walles.
            The Screech-owles, and the birds of night,
            VVere common ſeene in broad day light.
            And ſauage beaſts without diſmay,
            (Leauing their dennes at cloſe of day)
            would come to Rome their reſt to take,
            And in the ſtreetes their kennels make:
            And cattell humane language ſpake.
            VVomen likewiſe the ſight did feare
            Of their owne births, which monſtrous were.
            
               Sybilla, that Cumana hight,
            Her propheſies were brought to light,
            Then thoſe whom ſterne Bellonas ire
            VVith franticke humors did inſpire,
            (Tearing their armes) did rauing cry,
            The vengeance of the Gods was nye.
            The griſely ghoſts of Gallicke flockes,
            (Shaking their bloudy-fettred lockes)
            Vnto the people threatning tell
            
               Many a heauy fearfull ſpell.
            And from the ſhrines the heaped bones
            Did often mutter ruthfull grones.
            Claſhing or armes, and horrid ſounds,
            From the vnhaunted groues rebounds:
            And many apparitions ſtrange
            So neere the Citty-walles did range,
            That they, which in the Sub-vrbes wonne,
            Did from their homes affrighted runne.
            An vgly Fiend, (that in her hand
            Did hold a ſparkle-blazing brand,
            With ſnaky haire about her face)
            Alongſt the ſtreets did ſtalking trace.
            Euen ſuch a one as did conſtraine
            
               Agaue with a franticke vaine:
            Or that Licurgus did incite
            To wound himſelfe through Bacchus ſpight.
            Or like Megera, whoſe aſpect
            Did more Alcides ſpright deiect
            Then Dis with his infernall looke,
            When Iunos taske he vndertooke.
            And oft by night, when all was ſtill,
            The Trumpets ſounds were heard as ſhrill,
            And ſhoutings maine with clamorous cries,
            As when two hoaſts together flies.
            And Sylla's ghoſt lamenting rombd
            In Mars his field where it was fombd.
            Which by coniecture did preſage
            Some bloudy broiles and ciuill rage.
            So from his broken Sepulcher,
            
            Was Marius ſeene his head to reare,
            That by Arriems brinke did ſtand,
            Wherewith the Peaſants of that land
            Were ſo ſurpriz'd (with trembling fits)
            That ſome were ſcard out of their wits.
            ¶ Theſe tokens do the Romans cauſe
            (According to their ancient lawes)
            In caſes of ſo great diſmay,
            To ſend for thoſe without delay,
            That could by diuinations geſſe,
            
               If flights of fowles might ought expreſſe.
            Or elſe if bowels of beaſts ſlaine,
            Theſe ſtrange preſages could explaine,
            Then from Tuſcana one ariu'd
            That in ſuch myſteries had diu'd,
            
               
                  Aruns, an Augur, ſeekes out the cauſes of the ciuill war by diuination.That he knew well the courſe of heauen,
            And influence of the Planets ſeuen.
            And Aruns was this wiſards name,
            Who from the Citty Luna came.
            This ſolemne ſire did firſt decree,
            That all ſuch beaſts deſtroy'd ſhould be
            As were ingendred againſt kinde,
            And vnto monſtrous ſhapes inclind.
            And that ſame vgly fleſhy clot
            (Vpon a barren Mule begot)
            Should be conſum'd in Cinders hot.
            Then he the frighted Burgers calles
            To march about the Citty-walles
            
               A Roman proceſſion.
               Proceſsion-like in ordred rowes,
            And firſt the ſacred Biſhops goes.
            And in their turnes next to them trace
            
               Prelates of an inferior place,
            In ſhort roabes with Gabinian braids.
            The Matron then Veſta's maids,
            (To whom it lawfull was alone,
            That Pallas Temple ſhould be knowne)
            Doth follow with her virgin-traine:
            Then all ſuch Prieſts as appertaine
            To Oracles, and Sybils loare,
            With thoſe that drew vnto the ſhore
            
               Cybellen, out of Almon flood.
            The Augures then that vnderſtood
            Of all vnlucky birds the flight.
            And the Septemviri that dight
            And ouerlooke the ſolemne feaſts.
            Then Titius Prieſts, whoſe ſacred heaſts
            The ſub-vrbs of the Citty ſwayes
            In all their ceremoniall wayes,
            Then next the dauncing Salij ranke,
            Whoſe necks guilt gawdy brooches pranke,
            
               And laſt of this religious fry
            The holy Flamen he paſt by
            With Lordly Turbant towring high.
            ¶ Whilſt (in a long out-ſtretched droue)
            They thus about the walles do roue,
            
               Aruns the ſcattered ruines tooke,
            That with the lightning blaſts were ſtrooke:
            And (when ſome muttring charms were ſaid)
            Deepe vnder mould the ſame he laid.
            And euery place (where they were ſhrin'd)
            With names and characters he ſign'd.
            Then doth he take a faire large bull,
            (Which he out of a heard did cull)
            And him vnto the Altar leades,A Bull ſacrificed.
            
            And twixt his hornes pure wine he ſheads.
            Then mingled flower, and crooked blade,
            For ſacrifice he ready made.
            But yet the beaſt, with ſtruggling might,
            Reſiſts to ſerue that ſacred Rite,
            Wherein the Gods tooke no delight.
            And yet at laſt the Prieſtly rout
            Pulles downe this Bull, that was ſo ſtout,
            Then bound, and laid to looſe his life,
            Within his throat they ſheath'd the knife.
            Which with ſo deepe a gaſh they ſlit,
            That thence abundantly did flit
            A reeking ſtreame of venom blacke,
            Which did of blood the colour lacke.
            This vncouth ſacrifice amaz'd
            Pale Aruns, whilſt thereon he gaz'd.
                  Aruns the Augur amazed.
            
            And yet againe he further ſeekes
            To finde ſome cauſe of heauens diſlikes:
            And vp the paunch he rippeth wide,
            To ſee what lucke would there betide.
            But that which more did him confound,
            Were bowels ſpotted and vnſound,
            Of colour pale, and blew commixt,
            With clotted goare congeal'd betwixt.
            Then rotten liuer, which he ſaw,
            Was cloathed with the wateriſh maw;
            
               The left ſide guts no ill ſignes wants:
            The lung-veines neither ſtirres nor pants:
            The ſlender rimme too weake to part
            The boyling liuer from the heart:
            The ſmothered heart expreſt no pulſe,
            The crackt-ſhrunke intrailes did convulſe
            Corrupted bloud into the vaines:
            The cawle the paunch-heſt ouer-ſtraines.
            And that of all (which hee found worſt)
            No part appear'd, but ſeem'd accurſt.
            Then he amongſt theſe inwards findes
            Two maſſy heads of ſinnoye kindes:
            Wanniſh the one, and all fore-ſpent,
            Flaggy, corrupt, and drooping bent:
            The other with more vitall heates
            His vaines with naughty humors beats.
            ¶ All theſe he takes to be true ſhowes,
            Prognoſticating future woes.
            
               
                  Aruns afeard to expreſſe the coniecture.And then cryes out, O Gods I ſee
            'Tis more then lawfull now for me
            To blaze abroad your high decree;
            Neither, O Ioue, do I deſigne
            This offering to thy grace diuine.
            For I ſuſpect the fiends of hell
            Within theſe ſlaughtered bowels dwell.
            We feare miſ-haps not fit to ſpeake
            
               
                  Aruns cenſure.Yet worſer ſhortly out will breake.
            Heau'ns turne to good what is betide!
            Let no preſage in bowels bide!
            But Tages fictions; to deuiſe
            Such myſteries in ſacrifice.
            
               
                  Tages the firſt inuenter of Auguring.
               Thus doubtfully his doome he ſhrowdes
            Of what was ſeene, and ſpake in clouds.
            ¶ But Figulus that deeply lookes
            Into the heau'ns, as in his bookes;
            And onely did his time beſtow
            
               
                  Figulus an excellent Aſtrologer.
               The natures of the Gods to know:
            Who in Aſtrology exceld
            The Aegiptians, that in Memphis dweld.
            Thus ſaid; either the heauens, quoth he,
            
               Diſordred in their motions be,
            And all the Planets (in their ſway)
            Doe hold a cleane contrary way;
            Or elſe if prouidence diuine
            Thus ſtrangely guide them to encline,
            Sudden and heauy wracke will fallDoubtfull coniectures.
            
            Vpon this Citty, and vs all.
            But whether the Earth gaping wide,
            VVill in her wombe whole Cities hide:
            Or whether the contagious Aire,
            
            VVith peſtilence will health impaire:
            Or that the Land barren of food,
            VVill ceaſe to nouriſh humane brood:
            Or that the Riuers from their heads
            Streames with infectious poyſon ſpreads:
            I cannot ſay, O ſupreme powers!
            VVhat woes vpon our mortall bowers,
            Or what ſtrange plagues doe you intend
            Vpon this wretched world to ſend?
            Shall now with vs all ages end?
            If Saturnes chill vnlucky ſtarre
            Had in the tenth houſe rang'd his Carre;
                  Figulus conſiders the inclinations of the heauens.
            
            Then might Aquarius watry vaine
            Haue brought Deucalions floud againe,
            And all the earth ore-whelm'd with raine,
            And raging Neptunes riſing maine.
            Or if thou Phoebus hadſt combin'd
            VVith Leo of Nemean kinde;
            The Fire would then the Earth haue melt,
            And with thy flames the heau'ns haue ſwelt.
            But now theſe planets being ſtill;
            O Mars! what hath incenſt thy will,
            (VVith the great force of thy aſpect)
            Such beames on Scorpio to reflect
            As that his taile all flaming roles,
            VVith ſcorching clawes as red as coles?
            Milde Iupiter, with friendly eyes,
            Into the weſt his progreſſe hies.
            But Venus face (with ſmiling lips)
            Is now obſcured in Eclips.
            
               And Mercury (ſo ſwift of ſourſe)
            Doth retrograde diſtort his courſe.
            So Mars as now in this diſcord,
            Is of th' aſcendant onely Lord,
            And whilſt all ſtarres their roomes reſignes,
            Blading Orion onely ſhines.
            
               The cenſure of Figulus.
               Fury of warre comes now in date,
            And force of armes will ſteare the State,
            Iuſtice and lawes may both goe ſleepe,
            Strong hand will them in bondage keepe,
            
               Vice now ſhall Vertues name retaine,
            And many yeares this rage ſhall raigne.
            
               Prayers bootleſſe againſt Deſtinie.What boots it then the Gods to pray,
            This miſery to turne away?
            For peace againe we ſhall not haue,
            Till all become a Tyrants ſlaue.
            O Rome! poſt off (if thou haue power)
            The date of this vnhappy houre.
            Extend theſe furies off a farre,
            And vs preſerue from ciuil warre.
            ¶ Theſe hard predictions ſadly told,
            
               The cenſure of Figulus diſcomforteth the Romans.Did make the peoples hearts full cold;
            But that which followed on behind,
            Trencht deeper wounds within their minde:
            For as Aedonis, Bacchus Nunne,
            
            From Pyndus hill inrag'd doth runne,
            When as Ogigian wine diſtraines
            The madding humor of her braines:
            So did a Matron of the Towne
            
               The propheſying of a Roman Matron rap't with a ſudden fury.In franticke wiſe gadde vp and downe,
            Vttring ſuch words as they expreſſe
            Whom ſprights of propheſing poſſeſſe.
            O Paean tell me (then ſhe ſaid)
            Vnto what place am I conuaid!
            What ſhore wilt thou caſt me vpon,
            That rapt aboue the clouds haue gone?
            Me thinkes Pangeus mount I ſpye,
            Vpon whoſe top the ſnow doth lye:
            And thence Philippi's fields I ſee,
            That at the foot of Haemus be.
            
               O Phoebus tell me the intent
            By this great hurly-burly meant.
            Why doe the Roman armies ſtraine
            Againſt themſelues with might and maine?
            By what meanes comes it to be ſo,
            They warre without a forraine foe?
            Nay, whither am I further toſt?
            Me ſeemes I now am on the coaſt
            Eaſtward, where Nylus her ſeuen heads
            VVithin the Ocean ſoftly beds.
            There ſee I him, and him deplore,
            That lies vpon that ſandy ſhore,
            A headleſſe trunke diſtain'd with gore.
            Thence am I rap't againe anew,
            And now the Lybian Syrts I view,
            VVhere Deſtinies tranſport with ſpight,
            The remnants of Pharſalias fight.
            Yet further am I forſt to walke
            Ouer the Cloud-brow'd Alpes to ſtalke▪
            
            And in this flitting whirle-winde veaſe,
            I paſſe the Mountaines Pyrinees.
            
            Thence backe vnto my Natiue Towne,
            VVhere I finde all turn'd vp-ſide-downe.
            Vprore, diuiſion, and debate
            Turmoyles the Senate and the State.
            So am I now (from mine owne ſhore)
            Hurry'd about the world once more.
            O Phoebus, eaſe me of this toyle,
            In vnknowne ſeas, and vnknowne ſoyle,
            For I haue ſeene Philippies broyle!
            Thus ſaid, a ſlumbring reſt ſhe takes,
            VVherewith this fury her forſakes.
            Finis Libri primi.
         
         
            
            LVCANS PHARSALIA· The ſecond Booke.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               FOre-knowledge much it doth bewaile
               Of woes, that needes muſt men aſſaile.
               The Roman Matrons plaints expreſt
               All lawes and iuſtice are ſuppreſt.
               
                  Marius and Sylla's rage it ſhowes,
               
                  Brutus in doubt to Cato goes,
               Who once againe doth Martia wed,
               Attir'd like mourners for the dead.
               
                  Pompey to Capua takes his way,
               
                  Caeſar at large beares all the ſway,
               And doth Domitius priſoner take.
               
                  Pompey doth his oration make.
               His ſonne hee ſends for more ſupplyes,
               Himſelfe then at Brunduſium lies,
               And there beſieg'd, thence hardly flies.
            
            
               NOw haue the Gods reueal'd their ire,
            The heauenly ſignes with warres conſpire,
            And Nature likewiſe (with fore-ſight)
            Her lawes and bonds peruerteth quite
            With monſtrous tumults and garboyle,
            
               Which wretchedly doth humanes toyle.
            Great guider of Olimpus hill,
            Why hath it pleaſd thy ſacred will,
            That carefull mortals take ſuch count
            Of what their skill can not ſurmount,
            As that they ſhould preſaging know
            Thoſe wrackes they needs muſt vndergoe?
            Whether the All-Creator high
            (When firſt he gan to rectifie
            This formleſſe maſſe of Chaos rude,
            And did the fire a part ſeclude)Whether there bee deſtiny or chance in worldly courſes.
            
            With an eternall fixt decree
            Ordain'd that all ſhould certaine be;
            And to that law himſelfe confin'd,
            Wherewith all ages he did binde:
            And fram'd the world that courſe to runne,
            That Fates vnchanging heſts had ſpunne?
            Or elſe of humane haps the heft
            Were vn-fore-doom'd at randome left?
            So that in lifes vncertaine dance,
            Things to and fro ſhould ſlide and glance,
            And all ſubiected vnto chance?
            But howſoeuer 'tis ordain'd,
            O let mans minde be ſo reſtrain'd
            From knowing chances future ſcope
            As that his feares may liue in hope!An Imprecation againſt fore-knowledge.
            
            ¶ When all at length had full conceiu'd,
            In what ſort higher powers bequeath'd
            The Citty to reſiſtleſſe harmes;
            Then lawes and iuſtice ſilence charmes;
            And reuerent Honour lackt his meed,
            Attir'd in baſe Plebeian weed.
            No Axes now (in bundles bore)
            Makes way the Magiſtrates before.
            
               Amazement ſo doth griefe foreſtall,
            That Sorrow hath no voyce at all.
            Such ſtupid ſilence doth inueſt
            Whole families (with griefe poſſeſt)
            Where husbands lye, in gaſping ſtrife,
            Before they doe reſigne their life.
            
               The good-wife wrapt in ſorrowes bands,
            With flaring lockes wringing her hands,
            Amidſt her wofull houſhold ſtands:
            Vntill the liuing breath be fled
            From out the corpes (that ſtreacht out dead)
            Doth in the pale disfigured face
            And cloſed eyne Deaths portraict place,
            
               Sorrow doth not at full complaine;
            But then begins her howling vaine.
            Whoſe mazement now with rage ſurpriſd,
            Doth change her robes to weeds diſguiſd:
            And (with her wofull ſad conſorts)
            Vnto the Temples then reſorts.
            So did our women (in their feares)
            Sprinkle the Temple-gods with teares.
            
               The Roman Matrons frequent the Temples with an extraordinary deuotion.Beating their breaſts againſt the ſtones,
            Powre out their plaints and ruthful moanes.
            And (ſtupify'd twixt griefe and dread)
            Did rent their haires from off their head,
            And ſacred porches therewith ſpread.
            And ſuch as wont in humble wiſe
            To pray and caſt to heauen their eyes,
            With outrage now the Gods would bend,
            
               Not to vſe preſumption in praying.Whoſe eares with clamours they offend,
            Neither to Iupiter alone,
            Doe they expoſe their vowes and mone:
            But to all Temples elſe beſides,
            Where any of their Gods reſides:
            The which are fild, and all too ſcant,
            No Altar doth deuotion want.
            So do the Matrons (with out-cries)
            Inuoke the Gods, and teare the skies.
            And one of them amongſt the reſt
            (With blubbered cheeks beating her breaſt)
            Her braided lockes in peeces cuts,
            And then her armes ſhe ſpreads and ſhuts,
            Whilſt wth theſe plaints her voice ſhe gluts
            
               The ſpeech of a Roman Matron.¶ O wretched Mothers now, ſhe ſaid,
            To beat your breaſts be not affraid,
            Nor yet your treſſed lockes to teare.
            
               
               Langor no longer now forbeare.
            Like happes did neuer vs aſſaile,
            For which we had ſuch cauſe to waile:
            Whilſt that the fortunes are vntry'd
            Of theſe two Chiefetaines ſwelling pride.
            But were once one of them ſubdu'd,
            Then ſhould our comforts be renew'd:
            And ſo their plaints they aggrauate
            That ſorrowes ſelfe grew paſſionate.
            ¶ Their men likewiſe reſolu'd for warre,
            Now cluſtred into campes a farre,
            Againſt the wrathfull Gods on high,
            In this ſort doe exclaiming cry.
            O hapleſſe Captiue-youths forlorne!
            Why were we not in thoſe dayes borne,
            When Punicke warres did vs ingage,The cōplaints of the Romans leauing the Citty, and following the warres.
            
            With Canna's and Trebeia's rage?
            Yee heauens wee doe not peace deſire;
            But on vs turne ſome forraigne ire:
            Let all the world our bane conſpire;
            Stirre Cities vp with ſword and fire.
            Let Parths and Perſians bend their armes,
            Let Scythians rampe on vs in ſwarmes:
            And (from the Northerne extreme parts)
            Let red-haird Sweaths powre ſhowrs of darts
            And with them all that people bred
            About the raging Rhenus head:
            Yea make vs to all Nations foes,
            So you diuert our Ciuill blowes.
            Then let the wrathfull Danes and Getes,
               All warres more pleaſing to the Romans then ciuill ſtrife.
            
            Aſſaile vs in their hoſtile heats.
            Let the Iberians make diſcent,
            With enſignes and with weapons bent:
            Vnto the Archers of the Eaſt
            Let Rome from no ſtrife be releaſt.
            Nay if high powers decree the ſame,
            To raze out the Heſperian name;
            From heauen, to earth let flames deſcend;
            That ſo the Latium race may end.
            And then O direfull Fates withall
            
               
               The Romans lay a curſe on Caeſar & Pompey both.Grant that ſome hatefull wracke befall
            Both Factions, and the leaders both;
            For yet they haue not ſhewd their wroth▪
            
            Why ſhould they ſuch dominion ſeeke,
            As neuer yet was heard the like?
            That all mens thoughts it muſt diſmay,
            Whether of them the world ſhould ſway?
            Not both their worth can counterpaiſe
            The ciuill ſtrife that ſo they raiſe.
            ¶ Thus Pieties declining ſtate
            Her lamentations did relate,
            And parents wofully beſides,
            Like preſſing care and cumbers grides.
            In whoſe repining words appeares,
            The wretched fate of their old yeares:
            To be preſeru'd in lifes diſdaine,
            To ſee a ciuill warre againe.
            And one of them thus wail'd with teares,
            Th' example of great former feares.
            
               The cōplaint of an old Citizen, declaring the bloudy times of Marius and Sylla.
               ¶ No otherwiſe (quoth he) did fate
            Stirre vp commotion in our ſtate;
            When Marius after victory
            Obtain'd againſt the Teuton fry,
            And after he in Triumphes Carre
            Had rid; for the Numidian warre.
            A baniſht man he hid his head
            In dikes, where flaggie ruſhes bred.
            So did the greedy marriſh fennes,
            And quagmire bogges ſhut in their dennes,
            (O Fortune) they reſeru'd a ward;
            But yet anon he was not ſpar'd
            From fettring gyues, nor loathſome Iayle,
            VVhich long the old mans life did baile.
            But bleſt had beene if hee had dy'd,
            VVhen Conſull he the State did guide;
            Before he felt the ſcourging doome
            For his miſchieuous deedes at Rome.
            
            But Death it ſelfe did from him flye,
            VVhen 'twas decreed that he ſhould dye.
            And that the foe was ready preſt
            
               To rid the life out of his breaſt.
            When he ſhould giue the fatall wound,
            Numneſſe his ſences ſo confound,
            And mortify'd his arme withall,
            That from his hand the ſword did fall:
            Wherewith the darkſome priſon ſhone
            Like Phoebus beames at height of noone:
            He heard withall a fearefull ſpell,
            As from the gaſtly ſprights of hell,
            That Marius power muſt come againe,
            Lawfull 'tis not thy ſteele to baine
            Within his bloud; therefore refraine:
            For he ſhall many doome to death,
            Ere he yeeld vp his lateſt breath.
            Let thy vaine rage his ſword vp-ſheath.
            But if the Cymbrian youth deſires
            Auengement, for their ſlaughtered ſires;
            Let them wiſh him a longer race,
            Who was not (by the heauens high grace)
            Preſeru'd for good; but, by their wrath,
            Deſſign'd to worke Romes greater ſcath;
            A murtherous man (and if Fates will)
            Able much Roman bloud to ſpill.
                  Marius a bloudy man.
            
            This wretched wight the raging waue
            Into a hoſtile Countrey draue.
            Where faine he was for his reliefe
            (Sculking in corners like a Thiefe)
            To lodge in dennes where none did wonne
            Of Iugurths Countrey ouer-runne.
            And ſometimes in the ruines lay
            Of Punicke walles, the Romans pray.
            Where Carthage fate and his did meete,
            Each others miſery to greete.
            But ſoone againe his fortune chang'd,
            And then vnto his party rang'd
            The raging ſcum of Lybick land:
            Where he did all the Iayles diſ-band,
            And of the Fetters and the Gyues,
            
            His Martiall weapons he contriues.
            But none he gaue a Captaines charge,
            
               Vnleſſe he could make knowne at large,
            That hee had done ſome heynous deed,
            And at his Campe ſo ſought his meed.
            O cruell Fates, what day was that,
            What day that diſmall chance begat?
            That Marius ſhould, with his returne,
            Victor againe, make Rome to mourne?
            How proudly then did cruell death
            Both Lords and Commons reaue of breath?
            
               Bloudy Fury.How did the ſword about him lay?
            No breaſt was free from Murthers way.
            The Temples human bloud did ſtore,
            Their pauements ſtained with the gore.
            No ſex nor age protection gaue:
            On hoary heads the ſword did raue,
            And ſent them headlong to their graue.
            Nither did they a whit forbeare
            The ſilly babes, that newly were
            But borne, and brought to this worlds light:
            Their liuing day held not to night.
            O what could colour their pretents,
            Againſt poore harmleſſe innocents?
            But it ſuffiſd their tyranny
            That they ſtill found out ſome to dye.
            So raues this force in cruelty:
            And he was deem'd a coward ſlacke,
            That none but faulty men would wracke.
            Thus numbers dyed day by day:
            For now they would not ſpare to ſlay
            The ſtrangers, whom they did not know:
            But cut their heads their bodies fro.
            
               More cruelties.They ſham'd to come their Lord before
            With empty hands, not fil'd with gore.
            One ſaue-guard yet for life remaines
            To thoſe, that ſuch a grace obtaines,
            As on their knees with vowes ſubmiſſe,
            Fell Marius bloudy hand to kiſſe.
            O people growne degenerate,
            From glory of your wonted ſtate!
            A thouſand ſwords threatning new kindes
            
               Of deaths, ſhould not debaſe your mindes.
            By ſuch meanes to prolong your dayes,
            As doth ſo foule diſhonor raiſe.
            And yet you did but life adiurne,
            Vntill that Sylla do returne.
            Few liue this common bane to mourne.
            Scarcely ſhall any one remaine,
            That ſaw when thou O Bebius ſlaine,
            wer't into mangled morſels cut,Noble Romans ſlaughtered.
            
            Their bloudy thirſting blades to glut.
            Or yet, O Antony, to tell
            Of thee, that didſt preſage too well
            Theſe fatall harmes, how thy graue head
            (with milke-white lockes all ouer-ſpread)
            Was from the murthered body tore,
            And (by a furious ſouldier bore
            Dropping and ſmoking all in gore)
            Was on the Table ſet, in ieſt,
            Where Marius kept his ſolemne feaſt.
            Nor how the Craſsies corpes in ſcorne,
            By Timbria were hackt and torne.
            And how the awfull Roſtrums beake,
            Soyled with Tribunes bloud did reake.
            And Scoeuola thy age doth plaine,
            To be ſo murdered in diſdaine,
            Where Veſta's ſacred Temple ſtands,
            By their life-violating hands.Murder in Veſta's Temple.
            
            Thoſe fires that alwayes burne ſo cleere
            With thy bloud ſomewhat tainted were:
            Yet thy old veines could yeeld ſmall ſtore,
            But ſpar'd thoſe flames from quenching gore.
            
            The ſeuenth time now is come in date,
            That Marius takes his Conſuls ſtate.
            Such was the manner of his life,
            No man with Fortune had more ſtrife,
            And none her fauours found more rife.
                  Marius chāge of fortunes.
            
            Who better then his courſe ſhould range,
            Then he that oft had try'd ſuch change?
            How many other bodies ſlaine
            The ſtreets of Sacroportum baine?
            
               What heapes of carcaſſes all hewd,
            Before Collina gates were ſtrewd?
            And now at laſt the whole worlds head
            (She whoſe high power all Nations dread)
            Muſt be depriu'd of ſupreme grace,
            And chang'd vnto another place.
            And Samnium now the world muſt know,
            Shall giue to Rome a greater blow;
            Then when her Army forced was
            Vnder the Caudium forkes to paſſe.
            ¶ Reuenging Sylla now comes in,
            And monſtrous ſlaughters doe begin:
            
               
                  Sylla's raging time of crueltie.For that ſmall ſtore which did remaine,
            Of bloud, he ſearcheth euery vaine.
            And whilſt he doth in ſhew pretend
            Corrupted humors to amend,
            The medcines rage did more offend.
            His hand to deep doth ſearch the wound,
            Cutting of thoſe were faultleſſe found,
            And onely thoſe were left to liue,
            That to his miſchife helpe would giue.
            Then ſpleene did lawleſſe leaue obtaine,
            That head-ſtrong wrath on law ſhold raigne.
            VVhich power was not to one deſign'd,
            But vnto euery murtherous minde.
            So will did all things looſe and binde.
            
               The liberty that was giuen to out-rage.Seruants and ſlaues (with balefull blades)
            Their maiſters bowels now inuades:
            Children likewiſe their hands did ſtaine
            VVith bloud of their owne parents ſlaine:
            And ſtriue ſome meed for it to gaine.
            So did the brothers in likewiſe,
            Of bloud fraternall make their prize.
            Vnto the Tombes ſome frighted fled,
            The quicke were mingled with the dead.
            
               The ſundry meanes that men make to dye, ſo to auoid the diſdaine of Syllas inſolencies.None ſafe-guard ſeeke in ſauage coates:
            Some hang themſelues: ſome cut their throats
            
            Others againe (ſhort worke to make)
            Their neckes and limbes in peeces brake,
            By falling to the ground from high,
            
               Scorning by murdrous hands to dye.
            Others againe doe now deſire
            To make a pile for funerall fire,
            VVounding themſelues to that intent,
            And ere their life-bloud was out-ſpent,
            Into the flames their bodies caſt,
            And laid them there whilſt ſtrength did laſt.
            The heads of Peeres were borne the whiles
            About the trembling ſtreets on piles,
            And in the Forum there lye throwne.
            No villany is left vnknowne,
            All horrid acts are boaſting blowne.
            The Thracian tyrant Dyomede
            
            Neuer ſaw bloud more rifely ſhed,
            Floting in his Biſtonian ſtalles,
            Nor carkaſſes about the walles
            Of huge Antaeus Lybicke caue:
            Nor Greece to more laments it draue,
            To ſee the heads of worthy men
            Dight the Picean bloudy den.
            Now though the heapes of gored clots.
            And tract of time disfiguring blots
            The knowledge of the faces ſlaine;
            Sad parents yet would not refraine,
            By ſtealth to get (if they could pry)
            Their childrens limbes where they did lye.
            And I my ſelfe can call to minde,An old mans report of Syllas time.
            
            That then I much deſir'd to finde
            Mine owne deare brothers mangled head,
            That there lay ſlaughtred mongſt the dead.
            VVhereby to giue it funerall,
            And fires (although deny'd to all)
            VVhen as I ſaw the rage decreaſe
            Of Sylla's ſword, reputed peace;
            Then heaps of Trunkes abroad I ſpread,
            To ſee which fitted with his head.
            ¶ What ſhould I here at large relate,
            How Catulus ghoſt was expiate,
            VVhen Marius (hackt and tortured)
            For ſacrifice was offered
            
               To his vnſatiable Tombe,
            By an vn-heard-of cruell doome.
            
               A Marian cruelly tortured by Sylla's Executioners.Whereas perhaps the wrathleſſe ſpright
            Did not affect that horrid ſight;
            VVhich we beheld when his cruſht bones
            VVith ioynt from ioynt was wrackt at once.
            VVhen he as many wounds did beare
            As members in his body were.
            And yet no mortall ſtroke of ſword
            VVould him deſired end affoord.
            VVhich manner of a cruell death
            Too long defer'd his lateſt breath.
            His hands hewd off, fell from the ſtumpes,
            His tongue out-torn, then trembling iumps.
            Vnable to expreſſe a voyce,
            His weaſan pipe roares out a noyſe.
            One pares his eares from off his head,
            Another doth his noſtrels ſhred:
            VVhilſt he the whiles (poore tortured ſoule)
            On theſe rent parts his eyes did rowle.
            And then (to glut their tyrannies)
            From out his head they pluckt his eyes.
            Hardly may credit vs aſſure,
            That life could ſo much paine endure.
            So (with the fall of ruines heft)
            Are bones and members cruſht and cleft:
            And ſo deform'd in tempeſts drown'd
            Vpon the rockes are bodies found.
            VVhat fruit or pleaſure could they take
            This wofull ſpectacle to make
            Of Marius vgly mangled face?
            Forſooth they knew they ſhould gain grace
            To ſhew it Sylla in that caſe.
            ¶ Now comes in Praeneſtina's turne,
            For her inhabitants to mourne:
            VVhom ſhe beheld (all at a trice)
            To pay the bloudy ſword like price.
            Then quailed were th'Heſperian flowers,
            And Latium youths now death deuours:
            Then loathſome ſtreame from bodies ſlaine,
            
               The pleaſant fields of Rome diſtaine,
            Where gallants in their owne bloud baine.
            Not Famines rage, nor wrackes of ſeas,
            Not Earthquakes dreads,
                  Rome did neuer by any meanes ſuffer ſo great deſolation as by Marius and Sylla.
                nor Plagues t'apeaſe
            The Heauens wrath; nor bloudy Warres,
            
            Euer gaue vs ſuch deadly ſcarres.
            For now the heapes of bodies dead
            The murderers ſway ſo peſtered,
            That they lackt roome to fetch the blow,
            When they would hewing wounds beſtow.
            And when that any one was ſlaine,
            He could not fall flat on the plaine:
            The dead did reeling them ſuſtaine.
            But ſlaughters came at laſt ſo thicke,
            That bodies dead ſtifle the quicke.
            Nothing at all theſe horrid facts,
            
               Sylla's vnmated minde diſtracts;
                  Sylla beholds the ſlaughters without any remorſe.
            
            But from his Turrets top doth eye
            (Without remorſe) thoſe ſwarmes that dye
            And careleſſe heares their clamorous cry.
            The Tyrrhen gulfe at laſt receiues
            Millions (whom death to it bequeaues)
            Of Syllane ſlaughters, whoſe torne limmes,
            At firſt vpon the Tyber ſwimmes:
            But at the laſt twas heapt ſo high,
            That bodies did on bodies lye:
            So as the boats were ſtopt their courſe,
            And Tybers ſtreames were bard their ſourſe.
            For heaps of limmes that thither flocke,
            Damb'd vp the riuer like a locke.
            But that part next vnto the ſeas,
            Had liberty to take his veaſe.
            And that which was the heapes behinde,
            The cluſtred carkaſſes did binde.
                  Tyber ſtopt of his courſe with the infinite number of ſlaine bodies.
            
            Nathleſſe the torrents of the bloud
            Did force a way, and with his floud,
            Aboue the Tyber ſtrand did riſe,
            And ouer all the fields it flies.
            So as the ſtreames of bloud gaue vent
            Vnto the River, that was pent.
            
               The bankes could not this floud withſtand,
            Which caſt the bodies on the land.
            And thence into the Tyrrhene maine,
            The bloud did fall with ſuch a traine,
            That her blew waues it did diuide
            Into a ſanguine colour dy'd.
            Were theſe the meanes to mend amiſſe?
            Was Sylla, Foelix nam'd for this?
            
               A ſpeech of ſcorne againſt Sylla.
               Is this the merit he doth yeeld,
            To haue his Tombe in Martius field?
            ¶ Theſe miſchiefes muſt be borne againe,
            This warre will follow that ſame vaine
            Of ciuill ſtrife; I feare this curſe
            To fall at laſt from bad to worſe.
            For where two armed factions meets,
            Mankinde with common bane it greets.
            The Marian rage did onely tend
            His exil'd ſtate but to amend:
            So Rome receiues him as a frend.
            And Sylla did no more deſire,
            But to reuenge his quenchleſſe ire
            With bloudy ruine of all thoſe
            That were of party with his foes.
            But Fortune calles theſe Captaines twaine
            
               The feare and doubt that this ciuill warre will bring a worſe euent then the factions of Marius and Sylla.
               (I doubt me) to a higher ſtraine.
            Theſe both in Armes are ſtout and ſtrong,
            And will together ruſh ere long.
            The others raiſd no ciuill ſtrife,
            And Sylla tooke a priuate life.
            So did this graue old fire lament
            His mindfull woes of time fore-ſpent,
            Fearing this ciuill warres euent.
            ¶ And yet no feare a place could finde
            In noble Brutus valiant minde,
            This ſtaggering dread that mazed all,
            
               
                  Brutus conſtancy and courage.His conſtant heart could not appall.
            But ere the dawning of the day,
            When Parrhaſis did downeward ſway
            The oblique Axels of her waine,
            And did the drowſie skies refraine.
            
               Vnto the little lodge he hies,
            Where Cato his deare Vnkle lies;
            And at his wicket lowd he rapt,
            Whom he found not in ſlumbers wrapt:
            But toſſing (in his carefull mood)
            The fortunes of the common good,
            And ſafety of the Cities ſtate,
            Which he more wey'd then his owne fate:
            Then thus with him he did debate.
            ¶ O matchleſſe Truth, and vndefil'd,
                  Brutus ſpeech to Cato.
               
            
            Which all the world hath now exil'd!
            O Vertue, whilome in requeſt,
            Now onely lodg'd in thy iuſt breaſt.
            Which no worlds fortunes thence can wreſt
            Affoord thy graue aduice to me,
            Settle my thoughts that wauering be;
            And (with thy iudgement ſound and ſtout)
            Direct me now that am in doubt.
            Some now on Caeſars ſide will warre:
            Others of Pompeyes party are;
            But reuerend Cato, or elſe none,
            Shall Brutus Captaine be alone.
            And whether thou reſolued art
            (In theſe fraile times) to ſtay from Mart,
            
            Or that thy minde be not diſmaid,
            One of theſe ſelfe-wild guides to aid:
            And that thou deeme this ciuill ſtrife,
            worthy the waging of thy life?
            I do not know; but others all
            Reſpects to wicked Armes doe call.
            Some for their filed houſes cauſe:
            Some that in peace feare Iuſtice lawes:
            Others their ſtaru'd eſtate to mend,
            To ſpoyles and ciuill rapine tend:
            And many banckrouts (drownd in debts)
            In troubled ſtreames would caſt their nets.
            None take vp Armes with good intent,
            But all for hope of profit bent.
            Onely thy ſelfe no humor drawes
            To warres, but for thy Countries cauſe.
            
               What can it now tend to thy praiſe
            To haue vprightly ſpent thy dayes?
            So fraught with vertue, free from crimes,
            In theſe our vice-corrupted times?
            If thou at laſt this cenſure haue,
            Thy honeſt minde ſo to depraue?
            That others were corrupt before
            (In theſe vile warres) thy armes had bore.
            But now thy ſelfe, this ſtrife accurſt
            Hath made as faulty as the worſt.
            But I beſeech the Gods aboue,
            That from thy heart they ſo remoue
            The humor of this mood vnmilde,
            That with it thou be not defil'de:
            And that thy armes thou doe not ſtraine
            To caſt the Pile, with might and maine,
            In clouds amongſt the common rout;
            And ſo great valour ſpend in doubt.
            For in theſe warres if any erre,
            The blame on thee they will conferre:
            And thoſe whom others bring to bane,
            Thy ſword therewith they will prophane,
            And make thee author of all harmes,
            That in this ciuill diſcord ſwarmes.
            Peace better with thy temper ſorts,
            Exempt from enuies falſe reports.
            Like as the heauenly bodies ſway
            With true and milde vnchanging way,
            The aire (that to the earth is next)
            With thunders rage is moſt perplext:
            Whilſt windes earth plants doth ouercaſt,
            And lightning flaſhes do them blaſt:
            
               Olympus 'boue the clouds ſtands faſt.
            It is ordain'd by Ioues high heſt,
            That diſcord ſhould ſmall things infeſt:
            But concord higheſt ſtates hath bleſt.
            How would it Caeſars eares content,
            That ſuch a Peere, as thou, wert bent
            To yeeld thy ſelfe vnto the warres,
            And be partaker of theſe iarres?
            
               For if thou Pompey's part do take,
            He would thereof aduantage make,
            And pleaſe himſelfe withall to thinke,
            
               Cato at Ciuill warres doth winke.
            The Senate for the greateſt part,
            And Conſuls likewiſe range their Mart,
            
            Now vnderneath a priuate head,
            And many other Lords ſo lead;
            To whom adde Cato to the reſt,
            A Souldier vnder Pompeys heſt,
            So Caeſars power ſhall be increaſt.
            For then will he ſway all alone,
            That in his Campe compeere hath none.
            But if our Armes we needs muſt take,
            For Lawes defence, and Countries ſake,
            
               Brutus to neither part will goe,
            As Pompeys friend, or Caeſars foe:
            But which of them ſhall victor ſtand,
            Him Brutus meanes to take in hand.
            So ends his ſpeech; To whom againe
            
               Cato replies, with ſober vaine;
            And from the ſecrets of his breaſt,
            Like Oracles theſe words expreſt.
            ¶ O Brutus, needs we muſt confeſſe,
            Moſt heynouſly they doe trangreſſe,
                  Cato's anſwere to Brutus.
               
            
            That wilfully raiſe ciuill warre,
            Which thought be euer from vs farre.
            
               But whither fates doe men conſtraine,
            
            
               Thither may Vertue ſafely traine.
            
            Let heauen, for me, beare all the blame,
            If I amiſſe my courſe doe frame.
            For who can view (with dreadleſſe eye)
            The falling of the ſtarry sky?
            Or elſe containe his helping hands,
            If he in doubt and danger ſtands
            To be ore-whelmed with the fall
            Of earths groſſe weight, and this vaſte all?
            Or that the aire on flaming fire,
            Our preſent ruine did conſpire?
            Shall vnknowne Nations parties take
            
               With factions that the Romans make?
            Shall Kings, from Clymes remote ſo farre,
            Aſſiſting be vnto our warre?
            And ſhall I hold an idle place?
            Farre from me be a minde ſo baſe!
            Theſe bloudy broyles like to enſue,
            Might moue the Dakes and Getes to view
            Our hard miſhaps; and yet ſhall I
            Careleſſe let Rome her fortune try?
            Or rather as the parent ſhowes
            His tender loue, that mourning goes
            (Accompaned with many frends)
            His childs ſad funerals intends;
            When Nature doth his heart enforce
            Vnto the graue to guide the corſe;
            And then with ſorrow takes in hand
            To fire the ſtack with blazing brand.
            No: otherwiſe can I remoue
            From thee (O Rome) my loyall loue,
            Whilſt that my limbes with life do moue,
            And liberty thy name embrace,
            Or thy vaine ſhadow in thy place.
            But let the world goe how it will,
            And let the wrathfull Gods vp fill
            The full amends for Romes offence,
            In this Warre with our blouds expence;
            No drop thereof will we defraud,
            But if my wiſh yee would applaud,
            O powers of heauen and hell, vouchſafe
            To caſt the burthen of this ſcath
            Alone vpon my wretched head.
            No hoſtile harmes the Decij fled,
            To free their Countrey hard beſtead.
            Let both the Armies me incloſe,
            Let all the barbarous ruthleſſe foes
            Of Rhene, on me beſtow their blowes.
            Yea let my body beare the ſcarres
            Of all the wounds giuen in theſe warres.
            My limbes thereto I would bequeaue,
            And willingly them all receaue.
            
               And happy would my death eſteeme
            The peoples wracke ſo to redeeme.
            Could ſacrifice of my bloud ſpilt,
            Propitiate the Roman guilt?
            Why doe the people fondly throng
            To Tyrants, that our State would wrong,
            And willingly the thraldome truſt
            Of kingly raignes, proud and vniuſt?
            O let me witting onely feele
            The fury of the murthering ſteele!
            Let me that ſtill haue beene afraid
            To violate what Iuſtice ſaid,
            And thus in vaine haue lawes obaid.
            O let this throat be caru'd in twaine,
            If peace by it we may obtaine,
            And giue an end vnto thoſe broyles
            Which now th'Heſperian nation toyles!
            For if with me theſe warres had end,
            No man would Monarchy intend.
            But as it is warres we muſt make,
            And Pompey for our leader take.
            And all our force and courage bend,
            The publicke ſtandard to defend.
            For I aſſuredly doe know
            If Pompey giue the ouerthrow;
            He is of minde too iuſt and meeke
            Supreme command alone to ſeeke,
            But doth ſuch tyranny diſlike.
            To make him victor Il'e be one:
            He ſhall not claime the baies alone.
            Thus Cato ſpake; whoſe feeling words
            (Like pricking neelds, or points of ſwords)
            Stir'd vp ſtout Brutus martiall ire,
            And his yong bloud doth ſet on fire,
            Too much on Ciuill warres deſire.
            ¶ By this time Phoebus ſhining bright,
            With beames had chaſt the chilly night.
                  Martia, Cato's old wife returnes to his houſe againe.
            
            When all the houſe did ringing ſound
            With blowes, that from the gate rebound,
            Giuen by modeſt Martia's hand,
            
               Who mournfully without did ſtand,
            But newly thither come withall
            From her Hortenſius funerall.
            That whilome (in her virgins ſtate)
            Was ſpouſed to a better mate.
            And now againe ſhe was inlarg'd
            From nuptiall bonds, and vowes diſcharg'd.
            Which for a time ſhe did fulfill,
            So to obey her Cato's will.
            And fruitfully her children boare,
            Wherewith two houſes ſhe did ſtore.
            And then with child ſhe was conceiu'd,
            When firſt Hortenſius her receiu'd.
            But after ſhe (with funerall fire,)
            Had paid his bones their lateſt hire:
            And aſhes in the Vrna plac'd,
            With mournfull cheere, and looke defac'd,
            Her haires about her ſhoulders ſpread,
            Sprinkled with cinders of the dead,
            Beating her breaſt with mournfull cry,
            No preſence to delight the eye.
            Thus ſhe her heauie tale began.
            
               
                  Martias ſpeech to Cato.
               ¶Whilſt youths pure bloud through my veines ran,
            And I (repleat with fruitfull ſeed)
            Obayd the heſt by thee decreed,
            Yeelding my ſelfe to husbands twaine,
            Poſterity to both did gaine.
            But now with paines maternall worne,
            And weake with many children borne,
            With thee I ſeeke my dayes to ſpend,
            Fit elſe for none to wedlockes end.
            Reſtore me to thy loue againe,
            That neuer did thy bed diſtaine,
            And (to content my wretched life)
            Affoord me but the name of Wife.
            
            That my ſad Tombe this ſtile may beare,
            
               Cato's true Martia reſteth here.
            
            So that the wrong of future time,
            Slander me not with blameleſſe crime,
            And deeme I had defil'd thy bed:
            
               Becauſe I did Hortenſius wed.
            When well thou knowſt, in thy iuſt minde,
            I was thereto by thee deſign'd:
            Yet ſeeke I not to be thy mate,
            Thereby to liue in better ſtate,
            Or to enioy a life of eaſe:
            To ſhare thy cares me beſt will pleaſe.
            Part in thy trauels I deſire,
            To campe with thee ſhall be my hire:
            Should I in peace and ſafety ſhrowd,
            Whilſt that Cornelia ſo hath vowd
            To follow Pompeys ciuill warre?
            Doe not my loue ſuch grace debarre.
            ¶ Theſe faithfull words ſo won the man,
            That though the time vnfit were than,
            Whilſt ſtrife and tumults were in date,
                  Martia againe married to Cato.
               
            
            To enter into wedlockes ſtate:
            Yet they agreed, the knot was ty'd;
            But ſolemne pompe was laid aſide.
            The Matrimoniall bond alone
            Suffiſd to make the nuptials knowne:
            All Ceremonies they forbeare;
            Onely the Gods their witneſſe weare.
            The Porch with Garlands was not dight,What Ceremonies Cato would haue at his wedding.
            
            The Pillars want ſilke-ribbone white,
            No Tapers lent a flaming light:
            No ſtately ſteps of Ivory
            Ioyn'd to the bed where they ſhould lye:
            The Curtens and the Couerlets
            No gold embrodery beſets:
            No matron there, with crowne of ſtate,
            To guard the bride till it were late,
            From companing her ſpouſed mate:
            No vaile of lawne did hide or grace;
                  Martias attire.
            
            Her modeſt lookes, and baſhfull face:
            Her mantle that did looſely flye,
            No faire imboſſed belt did tye:
            Rich Carkanets her necke had none,
            Set out with pearle, and pretious ſtone:
            But from her ſhoulders there did traile
            
               Downe to her waſte a ſimple vaile;
            Theſe dolefull weeds her ſtate did waile.
            But as ſhe did her children beare
            In ſorrow, and in doubtfull feare,
            Such now her ſpouſall pleaſures were.
            And ouer all her purple gowne,
            A mourning mantle trailed downe:
            No melody, nor muſickes voyce
            Did with theſe nuptials reioyce:
            Nor ſuiting with the Sabines trade:
            No ſolemne feaſts at all were made:
            Her Stoicke husband them forbade.
            No children then the houſe did grace,
            No kinſ-folkes flockt vnto the place:
            The match they made vp ſecretly,
            Suffiſd with Brutus company.
            The Bride groome had long time deferd
            
               The deſcription of Cato and his manner of life.To cut or ſhaue his wilde growne beard:
            It ouer-ſpred his reuerend face,
            In his ſad lookes no mirth tooke place.
            For when he firſt did vnderſtand,
            That Faction furiouſly did band;
            Vnſhorne he left his hairy head,
            Vnkemb'd his rugged brow to ſpread.
            And in like ſort about his face,
            His ſhaggy beard did dangling trace.
            He thought it fit that ſome iuſt minde,
            (Vnto no partiall mood inclin'd)
            Should waile this rage in humane kinde▪
            
            His recreation was not fed
            With comfort of a nuptiall bed:
            
               Loues vigor now in him lay dead.
            And (with the common care fore-ſpent)
            From troubled thoughts could not relent:
            This courſe ſtrict Cato doth content.
            The modeſt meane he ſtill intends,
            And of his actions caſts the ends.
            With Natures lawes he holds no ſtrife,
            And to his Countrey vowes his life.
            He doth not thinke that he was borne
            
               His owne ſtate onely to adorne:
            But that he is in duty ty'd,
            And zeale, to all the world beſide.
            His dainties were but hungers ſtay:
            Large Palaces he did not way:
            But that ſound ſtructure that did hold
            Out Summers heat, and Winters cold.
            And neuer in the pompe exceedes
            Of garments, or of coſtly weedes:
            But as the cuſtome old did beare,
            When Roman Quirites vſd to weare
            Gownes, made of wouen ſhaggy heare.
            He lent no luſt to Venery,
            
            But to maintaine poſterity.
            He Father was, and Husband ſworne
            Vnto his Citty, now forlorne.
            Iuſtice moſt ſtrictly hee obſerues,
            From honeſt faith he neuer ſwerues.
            Voluptuous life he did deteſt,
            It could not breed in Cato's breaſt.
            ¶ Now Pompey,
               
                  Pompey hauing forſaken Rome, comes to Capua.
                and his gathred Troopes
            Of Souldiers, that with terror droopes,
            To Capua's walles themſelues betake,
            And there their randevous doe make.
            A Towne built by the Troian race,
            Where they a Collonie did place.
            This for a ſeat of warre he choſe,
            And in the Countrey round beſtowes
            His bands, and Cohorts to withſtand
            The force of Caeſar, now at hand.
            ¶ Here are thoſe hilles of Apenine,
            
            That in the midſt run like a line
            Alongſt the whole Italian land,
            Where theſe vmbragious mountaines ſtand,The mounts Apenius.
               
            
            Towring their lofty toppes a high;
            None to Olympus comes more nigh.
            This tracke of hilles (betweene two maines)
            Iuſt in the midſt his race out-ſtraines.
            The higher and the lower deepes,
            Theſe hilles conioyn'd a ſunder keepes.
            
               On this ſide doth the Piſan land
            The rage of Tyrrhene ſeas withſtand.
            On th'other ſide Anconas ſoyle
            Makes the Dalmatian flouds recoyle.
            Theſe mountaines in their bowels breeds
            Many ſprings heads, that Riuers feeds:
            Which diuerſly their ſtreames conuart
            Into both ſeas on either part.
            
               Metaurus ſwift, on the left ſide
            
               Names of ſundry riuers that flow from the Apenius.
               And fierce Cruſtumium thence doe glide:
            With Senna, and Iſapis waues,
            
               Iſaurus walles that mildly laues:
            Then Aufidus, that takes his veaſe
            Into the Adriaticke ſeas:
            
               Eridanus, that roots vp woods,
            And ſweepes them with his ſwelling floods,
            And (from the faire Heſperian lands)
            Conuayes them to the Oceans ſtrands;
            This Riuer (as old lawes ſuppoſe)
            With poplar ſhades did firſt encloſe,
            And crowne his banks with circling rowes,
            
               
                  Phaetons flames.When Phaeton (out of the way,
            Leading his blazing Carre aſtray)
            Did ſet on fire the aire and sky,
            The earth did ſinge, and waters dry;
            Whilſt yet this riuers flowing ſtreames
            Held tacke againſt thoſe burning beames:
            And doth maintaine as broad a courſe,
            As Nylus, with his ſeuen-fold ſourſe:
            Except when Nylus ouer-bounds
            The Lybicke and Aegiptian grounds:
            Nor leſſe then Iſtar; but when as
            He doth through many Nations paſſe,
            And other ſtreames vnto him takes,
            That to the ſeas their progreſſe makes:
            Whereby alone he doth not pay
            His tribute to the Scythian bay,
            Now from this mountaines ſteepe right ſide
            Firſt doth the Riuer Tyber glide:
            And high-bankt Rutuba withall:
            
               
               Vulturnus likewiſe with ſwift fall:
            And Sarnus, from whoſe muddy liſts
            The aire about is ſtuft with miſts:
            And Lyris that the prouince trades
            Of ſweet Maurica, clad with ſhades,
            Whoſe backe Veſtinus water lades:
            And Syler, that through Salerne floates:
            With Macra, that will beare no boates,
            But doth diſ-boage into thoſe deepes,
            That by the Citty Luna ſweepes.
            Theſe mountaines (as they longer ſtreach)
            Their tops withall doe higher reach
            Towards the confines of faire France,
            
            And on the Alpes their proſpect glance,
            The Vmbrians and the Marſians ſoyle,
            VVhere the Sabellian plowes doe toile.
            So do theſe Pine-treed hilles embrace
            The coaſts of Latiums ancient race;
            And neuer leaues th'Heſperian ground,
            Till Sycils ſeas their limits bound.
            Yet long agoe did further wend,
            And to Lacinia's Temple tend;
            Vntill ſuch time as her confines
            (By ſeas encroach) their length declines.
            For Italy to Sycill ioyn'd,
            Before the double ſeas purloyn'd
            The land away, and cut the ſhore,
            That earſt was fixt vnto Pelore.
            
            ¶ Caeſar in Armes with furies ſway,
            Not without bloud will ſhape his way.
                  Caeſars humor and expedition.
            
            
               Heſperians he accounts his foes,
            And would not gaine them without blowes,
            Leaſt in that kinde he being ſlacke,
            Might leaue a warre behinde his backe.
            Thoſe gates more pleaſe him that withſtand,
            Then thoſe ſet open to his hand.
            Beſt ſorting are to his deſire
            Thoſe Countries won with ſword and fire,
            Then ſuch as would his peace acquire.
            He ſcornes to march through beaten waies,
            
               Or to deſerue a Patriots praiſe.
            
               At the firſt beginning of the warre the Citties of Italy ſtood wauering to which ſide to inclineThe Latine Citties yet repine,
            And doubt which way they ſhould incline:
            For though at firſt they ſtood at gaze,
            When as the warre began to blaze;
            Yet now their walles they fortifie
            With Ramparts, and with Bulwarkes hye,
            And caſt about them ditches deepe;
            Then to the Towers, and Turrets ſteepe,
            Round ſtones of hugye weight they bring,
            And darts amongſt the foes to fling.
            
               The vulgar do more affect Pompey then Caeſar.
               The vulgar moſt to Pompey bends;
            Yet with their loue their feare contends.
            Like as when whiſtling Southerne winde
            (Vnto tempeſtuous ſtormes inclin'd)
            Shoouing the ſeas before his blaſt,
            The rowling billowes follow faſt,
            Although that Aeols changing hand
            From his vaſt caue do them diſ-band;
            And Eaſterne gale, that checkes the maine,
            Whoſe puffes the very Racke doth ſtraine:
            The ſea his firſt voage yet doth trace,
            And ſtill the Southerne winde imbrace.
            So dread theſe men in doubt did hold,
            Their faith ſo fortune bought and ſold.
            
               
                  Libo flyes from his charge.And Libo firſt (with baſe diſmay)
            
               Hytruria naked left a pray.
            
               
                  
                     Pompeyes great Commanders flie from their gariſons before they ſaw the enemy.
                  
                     Sylla flies from his charge. Varus flies frō 
                     Auximium.
                  
               
               Thermus (with his example led)
            Left Vmbria guardleſſe, and thence fled.
            So Sylla (with opprobrious ſhame,
            Forgetfull of his Fathers fame)
            Trembled to heare but Caeſars name.
            
               Varus likewiſe himſelfe inlarg'd,
            And all the garriſon diſcharg'd,
            That in Auximium he had plac'd,
            Ere any foe the walles had fac'd;
            Out at poſterne gate he rides,
            And in the woods and mountaines hides.
            
               
                  Lentulus forſooke Aeſculea his garriſon.
               Aeſculea, Lentulus forſooke,
            And vnto flight himſelfe betooke.
            
               But him the Victor did purſue,
            Making them turne againe that flue;
            And of ſo many armed bands,
            Onely the leader ſcap't his hands:
            No Enſignes mongſt thoſe Cohorts ſtands.
            And Scypio thou too ſoone didſt leaue
                  Scipio forſook Nuceria, that was man'd with a braue garriſon of Roman Veterans.
               
            
            
               Nuceria, that their ſtate bequeaue
            Vnto thy truſt, which ſo did faile,
            Ere any force did them aſſaile;
            When as that warlike Towne was man'd
            With many a gallant trained band
            Of valiant youths, from Caeſars armes,
            Cal'd to relieue the Parthian harmes.
            But firſt imploy'd on Pompey's coſt,
            To venge the bloud in Gallia loſt.
            And now himſelfe doth warres intend,
            For theſe ſtout troopes againe did ſend,
            To be his father-in-lawes ſure guards:
            This vſe of Roman bloud awards.
            But thou Corfinium, ſtrong-fenc'd hould,
            Commanded by Domitius bould,
            That with huge walles inuiron'd art,
            With Flankes and Ramparts, fit for Mart;
            Thy garriſon were thoſe new bands,
            That Milo tooke from Iuſtice hands.
            Now from the walles (with watchfull eyes)
            
               Domitius firſt neere hand eſpies
            Great clouds of duſt aloft to riſe.
            And with the glittering ſun-ſhine beames,
            Faire armed Troopes caſt flaming ſtreames.
            ¶ Souldiers & friends, quoth he, make haſte,
            This bridge forthwith muſt be laid waſte,
                  Domitius ſpeech to his garriſon Souldiers.
            
            That doth vpon this riuer ſtand:
            See it be razed out of hand.
            And you huge mountaines now let flie
            Your fountaine heads, and raiſe ſo hye
            The flowing Riuers with rough tides,
            That all the boats that thereon glides,
            Vpon the ſhelues may wracke their ſides:
            Stay here the limits of this warre,
            
               This Towne their proud attempt ſhall barre:
            And on theſe bankes thoſe rauening bands
            (With hopeles gains) ſhal make their ſtands.
            Here firſt ſhall Caeſars force deſiſt,
            And victory yeeld to our fiſt.
            He ſaid no more, but haſtes withall,
            The ſwaggring troopes from off the wall,
            That headlong to the worke doe fall.
            ¶ VVhen Caeſar from his Campe perceiu'd
            The Riuers paſſage was bereau'd,
            And that the breaking of the bridge,
            His iournies ſpeed would much abridge;
            
               
                  Caeſars words at the ſiege of Corfinium.
               Enrag'd with wrath: what now? quoth he,
            Are not ſtrong walles eſteem'd to be
            Sufficient ſculking dennes to hide
            Theſe crauen Souldiers terrifide?
            O cowards will you ouer-flow
            The fields, thereby my march to ſlow?
            VVhen Ganges with his ſtickle ſway,
            Nor any other floud can ſtay
            
               Caeſar, from holding on his way;
            Now he the Rubicon hath paſt,
            Yee troopes of horſe ſet forth with haſt:
            And bands of foot come follow on,
            This ſhaken bridge goe ſet vpon.
            ¶ No ſooner he the word did ſpeake,
            But out his forward horſemen breake,
            And doe the riuers bankes aſſaile,
            Like to a ſtormy drift of haile.
            To th'other ſide then they let flye
            A ſhowre of darts, that cloud the skye.
            And Caeſars ſelfe the paſſage takes,
            VVhere none to him reſiſtance makes.
            Then quickly he doth force them all
            To make retrait within the wall.
            And then the Rammes for battery
            Vnto the worke he doth apply.
            VVith other Engines brought in place,
            That Towers and Bul-warkes will deface.
            ¶But ſee the villany of warre!
            
               The garriſon the gates vnbarre,
                  Domitius deliuered to Caeſar by his owne men.
            
            Their Gouernour they doe betray,
            And him a priſoner forth conuay,
            Before proud Caeſars feet to lay,
            But yet his ſtate and noble face
            It ſeem'd no terror did imbaſe:
            For oft he ſtoutly cal'd for death;
            The Victor knew he loathed breath,
            As one that did deſpaire of life.
            But Caeſar ſaid; Our grace is riſe:
            Liue therefore though againſt thy will;
                  Caeſars words to Domitius his priſoner.
            
            And by our gift (ſaid he) liue ſtill.
            Let others (whom I ſhall ſubdue)
            In thee a perfect patterne view
            Of Caeſars mercy; and now chuſe,
            On whoſe ſide thou thy Armes wilt vſe:
            Or if thou wilt retired liue,
            Thy choyce to thee I freely giue.
            But doe not thinke this moues my minde,
            That I thereby like grace would finde,
            If thou hereafter conqueſt gaine;
            That baſe reſpect I much diſdaine.
            Thus ſaid; forthwith he gaue in charge
            His hands from fetters to inlarge.
            But better much had him bety'd,
            If he that preſent houre had dy'd:
            And Fortune more had freed from ſhame
            The honour of the Roman name.
            He holds it now a grieuous ſcorne
            (With reputation ſo forlorne)
            To warre for his deere Countries ſake,
            And therein Pompey's part to take;
            Whom all the Senates forces aides,
            Whilſt hoſtile pardon him vpbraides.
                  Domitius his inward troubled thoughts
            
            Theſe thoughts his heart doe ſtill infeſt,
            And with himſelfe doth thus conteſt:
            ¶ Shall I in Rome goe make my neſt,
            And (as a man degenerate)
            Shut vp my ſelfe in peacefull ſtate?
            And not this noble warre purſue,
            
               That wiſht for death, ſo lately due?
            Nay rather into hazards runne,
            Vntill thy lifes twiſt be out-ſpunne,
            And Caeſars gift with glory ſhunne.
            ¶ Report did not as yet relate
            This Captaines baſe ſubdued ſtate
            To Pompeys eares fraught full of cares,
            For his deſignes that now prepares
            To ſtrength his part with forraigne ſhares,
            And order giues the following day,
            With Trumpets ſound to ſet in ray
            His troopes, and then to feele their minde
            How they to battaile were enclinde.
            To whom, when they did ſilence make,
            With reuerend voyce he thus beſpake.
            
               
                  Pompeys oration to his ſouldiers.¶ Yee vengers iuſt of guilty hands,
            Yee Souldiers of right Roman bands,
            That for defence of Iuſtice ſtands,
            Whom now the Senates ſupreme heſt
            Doth not with priuate armes inueſt;
            Diſpoſe your forward hearts for fight,
            Since now Heſperia (in our ſight)
            Doth flame on fire in wretched ſtate,
            And her faire fields depopulate.
            This clew of rage (in Gallia ſpunne)
            Ouer the yeie Alpes is runne,
            And Caeſar in this raging mood,
            Pollutes his ſword with Latium blood.
            The Gods him iuſtly charge with blame,
            As Author of this ciuill flame.
            And now euen now Rome to me calles,
            Whom ſhe her preſident inſtalles)
            To chaſtiſe theſe rebellious brawles.
            Whoſe armes (with countries bloud defil'd)
            Cannot as worthy warres by ſtil'd:
            To ours that honoured name belongs,
            
               Hee compares Caeſar to Cataline.
               That doe reuenge our Countries wrongs.
            His warre is of no better kinde,
            Then that which Cataline deſign'd,
            When Rome he meant to ſet on fire,
            
               And had with him that did conſpire
            One of the Lentulij his mates,
            
               Caethegus, bare-arm'd in debates.The houſe of the Caethegi vſed alwayes to fight bare Armed.
            
            O wretched rage that ſo doſt raigne
            Within this leaders wilfull braine,
            Whom Fates would raiſe to no leſſe fame,
            Then thoſe of the Camillan name!
            Or thoſe braue Lords Metellij hight.
            But thou art of another ſpright:
            Yhy humor followes iuſt the ſtraine
            Of Cinna's and of Marius vaine:
            Whoſe infamies doe ſtill remains▪
            
            Like Lepidus that was ſuppreſt
            By Catull', or as we diſtreſt
            Proud Carbo, that (by Iuſtice heſt)
            Our Axes fatall edges try'd,
            Whoſe bones Sycilia ſoyle doth hide.
            Or as Sertorius,
               Sertorius. iuſtly ſlaine
            For his rebellious courſe in Spaine.
            
            Although in faith it grieues me much
            So to compare with any ſuch
            Thee Caeſar; but that Romes offence
            Cannot with our reuenge diſpence.
            But would it had beene ſo ordain'd
            That Craſsus victory had gain'd
            Againſt the Parthes, and from the coaſt
            Of Scythia, brought againe his hoaſt;
            Whereby he might thy ſelfe ſubdue,
            As Spartacus he ouerthrew.
            Or if the all fore-ſeeing eye
            Will that we two our forces try;
                  Spartacus a Rebell.
            
            My arme as well as thine ſhall ſhow,
            That it the pearcing Pile can throw.
            And that my bloud, for courage bold,
            Diſdaines by thee to be controld.
            And that a heart to peace inclin'd,
            Is not therefore of cowards kinde.
                  Pompeys oſtentation recounting all his owne great deeds.
            
            For though he tearme me ſpent with yeares▪
            
            Let not my age put you in feares.
            My Campe experience ſo ſhall guide,
            
               As fits an ancient leader try'd.
            Let his be ordered by the ſway
            Of a yong Captaines heady way;
            I haue arriu'd to higheſt place
            That free-men gaine by peoples grace:
            And haue all honours palmes poſſeſt,
            But Monarchy, which I deteſt.
            He (whom ambition ſo doth feed,
            
               A vaine-glorious ſpeech.That Pompeys power he would exceed,
            In ſwaying of the Roman ſtate)
            Affects more then a priuate fate.
            The Roman Peeres this Campe doe grace,
            The Conſuls here doe hold their place.
            Shall Caeſars pride them all out-face?
            O Fortune! can it thus betide,
            That thou ſo blindly things ſhould guide,
            And ſhameleſſe tollerate ſuch pride?
            Becauſe that he (in ten yeares ſpace)
            Had neare ſubdu'd the Gallicke race,
            Where he ſo long a time hath war'd,
            And oft from Rhenes cold banke beene ſcard,
            
               
                  Pompey chargeth Caeſar to haue fled from the Brittons.
               And laid the fault vpon the deepes,
            That with ſuch rage their channell ſweepes
            As no ſhippes there ſafe harbour keepes;
            Thereby his daſtard flight to cloake
            From Brittons, whom he did prouoke.
            But now, ſince he doth proudly boaſt,
            That (at the fame of his fierce hoſt)
            The Senate left their homes for dread,
            And from the armed Citty fled;
            Vaine foole, for feare they fled not thee,
            
               A poore excuſe.But for good will all followed me;
            That haue my glittering ſtreamers ſhowd
            Through all the Seas, with pyrates ſtrowd,
            And did thoſe Rouers force to ſeeke,
            Their refuge, in a little creeke.
            I likewiſe did, with conquering hand,
            Subdue the Soueraigne of that land,
            That Romans force did long withſtand:
            And made an end of Pontus warre,
            
               More bleſt thereby then Sylla farre.
            No part of all the world is free,
            But hath beene conquered by me.
            The cold North ſtreames of Phaſidos
            
            My powerfull hand and conqueſt knowes,
            With Aegypts parching ſands beſides,
            And Syen, whom no ſhadow hides:
            My name is fearfull to the weſt,
            And Spaine likewiſe I haue ſuppreſt:
            Where Baetis riuer laſt of all,
            Into the Ocean ſea doth fall.
            
               Arabia conquered felt my hands,
            And fierce Aenochians warlike bands.
            
               Colchos renownd with fleece of gold,
            And Capadocia I controld.
            The Iewes, the vnknowne God that ſerue,
            And dainty Sophens that preſerue
            Themſelues ſo choyce; th' Armenians,
            
            The Taurynes, and Sylicians:
            All theſe are vanquiſhed by me,
            And nothing from my hands left free:
                  Pompey recounts his actions.
            
            But Ciuill warres vnweldy heft,
            Which to my father-in-law I left.
            ¶ Thus Pompey did his mind make knowne,
            Whereat no ſhowts of ioy were ſhowne.
            Neither ſeem'd they much to deſire
                  Pompeys Souldiers but little mou'd with his great words.
            
            The Trumpet kindling Martiall ire.
            And he himſelfe (diſmaid at this)
            The Bands and Enſignes doth diſmiſſe.
            Not truſting to his ſtaggering troopes,
            That baſely ſo halfe-conquered droopes,
            To heare the ſound of Caeſars fame,
            Before that he a neere them came:
                  Pompey's men amazed at the fame of Caeſar.
               
            
            And therefore would not hazard fight
            VVith cohorts in that daunted plight.
            But as a Bull his leaſe forſakes,
            VVhen he a foyle in combate takes,
            Into ſome groue, and deſart wood,
            Doth range and runne with furious mood.
            In which mad plight, (with rage repleat)▪
            
            
               With hoofe and horns the ſhrubs doth beat,
            And to his paſture comes no more,
            Vntill his ſtrength he doe reſtore.
            And his rug'd necke, and furrow'd hide
            Pleaſe him againe with puft vp pride;
            Doth then at laſt returne againe,
            And more inſult ore all the plaine;
            Leading the heard with him to goe,
            Whether the heardſ-man will or no.
            So Pompeys force (too weake for fight)
            Leaues Italie to Caeſars ſpight.
            And (like a ſculking run-away)
            Doth through Apulia roaue and ſtray,
            Till at Brunduſium he arriues,
            The which ſtrong fortreſſe him reuiues.
            
               
                  Pompey comes to Brunduſium.
               ¶ This Towne of old was firſt poſſeſt,
            By a ſtrange Collony diſtreſt,
            That were as baniſht men out-caſt.
            From Creet, and through the Ocean vaſt
            Conuay'd by ſhips of Athens ſtate,
            (As ancient fables doe relate)
            When Theſeus did blacke ſailes aduance,
            Breading falſe feare of his miſchance.
            This part of Italie doth ſhow
            An indraught, compaſt like a bow,
            In midſt whereof a peece of land
            (Form'd like a tongue out-ſtretcht) doth ſtand
            Which bow the Adriaticke maine,
            With horned compaſſe, doth containe.
            
               
                  Brunduſium deſcribed.And yet thereby ſhips could not finde
            A harbour ſafe from euery winde;
            But that an Iland of high rockes
            Safe from the ſtorme, this indraught blocks:
            And doth repell the raging waues,
            When ſo the ſtormy tempeſts raues.
            And here and there, on euery ſide,
            
               Nature doth ſafely ſo prouide,
            That boats and ſhips may ſafely ride,
            But by a little Cable ty'd.
            And thence they may free paſſage take;
            
               If they a voyage meane to make,
            For the Corcyrian Iland bound;
            Or elſe would ſeke their anchor ground
            On the Ilyrian left-ſide lands,
            Where Epidamnus Citty ſtands.
            Here alſo oft ſea-faring men
            Their tempeſt-driuen ſhips vp pen,
            When Adriaticke ſtormes ariſe,
            Or on Ceraunia cloudy skies:
            Or when Calabrias Saſon ſhores,
            With foaming billowes ſwelles and roares.
            ¶ When Pompey now did plainly finde
            Aſſurance none remaind behinde
            His backe, in Italies affaire,
            Nor that he could himſelfe prepare
            To turne the warre another way
            For Spaine, where his chiefe forces lay:
            Becauſe the Alpes were iuſt betweene
            And from that courſe debar'd him cleane;
            His ſonne vnto him he doth call,
            That eldeſt was amongſt them all:
            And him commands the world to try,
                  Pompey his words to his eldeſt ſonne, whom hee ſends for aids.
            
            For aid whereon he might rely.
            Search Euphrates and Nylus ſhore,
            To whom our fame was ſpred of yore:
            And all thoſe Nations draw to head,
            Where I haue Roman Armies led:
            With all thoſe Pyrates vanquiſhed,
            Whom I in Collonies did ſpredA briefe Catalogue of the nations that aid Pompey.
               
            
            Throughout the large Cylician ſoile,
            Bid them vnto the ſeas recoyle.
            Stirre vp with all the Pharaoh's King:
            Let my Tygranes his force bring;
            But therewithall haue ſpeciall care,
            
               Pharnaces doe his armes prepare,
            With both Armenians wandring rout,
            And Pontus people warlicke ſtout:
            Together with Ryphaean bands,
            And thoſe that coaſt alongſt the ſtrands
            Of ſlow Meotis lake, thicke frorne,
            
               Whereon the Scythian Carts are borne.
            But what, my ſonne, needs many words?
            Bid all the Eaſt now whet their ſwords,
            And Citties all where ſo they ſtand
            That haue beene conquered by our hand:
            And to my Campe ſummon them all,
            That to my Tryumphes haue beene thrall.
            
               
                  Pompeys words to the Roman Lords at Brunduſium.
               And you likewiſe, braue Latium Lords,
            Whoſe names our Holy-dayes records,
            Firſt to Epyrus get you gone;
            Then through the Grecian fields march on:
            In Macedon new force receiue,
            Whilſt winters ſeaſon lends vs leaue.
            When he had ſaid, they all agreed
            To follow what he had decreed:
            And that there might no time be loſt,
            They hoiſe their ſailes, and leaue the coaſt.
            ¶ But Caeſar not enduring peace,
            Nor liking long from Armes to ceaſe,
            
               
                  Caeſar followes Pompey cloſe at the heeles.Leaſt Fortune ſhould eſtrange her face,
            Still hotly doth purſue the chaſe,
            And preſſeth Pompey at the heeles,
            As one that no contentment feeles,
            In ought that yet by him is done:
            That hath ſo many Cities wonne
            In ſo ſhort time; and hath diſtreſt
            So many foes, of Forts poſſeſt:
            And finding Rome, the worlds chiefe head,
            So eaſie to his conqueſt lead,
            The greateſt prize that warre could gaine:
            Yet Caeſar (in his maiſtering vaine)
            With nothing done contents his minde,
            VVhil'ſt ought to doe remaines behinde.
            
               
                  Caeſars humor.But onward in this warre doth trace,
            Though all Italia giues him place:
            And much at Pompey's ſtate repines,
            That he ſhould reſt in her confines.
            And no leſſe doth it him diſpleaſe,
            That he ſhould paſſe from thence by ſeas:
            The Hauens mouth he ſtriues to ſhut,
            
               And therein heapes of rockes doth glut.
                  Caeſar goes about to ſhut vp the Hauen of Brunduſium to keepe in Pompey from flying away.
            
            But that his labour loſt in vaine,
            Swallowd by the deuouring maine.
            And like the ſands are ſpearſt abroad,
            Faſter then hands can them vnload.
            For of thoſe heapes no marke was ſeene
            More then if Athos mount had beene
            Orethrowne, and in the middle caſt
            Of the Egaean Ocean vaſt.
            Or as if G
                     •
                  urus hill ſo ſteepe
            VVere into the deuouring deepe
            Of foule Auernus headlong throwne:
            So this huge worke was ouerflowne:
            No ſigne at all thereof was ſhowne.
            Now therefore he meanes to aſſay
            Another courſe to ſtop the bay.
            VVith piles of wood (hereto deſign'd)
            And huge Oke trees with chains combin'd,The like was vſed by the Spaniards before Antwerpe, which they tearmed a Stockado.
               
            
            This harbours mouth muſt be confin'd.
            So fame reports that Zerxes tryd,
            The raging ſeas to ouerſtride,
            Framing on Helleſpont a way,Zerxes.
            
            Ouer the which he would conuay
            From Aſias ſide his mighty hoaſt,
            Vnto Europas fertill coaſt.
            And on this floting bridge tranſport
            Old Abydos to Seſtus fort.
            Not fearing to be ouer-caſt
            VVith Eurus, or with Zephirs blaſt,
            VVhen he through Athos forc'd a way,
            Safely his Nauy to imbay.
            So was this harbours mouth chain'd faſt
            VVith woods cut downe into it caſt;
            VVhereon they did large Towers aduance,
            That on the rowling billowes dance.
            VVhen Pompey now at laſt perceiu'd
            The out-let of the ſea bereau'd;
            VVith firme compact foundation wrought
            VVhereby the worke to paſſe was brought,
            A world of cares torment his thought,
            
               How to ſet free the bay againe,
            And ſparſe theſe workes into the maine.
            He therefore now ſtout ſhippes prouides,
            (With hoiſed ſailes, and force of tides)
            Againſt this linked bridge to ruſh,
            Which with huge Engines they doe cruſh,
            
               
                  Pōpey forceth a way through Caeſars worke before the harbour.So that peece-meale it teares and ſplits,
            And on the weltring Ocean flits:
            In cliffes and rockes lye linked trees.
            Thus for his ſhips a paſſage frees.
            And in the darke (with force of flings)
            Great wilde-fire balles amongſt them flings.
            Then he commands, in ſtill of night,
            That all prepare themſelues for flight.
            That Mariners no clamours make;
            When to their ſhippes they them betake:
            Nor that the Trumpets warning giue,
            When they their watches doe relieue.
            But that the troopes doe come aboord,
            Not thereto cal'd by Trumpets woord.
            
               It ſeemes Lucan is heere miſtaken, for that this beginning of the war was in the Spring of the yeare, as Appian writeth.The Sunne in Libra now doth ſhine
            On Autumnes Equinoxiall line,
            When (with the dawning of the day)
            They doe prepare to packe away,
            And wey'd their Anchors with no cries,
            That in the oafe deepe buried lies.
            And whilſt they hoiſe their tackled yards,
            The fearfull Maiſters ſilence guards.
            They cut their ſailes, and cables coyle,
            
               
                  Pompey leaues Brunduſium, & flies by ſea in the night.The Sailers without noiſe doe toile.
            Then Pompey Fortune did deſire,
            That now he ſafely might retire
            From Italy; ſince ſhe deſign'd,
            That he no reſting there ſhould finde:
            But ſeem'd it did the Fates diſpleaſe;
            For (with the working of the ſeas)
            The ſhippes pell-mell incumbred were.
            Which did a ſudden clamor reare.
            And falling foule (with bluſtring weather)
            Their beake-heads clattring meet together.
            
               ¶ The enemy the Citty takes,
            As ſoone as Pompey it forſakes.
            The Townſmen ſtraight ſet ope the gates.
            
               So faith doth change when fortune mates.
            
            The walles they had no ſooner wonne,
            But ſtraight the armed troopes doe runne
            To both ends of this compaſt land,
            Which at the harbours mouth doth ſtand.
            And much were vext to looke thereon,
            How Pompey with his fleet was gone.
            O ſhame! a little conqueſt 'tis,
            To ſee great Pompey flying this.
            He ſlipt out at a narrow breach,
            And ſo the Ocean wide did reach:A reproch to Pompey.
               
            
            This breach by which his ſhips did paſſe,
            Through this huge worke, no bigger was
            Then the Eubaean ſtraight, whereon
            There beates the waues of Calcydon.
            
            And here two of theſe ſhips ſtooke faſt,
            Into the which theſe Souldiers caſt
            Huge grapling hooks, with mighty chains,
            That them vnto the ſhore conſtraines.
            Here ciuill bloud the ſea firſt ſtaines.
            The whole fleet elſe free paſſage finde;
            But theſe chiefe ſhips were left behinde.
            Euen ſo when Iaſon tooke in hand,
            Firſt to attempt the Colchos land;Iaſon.
            
            
               Cyanea's cliffe let fall two rockes
            Into the ſea, whoſe boyſterous ſhockes
            One of his leſſer veſſels hits,
            Whoſe ſterne abaft it ſomewhat ſplits:
            Yet ſafely from thoſe rockes ſhe flits
            Into a ſheltring creeke, and theare
            Her wracke forthwith ſhe doth repare.
            ¶ By this the breaking of the day
            A differing colour doth diſplay:
            Yet Phoebus (with his gliſtering head)
            Had not Aurora's cheekes made red,
            Though his approach drew on a pace:
            To which the nearer ſtarres giue place.
            
               The Pleiades no longer ſhines:
            
               Boötes to the Eaſt inclines:
            The greater ſtarres that ſhine by night,
            And Lucifer, that lampe of light,
            Hides from the heate of Tytans ſight.
            Now Pompey through the ſeas doth ſcower,
            But not with like Empiring power,
            As when he did thoſe Pirates foyle,
            That all the maine did robbe and ſpoyle.
            Thy fortunes haue their race out runne,
            Tired with thy great conqueſts wonne.
            So as miſhap thee now doth call,
            With thy deere ſpouſe and children all,
            Into a warre farre off to flee,
            And all thy houſhold Gods with thee.
            And yet (in this exiled fate)
            A noble traine ſupports thy ſtate.
            But oh ſome forraigne ſhore is ſought,
            Whereas thy ruine muſt be wrought.
            Not that the Gods in wrath deſire,
            That thou ſhouldſt want thy funerall fire
            Vntomb'd in thine owne natiue land;
            But with thy death curſe Aegypt ſtrand:
            And free that heynous wretched deed
            From Latium, that thy worth did breed.
            For her ſo Fortune doth prouide,
            In coaſts remote that guilt to hide.
            To keepe the Roman land from ſtaine
            Of bloud, of her deere Pompey ſlaine.
            Finis Libri ſecundi.
         
         
            
            LVCANS PHARSALIA· The third Booke.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               THis doth declare Whilſt Pompey flees,
               The viſion that he dreaming ſees.
               To Sicill Ile is Curio ſent,
               
                  Caeſar to Rome makes his deſcent.
               The Treaſurie as ſpoyle he takes,
               
                  Metellus ſome reſiſtance makes.
               In theſe warres who takes Pompey's Part.
               
                  Caeſar to Spaine transferres his Mart,
               
               And in his paſſage takes in hand
               
                  Marſeilles ſiege by ſea and land.
               Yet onwards ſtill he doth proceed,
               And leaueth Brutus in his ſteed:
               Who by a battell on the Maine
               
               With conqueſt doth the Citty gaine.
            
            
               WIth friendly gales the ſailes doe flye,
            Whilſt through the deepes the ſhips doe plye;
            And all their lookes as they doe wend,
            Vpon Ionias coaſt they bend.
                  Pompey flying by ſea, ſtill caſts his eyes toward Italy.
               
            
            But Pompey's eyes ſtill fixed ſtand,
            Gazing on the Heſperian land,
            
               And whilſt he viewes his natiue ſhore,
            (Which he is like to ſee no more)
            The high lands ſeeme as clouds to ſight,
            And then at laſt doe vaniſh quite.
            Now whil'ſt a ſlumbring ſleepe did ceaze
            His wearied ſprights, to giue them eaſe;
            In dreames, a viſion he deſcries,
            That from below did gaſtly riſe.
            The ſad aſpect of Iulias face,
            
               
                  Pompeys viſion in a dreame on the ſea, & Iulias ſpeech to him.Seem'd to appeare in that ſame place,
            Whereas her funerall fire was made,
            And ſaid, I come from Stygian ſhade,
            Where ghoſts afflicted haunt and trade,
            Chac'd from thoſe faire Eliſian fields,
            To bleſſed ſoules that ſolace yeelds.
            Conſtraind I follow ciuill warre,
            Where I beheld the Furies iarre,
            Sparkling abroad their blazing brands
            Amongſt thy troopes of armed bands.
            And Charon, Ferry-man of Hell,
            
            More skiffes prepares then tongue can tell.
            And Dis new torments doth deuiſe
            For ſoules, that poſting to him flies.
            And now the Fatall Siſters try,
            With all their ſpeed, their worke to ply.
            Yet their three hands can ſcarce ſuffiſe,
            Their webbes ſo faſt in ſunder flies.
            O Pompey! whil'ſt I was thy wife,
            In Triumphes thou didſt lead thy life:
            Thy Fortune ſince, it ſeemes, it fled,
            Cleane chang'd with thy new nuptiall bed,
            Which is ordain'd (by wrathfull Fates)
            To bring her Pheeres to dolefull dates.
            
               Cornelia, that ſame ſtrumpet vile,
            That did her ſpouſall bed defile,
            Before the funerall fires were ſpent,
            Wherein her husbands bones were brent.
            She ſtill thy Enſignes doth accoſt,
            By land or ſea where ſo thou goſt.
            Whilſt, me in memory to keepe,
            
               Thou wilt not breake one houres ſleep.
            No vacant time there doth remaine,
            Your mutuall loue-ſports to reſtraine.
            But Caeſar ſhall thee chaſe by day,
            And I by night will thee diſmay.
            
               Laethe from me cannot remoue
            The memory of thy deere loue.
            The powers infernall licence me
            Throughout the earth to follow thee.
            Amidſt the fierce batalions rage,
            I dreadleſſe will my ſelfe ingage.
            For by my ghoſt I doe proteſt,
            Within thy power it ſhall not reſt,
            (O Pompey) that ſtile to prophane
            Of Sonne-in-law, which thou haſt tane.
            Thou ſeekſt in vaine with thy ſwords edge
            To cut the knot of that vowd pledge.
            Doe what thou canſt, theſe Ciuill harmes
            
            At laſt ſhall caſt thee in mine armes.
            Thus hauing ſaid, the wandring ſhade
            From the embracements ſoftly fade,
            Of her old ſpouſe, herewith adrade:
            Yet though the Gods his ruine threats,
            And ghoſts would moue him to regreats,
            The fiercer he to armes doth flye,
            Reſolu'd his fatall chance to try.
            ¶ What now (quoth he) ſhall ſlumbring ſights
                  Pompeys words hauing ſeene the viſion.
            
            Of viſions vaine, appall our ſprights?
            Either the bodies laid in graue
            Of mortals here, no feeling haue:
            Or nothing 'tis when death doth raue.
            By this time Tytan dipt his head
            Downe into Thetis azur'd bed:
            And onely ſo much light he lends
            Vnto the Earth, as Phoebe ſends
            From her pale face, with hornes new cloſ'd,
            Or when her orbe hath beene compoſ'd.
            Now this deſired ſtranger coaſt,
            Affoords him leaue to land his hoaſt:
            And to that end they did prepare
            
               Their Anchors, and their Cables yare.
            And as they doe approch the ſhoares,
            They ſtrike their ſailes, and ply their oares.
            ¶ When Caeſar ſaw that from the bay
            The windes had borne the fleet away,
            
               
                  Caeſar diſcontent with Pompeis eſcapeWhich now the ſeas hid from his ſight,
            Although his onely power and might
            Commanded all Heſperia ſoyle;
            No glory yet in him did boyle,
            So to put Pompey to that foyle.
            But did his minde much more diſpleaſe,
            That ſo his foes had ſcap't by ſeas.
            
               Fortune by no meanes could content
            The height whereto his minde was bent:
            He weyes not ſo much conqueſts gaine,
            As ſtill in raging warres to raigne.
            And yet now ſeemes that he doth meane,
            From care of warres his thoughts to weane:
            And to intend the publicke peace;
            Hoping by that meanes to encreaſe
            The peoples vaine vnconſtant loue,
            And diſcontentments to remoue.
            
               
                  Caeſar affects to winne the peoples fauor.Which to effect, the grateful'ſt way
            Was how the common dearth to ſtay:
            For now the Cities, and the reſt
            
               Famine moſt grieuouſly oppreſt.
            Then Awe, and Loue are ſureſt bread,
            When by the rich the poore are fed,
            The ſtarued vulgar nothing dread.
            ¶ Curio therefore to this intent,
            
               
                  Curio ſent into Sycilia.
               Into Sycilia Ile is ſent:
            Whereas the ſeas with furious waues,
            Either the mouldring ſhores ſtill ſhaues,
            Or elſe the clyffes ſo beates and ſhakes,
            As in the land great indraughts makes.
            And ſtill their fury ſo maintaine
            As keepes the parted confines twaine
            That they can neuer ioyne againe.
            Now rage of warre (but new begunne)
            Doth ouer all Sardinia runne.
            
               Both of which Ilands ſtill abound
            With fertill croppes vpon the ground;
                  Sycilias fruitfulneſſe,
            
            So as no coaſt on all that maine
            
               Heſperia ſerues with ſo much graine.
            The Roman barnes no land ſo feeds,
            Scarcely the ſtalkes the eares exceeds.
            Not Affricke doth affoord like ſtore;
            When as the clouds, with Boreas rore,
            Breeds fruitful years, and moiſts the ſhore.
            Thus Caeſar did, with care prouide
            How theſe defects might be ſuply'd:
            Then marcheth on (with ſtately port)
            But not in any warlicke ſort:
            His countenance ſeem'd to peace deſign'd,
            And ſo to Rome his courſe enclin'd.
            ¶ O had he come vnto that Towne,
            Only adorn'd with the renowne,
                  Caeſar comes to Rome.
               
            
            And Trophies of the Gallicke ſpoyles,
            And glory of his Northerne broyles,
            How great a traine, what worthy ſhowes
            Might he haue made of conquered foes?
            Of all his Rhene and Ocean thralles,
            His conqueſt of the noble Gaules,
            
            And with them all his captiue flockes,
            Of Brittons, with their yellow lockes.
            O what a triumph did he leefe,
            In winning more then all of theſe!
            ¶ The Cities now as he remoues,
            Did not (in troopes to ſhew their loues)
            Meet him with ſhouts and friendly cries:
                  Caeſar not applauded by the Citties, as he paſt towards Rome.
               
            
            But ſilent, and with fearfull eyes.
            No flockes of people in the fields
            To ſee him there, applauſes yeelds:
            Yet his contentment ſtands in this,
            That he to them a terror is.
            For he did euer more approue
            The peoples feare, then their vaine loue.
            ¶ Now he the ſteepy Towres had paſt
            Of ſtrong Anxuris, and at laſt
            The fennie way withall he takes,
            
               That lies between Pontinas lakes:
            Neere which the groue aloft is ſeene,
            Of Diane, Scythians heauenly Queene.
            And not farre thence, high Albas way,
            Where Latium rites make Holiday.
            From whence vpon a rocke on hye,
            A loofe, the Citty he did eye:
            Which (ſince his Gallicke warre began)
            He neuer yet had ſeene till than.
            And now (admiring that proſpect)
            To Rome this ſpeech he did direct.
            ¶ O ſeate of Gods! could this men ſo
            
               
                  Caeſars ſpeech looking vpon Rome.
               Forſake thee, ere they ſaw a foe?
            If thou canſt not, what Citty can
            Deſerue to be fought for by man?
            Well haue the higher powers repreſt,
            The humors of the armed Eaſt,
            
            From ioyning with the Hungars ſtout▪
            
            And all that fierce outragious rout
            Of Dakes, of Getes, and Sarmatans,
            
            From bringing downe their bloudy bands
            To thee (poore Rome) by Fortune ſpar'd,
            Whom fearefull Pompey durſt not guard.
            So weakely mand, more bleſt art farre
            With Ciuill then with Forraigne warre.
            ¶ Thus ſaid, forthwith he did inveſt
            The Citty, then with feares poſſeſt:
            For ſure they thought, that (in his ire)
            All ſhould haue beene conſum'd with fire,
            
               
                  Caeſar is not ſo cruell as the Romans ſuſpected.And Temples ſhould to ruine runne,
            As ſoone as hee the walles had wonne.
            Such was the meaſure of their fright,
            His will they conſtru'd by his might.
            And in ſuch ſudden mazements weare,
            That they their ſacred rites forbeare.
            The common ſort to ſportings bent,
            Their merry tunes turn'd to lament:
            No ſpleen they had, their ſprights were ſpent
            
            The Roman Fathers reuerend troope
            In Phoebus Pallace ſitting, droope:
            
               Not thither called at an houre,
            By order of the Senates powre.
            No Conſuls with their preſence grace
            Their ſacred ſeates in ſupreme place.
            Nor next to them the lawes to ſway
            The Praetor ſate in his array.
            No Coches at the Senate gate,
            That thither bring the Peeres of ſtate.
            
               Caeſar alone was all in all,
            His priuate voyce the Court doth thrall.
                  Caeſars great authority in Rome.
               
            
            The Fathers to his heſts giue way,
            Rady his pleaſure to obay.
            Whether he Monarchy deſire,
            Or would to ſacred rites aſpire:
            Or liues of Senators would waſt,
            Or them into exile would caſt.
            But he (more modeſt and more milde)
            Did bluſh his power ſhould be defil'd;
                  Caeſars modeſty.
            
            More to command (with threatning feare)
            Then well the Roman ſtate could beare.
            ¶ But one there was amongſt the reſt,
            For liberty that would conteſt:
            And in a rage he tooke in hand,
            To know if Caeſar might withſtand
                  Metellus a Roman Tribune conteſts with Caeſar.
               
            
            The ancient Rules of their free ſtate,
            And in that point would right debate.
            This ſtout Metellus was, who ſaw
            A ſwarming troope of Souldiers draw
            Neere to Saturnus Temple gates,
            That were lockt vp from dire debates,
            Steps forth enrag'd, and doth aſſay
            Through Caeſars bands to force a way.
            
               So much of tempting gold the loue
               
                  Metellus would protect the Treaſury of Rome from Caeſars ſpoyle.
            
            
               The mindes of mortall men can moue,
            
            
               Danger of ſword and death to proue.
            
            The lawes no Valor doth protect,
            The care thereof all do neglect.
            But (that which is moſt vile of all)
            Riches, whereto baſe mindes are thrall,
            Stirres vp a fooliſh idle brawle.
            
               This Tribune, with a tongue at large,
            The out-rage laies to Caeſars charge:
            And telles him plainly that before
            He ſhall breake ope the Temple dore,
            The ſword ſhould firſt his breaſt inuade,
            And bathe in ſacred bloud his blade.
            And that the Gods for iuſtice ſake,
            Vengance would pay if ſpoyle he make,
            Or doe by force the treaſure take.
            The Tribunes curſes in like caſe
            (Said he) did greedy Craſſus trace.
            And did againſt him ſo preuaile,
            That wofull warre his pride did quaile.
            Doe thou ſo now vnſheath thy ſword,
            That doſt ſuch lawleſſe leaue affoord
            To this iniurious foule contempt
            From peoples rage thou art exempt.
            What can this forlorne towne attempt?
            Thy wicked Souldiers muſt not craue,
            The treaſures of our ſtate to haue:
            Elſe-where thou haſt ſufficient ſpoyles
            Of conquered Townes in other ſoyles.
            No want at all thy troopes conſtraines,
            Of our long peace to ſhare the gaines:
            In warre (O Caeſar) looſe the raines.
            ¶ With theſe proud words the Tribune hath
            So farre prouoked Caeſars wrath,
            As that with ſcorne he did reply;
            
               
                  Caeſars words to Metellus the Tribune.In vaine poore ſoule thou hop'ſt to dye
            So braue a death, as by my blade:
            Nought hath Metellus worthy made,
            So great a grace as Caeſars ire,
            It ſorts not with thy proud deſire.
            Thinkſt thou that freedoms ſtate muſt ſtand
            Supported by thy feeble hand?
            My glory wonne in ſo long warre,
            Thy vaine conceipt exceeds ſo farre,
            As that the lawes would leſſe deteſt,
            By Caeſars hand to be ſuppreſt,
            Then by Metellus voyce to hold,
            
               The freedome that they did of old.
            So Caeſar ſpake, and yet before
            The Tribune left the Temple dore,
            His rage increaſed more and more.
            And to the wrathfull ſwords he preſt,
            Forgetting what his gowne profeſt.
            ¶ But Cotta check't, and ſtaied than,
                  Cotta's diſcreet words to Metellus.
               
            
            The ſawcy boldneſſe of this man.
            And ſaid; the freedome now they held,
            To ſoueraigne power in ſpight muſt yeeld.
            For though this act thou couldſt maintaine,
            Thou ſhouldſt but freedomes ſhadow gaine.
            Since our deiected ſtate obayes
            So many other ſeruile wayes.
            This comfort and excuſe we haue,
            If ſlander vs as baſe depraue.
            
               Reſiſtleſſe power doth all men braue.
            
            And I would rather wiſh to heare,
            Theſe ſeedes of warre diſperſed weare.
            With loſſe of wealth thoſe may be vext,
            That freedome haue for their pretext.
            
               For want more grieuouſly doth raue
            
            
               Vpon the maiſter then the ſlaue.
            
            ¶ Metellus being put aſide,
            The Temple was ſet open wide:
            And ſuch a noyſe the ruſhing ſhockes
            Did make, when they did force the lockes,
            That the Tarpeian cliffe did ſound,
            Lowd with the Eccho's that rebound.
            Out of the Temple cleane they ſwept
            The wealth,The treaſures of Rome taken by Caeſar.
                that had full ſafe beene kept
            So long agoe by conqueſts gain'd,
            Whereof ſcarce memory remain'd.
            ¶ The treaſures got in Punicke broyles,
            The Perſian, and Macedons ſpoyles;
            With heapes of gold, that were a pray,
            When Pirrhus trembling fled away,A Catalogue of thoſe places from whence the Roman treaſures came
            
            That had Fabritius faith aſſay'd,
            In vaine our Rome to haue betraid.
            And whatſoeuer heretofore
            
               Our frugall ſires laid vp in ſtore:
            With all the tribute and the rent,
            From time to time that Aſia ſent:
            And all the ſpoyles from Creta fot,
            By conqueſt that Metellus got:
            With Cato's wealth, which he did bring
            (By long ſeas) from the Cyprus King:
            With all the treaſures of the eaſt,
            And thoſe rare Trophies that did feaſt
            The eyes of all that them beheld,
            When Pompeys triumphes ſo exceld:
            And was the lateſt conqueſt wonne
            On thoſe great kingdomes ouer-runne.
            All theſe the Victors vſe ſupplies
            By wofull rapine made good prize.
            
               
                  Caeſar richer then all Rome.
               Whereon might truly paſſe this doome,
            
               Caeſar was richer now then Rome.
            
            ¶ Pompey meane while a world had wonne,
            That would in warre his fortune runne:
            Great Cities on his ſide did band,
            
               The aids that came to Pompey.
               That ſhall at Caeſars mercy ſtand.
            The Graecians firſt their ſuccour lends:
            
               Amphiſa her braue Phoceans ſends;
            Then thoſe that doe the Countries fill,
            On both ſides of Parnaſsus hill;
            With rocky Cyrrha, to him ſwarmes
            The Captaines of Boetian Armes.
            Where Cephiſos, with his ſwift waues,
            Old Cadmus Citty weltring laues.
            Whoſe water fatall anſweres raues.
            To theſe, Piſean people ioynes:
            With ſweet Alpheus, that purloynes
            Her ſecret current vnder ground,
            Till ſhe Trinacria hath found.
            
               Menala then th'Arcadians leaue,
            And to theſe warres themſelues bequeaue:
            And Trachine Souldiers thither flye,
            From the Herculean Oeten hye:
            The Theſprotes and Driopes
            
            Doe likewiſe march along with eaſe.
            
               The Sellae, that his part doe take,
            Their ſolitary groues forſake,
            That on Chaonians toppe doe ſhake.
            And though th'Athaenian bands were ſpent
            In former warres whereto they went,
            Yet loyall Salamina lent
            Three little ſhippes, which now they rigge,
            That in Phoebeian docks did ligge.
            The ancient Creet, Ioues loued land,
            Where Citties ten times ten did ſtand,
            Her Gnoſsian quiuers thither ſent,
            With people vſing bowes euent:
            
               Gortinae ſhewes the like good will,
            Whoſe Archers equals Eaſterne skill.
            Then Orithow ſent Dardan ſtrength:
            With Athamus that farre in length
            Diſperſeth many woods ſhe ownes.
            And old Enchyle, where the ſtones
            Shew Cadmus metamorphoz'd bones.
            So Colchis, and Abſirtos flud,
            Whoſe froth filles Adriaticke mud.
            The Paeni, that (with clowniſh skill)
            The Countries all about there till.
            And with Theſſalian Plowes doe toyle,
            And furrough vp Hialcons ſoyle.
            From whence (into the raging maine)
            Was carried firſt that ſtranger traine,
            Of Argonauts, whoſe boyſterous bands
            Did range and ſpoyle in forraine lands.
            They firſt the practiſe did contriue,
            How men againſt the ſeas might ſtriue.
            And how with ſailes to take the winde,
            Whereby remoted ſhores to finde.
            And therewithall they did diſplay
            To loathſome Death a new found way,
            On mortals liues to raue and pray.
            The Thracian Aemus is left bare:
            And Pholoe, whoſe manrood are
            (As lying fables leaue to minde)
            By nature ſhap't of Centaurs kinde.
            
               
               Strymon (that doth to Nylus ſands
            Send birds of the Biſtonian lands)
            Her aid ſets out in warlicke bands:
            And barbarous Conè, when ſhe leaues
            
               Sarmatian ſtreames, and after cleaues
            To Peucens ſpreading channell deepe,
            One of thoſe heads alone doth keepe,
            That from great Iſtars current ſweepe:
            Then Miſia and Idalis land,
            That mingles with cold Caicos ſtrand,
            And the Arisban barren mould,
            With thoſe that doe Pitanen hould;
            Then the Celenes moſt accurſt,
            Lamenting that their Marſia durſt
            (O Pallas with thy gifts elate)
            Stirre conquering Phoebus to debate.
            And high ſhoar'd Marſia whoſe ſwift race,
            Crooked Meander doth embrace,
            And with her, wheeles about her pace.
            With Pactols ſands, that do vnfold,
            The pretious graines of glowing gold
            To forraigne coaſts, and Hernius ſtrands,
            That equals it with pretious ſands.
            So likewiſe all the Ilium bands,
            To fruitleſſe warres for Pompey ſtands.
            Neglecting the old flying fame,
            That Iulius of the Troians came.
            
               
                  Caeſar ſuppoſed to bee come of the Troians.
               So Syria her aſſiſtance giues,
            And the inhabitants that liues
            About Orontes deſart coaſts,
            And Ninus towne, whoſe bliſſe fame boaſts:
            
               Damaſcus ſubiect to high windes:
            
               Gaza likewiſe; and where men findes
            Palme-trees ſo rife, and thicke to ſtand,
            Named the Idumean land:
            The ſea-waſht Citty Tyrus hight,
            
               The Tyrians & Sidonians skilfull ſea-men.
               Sydon with pretious purple dight,
            Their ſhips (when to the warres they flye)
            Range not the ſeas vncertainly.
            No ſea-men haue the Art more try'd,
            
               How by the Pole their courſe to guide.
            So likewiſe (if we credit fame)
            
               Phoenicians were the firſt had name,The Phaenicians the firſt that inuented letters.
            
            The vſe of characters to finde,
            And letters to expreſſe our minde.
            
               Memphis the practiſe had not found
            Of thoſe broad flagges vpon her ground,The Memphites kept their magicke art carued in ſtones, with the figurs of Beaſts and Birds before they knew letters.
            
            How they together ſhould be bound.
            Of beaſts and birds (this was their trade)
            The ſhapes deepe cut in ſtones they made.
            And ſo their magicke art preſaru'd
            In brutiſh Images faire caru'd.
            Then thoſe inhabitants that roues
            About mount Taurus wooddy groues.
            And Perſian Tarſus, with thoſe men,
            That cut rockes for Coricum denn.
            The Mallians, and the Aege coaſt,
            Whoſe ſhippes doe ring with billowes toſt.Theſe were the Pirats that Pompey conquered, and triumphed for long befor the ciuill war began.
            
            And Silix now the ſeas frequent
            Allowd, but not as Pyrates ſent.
            So are the Eaſterne Countries led
            Vnto this warre by fame farre ſpread.
            That Ganges now her troopes forth brings,
            The current of whoſe floating ſprings
            Of all ſtreames in the world dares runne,
            A courſe contrary to the Sunne;
            And headlong flies againſt the Eaſt,
               
                  Ganges runnes his courſe cō
                  trary to the Sunne.
            
            Heere it is ſaid the warfare ceaſt,
            That Macedons great Captaine made,
            
            When he the Ocean did invade.
            And did himſelfe ore-come confeſſe
            With this vaſt worlds vnweldneſſe.
            There Indus fiercely forth doth ſweepe,The place where Alexander ended his warre.
            
            With mighty ſtreames, and channels deepe,
            Diuided into gulfes alone,
            But with Hidaſpis mingles none.
            Then thoſe that the ſweet liquor ſwilles,
            Which from the ſugar-canes diſtilles:A people that doe paint and adorne their haire with Iewels.
            
            And they that vſe with ſaffrons graine,
            To giue their haire a ſhining ſtaine.
            
               And ſo in dainty lawnes doe dangle,
            Which they with gliſtering Iewels ſpangle.
            And thoſe that make their funerall piles,
            Before that Death their Life exiles.
            And doe without conſtraint embrace,
            The furious flames with dreadleſſe face.
            O how great glory doe they gaine,
            
               A people that do burn themſelues, and not attend their natural death.That death can hold in ſuch diſdaine,
            With their owne hands (in ſpight of fates)
            To haſten on their welcome dates;
            And whilſt in perfect health they liue,
            Their ſoules vnto the Gods do giue!
            Then thoſe fierce Capadocian lads
            Whom hunting humors ſo much glads,
            
               A hunting nation.With bruske Ammannian plowing ſwads:
            
               Armenia, where Nyphatem flowes,
            And rowles huge pebbles as ſhe goes,
            With the Coaſtrae forreſts hye,
            Whoſe lofty toppes doe threat the skye.
            And yee Arabians (that doe view
            An vncoth clime vnknowne to you)
            Do wonder much the ſhade to ſee
            Streame from the left ſide of a tree.
            Then came vnto this Roman warre
            Th'Oreſtians, that doe dwell a farre:
            The leaders of Carmania bands,
            Whoſe climate to the Southward ſtands,
            Not wholly hid from Arctons light,
            But ſee his Carre part of the night.
            And Aethiop neere to all the ſignes,
            That in the cirkling Zodiaque twines.
            Excepting Taurus clouen heeles,
            When cowring crookedly he reeles.
            And where great Euphrates is bred
            With ſwift ſtream'd Tygris from one head,
            In Perſian fountaine ioyntly fed.
            Who when they mingle here and there,
            Breeds doubt which of the names they beare
            But Euphrates (with fruitfull ſtreames,
            As ſhe doth trauerſe ſundry realmes)
            Reſembles Nylus in her courſe.
            
               But Tygris in her rapid ſourſe,The riuer Tygris runnes a great way vnder the ground and then riſes againe.
            
            Is ſuddenly deuoured quite,
            Into the earth from all mens ſight,
            And vnder ground doth runne her race
            Till with new head her ſtreame ſhe trace,
            And with the Ocean enterlace.
            This while the Parthians held them coy,
            Either to helpe or to annoy,
            Any of theſe two mighty guides,The Parthians refuſed to ioyne either with Caeſar or Pompey, but laugh and looke on.
            
            They'l warre on none of both their ſides:
            But laugh which way the world it ſlides.
            The wandring Scyths, with poyſned darts,
            Their aid vnto this warre imparts.
            And Bactrians cloſd with chilly gulfes,
            VVith Hircane forreſts foſtring wolfes.
            Then the Henochians bring their band,
            A part of Lacedemon land.
            That headſtrong are where they withſtand
            And of Sarmatia all that track,
            That ioynes to Mosko backe to back.
            And where rich Phaſis cuts and bounds
            The Colchos fields, and fruitfull grounds.
            VVith Halis bringing heauy fate
            To Craeſus, in his rich eſtate▪
            
            And where as Tannais tumbling downe
            His ſtreames, from off Rypheus crowne.
            Giues vnto Nations ſundry names,
            As ſhe her winding channels frames.
            And Europe doth on either ſide,
            From Aſia with her bankes diuide.
            Now here, now there, which way ſhe bends,
            The limits of the world extends.
            And where the Euxine ſea doth take
            Huge torrents from Meotis lake,
            And ſo the glory doth abate
            Of Gades, whom (as tales relate)
            Did onely through her pillars twaine,
                  Hercules Pillars ſet vp at Gades.
               
            
            That way let in the weſterne maine,
            VVrought by the huge Herculean paine.
            Then aids come from Scythonian ports,
            
               With whom the Arimaſps conſorts.
            
               The delicacy of the Arimaſpes.
               Thoſe doe with golden phillets dreſſe
            Their curled lockes, and combed treſſe.
            The Axij, Pompey's part profeſſe,
            With Maſſagets, that did let blood,
            Their horſes hoofes in ſteed of food,
            So to releieue their hungry mood,
            In the Sarmatick lingring brawle,
            
               The Maſſagets in their warres for want of victuals let their horſes bloud, & ſo relieued themſelues.And Gelons ſwifteſt of them all,
            So huge a maſſe of Martiall bands
            Came not from the Memnonian lands,
            When Cyrus did his armies make,
            For warres that he had vndertake.
            Nor Zerxes with his boyſterous crew
            That all his thouſands onely knew
            By counting of the darts they threw.
            Nor Agamemnons nauy ſtrong,
            Which to reuenge his brothers wrong,
            With Graecian Princes paſt the ſeas,
            In number euer equal'd theſe.
            
               The variety of Nations, Languages and attires that were in Pompeys campe.So many Kings to battaile preſt,
            Neuer obay'd one Chiefetaines heſt.
            Such diuers formes of habites ſtrange,
            Of language ſuch confuſed change,
            So great a traine of royall Peeres
            
            Was neuer ſeene in former yeares,
            As Fortune now did lead in dance,
            To mingle with this warres miſchance.
            Like funerals for Pompey's ſake
            A fitting exequie to make.
            Then Corniger, that Hammon hight,
            
               Iupiter Hammon.Did not forbeare with ſupreme might,
            To ſummon all Marmatick lands
            Vnto theſe warres to leade their bands.
            Or whatſoeuer force did reſt
            Euen from the furtheſt of the weſt,
            Of parching Lybs, and ſun-burnt Moores;
            Together with the Eaſterne powers,
            As farre as Paratonia ſtrands,
            Vnto the bounds of Syrtes ſands.
            
               That Caeſars fortune yet may know
            He had not wonne all at a blow:
            But ſhould in the Pharſalian fields
            Incounter worlds with ſpeares and ſhields.
            ¶ Now Caeſar following on his Mart,
               
                  Caeſar takes his iourney from Rome towards Spaine.
               
            
            From trembling Rome he doth depart:
            And (with his valiant expert hoſt)
            Ouer the cloud-brow'd Alpes doth poſt.
            And whilſt that other Citties feare,
            The thundring fame of him to heare,
            
               Maſsilian youthes dare take in hand,
            As N
                     ••
                  ters in theſe warres to ſtand.
            Not with Greeke lightneſſe vnreſolu'd,The courage of the Maſſilians.
               
            
            But with a conſtant courage bold,
            They doe entend for to debate
            The lawes and freedome of their ſtate,
            And not to change or follow fate.
            But yet before they do engage
            Their Cittie vnto battailes rage,
            They will attempt (with all their skill)
            To qualifie his head-ſtrong will
            With courteous and perſwaſiue words,
            And not till need vnſheath their ſwords.
            Now therefore when they vnderſtand
            That Caeſars force was neere at hand,
            
               Embaſſadors to him were ſent,
            Who with them Oliue branches hent,
            To ſhew that peace was their intent.
            ¶ Your Latium Annals doe make knowne
            
               Maſsilia ſtill ſuch faith hath ſhowneThe Oration of the Maſſilians to Caeſar.
               
            
            Vnto the reuerend Roman ſtate,
            As that in all the dire debate,
            That they haue had with forraigne foes,
            She hath partaked with their blowes.
            And now if thou doe vndertake,
            Conqueſts in vnknowne Climes to make,
                  Maſſiliians offer to aid Caeſar in forraigne warres, but not to intermeddle in this ciuill ſtrife.
            
            Command our true deuoted hands,
            To warre with thee in forraigne lands.
            But if yee (with infeſtious Armes)
            Prepared are for diſcords harmes,
            
               To ciuill warres, then giue vs leaue
            Our teares in ſecret to bequeaue.
            Againſt all piety it ſtands,
            In bloud of friends to bath our hands.
            But if the Gods (to wroth inclin'd)
            VVith venging arms would ſhew their mind,
            Or if the earth-bred Gyants fell,
            Againſt high heauens would rebell,
            Yet humane duty ſhould not dare
            VVith an inferior bootleſſe care,
            Either by treaty, or by might,
            To offer for the Gods to fight.
            Little can we poore mortals geſſe
            VVhat humors higher powers poſſeſſe:
            VVhen Ioue from high his anger wreakes,
            He thunder-bolts and lightning ſpeakes.
            Admit that many nations ſtrange,
            Amongſt theſe broyles their forces range.
            And that the ſottiſh vulgar ſort
            VVould this contagious crime ſupport,
            And not repine (conſtrain'd from farre)
            To whet their ſwords for ciuill warre;
            Yet be it farre from honeſt hearts
            To follow any factious parts.
            
               A reprehenſion of this ciuil warre.Let no braue Souldiers venter life,
            To bolſter out domeſticke ſtrife.
            VVhat hand would not with feare be taint,
            To ſee his wounded father faint?
            Brothers that warre on either parts,
            VVill doubt to throw their fatall darts.
            And ſure your Empires ſtate will end,
            
               The ſumme of the Maſſilians Petition to Caeſar.
               If warres vniuſt you doe intend.
            But now our ſuite we doe commend,
            VVhich is, that from our Citty gates,
            You would with-hold all dire debates;
            And no infeſtious Enſignes ſend,
            
               The Maſſilians offer to receiue Caeſar vnarmed, and without his Troopes.Nor Egles fierce vs to offend;
            But that as to your friends moſt iuſt
            Your perſon with our walles would truſt.
            VVhere Caeſar may (deuoid of doubt)
            
               Aſſure himſelfe his armes ſhut out.
            Our Towne is free from enuies wroth
            To Caeſar and to Pompey both.
            But if that Romes vn-vanquiſht ſtate
            Shall ſtill ſubſiſt by fauouring Fate;
            And that your humors it might pleaſe,
            Your wraths with friendſhip to appeaſe▪
            
            Here may you both vnarmed meet,
            And peaceably each other greet.
            But if prouoking warres of Spaine,
               
                  Maſſilia indifferēt between Caeſar & Pompey offer their Towne for a place of parly.
            
            Your forces thither doe conſtraine;
            Why range you then ſo farre aſtray?
            Our Citty lies not in your way;
            Whoſe worth of no importance is,
            Our ſtate ſtands ſtill exempt from bliſſe.
            We could not earſt with happy armes,
            Defend our ſelues, and countries harmes.
            But exil'd made our laſt retreat
            From Phocis Towers, our natiue ſeat;
            Arriuing in this ſtranger port,
            Where we ſecurely raiſd a fort,
            Rounded with walles of no great haigth,The ſtrength of the Maſſilians conſiſted in their loyall dealings with their neighbours.
            
            But alwayes guarded with our faith.
            Now if you will beſiege our Towne,
            And teare our gates and ramparts downe,
            And ſet our houſes on a fire,
            Spending on vs your hoſtile ire,
            Our water-courſes turne awry,
            And all our fountaine heads draw dry,
            And ſucke the moiſture from thoſe fields,
            That fruits and graine vnto vs yeelds.
            O then behold a loathſome ſight,
            When Famin ſhall (with rauening plight)
            Conſtraine vs for to eate and gnaw
            Our fleſhy limbes to feed our maw;
            Our liberties we hold ſo deare,The reſolution of the Maſſilians.
               
            
            That we no toyles nor torments feare.
            But as Saguntum, with renowne,
            When Hannibal beſieg'd that Towne,
            Our mothers ſo, with dried pappes,
            
               Will caſt their infants from their lappes,
            Into the fire, to end miſhaps.
            The wife will begge with watery eye
            Of her deere husbands hand to dye.
            And miſchiefes meaſure vp to fill,
            The brother will the brother kill.
            Such ciuill warre they'le rather make,
            Then any other vndertake.
            ¶ Thus the Maſsilian Legats ſaid,
            Which ſpeech did Caeſar ſo vpbraid,
            As that in him it ſtird vp ſpleene
            Which in his very lookes were ſeene.
            And in theſe tearmes expreſt his teene.
            
               
                  Caeſars anſwere to the Maſſilians.
               ¶ Your Graecian race conceiues in vaine,
            What courſe we meane to entertaine.
            For though our iourney ſeeme to bend
            Weſtward for Spaine, yet we may ſpend
            And ſpare ſufficient time to boote,
            To raze your walles vp by the roote.
            Reioyce my Cohorts, at this hap;
            
               Fate caſts a warre into your lappe.
            The bluſtring windes do looſe their grace,
            When in the vacant aire they trace,
            If no thicke woods withſtand their race.
            
               
                  Caeſars Army cannot indure idleneſſe.The flaming fire is but a blaſt,
            If fewell be not on it caſt:
            So is it noiſome vnto me,
            Without a warring foe to be.
            My troopes that idle life doe rue,
            When they meet no rebellious crue,
            That with their force they may ſubdue.
            
               
                  Caeſar diſdains that the Maſſilians offer him to come diſarmed into their Towne, or elſe to ſhutte their Gates againſt him as an enemie.
               Maſsilians thinke they offer faire,
            That Caeſar may vnarm'd repaire
            In priuate ſort ſafe to their ſtate,
            Or elſe they will ſhut vp their gate:
            I needs muſt ſcorne this double flout,
            
               To ſhut me in, or ſhut me out.
            
            Then they will ſeeme to baniſh farre,
            Contagion of a ciuill warre;
            But they ſhall ſmart in that they dare
            
               Intreat of peace in my affaire,
            And by experience well ſhall ſee
            None are then thoſe more ſafe and free,
            That by my armes protected be.
            So hauing ſaid, his troopes he leades
            Towards the Towne that nothing dreads,
            Whoſe gates were ſhut, & walles well mand
            VVith ſtore of youths that on them ſtand.The ſiege of Maſſilia.
               
            
            ¶ Not farre from thence Caeſar eſpies
            A hill, that loftily did riſe.
            VVhoſe toppe extends a pretty ſpace,
            Fit for a little camping place.
            This he eſteem'd a peece of ground,
            VVhich all their tents might ſafely bound,
            Caſting a trench about it round.
            The Cities ſide next fronting this,
            A ſtrong and lofty Caſtle is,
            VVhoſe toppe euen with this hill is ſeene,
            And then a plaine lies both betweene:
            VVhere with great labour vp were caſt
            Diuers high mounts with Ramparts vaſt.
            But firſt on all parts to the land,
            VVhereon the Citty walles did ſtand,
            He did inuiron round about
            VVith trenches and with bulwarkes ſtout.
                  Caeſar inuirons Maſſilia with a trench on all ſides of the land.
            
            And this huge worke ſo did conuay,
            That all was ſhut vp but the bay.
            How great and eterniſing fame
            VVas it vnto this Citties name,
            That neuer ouer-awd with feare,
            In this diſtreſſe, that now they were,
            Did ſtill vndaunted courage beare.
            Seeing that Caeſar had ſo late
            Subiected all in ſo ſhort date,
            That one towne ſhould oppoſe his fate.
                  Maſſilia ſhews more valor in reſiſting Caeſar, then all Pompeys townes in Italy.
               
            
            Bootleſſe it is that to fore-ſlow,
            VVhich Fate ſets downe how it ſhall goe.
            
               Fortune, that haſtens this mans ſway,
            And ſaies the world ſhall him obay,
            In this but crifles time away.
            
               Downe goes the woods hand ouer head,
            The Okes are from the forreſts ſhred.
            With which their works of earth are bound,
            Wherby they ſtand more firme and ſound:
            That their foundation well may beare
            The ſtructures that on them they reare,
            which elſe their heft wold mouldring teare
            ¶ A Groue there ſtood full long of yore,
            Which none durſt violate before,
            Whoſe armes ſo thicke did interlace,
            That it obſcured all the place.
            
               The deſcription of a ſtrange and hideous groue neere Maſſilia.
               And with coole ſhadowes kept off farre,
            The glowing beames of Tytans carre.
            The rurall Nymphes here did not wonne,
            Nor Syluane Gods, nor Fairies runne:
            But with a barbarous ſacred rite,
            For ſacrifice had Altars dight.
            The rugged rindes (throughout this wood)
            Were ſmer'd and ſtaind with human blood.
            If we may credit giue to eld,
            That heauenly powers in reuerence held;
            The very birds it did affright,
            Vpon the boughes to pearch or light.
            The ſauadge beaſts did it forbeare,
            And would not haunt or kennell there.
            No windes on theſe trees ſhewd their force,
            Lightning did thence her flames diuorce.
            An vgly horrid denne it was,
            That neither bred greene leafe or graſſe.
            But many ſwarthy ſprings there riſe,
            From whence froth-bubling black ſtreams flies:
            And there rough hewed pictures ſtands
            Of Gods, fram'd by ſome bungling hands.
            In rotten trunkes of hollow treene,
            Strange vncoth ſhapes are often ſeene.
            The hideous ſeate of this ſterne place,
            With dread makes pale the gazers face.
            
               Strange ſights in this groue.The vſuall figures daily ſeene
            Of God-heads, not ſo fearfull beene,
            Nor holds mens mindes in ſo great awe
            
               As thoſe they neuer knew or ſaw.
            Oft-times from out the hollow ground,
            Strange howling voyces did reſound.
            Huge Ew-trees ſometimes ſeeme to fall,
            And ſtraight ſpring vp againe withall.
            The fires that run by night in fields,
            Twining theſe trees no blaſting yeelds.
            About the Okes fell Dragons twiſt,
            Thither to come no people liſt.
            Tis left vnto the powers diuine:
            For be it when the Sunne did ſhine,
            Or when darke night the earth doth hide,This ſhould ſeeme to bee a very melancholy God.
            
            The Prieſt there ſcarcely durſt abide.
            To meet (in ſo great feare he ſtood)
            The God that patroniz'd this wood.
            This groue that neere the campe did ſtand,
            Muſt now be feld downe out of hand.
            Of which in former warres with Gaule,
            
            No ſticke was euer cut at all;
            But ſafe vntoucht did ſtand vpright,
            Neere other woods deſtroyed quite.
            ¶ But yet the Souldiers daring mood,
                  Caeſars Souldiers make ſcruple to cut this groue.
            
            To cut theſe trees diſmaied ſtood,
            The reuerent place ſo cool'd their blood.
            They thought that if this groue they fell,
            The Axes edge would then rebell,
            And in reuenge (as thereto loath)
            Vpon their limbes turne backe his wroth.
            ¶ When Caeſar ſaw his Cohorts put
            In ſo great dread this groue to cut;
            He takes an Axe, and fiercely ſtroake
            Vpon a mighty high-growne Oake:
            Which when he had halfe hewne a ſunder,
                  Caeſar by his own example cauſeth his Souldiers to cut down this groue.
            
            Why mates (quoth he) is this a wonder?
            Feare not with me to doe the ſame,
            Vpon my head lay all the blame.
            Which ſaid, they his command attempt:The Souldiers doubtful whether to anger Caeſar or the Gods.
            
            But yet from feare not full exempt.
            Their mindes in doubt were held at oddes,
            To anger Caeſar, or the Gods.
            
               ¶ Then downe is feld the long-grain'd Aſh,
            
            The knotty Holme in twaine they ſlaſh.
            The great Dodonian Beech high-growne,
            Now with the Axe lies ouer-throwne.
            The Alder, bred by riuers ſides,
            As did the reſt, like wracke betides.
            The Cypres, vſd by thoſe that mourne,
            Whilſt noble funerals do burne.
            Then did the place ſo fleec'd and ſhorne,
            In ſtead of ſhade, let in the morne:
            So neere they grew, that being feld,
            One tree another vpright held.
            ¶ The Gallicke peaſants at this ſight,
            
               
                  The peaſants of Gaule grieued to ſee this groue cut downe.
                  But the Maſſilians being glad of it.
               Condole the ſpoyle with heauy plight.
            But all the Burgers (from the wall)
            Reioyce to ſee this huge down-fall.
            They hope this ſacrilegious deed
            Againſt the Gods, would vengeance breed.
            
               Yet Fortune oft we ſee doth ſpare
            
            
               The mighty that moſt guilty are.
            
            
               And heauenly powers their fury ſlakes,
            
            
               In plaging wretched harmleſſe ſnakes.
            
            ¶ When they had trees ſufficient ſtore
            To ſerue their turne, they feld no more.
            But round about they ſeeke all parts,
            To bring in carriages and carts:
            Which did the countrey much annoy,
            
               The Gallicke peaſants repine that their plowing is hindered by Caeſars carriages.Their plowes in that ſort to imploy.
            This ſeaſon ſeru'd the lands to till,
            And much it went againſt their will
            To let their husbandry ſtand ſtill.
            ¶ Caeſar likewiſe was much inrag'd,
            About this ſiege to be engag'd.
            His forces were deſign'd a farre,
            To be imployd in greater warre,
            
               
                  Caeſar offended to be thus ſtaied before Maſſilia.
               Againſt his enemies in Spaine,
            
            Whoſe armies coaſt the Weſterne maine.
            And therefore to cut off delayes,
            A woodden Turret he did raiſe,
            Of ſo great height, and large withall,
            
               As was the caſtle and the wall.
                  Caeſar erects Engines againſt the walles of Maſſilia.
               
            
            Which was not fixt vnto the ground,
            But borne vpon huge truckles round.
            And creeping forward like a ſnayle,
            Was not diſcernd how it did trayle.
            And when this maſſe did crackling ſhake
            The Townſmen thoght that ſome Earthquake
            
            This hugious ſtructure did ſurpriſe,
            And muſd their walles ſhak't not likewiſe,The Maſſilians wonder at Caeſars Tower, to ſee it goe and ſhake.
            
            Yet ſtill their courage did ſubſiſt
            The Romans ſtoutly to reſiſt.
            And not alone with caſting darts,
            But with great ſlings they pierce both parts
            Of this huge frame, and make ſuch way,
            That armed troopes downe-right they ſlay.
            And with thoſe maine ſtones from them caſt,
            When bones are bruiſd, and liues laid waſt.
            More wounds they leaue ſo gaping wide,
            That darts had way from ſide to ſide.
            Such mighty blowes theſe ſtones do giue,
            As when fierce windes do whirling driue,The Maſſilians reſiſting engines
            
            Againſt ſome old high tottering rocke,
            VVhich ſo the cliffe doth teare and ſhocke,
            As that on whom the ruines fall,
            The bruiſed corpes to death doth ſprall,
            And mingles bloud and ioynts withall.
            But then to giue them more offence,
            VVith thicke conioyned Target fence,
            They do aſſaile the Citty wall,The walles aſſaulted by Caeſars ſouldiers.
            
            And to that ſight with courage fall.
            
               Target to Targe, borne with high hand,
            One doth behinde another ſtand.
            The ſides whereof ſo wide extends,
            As that their Murrions it defends;
            And now the darts that coſt from farre
            Their enemies did wound and ſcarre,
            Could not preuaile gainſt this cloſe fight,
            But ouer-ſlipt their bodies quite.
            Then were the Townſmen new to ſeeke
            Some other meanes that were more like
            
               
               The ſtrength of the Romans target-fence.How to offend, which did them paine
            How to begin to learne againe
            To vſe their darts with faſhions ſtrange,
            And practiſd weapons now to change.
            Therefore (in ſtead therof) they choſe
            With armes vnarm'd vpon their foes,
            Huge ſtones to ding downe from the walles,
            Whoſe weight might cruſh them with their falles.
            But ſo firme ſtood their cluſtred ſheelds,
            That to thoſe ſtones no more they yeelds
            Then toppes of houſes breake or faile
            With whirling ſhowers of ratling haile:
            Which on the tile ſtones ſound and dance,
            So from this fence the ſtones did glance.
            Yet ſtill the Burgers grew more fierce,
            And with continuall heaps did pierce
            This Target-fence, and at the length
            
               The Target-fence at laſt broken, and Souldiers retire.Diſioyn'd their ſtrong connexed ſtrength:
            So as the Cohorts ouer-toyl'd,
            Seuer'd themſelues, and then recoy'ld.
            But therewithall came new ſupplies,
            Who then another Engine tries.
            Their Vinias to the wall they brought,
            Couerd with greene turfes all aloft.
            Whoſe hollow pent-houſe ſheluing ſteepe,
            
               With an other Engine the walles are begun to be vndermined.Did them from blowes and danger keepe:
            Then with the Pick-axe and the ſpade,
            The walles foundation they inuade,
            And ſo began to vndermine,
            Safely protected with their Vine.
            
            The battering Ramme then forth they bring
            Whoſe hanging huge heft with a ſwing
            
               The Ramme brought to the walles.Firme couched ſtones down tottring bring
            And whilſt the force thereof they try,
            The Burgers heape downe from a hye
            
               The Romans retire to their campe, ſeeing their Engines burnt & ſpoyled.Such monſtrous logs and quenchleſſe flames
            VVith fiered brands to burne theſe frames.
            And ſtill theſe fires doe ſo renew,
            That the ſcorch't flames in ſunder flew:
            VVhereat the Souldiers tyr'd with paine,
            
               Seing their labour loſt in vaine,
            Home to their Tents retir'd againe.
            ¶ The Burgers then the Gods did craue,
            Their Citty walles from wracke to ſaue.
            And therewithall with courage ſtout,
            Their youths by night did ſally out;
            Preſſing vpon the Roman bands,
            And cloſely carried in their hands
            Fierce wild-fire balles,The Maſſilians ſally out, and ſet fire on the Roman fortifications & engines. which they with ſlings
            Amongſt the hoſtile army flings.
            No other Armes with them they tooke,
            Their darts for that time they forſooke.
            Their bended bowes were laid aſide,
            Onely thoſe whorling fires they try'd:
            Which kindling flame with winde enrag'd,
            Their campe moſt deſperatly ingag'd.
            And with ſuch fury did inuade,
            The workes and Towers that they had madeIf Caeſar had beene as well reſiſted by Pō
                     peys Captaines in Italy, or by Pompey himſelfe in Rome, hee had not found ſo eaſie and ſpeedy a conqueſt.
            
            Of wood and timber, though but greene,
            Yet did the flames ſo creepe betweene
            With ſmouldring heat the ioints and floores
            That ſearching fire the boords deuoures.
            Wch ſpred abrode ſuch ſwarth-thick ſmokes,
            As that the aire it dampes and chokes.
            At laſt this flame was growne ſo fierce,
            As that it did not onely pierce
            Their timber-frames ſo ſtrong compact,
            But with like force in ſunder crack't
            The very ſtones new dig'd from ground,
            Wherwith their ſtructurs were compoundGreat ſpoyle by fire in the Roman Campe
            
            So waſting fire did all confound,
            And theſe maine ruines ouer-caſt
            In hugeneſſe farre the workes ſurpaſt.
            ¶ The Romans thus diſtreſt by land,
            Do now reſolue to take in hand
            To try their fortunes on the ſeas;
            But not with ſhips the eye to pleaſe,The Romans doe now prepare to attempt the towne by ſea.
            
            Adorn'd and painted on their ſides
            With formes of Gods their ſailes that guides,
            But rough and rude made vp in haſte,
            
               Of trees new cut, ſtrong built, and vaſte,
            Compact with knees and timber ſure,
            That ſeas and tempeſts would endure.
            This nauy rig'd, forthwith they guide,
            Aſſiſted both with winde and tide,
            
               The Roman fleet, whereof Dectus Brutus was Admirall.Vnto the mouth of Rhodanus,
            
            Where being all aſſembled thus,
            On Brutus they attendance gaue,
            Whoſe ſhip was ſtout, high carg'd, & braue,
            Then hoyſing ſailes, they rang'd the ſeas
            Alongſt the ſhores of Staecades.
            
            The Greeke Maſsilians in like ſort,
            Prouide themſelues within their port:
            No leſſe reſolu'd to venter blowes
            
               The Maſſillians prouide to incounter the Romans on the ſea.Vpon the ſeas, againſt their foes.
            And in this minde with courage bold,
            They man their ſhips with yong and old.
            And doe not ſet out to this fight,
            Onely thoſe veſſels in good plight;
            But rig'd vp ſhips decay'd and torne,
            That in the dockes lay then forlorne.
            ¶ Phoebus no ſooner with his beames
            Glitter'd vpon the Ocean ſtreames,
            Blunting his darts on Neptunes face,
            And from the skies the clouds did chaſe.
            The North-winds laid, the South-wind ſtill,
            The ſeas all calme for fight at will:
            But they wey'd anchor, and did load
            Their yards with ſailes, and left the roade.
            ¶ Here Caeſars fleet their Oares do plye,
            There do the Grekes like labour try:
            And with ſuch ſway their ſtrokes they take,
            As that the very keeles did quake.
            The lofty ſhips are drawne on faſt,
            By thoſe that to the fight make haſte.
            ¶ The Roman wings compoſed were
            
               The Roman wings on the ſea.Of many ſhips, whereof ſome beare
            Three bankes of Oares, and foure ſome,
            Others had more the ſeas to ſcumme.
            And with this ſtrength into the deepe
            
               They lanch, and creſcent order keepe.
            Whereas Liburnian Gallies goe,
            With Oares of two bankes and no moe.
            Yet Brutus Gallion Admirall,
            
            With ſixe bankes went ſtouteſt of all,Brutus his Gallion.
            
            And with long Oares their ſtrokes let fall.
            ¶ When in the maine both of theſe fleets
            In battell rang'd together meetes:
            Confronting with their force ſo neere,
            As that their Oares could ſcarce goe cleere,The battaile on the ſea begun.
            
            Such ſhouts and clamors they did make,
            As that the very aire did ſhake.
            And with the voyces that rebound,
            The claſhing of the Oares were drown'd,
            And did ſuppreſſe the Trumpets ſound.
            The rowers then the blew waues teare
            And on their benches fall and reare,
            Whilſt Oares each other ouer-beare.
            Their beake heads firſt together foyne,
            Then caſt about their ſternes to ioyne,
            And did ſo faſt their darts let flye,
            As that their numbers cloud the skye,
            And on the ſea in heapes did lye.
            About againe with ſpeed they tacke,
            Prow againſt Prow doth ſhocke and cracke:
            And many ſhips ſcattred abrode
            Againe relying, lay on loade.
            As when the Eaſterne windes oppoſe
            The Southerne gales, that ſternly blowes.
            One way with force the billowes ſweepes,
            Another way the current keepes.
            So in the deepes the Gallies range,
            Vncertainly with flitting change.
            For when their Oares haue forward ply'd,
            Backe are they checkt with winde and tide.
            But the Maſsilian gallies are
            Of ſaile and ſtirrage much more yare,The Maſſilian ſhips nimble and ſwift.
            
            Nimble and light to leaue or take,
            And on their ſtaies quicke ſpeed can make,
            Whereas the Roman ſteady ſhips
            
               
               The Roman ſhips ſtout, & or deepe draught.With deeper draughts their bottomes dips.
            And in the ſeas do vpright ſtand,
            As fierce for fight, as on the land.
            The maiſter of that Gallion ſtout,
            That Admiral'd the Roman rout,
            Sitting vpon the puppe on hye,
            From whence he all the courſe might eye.
            
               
                  Brutus ſtout words to the maiſter of his Gallion.
               Brutus to him aloud thus ſpake.
            What worke (quoth he) meane you to make?
            Shall my fleet idle range the coaſt,
            That you your marine Art may boaſt?
            We hither come prepar'd for fight,
            Againſt our foes to ſhew our might.
            Come bring vs therefore ſword to ſword,
            Lay me the ſtouteſt Greekes aboord.
            Theſe words of Brutus he obayes,
            His broad ſide to the foe he layes.
            But whoſoeuer of the foes
            Did ſhocke their ſides, or changed blowes
            
               
                  Brutus ſhip ſtil victorious.With Brutus ſhippe, him grappling faſt,
            He boords, and ouercame at laſt.
            The other Gallies waſt to waſt,
            With hookes and chaines doe grapple faſt.
            And by the Oares did hold each other,
            The fighting ſhips the ſeas did ſmother.
            But now they doe not make their warre
            With ſlings and engines caſt a farre.
            Thoſe deadly wounds the life that parts,
            Are not from Iron-headed darts.
            
               The fury of this ſea-fight when the fleets ioyned.But now they buckle hand to hand,
            The ſea-fight doth on ſharpe ſwords ſtand.
            The ſhips aloft are man'd and arm'd,
            And fiſt to fiſt incountring ſwarm'd.
            Dead bodies on the hatches fell,
            Their bloud amongſt the waues doe mell
            In ſuch abundance, that the froth
            Of clotted gore, made Neptune wroth.
            And whilſt with force their arms they ſtraine
            To linke themſelues with grappling chaine.
            The bodies ſlaine in heapes ſo rides,
            
               They cannot ioyne their ſides to ſides.
            Some halfe dead ſprawling down-right ſink,
            Some their own bloud with ſalt-waues drink.
            Others halfe drownd reſiſting death,
            Struggling for life with lateſt breath,
            VVith timbers from crack't ſhips that ſlid,A terrible deſcription of a ſea-battle.
            
            Out of their paines are quickly rid.
            And many darts that ouer▪ſlips
            The fight, into the Ocean dips.
            Miſſing the markes their force to ſtay,
            Embrue their ſteele another way.
            Lighting on thoſe that ſwimming fleet,
            VVho in the waues new wounds do meet.
            ¶ The Romans now are throughly try'd,
            Encompaſt round on euery ſide.
            And then the fury of the fight,
            Straines on the left hand and the right.
            VVhere whilſt that Tagus deales his blowes
            From his high puppe on Greekiſh foes,
            Two diſmall darts light on his breaſt,
            And ſteepe their ſteele deepe in his cheaſt.
            So as the bloud did ſtand in doubtA Roman called Tagus, ſlain with two wounds.
            
            At whether wound it ſhould guſh out.
            Vntill at length the boyling blood,
            Draue both the darts out with their flood.
            So life departed with the gore,
            The wounds did open death a dore.
            ¶ Maſsilian Telo, wretched wight,
            The Gally guided to this fight,
            A better Mariner was none,
            That had more Art and practiſe ſhowne
            Of any ſhip to finde the trimme,
            In wrought ſeas how ſhe beſt might ſwimme.
            Nor better knew his markes a farre,
            Nor how to take the Sunne and Starre.
               
                  Telo, an excellent Pilate of the Maſſilians ſlaine.
            
            Nor better geſt which way the winde
            VVas likelieſt to be enclin'd.
            This maiſter with his braſſe-beake head,
            Out of a Roman ſhip had ſhred
            A mighty planke; but loe the while,
            
               His breaſt was pierc'd through with a pile.
            And as this worthy Pilot dy'd,
            Out of his hand the helme did ſlide.
            
               Gayareus, a Maſſilian.¶ Then whilſt Gayareus Gallicke Greeke,
            
            Another ſhippe doth bordering ſtreeke,
            And ſtraines to enter her by fight,
            A Iauelin pierc'd his bowels quite,
            And to the ſhip ſide nailes him faſt,
            VVhere he muſt hang if ſteele-head laſt.
            
               Two Maſſilian brothers twins ſlaine in this battell whereof one ſhewed admirable valour.¶ Two brothers did this fight adorne,
            Twins hard to know, at one birth borne.
            Theſe glorious teſtimonies were,
            Of that rich wombe that did them beare.
            But ſundry fates did them purſue,
            Though from one ſelf-ſame root they grew:
            For one of them in this ſterne fight,
            VVith fatall ſtroke was reſt the light.
            And him the parents better knew
            That did ſuruiue, wanting the view
            Of him late ſlaine, of ſemblant hue,
            A chance that much lamenting breedes,
            His halfe-ſelfe loſt, his dolour feeds.
            This brother that as yet ſuruiues,
            Againſt a Roman Gally ſtriues,
            VVho though the oares his breaſt withſtand
            Yet on her ſide he graſpt his hand,
            Till one dire ſtroke the hand did reaue,
            VVhich to his hold ſtill faſt did cleaue;
            Not vtterly depriu'd of ſence,
            
               True valor increaſeth with miſ-fortune.Whoſe ioints wold not be loſd from thence
            Now valor with miſhap increaſt,
            The noble ſtumpe more wrath expreaſt.
            Stirring vp then his left hands might,
            To take reuenge of this deſpight,
            But as hee ſtoop't for to recouer
            The firſt loſt hand, he loſt the other;
            And both into the ſea did fall,
            Slaſht from the body arme and all.
            Thus of his limbes diſpoild and wrack't,
            His Target both and ſword he lack't:
            
               Yet for all this aloft he bides,
            And vnder hatches neuer hides.
            But his bare trunke he did diſplay
            On his ſlaine brother where he lay,
            Whil'ſt many wounds he did aſſay.
            And then as one that life diſdaines,
            Other mens harmes he entertaines;
            Vntill at laſt, with wounds oppreſt,
            Finding that life would leaue his breaſt,
            That little ſtrength that yet remaines
            He doth collect into his vaines;
            And with that ſmall ſtore of life-blood,A reuenging humor ſtrangely expreſt.
            
            He armes his legges, and with fierce mood
            Into the ſhip did leaping ruſh,
            That with his weight he might her cruſh.
            This ſhip oppreſt with ſlaughtered limbes,
            The bloud about the hatches ſwimmes:
            And being crack't with many a cruſh,
            That oft a-thwart her ribbes did bruſh:
            Her knees were looſd, her ioynts did ope,
            The leakes in her did giue free ſcope
            The waues ſo faſt to ſucke and gull,
            That all her deckes at laſt were full.
            Then to the bottome downe ſhe ſinkes,A Gally fighting is ſunke down-right.
            
            Making a gulfe with circling crinkes.
            The hollow where the ſhip did ride,
            That did before the waues diuide,
            Is now againe with ſeas ſupply'd.
            This day in midſt of Thetis lappe
            Many ſtrange accidents did happe.
            ¶ Then whilſt into another ſhip,
            The Harping-irons they did ſlip,
            Which in her ſides their hooks ſhould fixe,
                  Lycida miſerably tortured betwixt his foes and his friends.
            
            In Lycida one of them ſtickes;
            Which would haue hald him ouer-boord,
            But that his mates their helpe affoord:
            And by the legges ſtill held him faſt,
            Till he in peeces flew at laſt;
            Whereby his bloud dropt not ſo ſlow
            As that which from a wound doth flow:
            
               But out at euery broken vaine
            A ſtreame of crimſon guſht amaine.
            And that which wont was to impart
            Life to the limbes from out the heart,
            With that ſame element was mixt,
            That earth and aier lies betwixt.
            Neuer did any dying wight
            So many wayes breathe out his ſpright.
            The lower parts of that torne trunke,
            Depriu'd of ſpirits, fainting ſhrunke.
            But where the lungs and liuer lies,
            And nobleſt parts that heat ſupplies,
            That did a while his breath prolong,
            And ſtill for life did ſtruggle ſtrong.
            But he with ſtretching grew ſo lither,
            That limbe with limbe ſcarce held together.
            ¶ Now whilſt the fight is fiercely try'd,
            The Souldiers all runne to that ſide,
            Whereas the foes doe thickeſt ſtand,
            And left the other ſide vnmand.
            
               A ſhip ouerwhelmed by the running of the men all to one ſide.With which vnequall poiſe ore-way'd,
            One ſhip is topſie-turuy ſway'd,
            And dooth into the Ocean reele,
            And ouer head turnes vp her keele:
            Which ſo oppreſſed all the ſwarme,
            That none could ſtretch a legge or arme,
            
               So was the Mary Roſe loſt before Portſmouth in a fight againſt the French in the dayes of Henry the 8.Whereby to ſwim and ſaue their liues,
            And ſo the ſea their breath depriues.
            ¶ Thus death amongſt them al doth raue
            For whilſt one youth did ſtriue to ſaue
            His life, by ſwimming on the waue,
            Two hoſtile ſhips together ran,
            Which 'twixt them bare this hapleſſe man,
            And with ſuch force their powers did ruſh,
            That fleſh and bones together cruſh.
            
               A miſerable deſtiny.The body was not of ſuch proofe,
            To keepe thoſe ſhips ſo farre aloofe:
            But they ſo cloſe together fall,
            That their braſſe beakes did ring withall.
            Herewith his belly being ript
            
               Into the panch the water ſlipt.
            And at his mouth he powred out
            His bloud and bowels like a ſpout.
            But now the Oares doe backward ſteere,
            So as their beake-heads were ſet cleere:
            And ſo this carkaſſe rent and ſlit,
            Vpon the waues did weltring flit.
            ¶ There were beſide a hugie rout,
            That ſuffering ſhipwracke ſwamme about
            To ſaue their liues, and to that end
            Sought for ſome ſhip that was a frend.
            But by miſchance they light vpon
            A Greekiſh Gally of their fone,The diuers ſtrange aduentures of a ſea-fight.
            
            Hanging vpon her ſides and helme,
            So thick, that might her ouer-whelme:
            Wherewith the ſouldiers then aboord,
            Hewd off their armes with edge of ſword.
            And left the hands claſpt on the ſides,
            From whence their maimed bodies ſlides.
            So as they could no more ſuſtaine
            Themſelues, by ſwimming on the maine.
            ¶ Now in this battailes long euent,
            Were darts and weapons almoſt ſpent.The weapons all ſpent, what ſhift was made to offend one another.
            
            But fury then prouides for Armes,
            With Oares now one another harmes.
            The ſtaues that flagges and Enſignes beare,
            They from the banners ſnatch and teare.
            With benches whereon they did ſit,
            The rowers one another ſmit,
            And peeces from the ſhip ſides ſplit.
            Their fellowes that in heapes lye ſlaine,
            Vpon the deckes they ſearch againe,
            That they their weapons might retaine.
            Others to ſhew their dreadleſſe hearts,
            Out of their wounds doe raſh the darts,
            And with their left hands cloſe the ſore,
            So to repreſſe the bubling gore,
            Which ſtriues that way to finde a vent,
            Whereas the lance had made a dent.
            ¶ But all this hauocke by the ſeas,
            
               Was not to be compar'd to theſe,
            That laſt of all they did inuent,
            By a contrary element.
            For now enrag'd with greater ire,
            
               The cruelty of fire in a ſea-fight.They caſt abrode ſuch deſperate fire,
            Compoſd of brimſtone, pitch and oyle,
            Wherein their darts they wrap and foyle.
            And then ſuch wild-fire balles doe make,
            Whoſe flames no waters force can ſlake,
            But on the ſhips quicke hold will take:
            Where they incounter ropes and boords,
            That tarre and roſin ſtore affoords;
            Stuffe that will quickly flame retaine,
            And hard to be extinct againe.
            The boords that from the ſhips ſides ſhakes,
            Theſe fiers hand-faſt on them takes.
            
               To auoid fire, ſome drowned themſelues.Here ſome doe plunge into the ſeas,
            The ſcorching flames ſo to appeaſe.
            Others in danger of the waues,
            
               Others to eſcape drowning aduenture vpon the flames.Hold by thoſe plankes that flaming raues;
            So whilſt mongſt many deaths they runne,
            No death ſo much they ſtriu'd to ſhunne,
            As that which firſt they apprehend
            
               Any death ſeemes more eaſie to men, then that which they moſt doubt.Did threaten them their liues to end.
            Yet all theſe ſhip-wrackes nought auaile,
            Their courage to abaſe or quaile:
            But on the ſeas the darts that flow
            They gather vp, at ſhippes to throw,
            With thoſe faint hands that them ſuſtaine,
            By ſwimming in the rowling maine.
            And when they cannot meet with darts,
            
               Great malice expreſt.Another way they play their parts.
            When one foe doth another ſpy,
            They ſtraight together ſtruggling try,
            Till both downe to the bottome flye.
            ¶ Amongſt the reſt in this fierce fight,
            A man there was that Phoceus hight,
            
               
                  Phoceus an excellent ſwimmer and diuer drowned at laſt.A Souldier of a gallant ſpright,
            That well could ſwim, and well could diue,
            And vnder water long ſuruiue,
            
               So as for need the bottomes ſands,
            He would take vp with diuing hands.
            Or if the Anchors hooke were bound,
            He could vnlooſe it from the ground.
            Or fixe the cable, that by chance
            From out the Anchors ring did glance.
            This fellow ſingles out a foe,
            And in his armes doth graſpe him ſo,
            That to the bottome both do goe.
            There him he ſtrangles in the mud,
            Then lifts himſelfe aboue the floud.
            But after this againe he tries
            In ſemblant ſort to diue and riſe:
            And as his head aloft he reares,
            Againſt a ſhip his skull he teares;
            Wherewith he downe-right ſunke amaine,
            And neuer roſe aliue againe.
            Some now the hoſtile oares by might
            Would hold and ſtay their ſhips from flight.
            But that which moſt did all offend,
            Was vnreueng'd their liues to end.
            Many that ſaw their death draw nye,
            Would on the ſhip ſides hazards try.
            And ſo the beake-head brace and clip,Some that expoſe their bodies to ſaue the ſhips from bruiſing.
            
            To beare the blow from off the ſhip.
            ¶ Then Lygdanus by chance did eye,
            
               Tyrrhenus mounted loftily,
            Strowting vpon a Gallions puppe,
            A ſling and bullet he takes vp,
            And ſent it with a ſtrength ſo fierce,
            That both his temples it did pierce;Lygdanus.
            
            From whence a ſtreame of bloud forth flies,
            And after it ſtarts out his eyes.
            His ſight thus rap't, amaz'd did ſtand,
                  Tyrrhenus a valiant Roman.
               
            
            And thought this darknes was deaths hand.
            But when his ſprights were come againe
            That did true valor ſtill retaine;
            My mates (quoth he) that ſo well know
            The piercing dart a farre to throw,
            Direct me now a right to ſtand,
            
               That I may vſe my darting hand.
            Then to himſelfe a lowd he ſpake,
            
               Tyrrhene goe now and vndertake
            In warre all hazards that may chance,
            Thy end more brauely to aduance.
            Such noble thoughts this man halfe ſlaine
            Did in his haughty heart retaine.
            My wel-ſteel'd dart, Ioue grant thou light
            Vpon ſome gallant worthy wight.
            So ſaid, his dart he forth did ſtraine
            
               It ſeemed that blinde Fortune guided this blinde mans hand.With his blinde arme, yet not in vaine,
            But did a luſty younker ſmite,
            Of noble bloud, he Argus hight.
            The point his very nauell hit,
            But pierc'd it not halfe through as yet;
            
               
                  Argus a noble youth ſlaine.Vntill he groueling downe did fall,
            Which preſt the head home ſhaft and all.
            ¶ When this happe Argus did betide,
            His father on the other ſide,
            Did in a conquer'd Gally ſtand,
            Great was his worth by ſea and land;
            For he in all the Phocians warres,
            Gaue place to none that doing dares.
            But now with eld was weake and ſpent,
            And yet vnto this battaile went;
            Not as a Souldier to obay,
            But in high place to rule and ſway.
            Now when this diſmall chance he ſpy'd,
            Ouer the ſeats he ſtraines to ſtride:
            And ſo poore man ſtill clambring vp,
            Made ſhift to come vnto the puppe:
            Where when he ſaw his Argus lye
            Gaſping for life, at point to dye,
            
               The griefe of a father for his ſlaine ſonne, not expreſt by teares, not cries, but by a reſolute death.No teares fell from the old mans eye,
            Neither did he outraging cry;
            But numneſſe did his ſence ſurpriſe,
            And darkneſſe did benight his eyes.
            His body ſodainly grew cold,
            His hands out-ſtretcht could nothing hold.
            And in this trance and ſenceleſſe plight,
            
               He had forgot his Argus quite.
            But he ſweet youth his head did becke,
            That faintly reeled on his necke.
            And lifts it vp a little ſpace,
            When firſt he glimpſt his fathers face.A lamentable meeting.
            
            His Iaw-falne mouth no voyce forth ſends,
            But ſilent to his father bends;
            And beckes his head as lateſt bliſſe,
            From his old lippes to get a kiſſe.
            And with beſt meanes he could deuiſe,
            Pointed to him to cloſe his eyes.
            The griping ſorrow that did ſtraine
            This poore old man in euery vaine,
            Puts rage and ſpright in him againe.
            Well now (quoth he) I'le looſe no time,
            This wracke is chanced for my crime.
            The direfull Fates as they ordaine
            Shall haue me, by mine owne hand ſlaine.Old Argus his ſpeech to his dying ſonne.
            
            Deare Argus my ſweet boy diſpence
            With thy ſad fathers late offence,
            In that I did not thee embrace,
            Nor with laſt duties kiſſe thy face.
            As yet thy wound doth not ſo draine,
            The life-blood out of euery vaine,
            But that thy lookes good hope do giue,
            That thou a while maiſt longer liue.
            No ſooner had he ſaid that word,
            But ſtraight he fell vpon his ſword,
            Which he draue to the very hilt;
            Yet not content with his bloud ſpilt,
            Into the ſea he head-long flies,
            One way to death could not ſuffice.The old man purſues a double death.
            
            ¶ This fortune now drawes to an end
            Which way the victory ſhall tend.
            No longer cauſe there doth remaine,
            Hazards of battaile to maintaine.
            Moſt of Maſsilian fleet is drownd,
            The reſt for Roman ſeruice bound.The Maſſilian ſhips ſerue the conquering Romans.
               
            
            Whoſe rowers when they changed were,
            The Roman victors in them beare.
            
               A few with ſpeed away did flye,
            For ſhelter in ſome harbours nye;
            But now what tongue can well expreſſe
            
               The lamentation in Maſſilia
               The Cities fright and heauineſſe?
            How fathers for their ſonnes lament,
            What teares the wailing mothers ſpent.
            And how the wiues vpon the ſhore,
            In forlorne troopes would ſearch and pore
            Amongſt the waues diſtain'd with gore:
            Where they their husbands corps might haue
            
               The Maſſilians affection to their ſlaine friends.Disfigured weltring in the waue.
            But often-times their markes did miſſe,
            And for a Greeke, a Roman kiſſe.
            The fathers with like ſtrife deſires
            To giue their ſonnes their funerall fires.
            But Brutus with triumphant hands,
            
               
                  Brutus victorious on the ſea.
               Victor vpon the Ocean ſtands.
            And on the ſea firſt purchaſt fame
            With victory to Caeſars name.
            Finis Libritertij.
         
         
            
            Lucans Pharſalia. The fourth Booke.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  CEſar vpon a lofty mount
               Incamped, doth his foes afront,
               Neere to Ilerdas ſtately walles;
               Where by the rage of water falles
               Beeing diſtreſt; thence his Cohorts
               
               Hee ouer Sicoris tranſports:
               And doth Petreius hoaſt purſue;
               Where both the Campes a league renew.
               Which wickedly Petreius brake,
               And Friendſhip did with Slaughter ſlake.
               His Campe then Caeſar doth incloſe,
               And ſo oppreſt his ſtaruing foes,
               That proud Petreius and his bands
               Seeke mercy now at Caeſars hands.
               Meane while Antonius men are ſlaine
               Vpon the Adriaticke maine:
               Whereas Vulteius and his mates,
               Moſt gloriouſly doe end their dates.
               Then Curio on the Lybicke coaſt
               Is ouer-throwne with all his hoaſt.
            
            
               FIERCE Caeſar now in Climes a farre,
            Doth ſeriouſly purſue his warre:
            And yet his Mart doth mildly wage,
            Free from reuenge, or bloody rage.
            Chiefly hee doth affect to ſee,
            Of what import theſe Captaines be;
            
               
               Afranius and Petreius command in Spain for Pompey.
               Afranius and Petreius were
            The two that all the ſway did beare.
            The power was equall that they held
            Ouer the Troopes, in Towne or field:
            In campe they no precedence haue,
            Either of them the watch-word gaue.
            Theſe had beſides their Latium bands,
            Swift Souldiers from Aſturian lands:
            And to them ioyn'd the Vectons light,
            With all that people that tooke flight
            From Gaule, to mixe their race with Spaine:
            VVho Celtiberian name retaine.
            ¶ A place there is that naturally
            Doth raiſe it ſelfe vp loftely;
            And is a fertile plot of ground,
            In midſt whereof a hillocke round
            Extends it ſelfe with ample bound.
            
               The Cittie Ilerda.
               On toppe whereof Ilerda ſtands,
            Founded long ſince by Antique hands:
            VVhoſe gallant ſeat, and ſtately walles,
            Are waſhed with the water falles
            
               The Riuer Sicoris.
               Of pleaſant Sicoris, not leaſt
            Of thoſe ſweet ſtreames that Spaine do feaſt;
            Shap't like a bow on either ſides:
            A bridge of ſtone this flood beſtrides.
            And vnto it a rocke is nye,
            
               
                  Afranius campVVhere Pompey's men incamped lye:
            
               
                  Caeſars Campe.VVhence Caeſars Tents are plainly ſeene
            High pitcht vpon a lofty greene;
            The Riuer runnes the Campes betweene.
            VVhich field in largeneſſe doth extend
            Further then ſight can comprehend.
            And this great Champion circling round
            
               The Riuer Cinga.
               Swift Cingas ſtreames doth ſafely bound.
            VVhich is reſtrain'd to dippe or laue
            His ſiluer breaſt in Neptunes waue:
            For he his ſtreames hath intermixt
            VVith one great Flood that runs betwixt:
            
               The Riuer Iberius.
               And Iberus it hath to name,
            From whom that word Iberia came.
            
               At firſt ſight no exploits were vſd,
            But was from bloudy Mart excuſd:
            For both the Captaines ſpent this day
            To view their ſtrength, and bands ſuruay.
            This ſtrife remorce of minde did rue,Remorſe in both the Armies.
            
            And ſhame the rage of Armes withdrew:
            Their Countries ſake, and wronged lawes,
            Gaue one dayes leaſure for a pauſe.
            No ſooner day began to lurke,
            But Caeſar ſets great Troopes a worke,
                  Caeſars ſpeedy expedition.
            
            As long as all the night did laſt,
            About his Campe a trench to caſt.
            And then before this worke, the whiles
            His armed bandes he rankes and files,
            And with this ſlight his foe beguiles.
            No ſooner day his firſt light lends,
            But Caeſar ſtraight ſome legions ſends
            To take a hill, that mid-way roſe
            Betweene Ilerda and his foes.
            
               Afranius then ('twixt feare and ſhame)
            Was forc'd to entertaine this game,
            And firſt with ſpeed poſſeſt the ſame.
            The one by ſword and valor ſtraue,
            At his command the hill to haue:An incounter betweene Caeſars and Afranius Souldiers.
            
            The others for their right conteſt,
            Already of the place poſſeſt.
            But Caeſars men laden with Armes,
            The Rockes doe clamber vp in ſwarmes.
            And though the place were crag'd & ſteepe,
            Where footing failes, they crawle & creepe:
            And when they hold or handfaſt lackes,
            Others with ſhields ſupport their backes.The admirable courage & vndertaking humor of Caeſars men.
            
            No fitting roome that place affoords
            To throw their darts, or fight with ſwords.
            Their Piles into the banke they ſtake,
            And by them mounting ſteppes do make.
            And whilſt by ſhrubs and cragges they ſtay,
            Through buſhes they hacke out a way.
            But Caeſar (ſeeing that his Troopes
            For want of helpe in danger droopes)
            
               Forthwith his aids of horſemen ſends,
            Commanding them to backe their frends.
            And that they ſhould with circling ring,
            Charge home vpon the left hand wing.
            So by this meanes vp to the top
            
               
                  Caeſar winnes the hill from Afranius.
               His foot-men gat, and found no ſtop:
            For they that firſt the hill did gaine,
            Did now retire from thence amaine,
            Their honour loſt, and labour vaine.
            Onely this while the chance of warre,
            On either ſide did make a marre.
            But now the hazards that enſue,
            From the vncertaine motions grew,
            Which then the aires vntemperance drew.
            ¶ The winter ſeaſons chilly froſt,
            With Northerne windes are turn'd and toſt.
            And now the aire within it ſhrouds,
            Abundant heapes of cluſtred clouds.
            The hilles lay cou'red thicke with ſnow,
            And all the fields that lye more low,
            Wanting the comfort of the ſunne,
            
               A deſcription of winter.With hoary miſts are ouer-runne.
            The vtmoſt coaſts that Weſtward lye
            Were hardned with the freezing skye.
            But when the bright-beam'd Tytan came
            To lodge him with the gold fleec'd Ramme,
            
            That in the ſeas did Helles beare,
            VVhen from his backe ſhe fell for feare,
            And with his flaming rayes did bring
            More warmth vnto the moiſty ſpring.
            And with an equall poyſe vpright,
            Did ballance out the day and night.
            Then Cinthia's hornes but late renew'd,
            Did Boreas from the aire exclude,
            VVhich was with Eaſterne ſhine endu'd.
            This Eaſt wind with Nabathean blaſts,
            A loofe from his owne quarter caſts
            The clouds that with him did reſide,
            And thoſe that in Arabia bide.
            And all thoſe vaporing miſts that mounts
            
               Into the aire from Ganges founts:
            Or whatſoeuer elſe the Sunne
            By his attractiue power had wonne,
            Or any fogges that North-weſt winde
            Hath to the Eaſterne clime deſign'd,
            Or that the Indian aire did binde.
            ¶ Theſe clouds remou'd from out that sky,
            The dayes began with heat to fry:
            Nor South nor North doe tempeſts feele,
            Their rackes with cleered face doe wheele.
            But now the Weſterne world of Spaine,
            
            Theſe rowles of clouds doth entertaine.
            So this part of the globy round,
            That with his cliffes doth Thetis bound,
            Theſe cluſtred wool-packes ſo confound,
            As that the aire all thicke is ſeene,
            That lies the heauen and earth betweene;
            And hardly roome there did remaine,
            Theſe bundled vapours to containe,
            But preſt, do powre down ſhowres amaine.
            The thunder now the flaſh holds backe
            Of lightning, that precedes the cracke,Foule & tempeſtious weather in Spaine.
               
            
            They are no ſooner ſet on flame,
            But the moiſt clowds do quench the ſame.
            Here Iris now begins to ſhow
            Some part of her halfe-circled bow;The Rain-bow
            
            But not in wonted colours dy'd,
            The beauty thereof thicke clouds hide.
            Her thirſt ſhe in the Ocean ſlakes,
            And to the clouds beares what ſhee takes:
            And when they are diſperſt againe,
            They ſhowring fall into the maine.
            And now the Pyrenean hilles,
            Whoſe heapes of ſnow neuer diſtillesThe mounts Pyrenes.
               
            
            By any vigor of the Sunne,
            In torrents downe do ſwiftly runne;
            Diſſolu'd with mighty raines that fall,
            Which thoſe ſteepe rockes do bathe withall.
            So as the monſtrous ſtreames that ſlides
            Downe from thoſe hugie Mountaines ſides;
            
               So faſt into the riuers flye,
            
               A great inundation.And doe their channels raiſe ſo hye,
            As that their bankes they ouer-ſtride
            For want of roome, their courſe to guide.
            And ouer all the field ſo skimmes,
            That Caeſars Campe now floting ſwimmes:
            And with the rage of this fierce flood,
            The tents are ſwept from whence they ſtood.
            The medowes and the paſtures dry,
            All in a poole do bathing lye:
            So as no cattell they can get,
            
               Famine in Caeſars campe.Nor ought elſe whereof to make meate,
            Nor fodder for their horſe to eate.
            For thoſe that goe to fetch in pray,
            In vnknowne paths doe range and ſtray,
            And doubtfull roame on euery hand,
            The floods ſo couers all the land.
            ¶ Now miſchiefes mate, dire famines rage,
            So playes his part vpon this ſtage,
            That Caeſars troopes to ruine goes,
            And yet beſieged with no foes.
            One Souldier giues a heape of gaine
            Onely to buy a little of graine,
            Yet therein ſhewes no prodigue vaine.
            O hatefull humor Couetiſe,
            
            Whoſe quenchleſſe thirſt nought can ſuffiſe.
            A ſtarued man cannot with-hold,
            
               The force of Auarice.But he will ſell his food for gold.
            The mountaines now and hilles are hid,
            The floods hath all things ouer-ſtrid:
            One onely face of waters vaſte,
            Hath all the lands cleane ouer-caſt.
            No troopes of craggy cliffes are kend,
            To ſauadge cotes where wilde beaſts dend,
            
               A great deluge.Vpon this ore-growne waters driues,
            Where beaſts ſwim ſtrugling for their liues▪
            
            There flote the neighing Courſers braue,
            Snatcht vp with this all-ſweeping waue:
            Which more then did the Ocean raue.
            The Sunne to darkneſſe ſo gaue way
            
               That night was all as cleare as day.
            Heauens face with ſuch confuſion mourn'd,
            That all was topſie-turuy turn'd:
            And as the Poles, and Northerne Zones,
            
            So vnder cold this milde clime grones.
            No twinkling ſtarres by night are ſeene,
            The frozen earth brings forth no greene;
            The chill num'd aire did coole the heate,
            That makes the Torrid Zone to ſweate.
            ¶ Great guider of this endleſſe All,
            
            Let theſe dire miſchiefes ſo befall:
            And Neptune, thou that haſt next place,
            Aſſiſt vs with thy powerfull mace.
            O Ioue! doe not theſe clouds reſtraine,An imprecation againſt civill warre.
            
            But let them fill the aire with raine.
            And Neptune, when thou forth doſt ſend
            Thy ſtreames, forbid them backe to bend
            Their courſe, nor let them haue
            Retrait to thee; but with thy waue
            Repulſe the refuge that they craue;
            And with thy Trident ſtrike the ground,
            That fountaines may from thence abound.
            Let Rhenus ouer-whelme theſe fields,
            And Rhodanus that ſwift ſtreame yeelds.
            Yea let all ſpring-heads flye at large,
            And on this ſoile their ſourſe diſcharge.
            Let mount Rhypheus ſnowes diſcend,
            And euery lake to this place bend.
            Let ponds and Pooles that ſtand at ſtay,
            With oblique courſe encline this way;
            Whereby the world may finde releaſe
            From ciuill warres, that vs oppreſſe.
            But Fortune, with this little tutch,
            Is pleaſd to thinke all done, to much,
            Vntill ſhe Caeſar doe reſtore
            Vnto her fauours, as before.
            And all the Gods are now in paine
            To make this man amends againe.
            The aire therefore is rarefy'd,
            And Phoebus with his wonted pride
            
               Diſſolues theſe wool-packes in the skies;
            
               Aurora bluſhing red doth riſe.
            Each thing his wonted order takes,
            The ſtarres from them moiſt humors ſhakes;
            And where dampe miſts too much abound,
            They are confin'd within the ground.
            The groues begin with leaues to bud,
            The hilles are ſeene aboue the flud.
            The vallies and the pleaſant meades
            Firme graſſe and flowers ouer-ſpreades.
            ¶ When Sicoris had left her prankes,
            And drawne her ſelfe within her bankes;
            
               Caeſar ſmall skiffes prepares and rigges,
            Compoſed of greene willow twigges.
            And ouer it doth Oxe-hides dight,
            Wherwith to keepe them ſtaunch and tight.
            Thus able made their load to take,
            By them he doth his paſſage make.
            So the Venetian frames like boates,
            Wherewith on Padus ſtreame he floates.
            And ſo the Brittons in ſuch skiffes,
            Do coaſt alongſt their Oceans cliffes.
            And ſo with Canes conioyn'd together,
            Couerd vpon with vntan'd leather.
            The Memphites doe on Nylus trade,
            Of which Canes leaues they paper made.
            Now Caeſar with all ſpeed tranſports
            A many of his chiefe cohorts.
            Who being on the other ſide
            Do timber for a bridge prouide,
            Wherewith this riuer to beſtride.
            But doubting that it might againe
            Aboue the bankes his channell ſtraine,
            He would not on the riuers brinke
            The ground-work poſts driue down & ſinke.
            But ſomwhat farther in the lands,
            On both ſides the foundation ſtands;
            And leaſt that Sicoris ſhould riſe
            With new floods, he did then deuiſe
            Deepe trenches cut alongſt the ſides,
            
               To draine away all ſwelling tides.
            Now when Petreius plainly found
            That Fate with Caeſar went ſo round,
            His courage was therewith pluck't downe,
            And left Ilerda's lofty Towne.
            And thus his Army he withdrewPetreius leaues Ilerda.
            
            From thoſe he truſted leſſe then knew:
            And takes his way, with all his traine,
            Towards the vtmoſt coaſts of Spaine.
            
            A Nation that he heard was man'd
            With many a ſtout and warlike band:
            Of courage fierce, in broyles ſtill bred,
            Affecting Armes, and ſcorning dread.
            When Caeſar ſaw the hilles left bare,
            And Tents no longer ſtanding thare,
            He bids his troopes their Armes to take,
            And would not ſtay this bridge to make,
            Nor gage the riuer for a foord,
            But bids them ſwim; and with that word
                  Caeſar paſſeth his Army ouer Sicoris.
               
            
            They cut the ſtreame with nimble hands,
            And in that ſort tranſport the bands.
            The Souldiers being grieu'd at heart
            To ſee their foes ſhould ſo depart,
            In head-long ſwarmes do flye to Mart.
            No ſooner dry'd, they fall to Arme,
            And then their chilly ioynts doe warme
            With ſpeedy march, and neuer ſtay
            Vntill the noone-tide of the day.
            By this did Caeſars horſe out-goe
            The marching battaile of the foe:
            Who were with that vnlook't-for ſight
            Doubtfull whether to flye or fight.
            Here where they met, a large field lies,The place where Caeſars Armie purſues Petreius.
               
            
            In which two ample hilles did riſe
            That rocky were, and nothing greene,
            And there a valley lay betweene.
            Which barren earth of ſtony ground
            A ledge of hilles doth both ſides bound:
            And by them trending there did ſtray
            A crooked and vncoth by-way.
            
               The entrance whereof if the foe
            Had gained firſt, he ſafe might goe
            (As Caeſar ſaw) and lead the warre
            Into a Quarter ſtrange and farre:
            The Countrey wilde, and ill to paſſe,
            Whoſe people fierce and ſauadge was;
            Therefore he bids his men be bold,
            Haſte on (quoth he) no order hold.
            Turne backe againe your flying foes,
            
               
                  Caeſar encourageth his Souldiers.The face of Mart gainſt them oppoſe.
            With threatning looks ſhew them their death
            
            Let cowards draw no lingring breath.
            If they by fight away would ſcape,
            With your ſharp blades their boſomes rape.
            No more he ſaid, but did preuent
            His foes, ere they the hilles had hent.
            Then there a ſunder they did pitch
            Their Tents, fenc't with a little ditch:
            From whence each other did deſcry
            VVith eaſe, how they incamped lye.
            Then they began to know each other,
            Father the ſonne, brother the brother.
            Their ciuill mallice waxed cold,
            Yet for a while from ſpeech they hold;
            Onely with ſwords they beckning make,
            
               The two Armies take acquaintance one of the other.And ſo their firſt acquaintance take.
            At laſt vnto ſuch tearmes they fall,
            That loue ſuppreſſeth raging brawle.
            For then the Souldiers vndertooke
            Into each others campe to looke:
            And with free hearts and dreadleſſe face,
            VVith friendly armes their gueſts embrace.
            This man his hoſt calles by his name,
            Others to kinsfolkes doe the ſame.
            Another he eſpies his mate,
            That was his ſchoole-fellow but late.
            No Roman was on either ſide,
            But he ſome old acquaintance ſpy'd.
            Their Armes were all with teares beſprent,
            Their kiſſes do in ſo
                  ••…
               es lament.
            
               And though no bloud were drawne at all,
            Yet did they feare what might befall.
            Alas! why vexe you ſo your breaſt?
            What need you waile this mad vnreſt?
            Theſe needleſſe teares were baniſht quite,
            If you conſider but a right
            That you your ſelues nurſe this deſpight.
            Do you ſo much the miſchiefe feareAnd exhortation to peace.
            
            That your owne humors bred and reare?
            Why let the Trumpet ſound his fill,
            Regard it not, but keepe you ſtill:
            And though the Enſignes flye at large,
            From ciuill brawles your Armes diſcharge.
            So ſhall you end Erinnys date,
            And Caeſar then in priuate ſtate
            Shall ceaſe his ſon-in-law to hate.
            ¶ O Concord with eternall grace!
            That ſweetly do'ſt all things embrace:
            Within this mixed maſſie ſpheare,
            Worlds ſacred loue be preſent heere;
            For now in danger ſtands our age,An Apoſtrophe to concord.
            
            To be diſtreſt with future rage:
            Warres miſchiefes ſecretly deuiſd,
            Is now diſcouer'd and deſpiſd.
            The miſ-led people ſee with ſhame,
            What is the cauſe of all their blame,
            Each friend doth know his friend by name.
            But (ah) dire Fates, that do aduance
            With a ſiniſter ordinance,
            The bloudy ſtrife that ſhall encreaſe
            For this ſmall time of pleaſing peace.
            Truce now in both the Campes did ſwarme,
            With viſitations free from harme.
            Vpon the greene turfe is their ſeat,
            Where they together friendly eate.The kinde entertainment betweene the Souldiers of both Campes.
            
            And Bacchus liquor doth abound,
            Huge fires they kindle on the ground.
            Together they do Cabbins make,
            But all the night no ſleepe doe take,
            The tales they tell keepe them awake.
            
               One telles how he the trench defends,
            Another how his pile he bends,
            With ſtrength that from his arme he ſends.
            And whilſt that ſome thus brags and boaſts
            What they haue done in ſundry coaſts:
            Others againe will giue a glance,
            And ſay that this fell out by chance.
            Yet they poore ſoules doe finde content
            That with ſuch faith the time is ſpent.
            But (ah) this new contracted loue
            Muſt greater future mallice proue.
            For when Petreius heard report,
            How both the Campes in friendly ſort
            With mutuall loue each other greets,
            And in ſuch kindneſſe daily meets;
            
               
                  Petreius violates the friendly complements between the two Campes.He then imployes ſome truſty bands,
            Who with their armed wicked hands,
            Do fall on the vnarmed foe,
            And ore the trenches them do throw.
            Then their embracements and kinde words
            They ſeparate with bloody ſwords;
            So in a ſauadge brainſick mood,
            He waſht away this peace with blood.
            ¶ Then he enrag'd with words of ire,
            New fewell addes vnto old fire.
            O Souldiers, that with baſe neglect,
            Do thus your Countries cauſe reiect,
            And with a looſe forgetfull minde,
            To your owne Enſignes are vnkinde;
            By this meanes you can neuer ſhowe
            
               
                  Petreius oration to his Souldiers.The faith that you the Senate owe.
            Can this league that you haue renewd,
            Witneſſe that Caeſar is ſubdu'd
            By you? and can it be maintain'd,
            Your countries freedome thus is gain'd?
            Beleeue me, now you rather goe
            The way your ſelues to ouer-throw.
            Will you become proud Caeſars ſlaue
            Whilſt in your hands you weapons haue?
            And whil'ſt the Victors happy ſtate
            
               Depends vpon a doubtfull fate?
            And whilſt your ſturdy limbes and vaines
            (Not ſoak't with wounds) freſh blood retains?
            Will you as men that ill deſerue,
            Vnder condemned Enſignes ſerue?
            Muſt Caeſar without more adoe
            Now needs be ſu'd and ſought vnto?
            That he would you vouchſafe the grace,
            To ſerue in ſome inferior place?
            And muſt we (that command in chiefe)
            Of Caeſar ſeeke our liues reliefe?
            Oh no, that ſcorne we much diſdaine,
            Treaſon ſhall not our ſafety gaine,
            No wicked price can vs retaine.
            This ciuill warre we doe not wage
            To ſaue our liues from furies rage;
            Our liberties, and Countries cauſe,
            Vs willingly to dangers drawes.
            What need we deepe mines vndertake
            For Steele and Iron, Armes to make?
            Or why ſhould we our Citties wall,
            And raiſe huge Ramparts therewithall?
            What need ſuch troopes of Courſers braue,
            As in our Campes we daily haue?
            Or to what vſe ſhould we maintaine
            Such towring Gallions on the maine,
            If we be willing to releaſe
            Our liberties, to gaine a peace?
            A wicked oath our foes doth binde
            To ſue theſe warres with conſtant minde.
            And can you with your faiths diſpence,
            That is engag'd with iuſt pretence?
            Need you from guilt to be acquite,
            Becauſe you for your Countrey fight?
            O ſhamefull and vnmanly act!
            That would ſuch heynous leagues contract.
            
               Pompey, that art eſtrang'd by Fate,
               An Apoſtrophe to Pompey.
               
            
            From knowledge of the Cities ſtate,
            And Armies doſt prepare for warre,
            With aids from Kings remote ſo farre.
            
               Perhaps thou buildſt vpon our truſt,
            Ready to aid thy quarrell iuſt.
            Thus ſaid, againe he ſets on fire,
            Their mindes with wicked warres deſire.
            
               An apt compariſon.¶ Like as the cruell ſauadge beaſt,
            That long from forreſt prey hath ceaſt,
            Shut vp within a cloſed cage,
            More mildly bred, diſ-vſd from rage:
            At length his nature being tam'd,
            To humane bent is brought and fram'd.
            If he againe but taſte the ſmacke
            Of blood, that he ſo long did lacke;
            And therewith warme his rauening Iawes,
            Will then with furious ramping pawes,
            Thirſty of bloud, expoſe his power
            His fearefull keeper to deuoure.
            So to all villany they goe,
            And monſtrous treachery they ſhow.
            The which vile fact they cloake with night,
            Blinde Fortunes deed, and Fates deſpight.
            For now behold, 'twixt bed and boord,
            They brutiſhly doe bathe the ſword
            VVithin their breaſts, whom they before
            VVith deere embracements did deplore.
            And though at firſt they moaning yearne,
            So to employ their weapons ſterne:
            The thirſty ſword that peace withſtands,
            Offers it ſelfe into their hands.
            Yet whilſt they kill, they loath the fact,
            Their faint blowes ſhew their minds diſtract.
            But now the Campe is raging hot,
            
               
                  Petreius men vnwillingly betray their aduerſaries.All faith is brutiſhly forgot:
            Their rauening hands with blood they glut,
            The ſonnes their fathers throats do cut.
            Yet that the Souldiers may be freed
            As guiltleſſe of this heynous deed:
            Before their two great Captaines eyes
            They did ſhew forth this bloody prize,
            VVhich ſight did them with ioy ſurprize.
            ¶ But Caeſar, though thy gallant bands
            
               Be thus deſpoil'd with treacherous hands,
            Yet thou the Gods doſt ſtill regard,
            And didſt not ſuch reuenge award
            Vpon thy foes; when thou didſt ſtand
            Triumphant in Pharſalia land.
            Nor when thou didſt on ſeas of late,
            The ſtout Maſsilian force abate.
            Nor when thou didſt in Aegypts ſoyle
            At Pharos, giue thy foes the foyle.
            But their outrage, and thy milde courſe
            Betters thy cauſe, and makes theirs worſe.
            For now theſe Captaines ſpirits droopes,
                  Caeſars clemency graceth his cauſe.
            
            They dare not with polluted troopes
            Longer incampe in Champian lands,
            Their Tents too neere to Caeſars ſtands.
            But to Ilerda they willl flee,
            VVhoſe walles they thinke much ſafer be.
                  Petreius minded to flye to Ilerda.
               
            
            But Caeſars horſe-men them preuent,
            And in dry hilles they are vp-pent.
            VVhere want of water they ſuſtaine,
            For Caeſar did their ditches draine;
            And them with Troopes incompaſt ſo,
            That from their Campe they dare not goe
            To fetch in water, where ſprings flow.
            ¶When theſe men ſaw their deaths at hand
            No longer now in feare they ſtand,
            But carried on with raging will,
            Their horſes firſt of all they kill;
            VVhich now can ſerue them to no vſe,
            Being thus pent vp in a muſe.
            And therefore ſet aſide all hope,
            Seeing to ſcape was left no ſcope.
            Towards their armed foes they flye:
            But when that Caeſar did eſpye
            In them this furious deſperate vaine;
            Souldiers (quoth he) your Armes refraine,
                  Caeſars aduice to his Souldiers.
            
            Though ruſhing thus, they you confront,
            Do not receiue their head-ſtrong brunt:
            I know a better way by farre,
            In blood I liſt not bathe my warre.
            
               
               Hee conqueſt gaines at too high price,
            
            
               That ſtriues with thoſe that death entice.
            
            Theſe laddes now weary of their liues,
            Together with their ruine ſtriues,
            To bring ſome wracke on vs withall;
            But on our ſwords they ſhall not fall:
            Though they deſire in this ſtaru'd mood
            To looſe their liues, to ſpill our blood.
            O this is but a madding fit!
            Let them a while champe on the bit.
            Barre them that death ſo faine they would,
            Their courage will be quickly coold.
            Hold them but lingring off from fight,
            Vntill the Sunne with-draw his light,
            And in the Ocean dip his head,
            And that the skies be ouer-ſpred
            With ſtarres; let Tytan ſiluer-bright,
            Giue them but ſpace to pawſe a night.
            Thus when they ſaw their Mart was mar'd,
            And meanes of fight they were debar'd;
            Their furious humor waxed cold,
            And in their mindes more temper hold.
            Like him whoſe breaſt the ſword doth pierce
            With wounds, griefe doth become more fierce:
            Whilſt guſhing from the nerues and vaines
            Hot bloud, his ſtriuing ſpirits ſtraines
            To ſhew the force that yet remaines:
            And yet vntill the bones beginne
            Neerer to draw the blood-puft skinne,
            The whilſt the witting victor ſtands
            Retyr'd, and doth with-hold his hands,
            Vntill a chill numme heauineſſe
            The ioynts and ſpirits doe poſſeſſe
            Of this poore wounded man, at length
            Who findes himſelfe depriu'd of ſtrength,
            When as the gore no longer flowes,
            But on the wound ſtiffe-dried growes.
            ¶ Now want of water them conſtraines
            
               
                  Petreius Camp diſtreſſed for want of waterTo digge and ſearch out hidden vaines
            Of ſprings & ſtreames, that haue their birth
            
               Deepe in the bowels of the earth.
            And whilſt about this worke they ſtand,
            They do not onely take in hand
            The Pick-axe, and the deluing ſpades,
            But do employ their martiall blades.
            And toppes of hilles they deeper ſinke
            Then any low-lodg'd riuers brinke.
            The pale-hu'd Myners (that doe toyle
            For gold, in rich Aſſyrian ſoyle)
            Doe not ſinke deeper pits downe-right,
            In dungeons more remote from light.
            And yet for all they can deuiſe,
            They cannot ſee a ſpring to riſe.
            Nor any ſtreame could be deſcry'd
            That vnder-neath the ground did ſlide.
            Nor from the ſides of rocky hilles,
            A droppe of liquor out diſtilles,
            Though dig'd & pierc'd with pick-axe bils.
            No drop of deaw or moiſture laues
            The hollow dampiſh airy caues.
            Nor in the pits of grauill ſand,
            Doth any plaſh of water ſtand.
            Their men thus ouer-laid with ſweat,
            And fainting now twixt thirſt and heat;
            Seeing that they but looſe their paine,
            Raiſe them from out the mines againe.
            But by this diuing vnder ground,
            Whereas ſome dampiſh miſts they found,
            When they come vp, can ſcarce endure
            The aire, that is more hot and pure.
            Neither are they refreſh't with meate,
            They faint for drinke, and loath to eate.
            Hunger to them beſt helpe doth giue
            Their thirſty humor to relieue.
            But if that any moiſty field,
            Do graſſie roots, or greene turfes yeeld,
            Betweene their hands the ſame they ſquees
            Into their mouth, and no drop leeſe.
            Or if they meet with ſtanding puddles,
            Where ſlime & black mud ſtinking huddles;
            
               The Souldiers there (to get a draught)
            Will ſtriue, as though a world they ſought.
            And ſtaruing, will contented drinke
            That, which they would elſe odious thinke.
            And then will take it for their feaſts,
            To ſucke the vdders of bruit beaſts;
            And when therein no milke remaines,
            They ſucke the bloud from out the vaines.
            Others freſh leaues and hearbes will pound
            With dew that on green boughes is found;
            But chiefly, thoſe crude ſtalkes that twines
            About the tender-budding vines,
            They preſſe, and ſap from yong tree rinds.
            ¶ O happy ſoules, full bleſt were yee,
            That whilſt your barb'rous foes did flee,
            They did in all the wayes they paſt
            Poyſon amongſt the waters caſt,
            And ſo deſtroyd you all at laſt.
            Our Roman youths will neuer ſhrinke
            Witting thoſe water ſtreames to drinke;
            Though Caeſar ſhould the ſprings defile
            With vennome, or with carrion vile;
            Or wholeſome welles ſhould in deſpight,
            Infect with deadly Aconite:
            But now their bowels drowth hath fry'd,
            Their mouthes reſemble parchment dry'd.
            Their tongues the baked froth doth furre,
            In their ſhrunke veines no bloud will ſturre:
            Their lights and lungs do ſcarcely pant,
            They all refreſhing humor want.
            And it doth grieue them to the death,
            Through their chopt pipes to draw their breath.
            Their iawes wide gaping they do ſtretch,
            The cooling deawes by night to ketch.
            They watch when ſome ſweet ſhowres will fall,
            Which but of late ore-whelmed all:
            And euermore they caſt their eyes
            Vpon the niggard cloudy skies;
            And ſo much more it did them grieue,
            Becauſe that now they did not liue
            
               Amongſt Meroens parched plants,
            Nor with the naked Garamants,
            
            Nor vnder Cancers fiery lampe,
            But their ſtaru'd Army did encampe;
            Where they (like Tantalus) might view,
            Sweet Sicoris, with ſiluer hue,
            And Iberus ſo ſwift and cleere,
            Both hard at hand, they nere the neere.
            ¶ Theſe tamed Captaines now are calme,
            In ſtead of Bayes they carry Palme;
            
               Afranius with a carriage meeke,
            Peace for his guilty Armes doth ſeeke:
            And ſo with all his creſt-falne troopes
            (That now in ſtarued languor droopes)
            Vnto the hoſtile Tents he wends,
                  Petreius & Affranius ſubmit themſelues to Caeſar.
               
            
            And there at Caeſars feet he bends.
            But though he ſue, yet holds his grace
            Not with miſ-fortunes daunted face;
            But carries all in fitting ſort
            For his now fate, and his late port:
            And with a brow ſecure and bold,
            To gaine his peace, this tale he told.
            ¶ Had Fate ordain'd that I ſhould ſtand
            Thus vanquiſht by a ſtrangers hand:
                  Afranius Oration to Caeſar.
               
            
            My dreadleſſe Arme I ſoone would frame
            To reaue my life, and ſhun that ſhame.
            But now this reaſon doth me leade
            For ſafety of my life to pleade;
            Becauſe thou Caeſar doſt beleeue
            He nobly doth, that life doth giue.
            Of faction we no parties are,
            Our charge we held before this warre:
            And to that former Martiall truſt,
            Whilſt we had power, we haue beene iuſt,
            To ſtriue with Fate we do not luſt.
            
               Spaine we deliuer to thy hands,
            We opned haue the Eaſterne lands:
            Thoſe coaſts ſhall be ſecur'd from wracke,
            That thou doſt leaue behinde thy backe:
            This conqueſt now on vs ſo gain'd,
            
               Is not with loſſe of bloud obtain'd,
            Thy hand or ſword it hath not ſtain'd.
            This onely boone in thee doth reſt,
            To ſpare thy foes that are diſtreſt.
            It is not much that we do craue
            On our miſhaps remorſe to haue.
            Permit our liues that thou doſt giue,
            From ciuill diſcord free to liue,
            And reſt ſecure of our intent;
            Theſe proſtrate troops their ſpleen haue ſpent.
            It fits not with thy happy Armes,
            To mingle our ſubiected ſwarmes:
            Nor that our captiue Troopes ſhould dare
            Triumphes with thy braue Hoaſt to ſhare,
            Theſe with contentment know their fare.
            Onely this grace let vs obtaine,
            
               The ſumme of Afranius Petition.That thou do not our Armes conſtraine,
            And force vs (conquer'd men) to be
            Hereafter Conquerors with thee.
            ¶ Thus ſaid, Caeſar (of nature milde)
            With gracious lookes was reconcil'd:
            
               
                  Caeſars clemency.All puniſhment he did remit,
            And them from vſe of Armes acquit.
            No ſooner was this grace obtain'd,
            And their faith bound to be maintain'd,
            But ſtraight in heapes the Souldiers flee
            
               Many of the Souldiers kill themſelues with greedy drinking.Vnto the riuers, then ſet free:
            And on the bankes did groueling fall,
            Striuing for that was free for all;
            So greedily the ſtreames they ſwill,
            And ſuddenly their panches fill,
            As that their breath they neuer take,
            Striuing their thirſty iawes to ſlake:
            Whereby the aire that ſhould relieue
            Their empty vaines, and comfort giue,
            No paſſage to their lights can finde;
            And ſo withall they life reſign'd.
            This ſcorching peſtilent diſeaſe,
            So ſtill doth on their bowels ceaze,
            That though they ready be to burſt,
            
               The more they drinke the more they thurſt.
            Yet many comfort finde at length,
            And well refreſht, receiue new ſtrength.
            O Luxury! thou prodigue vaine,
            That neuer canſt the meane retaine;A reprehenſion of Luxury.
               
            
            And thou inſatiate Glut tonie,
            
            Pamper'd with ſuperfluitie,
            That rak'ſt and rob'ſt both land and ſeas,
            Thy wanton appetite to pleaſe.
            O learne, and better do aduiſe,
            How ſmall reliefe will life ſuffiſe,
            For Nature doth exceſſe deſpiſe.
            The ſtrong old wine that we do keepe
            Time out of minde in Cellars deepe,
            No health or helpe at all can bring
            To ſickly ſowles, whom feuers wring.
            They mixed liquors do not ſuppe
            Delitiouſly in golden cuppe:
            Freſh water, and the hearty graine,
            Doth ſtrength reſtore, and life ſuſtaine.
            O! with what ſtormes do they contend,
            That in the warres their liues do ſpend?
            The Souldier now his Armes bequeaues,
            To Caeſar, whence he grace receaues.
            And more ſecurely he doth reſt,
            Then with his corſlet on his breaſt.
            For freed thus from carke and care,
            Vnto the Citties they repare.
            And now do they that finde releaſe
            From warres, by this ſo happy peace,
            That bloody trade and trauaile ſcorne,
            Wiſhing they neuer Armes had borne,
            To haue endur'd ſuch thirſt withall,A deteſtation of warre.
            
            And on the Gods in vaine to call,
            For conqueſt on their ſide to fall.
            The wiſhed hope of good ſucceſſe
            With doubts doth ſtouteſt hearts oppreſſe.
            When Armies ſterne confonting ſtriues,
            Such toyles the wretched world contriues,
            That Fortune neuer ſhould haue reſt,
            
               If ſhe ſhould tend to their requeſt,
            As oft as men doe call and cry,
            When they doe doubt of victory.
            For through the world muſt bloud be ſhed,
            Where troopes with Caeſars fate are led.
            And therefore we may thinke him bleſt,
            That knoweth where in quyet reſt
            His head to ſhelter free from ſcarres,
            Since all the world is ſet on iarres;
            So that this wretched ciuill broyle,
            Men wearied do not ouer-toyle.
            And ſlumbring ſoules are not affright
            
               The ſecurity and contentment that poore men liue in.When Trumpets ſound calles men to fight.
            The wife may haue her deere conſort,
            Parents may with their children ſport.
            And lodg'd in ſimple Cotes ſecure,
            Their fields may labour and manure,
            Vnforc'd warres hazards to endure.
            Thus Fortune now becomes more kinde,
            And hath releaſt from cares our minde,
            So as no cauſe of feare we finde.
            
               Caeſar is founder of our reſt,
            But we were led by Pompey's heſt.
            And now this boone thereby we haue,
            That whilſt theſe ciuill warres do raue,
            For neither ſide ſucceſſe we craue.
            ¶ Fortune doth not her grace expreſſe
            On Caeſars ſide with like ſucceſſe
            In other coaſt, but there ſhe ſhewes
            That ſhe dares croſſe him with ſome blows.
            For where the Adriaticke maine
            His waues doth on Salona ſtraine.
            And whereas luke-warme Iaders ſourſe
            Into ſoft Zephyr bends his courſe.
            
               Antonius with his troopes reſides;
            Which coaſts vpon the vtmoſt ſides,
            The Adriaticke ſea doth bound:
            There is he ſhut vp in that ground,
            And truſts vnto thoſe valiant bands
            That he had from the Curets lands.
            
               And able was his warre to wage
            Againſt the force of hoſtile rage;
            Had Famine not his campe diſtreſt,
            Wherewith ſtrong forts are oft oppreſt.
            This ſoyle for horſe no fodder yeelds,
            Nor any graine grew in the fields.
            The hungry ſouldiers from the turfe
            Pluckes vp for food the heathy ſcurfe.
            And with their teeth do gnabbe the greene
            Of medowes, that earſt mow'd had beene.
            But when theſe men their friends deſcry'd
            Vpon the ſhore on th'other ſide;
            And ſaw Baſilus Enſigne ſpred,
            Vnder whoſe conduct they were led:
            A new deuice they vndertake,
            By ſea their ſecret flight to make;
            But not with ſhips of common wont,
            With ſayles or oares the waues to front:Diſtreſſe puts men to their ſhifts.
            
            But with vn-vſed ſtratagems,
            Together they did binde huge beames,
            That would a mighty fraight ſuſtaine,
            And ſafely ſwim vpon the maine:
            With empty Caske ſupported vp,
            Which would not ſinke, nor water ſup.
            Theſe bundled trees great chaines did ſtrength,
            With doubled rankes combin'd in length.
            Not drawne with oares on either ſides,
            Vpon the waues theſe vaſte piles ſlides.
            But by the floating of the beames,
            They are borne vp vpon the ſtreames.
            And in that ſort doth ſlily wend
            With ſecret courſe not to be kend.
            For neither ſailes do make them flye,
            Nor any oares they doe apply:
            But now they doe the tides attend,
            For then the ſeas did backward bend.
            And with the ebbe the ſhores and ſands
            All bare and dry vncouered ſtands.
            But after when the ſwelling maine
            With turning flood did riſe againe,
            
               Theſe ſtructures that they did compoſe,
            Were ſlidde into the floting Oaſe;
            With two ſhippes that before them goe,
            And after them theſe Raffes did tow.
            Theſe ſhips had turrets built vpright,
            That plainly did appeare in ſight;
            And on the decke the trembling maſt
            Did bow, and ſtoope with euery blaſt.
            But now Octauius Admirall,
            That on the ſeas did gouerne all
            For Pompey's part, would not in haſt
            Aſſaile theſe Raffes, but ſtill ſtood faſt.
            And did his nimble ſhips reſtraine
            From ranging out into the maine,
            Vntill the foe were in his way,
            Aloofe at ſea, farre from the bay,
            Securely running on his race,
            Doubting no ſayles to giue them chaſe.
            So doth the fearefull Hart refraine
            To ſcoure or range vpon the plaine,
            But ſculkes and hides amongſt the brakes,
            When by the winde the ſent he takes
            Of bow or ſhaft, or human breath,
            Which he doth ſhun vnto the death.
            Thus while the hunt with-holds the ſounds
            Of his fleet-hunting wel-mouth'd hounds;
            And therewithall in cooples clogges
            His Spartane, and his Cretan dogges;
            And ſuffers none the Chaſe to ſue,
            But ſome old hound that can hunt true·
            On dry-foots ſent, with nuſling ſnowt,
            That will not put the beaſt in rowt,
            With ſpending of his open iawes;
            But when the tapiſe neere he drawes,
            Will ſhake his taile, and quiet ſtand,
            To fit all for the hunters hand.
            Now theſe huge Raffes with ſpeed they load,
            And then conuey them from the road,
            VVhen as the laſt of dayes twy-light
            VVithſtood the firſt approch of night.
            
               Then Cilix, that ſame Pirate old,
            That did on Pompeys party hold,
            A ſlight deuiſd them to betray,
            VVhen on the ſeas they were mid-way.
            A long huge chaine there he did ſinke,
            And to a rocke the end did linke
            Of the Ilyrian cliffie ſhore,
            But lets the firſt ſhip paſſe it ore,
            And ſo the ſecond in likewiſe,
            And then the third he did ſurpriſe,
            VVith his hook't chaine, the which he drew
            Vnto the ſhore, with her arm'd crew.
            This land doth ſheluing hollow lye
            Ouer the ſeas, ſtrange to the eye.
            VVhereon a tuffe of huge trees growes,
            That on the waues great ſhadowes ſtrowes.
            Hither from ſhips by North-windes torne
            Many dead carkaſſes are borne,
            And in the creekes a while lye cloſd,
            But after are againe expoſd:
            For when the Cauernes of this bay
            VVith ebbe returnes his circling ſway,
            Theſe whirle-pooles ſpue vp from their maw
            More then Charybdis gulfie iaw;
            Here now this Raffe incloſed is,
            Deepe laden with the Colonies
            Of Opiterge; and then the fleet
            Of enemies about them meet.
            And all about the neighbour ſtrands
            In Cluſters gazing on them ſtands.
            
               Vulteius now diſcerned plaine,
            That he was taken in a traine:
            For of this Raffe he was the chiefe,
            And ſeeing no meanes of reliefe,
            Nor that this cumbrous tangling chaine
            By any force would breake in twaine,
            He takes his Armes with doubtfull hope,
            VVhether by flight to compaſſe ſcope,
            Or with the ſword a paſſage ope.
            Yet in this hard diſtreſſed plight,
            
               Valour affoords her manly might;
            For being cloſed in a pownd
            With thouſands that this raffe did rownd,
            Which ſcarcely had aboord it than,
            One Cohort full the ſame to man.
            (Although not long) they maintain'd fight
            Vntill at laſt they wanting light,
            The fray was parted by darke night.
            ¶ Then did Vulteius ſtoutly braue
            With dreadleſſe ſpeech himſelfe behaue,
            And cheereth vp his ſtaggering band,
            Amazed with the fate at hand.
            
               
                  Vulteius manly oration to his diſtreſſed troopes.Braue youths (quoth he) weigh in your breaſts
            This little time of night that reſts;
            And do reſolue in this ſhort date,
            How you will ſeeke your lateſt fate.
            Scarce haue we ſo long time of breath,
            With leaſure to fore-thinke our death.
            
               More glory we ſhall giue our end,
            
            
               To meet our Fate, then it attend.
            
            Thoſe mindes do merit no leſſe praiſe,
            That dare cut off their doubtfull dayes,
            Then thoſe, that ſhorten doe the ſcope
            Of longer yeares, that they doe hope.
            
               A Pagan reſolution.For he that doth with his owne fiſt,
            In ſunder breake his life-ſpun twiſt;
            A conqueſt to himſelfe hath gain'd,
            
               Willing to dye comes not conſtrain'd.
            
            To ſcape, no meanes vs hope affoords,
            We are empal'd with Romans ſwords.
            Out-face proud death, lay dread aſide,
            
               Freely affect that muſt betide.
            
            But let vs not (take heed withall)
            Like ſlaughtred beaſts in cluſters fall,
            With hoſtile hands hew'd downe and hack't,
            Be in a cloud obſcurely wrack't:
            
               Confuſed fighting in Troopes, obſcures particular valour.Or elſe be ſlaine whilſt night doth laſt
            With ſhowres of darts from our foes caſt.
            For they that ſo confuſedly
            Fighting, doe intermingled dye,
            
               True valour ſhades from ſight of eye.
            The Gods on vs this ſtage beſtowes
            In open view of friends and foes.
            The rowling ſeas, and mountaines hye,
            Shall ſee our courage death defie:
            This Iſland witneſſe ſhall the ſame,
            And to her rockes record our fame.
            The coaſts on both ſides ſhall behold
            Valour vn-vanquiſht vn-controld.
            O Fortune! we vnwitting are
            What endleſſe fame thou doeſt prepareWhat felicity the Romans tooke to acquire vnto themſelues future fame.
            
            Wherewith to glorifie our Fates.
            
            For all records of future dates,
            That endleſſe ages can retaine,
            Our memory ſhall ſtill maintaine;
            And for our ſakes repeat with ruth,
            To conſtant Mart our ſpotleſſe truth,
            Eternizing our famous youth.
            And Caeſar,
               The affection that Caeſars Souldiers did beare vnto him. for thy ſake we know
            In this too little we beſtow,
            With our owne ſwords our ſelues to gore,
            But thus beſet, we can no more.
            This conſtant death that we will proue,
            We dedicate vnto thy loue.
            But enuious Fate our praiſe did grutch,
            And from it hath detracted much;
            In that our Parents and our ſonnes
            With vs none of this fortune runnes.
            Then ſhould they know (had we ſome aid)
            What dauntleſſe ſpirits they way-layd.
            And, doubtleſſe, we ſhould make them feare
            To mell with vs, that ſuch minds beare.
            But they may hold them well-a-paid,
            That no more of our ſhips they ſtaid.
            For then muſt they ſome means haue found
            For our enlargement to compound;
            And ſought with ſome vaine offers baſe,
            Our liuing honour to deface.
            O would (that now to giue our death
            One glory more, ere our laſt breath)
            
               
               A glorious wiſh.They would but vs ſome offer make,
            Whereby we might our pardon take:
            That we with ſcorne might it forſake:
            That thereby they might plainely know
            How dreadleſſe we to death do goe.
            And not as men in hopeleſſe mood,
            With our own ſwords coole our own blood.
            Let vs ſuch vertue now expreſſe,
            That Caeſar may with right confeſſe,
            That he in vs hath vndergone
            A bloody loſſe worthy of mone.
            Although we few are but a mite
            Mongſt thouſands that for him do fight,
            
               The reſolution of Vulteius.
               Though fate would ſet vs free againe,
            That offer yet would I diſdaine;
            Deere mates, this life to me is ſcorne,
            Deaths motiues do my thoughts ſuborne.
            Fury diuine hath rap't rap't my minde,
            The Gods in fauour haue deſign'd
            That we to death ſhould giue our minde.
            
               To be willing to die is a heauenly bleſſingTo others they ſuch grace deny,
            To thinke it happineſſe to dye;
            Becauſe here in this world of ſtrife,
            They ſhould protract a wretched life.
            Now are theſe noble youths on fire,
            To haſte their fates with true deſire.
            
               How much Vulteius ſpeech did animate his little troope
               Who did before gaze on the skies
            With heauy hearts and watry eyes,
            Expecting death when ſunne did riſe.
            And did behold (with grieuing feare)
            The ſtooping of the greater Beare,
            Before that they this ſpeech did heare.
            But then they wiſht to ſee dayes light,
            So free they were from deaths affright.
            For now their Captaines glorious words,
            Prouok't their hearts like points of ſwords.
            The Sphere with all her lampes of night
            Haſte in the ſeas to plunge their light.
            The Sunne his parting then begins
            
               Caſtor and P
                     •
                  ll
                     •
                  x.From out the armes of Laeda's twins,
            
               And now this lofty ſtarre him drawes
            To lodge more neere to Cancers clawes
            And for a farewell night imparts
            With vs, her two Theſſalian darts.
            ¶ The day ſpring doth deſcry abroad
            How Iſtrian troopes the Cliffes do load,
            And how the ſtout Liburnian fleet
            With Greekiſh ſhips in conſort meet.
            But firſt, the rage of warre to ceaſe,
            They offer them to treate of peace:
            And onely this contract would haue,
            To yeeld themſelues, their liues to ſaue;
            Except they more deſired death,
            Then to preſerue a Captiue breath.A parly offered, but refuſed.
            
            But theſe braue yonkers did diſdaine
            Parlie for life to entertaine.
            They were reſolu'd that their owne Armes
            Should free them from all ſcornfull harmes.
            Their mindes prepar'd for vtmoſt woes,
            Could not be mou'd with clamorous foes.
            Few hands of theirs ſuſtain'd the brunt
            Of multitudes,
                  Vulteius aſſailed on all ſides that them affrunt
            By land and ſeas on euery ſide,
            Conſtant to death they firme abide.
            And when they ſaw of hoſtile gore,
            That they had ſhed ſufficient ſtore;
            They turn'd their fury from the foe,
            And with themſelues in hand they goe.
            The noble Captaine led the way
            
               Vulteius braue, that doth diſplay
            His naked breaſt, and thus did ſay:
            That hand amongſt you moſt of worth
            My blood with glory to let forth;
            Let him giue proofe by wounding me,
            That he likewiſe himſelfe dares free
            From captiue fate. No more he ſpake,The reſolution of the Romans in ſcorne of their foes.
            
            But therewithall ſhort worke to make,
            More ſwords then one became ſo fierce,
            That all at once his bowels pierce.
            Yet he that on him firſt did light,
            
               Him with like kindneſſe to requite,
            His dying hand did then beſtow
            On him againe a fatall blow.
            Then all the Troope hand ouer head,
            With mortall wounds each other ſped.
            In ſuch ſort rag'd the Dircaean breed,
            
               Cadmus.That did ſpring vp of Cadmus ſeed,
            Which did preſage the diſmall fate
            
               
                  Ocdepus two ſonnes, Etheocles, and Polynices.
               Of Theban brethrens dire debate;
            Whoſe earth-bred race their linnage drawes
            From that ſame waking Dragons iawes,
            Whoſe teeth ſowne in the Phaſian fields,
            Such cankred bloody natures yeelds;
            As that the furrowes flowing ſtood
            With fowle inrag'd allied blood,
            Contriu'd by wrathfull Magickes mood.
            
               Medea.And vile Medea, that theſe harmes
            Did bring to paſſe with ſorcerous charmes,
            Fear'd what thereof might more betide,
            Becauſe thoſe ſpelles ſhe had not try'd.
            In this ſort dy'd thoſe gallant laddes,
            Whoſe mutuall fate each other glads.
            Death to great vertue did expoſe,
            To quell ſuch valiant men as thoſe.
            Yet they together dye and fall;
            No one mans hand did faile at all
            To giue a wound, but it did bring
            With dying hand, deaths deadly ſting.
            Neither did they to ſtrong blowes truſt,
            But through their breaſts the ſwords did thruſt;
            And for it ſhould be throughly donne,
            Vp to the hilts they did them runne.
            In this blood-thirſty ſlaughtring fray,
            The brother doth the brother ſlay;
            
               A cruell ſlaughter.Sonnes fathers ſend the ſelfe-ſame way.
            And yet their hands were not affright
            'Gainſt natures lawes to ſhew their might.
            But this was deem'd a pious deed,
            With one blow and no more to ſpeed.
            Now did the bowels all beſtrow
            
               The hatches, and the bloud did flow
            Ouer the ſides into the ſeas.
            To ſee the light did them diſpleaſe;
            But that with proud diſdainfull grace
            They might looke in the victors face,
            And ſcornfully their deaths embrace.
            The Raffe was heap't, and ouer-ſpred
            With theſe braue youths that there lye dead.
            To whom the Conquerors impart
            Due funerals, as their deſart.
            And all the Captaines wondring ſtood,
            At this braue Captaines dauntleſſe mood.
            And now the fame of this deed donne,
            (As matchleſſe) through the world did run.
            But yet this patterne cannot make
            Many baſe mindes like heart to take:
            
               Dread will not let them vnderſtand,
            That Vertue with her valiant hand,
            May eaſily their woes releaſe,
            If ſlauiſh Fate do them oppreſſe:What power reſts in valour
            
            But Tyrants ſwords do them appall,
            Their freedome vnder force doth fall,
            Becauſe they do not vnderſtand
            Why ſwords were fitted to the hand.
            O Death! therefore doe not affright
            The poore diſmaied coward wight;
            But ſhew thy tyrant murdrous dart
            Vnto the dauntleſſe noble heart.
            Like courage he in Mart expreſt
            That doth the Lybian fields inueſt:
            For noble Curio leaues the rode
            Of Lilybey, where his abode
            With all his fleet, a while he made
            Which now the Ocean do inuade.
                  Curio with an Army goes into Affricke.
               
            
            When as a friendly Northerne gale
            His ſhips vnto the port did hale,
            Whereas the waues the ruines beat
            Of great Carthagoes famous ſeat.
            And then vnto the harbour came
            
               Clupea hight, of noted name.
            
               There firſt he maketh his diſcents,
            
               
                  Curios landing in Affricke.
               And farre in land did pitch his tents
            Hard by the ſtow Bagrada's ſides,
            That furrowes vp the ſands with tides.
            Then to the hilles his Army goes,
            And to thoſe hollow rockes that ſhowes
            
               
                  The Gyant Antaeus.Where great Antaeus raigned king,
            As old bards do not vainly ſing.
            Here Curio ſeriouſly deſires
            To heare report of ancient ſires,
            And what the peaſants of the land
            Did by tradition vnderſtand;
            From what occaſion that tale roſe,
            That through the world this rumor blowes.
            
               The tale of Antaeus
               ¶ Long after that ſame monſtrous brood
            Of Earth-borne Gyants, Ioue with-ſtood,
            Our Libian Countrey did not reare
            Such ore-growne creatures as they were.
            
               The Gyants that rebelled againſt Iupiter
               Neither was Typhons worth ſo much;
            Nor Tityos, nor Briareus ſuch,
            As in the world they glory bare;
            But ſure the earth the heauens did ſpare,
            That then Antaeus was not borne,
            
               A right Heathen conceite.Nor did in Theſſaly ſoiorne.
            A man ſo deere vnto the earth,
            
               
                  Antaeus the ſon of the earth.From whom he tooke his liuing birth;
            As that he neuer touch't the ground,
            But his maine force did more abound.
            And when his huge limbes fainting grew,
            Freſh ſtrength in them it did renue.
            This caue the houſe where he did dwell,
            And vnder this high rocke the cell
            Where he did lodge, and for his meate
            The fleſh of Lyons he did eate.
            
               The maner of Antaeus life.On wilde beaſts skinnes he would not lye,
            Nor on the broad leaues ſoft and drye;
            But on the bare mould he would reſt,
            Wherewith his vigor ſtill encreaſt.
            The people ouer all the lands
            Were mangled with his murdrous hands.
            
               Of ſtrangers, that the coaſt did trade,
            A ſlaughter and a ſpoyle he made.
            But for a time (proud of his force)
            He did the helpe of earth diuorce.
            And though he were of ſo great might,
            That none durſt him withſtand in fight;
            Yet when the fame abroad was ſpread,
            Of this foule monſter ſo a-dread,
            And what great miſchiefe he had donne,
            It mou'd Alcides noble ſonneHercules.
            
            To paſſe to Affricke on the maine,
            To buckle with this ſurly ſwaine.
            ¶ But ere his taske he did beginne,
            From him he caſts his Lyons skinne,
            That in Cleoneae he had ſlaine:
            
               Antaeus likewiſe did refraine
            To weare his Lybicke Lyons ſpoyle.
            Then Hercules, the ſoueraigne oyle
            Vpon his brawny limbes infuſd,
            That in Olympian games he vſd.
            But now Antaeus (earſt ſo ſtout)
            His proper force began to doubt;
            And therefore ſtretcht himſelfe at length
            Vpon the ſands, that gaue him ſtrength.
            Now with their hands they hand-faſt take,
            And fiercely doe their ſtraind armes ſhake:The combate between Hercules and Antaeus.
               
            
            Then did they long (but all in vaine)
            Each other by the collars ſtraine,
            And brow they doe confront to brow,
            Which neither of them both would bow:
            But each of them did muſe to ſee
            One that his equall match could bee.
            
               Alcides yet forbare to ſhow
            His vtmoſt vigor on his foe:
            But vrg'd him ſo with cunning ſlight,
            That out of breath he puts him quight;
            Which by oft panting he expreſt,
            With cold ſweat trickling downe his breaſt.
            Then both their necks with ſtraining ſhakes
            Breaſt againſt breaſt reſiſtance makes,
            
               Whilſt their croſt arms, with ſtooping chine
            About each others thighes they twine.
            Then doth Alcides leaue that hold,
            And fiercely both his armes did fold
            About Antaeus bending waſte,
            And wringing girds his bowels faſt;
            Whilſt he his foot with skill did ſlide
            Betwixt his ſhankes, and made him ſtride.
            Then with an in-turne following that,
            Vpon his backe he threw him flat.
            The parched earth the ſweat receaues,
            And vnto him new force bequeaues:
            
               
                  Antaeus ſtrēgth renewed by touching the earth.Freſh blood reuiueth euery vaine,
            His ſinowy necke grew ſtrong againe.
            His ioynts more firme and nimble were,
            And with ſuch force himſelfe did beare,
            That all that Herc'les did before,
            His body now annoy'd no more.
            Herewith Alcides grew amaz'd,
            And on this ſtrength increaſing gaz'd,
            For he was not ſo much affright,
            
               Hydra.When he did with that Hydra fight,
            That new heads for his old could dight,
            In the Inachian plaſhie fenne,
            Though he were but a ſtripling then.
            Long doubtfully did they contend:
            One truſts the ſtrength the earth did lend;
            Th'other did on the vertue reſt
            That lodg'd within his manly breaſt.
            
               Iuno.His bitter ſtep-dame neuer had
            Such cauſe as now her hopes to glad,
            In ſeeing him ſo hard beſtad:
            For now ſhe ſees his limbes to ſweate,
            And his ſtrong ſhoulders ſtarke with heate,
            Whereon he wonted was to beare
            The burthen of the ſtarry ſpheare.
            But now againe he did begin
            His armes about his foe to cling,
            Which when Antaeus did perceaue,
            He ſtraight vnto the earth did cleaue,
            
               From whence new force he did receiue.
            And all the helpe the earth could giue,
            Her ſonne therewith ſhe did relieue;
            And labours with her might and maine,
            His wearied limbes to ſtrength againe.
            Now when Alcides found at length,
            That ſtill he did renew his ſtrength
            By vertue of the touched earth
            His mother, whence he tooke his birth.
            Stand now (quoth he) and truſt no more
            As thou didſt to the earth before:
                  Hercules words to Antaeus.
               
            
            I will reſtraine thee from that hope,
            Within my armes ſhall be thy ſcope.
            Thy heft ſhall ſtay vpon my breaſt,
            Here is the place that thou ſhalt reſt.
            And with that word aloft him hent,
            That ſtruggling to the earth-wards bent.
            But there the ground no whit auailes
            Her childs cruſht cheſt, whom death aſſailes.
            Thus did Alcides gird him faſt,
            Vntill his chine he brake at laſt.
            And now deaths pangues, with crazie cold
            On all his limbes did lay ſure hold.
            Thus he a long time did him ſtraine,
                  Antaeus kild by Hercules.
               
            
            Ere he would let him fall againe.
            This combate hath beene ſince the cauſe,
            From whence our Countries ancient ſawes,
            Admiring this great Gyants fame,
            Vnto his mother gaue his name.
            But ſince a name of greater grace,
            Was giuen vnto this hilly place
            By Scipio, that braue Roman knight,Scipio Africanus.
            
            That did by valor and by might,
            Conſtraine the hoſtile Punicke powers
            Home to returne from Latium bowers.
            And here when firſt the Lybicke land
            He did inuade,, his campe did ſtand:
            And in this place ſtill may you ſee
            Where ramparts and huge trenches bee;
            So as the fields did firſt of all,
            
               Vnto the Roman conqueſt fall.
            ¶ Curio is pleaſd that he hath found
            The chance of ſuch a lucky ground,
            And thinkes the fortune of the place
            
               
                  Curio's vaine conceit.His warre with like ſucceſſe would grace,
            As it had done that noble Peere
            
               Scipio,that earſt incamped heere.
            And therefore on this happy land,
            His hapleſſe tents he cauſd to ſtand:
            Too looſely he doth range his hoſt,
            And of theſe hilles the vantage loſt.
            Then with vnequall force doth goe
            To dare a mighty armed foe.
            In Affricke all the Roman bands
            That ſeru'd, were vnder Varus hands;
            
               Actius Varus Pompey's captaine in Affricke.Whoſe Latium forces might ſuffice,
            Yet he ſeekes all the beſt ſupplies
            That Lybicke kingdome would affoord,
            And ſubiects were to Iuba's ſword:
            Who farre and neere his force did raiſe,
            And ſo his ſtandard he diſplaies.
            
               King Iuba.
               In all that continent no King
            Could ſo great powers together bring.
            His Territory from the weſt,
            Where Atlas mount neere Gades doth reſt
            Begins, and ſo forth Eaſtward runnes
            Vnto the Syrtes, where Ammon wonnes:
            And then in bredth takes all that coſt,
            Whoſe lands the Torrid Zone doth toſt;
            With thoſe vaſte kingdomes ſtretcht a farre,
            That bounded with the Ocean are.
            Vnto his Campe repaired theſe,
            The Nation of Antololes,
            
            The vagrant fierce Numidaeans,
            
            The ſtill prepar'd Getulians
            
            That doe vnarmed horſes ride.
            Then Moores, whoſe skins are cole-black dy'd
            The Naſamons that riches wants,
            And all the parched Garamants.
            
            The Marmaryds ſo ſwift of foote,
            
               With Maxans, that as ſtrongly ſhoote
            Thoſe darts that from their armes they throw,
            As Medes can ſhafts out of a bow.
            And thoſe Maſsilians that beſtride
            Their horſes bare-back't when they ride,A nation that ride and rule their horſes without bridles.
            
            And neuer doth a bridle need,
            But with a wand can guide his ſteed.
            The hunting Aphers, that did vſe
            No ſteady dwelling houſe to chuſe,The ſeuerall nations vnder Iuba.
               
            
            But rang'd in Tents from place to place,
            As they purſue the Lyons chaſe;
            And truſts not to their headed ſpeare,
            But with their clokes his eyes will bleare,A ſtrange maner of hunting the Lyon.
               
            
            And nothing do his raging feare.
            ¶ Neither did Iuba raiſe his Mart,
            
            Onely regarding to take part
            With one ſide in this ciuill fight,
            But was drawne on with priuate ſpight.
            For Curio in his Tribunes time,
            That had committed many a crime
            Againſt the Gods, and humane right,
            Did practiſe then with all his might,
                  Iubas particular malice to Curio.
               
            
            By his owne Tribunitian law,
            King Iuba's realme from him to draw:
            And to diſgrade him from the Throne,
            By true diſcent that was his owne.
            VVherein thou didſt thy power diſplay,
            VVhen Rome gaue thee too great a ſway.
            
               Iuba remembring this abuſe,
            Did of this warre make priuate vſe,
            Hoping thereby that vncontrold
            He ſhould his crowne more freely hold.
            The fame of this offended king
            VVith feare in Curios Campe did ring:The rumor of Iubas mallice troubles Curios Campe.
            
            For moſt of all the troopes he led,
            In Caeſars Armes were neuer bred;
            Nor in thoſe Gallicke warres were train'd,
            Nor with their blood the Rhene had ſtain'd.
            But from Corfinium garriſon
            They were with-drawne when it was wonne.
            
               And to new leaders bare ſmall truſt,
            As they to former were vniuſt,
            Still thinking to doe what they luſt.
            When therefore Curio plainly ſaw
            Baſe feare their mindes did ouer-awe;
            Whereby the trenches euery night
            Were barely man'd by ſluggiſh fright:
            And that his Souldiers day by day
            From out the trenches fled away:
            His minde theſe ill preſages mates,
            And with himſelfe he thus debates.
            
               Daring attempts doe couer dread:
            
            
               
                  Curio finding his Army ſtaggering, debates with himſelfe what courſe to take.My Enſignes therefore I will ſpread,
            And with my Souldiers take the field,
            Whilſt they to me obedience yeeld:
            
               For Idleneſse breeds mutiny,
            
            
               But action voids conſpiracy.
            
            Whilſt that the valiant minde is preſt,
            And ſees the ſword againſt his breaſt,
            His helmet then doth ſhelter ſhame;
            He leaſure wants to ſcorne, or blame
            His Captaines will; or to compare
            How martiall cauſes ordered are.
            But on which part in armes he ſtands,
            There he imployes his hired hands.
            So do the fencers, for rewards
            Expoſe their skill and ventrous guards
            Againſt their riuals in their fight,
            Not led thereto with ancient ſpight.
            But when they meet, their force they ſtraine,
            Which of them ſhall the conqueſt gaine.
            This when he had revolu'd in minde,
            He to the field his hoaſt deſign'd.
            And Fortune giues him one faire day,
            Whom afterwards ſhe did betray.
            For he in battaile Varus meetes,
            
               
                  Curio ouerthrowes Varus in the field.And with ſuch force his Army greets;
            As that he made him turne his face,
            Put him in rout, and gaue him chaſe;
            Who neuer turn'd his face againe,
            
               Vntill his Campe did him conſtraine.
            ¶ Theſe heauy newes abrode were blowne,
            That Varus now was ouer-throwne:
            VVhich when to Iuba's eares it came,
            He was well pleaſed with the Fame,
               
                  Iuba glad of Varus ouerthrow.
            
            Preſuming that this warfare ſtayes
            For him, thereof to win the praiſe.
            And therefore ſecretly ordain'd
            Great force, which he with ſpeed retain'd
            For this exployt, by him conceald
            With charge it ſhould not be reueald.
            He onely fear'd that his intent
            His foe would fearefully preuent.
            
               Sabbura was the ſecond man
            That ruled all his kingdome than;
            And vnto him he did commit
            A little troope that he thought fit
            To march before, and with no moe
            Into the field to tyce his foe:
            Pretending that vnto his hands
            He had committed all the bands:
            Meane while the King with his huge Traine,
            Lay hidden in a hollow plaine.
            So doth the Serpent, enemy
            Vnto the Aſpicke, hidden lye,A Simile.
            
            And with a ſubtile ſhadow drawes
            Him neere vnto his murdring iawes:
            And when the Aſpicke nought ſuſpects,
            He ſuddenly his head reflects,
            And with his teeth the throate doth ſquiſe,
            Not where the lurking poyſon lies;
            And therewithall this vermin dies.
            VVho then his venom forth doth caſt,
            But all in vaine, and all in waſt.
            So fraud ſits now in Fortunes lappe,
            For Curio haught with his late happe,
            Did not forecaſt the deepe deceit
            Of his ſtrong foe, that lay in wait.
            But ouer-night he giues in charge
            That all his horſe-troopes ſhould enlarge
            
               
               
                  Curio too venterous, neglecteth good aduice.Themſelues, and range the fields about;
            And in the morning he drawes out
            From forth his Campe, his armed bands,
            Who in the field imbatteld ſtands.
            Yet he was warn'd (but all in vaine)
            That cloſe his campe he ſhould containe,
            And wary be of Lybicke baytes,
            And of the Punycke warres deceytes.
            
               The Punicke deceit in war.But Deſtinies reſiſtleſſe date,
            Gaue vp this yong man to his Fate.
            
            
               And now this ciuill warre betraid
            
            
               Him, that her firſt foundation laid.
            
            His troopes and Enſignes he diſplayes,
            And leades them ouer rocky wayes;
            Which when his enemy eſpyde,
            From hilles a farre where they recide;
            With fraud they ſeeme (as men affright)
            To make retrait in open ſight;
            Vntill thereby they could procure
            Their foe to leaue a place ſo ſure,
            And ſtrong, as thoſe high mountaines were;
            And that the Army did not feare
            To range it ſelfe in martiall wiſe,
            Where as the open Champian lies.
            Now Curio thought his foes did flye,
            And did not their deuice deſcrye;
            
               
                  Curio deceiued with an ambuſh.But as a Conquerour, in haſte
            His Army in the fields he plac't.
            And then the Lybicke guile brake out:
            For thoſe that fled but for a flout,
            With horſe-men ceiz'd the hilles about;
            And with huge troopes they did encloſe
            On euery ſide, their Roman foes.
            ¶ This Curio ſomewhat did amaze,
            His hope-loſt troopes ſtood at a gaze;
            Yet ſought they not for feare to flye,
            Nor ſtrong enough with force to try.
            Their tired horſe, when Trumpets ſound,
            Would neither ſnoring bray, nor bownd:
            Nor with their hoofes the earth would ſtamp,
            
               Nor ſtraine their bridles whilſt they champe
            The foamy bits, nor creaſts vp-reares,
            Nor with a courage pricke their eares.
            Nor ſtriue amongſt the thronging troope,
                  Curios horſe-troopes ſpen and tired.
            
            But all fore-ſpent, their heads down droope.
            And creſt-falne ſmoking in a ſweat,
            Their mouthes are dry, and parcht with heat.
            Their tongues do hang below their iawes,
            Hoarſe grones they ſend from out their maws
            
            With thick drawne winde they puffe & pant,
            Their flankes doe riſe, and breath doe want.
            And all their bits were ſmeared ore
            With duſty dryed frothy gore.
            So as they hardly could be got
            With whips or wands to keepe a trot.
            Nor yet with often ſtroke of ſpurre
            Could they at laſt be made to ſturre.
            It nought auailed him that rides,
            To rent and teare their bloody ſides.
            His pace he would not ſo aduance,
            With force thereof to breake a launce;
            Which greatly did the foe auaile,
            For they the while did them aſſaile
            Aloofe with darts as thicke as haile.The battaile betwixt Curio and Sabbura.
               
            
            ¶ Now when the ranging Aphers preſt
            In with their troopes amongſt the reſt,
            Their trampling ſteeds ſo beat the ground,
            That all the hill therewith did ſound.
            And therewith raiſd ſuch duſty ſmokes,
            That all the aire it dimmes and chokes.
            Like as when the Biſtonian blaſts,
            With rage whole hilles of ſands vp caſts;
            VVhich in ſuch clouds aloft doe riſe,
            As that they dimme and darke the skies.
            No ſooner now their raging Mart
            Vpon the foot they did conuart,
            But that the fight was out of doubt,
                  Curio's Army oppreſſed with numbers of foes
            
            Death ſpent the time amongſt the rout.
            Forward at all, they could not preſſe,
            Nor vſe their Armes in this diſtreſſe.
            
               So were they compaſt round with foes,
            That roome they want to deale their blowes.
            Their ſpeares held vpright in their hands,
            Were throng'd together in whole bands.
            So heapes of foes their helpe confounds,
            Neither fall they alone with wounds,
            
               This fighting in an orbe was the laſt refuge that the Romans vſed euer in extremity.And bloud; but this them death affoords,
            The clouds of darts, and weight of ſwoords.
            And then for laſt refuge of all,
            The troopes now left that were but ſmall,
            Into a little orbe did fall.
            And thoſe that vtmoſt bare the ſtreſſe,
            If they into the midſt would preſſe
            For feare, thereby reliefe to gaine,
            Hardly eſcap't, but there was ſlaine.
            This battail'd Orbe now grew ſo thicke,
            And did ſo cloſe together ſticke,
            And foot to foot ſo preſſing ſtands,
            They could not vſe their martiall hands.
            Their thronged bodies ſo are preſt,
            That arm'd, they cruſh each others breaſt.
            The conquering Moore did not delight
            So much to heare of their hard plight,
            That Fortune proſtrates to his might;
            Not hauing ſeene the bodies ſlaine,
            Nor how the ſtreames of blood did draine,
            Nor that the limbes beſtrewd the land,
            For now the Orbe ſo thicke was mand,
            That bodies dead vpright did ſtand.
            Thus Fortune ſends new ſlaughtred wights
            To pleaſe Carthagoes enuious ſprights:
            The ſacrifice of this braue Hoſt,
            May well appeaſe the thirſty ghoſt
            Of bloudy Hanniball, and thoſe
            That Punicke warres hath made our foes.
            But (O yee Gods) this Roman ſpoyle
            That now is made on Libicke ſoyle,
            To Pompey cannot yeeld content,
            The Senate will this wracke lament.
            Let Affricke thereof make her gaines,
            
               Whoſe fields our Latium blood diſtaines.
            When Curio ſaw his hoaſt in rout,
            And that their blood ſo ſtream'd about,
            As that therewith the duſt was laid,
            And with the gore the land beraid;
            His heart could not endure the ſight
            Of his poore mens diſtreſſed plight,
            Nor would he ſaue himſelfe by flight.
            But on his foes he preſt amaine,
            And ſo amongſt his Troopes was ſlaine.
                  Curio and his Army deſtroyed.
            
            He now diſdaines longer to liue,
            Valour to him his end did giue.
            ¶ What can the Roſtrum thee auaile?
            Or Forum now, when Fates aſſaile?
            What boots it, that in thee it lay
            The armed peoples willes to ſway?
            What profits it thy voyce did draw
            The Senate to infringe the law?
            Whereby the Father and the Sonne,
            This hatefull ciuill warre begunne.
            Sith thou to death thy date muſt yeeld,He taxeth Curio for faction.
            
            And ſhalt not ſee Pharſalia's field:
            Where theſe great Captaines, led with rage
            To battailes chance, their ſtates engage.
            For croſſe-bent Fate denies to thee
            The iſſue of theſe warres to ſee.
            So you diſturbers of the ſtate,
            Make your owne ſelues a prey to fate;
            And pay the price with your owne blood,
            For which you ſold the common good.
            O happy Rome! couldſt thou but finde
            Thy Citizens ſo iuſt and kinde,
            As that the Gods their mindes would moue,An Apostrophe to the Roman Lords.
            
            Rather to cheriſh and to loue
            The publique freedome of the ſtate,
            Then to reuenge their priuate hate.
            O noble Curio 'tis thy meed,
            The rau'ning Libicke fowles to feed;
            For to thy lot will neuer fall
            The honor of a funerall.
            
               But yet our lines might merit blame,
            To ſilence that which for thy name
            Deſerues to be in braſſe inchaſt,
            That with all ages it might laſt.
            I yeeld this therefore to thy ſpirit,
            The due commend that it did merit.
            
               
                  Curio's praiſe.
               Rome neuer bred a greater wit,
            That did within the Roſtrum ſit:
            Nor more did dignifie the lawes,
            Whilſt thou didſt ſtand for iuſtice cauſe.
            
               Auarice and Bribery the ruine of Rome
               But after Pride and Luxurie,
            
            With auaritious Briberie,
            
            Poſſeſt the head-ſtrong wils of youth;
            They ſwamme in ſtreames that led to ruth.
            So with the times things changed then,
            That age corrupt, corrupted men;
            And Curio blaſted with the reſt,
            Was chiefeſt cauſe of Romes vn-reſt.
            For Caeſar did his minde inthrall,
            With golden gifts of conquered Gaule.
            
            Though Sylla's power, and Marius wrath,
            And Cinna's rage bred Roman ſcath;
            Though Caeſars ancient noble line,
            With glory long did ſway and ſhine:
            Yet for all this, their ſwords lack't might
            To frame a tyranny out-right:
            They all did ſtill attempt with gold,
            To purchaſe Rome, which Curio ſold.
            Finis Libri quarti.
         
         
            
            Lucans Pharſalia. The fifth Booke.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               IN Greece the Senate doe decree,
               That Pompey ſhall their leader be.
               Then Appius doth to Delphos goe,
               The Oracles aduice to know.
               Now Caeſar hauing maiſtered Spaine,
               
               His mutiners ſuppreſt againe.
               And then to Rome in haſte he goth,
               There Conſull and Dictator both.
               Thence to Brunduſium he departs,
               And to Epyrus bends his Marts,
               
               He raſhly venters on the Maine:
               Then comes Antonius with his traine.
               
                  Pompey Cornelia doth betake
               To Lesbos, whilſt he warre doth make.
            
            
               THESE Captaines now on either ſide,
            The wrackes of Ciuill warre had try'd,
            And Fortune partiall vnto neither,
                  Fortune as yet ſtand: indifferent betweene Caeſar and Pompey.
               
            
            Mingled good lucke and bad together;
            Bringing them with an equall hand,
            Into the Macedonian land.
            
               Mount Aemus now was thatch't with ſnow,
            That from th' Atlanticke skies did blow.
            And then the feaſt dayes onward drew,
            VVhich did their Magiſtrates renew.
            And that prime ſeaſon gan appeare,
            That leads the vaunt-gard of the yeare.
            But whilſt ſome latter time remaines
            To thoſe that yet doe rule the raines,
            The Conſuls both did then decree
            The Senate ſhould aſſembled be,
            VVith thoſe great Lords both farre & neare,
            In Prouinces did office beare.
            
               
                  Epyrus the randevous of Pompey's forces.And then Epyrus they did chuſe
            The place for this warres Randezvous.
            
            But oh this forraigne ſordid ſeat!
            For Roman Peeres was farre vnmeet.
            It needs muſt be a ſcornfull ieſt,
            That their high Court ſhould be a gueſt
            In ſtranger lands, there to debate
            The Councels of the Empires ſtate.
            For who a Campe will deeme this place,
            That all the Conſuls axes grace?
            The Senates reuerend order ſayes,
            
               
                  Pompey followes the Senate, and not the Senate Pompey.
               They runne not after Pompeys wayes.
            But Pompey for the publicke cauſe,
            Saith he obſerues the Senates lawes.
            ¶ Now when theſe ſad aſſembled Peeres,
            VVith ſilence gaue attentiue eares:
            Lord Lentulus from his high Throne,
            In theſe words makes his meaning knowne;
            
               
                  Lentulus oration to the Senators in the Campe.If courage ſuch your mindes doe feed,
            As worthy of the Latium breed:
            Or ancient blood boyle in your breaſt,
            VVhat matter is't where Romans reſt:
            Regard not how farre we reſide
            From Rome, by Caeſar vilefi'd.
            But know you now with loue and grace
            Your natiue Countrey peoples face.
            Firſt therefore reuerend Fathers heare,
            By all your powers make it appeare
            
               That you the rightfull Senate are,
            Whoſe high decrees in peace and warre,
            Nations muſt reuerence neere and farre.
            For be it ſo that Fortunes ſway
            Would carry vs ſo farre away,
            As where the ycie leſſer Beare
            Doth dimly twinkle in the ſpheare:
            Or elſe whereas the Torrid Zone
            
            Refreſhing vapours caſteth none.
            But alwayes with one counterpaiſe
            Equals the length of nights and dayes;
            Yet whereſoeuer we ſhould roame,
            There alwayes is the Empires home.
            With vs we hold, as proper mate,
            The ſupreame care and rule of ſtate.
            So when with fire the furious Gaules
            
            Aſſail'd the high Tarpeian walles;Camillus.
            
            At Veia did Camillus wonne,
            And there did Rome her fortune runne.
            The Senatorian ordred ſtate
            Is neuer chang'd by place or date.
            
               Caeſar the City doth retaine,
            Whoſe houſes empty do remaine.
            The mourning Courts he ouer-awes,
            Where Armes haue ſilenced the lawes.
            The Roman Courts know but the face
            Of Senators which he did chaſe
            From out the Citty ſwarming than;
            And him that Caeſar did not ban
            Of that great Senatorian traine,
            His fellowſhip we muſt diſdaine.
            That fury firſt did ſcatter ſuch
            As did at wicked diſcord grutch;
            Who with their children and their wiues,
            In peace deſir'd to lead their liues.
            But yet for all this raging vaine,
            Here are we now well met againe.
            And all the Gods in recompence
            Of Italie (though chaſt from thence)
            Hath giuen vs (to cheere our hearts)
            
               The whole worlds force that takes our parts.
            And now in the Ilirian maine,
            
               Vulteius and his troopes are ſlaine.
            And Curio, that was greateſt part
            
               A ſpeech of ſcorne to Caeſar.
               Of Caeſars Senate in his Mart;
            Lies foyl'd, with all his Martiall bands,
            In Affrickes filthy parched ſands.
            Therefore your Enſignes now diſplay,
            Braue Captaines thruſt on Fortunes way;
            In Ioues high grace your hopes repoſe,
            Your mindes as forward now expoſe,
            Againſt the forces of your foes,
            As you were ready then to run,
            When their approches you did ſhun.
            Our power no further doth extend,
            For with the yeare the Conſuls end.
            But reuerend Lords your powerfull ſtate
            Is not confin'd to any date.
            Therefore conclude amongſt you all,
            
               
                  Pompey choſen General of the Army for the Senate.That Pompey be your General.
            Hereat the Senate did reioyce,
            And then decreed with one voyce,
            That they would lay on Pompey's fate,
            The publique and their priuate ſtate.
            That done, to honors they prefer'd
            The Kings and people that deſeru'd.
            And vnto Rhodes, Apollo's ſeat,
            (Whoſe power by ſea was ſtout and great)
            They preſents gaue, and for their truth,
            The like vnto the homely youth
            Of Taygety; and then the Towne
            Of ancient Athens they renowne.
            And to Maſsilians (Caeſars ſpoyle)
            They freely gaue the Phocean ſoyle.
            ¶ Then Sadalen, and Cotyn ſtrong,
            And Deiotarus that had long
            Beene loyall to the Roman ſtate,
            To honors they did eleuate:
            And therewithall Rhaſipolin,
            
            The Lord of that coaſt whereas binne
            
               The chilly ſharpe windes foſtered;
            All theſe with praiſe were honored.
            Then by the Senators decree,
            
               Iuba deſigned was to bee
            The ſoueraigne of all Libicke land,
            To ſway that ſcepter with his hand.
            But oh dire Fates, thou that haſt name
            Of Ptolomey, thou Fortunes ſhame!
                  Ptolomey diſcended of the race of Peleus.
               
            
            To thee a kingdome was deſign'd,
            Whoſe people were of faithleſſe kinde:
            The Gods herein moſt faulty were,
            To grace thy wretched head of haire
            VVith that braue Alexandrian crowne,
            That had from Peleus his renowne.
            Thou boy didſt take the ſword in hand,Yong Ptolomey king of Aegipt, that cauſed Pompey to bee ſlaine, and had almoſt betraied Caeſar.
               
            
            To rule the people of this land.
            And would to God to them alone
            Thy tyrant ſword had beene made knowne;
            But Lagus Realme was giuen thee more,
            And thou defil'd with Pompey's gore,
            Thy ſiſters Crowne thou didſt depriue,
            And Caeſars wracke wel-neere contriue.
            This great aſſembly now diſmiſt,
            The multitude in Armes perſiſt.
            VVhilſt Souldiers and the Captaines all,
            Fore-caſting nought what might befall,
            Their Enſignes and their Armes aduance,
            Guided by giddy Fortunes chance.
            But Appius was the onely man
            That did this purpoſe better ſcan:
                  Appius ſeekes to know of the Oracles what ſhall bee this warres euent.
            
            For he did feare with raſh attempt
            To hazard doubtfull warres euent;
            And therefore he the Gods beſought
            
            To ſhew to what end twould be brought.
            VVhich done, he takes his iourney then
            To the Phoebeian Delphicke Denne,
            That he this Oracle might heare,
            VVhich had beene ſhut vp many a yeare.
            ¶ Parnaſſus mountaine toppe is ſpred
            VVith lofty double forked head.
            
               And in the worlds mid way doth reſt,
            
               It was a little before Chriſt came that the Oracle, ceaſt, as was forepropheſied by the ſcriptures.Iuſt plac't betweene the Eaſt and Weſt.
            
            This ſacred hill, as eld deſignes,
            To Phoebus, and the God of wines
            With equall heſt was conſecrate,
            Where they their Oracles relate.
            His onely toppe ſurmounting ſtood
            Of all the earth aboue the flood,
            That in Deucalions time did drowne
            The world with her high towring crowne,
            And onely as a confine ſeene
            
               The Pagans conceit of Parnaſſus mount.The waters and the skies betweene.
            Yet thou Parnaſsus didſt not riſe
            So high, but that one forkes poynt lyes
            Vnder the water hid from eyes.
            Reuenging Paean there did ſhow
            The vigor of his arme and bow.
            Calling to minde his mothers wrong,
            Whilſt he within her wombe did throng:
            She from her natiue home expeld,
            He with his arrowes Python queld,
            Which yet he ſcarce had skill to weld.
            
               Themis, the Goddeſſe of Iuſtice.This ſacred ſoyle as then did reſt
            With Trypods vnder Thaemis beſt.
            As ſoone as Paean firſt beheld
            The ſounding voyce theſe caues did yeeld,
            Diuinely breathing out ſuch ſawes,
            With windy words from earths deep iawes,
            He ſecretly himſelfe with-drawes,
            And in the ſacred dennes did ſhade,
            There Paean was a Prophet made.
            ¶ What God (quoth he) is here incloſd?
            
            
               What ſupreme power (from heauen depoſd)
            
            
               Vouchſafes confined thus to dwell
            
            
               Within this ſolitary Cell?
            
            
               What Deity of heauenly birth
            
            
               Can be partaker with this earth?
            
            
               Within whoſe all conceiuing breaſt,
            
            
               Eternall ſecrets liue and reſt.
            
            
               Whoſe high fore-knowledge hath deſcride
            
            
               
               What ſhall in future times betide.
               This ſeemes to hold great correſpondency with the deſcription of the incarnation and life of our bleſſed Sauiour.
               
            
            
               That preacheth to the peoples eares,
            
            
               That humane forme and nature beares.
            
            
               Dreadfull and potent in his ſtate,
            
            
               And whether he doth ſing of Fate,
            
            
               Or do command that which he ſings,
            
            
               He Fate vnto perfection brings.
            
            
               Perhaps of Iupiter entire,
            
            
               A great part doth his ſoule inſpire;
            
            
               Which was vnto the earth downe ſent
            
            
               To ſway this or by continent
            
            
               With true proportion'd vpright paiſe,
            
            
               Whereby amidſt the Aire it ſtaies.
            
            
               Which power diuine, accuſtom'd then
            
            
               To haunt in this Cyrrhaean Denne,
               
                  Cyrrha a Citty at the foote of Pernaſſus.
               
            
            
               And was withall conioyned nye
            
            
               To thundring Ioue aboue the skye.
            
            
               This power that had ſuch grace receiu'd,
            
            
               Was in a virgins breaſt conceiu'd.
            
            
               With humane ſoule it did ſubſiſt,
            
            
               Sounding his voice when as him liſt:
            
            
               The mouth he opened of the Prieſt,
            
            
               With ſo great force as flaming blaſts
            
            
               That Mountaine Aetna's toppe out caſts.
            
            
               Or as Typhaeus ouer-preſt
            
            
               With hugie weight vpon his breaſt,
            
            (Whom great Inarymes doth hide)
            
               Conſtrained (from his ſtomach wide)
            
            
               To vomit vp, with ratling grones,
            
            Campana's flinty rugged ſtones.
            
            ¶ This power expoſd to all mens good
            
            
               No mortals prayers hath withſtood;
            
            
               Onely his nature doth diſdaine
            
            
               To be defil'd with humane ſtaine.
            
            
               Wicked inchanters neuer dwels
            
            
               Nor yet converſe within his celles:
            
            
               There witches mutter not their ſpelles.
            
            
               A conſtant truth his ſpeeches are,
            
            
               To alter which none ought to dare.
            
            
               Forbidding mortals that deſire,
            
            
               
               His fauour is the iuſt mans hire.
            
            
               For vnto ſuch (caſt from their ſeat)
            
            
               He hath reſtored Cities great.
            
            
               The Tyrrians ſo he did relieue,
            
            
               And gaue them meanes away to driue
            
            
               The threatnings proud of hoſtile Lords,
            
            
               As Salaminian ſea records.
            
            
               The barren lands he fruitfull makes,
            
            
               Contagious aires away he takes,
            
            
               And teacheth how the ſame he ſlakes.
            
            
               This age of ours with grieſe may ſay,
            
            
               The Gods from vs hold not away
            
            
               A bleſſed gift of greater grace,
            
            
               Then was this Delphicke ſacred place.
            
            Which propheſing no longer ſings,
            
               The griefe that the Pagans conceiued for the ceaſing of their Oracles.
               So future feare doth hold our kings:
            And in that iealous doubtfull vaine
            All Oracles they doe reſtraine.
            Yet Cyrraen Prophets nought lament,
            That ſo their voyces are vp-pent,
            Or that their Temples none frequent.
            For if this God-heads ſpirit lights
            Within the hearts of mortall wights,
            They that this power diuine receaues,
            Death vnto him thereby bequeaues
            
               The opinion of the Pagans concerning this Oracle.
               The full reward of preſent bliſſe,
            Or elſe his paine eternall is.
            For thoſe weake powers of humane life
            Faint in the waues and vrging ſtrife,
            That in this fury raigneth rife.
            
               So can the Gods, when they doe ſtreeke.
            
            
               Shake mortall mindes, and make them meeke.
            
            Now Appius that ſearcheth out
            
               
                  Appius comes to the Oracle.
               To vnderſtand this lateſt doubt
            Of the Heſperian hidden Fate;
            Addreſt himſelfe vnto the gate
            Of this ſame ſilent vncoth caue,
            Whoſe Oracles no anſweres gaue
            Long time before; nor Trypods draue.
            There he the Prelate doth intreat
            
               Then to ſet ope his ſacred ſeate,
            And to let in the fearfull Nunne
            
            
               Phaemonoë, that now did runne,
            And gadde about in ſhady woods,
            And by Caſtalio's ſecret floods,
            Where wandring careleſſe ſhe was caught,
            And ſo vnto the Temple brought.
            ¶ The Nunne whom feare did now diſſwade
            This vgly entry to invade,
            Vſd all the Art ſhe could inuent
            To hold this Lord from his intent,
                  Phaemonoë diſſwadeth Appius from ſearching this Oracle.
               
            
            Whereon his minde was ſo hot bent.
            Great Roman Lord, I muſe (quoth ſhe)
            What wicked hope inueagleth thee
            To ſearch to know thy future Fate,
            
            Where Oracles are out of date.
            
               Parnaſſus long hath ſilent ſtood,
            The God ſuppreſſed hath his mood:
            His voyce is either dumbe or hoarſe,
            Or elſe this ſeat he doth not force.
            But rometh in by-waies vntry'd,
            Or Pythons Trypod-couering hide,
            Is by Barbarians burnt and fry'd:
            Whoſe aſhes in the Cauernes lies,
            And Phoebus paſſage ſo denies.
            Or whether that the Gods high heſt
            With Cyrrha's propheſies ſhall reſt,
            And that the Sibylls old preſage
            Of things to come in future age,
            Which are committed vnto verſe,
            Sufficiently may Fates rehearſe.
            Or Paean (that is vſd to chaſe
            The ſpirits of a harmfull race)
            Cannot finde out in this fraile time,
            A truthfull tongue deuoid of crime.
            Now in this virgins words and cheere,
                  Phaemonoë fearefull to enter the Cauerne of the Oracle.
            
            Diſſembling fraud did plaine appeare.
            Her guilty feare did then deſcry
            She falſely did the Gods deny.
            Her writhed fillet ſhe doth dreſſe
            
               Vpon the fore-part of her treſſe.
            Her lockes hung downe her backe behinde:
            Vpon her crowne ſhe wreathing twinde
            A garland greene of Laurell dight,
            With Phocian vaile of lawne pure white;
            But in the porch ſhe made a ſtay:
            The prieſt then puſht her on her way.
            Yet ſhe, poore ſoule, was ſore adread
            Into the horrid cell to yed:
            Lothing the gaſtly dennes to proue,
            Nor from the Porch would ſhe remoue.
            But there right doth a muttring faine,
            As though the ſpright ſhe did retaine,
            And yet her breaſt he did not ſtraine.
            In this ſort ſhe vntroubled ſtood,
            With quiet voyce, and ſober mood;
            Which ſhewd no ſacred furies guiſe
            Did her diſtracted ſence ſurpriſe:
            Neither could that ſmooth tale ſhe told,
            With Appius more credit hold,
            Then it was able to abuſe
            The Trypods, or Apollos muſe.
            No trembling ſounds doe ſtoppe her words,
            The Cauerne vaſte no voyce affoords:
            Her garland doth not brandling reare,
            With the vp-riſing of her haire:
            The Temples ſteeple no whit ſhakes,
            The ſhady groue no bluſtring makes.
            And ſhe poore wretch the whilſt ſtill feares,
            With Oracles to truſt her eares.
            This while the Trypods yeeld no ſignes,
            And Appius vnto rage enclines:
            Wherewith he ſaid, thou falſe for-ſworne,
            That haſt both Gods and Me in skorne;
            Thy fraud thou deerely ſhalt abye,
            Except thou enter preſently
            This cauerne, and do truths relate,
            Preſume not of thy ſelfe to prate
            In matters of this great aduice,
            No leſſe worth then the worlds whole price.
            
               Herewith the Nunne was ſo agaſt,
                  Phaemonoë enters the Cauernes by the conſtraint of Appius.
               
            
            That to the Trypods ſhe makes haſt.
            And to the Cauernes being come,
            She ſtands amaz'd, and waxeth dumbe.
            And with an vnaccuſtom'd breaſt,
            The ſpirit ſhe receiues her gueſt:
            So as not any long of yore
            This caue ſo fully did explore.
            Then did the Cyrrhen Furie runne
            So fiercely through this rapted Nunne,
            
            That neuer any had like part
            Of this diuine Phoebaean Art.
            Her proper wits it driues away:
            Now now (quoth ſhe) heare whilſt you may
            And truſt vpon the words I ſay.
            Her necke ſhe whirles, and windes about,
            And madding through the dens doth ſtrout.
            Her phillets, and Phoebaean bayes,
            Her vpright ſtaring lockes did raiſe.
            And through each horrid vacant place,The deſcription of one inſpired with the fury of propheſying.
            
            She flings about with gaſtly face:
            And where the Trypods ſhe doth meete,
            She ouer-whelmes them with her feete.
            She frets and burnes with inward fire,
            
               Phoebus on her expreſt his ire,
            Not onely with his ſtripes and threats,
            But he her bowels flaming heats,
            And her inſpires with ſo great skill,
            That ſhe was ſtinted of her will.
            For 'twas not lawfull ſhe ſhould ſhow
            Thoſe wondrous things that ſhe did know.
            All times beginnings, and their ends
            She ſees, and fully comprehends.
            And euery ages deſtiny
            Within her racked breaſt doth lye.
            Huge heapes of things to her appeares,
            She ſwels with geſſe of future yeares,
            Whoſe fates whilſt ſhe conceald doth hold,
            In her did ſtruggle to be told.
            The worlds laſt dayes ſhe viewed than,
            
               With that firſt houre that it began.
            The ſecrets of the Ocean vaſt,
            Reuealed were to her forecaſt:
            And therewithall ſhe vnderſtands
            The iuſt account of all the ſands.
            ¶ So great a Propheteſſe ſome time
            There liu'd in the Euboean Clime,
            That did diſdaine her ſecret Art,
            
               Sybilla CumanaWith forraigne nations to impart.
            And yet amongſt ſo great a troope
            That vnder fatall bonds did droope,
            With haughty hand ſhe fram'd her ſprite
            The Roman deſtinies to write.
            
               Phoemonoë ſo with fury fild,
            Labours the like content to yeeld
            To thee (O Appius) that ſeek'ſt out
            To be reſolued of thy doubt.
            But much a doe ſhe hath, God wot,
            To light vpon thy ſingle lot,
            Amongſt ſo many deſtinies,
            As in Caſtalia hidden lies.
            With flowing foame her mouth grows white,
            And raptures agonize her ſprite:
            She groanes, and therewith gaſping throbs,
            And yelling ſhrill ſhe ſighing ſobs.
            With heauy howling then ſhe raues,
            Which rings throughout the vaulted caues.
            Then growing tame, her worke beginnes,
            And thus her lateſt words ſhe ſings.
            
               The words of the Oracle to Appius.
               
               Thou Roman ſhalt the dangers great
            
            
               Of theſe warres ſcape, that doe thee threat.
            
            
               And in the vaſt Euboean ſoyle
            
            
               Thou ſhalt reſt ſafe, and free from toyle.
            
            So ſaid, ſhe did conceale the reſt,
            And Paean then her tongue ſuppreſt.
            ¶ Yee Trypods that the Fates doe keepe,
            And of the world the ſecrets deepe.
            And thou (O Paean) that wantſt power
            To hide the future of one hower
            From knowledge of the Gods on hye,
            
               Why ſtrangely doſt thou ſo deny
            The lateſt ruine to relate
            That ſhall oppreſſe the Empires ſtate?
            The Captaines ſlaine, the death of Kings,
            The fall of Nations that it brings.
            Whoſe liues the deſtinies thinke good,
            To mingle with the Latium blood?
            Haue not as yet the powers diuine
            Reſolu'd, how this wracke ſhall encline?
            And are ſo many Fates obſcur'd,
            As though the ſtarres were not aſſur'd
            That Pompey's head is doom'd to dye,
            Or elſe doe theſe things ſilent lye?
            That Fortune may due vengeance take
            Vpon that ſword that makes all quake,
            With chaſtiſement his rage to ſlake.
            And raiſe the Brutes, to quell the raigne
            Of Tyrants that would riſe againe.
            Then with her breaſt the virgin puſh'tThe Bruti, ſuppreſſers of Tyrants.
            
            Againſt the gate, which open ruſh't.
            Out of the Temple ſo ſhe went,
            But yet her fury was not ſpent:
            Though not a word at all ſhe ſpake,
            For yet the God did not forſake
            Her breaſt, but there his ſtay did make.
            She ſtill doth whirle her gogling eyes,
            And wiſtly ſtares vpon the skies.
            One while ſhe ſhewes a fearfull grace,
            And ſometimes looke with ſcowling face.
            A ſteady eye ſhe neuer keepes,
            Her lippes red flaming colour ſteepes.
            Her cheekes were deadly pale to ſight,
            Not as when terror brings affright.
            But bloodleſſe wanniſh, and her heart
            Did beat, as though her life did part.
            But as the ſeas, when ſtormes doe ſlake,
            Will ſwell, and hollow roaring make;
            So with her many ſighes out-ſent,
            She grew appeaſd, her breaſt had vent.
            ¶ And when ſhe ſeuerd had her ſight,
            
               A while from out the ſacred light,
            Which had reueal'd to her all Fate,
            
            She was reſtor'd to her old ſtate.
            Her humane notions came againe.
            And Paean did her bowels baine
            With water of the Lethe flood,
            All was forgot ſhe vnderſtood.
            The ſecrets of the Gods were fled,
            And ſhe no longer prophiſed.
            All future fore-caſt that inſpire,
            To Phoebus Trypods did retire.
            Downe-right ſhe fell into a trance;
            
               
                  Appius miſconſtrues the words of the Oracle to his owne advantage.But Appius though thy death aduance,
            Thou doſt not yet a right conceaue
            What doubtfull fate to thee doth cleaue;
            For thou deluded with falſe hope,
            The whole worlds rule tak'ſt for thy ſcope:
            And with an idle miſconceit,
            Doſt thinke to make thy ſafe retrait
            In Calcis and Euboian land,
            And fondly bearſt thy ſelfe in hand
            (O foole!) with that which cannot be:
            For how canſt thou from cares be free,
            Amidſt this whole worlds ſtorme of ſtrife,
            
               The true meaning of the Oracle concerning Appius.
               Except the Gods bereaue thy life?
            And that is true; for thou ſhalt haue
            Prepar'd for thee a worthy graue,
            Neere to the ſtrict Euboian coſts,
            Whereas huge rockes of marble poſts,
            
               Chariſtos hath ſuch quarries ſtore,
            And whereas Rhamnis doth adore
            
               
                  Nemeſis, the Goddeſſe of Reuenge.Great Nemeſis, that there doth keepe
            Neere to the ſtraits of that vaſte deepe
            
               Euripus cal'd, whoſe rapid courſe
            With checking tides, and changing ſourſe:
            The Calcidonian trading maſts
            On Aulis wracking channels caſts.
            ¶ Caeſar meane while remoues his hoaſt
            From the Iberian conquered coaſt,
            And his victorious Aegles flye
            
               Vnto another ſtranger skye.
            And then the Gods had wel-neere quel'd
            That good ſucceſſe which long he held.
            For now whilſt he no warre did wage,
            He ſtands in doubt that mutines rage
            Within his Campe would raiſe ſome broyle,
            And ſo his plotted warfare ſpoyle.
            Whilſt that his chiefeſt troopes now fild
            With blood, in many battailes ſpild:
            Their faith did from their Captaine fall,
            And were it that the Trumpets call
            Had not of late ſtir'd vp their ſprights,
            Or that from their accuſtom'd fights
                  Caeſars Army returning out of Spaine, Mutinies.
            
            Their ſwords to ſcabbards now confin'd,
            All martiall rage chaſt from their minde.
            Or whether that the ſwaggering ſway
            Was to procure ſome larger pay.
            But ſo it was amidſt theſe flawes,
            They curſe their Captaine, and the cauſe;
            And do accuſe their proper Armes
            As guilty of theſe ciuill harmes.
            Neuer was Caeſar better try'd,
            Then now this mutiny to guide.
            He ſees all in a ſtaggering way,
            Vncertaine how mens mindes would ſway:
            And like a body reſt of hands,
            As vnaſſiſted now he ſtands:
            And almoſt left to his owne ſword,
                  Caeſar perplexed.
            
            Saw now what twas that did affoord
            Him meanes ſuch warres to entertaine,
            'Gainſt all the world by land and maine;
            That 'twas the Souldiers ready armes,
            And not the Captaines fatall charmes.
            But now amazed murmure roſe,
            Their rage they openly oppoſe:
            For that ſame cauſe that is of wont,
            Of wauering mindes to ſtay the brunt,
            Is when that men their priuate feare,
            And his owne dread each one doth beare.
            But now them all one humor drawes,
            
               The Campe takes intereſt in the cauſe,
            As tyranny againſt their lawes.
            They make no ſtoppe, for all the rout
            Dreadleſſe run on, and caſt no doubt.
            
               For ſtill a generall offence
            
            
               Doth with all chaſtiſement diſpence.
            
            ¶ Then one of them amongſt the reſt,
            Their publicke grieſe this wiſe expreſt.
            
               The mutinous oration of one of Caeſars Souldiers.
               Caeſar let vs at length in peace
            From wicked warre finde ſome releaſe.
            By lands and ſeas thou doſt deuiſe,
            To make our throats a ſacrifice.
            And doſt (as vile) expoſe our blood,
            To euery hoſtile raging mood.
            A part of vs in France were ſlaine,
            Many in theſe hard warres of Spaine;
            And Latium, ſome with blood did ſtaine.
            So all the world our Troopes deuoures,
            Whilſt thou diſplai'ſt thy conquering powres.
            But what are we the more of worth,
            For all that bloud ſhed in the North?
            For Rhodanus, and Rhene ſubdu'd,
            Our labours are but ſtill renu'd.
            And for thoſe warres both neere and farre
            All our reward is ciuill warre.
            
               Rome we haue taken, and made waſte:
            The Senate from our Countrey chaſte.
            What ſpoyles of Gods or men remaines,
            For vs to aske more for our paines?
            Yet ſtill with rauening ſwords and hands
            Preſt to all ſpoyle our practiſe ſtands.
            
               Patient in pouerty we pine,
            
            O when will theſe warres haue a fine?
            If Rome too little be eſteem'd,
            What as ſufficient can be deem'd?
            O now reſpect our hoary haire,
            Our hands that ſcarce can weapons beare,
            Our weakned arms with wounds and ſcarres,
            Our liues decayd, youth ſpent in warres.
            Their death in peace let old men take,
            
               O 'tis a ſtrange requeſt I make,A pittifull deſcription of the liues of common ſouldiers.
            
            That dying we might not of force,
            Vpon the bare earth life deuorce;
            And with our cold caskes cruſh our powles,
            Whilſt we are yeelding vp our ſoules:
            And want a hand to cloſe our eyes
            When deaths laſt ſtraine doth vs ſurpriſe.
            No wife at all by vs to moane,
            Nor yet to haue a graue alone,
            But vpon heapes in ditches caſt,
            Let old age beded dye at laſt.
            And ſome thing get by Caeſars fate
            More then ſharpe ſwords, and dire debate.
            Why doſt thou (Caeſar) hope to draw
            Vs all as ſtupid vnder awe.
            As though we wanted ſence the while
            To iudge of employments vile?
            Thinkſt thou, we cannot geſſe aright
            Vpon whom all the wracke will light?
            And whoſe liues blood ſhall pay the price
            Of all thy ciuill warres deuiſe.
            What in thy Mart effected was,
            But that our hands hath brought to paſſe?
            We haue done all, and what I ſay
            No law nor right can me denay.The Souldier braues Caeſar behinde his backe.
            
            
               Caeſar my Chiefetaine was in Gaule,
            
            My fellow here I may him call.
            
               The crime that doth coinquinate,
            
            
               Doth likewiſe yeeld men equall fate.
            
            Beſides the merit of our acts,
            Wrong cenſure now from vs detracts.
            For whatſoeuer we haue wonne,
            Is deem'd by Caeſars fortune ſpunne.
            Yet let him know we are his Fate,
            
            Though he hope Ioue ſupports his ſtate,
            For if thy Souldiers with thee iarre,
            
               Caeſar thou may'ſt ſhut vp thy warre.
            Thus ſaid, in all the Campe throughout
            Together they doe cluſtring rout,
            And raging ſeeke their Captaine out.
            
               ¶ Yee Gods ſo did Romes forttune quaile,
            When piety and faith did faile,
            And wicked manners void of grace,
            In ſteed thereof did come in place.
            O let our diſcords raging iarres
            Once make an end of ciuill warres!
            What Captaine of the greateſt ſpright
            Would not this mutiny affright?
            But noble Caeſar (that dares runne
            Into all Fates, and nothing ſhunne,
            
               The admirable vndaunted valour of Caeſar
               Delighting then to try his chance,
            When dangerss moſt their threats aduance)
            Comes dauntleſſe now with courage bold,
            Not ſtaying till their fit was cold.
            But in the midſt of all their rage,
            Himſelfe amongſt them doth ingage.
            He neuer would haue blam'd their fact
            If they had Townes or Cities ſack't;
            Or had they reuerend Temples burn'd,
            Or Ioues Tarpeia ouer-turn'd.
            The Matrons, and the Senate ſpoil'd,
            Infants, and mothers great with child.
            For Caeſar would his Souldiers haue
            All cruelties of him to craue;
            And that they ſurely ſhould deſire
            The ſpoyle of warfare as their hire.
            He onely fear'd his furious troope
            With quiet hands would loytring droope.
            O Caeſar! art thou not aſham'd,
            That ſtill to warre thy minde is fram'd?
            When thine owne Armes doe thee forſake,
            Shall theſe their thirſt from bloud ſo ſlake?
            Shall they the murdring ſteele diſdaine,
            
               An Apoſtrophe to Caeſar.
               Whilſt thou doſt ruthleſſe ſtill remaine,
            And proſecute this impious vaine?
            Be weary, and learne without Armes,
            To ſuffer, and ſhunne ciuill harmes.
            Affect a life of peace at laſt,
            Theſe heynous humors from thee caſt.
            Cruell why doſt thou ſtill perſiſt,
            
               Prouoking men againſt their liſt?
            For Caeſar thou maiſt plainly ſee,
            This ciuill warre thy ſword doth flee.
            He ſtands vpon a little hill,
            His ſtout lookes he retaineth ſtill.
            
               Deſeruing to be fear'd of all,
            
            
               For that no feare could him appall.
            
            Then to this ſwarme his minde he breakes,
            And wroth doth dictate what he ſpeakes.
            ¶ Souldier that ſo took'ſt on yer-while,
                  Caeſars oration to the mutiners.
            
            And abſent didſt my name reuile;
            See heere thou haſt a naked breaſt
            Ready for wounds, now do thy beſt,
            And get thee hence if fault thou finde
            With warres, and leaue thy Armes behinde.
            
               Sedition that ſuch ſwaggering makes,
            
            
               And nothing manly vndertakes,
            
            
               Diſcouers but a coward minde,
            
            
               And ſuch as come of crauen kinde.
            
            Theſe youths ſo pamper'd vp with pray,
            Study but now to runne away;
            To ſloth they would themſelues bequeaue,
            And their victorious Captaine leaue.
            Be gonne, (ſuch abiect mindes I hate)
            Leaue me to warre, and to my fate.
            Theſe armes of mine will finde out hands,
            VVhen I haue caſht ſeditious bands.
            
               Fortune with gallants will ſupply
            My weapons, that vn-vſd ſhall lye.
            Can Pompey, whom I chaſt away,
            Be follow'd with ſo great a ſway
            Of Latium ſhips, with him to flye?
            And thinke you that my victory
            VVill not my campe with troopes ſupplie?
            Yes, and thoſe troopes we muſt prefarre
            To haue the honor of this warre:
            And they will ſhare away the gaines
            Of all your former taken paines.
            Then ſhall you Veterans relent,
            To ſee your blood in vaine ſo ſpent
            
               And when my Triumphes come in place,
            Your ſelues haue nether gifts nor grace.
            Thinke you that I ſhall loſſe receaue,
            Becauſe that you my Campe doe leaue?
            Yea all as much, as it the courſe
            Of riuers, threat to change their ſourſe,
            And from the ſeas their ſtreames detaine,
            Were able ſo to ſlake the maine,
            That ebs & floods 'twould not maintaine.
            What do you now your ſelues perſwade
            That you in ought my fortune made?
            The Gods do not their care abaſe
            To men of your inferior place.
            
               A proud Heathen conceit.They giue no leaſure to their eye,
            To ſee where ſuch men liue or dye.
            Of great mens Fate they haue a care,
            That of this world ſupporters are.
            To Spaine, and to the Northerne coaſt,
            You terrors were, led in my hoaſt.
            But had you followed Pompey then,
            You would haue prou'd but conquer'd men.
            
               Labienus was a valiant knight,
            Whilſt he in Caeſars Armes did fight.
            But now (a run-a-way moſt baſe)
            Doth after a new Captaine trace,
            By ſea and land from place to place.
            Your faiths to me no better are,
            If you ſhall ſhew your ſelues in warre,
            Of ſo debauſhed minds to be,
            As neither foes nor friends to me.
            For he that doth my Enſignes leaue,
            And will not vnto Pompey cleaue,
            Of me no fauour can receaue.
            Surely the Gods my Tents protect,
            And will I ſhould your fraud reiect.
            And that I doe vnto mee call
            New troopes to wage this warre withall.
            O Fortune! how doſt thou enlarge
            My weary ſhoulders of a charge?
            To giue me meanes now to deſpiſe
            
               Thoſe hands, whoſe hopes nought can ſuffiſe;
            No not the whole worlds ſpoyle and pelfe,
            But I will warre now for my ſelfe:
            Therefore from out my Campe depart,
            And thoſe braue Enſignes of my Mart,
            
            Yee ſlothfull Romans lay them downe,
            They ſhall be borne with more renowne.
            And now the Authors of this rage,
            
               Iuſtice, not Caeſar, doth engage.
            Proſtrate your ſelues therefore with ſpeed,
            And on the blocke receiue your meed:Puniſhment for the mutiny.
            
            For of this mutinous deuice,
            Your faithleſſe heads muſt pay the price.
            And you new Souldiers, on whoſe hands
            The ſtrength now of my Army ſtands;
            Behold theſe paines, learne lawes of Armes,
            Know how to dye for factious harmes.
            The common rout whilſt thus he ſpake,
            Vnder his threatning voyce did quake.
            And this great bragging factious troope,
            That might haue made one head to droop,
            Vnto his will with awe did ſtoope,The awe that Caeſars Souldiers ſtood in of their General.
            
            As though the very ſwords conſpir'd
            To yeeld to what his will requir'd:
            And that the ſteele it ſelfe in ſpight
            Of hands, would yeeld him duties right.
            Yet Caeſars ſelfe did ſtand in doubt,
            That moſt of all the armed rout
            Would haue maintain'd their cauſe in field,
            And not to execution yeeld.
            But yet their patience paſt the ſcope
            Of their offended Captaines hope:
            For they not onely held them ſtill,
            But gaue their throats vnto his will.
            Then did he feare that their ſterne hearts
            Inur'd before to ruthleſſe parts,
            Would now grow dull, vnfit for Marts.
            
            Loe thus did Iuſtice direfull ſtrokeThe mutiny appeaſed.
            
            To former peace their mindes reuoke.
            Chiefe Mutiners receiu'd their paine,
            
               The reſt reſtor'd to grace againe.
            
               
                  Caeſars Armie goes to Brunduſium.
               ¶ The Army then directed was,
            Thence to Brunduſium to paſſe
            In ten daies march, and there to meet
            The Mariners, and Caeſars fleet.
            Some of them cal'd from Hydrus bay,
            And from old Taras, where they lay:
            Others from Leucas ſecret ſhores,
            And thoſe in Salapin, that Moores,
            
            With ſome that did in Sipus ride,
            Whoſe ſtreams neere to thoſe cliffes do tide
            Where the Apulian Gargan hill
            Fruitfull to husband men that till,
            Stretching along Auſonia's ſoyles,
            By North Dalmatia entoyles.
            And on the South Calabria bounds,
            Thence like a Promontory rounds
            Into the Adriaticke ſounds.
            Meane while doth Caeſar take his way
            To fearefull Rome, taught to obay.
            
               
                  Caeſar comes againe to Rome.
               In peacefull gowne, the victors minde;
            His armed troopes he left behind:
            And there the people by requeſt,
            In ſigne of loue, would needs inueſt
            Him with the high Dictators name,
            And Conſulſhip ioyn'd to the ſame.
            Obſeru'd with ioyfull ſolemne feaſts,
            And ſuffrages to his owne heſts
            So generally, as that before,
            Neuer was any flattered more,
            With Lordly phraſe him to adore.
            And for to grace with iuſt pretence
            His warre, as for the ſtates defence;
            The ſwords that they before him beare,
            With Conſuls axes mingled were.
            And where the Aegles Enſignes waue,
            He ioynes the Faggots ribbond braue.
            
               
                  Caeſar made Dictator and Conſull at one time.And ſo vſurpes, with idle fame
            Of Empires rule, Dictators name.
            Thus markes he out that wofull time
            
               With worthy Titles free from crime.
            And ſo to giue Pharſalia's fight
            The colour of a quarrell right.
            That yeare the Conſuls name he hends,
            And publique good his cauſe pretends.
            To ſolemne ſhewes in Martius fields,
            A forced fained forme he yeelds;
            The peoples voyces he obtaines,
            For will, or nill, powre them conſtraines.
            The Tribes he partially diuides,
            With ſhew the Vrne the lots decides.
            The heauenly ſignes no credit beares,
            Thunders moues not the Augures eares.
            They ſweare the birds with good lucke flye,
            Whilſt diſmall Owles are heard to crye.
            So breach of lawes that high powre ſtain'd,
            Which reuerence had ſo long maintein'd.
            And that times names might full agree
            With his deſignes, he doth decree
            A monthly Conſull to inſtall,A monthly Conſull.
            
            Diſtinguiſh't with times feſtiuall.
            And that high powre that Latium brights,
            Should haue his Ceremoniall rites
            Perform'd by Torches in the nights,
            Though ſacred honours ſcarce were due
            To Ioue, that nought our wrackes did rue.
            ¶ From Rome then Caeſar haſtes away,
            Through thoſe low meads that yeelds the hay
            That the Apulian people makes
            With handy pitchforkes, and with rakes.
            And in his ſpeed he is more ſwift
            Then is the flaſh of lightnings drift,
            Or Tyger of the female kinde,
            Vntill the houſes he doe finde
            Of Craetan frames, Brunduſium hight,
            Where with the aires tempeſtuous ſpight
            He findes the hauens mouth winde-bound,
            And trembling barkes within the ſound,
            With winters ſtormes like to be drownd.No dangers muſt hinder Caeſars deſignes
            
            But yet this daring Captaine thinkes
            
               That ſhamefully his buſineſſe ſhrinkes,
            If doubts, or dreads ſhould him delay,
            Or him confine within a bay.
            Whilſt that he ſees the toſſing maine
            Is ſcour'd by Pompey's luckleſſe traine,
            And to adde courage to their ſprites,
            His mariners he thus incites.
            The Northerne sky, and winters winde
            
               
                  Caeſar exhorts his mariners to take the ſeaWe alwayes doe more certaine finde;
            And current of the Ocean vaſt,
            Continue with more conſtant blaſt,
            When once they take, then thoſe ſlight puffes
            Which from the chopping changing huffes
            Of the ſpring ſeaſon do proceede,
            Either for certainty or ſpeede.
            Beſides, our courſe needs not to feare
            How ſore the ſeas do breake and teare:
            We need not gaze for markes of lands,
            Whereby to void the rockes and ſands.
            But with a forth-right leading winde,
            By North we ſhall our harbour finde.
            And would to God this Northerne racke,
            Would whirle to make the maſt to cracke,
            And fill the ſailes with ſuch a gale,
            To make the top-maſt ſtoope withall;
            
               A ſtout requeſt.And bring vs to the Greekiſh ſhores,
            That Pompey's Gallies, with their Oares,
            May not in calmes our fleet ſurpriſe,
            Whilſt in the ſeas it hulling tries.
            Therefore my hearts your Anchors way,
            Doe not our happy fleet delay:
            For all this while we looſe but time,
            Since windes and ſeas are in their prime.
            ¶ Now Phoebus falles vnto his reſt,
            And brighteſt ſtarres the skies inveſt;
            When Cinthia ſhewes her ſiluer eye,
            The ſhips out of the harbour flye.
            With Anchors weigh'd, and Cables coyl'd,
            Amongſt the waues the Sea-men toyl'd.
            They hoiſe their yards a croſſe the maſt,
            
               And then to take the friendly blaſt,
            Their climing feet their hands purſue
            To cut their ſailes, and ſpreade their clue.
            But for the winde they gan to doubt,
            Their top-ſailes likewiſe they heaue out,
            With all their helpes they can deuiſe,
            To take the leaſt breath of the skies.
            Yet now more ſlowly ſlides the racke,
            And all their ſailes began to ſlacke;
            Wherewith came on ſuch ſlender blaſts,
            That ſailes did flat vnto the maſts.
            Of land no ſooner they loſt ſight,
                  Caeſar becalmed.
            
            But they were all becalm'd out-right.
            The gale that blew off from the ſhore,
            At ſea did follow them no more.
            The rowling billowes of the deepe
            Were now growne calme, and ſtill a ſleepe.
            The waues all ſmooth, were as but one,
            The maine ſcarce felt a motion.
            So Boſphorus doth dully ſtand,
            Bound with the flawes of Schythia land.
            When Iſtar cannot moue that maine
            Which freezing vapours doe reſtraine,An ycie ſea.
            
            That ſea becomes an ycie plaine:
            And ſhips brought thither by the windes,
            In beddes of yce faſt lockt it bindes.
            So as the men by toyle, nor Art,
            Can make a way thence to depart.
            Whoſe waues condenſed with the cold
            The hugie weight of Carts do hold.
            With hollow ſound that thereon runne,
            And there the Beſseans doe wonne,
            Vntill Meotis feele the Sunne.
            With ſuch a froward ſtill, the deepes
            A ſoft and ſluggiſh wallowing keepes;
            As if in ſlumber they did reſt,
            And of their nature diſpoſſeſt.
            And like a ſtanding poole growne ſad,
            That neither ſpring nor motion had;
            But changed from his nature quite,
            
               Forgotten had his wonted plight.
            For he will neither riſe nor fall,
            Nor with his wonted roaring call;
            He trembles not, nor frothing chides,
            Nor Phoebaes influence giues him tides.
            This fleet meane while with much diſeaſe,
            Lay tumbling in this dead growne ſeas.
            On this ſide did the aduerſe fleet
            Prepare their oares with them to meet,
            Whilſt they in this dead calme do ride,
            And could not moue with winde or tide.
            
               The dangers of Caeſars fleet by a calme.On th'other ſide they ſtood in dread,
            And danger to be famiſhed.
            So as in this diſaſterous ſtate
            New feares, new praiers eleuate.
            Vpon the Gods they call and cry,
            That all the fury of the sky
            Would bend it ſelfe to boyſterous rage.
            And ſo the ſtupid waues engage,
            As that the fury of the maine
            
               Would ſhew it ſelfe a ſea againe.
            
            But winde nor waues became ſo ſtout,
            That they of ſhip-wracke need to doubt.
            Yet after when the night was paſt,
            The day with clouds was ouer-caſt.
            The hollow ſeas began to ſturre,
            And then Ceraunia windes did whurre,
            Wherewith the fleet began to quake,
            And ſo the aire the ſailes did ſhake,
            At length the crooke-back't waues did riſe,
            And in the ſternes the ſhips ſurpriſe,
            That with full ſailes now forward plies.
            
               
                  Caeſar arriues with his Army at Paleſta in Greece, where Pompey lay encamped.So as theſe friendly ſeas and gales,
            Them to Paleſtes hauens hales:
            Where when they ſafely were arriu'd,
            They Anchors caſt, with ioy reviu'd.
            ¶ This was the firſt confronting coaſt,
            Where theſe two Captaines hoaſt to hoaſt,
            Incamped were in eithers view.
            And through theſe fields two riuers drew
            
               Their pleaſant ſtreames, on Apſus hight,
            And Genuſus, more ſwift of flight.
            
               Apſus by reaſon of a lake,
            That into her his courſe did make,
            With ſteady ſlye ſought ſtealing pace,
            Could ſhipping beare from place to place.
            But ſwift Genuſus head-long goes,
            When as the Sunne melts heapes of ſnowes,
            Or that the falles of ſhowring raines,
            Her ſwollen channels higher ſtraines.
            Yet neither of them with long race,
            Within the land doth winding trace.
            
               Fortune to this place gaue the fame
            Of two braue Captaines great in name:
            And here the worlds vaine hope decay'd,
            That now their furies could be ſtay'd;
            Since that the ſtations were ſo nye,
            Where now they both incamped lye;
                  Caeſars & Pompeys Campe confront each other.
            
            That each might others face behold,
            And heare the tale each other told.
            And many yeares were paſt betweene
            Since thou great Pompey laſt had ſeene
            That loued father-in-law of thine;
            And did ſo neere a league combine
            Of ſtrict alianc'd blood with blood,
            Though froward Fate the ſame with-ſtood.
            When Caeſars daughter reft of life
            His ſonne-in-law made fit for ſtrife.
            And but vpon the Nylus ſhore,
            He after ſaw thy head no more.
            ¶ Now Caeſars thoughts were much diſmaid
            That many troopes ſtill lingring ſtaid:
            Which for this place were ready preſt,
            And (ſtraightly charg'd by his owne heſt,
            With ſpeed to meet him on that coaſt)
            Doth vexe to ſee warres time ſo loſt.
            The leading of theſe wanting bands
            Was vnder fierce Antonius hands.
                  Caeſar troubled with the delayes of Antonius.
               
            
            Who now (belike) did meditate
            Vpon his owne Leucadian fate.
            
               
               Caeſar on him calles with intreates,
            And checkes his ſtaying thus with threats.
            O thou that in the world doſt cauſe
            
               
                  Caeſars meſſages to Antonius.
               Such miſchifes by thy tedious pauſe.
            VVhy holdſt thou both the Gods and Fates,
            
            Suſpenced from our happy dates.
            By mine owne ſpeede and proper care
            All other things diſpatched are;
            And Fortune now doth call for thee,
            That thy right hand might aiding be:
            The chiefeſt ſeruice to intend
            That muſt our proſperous warfare end.
            No Lybicke Syrts, nor doubtfull deepes
            Vs in this ſort a ſunder keepes.
            VVe doe not ſeeke with new deuice
            Thy armed troopes now to entice
            Into an vnknowne deſperate maine.
            O no thou ſluggiſh idle ſwaine,
            
               Caeſar bids thee to come, not goe,
            I lead the way, and pierc'd the foe
            Throughout theſe ſtranger ſeas and ſands,
            And ſafely haue conuaid my bands.
            My tents art thou afraid to ſee?
            This timeleſſe hap is death to me.
            
               
                  Caeſar taxeth Antonius with backwardneſſeMy words are ſpent to waues and winde,
            Yet do not thou their humors binde
            That to the ſeas are well inclin'd.
            For if I bee not much deceau'd,
            Thy Troopes ſo truely haue bequeau'd
            To Caeſars Armes their might and maine,
            That ſhipwracks doubt they would diſdaine.
            And dolours voyce now muſt I vſe,
            Thou doſt thy ſelfe to much abuſe.
            The whole worlds hopes twixt thee and me,
            Yet in no equall ballance be;
            
               Caeſar doth in Epyrus Campe,
            
               A Iealous ſpeech.And there is all the Senates ſtampe:
            VVhilſt onely thou (ſo vncontrol'd)
            Doſt but Auſonia's limits hold.
            VVhen Caeſar thus had twice or thrice
            
               Reprou'd him for his loytring vice,
            And ſaw that he ſo oft did ſpend
            His treats, and threats vnto no end.
            But Fortunes fauours thus neglects,
            That his ſucceſſe ſo much protects.
            He vndertakes ('gainſt this deſpight)
            To make a ſtrange attempt by night.
            And maugre frights of ſeas miſchance,
            He dreadleſſe doth himſelfe aduance.
            VVhilſt ſterne Antonius ſo did feare,
            So oft commanded to be there.
            For Caeſar ſaw his raſh attempts
            
               Fortune from danger ſtill exempts:Fortune Caeſars friend.
               
            
            And now he hopes with paſſage good,
            To furrow through the raging flood,
            Embarked in a Fiſher-boate,
            VVhen ſhips could ſcarce in ſafety floate.
            ¶ Now had the ſilent night with reſt
            From care of Armes freed euery breaſt,
            And ſlumbring ſoules with ſweet repoſe
            Their eyes in quyet thoughts doe cloſe.
            
               And thoſe moſt ſoundly take their eaſe,
            
            
               Whom lowly pouerty can pleaſe.
            
            Now all the Campe dead ſilent binne,
            The ſecond watch did new beginne.
            VVhen Caeſar with a carefull-pace
            Alongſt the whuſted guards did trace;
                  Caeſar vnknown ſteales out of his Campe.
            
            Not of his owne attendants heard,
            VVhen his owne Tent he firſt vnſpard.
            
               Fortune was then his mate alone;
            So through the Campe he paſt vnknowne,
            VVho now were all poſſeſt with ſleepe,
            But ſcarce good watch the while they keepe.
            And he diſlik't this fault to ſee,
            That they could ſo ſurpriſed be.Negligence in a Campe.
            
            He romes about the crooked ſhores,
            VVhere he a creeke at length explores:
            And there a fiſher-boate did ride,
            That by a ſturdy rope was tide.
            The owner of this pelting skiffe
            
               Hard vnder-neath a craggy cliffe,
            Not farre from thence had his poore coate;
            The bottome of a rotten boate
            
               A deſcription of a Fiſhermans cottage.Was all his roofe; and for the ſide
            Twas made of platted bul-ruſh dry'd,
            Combin'd with canes and fenny flagges;
            And on no ſtronger proppes it ſwagges.
            
               
                  Caeſar knockes at the Fiſhermans doore.¶ Here Caeſar with his fiſt ſo knockes,
            That therewithall this cottage rockes,
            And did Amyclas frighted wake,
            Who ſoundly then his reſt did take;
            But now his ſoft couch doth forſake.
            
               
                  Amiclas ſpeechWhoſe there (qth he) what ſhipwrackt wight
            Beates at my doore this time of night?
            What wretched man my helpe doth craue?
            Or who can hope reliefe to haue
            Of this baſe cottage where I wonne?
            
               Great Fortune doth ſuch corners ſhunne.
            
            Thus ſaid, he haſtes a fire to make,
            And doth the heaped aſhes rake,
            Some kindled ſparkles to finde out,
            And them with dry leaues ſtrawes about:
            And ſo with blowing kindles flame,
            Whilſt he of warres feares not the name.
            He knew his ſimple home was free,
            His houſe no prey of worth could be
            For ſouldiers ſpoyles, or ciuill ſtrife.
            
               The happy & ſecure eſtate of poore-men
               O ſafe and bleſſed poore mans life!
            
            
               O ſweet ſecured quiet ſtate!
            
            
               This pretious gift, and heauenly fate,
            
            
               That on meane wights the Gods beſtow,
            
            
               The mighty ones do ſcarcely know.
            
            VVhat Cities walles, or ſtrongeſt Forts
            VVhen Caeſars hand beates at the ports,
            Could like ſecurity poſſeſſe?
            But that ſome fright they would expreſſe.
            His little wicket he ſets ope;
            Then Caeſar gaue his ſpeech this ſcope:
            
               
                  Caeſars words to poore Amyclas.
               Yong man (quoth he) aduance thy hope
            Beyond the thoughts thou canſt conceaue,
            
               
               Fortunes full bounties now receaue.
            If my directions thou obay,
            And to Heſperia me conuay,
            A Skippars trade thou ſhalt not need,
            Nor toyle in age with hungry feed.
            Spare not therefore thy wealth to raiſe,
            Since that the Gods ſhew thee the wayes:
            And (whilſt thou maiſt) receiue that Fate,
            
            Which will for euer ſtore thy ſtate.
            So Caeſar ſaid; for though but clad
            In ruſticke habit like a ſwad,
            Yet could he not his tongue conſtraine
                  Caeſars naturall inclination to ſpeake like a Prince.
            
            In ſpeech to vſe a priuate vaine.
            Then poore Amyclas thus replies,
            Too many dangers vs denies,
            To truſt this raging ſea by night;
                  Amicl
                        •
                     s ſpeech to Caeſar, deſcribing the ſignes of foule weather at ſea
            
            For firſt I mark't the ſunnes laſt light,
            When he declin'd to Thetis bed,
            His face was nothing flaming red.
            But his bright beames contracted were;The Sunne.
            
            For on the middle of his ſpheare,
            A foggy cloud his face did hide:
            So as his beames it did diuide.
            One part of them did Northward bend,
            The other to the Southward tend.
            And meane while in the midſt he quail'd,
            And ſetting pale, his brightneſſe fail'd.
            So as his beames did not offend
            The lookers eyes his face that kend.
            And when the Moone did mount the skies,
            With ſharpned hornes ſhe did not riſe.The Moone.
            
            Nor did her hollowneſſe appeare
            VVithin her Orbe right azure cleare.
            Nor as ſhe wont in calmy night,
            Her hornes thin toppes did beare vpright.
            But (that which is a ſigne of winde)
            Her colour was to red inclin'd.
            And with a faintie pallid looke,
            VVith dull aſpect, a cloud ſhe tooke.
            Beſides the murmure of the woods,
            
               The rut and rocking of the floods
            
               Diuers ſignes of a tempeſt.I doe not like; nor this ſigne neither,
            The tumbling Dolphins boad foule weather.
            The Cormorant me no whit likes,
            That he vnto the dry land ſeekes.
            And that he takes delight
            To truſt his wings with towring flight,
            That naturally affects the waues:
            His head the Sea-crow often laues,
            As though that he ſome ſtormes attends,
            And on the low ſhores ietting wends.
            But if it be thine owne deſire,
            And vrgent cauſe doe haſte require,
            Il'e giue thee all the helpe I may,
            To bring thee to thy wiſhed bay:
            And where thou bidſt we land will touch,
            Or windes and ſeas ſhall faile me much.
            ¶ He ends his tale, and therewithall
            The faſtned cable in they hale;
            And with the winde his ſailes lets flye,
            
               
                  Caeſar puts to the ſea in a little Fiſherboate.But with their motion ſuddenly:
            Not onely ouer all the deepes,
            Huge flaming ſtreames from ſtarers downe ſweepes.
            Spearſing in ſurrowes through the skye,
            But thoſe chiefe fixed ſtarres on hye,
            That next the pole doe ſtand ſo nye,
            Did ſenſibly appeare to ſhake.
            Then did a blacke miſt ouer-rake
            The vaſt wilde backe of Neptunes maine,
            And with a long ſtretcht rowling traine,
            The threatning billowes ſparkling burne,
            The windes vncertainly did turne.
            And by the ſwelling waues they finde,
            The hollow ſeas were fil'd with winde.
            Then quoth the Pilot of this barge,
            See how this tempeſt doth enlarge.
            Beſides we cannot certaine finde,
            
               
                  Amyclas words to Caeſar.
               Yet from what quarter blowes the winde.
            Whether from out the South, or Eaſt,
            In no place he doth conſtant reſt.
            
               Againe, if we the rut doe marke
            Which in the ſea doth murmuring barke,
            A North-weſt winde it ſignifies,
            Which ſlat our courſe to Latium ſtries.
            So as no meanes we haue to tacke
            That way, nor on that coaſt to wracke.
            This deſperate courſe we muſt reiect,
            If we our ſafety will reſpect:
            And caſt about to lay the land,
            From whence we now directly ſtand,
            Before our Skiffe bee too much toſt,
            And we too farre runne from the coaſt.
            ¶ But Caeſar ſcornes that he doth ſay,
            Hoping all perils will giue way
            To his attempts; and tels him plaine
            No fury of the winde; or maine,
            For feare ſhall make him turne againe.
                  Caeſars anſwere to Amyclas.
               
            
            If froward skies be all thy feare
            For Italy, that fault I'le beare.
            Thy onely dread and doubt doth grow,
            Becauſe (poore ſoule) thou doſt not know
            Who 'tis that with thee now doth ſaile,
            Whom Fortune neuer yet did faile.
            But ſhe would thinke ſhe did me wrong
            To hold backe my deſires ſo long.
            Therefore paſſe boldly through this rage,
            Secured in my ſafe preſage.
            This is but toyle of windes and ſeas,
            Which ſhall no whit our barke diſeaſe.
            Thy ſhip for fraight doth Caeſar beare,
            To free thee from the Oceans feare.
            And theſe fierce windes that blow ſo hye,
            Shall be appeaſed by and by:
            And euen the very raging maine,
            Shall by our ſhip his quiet gaine.
            Thy courſe in no caſe ſee thou change,
            But from a loofe, this next ſhore range.
            And then beleeue thou ſhalt attaine
            
               Calabria coaſt, and end thy paine.
            When no lands elſe beneath the skye
            
               Doth for our ſhip and ſafety lye.
            
               
                  Caeſars conceit of Fortunes fauours to him.Thou little knowſt that all theſe threates
            That ſo the waues with tempeſts beates,
            Is but that Fortune would declare
            To me her tender loue and care,
            VVhen skies and ſeas moſt furious are.
            The word he had no ſooner ſpoke,
            But from a cloud a whirle-winde broke
            The cordage and the tackling rownd,
            So that the ſailes aloft did bound,
            And whirle about the tottring maſt,
            The ſhips ioynts open with the blaſt:
            And all the perils of the earth
            VVere here deliuered at a birth.
            For firſt from the Atlanticke maine,
            The billowes rowl'd with weſterne ſtraine.
            And when they had this ſea ingag'd,
            Againſt the rockes they roar'd and rag'd.
            VVith that comes in the Northerne blaſt,
            VVhich doth the waues repell as faſt;
            So as the ſeas did ſtand at ſtay
            VVhich of the two they ſhould obay.
            But yet the rauing Scithian flawes,
            Did wreſt the waues vnto his lawes.
            And ſo the Oceans bottome rakes,
            
               A deſcription of a furious Tempeſt.That in the ſands it path-way makes.
            Neither did Boreas with his freate
            Againſt the cliffes the billowes beate;
            But euen againſt thoſe raging waues,
            That with the Weſterne Tempeſt raues.
            And now the ſeas are growne ſo hye,
            That waue againſt the waue doth flye,
            Although the winde doe calmed lye.
            But yet the Eaſt-winde did not ceaſe
            His fury likewiſe to expreſſe:
            Neither thinke I that in this ſtorme,
            The South-winde did his blaſts conforme
            To milder mood, with ſhowres ſuppreſt,
            And ſtill in Aeols dungeon reſt.
            But that the windes from euery part,
            
               Incenſed were to ſtriuing Mart.A deſcription of enraged ſeas.
            
            And that each one expreſt his moſt,
            To blow the billow from his coſt,
            And twixt them held the maine emboſt.
            For now the leſſer ſeas likewiſe
            In mutiny began to riſe.
            Th'Aegean gainſt the Tyrrhen waues,
            Impetuouſly reſiſting raues.
            And the Ionian roaring veaſe,
            Confronts the Adriaticke ſeas.
            How oft that day were ſteepy rockes
            Cleane ouerturn'd with whirle-wind ſhocks?
            Gainſt which the billowes beate in vaine,
            And could not ſuch huge mountains ſtraine,
            As quite did ouer-whelmed lye,
            Whoſe towring toppes did threat the skye.
            Neuer (I thinke) did any ſhore,
            Endure the like ſea-ſtorme before:
            Nor any clime twixt either pole,
            Did from her coaſts ſuch billowes role.
            Theſe ſeas where they the lands ſurrownd,
            In diuers parts with indraughts drown'd.
            So did high Ioue in former times,
            Weari'd with ſcourging worldly crimes,
            His thunder-bolts at laſt forbeare,
            And cauſd his brothers Trydent ſpeare
            To helpe him vengeance due to take,He meanes Neptunes and Deucalions flood.
            
            Which did a ſecond Empire make:
            When Nations were in waters drownd,
            And Thaetis would admit no boundThoſe that ſaile to the weſt Indies, do ſometimes meet with the like falles of raine in whole clouds, wherewith ſhips are often drownd: they are called by the Spaniards, the Huricanos; and by our men, the Spouts.
               
            
            Vnto the lands, but heauens high cope;
            Neither could that haue beene her ſcope.
            But to the ſtarres it would haue roſe,
            If Iupiter did not oppoſe,
            And her with weighty clouds forecloſe.
            ¶ This night was not the heauens night,
            But helliſh darke depriuing light.
            And thickned with ſuch clouds of ſhowres,
            That whole vnparted downe-right powres,
            So as the feared lightning flaſh,
            
               And his ſwift brightneſſe, it did quaſh.
            The clouded aire becomes obſcure,
            The conuex ſpheares quakings endure.
            The Axle that the world ſuſtaines,
            Doth ſound aloud with cracking ſtraines.
            The ioynts and ſtructures of the poles
            VVith labouring motion tottring roles.
            
               Chaos.Nature ſuſpects the Chaos old,
            And that diſcording vncontrold
            The Elements againe would warre,
            And in their harmony would iarre.
            
               Right Paganiſme.
               And that with Gods, the fiends of hell
            
            
               Would now all mingled be pell-mell.
            
            One onely ſigne ſome hope did giue,
            That in this ſtorme this barke could liue.
            But looke how farre the diſtance ſhowes,
            Downe where the pleaſant Ocean flowes,
            To him that on the top doth ſtand
            Of mount Leucades lofty land:
            Euen ſo the trough of ſeas appear'd
            To him that now the rudder ſtear'd:
            When as the ſhip was borne aloft
            
               The billowes of a wrought ſea deſcribed.With ſwelling of the billow ſoft.
            And when againe ſhe did deſcend
            Betweene the billowes, as they bend;
            So hollow in the furrow lies,
            As that her maſt is hid from eies.
            Sometimes as high as clouds her ſailes,
            Sometimes her keele the bottome trailes.
            For where the ſea doth breake a ſunder,
            The ſands are bared that lye vnder.
            And when the parted billowes filles,
            They riſe in heapes like mighty hilles.
            ¶ Feare now all hope of Art exceedes,
            To guide the helme the maiſter dreads:
            To port, or weare, or ſerue the ſeas,
            The labouring ſhip he cannot eaſe.
            Onely by this they did ſuruiue,
            The waues ſo contrary did ſtriue,
            As that it kept the ſhip vpright
            
               Betwixt them both with equall might.
            For as one billow downe did ſtraine,
            Another check't him vp againe.
            And by this meanes not ouer-ſet
            With every ſurge aloft they get.
            Of Saſons ſhelues, and lowly ſand,
                  Saſon, an Iland betw
                     •
                  en Brunduſium and Epirus.
               
            
            Nothing at all in feare they ſtand.
            Nor yet of the Theſſalian ſhore,
            Whoſe crooked ſtrands the pibbles ſtore.A Citty of Epirus.
               
            
            Nor yet Ambracia's noyſome bay,
            Where ſhips ſo oft are caſt away.
            But that which feares theſe ſea-men moſt,
            Is the high-clift Caeraunian coſt.
            
               Now Caeſar thinkes this dangerous ſtate,
               A mountaine in Epirus, that runs into the ſeas.
            
            
               Is worthy to confront his fate.
            
            How now (quoth he) are powers Diuine
            So troubled with this life of mine,
            As that they ſhould ſuch care beſtow
            How they the ſame might ouer-throw?
            That ſailing in this trifling boat
            Such monſtrous ſeas together float.
            If that the glory of my end
            Vnto the ſeas the Fates do lend,
            And warres no more we muſt intend;
                  Caeſars braue reſolution in this tempeſt.
            
            Yee Gods aboue, with dreadleſſe minde,
            I take what death you haue deſign'd:
            Although this haſtned date preuents
            The finiſhing of braue euents.
            But I haue done acts great enow,
            I made the Northerne Nations bow.A b
                     ••
                  efe relati
                     •
                  n of Caeſars atchieuemēts.
            
            The forces of my enemy
            For feare of mee I made to flye.
            And Rome it ſelfe doth plainly ſee,
            
               Pompey a ſecond is to mee.
            The fagots me by warre deny'd,
            With peoples voyce to me were cry'd.
            No Titles of the Roman ſtate,
            Haue wanted to adorne my Fate.
               
                  Fortune onely of Caeſars coū
                  ſaile.
            
            And no wight now but thou alone
            
               Fortune, to whom my vowes are knowne,
            
               Shall know the ſecrets of my will;
            For though that I haue had my fill
            Of honors, and enioy the grace
            Of Conſull, and Dictators place:
            And ſo to Stygian ſhades will trace.
            
               
                  Caeſar ſhewes how he deſires to dye.O yet tis my deſire to dye
            In priuate ſort, and ſecretly.
            O Heauens! no funerals I craue,
            Let my torne body for a graue
            Be kept amidſt the weltring waue.
            Both fires and mournings me deny,
            Whereby my fame the more ſhall flye.
            
               For no man witting of my end,
            
            
               All coaſts with dread will me attend.
            
            ¶ So hauing ſaid, the ſurging whifts
            The ſhip ten times together lifts,
            And (that which wondrous is to ſay)
            She on the waues top ſtill did ſtay;
            And did not downe decline againe:
            But with a ſweeping billowes ſtraine,
            
               
                  Caeſar caſt a ſhore in his boat.The barke was caſt vpon the ſands,
            Whereas their laſt forſaken lands,
            Doth make a narrow hollow bay,
            And there a ſhore doe ſafely ſtay.
            Here at one caſt againe poſſeſt
            With all his Fortune, ſo much bleſt:
            And with ſo many ſtately Townes,
            Such Cities, and ſuch Regall Crownes:
            But Caeſar thus return'd againe,
            And Phoebus riſing from the maine,
            He could not ſo himſelfe conceale,
            
               
                  Caeſar returnes againe to his Campe.As when he from his Campe did ſteale,
            And all his Army did deceaue.
            For now about him cluſtring cleaue
            His loyall troopes, to ſee his face,
            But teares a while all ioy did chaſe,
            And then their Chieftaine they reproue
            With ſuch complaints as grow from loue.
            Stout Caeſar, whither now (quoth they)
            Did thy raſh valour thee convey?
            
               And to what Fate (when thou wert fled)The cōplaint of Caeſars 
                  
                     •
                  ouldiers.
            
            VVere we poore ſoules abandoned?
            VVhy didſt thou to vnwilling waues
            Thy body giue, where danger raues?
            VVhen thou well knowſt how many frends
            VVhat peoples ſafeties, liues and ends,
            Onely vpon thy Fate depends.
            And that the world with loue and dread,
            Hath choſen thee her ſoueraigne head.
            
               Tis inhumanity (I ſay)
            
               Li
                     •
                  e wilfully to caſt away.
            
            VVas none of vs of that deſart,
            VVith thee in this to ſhare a part?
            Of all thy friends that yet remaine,
            In this wouldſt thou no one retaine?
            Dead ſleepe (alas) did vs deceaue,
            VVhilſt that the ſeas did thee bereaue:
            And thereof we are much aſham'd,
            But muſt this cauſe therefore be blam'd,
            That thou didſt ſeeke Heſperia land?
            A deſperate deed thou took'ſt in hand,
            In ſuch fierce cruell ſtormes as theſe
            To truſt thy ſelfe with raging ſeas.
            
               In moſt extreames, and laſt of all
            
            
               When doubtfull wrackes we would fore-ſtall,
            
            
               Then men are wont (to cut off ſtrife)
            
            
               Stoutly to end a loathſome life.
            
            But thou with all this worlds good bleſt,
            The ſeas muſt be therewith poſſeſt.
            Why wearieſt thou the Gods aboue?
            
               Fortune hath ſhewd her care and loue
                  Caeſar taxed f
                     ••
                   abuſing the fauours of Fortune, and the care of the Gods.
               
            
            Sufficient, if ſhe do no more
            But thy ſafe landing on the ſhore.
            And this may ſerue, thee to debarre
            From hoped fortune in thy warre.
            No better vſe can Caeſar make
            Of that great care the Gods do take
            For his affaires, the earth that ſwaies,
            And to whoſe heaſt all men obayes?
            Then that ſuch grace they him behight
            
               To be a happy ſhip-wrack't wight?
            But whilſt they thus expoſtulate,
            The ſunne his beames doth eleuate:
            And ſo breakes off this dire complaint,
            The ſwelling ſeas now growing faint
            With huge turmoyle; her waues depreſt,
            When as the windes were laid to reſt.
            ¶ And then the leaders of thoſe bands,
            That lay ſo long in Latium lands,
            
               
                  Antonius brings his bands from Italy to Caeſar by ſea.Seeing the maine now ſpent with rage,
            And cleanſing Boreas did aſſwage
            The lowring guſts of ſeas and sky,
            They looſd their ſhips the waues to trye.
            Which long and oft had tryall made
            Twixt ſailers skilfull in their trade,
            And the reſiſting ſtubborne windes,
            Which ſo each other equall bindes,
            That they the broad ſeas could not ſcoure,
            And come to Caeſar with their power.
            But now aboord the Souldiers get,
            The ſhips in order they are ſet.
            When as the night with froward gale,
            Kept Mariners they could not hale
            Their tackes aboord, nor ply their ſailes,
            Amongſt the ſhips all order failes.
            So do the Cranes in ſtrained rankes,
            When they forſake Strimonian bankes,
            Shunning the rage of winters froſt,
            Go ſeeke their drinke on Nylus coaſt.
            And when they firſt beginne their flight,
            Their rankes ſo orderly they dight,
            That diuers figures they retaine,
            Whilſt they throughout the aire doe ſtraine▪
            
            Vntill at length ſome Southerne blaſt
            Amongſt their wings his puffes do caſt:
            Wherewith they are inforc'd to flye
            A higher pitch in windy skye.
            And then confuſdly do begin
            To breake their order filed thin.
            In cluſters ſoaring round together,
            
               Framing their flight to ſerue the wether.
            And puts the letter out of ſquare,
            Whoſe forme in flying firſt they bare.
            ¶ But with the dauning of the day,
            The winde began to beare a ſway,
            Stir'd with the ſight of Phoebus face:
            And now it hath this fleete in chaſe.
            Which as it ſaild, did ſtriue in vaine,
                  Liſſus, a Cittie of Macedon.
               
            
            The ſhores of Liſsus to attaine.
            But yet that land they could not lay,
            Till North-winde gaue the South-winde way.
            And to Nymphaeus port did guide
            The fleet, which Boreas blaſt deny'd,
                  Nymphaeus, a Port towne of Macedon.
               
            
            In keeping backe the checking tide.
            Now Pompey ſees prouiſion made
            From ſundry coaſts him to inuade.
            And Caeſars force at point to Arme,
            From euery place about him ſwarme.
            So as his Campe muſt now withſtand
            The daily garboyles neere at hand.
            He doth reſolue to place a part
            His nuptiall care, ſecure from Mart.
            And vnto Lesbos meanes to ſend
                  Cornelia, Pompey's wife, daughter to Scipio.
               
            
            His faire Cornelia, there to ſpend
            This bloody time, remote a farre
            From clattring Armes, and noyſe of warre.
            Good God, how iuſt loue rules and bindes
            Thoſe men that are of worthy mindes.
            Loue ſo in Pompey breedes remorce,
            That dread and doubt doe warres diuorce.
            For now Cornelia is the cauſe
            That he himſelfe a while with-drawes,
            From hazarding the doubtful ſcarre
            Of Fortune, in this ciuill warre,The force of iuſt loue.
            
            When all the world and Roman ſtate
            Was now expoſd to martiall Fate.
            
            He now wants words to ſhew his minde,
            And to delayes is whole enclin'd.
            Whereby he may protract euent,
            And trifle Fate in loue-time ſpent.
            
               Now when the night was almoſt paſt,
            And ſleepy reſt had lent his laſt
            To ſlumbring eyes, Cornelia than
            Sweetly embracing her good man,
            Seeking withall his lippes to ſmacke,
            Whoſe breaſt deep cares did ſtrain & rack
            To her the whiles he turnes his back.
            When wounded ſhe with blinded feares,
            Seeing his eyes beſprent with teares,
            Durſt not deſire the cauſe to learne,
            Nor ſeeme ſhe did his teares diſcerne.
            Then ſighing, thus he ſaid; Deare wife,
            To me more pleaſing then my life,
            
               
                  Pompeys words to Cornelia.
               Whilſt I in happy ſtate did liue;
            But now doſt cauſe of ſorrow giue,
            Since that the heauy day I ſee,
            That our ſweet ioyes muſt parted bee.
            Too ſhort a date for our delight:
            Though all to long to ſtay from fight.
            For Caeſar now is ready preſt,
            And warre is onely in requeſt,
            During which time, Lesbos ſhall be
            A ſafe retiring place for thee.
            Forbeare requeſts to me to make,
            I haue reſolu'd this courſe to take.
            And haue denyd mine owne deſire,
            Thou ſhalt not long from me retire.
            But things are now in deſperate chaunce,
            
               And when as ruine doth aduance,
            
            
               The greateſt ſtates muſt lead the daunce.
            
            It may ſuffiſe thee ſtill to heare
            When perils are to Pompey neare.
            But ſure thy loue deceiues me farre,
            If thou affect to ſee this warre.
            How fouly I might be aſham'd
            That now for Mart haue all things fram'd;
            
               
                  Pompey's perſwaſions to his wife.To ſleepe ſecurely with my wife,
            Sequeſtred from this ciuill ſtrife?
            And when the ſounding Trumpets ſhall
            The wretched world to battaile call,
            
               That Pompey then with drowſie eyes,
            Should from thy tender boſome riſe.
            To wofull Pompey 'twere a skorne,
            That he no preiudice hath borne
            Amongſt the reſt, in ciuill ſtrife,
            Nor bard ſo much as of his wife.
            But thou meane while ſhalt liue ſecure
            From perils that the reſt indure.
            And ſafer then great Kings can bee;
            For being thus remou'd from me,
            
               Fortune ſhall neuer thee perplex
            With thoſe great cares that muſt me vex.
            But if the Gods will haue it ſo,
            That we be conquerd by our foe;
                  Pompey tearms his wife the beſt part of himſelfe.
            
            My beſt part yet ſhall ſafe remaine.
            Or if the fates doe me conſtraine
            The cruell victors force to ſhunne;
            Then know I whither ſafe to runne.
            The grieued dame waxt faint and pale
            When ſhe had heard this heauy tale.
            Her ſences rapted in a ſound,
            Sorrow a while did her confound:
            Vntill her voyce was come againe,
            And then did murmuring thus complaine.
                  Cornelia perplexed with Pompeys words ſorrowfully replies.
            
            No cauſe (deere Pompey) I doe finde,
            To thinke the Fates, or Gods vnkinde,
            For wronging of our nuptiall bed:
            Our liues haue happily beene led.
            Death doth not ſeparate our loue,
            Nor funerals need we to proue.
            But that now (as the common ſort)
            I ſhould be held from my conſort.
            And like the baſe Plebeian rout,
            From thee I ſhould be ſo caſt out
            It grieues my ſoule; what muſt our foe
            With his approch worke me ſuch woe?
            Thy father-in-law we honor doe
            To breake this league betwixt vs two.
            VVhat, is the loue that I haue ſhowne
            To Pompey, yet no better knowne?
            
               Think'ſt thou that ought ſo ſafe can bee,
            As thy deere ſelfe is vnto mee?
            Haue not we ſtill, with mutuall hearts,
            Withſtood all ſcornes, and Fortunes thwarts?
            And wilt thou cruell now me leaue,
            And (ſep'rate from thee) ſo bequeaue
            My carefull head to ruines ſtate,
            And to a thundring fearefull Fate?
            
            Thinkſt thou, thou doſt my life protect,
            Whil'ſt my deſire thou doſt reiect?
            As though to me a harme it were,
            With thee in perils part to beare.
            No, no; for whilſt I draw my breath,
            
               
                  Cornelia's deere affection to Pompey.
               I'le follow thee vnto the death.
            And after thee ſo long ſurviue,
            Vntill the heauy fame arriue
            Vpon this farre remoued ſhore;
            But after that will liue no more.
            Meane while thou doſt but me inure
            To Deſtinies, and to endure.
            O pardon me (confeſſe I muſt)
            In this I feare my ſtrength to truſt.
            But if my prayers may take place,
            Or that the Gods doe rue my caſe,
            
               
                  Cornelia's petition.Let thy poore wife know laſt of all,
            What euer Fortune ſhall befall.
            For though at laſt thou conqueſt gaine,
            Perplext yet ſhall I ſtill remaine.
            And Lesbos will hold me in awe,
            Though thou thy ſword with conqueſt draw.
            For I as much ſhall ſtand in doubt,
            That Caeſar being put to rout,
            Will (flying in a deſp'rate caſe)
            
               
                  Cornelia's doubt.Surpriſe me in this ſtrengthleſſe place.
            This coaſt will now bee more of fame,
            So honor'd with my noble name:
            Who will not know that place the while,
            Where Pompey's wife liues in exile?
            For euery one when ſerues the winde,
            
               
                  Mitelen, a citty in Lesbos.
               The way to Mitelen will finde.
            
               But now I make this laſt requeſt,
                  Cornelia's laſt requeſt to Pompey.
               
            
            If thou in battaile be diſtreſt,
            And that thy conquer'd Armes thou leaue
            And ſafety muſt by flight receaue:
            If thou thy ſelfe to ſeas bequeaue;
            O let thy luckleſſe veſſell ſtriue,
            On any ſhore firſt to arriue,
            Then on this coaſt to ſeeke reliefe;
            Such meeting would encreaſe our griefe.
            Thus ſaid, as one diſtract with dread,
            Inrag'd ſhe leaues her loathed bed,
                  Cornelia's impatient ſorrow
            
            And her prouides to haſte away,
            Impatient of her griefes delay.
            Her Pompey (ere ſhe left the place)
            She did not kiſſe with ſweet embrace:
            Nor yet her armes ſhe euer twinde
            About his necke, with fauours kinde,
            So to relieue his grieued minde.
            So quail'd the laſt fruit of that loue,
            Which they before ſo long did proue.
            Outragiouſly they both lament,
            Their ſtreaming teares their boſomes drent.
            And neither of them had the heart
            To ſay, Farewell, when they ſhould part.
            Neuer had they in all their life,
            Endured ſuch a ſtorme of ſtrife.
            All other harmes that could betide,
            With conſtant mindes they did abide.
                  Pompey & Cornelia more troubled with this parting, then when Caeſar chaſed them out of Italy.
               
            
            The hapleſſe dame the place doth leaue,
            And then her traine did her receaue.
            And to the ſeas doe her conuay,
            Where on the ſands ſhe proſtrate lay,
            And to the bankes ſhe clinged faſt,
            But her aboord they bare at laſt.
            They did not with ſuch heauy plight,
            At that time leaue their Countries ſight,
            Nor from Heſperian coaſt depart
            When Caeſars Armes did make them ſtart;
            Great Pompeys faithfull wife doth this
            Forſake her Lord without a kiſſe:
            
               And from him flies, now left alone,
            But both of them doe part in moane.
            When night approch't ſhe could not ſleepe,
            Cold then did her long waking keepe;
            Not vſd before to widdow'd bed,
            From cares ſhe could not weane her head.
            Nor take her reſt alone to lye,
            Her husbands ſides not being by.
            How oft could ſhe (but all in vaine)
            When ſleepe her tender eyes did ſtraine,
            With armes deceau'd, hugge and embrace
            The empty bed in Pompey's place?
            And now forgetfull of her flight,
            Did ſeeke to finde her Pheare by night.
            For though her feruent deere deſire
            Her heart and marrow ſets on fire,
            Yet tooke ſhe not delight to ſpread
            Her limbes throughout the cooling bed.
            But ſtill that ſide reſerued free,
            Fearing he ſhould vnfurniſh't be.
            But oh! the Gods did not prouide
            That ſo great ioy ſhould her betide.
            For now the fatall day drawes neere,
            That ſhe (poore ſoule) ſhall ſee her deere
            Repaire to her with heauy cheere.
            Finis Libri quinti.
         
         
            
            Lucans Pharſalia. The ſixth Booke.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               VNto Dyrachium Pompey goes,
               Which guards him ſafely from his foes.
               Then Caeſar with a mighty wall,
               Doth Pompey's Army round enthrall;
               But hee breakes out by open fight.
               
                  Scaeua's braue minde, and manly might.
               Then Theſſalies deſcription ſhowne,
               And what her old Records makes knowne.
               There Sextus, Pompey's worthleſſe childe,
               With ſorceries himſelfe defil'd:
               And doth Erictho's counſell take,
               Which ſhee learnes from the Stygian lake.
               And doth a carkas raiſe, that telles
               Much future wracke, and heauy ſpelles.
               Thus hauing ſerued Sextus turne,
               The ſpeaking carkas ſhe doth burne.
            
            
               WHEN theſe two Campes were lodg'd ſo nye,
            Confronting in each others eye,The two Armies in ſight of each other.
            
            Their Armes and Enſignes glittring ſtand,
            Brauing vpon the hilles at hand:
            And both the Captaines prone to fight,
            Hauing aſſembled all their might,
            
               The Gods each parties then beheld,
            Of forces equall in the field.
            But Caeſar holds it in diſdaine,
            
               Caeſars deſires not to winne townes but to fight once for all.The citties of the Greekes to gaine:
            And doth his Deſtinie debarre,
            To value that ſucceſſe in warre.
            For nothing now could giue him reſt,
            Vntill that Pompey were ſuppreſt.
            But doth affect with what he may
            To giue the world one bloody day.
            And thereby all to ruine bring
            That of his name the earth might ring.
            The Fates indifferent threw the dice,
            Which of their heads ſhould pay the price.
            Thrice Caeſar all his troopes diſplaide,
            Vpon the hils rang'd and arraide;
            And thrice prouoking ſignes had ſhowne,
            Of ioyning battell with his fone.
            
               
                  Caeſar could not prouoke Pompey to ioyn battell.But when at laſt he plainly ſaw
            To fight he could not Pompey draw,
            Who in his Campe more truſt repoſde,
            That with a trench was ſtrongly cloſde.
            His tents and enſignes he did raiſe,
            And ſecretly through buſhie wayes,
            With all the haſt he could deuiſe,
            He marcht Dyrachyum to ſurpriſe;
            
               
                  Caeſar remoues to Dyrachyum and Pompey followes him.But Pompey knowing his intent,
            By Seas doth this deſigne preuent.
            And on a hill that Petra hight,
            He lodge his Campe by his foreſight.
            So to defend Dyrachyum wals,
            Which Caeſar ſought to make his thrals,
            Although this Citties towres were ſtrong
            To haue repulſed any wrong.
            Yet her beſt ſtrength and rampars ſtands
            Not by the worke of ancient hands,
            That bulwarkes fram'd by art and toyle,
            
               The deſcription of Dyrachyum.With cluſtred heapes digd from the ſoyle.
            (Although ſuch ſtructures mightie power
            Nor war, nor time can well deuoure.)
            
               But it was ſtrongly fortifi'd,
            All Engines forces to abide,
            By onely helpe of Natures hands,
            And by the ſeate whereon it ſtands.
            For tis almoſt incloſed round
            With a maine ſea, large and profound.
            And craggy ſteepe cliffes tottring hye,
            Gainſt which the roaring billowes flye:
            And but by this hill hindered,
            With ſea it would be Ilanded.
            The walles foundations are of Rockes,
            Moſt dangerous for ſhip-wracke ſhockes.
            When as the Southerne raging blaſts,
            Th'Ionion furious waues vp caſts.
            For Temples then, and houſes ſhake,
            And froth of ſeas their toppes ore-rake.
            ¶Hither the haynous hopes of warre,
            Drew Caeſars rage; his foes to barre.
            But when he ſaw their troopes at large,
            Diſperſt on euery mountaines varge.
            He vnawares to them, aſſaies
            Farre off a mighty trench to raiſe:
            And brings it with a compaſſe round,
            Encloſing many a mile of ground.
            The lands he meaſures with his eye,
            And ſo caſts vp a Rampart hye;
            Not onely fram'd of earth and clay,
            But hugie rockes therein doth lay.
            And ſtones from flinty quarries dig'd,
            The Graecian houſes he vnrig'd,
            And goodly walles in peeces ſhakes,
            Wherewith this lofty trench he makes
            So ſollid, and ſo firme withall,
            That it would neither ſway nor fall,
            With force of battery, neere or farre,
            Of Rammes, or Engines for the warre.
            Downe go the hilles hand ouer head,A huge trench raiſed by Caeſar to encloſe Pompeys Army.
            
            With which the vales are leuelled,
            Till Caeſars taske were finiſhed.
            Ditches he caſts vp large and deepe:
            
               Then mantled Towers ſquare and ſteepe,
            He reares vpon his trenches toppes;
            And in this ſort he rounding ſtoppes
            A long fetch't compaſt monſtrous bound,
            Of buſhy woods, and forreſt ground,
            With plowed lands, and paſture fields,
            And ſome that nought but briers yeelds:
            And in this vaſt incircled ſoyle
            The ſauadge beaſts he did entoyle.
            So as now Pompey's Army needs
            Nor fields, nor fodder for their ſteedes;
            So large a territories ſpace,
            Did this Caeſarean trench embrace.
            And Pompey had ſufficient change,
            From place to place his Tents to range.
            Through it faire riuers tooke their ſourſe,
            And in the ſeas did end their courſe.
            
               Caeſar ſurueyes this wondrous feate,
            And when he ſaw it was compleat:
            He and his troopes (with toyle oppreſt)
            Amidſt the large fields tooke their reſt.
            Now let vs heare thoſe fables old,
            That of the Troians walles were told,
            Aſcribed to the God-heads cares,
            Although but fram'd of brittle wares:
            And thoſe great wonders that doe flye
            Of Babylonian walles ſo hye,
            That ſeem'd to front and threat the skye,
            Made by the Parthian turne againe,
            That flying doth his fight maintaine.
            But looke what ſpacious fields and lands,
            Are compaſt with fierce Tygris bands,
            Or ſwift Orontes doth embrace,
            From which the Kings of Eaſterne race
            Did at the firſt with ſuddaine might,
            
               The compaſſe of Caeſars trench.Small kingdomes ſhare vnto their right.
            Euen ſo much ground with rapted cloſe
            In broyles of warre fronted with foes,
            He quickly wal'd and finiſhed;
            Yet thoſe, and this all periſhed.
            
               Thoſe hands mought with a little toyle,
            Ioyne Abidos to Seſtus ſoyle.
            And with like heapes of earth haue made
            The Helleſpont a land-way trade.
            And might that Iſtmos haue purloyn'd,
            That Pelops land to Greece hath ioyn'd.
            Or elſe haue made a way direct
            For ſhips to paſſe without reflect
            Through that long ſtretching Malean ſtraine
            That ſhelues ſo farre into the maine.
            Or any part of all the earth,
            Haue changed from her proper birth
            Vnto ſome clime of better mood,
            Though Nature had the worke withſtood.
            This martiall terrace frame of rage
            So furniſht, doth encloſe the ſtage,
            VVhence factious ſtrife, & bloody ſtreames,
            Shall ouer-flow ſo many Realmes,
            Heere the Theſſalian ſlaughters wonne,
            And Lybick murdrous deeds miſ-done.
            And heere now flames the ciuill brand,
            VVithin this compaſt plot of land.
            ¶ This worke, when firſt it was erected,
                  Pompey neuer ſuſpected this trench to be in hand, vntill it was finiſhed.
            
            Of Pompey was no more ſuſpected
            Then are the claſhings of the waues
            That lowd againſt Pelorum raues,
            Hard by thoſe people, that farre wide
            In midſt of Trinacry reſide.
            Or then the Britton Calidons
            
            Can heare the bluſtring motions
            That Thetis billowes when they rake
            Againſt the Kentiſh cliffes, do make.
            But he no ſooner found it out,
            VVhat fields this vaſte trench cloſd about,
            But ſtraight his troopes he did conuay
            From Petra, where ſecure they lay:
            And them about thoſe hilles diſpoſd,
            That this maine Rampart had encloſd.
                  Pompeys policy to weaken Caeſars forces.
            
            And this he practiſd to this end,
            That Caeſar ſhould of force extend
            
               His troopes, and weaken ſo his ſtrength,
            Diſperſt to guard the trenches length.
            For ſo much quantity in ground
            This new-raiſd Rampart did ſurround,
            As is Aricia's little wood,
            Diſtant from Rome, whereas there ſtood
            A ſacred Altar eleuate,
            Vnto Diana conſecrate.
            Or as the riuer Tybris falles
            Into the ſea from Roman walles.
            If ſo it ran ſtraight in a line,
            And did not crooked trending twine,
            But yet no Trumpets ſound alarmes,
            Nor weapons marſhalled to harmes.
            Although ſometimes (their Armes to try)
            The wounding darts on both ſides flye.
            Theſe Captaines now are kept a part
            With greater cares from bloody Mart.
            For Pompeys campe found penury
            Of fodder for his Caualry:
            That daily galloping theſe fields,
            
               Want of fodder in Pompeys Campe for his horſes.Which earſt ſuch ſtore of herbage yeelds,
            Their horned hoofes ſo bare had beate,
            That graſſe nor greene was there to eate.
            The luſty Courſers than waxt faint,
            When as their leaſe was thus attaint,
            And to another feed were brought,
            Where rackes with hay were fully fraught.
            But then they mourn'd and pin'd away,
            Chang'd from freſh graſſe to dryed hay.
            And whilſt their Riders ſpurre their ſides,
            And in the rings their gallop guides,
            With trembling ioynts all ſuddenly
            They ſinke downe right, and gaſping lye,
            Till death their ſtretch't out limbes ſurpriſe,
            And ſo the luſty courſer dies.
            Beſides all this, there did enſue
            An aire, that ſuch infection drew,
            By heauens diſtemper'd foggy sky,
            Wherein contagious heates did fry,
            
               That through the Campe a peſt doth flye.
            Such banefull Stygian loathſome ſentsA plague in Pompeys campe
            
            Do riſe from out the dampiſh vents
            Of Neſis hollow mouldy caues;
            And ſuch like vapours breathing raues
            From forth Typhaeus naſty denne,
            That chokes with ſtench both beaſts & men.
            Herewith in heapes the Souldiers fall,
            And that which plagues them worſt of all,
            The poiſned waters more offend
            Then all thoſe dampes the aire doth ſend:
            For that their bowels ſo doth freate,
            And parch them with ſuch inward heate,
            As that the skinne it ſcorching ſwarts,
            Their very eyes with ſwelling ſtarts,
            Their faces flame with fiery hue,
            Cangranes and Calentures enſue.
            And thus tormented ſundry wayes,
            Their heads for paine they cannot raiſe.
            This raging violent diſeaſe
            So forcibly doth ſtill encreaſe,
            As that they do not life maintaine
            In languiſhing, and dye with paine;Sudden death in Pompey's Campe.
            
            But all as ſoone as ſickneſſe takes
            Without delay an end it makes:
            And in ſuch troopes ſo faſt they dye,
            That whilſt the dead vnburied lye,
            With noyſome ſtench amongſt the life,
            This foule contagion growes more rife.
            For theſe poore ſoules haue not at all,
            Any dig'd graues, or funerall.
            But as they doe yeeld vp their laſt,
            Out of the Campe their corpes are caſt.
            Yet (that wch ſomwhat calm'd theſe wrackes)
            The open ſea was at their backes,The ſea a friend to Pompey's campe.
            
            And now and then from Northerne winde,
            They ſome refreſhing blaſts did finde.
            And ſo the forraigne ſtranger ſhores,
            Their Campe with victuals plenty ſtores.
            ¶ Meane while this dull infectious aire,
            
               Did nothing Caeſars campe impaire.
            For they enioyed at their willes
            The large faire fields, and lofty hilles;
            Nor yet their waters noyſome were,
            But ſtreaming ſweetly, freſh and cleere.
            Although another croſſe they finde,
            
               Penury and famine in Caeſars Army.For famine plagues them in her kinde.
            Wherewith they were as much diſtreſt
            As if a ſiege did them inueſt.
            The bladed corne the earth did beare,
            Was not yet growne vnto an eare,
            So as the Souldiers for their feaſts,
            Were faine to ſhare their food with beaſts.
            Gnabbing vpon the bryar buddes,
            And gathering greene leaues in the woods.
            And therewithall ſuch hearbes finde out,
            Whoſe qualities they well might doubt.
            For that vpon ſuch roots they grew,
            
               The ſhift that Caeſars Souldiers make for victuals.As neuer earſt they ſaw nor knew.
            And ſome of theſe vpon the fire,
            They boyle and fry with ſharpe deſire,
            And ſome they chew and ſwallow raw,
            Wherewith to fill the hungry maw:
            And many other things they eate,
            Vnknowne before to be mans meate.
            Yet theſe ſtaru'd ſoules, beſieg'd and dar'd
            Their foes, that with full diſhes far'd.
            ¶ But when that Pompey did deſire,
            To force a way with blood and fire
            Through this huge trench, wherby his bands
            Might range at large in all the lands.
            
               
                  Pompey determines to ouerthrow Caeſars large trench.He would not take the darke of night,
            To cloke a baſe vnmanly fight.
            For whilſt they both from Armes refrain'd,
            To ſteale on Caeſar he diſdain'd.
            But breaches large he meanes to make,
            And thorough them his way to take.
            The Rampart he would lay full low,
            And her high Towers ouer-throw.
            The ſword and ſlaughter muſt hew out
            
               The way, to bring this worke about.
            The part that did moſt fitly ſtand
            For Pompey now to take in hand,
            And of this trench the neereſt ſide,
            Was one high turret dignifide
            With Scaeuas name; obſcur'd from view,
                  Scoeua's, or Minutius name.
            
            With trees that thicke about it grew.
            Thither did he addreſſe his Mart,
            And ſets vpon this vaſt rampart.
            With ſudden charge; but raiſd no duſt,
                  Pompey's forces aſſault the trench.
            
            Whereby to giue the foe miſtruſt
            Forthwith ſuch noiſe of Trumpets ſounds
            Throughout the fields and aire rebounds,
            Such ſtore of Enſign'd Aegles blazde,
            To hold the enemy amazde.
            Whereby the ſword ſhould not alone
            Claime all the honor as his owne.
            And now to ſhow their courage braue,
            That valour would due glory haue,
            What place ſoeuer any tooke,
            He neuer afterwards forſooke,
            But did that ground with force maintaine,A bloody fight at the trench.
            
            Or clouds it with his body ſlaine.
            This fight ſo many liues confounds,
            That bodies wanted to take wounds.
            And darts that flie like ſhowres of raine,
            Were ſpent, and caſt away in vaine.
            Then wildfire ſtreames, and flaming pitch,
            Flyes on the Rampar and the ditch,
            So as the turrets ſhake withall,
            And totter as they meant to fall.
            The rams, the engines, and the ſlings,
            Their battry now with fury dings,
            Whoſe often ſhockes did make ſuch wrack,
            That tower and rampart gins to crack.
            Then Pompeys men withouten ſtop,
            Do mount vpon the trenches top.
            And there their Aegles do diſplay,
            Who hoping they had wonne the day:
            Thinke now the world ſhall them obey.
            
               ¶ That which ſo many thouſand hands,
            Nor yet all Caeſars armed bands,
            Could not from vtter conqueſt hold:
            One man of courage vncontrold,
            
               
                  Scaeua, one of Caeſars Captaines defends the trench.Did change the fortune of this day,
            And reft the victor of his pray.
            His foes ſtill brauing in the face,
            With his owne armes made good the place,
            And ſtill, not vanquiſhed, nor ſlaine,
            Great Pompey's conqueſt doth reſtraine.
            And Scaeua was this worthies name,
            Who formerly had purchaſt fame
            In Caeſars Campe; a priuate man,
            Where he this height of honour wanne.
            For valour all thoſe to exceed,
            That Rhene and Rhodanus did breed.
            There was he made for bloody hand,
            
               Centurion of a Latium band.
            And of that order ware the weed,
            Prone to each doughty daring deede.
            But yet he skilleſſe was to chuſe
            Iuſt times his courage ſtout to vſe.
            
               For valour ſhewne in ciuill warres,
            
            
               Is vertue maim'd with vices skarres.
            
            When he at laſt beholds in ſight,
            His mates retiring from the fight,
            Seeking out corners to recoile,
            In ſafety from this furious broyle.
            With manly voyce he gan to cry,
            
               
                  Scaeua's words to his flying companions.VVhither (baſe cowards) do you flye?
            In Caeſars Armes you were not train'd,
            VVith fearfull ſcornes to be diſtain'd.
            O wretched beaſts, whom terror driues!
            VVithout fight will you looſe your liues?
            VVhat ſhame is this that you ſo droope,
            To ſhift your ſelues from all the troope?
            And not to couet to be found
            Amongſt the dead, with honors wound.
            Ought not your furies to bee ſuch,
            Although no dutie did you tutch?
            
               Becauſe the foe this choiſe hath made,
            To pierce through vs with his proud blade,
            This day ſhall not be faintly tride,
            Without bloud ſhed on Pompeys ſide.
            How much more happy ſhould I die
            Were I but grac't with Caeſars eye.
            But though that Fortune ſo detracts,
            His teſtimony of my acts;
            Yet will I ſo ſhut vp my dayes,
            That Pompeys ſelfe ſhall giue me praiſe.
            Come, ſhew the ſignes of noble hearts,
            On your foes boſomes breake your darts;
            And that they may your vigor feele,
            Vpon their throats retort your ſteele.
            The clouds of duſt ſo high are flowne,
            And this noyſe through the aire ſo blowne,
            As that the verie dinne, and rage,
            Doth Caeſar ſilent eares engage.
            Deare mates we yet vnuanquiſht ſtand,
            
               Caeſar will come with ſpeedy hand;
            Whoſe powre this place will ſoone releeue,
            Before our foes vs death can giue.
            This onely word ſo ſtird their ſprites,The name of Ceſar and hope of his coming reuiueth his diſcouraged troopes.
            
            As trumpets ſounds at firſt incites
            And cals men vnto Martiall fights.
            The dauntleſſe valour of this man,
            They all admir'd; and then they ran
            With eger minds him to behold,
            The youths likewiſe with ſpirits bold,
            Stood faſt to know, if poſſibly
            A man in ſuch extremitie,
            Enuiron'd with ſo many foes,
            When as the place did him encloſe,
            By vertue could his life retaine:
            And hold it ſafe in Deaths diſdaine.
            He ſtand faſts at the Towers defence,
            Thoſe that aſſaile he driues from thence.
            Then carkaſſes in heapes that lie,
            He trowles from off the turret hie.
            And bruiſeth them with bodies fals,
            
               That ſeeke to ſcale or mine the walles.
            
               
                  Sceua's toyle and valour in defence of the trench.Then he the ruin'd ſtones convarts
            To martiall vſe in ſtead of darts;
            Huge timbers he ore-turnes, and frames,
            Wherewith the foe he killes and lames:
            And threats on them himſelfe to caſt,
            Then pitchy brands, with flaming blaſt.
            And thoſe that on the walles would reare,
            He quels with Iron-pointed ſpeare:
            And with his blade ſheares off their wriſts,
            On battlements that lay their fiſts.
            Their chines he cracks, & breaks their bones
            With caſting down huge weights of ſtones.
            And thoſe whoſe Morions are but weake,
            Their ſculs in ſunder he doth breake.
            Others againe he burnes and ſcalles,
            With ſtreaming ſhoures of wilde fire balles:
            So as their cheekes, their haire and eyes,
            Rapt with the flames, lowd biſſing fries.
            ¶ Now when the bodies that were ſlaine,
            Did riſe and mount aboue the plaine:
            Off from the turrets top he leapes
            Vpon the corpes, that lay in heapes.
            And in the midſt of them he ſtood,
            With threatning browes, and raging mood,
            As if a Leopard ſhould skippe
            Out of the Hunters toyle to ſlippe:
            So he encloſd with trooping ſwarmes
            Engag'd, repelles all force of Armes:
            His looks with dread their courage charms
            His ſword that like a razor cuts,
            The dryed blood now blunts and gluts,
            That it abated had the edge,
            And turned dull like to a wedge:
            So as when Scaeua with it ſtroke,
            Where as it lights, the bones it broke;
            But drew nor blood, nor gaſhing wounded,
            The ſteele with hewing was confounded.
            On him the burthen of the fight
            Did lye, and many a dart did light.
            
               No hand in vaine againſt him bent,
            No Iauelins puſh vnlucky ſpent.
            
               Fortune now ſees new warres in hand,
            The prowes of one doth all withſtand.
                  Caeſar in his Cō
                     mentaries doth admirably cō
                  mēd this man, and ſaith, that in his ſhield there were 230 darts found ſticking.
            
            The Target of this valiant Knight
            Did ring, with blowes that on it light:
            His hollow caske ſo crackt and bryſ'd,
            That it his browes and temples ſquiſ'd.
            And yet this while no mortall blow
            Had he receiued by his foe;
            Onely the darts were throwne ſo thicke,
            That in his bones the heads did ſticke.
            ¶ O witleſſe gulles! why do you ſpend
            Your ſhafts and darts thus to no end?
            Theſe many ſhoots that you haue driuen,
            Not yet one deadly wound hath giuen.
            Your mighty ſlings you ſhold haue brought
            And ſo this one mans end haue wrought:
            Or hugie ſtones from off the wall,
            Whoſe weight on him you might let fall;
            Or elſe your battering Ramme, whoſe force
            Quickly from him would life diuorce.
            Or your Baliſta's you might proue,
            If force thereof could him remoue
            From off the entrance of this port,
            Where he doth ſo your force retort;
            And as a mighty Bul-warke ſtands
            For Caeſars ſide, and ſcornes your hands,
            And Pompey's force in idle waſts.
            But now thoſe Armes away he caſts
            That ſhould protect his breaſt from foes,
            And in his ſhield no truſt repoſe:
            His left arme doth therewith diſpence
            For hauing liu'd by his defence,
            And naked doth expoſe his breaſt
            Vnto all harmes that him oppreſt.
            And in his body fixt he beares
            A wood of darts, of ſhafts, and ſpeares.
            Then hee with fainting ſteppes ſeekes out
            Some one in all this hoſtile rout,
            
               Whom he might cruſh, and on him fall
            Like to a marine monſtrous whale.
            And as the beaſts of Libicke ſhore,
            And Affrickes Elephants do rore,
            Oppreſt with multitudes of ſpeares,
            When from their bloudy backes they teares,
            And do ſhake off the pointed darts,
            Which in their rugged tough hide ſmarts.
            Whoſe hidden wounds not dangerous are,
            But pierce the fleſh, and giue a skarre.
            Nor all thoſe darts that hang ſo thicke,
            Nor all the ſhafts that doe them pricke,
            Can fix on them ſo deepe a wound,
            To lay them flat dead on the ground.
            
               
                  Scaeua receiues a mortall wound.But now behold with skilfull art,
            Farre off Gortinus thrylles his dart,
            And Scaeua's head therewith he ſmot,
            And in his eye there ſtickes the ſhot.
            Yet not appal'd, when he did feele
            The blow, he brake the crooked ſteele;
            And from the wound the ſhaft did plucke,
            Whereto the tender eye faſt ſtucke.
            Then on the ground he lets it fall,
            And ſpurnes the dart and eye withall.
            So doth the griſly Poland Beare,
            When he is wounded with the ſpeare,
            And madded with the ſticking ſteele,
            Which hee with pricking ſmart doth feele;
            Gnawes on the wound, and like rage ſpends
            Vpon the dart that him offends.
            But whilſt he flying raues and kickes,
            Within his flanke the lance faſt ſtickes.
            The rancor of this direfull ſhot
            His viſage did moſt vgly blot:
            For all his face was ſwolne, and ſmear'd
            With clotted bloud, no ſhape appear'd.
            Herewith ſo lowd the foes did ſhout,
            
               The ioy that the enemies made for Scoeua's wound.As if from heauen ſome ſtorme burſt out.
            More ioy in them could not be ſeene,
            If Caeſars ſelfe had wounded beene,
            
               Then they expreſt; which did ſurmount
            At this mans hurt, of meane account.
            But he with haughty ſtedfaſtneſſe,
            Hereof doth the offence ſuppreſſe
            Mildly in ſhew, and with a grace,
            As though in him wroth had no place.
            Forbeare deere Countrey-men, quoth he,
                  Scaeua's ſubtilty.
            
            And turne your weapons off from me:
            No more wounds now my death doth need,
            You haue already done the deed.
            Theſe darts but pluck't out of my breaſt,
            Of bloud I ſhall be diſpoſſeſt.
            O take me vp, and let me lye
            In Pompey's Campe before I dye.
            Doe not your Captaine ſo betray,
            To hold from him what I doe ſay.
            
               Scaeua had rather Caeſar leaue,
            Then not an honeſt death receaue.
            ¶ Vnlucky Aulus credit gaue
            To thoſe falſe words that he did raue;
            And to his ſword he did not liſt,
            Which he held ready in his fiſt.
            And as he came for to diſarme
            This Captaine; (not ſuſpecting harme)
            Quite through the middle of his throte,
                  Aulus ſlaine by Scaeua.
               
            
            
               Scaeua his pointed fauchion ſmote.
            Then he new courage takes againe
            As ſoone as he had Aulus ſlaine.
            And ſaid, ſo let him be embru'd,
            That hopes that I am yet ſubdu'd.
                  Scaeua's proud ſpeech before his death.
            
            Let Pompey know that Scaeua's ſword
            No other place will him affoord;
            Vntill his Enſignes he do yeeld
            To Caeſars will, and quit the field.
            Thinke you (baſe men) that euer I
            Like Pompey's Cowards meane to dye?
            Deaths loue giues me more powerfull lawes
            Then Pompey's, or the Senates cauſe.
            Theſe threats no ſooner from him flies,
            But that huge clouds of duſt did riſe;
            
               VVhereby they all did then deſcry
            That Caeſar with his troopes was nye.
            ¶ And he arriued in good time,
            For thereby he takes off the crime
            And foule diſgrace from Pompey's part,
            That they deſerued in this Mart.
            Elſe Scaeua thou perhaps alone
            All Pompey's troopes hadſt ouer-throwne:
            For with the ending of this fight
            Thy life likewiſe did take his flight.
            But whilſt that any did withſtand,
            The warres gaue vigor to thy hand.
            But lying now ſtretcht on the ground,
            Thine own friends ſwarme about thee round;
            And ſtriue to whom the grace may fall
            To beare thee to thy funerall.
            And him withall they did adore,
            As if within his breaſt he bore
            Some heauenly gift, or power diuine,
            That made his vertue liuely ſhine.
            
               The honour done to Scaeua after hee was ſlaine.Then all of them did ſtraine and ſtriue,
            Out of his limbes the darts to riue:
            VVhich to the Gods they conſecrate,
            To memorize his noble fate.
            And with the Armes of Scaeua's breaſt,
            The God of warre they did inveſt.
            But yet how bleſt had beene thy name,
            And thou obtain'd more glorious fame;
            If Spaniards fierce of thee adread
            Had turn'd their backes, and from thee fled.
            Or the Cantabrian martiall wights,
            That brode ſhort glaiues vſe in their fights.
            Or thoſe rough Tewtons bruſky ſwart,
            That vſe long ſlang-ſwords in their mart.
            This ciuill warre allowes no place
            For Trophies; nor affoords the grace
            
               Ioues Temple with thy ſpoyles to dight,
            Nor Triumphes ſhowts for valours right.
            O thou vnhappy, that in vaine
            Didſt Caeſar with ſuch valour gaine!
            
               ¶ Pompey repulſed in this ſort
            By Caeſars forces from the fort,
            Hauing at laſt withdrawne his troopes
            From out this Ramparts trenching coopes,
            No more was tyred therewithall,
            (But to the warre a freſh doth fall)
            Then wearied is the raging maine,
            Whom Eaſterne winde doth hoiſe & ſtraine;
            When as the waues their wroth wold wreake,
            The rockes reſiſting do them breake.
            Or when ſome huge cliffe ſide it beates,
            Although at firſt no part it freates;
            Yet doth the weltring waue at length
            Moulder it downe for all his ſtrength.
            For now he hath diſcouered plaine
            A Caſtle, ſtanding neere the maine,
            Which of this Rampart was a part,
                  Pompey enlargeth his roome for his campe.
            
            Whither he turnes his ſpeedy Mart:
            Which he by ſea and land diuides,
            And it aſſail'd on either ſides.
            Then all the quarters as he goes,
            With Cohorts arm'd, abrode he ſtrowes;
            And doth at large diſpoſe his Tents,
            Now freed from former noyſome ſents:
            This freſh aire much his campe contents.
            So Padus channell ſwelling hye
            Ouer his bankes with ſtreames doth flye;
            And all the lower paſture fields
            Vnto her raging current yeelds;
            Who with her heapes of gathered waues,
            At laſt on all the Champian raues:
            And with her torrents doth explore
            New channels, neuer knowne before.
            Which likewiſe frontier lands confounds,
            From ſome Lords taking their due bounds:
            And vnto others giues againe
            More then they euer did retaine.
            
               Caeſar had ſcarce diſcouered out
            This plot that Pompey went about,
            But that a Beacon it bewrayes,
            
               That ſuddainly huge flames diſplaies.
            And therewithall the duſt that flies
            
               A Bulwarke of Caeſars trench razed by Pompey.
               In ſcatter'd cloudes vp to the skies;
            Now laid againe, the aire was cleere:
            Then to his ſight did plaine appeare
            This Ramparts turret raz'd and torne,
            He findes it ruin'd and forlorne,
            The cold ſignes of a hoſtile ſcorne.
            The place was voyd, no warre he meets,
            Whereat the more he frets and greets,
            That Pompey ſo ſhould take his reſt,
            As though that Caeſar were ſuppreſt.
            He therefore now his force prepares
            To runne into all miſchiefes ſnares,
            But that he would their new ioyes quaile;
            And then he fiercely did aſſaile
            The quarter where Torquatus lyes,
            
               
                  Torquatus, one of Pompey's Captaines, whom Caeſar ſets on.Who Caeſars march as ſpeedy ſpies,
            As is a ſhip with all ſailes borne,
            Swift driuen in a Circean ſtorme.
            
               Torquatus drawes his troopes withall
            Cloſely within the Ramparts wall;
            And to combine his ſmall ſtrength faſt,
            Into a ring he did them caſt.
            By this time Caeſars force drew nye,
            And ore the Ramparts fence they flye.
            Then Pompey all his troopes of Armes
            Calles from the hils, that come in ſwarmes,
            Whoſe Army couers all the lands,
            And now incloſeth Caeſars bands.
            Thoſe people that dwell in the fields,
            Where Aetnas mount ſuch ſparkling yeelds,
            Are not with greater feare poſſeſt
            When from Encelads boyling breaſt,
            
               
                  Caeſars troopes engaged and put to flight.Out of the cauernes fuming hye,
            The fiery flints abrode doe flye:
            VVhoſe heapes of burning cinders caſt,
            All ouer, ſtrowes the Champian vaſt.
            Then Caeſars troopes that ſaw with feares
            The duſt that Pompey's army reares.
            
               But blinde with clouds of trembling frght,
            Amaz'd betooke themſelues to flight.
            And then amongſt their foes they fall,
            So feare to ruine them doth hall;
            Here ſo much bloud might haue bene ſhed,
            As might of force haue Caeſar led
            To yeeld vnto a ſetled peace,
                  Pompey withholds the rage of his ſouldiers againſt Ceſars troopes which he had at an aduantage.
            
            And ſo from ciuill Armes to ceaſe:
            But that milde Pompey now withſtands
            The rage of his owne armed bands,
            And with his owne appeaſing words,
            Holds backe his ſouldiers forward ſwords.
            O Rome how bleſt had bene thy fate,
            How free thy lawes had held their ſtate,
            And how exempt from Tyrants mace
            Had Sylla bene in Pompeys place.
            Alas the greefe thereof doth ſmart,
            And ſtill that greefe will grieue my heart.
            That Caeſar thou haſt thus ſuruiu'd,
            And to this impious haight arriu'd.
            Becauſe in fight thou chanſt to finde,
            And meete a Son in law ſo kinde.
            O moſt accurſed fatall teene,
            No Libicke ſlaughters then had beene,
            Nor Spaine had Mundas furie ſeene;
            Nor yet that corps with goare polluted,
            Nobler then Egypts king reputed;
            Had ſo on Pharus ſhoare bene ſlaine,
            Nor Nilus bluſht with that blood ſtaine,
            Nor on Marmaricks ſandie plaine
            Had Iubas naked carkaſſe laine.
            Nor Scipios blood bene ſhed with theſe
            The Punicke ſpirits to appeaſe.
            Nor ſacred Cato in this ſtrife
            So ſoone had left his bleſſed life.
            But this might well haue prou'd the day
            All Romane wracks to wipe away,
            And therewithall anticipate
            The diſmall blacke Pharſalian fate.
            ¶ Caeſar thus croſt by heauenly powers,
            
               Forſakes theſe Ramparts and theſe Towers,
            And with his totter'd troopes defeated
            Vnto Emathias fields retreated.
            
               
                  Caeſar takes his way towards Theſſaly after this Defeate.Now thoſe that fauour'd Pompeys part,
            And all the leaders of his mart
            Do him perſwade all that they may,
            His forces now to turne away,
            And not his father inlaw purſue,
            Seeing that he his preſence flew;
            
               
                  Pompeys Captains perſwade him to returne into Italy after this defeate that he gaue Caeſar.
               But that he would with his braue hoaſt,
            Returne vnto his natiue coaſt,
            For ſince no foe did him withſtand,
            He well might viſite Latium land.
            But Pompey flat did that deny,
            And in theſe tearmes he doth reply.
            
               
                  Pompeys anſwer in deniall thereof.I neuer will to Rome returne
            As Caeſar did, to make her mourne,
            Neuer ſhall ſhe ſee me againe,
            But freed of a Martiall traine.
            I could haue ſtaide in Latium than,
            when firſt theſe ciuill iarres began,
            Would I our Temples ſo betray
            To make of them the ſouldiers pray,
            Or in the Forum armes diſplay.
            Nay rather then I would conuart
            To Italy this bloody Mart,
            I ſooner would purſue a warre
            Vnder the freezing Northerne ſtarre,
            Amongſt the Scythes, or in that ſoyle
            Whoſe plants the Torrid Zoane doth broile.
            Shall I for one victorious day
            Now take from Rome her reſt away?
            O Rome why fled I firſt ſo farre
            But to preſerue thee free from warre;
            And rather then Ile change that minde
            Now to become to thee vnkinde,
            And draw this hatefull ſtrife on thee,
            Let Caeſar take all Rome for me.
            So ſaid, he then prepar'd his hoaſt
            To march vnto the Eaſterne coaſt.
            
               And through by wayes his army paſt,Pompey purſues Caeſar.
            
            Pearcing thoſe deſart forreſts vaſt,
            That frontyer on Candauias ſides,
            And in Theſſalia he abides,
            The place that Fate for warre prouides.
            ¶ This land mount Oſſa doth incloſe
            On that ſide where Aurora ſhowes
            The riſing of the winters ſunne,
            When he his loweſt courſe doth runne.The deſcription and ſcituation of Theſſaly.
               
            
            But when the worlds eye lookes vp higher,
            The cold aire warming with his fier,
            Whilſt clyming vp the loftie skies,
            His beames yet ſomewhat oblique flies.
            And as thoſe beames the land enuades
            On that ſide Pelion caſts his ſhades.
            But when amidſt the heauens he drawes
            Chaſing the raging Lyons iawes,
            And makes his ſolſtice for thoſe lands
            There woody Othrys bordring ſtands.
            Then Pyndus frounts thoſe milder blaſts
            That Zephirus on that ſide caſts;
            And haſtens on approaching night,
            With his high top ſhading the light.
            And they that in the vale are bred
            Where mount Olympus lifts his head,
            Thoſe bitter blaſts neuer offends
            That Boreas from his cauerne ſends,
            Nor know they whether that the Beare
            Be all night glowing in the ſpheare.
            ¶ Whilome this vallie, that did lie
            In midſt of all theſe mountaines hie
            Was fenniſh grounds, and mooriſh muds,
            Still ouerwhelm'd with ſtanding fluds:
            And thoſe vaſt lakes that drownd this plaine
            Ranne not through Tempe to the Maine;
            But in one pond ſtood alwayes ſtill,
            And euer more did waters ſwill;
            Vntill that the Herculean wonder,
            With mightie ſtraine did rent aſunder
            The Oſſan mount from Pelion hill,
            
               And then theſe waters did diſtill,
            Into Nereus brakiſh fields,
            And ſo to Thetis ſonne it yeelds
            
               Emathias kingdome; where abounds,
            
               Pharſalos goodly champion grounds:
            But how much better had it beene
            A watry plaſh, then graſsie greene:
            There now Philaces cittie ſtands,
            
               The chiefe Cities of Theſſalie.
               That firſt ſent ſhips to Ilium lands.
            There Ptelos and Dorion towne,
            Wailing the Muſes wrathfull frowne.
            
               Trachin likewiſe is ſeated there,
            And Melibaea freed from feare
            By Hercules Artillery;
            The bitter price of periury.
            
               Lariſſa likewiſe of great power,
            And noble Argos here did tower.
            Where now the cultor ſhares the ſoyle
            And plough-men dayly eare and toyle;
            Here ſtood (as fables olde relates)
            
               Echions Thebes with ſeauen folde gates.
            Whereas Agaue baniſhed
            The Bacchanals ſhe worſhipped,
            By Pentheus her kingly ſonne,
            Him all inrag'd to death hath donne.
            Whoſe head though caſt into the fire,
            Could not appeaſe her franticke ire.
            ¶This hugie lake that now had vent
            To let out all her waters pent,
            In many parts it ſelfe deuides,
            Then Aeas with ſmall current ſlides,
            But with cleare ſtreame bends to the weſt,
            
               The chiefe Riuers of Theſſalie.
               Till in Ionian ſeas ſhe reſt.
            Nor yet with ſtronger courſe then this
            Doth run the ſire of Iſidis,
            
            Whoſe maiden ſhape high Ioue reſtores,
            And her tranſports to Egypts ſhores.
            So Achelous thence doth paſſe,
            (O Caeneus that almoſt was
            Thy ſonne in law) and then defiles
            
               With ſlimie waues Echinads Iles.
            With Euenos that bare the ſtaines
            Of blood from Neſſus wounded vaines.
            And with his current ſtreameth on
            Through Meleagers Calydon.
            
            Then Sperchios that with greater ſpeed,
            The waues Maliacan doth feed.
            And ſweet Amphriſos that doth ſweepe,
            With criſtall ſtreames and channell deepe
            The fields where Phoebus fed his ſheepe.
            And ſtill Anauros, whence doth riſe
            Nor vapours that the clouds ſupplies,
            Nor airie dewes that moiſture caſts,
            Nor gentle breathes of windy blaſts.
            All other riuers elſe beſide,
            Into the maine that do not glide
            With their own ſtrength and proper courſe
            Into Paeneus yeeld their ſource.
            Then ſtickle ſtream'd Aepidanus,
            
            With neuer ſwift Enipeus,
            
            Till ſhe with other waters bed;
            Thence doth Aſopos take her head;
            
               Phoenyx and Melas doe the ſame,A riuer in Theſſaly that runnes ouerthwart another riuer without mingling.
            
            And Tytareſſe that holds his name,
            And waues ſo firme, and from his ſprings
            A vertue takes, which neuer mings
            With other ſtreame; but ſafe and ſound
            A path hath on Peneus found,
            As if it ran vpon dry ground.
            And as Fame ſayes, this riuers head
            Is in the Stygian waters bred.
            And being mindfull of his fount,
            Doth hold it ſelfe in more account,
            Then with the common waues to mixe,
            But keepes the maieſtie of Styxe.
            
            ¶ As ſoone as all theſe ponds were drain'd
            Which erſt this tracke of land retain'd,The firſt inhabiting of Theſſaly after the land was drained.
            
            
               Bebicius with his furrowing ſhares
            For tillage theſe fat fields prepare;
            And all the Lelegans then tride
            
               How they the plough thereon could guide.
            Thereto the ploughmen put their hands
            Of Dolop, and Aeolian lands.
            The Magnetes there their horſes ſtoares
            And people knowne to Minyen oares.
            Here did the Centaure, birth of clowds,
            That in Pelethron darke dens ſhrowds,
            Ingendred of Ixions race
            Diſperſe themſelues, for dwelling place.
            And thou Moniche didſt wonne there
            That Pholoes rockes didſt riue and teare.
            And Rhetus that on Aetnas top
            Thoſe hugie trees didſt wreſting lop.
            Which Boreas with his boyſtrous blaſt
            Could hardly teare or ouercaſt.
            And Phole in this ſoile did reſt,
            Where great Alcides was his gueſt.
            And wicked Neſſus here reſides
            That afterwards gain'd bloody ſides.
            With Lernean ſhafts that Hercles guides.
            And thou O Chiron now growne old,
            Conuerted to a ſtarre ſo cold,
            Thy ſtrong Aemonian bow doſt draw
            Againſt great Scorpios poyſoned maw.
            So on this land in euery part
            Did ſhine the direfull ſeedes of Mart.
            Here firſt of all the goodly breeds
            Of the Theſſalian fierie ſteedes,
            For vſe of warre ſo prone and fit,
            Did riſe, when as Neptunus ſmit
            The flintie ſtones with Marine mace,
            Engendring ſo the coarſers race,
            That champs the bit with praucing pace.
            And here the Lapiths hands firſt ſtraines
            Their foaming mouths with bridling raines.
            Hence gallies cut the waues with oares,
            Sent from the Pagaſaean ſhoares;
            And Inland men did firſt engage
            To venter on the billowes rage,
            And here Ionos that did raigne
            
               Ouer the vaſt Theſſalian plaine,Coine framed
            
            Did firſt of all his ſtamps conioyne
            To molten mettals, fram'd for coyne.
            And maketh ſiluer run in ſtreames,
            Swelting amidſt the fiery gleames.
            The gold likewiſe at firſt he brake,The melting of Copper.
            
            And thereof money he did make,
            And in the boyling furnace vaſt,
            The copper he did liquid caſt.
            Then thence did all that garboyle ſpring,
            And miſchiefe that the warres did bring,
            Enticing all the world to armes
            For riches gaine, the ſeeds of harmes.
            Here was huge vgly Python bred,
            In Cyrrhan dens lurking his head.
            And then was vſde Theſſalian bayes,
            To yeeld the Pythian games their praiſe.
            Wicked Alaeus broode from hence
            Was ſent, that made that high offence
            Againſt the Gods waging their warres,
            On Pelions top neare to the ſtarres,
            Heaping mount Oſſa on his backe,
            Whereby heauens courſe they thought to ſlack.
            ¶Now when in theſe vnluckie lands,
            Both Chieftains had incampt their bands,
            The doubt of future warres euents,
            Their minds with equall cares torments.
            For now they ſee approaching nie,
            The day that muſt their fortunes trie.
            And as the houre did draw more neare,
            So coward minds the more did feare,
            And ſtill the worſt their thoughts retaine,
            But yet ſome few of theſe againe
            Giues to their courage better ſcope,
            By ballancing their feare with hope.
                  He taxeth Sextus Pompeys eldest ſonne.
            
            And Sextus now amongſt this rowte
            Did ſhew himſelfe a crauen lowte.
            As one that no way did inherit
            The glory of great Pompeys ſpirit.
            For he will take a Pirates trade,
            
               And will the Scycill ſeas inuade;
            Whereby thoſe Triumphs he diſtaind
            That on the ſeas his father gain'd.
            But now his feares ſtirres vp his mind,
            To know how chances ſtood deſign'd:
            And growne impatient of delayes,
            Long'd to foreknow his future dayes.
            The Delos God he doth not heede,
            Nor yet conſults with Pythias reede.
            Nor what Dodona ſawes relates,
            That breeds the Akorne ſwyniſh cates
            Which groue from Ioues mouth ſoundeth fates.
            Nor yet the Augures skill he tries
            Of bowel'd beaſts for ſacrifiſe;
            Nor what the flying birds preſage,
            Nor yet obſerues the lightnings rage;
            Nor doth he ſearch to vnderſtand
            The knowledge of th'Aſſyrian land,
            By motions of the ſtarres on hie,
            And how the planets qualefie;
            
               Sextus giuen to truſt to forcery.Or any hidden lawfull meanes,
            But he the hatefull ſecrets gleanes
            Of Magicks ſpels, and them doth proue
            So odious to the Gods aboue.
            And wofull murdrous altars dights
            To Dis, and the infernall ſprights
            Whom he beleeues, and as deiected,
            The heauenly powres he nought ſuſpected.
            And now this place where he reſides
            His wicked humour more miſguides,
            For many ſorcerers, and witches,
            Dwell there, where now his tents he pitches.
            Whoſe foule illuſions fraught with lies
            Doth modeſt pietie deſpiſe.
            And of their art this point is chiefe
            To vndertake things paſt beliefe.
            ¶ For Theſſaly on her rocks breeds
            Many inchanting balefull weeds.
            And ſenſibly her very ſtones
            Thoſe damned ſpels did ſeale with grones.
            
               And many charmes it eleuates,Theſ
                     •
                  ly much inclined to witchcraft.
            
            The heauenly powres it violates.
            And fell Medea from thoſe fields
            Fetcht herbs, that Colchos neuer yeelds.
            Their wicked charmes were of ſuch force,
            That they could wreſt vnto remorſe
            The Gods deafe eares, that hardned weare
            Gainſt thoſe that more deuotion beare.
            And nations that their heſts did feare.
            Their damned voyce and helliſh cries,
            Could force a way to pearce the skyes.
            And with their powrefull words inciteThe opinion of the force of Theſſalian Witches.
            
            The higher powres in heauens diſpight.
            For that ſame ſupreme care diuine
            How heauenly orbes and ſpheares encline
            Is caſt aſide, when they haue ſent
            Their charmes vnto the firmament.
            For though the Babylonian clime,
            And Memphis do retaine the prime,
            Of all ſuch ſages as can tell
            What deepe and hidden skill doth dwell
            Within the ancient magicks ſpell;
            Yet th'Theſſalian witch can bend,
            Thoſe powres their altars to entend.
            ¶Their charming words are of ſuch might
            That thoſe hard hearts that nought delight
            In ſports of loue, nor naturally
            Retaine thereof the quallity
            By their inchantments ſet on fier,
            Shall flame in feruent loues deſier.
            Yea crabbed ſires, foreſpent with age,
            They will infect with luſting rage.The opinion that ancient times held of the power of ſorcery and witchcraft.
            
            Nor onely noyſome potions vſe,
            Nor onely do that lumpe enfuſe
            Which on a young colts forhead breeds,
            That ſlimie humours ſwelling feeds:
            Before the louing damme do ſhare
            It with her teeth, and make it bare.
            But with the charmes that they do chatter,
            Not vſing any poyſnous matter,
            
               They will the ſtrongeſt minds infeſt,
            And at their pleaſure force and wreſt.
            And thoſe whom diſcord hath miſled
            To leaue and loath their nuptiall bed
            They haue reclaim'd; and that great force
            Of beautie wanting kinde remorſe,
            By meanes of Magicks twiſted twine,
            To gentle loue they made encline.
            And things from natures courſe eſtrang'd
            The daies to lengthned nights they chang'd
            The firmament kept not his courſe,
            The ſpheares forbeare their rapted ſource;
            Their motions dully languiſhing,
            When as their charming ſpels they ſing.
            And Iupiter himſelfe did woonder,
            Wat made the Poles ſo ſlowly blunder.
            And why they did not turne more ſwift,
            Being vrged with their woonted drift.
            All things are ouerlaide with ſhowrs,
            When Phoebus ſhines the dark clouds lowrs.
            Vnknowne to Ioue they make it thunder,
            As though the skies would rent in ſunder.
            With one ſelfe voyce they cloudes diſperſe,
            And then againe to raine reuerſe.
            When no wind blowes, the ſeas ſhall rage,
            And in huge ſtormes their wrath aſſwage.
            And (moſt contrary vnto kinde)
            
               Here the Poet ſhewes the opinion that was held of the power of Theſſalian ſorcerers.The ſhips ſhall ſaile againſt the winde.
            The torrent from the mountains top
            Amidſt his courſe ſhall ſtay and ſtop.
            The riuer ſhall run countermount,
            And turne his courſe vnto his fount.
            The Sommer ſhall not Nylus raiſe,
            
               Meander ſtraight his crooked wayes.
            The Rhodanus ſhall become ſlow,
            And Arar him ſhall ouergo.
            The mountains whelme their ſteepy head,
            And as a plaine be ouerſpread.
            
               Olympus vnderlooke the clouds:
            
               Scythia from whom the Sun ſtill ſhrowds
            
               In midſt of winters froſtie flaw,
            Her ſnowes ſhall then diſſolue and thaw;
            And with their charmes they will reſtraine
            The ſetled flowing of the maine.
            And force him with thoſe bonds diſpenſe
            Deſign'd by Cynthias influence.
            They will ſo ſtrike that fixed waight
            The Axe, that bears the worlds whole fraight
            That turning in the Orbes mid wheele,
            It beckning ſomewhat ſeemes to reele.
            And with one word this heaped maſſe,
            And pondrous loade ſo crazed was,
            That it would proſpects thorow teare,
            To ſee the other Hemiſpheare.
            ¶ All animals of deadly natures
            That Lethall beene to humane creatures,
            In feare of theſe inchanters liue,
            Or to their art aſſiſtance giue.
            The Tygre with his bloodie iawes;
            The Lyon that all ouer-awes,
            On them will fawne with milde aſpect.
            The water Snakes with like reſpect,
            Their chilly circles will vnfould,
            And ſtreatch themſelues on dewy mould,
            If theſe vile hagges do them behold.
            The vipers wombe, when it is torne,
            By that damn'd broode that ſhe hath borne,
            They will make whole; and humane breath
            Shall giue the Serpent preſent death.
            How are the Gods perplext with paine,
            To yeeld vnto this ſorcerous vaine?A conceit
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  f the Authors.
            
            And held in awe them to diſdaine?
            What contract haue they made withall?
            That they can hold them ſo in thrall.
            Are they oppreſt by Witches might,
            Or in their charmes take they delight?
            Are they deare to the Deities,
            
            For any ſecret pieties.
            Do they preuaile this by entreates,
            Or do they vſe ſome ſecret threates?
            
               With all the Gods haue they that hand:
            Or do thoſe powerfull charmes command?
            Some one peculiar Deitie,
            That can with ſuch facilitie
            Conſtraine this world to yeeld and tend
            To that which is ſo forc't to bend.
            Theſe witches firſt did headlong teare
            The ſtarres downe from the loftie ſpheare,
            And modeſt Cynthias ſiluer hue
            Vnto a pallid colour grew.
            Infected with their venom'd phraſe,
            And with ſwarth earthly face did blaze.
            As if the earth had bene betweene
            To barre her of her brothers ſheene.
            And that his orbe with duskie ſhade
            Thoſe heauenly beames kept from her glade
            And with theſe charmes is ſo oppreſt
            That ſhe can neuer be at reſt,
            Vntill the ſlimie matter fall,
            That they do oint their hearbs withall.
            ¶Theſe wicked rites and charming ſpels
            Practiſde whereas thoſe vile hags dwels,
            
               Erycktho fierce ſeem'd to diſdaine,
            Pretending her more pious vaine;
            
               A tedious d
                     •
                  
                  ſcription of Theſſalian witch called Ericktho.
               And into new formes would conuart
            The errors of this loathſome art.
            She would not lodge her damned head
            In towne, or houſe, or any ſhed.
            But ſtill amongſt the graues would reſt,
            And tombes of corſes diſpoſſeſt.
            Gratefull to helliſh Deities,
            Conuerſing ſilent companies.
            Life vnto her no hinderance was,
            Into the Stygian ſhades to paſſe.
            And there the ſecret will to know
            Of Dis, that woonneth ſtill below.
            Her bleaſme and megre lookes detect,
            A loathſome helliſh ſwarth aſpect;
            That bright dayes light will neuer ſee,
            The Stygian ſhades her proſpects bee.
            
               She hath withall a gaſtly face,
            And feltred lockes about it trace.
            When ſhowres, or duskie clouds by night
            Obſcure the ſtarres from humane ſight,
            Out of the ſilent graues ſhe haſts,
            And catcheth at the lightning blaſts.
            Then through the fields ſhe pacing ſpurnes,
            And full-ear'd corne ſhe blaſting burnes:
            And with the very breath ſhe ſends,
            The healthy aire taints and offends.
            Vnto the Gods ſhe neuer prayes,
            Nor powers of heauen to guide her wayes.
            She takes no keepe of Augures skill,
            How ſacrifice bodes good or ill:
            But moſt of all ſhe doth deſire,
            The funerall piles to ſet on fire;
            And whilſt they burne, to filch from thence
            The Spices and the Frankinſence.
            ¶ The Gods euen at the firſt requeſt,
            Do grant to her each wicked heſt:
            And feare to heare her twice to craue
            The thing that ſhe deſires to haue.
            She buries bodies yet aliue,
            Before that death their ſoules depriue:
            And though their date might long ſubſiſt,
            In ſpight of Fates ſhe cuts their twiſt.
            And others dead brings backe againe
            From funerals, with ioyfull traine;
            Reſtoring life to euery vaine.
            Out of the midſt of funerall fires
            She rapes, and greedily deſires
            The ſmoking cinders as they lye,
            And yong mens bones that flaming fry.
            And raging, will not doubt nor feare
            The torch from parents hands to teare.
            Then all the flakes that ſhe eſpies,
            Which from the coarſe wth black ſmoke flies,
            And garments vnto aſhes turn'd,
            And oylie fragments ſcarcely burn'd,
            Together ſhe doth ſcrape and glut;
            
               But when into a Tombe they put
            A ſollid body, moiſt within,
            With marrow cloſd in hardned skinne,
            Then will ſhe raue on all the parts;
            Into the eyes her fingers darts,
            And neuer digging leaues withall
            Till ſhe teares out the very ball.
            Then from the dryed hands ſhe rents
            And gnawes the pallid excrements:
            The knots her teeth in ſunder ſhare,
            Of ropes wherewith men ſtrangled are.
            The hanging carkaſſes ſhe fleeces,
            And then the gibbets breakes in peeces:
            The wether-beaten paunch ſhe caſt
            Out of the corpes, and then at laſt
            She lets the ſunne thereon to ſprout,
            And vn-ſod marrow ſo takes out.
            Thoſe that are hang'd in Iron chaines,
            Whoſe hands the ruſty fetters ſtraines
            From all the ioynts, whereof diſtilles
            The oylie moiſture, that downe trilles
            In greaſie filth, and ſwarthy gore,
            She gathers vp for poyſons ſtore.
            Whilſt gnawing on the nerues ſhe files,
            Faſt by the teeth ſhe hangs the whiles;
            And if that ſhe by chance doe finde
            A carkaſſe on the ground vn-ſhrinde,
            Amongſt the rauening beaſts and fowle,
            There will this Sorcereſſe ſitting ſcowle:
            But will not with a knife ſelect
            The fleſh, and parts ſhe doth affect:
            But ſhe will onely pry and watch,
            The morſels from Wolues iawes to ſnatch.
            From murder neuer ſtayes her hands,
            When as in need of blood ſhe ſtands
            That freſhly flowes from wounds at firſt,
            Such ſhe findes out to quench her thirſt.
            Nor will ſhe ſtay her murdrous mood,
            When ſhe would ſacrifice life-blood:
            Or that ſome funerall rites require
            
               The trembling intrailes on the fire.
            The babes within the mothers wombe,
            With gaſhing wound ſhe will vntombe
            Ere nature bring it forth to light;
            Her flaming Altars ſo to dight.
            And whenſoeuer ſhe needs moſt
            Some cruell ſturdy humor'd ghoſt,
            Her ſlaughtring fiſt the ſoules prepares,
            No humane life ſhe euer ſpares.
            From off the chinnes ſhe rents and teares
            Of flowring youths the downy haires.
            And with left hand the lockes will ſhaue
            Of ſtriplings, lingring to the graue.
            This Witch her owne kinne hath not ſpar'd,
            That death of her dire hand hath ſhar'd:
            But firſt ſhe would them coll and kiſſe,
            And then the head from corpes diſmiſſe.
            And when that death their iawes had fixt,
            She then would gnab her teeth betwixt,
            And ſo bite off the labbring tongue,
            That to the dry throat faſt was clung:
            And with her cold lips then would babble
            Of whiſpring charmes full many a rabble.
            And then at laſt with ſome vile ſpell
            Would ſend their ſprights to ſhades of hell.
            ¶ The fame that of this Witch did runne,
            Had made her knowne to Pompey's ſonne,
            Who in the depth of ſilent night,
                  Eryctho's fame reported to Sextus.
               
            
            When Tytan had conuaid his light
            Vnto the middle of that skye,
            That to our feet oppoſd doth lye;
            Abrode at that time Sextus traces
            Into the ſolitary places,
            Attended by a company
            Prepar'd, and true to villany:
            VVho ranging vp and downe the land,
            VVhere graues and Tombes did vſe to ſtand,
            By chaunce a farre they ſpy'd this hagge,
            Cloſe ſitting by a rocky cragge,
            Neere to a path that ſtraight doth guide
            
               The way vnto mount Aemus ſide:
            There ſhe ſuch charms did mūbling chatter,
            That no Magitians knew the matter:
            Nor yet the Gods of Magickes art,
            Of her ſtrange ſpels knew any part:
            New fictions ſhe did cunne by heart.
            And fearing that this bloudy warre
            VVould be transferred yet more farre,
            From Theſsaly to other ſoyles,
            VVhereby the blood that theſe garboyles
            On either ſide would flowing yeeld,
            Should be depriu'd Pharſalias field
            VVhich ſhe already had defil'd
            VVith ſpelles, and incantations vilde;
            Did what ſhe could that might withſtand
            To draw the warres from out this land.
            For now ſhe hop't to glut her mood,
            VVith vſe of flowing humane blood:
            And that in ſuch a world of ſtrife,
            She ſhould haue deaths, and ſlaughters rife;
            That cinders of the Romans dead,
            Might in Emathia's field be ſpread,
            And bones of noble Peeres there ſlaine,
            VVhoſe ghoſts ſhe hop't ſhould be her gain.
            This was her drift, this her deſire,
            VVherewith her heart was ſet on fire;
            Propoſing to her ſelfe the ſpoyle
            Of Pompey's part vpon his foyle.
            And with like rage to raue and rampe
            Vpon ſome wrackes of Caeſars campe.
            Then to this hagge, with words full milde,
            Firſt ſpake great Pompey's worthleſſe childe.
            
               
                  Sextus words to Eryctho.
               ¶ O thou that art the greateſt grace
            Of Sages of Aemonian race,
            That canſt at large to men relate
            Their deſtiny and future fate:
            And haſt the power to turne aſide
            Euents of harmes that ſhould betide:
            I thee beſeech doe me that grace
            To let me know this doubtfull caſe.
            
               What is the ſcope and certaine end
            VVhereto this ciuill warre will tend.
            I am not leaſt of Roman heires,
            That intreſt haue in theſe affaires;
            Great Pompey is my noble ſire,
            And I his ſonne that muſt aſpire
            Either to be the Lord of all,
            Or heire of his great funerall.
            My minde doth doubtfull dread retaine,
            And yet reſolu'd I am againe
            To carry all with courage ſtout,
            Were I but ſure what would fall out.
            Doe thou therefore reſolue I pray
            The doubt of this vncertaine day,
            That we be not ſurpriſ'd vnwares,
            Nor blindly led to Fortunes ſnares.
            From higher powers extort the truth,
            Or on the Gods thou maiſt haue ruth;
            And all the Stygian ghoſts below
            Vrge to thy power, the truth to ſhow.
            Goe ſearch Theſſalian fields about,
            And alſo learne which of our rout
            Death is reſolu'd to him to call,
            That in theſe ciuill warres muſt fall.
            This labour is of no baſe kinde,
            But worthy thy inſpired minde:
            A worke of glory by thee donne,
            To know how ſo great Fate ſhall runne.
            ¶ This glorifide Theſſalian Witch,
            To heare her fame, for ioy did itch,
                  Eryctho's anſwere to Sextus.
               
            
            And thus reply'd; O noble youth,
            Didſt thou deſire to know the truth
            Of future chance, in leſſer fate
            As thou requir'ſt I could relate,
            Although the Gods it diſavow'd;
            For ſo much is to Art allow'd.
            For though the planets influence,
            Did call ſome one mans life from hence;
            Yet could we thereof make a ſtay,
            And ſo likewiſe can take away
            
               With ſpeciall hearbes, his liuing houre,
            That all the ſtarres vnited power
            Did vnto eldeſt yeares deſigne,
            And in the midſt breake off his twine.
            But ſince the order of all things
            From one firſt chiefe beginning ſprings,
            And Fates do labour in this all,
            And thou of that a change wouldſt call,
            Whereby one onely mortall ſtroke
            Might this worlds vniverſe revoke.
            All our conſorts muſt needs agree,
            That Fortune can do more then wee.
            But if it may ſuffiſe thy hope,
            Of one mans hap to know the ſcope,
            Tis eaſie certainly to doe,
            And many meanes do helpe thereto.
            The earth, the aire, the Chaos old,
            The fields with hearbes ſo manifold,
            The rockes of Rhodopeian land
            VVould ſound that we ſhould vnderſtand.
            But ſince that daily there is ſtore
            Of new ſlaine bodies with freſh gore,
            Tis eaſie for Emathia's field
            One head for our deſignes to yeeld;
            VVhoſe carkaſſe warme, and newly ſlaine,
            Doth yet a ſound of voyce retaine:
            VVhoſe corpes not parched with the ſunne,
            Nor warmth as yet from members runne:
            This Stygian ghoſt not yet will ſtutter,
            But to our eares will plaine words vtter.
            ¶ VVhen ſhe had ſaid, her ſullen head
            She artificially ore-ſpread
            VVith doubled darkneſſe of the night,
            And with a foggy miſt bedight;
            About the bodies ſlaine ſhe pries,
            That in the fields vnburied lies.
            And with her lookes ſhe did affray
            The rauening Wolues, and birds of pray,
            VVho from the bodies fled away.
            VVhilſt that this hagge a carkaſſe prold,
            
               And ſearch't the marrow deadly cold,
            Wherein the lungs and lights ſhe found
            Quite ſtarke, but free from any wound.
            Then for a voyce ſhe ſeekes and pries,
            Within this body where it lies.
            Meane while there hung in queſtion than
            The fate of many a ſlaughtred man,
            VVhom ſhe againe from death would call;
            For had ſhe try'd to take them all,
            That of both Armies there lay ſlaine,
            The warres ſhe had ſupply'd againe,
            And ſilenced Erebus law;
            For could this powerfull monſter draw
            From Stygian lake ſo great a crew,
            Their fighting alwayes would renew.
                  Eryctho chuſeth a ſlaine body to enchaunt.
            
            But now a body ſhe hath got,
            That had no wound but in the throat.
            Him ſhe elects, and him doth hooke
            VVith halter, and with Iron crooke,
            And through the rockes the ruthleſſe hagge
            This miſerable corpes did dragge,
            That life muſt take, and doth it trace
            VVhereas a hollow vaulted place
            Vnder a lofty cliffe doth riſe,
            VVhere ſhe (fell Witch) doth ſacrifice.
            ¶ Here is a land not farre from hell,
                  Erycthos place of habitation.
            
            VVhere lies a deepe obſcured cell
            Sunke vnder ground, with cauernes vaſt,
            VVhoſe toppe with ſhades is ouer-caſt;
            For bowes of trees ſo enter-lace,
            That they obſcure and vaile this place,
            So as no where can mortall eye
            Diſcerne the Sunne, or glimpſe of skye;
            But deadly darkneſſe, and long night
            In this ſad Denne be-clouds all ſight,
            And but by charmes hath neuer light.
            The foggy aire within this cell,
            More lothſome is then dampes of hell.
            And this ſwarth Region on all ſides,
            
               Auernus from our world diuides.
            
               And hither the infernall King
            His ghoſts doth neuer feare to bring:
            For though this witch of Theſſaly
            
            The Fates by force can qualifie,
            Yet doubtfull is it whether ſhe
            From this place into hell can ſee:
            Or whether perſonally this fend
            Vnto the Stygian ſhades diſcend.
            A ſmokie foule rag'd weed ſhe weares
            With open face, and back-caſt haires:
            The fillets that her lockes do trace,
            She doth with vipers inter-lace.
            And when ſhe ſaw in how great feare
            Yong Pompey and his followers were,
            As men that horror did confound,
            Looking downe wiſtly to the ground.
            What now (quoth ſhe) be of good cheare,
            
               
                  Eryctho encourageth Pompey, and his men affrighted.Lay doubt aſide, and do not feare,
            For now you ſhall forthwith perceaue
            A figure new true life receaue,
            Though dread do make your ſpirits weake,
            Yet may you heare him plainly ſpeake.
            If I ſhould ſhew you Stygian lakes,
            And helles bankes breathing fiery flakes,
            And that you may the Furies ſee
            Safely, ſafe-conduited by me.
            And Cerberus with curled breaſt,
            Shaking his hideous ſnaky creſt,
            And Gyants huge, whoſe feter'd hands
            Behinde their backes, are tide in bands.
            VVhy ſtand you cowards in ſuch frights,
            To looke vpon poore trembling ſprights?
            ¶ Then ſhe doth luke-warme blood convay
            Into the body as it lay,
            And with new wounds the ſame doth gaſh,
            And clotterd gore away doth waſh.
            Then ſhe together working mings
            All vncoth births that Nature brings.
            The froth of mad dogges iawes ſhe takes,
            That feare to ſee freſh watry lakes.
            
               The Lynx his bowels laid thereon,A rabble of ſorcerous drugges.
            
            With the Hyena's ioyntleſſe bone.
            The marrow of a ſtagge new dead,
            That hath a ſerpent ſwallowed.
            And that ſame little fiſh whoſe force
            Can ſo with-hold the forward courſe
            Of any ſhip amidſt the maine,
            When all her ſailes the winde doth ſtraine.
            A Dragons eyes therewith ſhe preſt,
            And that ſtone in the Aegles neſt,
            That ratling ſounds, and heate doth catch
            Amongſt the egges that ſhe doth hatch.
            Th'Arabian Serpent that makes wing
            The poyſ'nous Viper, whoſe ſharpe ſting
            The red-ſea Cockle doth defend,
            Wherein the pretious pearle is pen'd.
            And therewithall the skinne new flead
            From the Coeraſtae but halfe dead;
            With thoſe burnt aſhes that ariſe
            Out of the Phoenix ſacrifice.
            Theſe venom'd heapes ſhe workes & frames,
            Diſtinguiſh't by their ſeuerall names.
            And leaues ſhe addes repleate with ſpelles,
            And growing hearbes, wherewith ſhe melles
            The ſpittle of her driueling iawes,
            And euery other poyſons cauſe,
            Deuiſed by her ſorcerous ſawes.
            ¶ Then with a voyce that farre exceeds
            The ſtrength of all hearbs that earth breeds,
            She calles and charmes the Gods of hell,
            And mutters firſt a confuſ'd ſpell
            Of varying ſounds, that wiſtly iarre,
            From humane language diffring farre.
            She hath the barking of a hound,
            And of a Wolfe the howling ſound.
                  Eryctho's ſundry ſorts of voyces.
            
            The hollow whooping of the Owle,
            
            The skryching of the blacke night fowle.
            The bellowing of the ſauadge beaſt,
            With hiſſing of a Snake expreſt.
            The hollow murmures of the waues,
            
               Beating againſt the cliffie caues;
            The whiſtling of the wooddy leaues,
            And thunders noiſe, the clouds that cleaues.
            So many ſounds from one voyce flye,
            The reſt her direfull charmes ſupply:
            And with her tongue ſhe frames a ſpell,
            That pierc'd downe to the depth of hell.
            ¶ Ye Deſtinies, the Stygian ſcourge,
            That torments on offenders vrge.
            
               
                  Ericthos charme.And thou Auernus gulfe profound,
            That ſwalowing canſt whole worlds confound
            And thou that all this earth doſt ſway,
            Whoſe death the heauenly powers delay,
            That thereby thou for longer times
            Maiſt be reſeru'd, to plague thy crimes.
            O Styx, and yee Elizian fields,
            That ſolace none to witches yeelds!
            And thou Perſephon that doſt loth,
            The heauens, and thy mother both.
            And Hecate our deereſt frend
            That to my tongue doſt cunning lend;
            Whereby commerce and vſe I haue
            Of ghoſts, and the infernall graue.
            Thou Porter of infernall gates,
            That doſt on bowels ſhare for cates
            VVith thy deuouring rauenous iawes;
            And you three ſiſters that forth drawes
            And cuts in two each liuing line,
            Of power to breake this worke of mine.
            And thou ô Ferry-man growne old,
            That haſt ſo long thoſe waues controld,
            Doe not theſe ſoules from me with-hold;
            But grant to me that I requeſt,
            If my petition be expreſt
            VVith wicked words ſufficiently,
            And vowes repleat with villany:
            Or if I neuer yet did charme,
            But that with bloud and bowels warme
            I firſt of all did breake my faſt,
            And bodies full to you haue caſt.
            
               And if that I the braines haue daſht
            That were bloud-warme, & then haue waſht,
            And to your Altars, heads did giue
            Of infants, that might longer liue:
            Obſerue my ſuit, that doth not craue
            A body ſmoldred in the graue,
            Or that in darkneſſe long hath beene,
            But one that late the light hath ſeene;
            And newly did his ſoule diſcharge,
            And ſcarce arriued at helles varge;
            Let him my charmes now entertaine,
            And he ſhall ſoone returne againe.
            Let this ghoſt of a Souldier late,
            Great Pompey's deſtiny relate
            To Pompey's ſonne, if in your ſight
            A ciuill warre deſerue that right.
            ¶ When ſhe her charming ſpell had ſed,
            She raiſd her frothy mouth and head:
            Wiſtly a while ſhe did behold
            The ghoſt of that ſame carkaſſe cold,
            That ſtood in feare, and great amaze
            Vpon thoſe liueleſſe limbes to gaze;
            And did that lothſome pinfold hate.The ghoſt amazed, loath to enter into the carkaſſe againe.
            
            That was her priſon but of late.
            She dreads into that breaſt to paſſe,
            That now ſo hack't and mangled was.
            And in thoſe bowels to reſide,
            Whoſe veins were cut with wounds ſo wide.
            Ah wretched Ghoſt whom deaths laſt ſtroke
            Could not exempt from lifes fraile yoke!
            
               Eryctho maruailes much, and frets,
            That Fates ſhould vſe theſe lingring lets.
            And in her wroth this dead corpes takes,
            And ſcourgeth it with liuing ſnakes.
            Then through the earth by that ſame glade
            She pries, which ſhe with charms had made.
            And barking, to the ſprights ſhe ſpeakes,
                  Eryctho enraged, threatens the infernall powers.
            
            Which noiſe Erebus ſilence breakes.
            
               Tyſiphone thou hatefull ſpright,
            And thou Megera, that ſetſt light
            
               By my requeſt, come tell me plaine,
            When this ſad ſoule you did retaine
            With you in hell, did ſhe not beare
            Your torments, and your ſcourgings there?
            By your true names I will you call,
            You Stygian hagges I will enthrall,
            And captiues hold in this worlds light,
            And follow you with all deſpight
            Through Graues, through Tombes, through Burials,
            
            And baniſh you from Funerals.
            
            And Hecate Il'e make thee knowne
            In perfect ſhape that is thine owne:
            Thou ſhalt no more thy ſelfe adorne
            With borrowed figure, ſo to ſcorne
            The Gods, with falſhood and decait,
            When thou art cal'd on them to wait.
            Thy vile pale forme I will diſplay,
            Helles lookes thou ſhalt not put away.
            And I (Proſerpina) will tell,
            That vnder earths huge weight doth dwell,
            What feaſts and iunketing you make,
            And what diſports in loue you take;
            And how you ſet your whole delight
            In dalliance with the King of night:
            Which life of thine, if Ceres kend,
            Thou neuer more to her ſhouldſt wend.
            To thee of wretches all moſt vile,
            As iudge of this, I'le ſend the while
            Bright Tytan, with his beames ſo fierce,
            That through the chinks of earth ſhal pierce,
            And all thy ſhiftings open lay,
            By ſuddaine ſending in of day.
            Will you aſſent my will to do,
            Or ſhall I him compell thereto,
            Vpon whoſe name I neuer call,
            
               Meaning Demogorgon.
               But that the earth doth quake withall?
            He that with face vncouered,
            Dares looke vpon Gorgona's head;
            And with his whippes and fell aſpect,
            Trembling Erinnis doth correct.
            
               And he that can farre better tell
            Then your owne ſelues the dens of hell.
            His manſion vnder you he takes,
            And he may ſweare by Stygian lakes.
            ¶Forthwith when ſhe had vſd her charme
            The chill blood in this corps grew warme.
            The black wounds now more fleſhly ſhowes
            And through the veins the thin blood flowes
            Strengthning withall each outward part;The dead body begins to take life.
            
            The tender ſtrings that feede the hart
            Vnder the cold breaſt gan to beate,
            As ſoone as they did feele the heate.
            The marrow that was dulled long,
            Taking freſh force was grown more ſtrong
            New life was mingled death among:
            Then pulſes all and artyres ſtrike,
            The ſinewes ſtreach and motion ſeeke.
            But now the body neuer tries
            To ſtreach his lims whereas it lies,
            With eaſie ſtrength and by degrees;
            But ſuddenly rebounding flees
            From off the ground, and ſtands vpright
            With eyes wide open to the light,
            And yawning iawes that breathed rife,
            Yet in his face was no great life.
            But rather of a deadly hue,
            Stiffe wrinckled and a pallid blew.
            He ſtoniſht was at this worlds wonder,
            His tyed tong no ſound could blunder.
            His voyce and ſpeech had but in taske,
            To anſwer what the witch did aske.
            Tell me quoth ſhe what I require,Eryctho ſpeaks to the carkaſſe
            
            And for it great ſhall be thy hire.
            If to the world we truths impart,
            The fame of our Aemonian art
            Will euer, after glory gaine,
            And our free ſawes, as ſoothes remaine:
            In ſuch a ſhrine thy lims ſhall lie,
            And in ſuch wood thy corps ſhall frie.
            And will ſo charme thy funerall,
            
               
               Erycthos reward ſhe promiſeth the carkaſſe that takes life.As that the ſpels of Magicks call:
            Thy ghoſt ſhall neuer hire at all.
            And to thy ſelfe this boone bequeaue,
            For that thou didſt new life receaue.
            That hearbs nor charms ſhall be of force,
            Thy long ſleepe euer to diuorce,
            That death receiueſt at my hand,
            None do thoſe anſwers vnderſtand
            That Oracles and Trypods tell,
            Who Fates requires from ghoſts of hell
            Shall euer in aſſurance dwell:
            He valiantly to worke doth go,
            That dire deaths Oracle would know.
            I pray thee therefore do not ſpare
            To ſhew things names right as they are.
            Deſcribe the places, and ſpeake plaine
            That I true Fates may entertaine.
            ¶ To this withall ſhe addes a ſpell,
            Whereby the ghoſt had power to tell
            What ſo of him ſhe ſought to know,
            Whilſt his ſad face teares ouerflow.
            
               The ghoſt replies to Erictho and makes his relation.Truly I had not time (quoth he)
            To marke the Fatall ſiſters three,
            How they their ſpinning twiſts did guide,
            I was cal'd from the riuer ſide,
            So ſecretly and in ſuch haſt,
            I could not know how all things paſt.
            But that which I did learne was doon
            Amongſt the ſoules where I did woon,
            Fell diſcord and outragious ſtrife,
            Amongſt the Roman ghoſt was rife.
            So as their broyles and armed riet,
            Th'infernall ſtate did much diſquiet.
            Diuers great Captains were diuided,
            About their quarrell vndecided.
            One part doth in Elyſium dwell,
            Tother in thoſe darke dens of hell.
            And both ſides readily inclin'd,
            To trie what deſtinie deſign'd.
            The bleſſed ſoules did then appeare,
            
               But ſad and mournfull in their cheare.
            The Decij both I there beheld,
            The father and his worthie child▪
            
            Braue ſpirits that did expiate
            The Tyranies from Roman ſtate.
            
               Camillus, and the Curij,
            
            There wayling ſtood with watrie eye.
            And Scylla one amongſt this rout,
            Againſt thee Fortune doth cry out.
            And Scipio there I ſaw deplore,
            That ſo the hatefull Affricke ſhore
            Their noble blood ſhould now diſtaine,
            With his owne grandchild thereon ſlaine.
            And Cato maior of renowne,
            The ancient foe to Carthage towne,
            Did here lament his Nephewes fate,
            That dy'd in ſcorne of ſeruile ſtate.
            And Brutus in his Conſuls gowne,
            That Tyranny did firſt put downe,
            We here beheld in ioyful moode,
            Amongſt bleſt ſoules whereas he ſtood.
            There Catilyne with prowd diſdaines,
            Inſults amongſt his broken chaines.
            And Marius with his bloody harmes,
            
               Cethegi with their naked armes.
            There likewiſe I the Druſians ſaw,
            That made their libertie a law,
            Reioycing in a popular loue
            And Gracchi that great things durſt proue,
            Though hampered with laſting chaines,
            Whoſe liberties hell-gates reſtraines.
            Yet clap their hands that plaudits yeelds
            Theſe wicked ghoſts craue bleſſed fields.
            Then this infernall Realmes great guide
            His ſtations did enlarge more wide.
            And therewithall he ſharpes the rocks,
            Hard adamantine chaines and locks,
            With iron links he doth prepare,The ghoſt ſpeakes to Sextus.
            
            As torments for the victors ſhare.
            But yet ô youth take now with thee
            
               This comfortable word from me,
            Expect a bleſſed reſting place
            For thy ſires ſoule and all his race.
            For in that kingdome deepe of Dis
            
            A pleaſant part reſerued is
            To entertaine great Pompeys ſpright.
            Let not the glory him delight,
            Of this ſhort lifes vncertaine date,
            The houre drawes neare, whoſe preſent fate,
            Shall theſe great captains fortunes mixe;
            In death therefore your comforts fixe.
            Go proudly and with high deſires
            Vnto your lowly funerall fiers,
            And ſpurning ſcorne thoſe haughty ſoules
            That Roman rites like Gods controules.
            For now the ſtrife is who ſhall haue
            
               Pompey on the one of them: and Caeſar on the other.On Tybris or on Nyle his graue,
            And all the warre theſe Captaines wage
            Is where ſhall be their funerall ſtage.
            ¶ But as for what concernes thy fate,
            Do not deſire I ſhould relate,
            Spare me, for though I ſilence keepe
            A Prophet of more knowledge deepe,
            Will let thee all things vnderſtand,
            And thou in the Sicilian land,
            Shalt haue it at thy fathers hand.
            Whoſe mind as yet I do not know,
            Whither he meanes that thou ſhalt go;
            Or from what place thou ſhouldſt refraine,
            Or what vnluckie coaſts diſdaine.
            Or in which part of this worlds clime
            Thou ſhouldſt abide and ſpend thy time.
            But hapleſſe ye, Europe forbeare,
            
               Affricke and Aſia, likewiſe feare,
            Fortune your tombes will there diuide,
            Where earſt triumphant you did ride.
            O wretched houſe! the world you yeelds,
            Nought ſafer then Pharſalias fields.
            Thus hauing his relation told,
            With mornefull lookes did ſilence hold.
            
               And death was his deſired meede,
            But Magicks charmes thereto would neede,
            And hearbes to make the carkaſſe fall;
            For Fates could not againe recall
            The ſoule that once at large did rome,
            By lawes expir'd of Stygian doome.
            Then did Erictho frame withallEryctho burnes the carkaſſe.
            
            A pile of wood for funerall,
            Thus to the fire the bodie went
            Which kindled, was laid downe and brent.
            Where when Erictho ſaw him lie,
            She left him in that place to die.
            And ſo along with Sextus went,
            To viſite Pompey at his Tent.
            But now the mornings dawne drew neare,
            So that the dayes peepe did appeare.
            Therefore that they might ſecret paſſe
            To Pompey where he camped was,
            She did inchant the ſcowling night,
            With ſable vailes to clowd the light.
            Finis Libri Sexti.
         
         
            
            Lucans Pharſalia. The ſeuenth Booke.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               THis doth great Pompeys dreame relate,
               And wailes withall hi hapleſſe Fate.
               His eager troopes would battell haue;
               
                  Tully the ſame doth likewiſe craue
               With filed ſpeech, to giue content,
               
                  Pompey (though loath) yeelds his conſent.
               Prodigious ſignes appeare in ſight:
               Both Armies in point to fight.
               The Chieftains with couragious words,
               Inuite the ſouldiers to their ſwords.
               The battels ioyne, and Pompeys hoaſt
               Is ouerthrowne, his Campe is loſt.
               To ſaue himſelfe away he flies;
               
                  Caeſar a victors Fortune tries.
               The ſpoyles he freely doth beſtow.
               
                  Pharſalias field with blood doth flow.
            
            
               
                  MOre ſlow then euer was his guiſe
               
                  Tytan did from Aurora riſe,
               And contrary to Natures will,
               Clymes heauily the Eaſterne hill.
               
                  He neuer more vnwillingly
               Did driue his Teeme againſt the skie:
               And laſily hung dragging backe.
               Though fiercely rapt with ſweeping racke;
               So prone he was to ſhew defect,
               Vnder Ecclips his bright aſpect
               Doth labour now, and blacke clouds breeds
               Not ſuch as fed his flaming ſteeds.
               And all this was but to delay
               From Theſſaly the light of day.
               But now Boötes with his cart,
               Drawes on darke night, the lateſt part
               Of woefull Pompeys happy life;
               Whom pleaſing dreames ſo free from ſtrife
               Did entertaine, and fained ſhowes
               His troubled thoughts did interpoſe.
               It ſeemed in this dreaming fit,
               That he with ſtately pompe did fit,Pompeys dreame.
               
               In that Theatre he did frame
               At Rome, which carryed Pompeys name.
               Thither the Romane people thrung
               In multitudes, whoſe voices rung
               With ioyfull ſhouts vnto the ſtarres,
               To ſee him ſafe return'd from warres.
               And more to ſhew how they reioyce,
               They clapt their hāds with thundring noyce
               Euen ſuch applauding ſhouts they raiſe,
               As they did in his youthfull daies;
               And with ſuch fawning him beheld,
               As when he had Sertorious queld,
               That fugitiue, in armes ſo fierce;
               And when he did with conqueſt pierce
               The weſtermoſt Iberian pride,
               And did for it in triumph ride.
               Then being but a youthfull knight,
               Attired in a robe ſun-bright,
               And in a lofty Charriot plac't,
               Whom with applauſe the Senate grac't.
               Now whether that this did portend
               Of all his happineſſe the end,
               
                  And as a laſt retraite of ioy
               Did but preſage future annoy;
               Or that this ſound reuealing ſleepe
               That doth our thoughts in fancies ſteepe,
               Did with accuſtom'd ambages,
               Expreſſe his fate by contraries.
               All turn'd to Pompeys miſeries.
               Or that Romes fortune did bequeaue
               To him this ſight for her laſt leaue;
               Knowing that he ſhould neuer more
               Set footing on his natiue ſhore.
               Ye that the Camping watches keepe,
               Do not breake off this pleaſant ſleepe,
               Let not the ſound of trumpets charmes,
               Pierce through his eares with wars alarmes
               The next night ſhe ſhall haue dire reſt,
               And ſad ſights ſhall his ſoule inueſt.
               On both ſides armed hoaſts ſhall meete,
               And raging warre each other greete.
               Whence then could ſouldiers free frō care
               Such ſound ſleeps, and ſuch ſweet reſt ſhare
               O happy would that day haue beene
               If thy Rome ſo could thee haue ſeene.
               O Pompey would the Gods of heauen
               That one deſired day had giuen
               Vnto thy country, and to thee,
               Of eithers fate aſſur'd to bee!
               Whereby you mutuallie might proue
               The lateſt fruits of your deare loue.
               
                  The euent of warre is doubtfull.Thou Pompey to the warres didſt wend,
               As though thy daies in Rome ſhould end.
               And Rome, that knew her conſcience cleare,
               (Tender of thee, to her vowes deare)
               Did neuer thinke that foule offence
               Had with the Fates hung in ſuſpence,
               That Rome ſhould not the fortune haue
               To giue her Pompeys bones their graue.
               For then would youths, and aged ſires,
               Vnbidden boyes with ſelfe deſires,
               Haue mingled howling plaints with teares,
               
                  The Matrones with diſheueled haires,
               And virgins would their breſts haue torne;
               Euen as the people then did mourne,That Brutus that did put downe the tyranny of the Tarquins.
               
               When Brutus was laid in his vrne.
               And now although they feare the hand
               Of him, that doth the victor ſtand,
               Though Caeſars ſelfe ſhould firſt relate
               The newes of Pompeys wretched fate,
               Yet would they not forbeare to mourne,
               Whilſt Caeſar were in triumph borne;
               And that the incenſe burning were,
               And that to Ioue they Bayes did beare.
               O wretched Citizens that hate
               The plaints of your owne greeued Fate!
               Becauſe all could not with one haile
               In full Theatre him bewaile.
               ¶ Now Heſprus wiih his dauning day
               Had baniſht the nights lamps away,
               When in the Tents through all the rout
               A ſecret murmuring burſt out,
               Where fate had drawne the world together
               The wretched people trooping thither
               To Pompeys tent,Pompeys army importune their Generall to ioyn battell with Caeſar. with furie driuen
               Would haue the ſigne of battell giuen;
               The moſt not like to ſee next euen.
               And with huge cries the houres they haſt,
               Of their neare deaths that drew on faſt.
               Such direfull ſudden rage them bends,
               Headlong to runne vnto their ends.
               
                  Pompey is ſlow and coward cal'd,
               And vnto Caeſar too much thral'd.
               And that he kingdome did affect,
               And would the world to him ſubiect.
               Who ſeeing now that he could draw
               So many nations to his law,
               Would ſtill his glorious powre maintaine,
               And therefore did all peace diſdaine.
               The Kings and Nations of the Eaſt,
               Complain'd the warre was turn'd to ieaſt;
               And ſo protracted to their wrong,
               
                  Who from their homes were held ſo long.
               O heauenly powres ſuch is your wills,
               When you deſigne ought to our ills!
               And all with vs ſhall go awry,
               The blame on our owne faults muſt lie.
               To miſchiefe headlong run they all,
               For diſmall fight they cry and call.
               In Pompeys campe Pharſalias fate,
               Is vow'd to trie this dire debate.
               Then Tullius that patron great
               Of Roman eloquence; muſt treate
               In all their names; he that of yore,
               In his long robe did Rome reſtore
               To ſetled peace; and to the law
               Brought dreadfull Catiline in awe.
               But then did he the warres deteſt.
               Onely with him was in requeſt
               The Forum, and the Roſtrum ſeate,
               Long ſilenced with martiall heate.
               His eloquence no grace doth adde
               Vnto a cauſe in it ſelfe badde.
               
                  Ciceroes oration to Pompey for the giuing of battell to Caeſar.¶ O Pompey, for her fauours great,
               At thy hands Fortune doth intreate,
               That thou to her thy truſt commend.
               The nobles that thy Campe attend,
               And all theſe kings, thy conſtant friends,
               That to thy aide their forces lends,
               Do now beſeech thee to agree
               That Caeſar may ſubdued be.
               Shall he ſo long haue meanes to finde
               A bloody warre with all mankinde?
               The nations that thy ſelfe hath wonne,
               And didſt ſo quickly ouerrun,
               VVill Pompeys glory diſauow,
               That is ſo ſlow in conqueſt now.
               VVhither is thy braue courage fled,
               Vngratefull doſt thou ſtand in dread,
               That heauen hath thee abandoned?
               Or with the Gods dar'ſt thou not truſt
               The Senate, and thy cauſe ſo iuſt?
               
                  Thy Hoaſt their enſignes will diſplay
               And giue the foe a bloudy day:
               Vnto thy glory 'twere a taint
               That thou ſhouldſt vanquiſh by conſtraint:
               Since thou by vs appointed art
               The Chiefetaine, and for vs doſt Mart.
               Let it bee lawfull for our Hoſt
               To warre when we affect it moſt.
               Why doſt thou ſo by force hold backe
               The whole worlds Armes frō 
                  Caeſars wrack?
               The darts do brandle in their hands,
               And all the troopes impatient ſtands
               Whilſt Enſignes do draw out the bands.
               Haſt therefore now thy Armes to take,Hee vrgeth Pompey either to profeſſe himſelfe a tyrant, or giue way to the Senate.
               
               Leſt thine owne Trumpets thee forſake.
               The Senate craues to know of thee
               Whether that they thy Souldiers bee:
               Or whether they do in this Mart
               As thy compeeres retaine their part.
               Sighing the Cheifetaine ſorrow ſhowes,
               Hee found the Gods became his foes,
               And Fate did his entents oppoſe.
               ¶ If ſuch, quoth hee, bee your deſires,
               And that this time rather requires
               Huge troopes, and many an armed band,
                     Pompeys anſwere, and reaſons to the cō
                     trary.
               
               Then ſuch a leader as will ſtand
               Vpon aduantage, when hee may,
               I neuer will your fates delay.
               Let all to ruin head-long goe,
               By Fortunes hand at one dire blow.
               And let this day the laſt light bee
               That moſt of vs ſhall euer ſee.
               But Rome I thee to witneſſe call,
               That Pompey cannot do with all,
               The time to him appointed was
               Wherein all ſhould to miſchiefe paſſe.
               This war might well haue ben made good,
               Without a blow, or loſſe of bloud
               
                  Caeſar might haue beene captiued,
               Without a battell hazarded,
               
                  And wonted peace recouered.
               What wicked rage (ô yee moſt blinde)
               Makes you to be of this ſtrange minde?
               That ſince you ciuill armes do beare,
               Is victory to you a feare,
               Except you rauing wound and teare?
               Our foes haue now but little ſcope,
               And are bereft all marine hope.
               We haue compel'd the hungry bands
               To eate the greene corne of the lands.
               And they haue often wiſht withall,
               That they vpon our ſwords might fall.
               Rather then this to ſtarue and wither,
               So we and they might fall together.
               
                  That warre is neare brought to his laſt,
               
               
                  And al' the difficulty paſt.
               
               
                  When to auoyde a greater fright,
               
               
                  New ſouldiers ſhall deſire to fight.
               
               
                  And with the ſpurre of valours ſhowes,
               
               
                  And kindled furie couet blowes,
               
               
                  For feare of future worſer harmes,
               
               
                  The minds of many ſo much charmes.
               
               
                  That to preuent what they ſuſpect,
               
               
                  All preſent hazards they neglect.
               
               
                  But truly valiant is that man,
               
               
                  That with a ſetled patience can,
               
               
                  Approaching perils ſo reſiſt,
               
               
                  As to defer them at his liſt.
               
               Muſt I leaue ſuch ſecuritie
               To Fortunes mutabilitie?
               The whole worlds hap muſt we afford,
               Vnto the hazard of the ſword?
               You rather I ſhould hazard fight
               Then conquer foes by martiall ſlight,
               Fortune committed to my cares
               The gouernment of Romes affaires,
               And I deliuer to her charge
               The ſame againe with powre more large,
               Let her as well now play her part,
               And guard them ſafe in blinded Mart.
               
                  For in this courſe all praiſe or blame
               
                  Pompey for his part doth diſclaime.
               O Caeſar! with the powers diuine
               Thy prayers more preuaile then mine.
               Fight when you pleaſe, and fall to Armes;
               But yet how many wicked harmes,
               How great and many peoples wrackes
               Will this next day bring on our backes?
               How many Kings will ſhed their blood?
               And how will Enipheus flood
               Her Chryſtall ſtreames pollute and ſtaine
               With purple gore of Romans ſlaine?
               But firſt I wiſh the hoſtile lance
               Of bloudy warre, with deaths miſchance,
               Might pierce this wretched head of mine,
               If that my fate might bring to fine
               Theſe ruines, and with it divart
               All miſchiefes from my Countries part▪
               
               The conqueſt if we do obtaine,
               Cannot to Pompey's fame adde gaine.
               If victory for vs do ſtand
               By ſlaughter, and by bloudy hand,
               The peoples hearts it will agriſe,
               And odiouſly my name miſpriſe.
               Or if that Pompey looſe the game,
               
                  Pompey will be a wretched name.
               All miſeries the conquer'd finde,
               But blame and mallice ſtil's aſſign'd
               Vnto the victor as his ſhare,
               That acts the warres laſt wofull chare.
               So hauing ſaid, he did giue way
               To Armes, and Souldiers raging ſway:
               As doth a Pilot ſore diſtreſt
               VVith a ſtrong tempeſt, blowne by weſt;That a multitude left to their owne will, are like a ſhip without a Pilot.
               
               Leauing the helme, and leauing Art,
               Doth to the ſtorme all rule impart;
               VVhereby the ſhip doth heaue and ſet,
               Drawne with the fury of the fret.
               Now in confuſion doth this Campe
               VVith fearefull tumults raue and rampe,
               
                  
                  The Souldiers feare.Their minds with horrid thoughts oppreſt,
               Vnconſtant moods boyle in their breaſt.
               Many with pallid lookes bewray
               Of deaths approch the diſmall day,
               And in their faces doe relate
               A count'nance ſuiting to their fate:
               And that the houre drew on with ſpeed,
               When humane chance ſhould be decreed.
               And in what tearms Romes ſtate ſhould ſtand,
               Muſt in this battaile now be ſcan'd.
               No man his perils deemes aright,
               But greater doubts doe them affright.
               For who is hee that ſees the maine
               With ſurges ſwallow vp the plaine,
               The higheſt mountaines ouerflowne
               With billowes from the Ocean blowne,
               The skies and Phoebus blazing crowne
               Vnto the earth come tumbling downe,
               In ſuch a publicke wracke each where
               Would of his priuate ſtand in feare?
               No man had leaſure now to dread
               The harmes that hanged ore his head,
               
                  Romes deſtiny, and Pompeys fall,
               Was it that did diſtract them all.
               
                  
                     Pompeys Soulers fit their Armes.¶ Vnto their ſwords they put no truſt,
               Except new ground and ſcour'd from ruſt;
               Their darts are ſharpned at the end,
               With ſtronger ſtrings their bowes they bend.
               Their quiuers alſo ſtored full
               With choyceſt ſhafts that they could cull.
               The rowels of the horſe-mens ſpurre
               Enlarg'd, to make his courſer ſturre.
               If it were lawfull to compare
               Mans labours with the ſupreame care,
               So Mars did grinde his fauchion
               Vpon the rough Cycilian ſtone;
               When the Phlegrean Gyants fierce
               Did make attempt the skies to pierce.
               So Neptune his three-forked mace
               With fiery temper did enchaſe,
               
                  And Paean ſo new ſteel'd againe
               His ſhafts, when he had Python ſlaine.
               So Pallas furbuſht vp her Targe
               VVith Gorgons head, and lockes at large.
               And ſo to chaſtiſe thoſe reuolts,
               
                  Vulcan then chang'd Ioues thunder-bolts.
               ¶ Nature did not that time refraineMany prodigious ſignes ſeemed to preſage miſ-fortune to Pompey.
                  
               
               By many ſignes to ſhew moſt plaine
               The fearefull accidents at hand,
               The skies the armed troopes withſtand,
               Marching to the Pharſalian land.
               The tearing clouds with thunder-claps
               The Souldiers on their faces raps;
               Contrary flames, and pillars bright
               Of ſcorching fire, did them affright.
               
                  Typhons commixt with ſparkling beames,
                     Typhon a kinde of fiery Meteor.
               
               That did affect the water ſtreames,
               Brake out withall; and lightning flaſhes
               Dazled their eyes with findging daſhes;
               From off their helmes it ſtrake the creſts,
               And from the blades the hilts it wreſts:
               It alſo melts the headed Pile,
               The ſulfrie aire ruſts murdring ſteele.
               The ſwarming bees in cluſtred flights,
               By heapes vpon their Enſignes lights;
               So as the Enſigne-bearers might
               Could not from ground raiſe them vpright,
               The weight thereof was growne ſo dead,
               It made them bow both backe and head.
               Their publique Standards in a ſwet,
               And Roman Aegles weeping wet,
               VVhilſt forward to the field they ſet.
               The Bull brought for the ſacrifice,
               VVith fury from the Altar flies;
               And running head-long, himſelfe caſt
               Into Emathias field at laſt.
               So as no offring could be found
               To expiate that luckleſſe ground.
               ¶ But what malignant Deities,
               
               And Furies of impieties
               
                  O Caeſar haſt thou cal'd vpon?
               What power of Stygian Region?
               What wicked damn'd infernall ſprights,
               That range about in gloomy nights,
               Hath ſtir'd thee vp, and whet thy rage
               This odious wicked warre to wage?
               But now this doubt againe doth riſe,
               Whether that feare abuſ'd their eyes,
               Or that theſe monſtrous viſions ſeene,
               Of Gods the Reuelations beene:
               For many thought they did behold
               How Pindus to Olympus rold,
               And that mount Aemus that ſame houre
               A gaping velley did deuoure.
               And that throughout Pharſalia's ground
               Strange howlings did by night reſound.
               That ſtreames of bloud by Oſſa's hill
               Did to Boebeida's lake diſtill.
               That they beheld in darke ſhades vail'd,
               How men with force their foes aſſail'd.
               The day pale dimneſſe ouer-whelmes,
               Darke ſhades likewiſe incloud their helmes,
               Their parents buried ghoſts did riſe,
               And fluttring doe accoſt their eyes:
               But this one comfort did remaine
               To eaſe them in perplexed paine,
               
                  Theſe prodigious ſignes did encourage thoſe that were bloudy minded.That thoſe who with a guilty minde,
               Did hope the wicked meanes to finde,
               Their aged fathers throats to cut,
               And in their brothers blood to glut;
               Reioyced at the monſtrous ſights
               That with ſuch horror maz'd mens ſprights:
               And hop't theſe ſuddaine furies rage,
               Did vnto them ſucceſſe preſage.
               But why ſhould it ſeeme ſtrange at all,
               That thoſe for whom death now did call,
               Should changes feele as life growes ſlacke,
               And trembling fits of natures wracke?
               If to the minde of man be giuen
               Knowledge of future things to ſteeuen,
               
                  The gueſt that wonnes in Tyrian Gades,
               
               The Roman that Armenia trades:
               And thoſe that vnder any clime
               Of all the world liu'd at that time
               Did grieue, and yet wiſt no cauſe why,
               And tooke their griefes offenſiuely;
               But little knew what they ſhould loſe
               At theſe Emathian fatall blowes.
               ¶ If old Records we credit may,
               Vpon Euganeo's hill they ſay,
               An Augure ſitting neere thoſe ſtreames
               Where Aponus breath-reeking ſteames
               Do riſe, and ſpread their ſprings abrode,
               And in Timavas flood vnlode,
               Where was Antenors firſt abode.
               Now comes (this Augure then did ſay)
               A great and lamentable day,An Augure ſitting on Mount Euganeo, foreſaw the battell of Pharſalia, and that Caeſar ſhould ouercome Pompey.
                  
               
               The mighteſt things of humane ſtate,
               Are like forth-with to haue their date;
               
                  Pompeys and Caeſars wicked Armes
               Will now ruſh on to ciuill harmes.
               But whether that the thunders rage,
               And Ioues dire darts did thus preſage:
               Or that the gazing on the skies,
               The heauens diſcordant humor ſpies;
               Or that the ſad duskt firmament
               Did note to him this daies euent
               By dimneſſe of th'eclipſed ſunne,
               That was with darkneſſe ouer-runne.
               Nature in this dayes forme expreſt
               Such difference from all the reſt,
               As that if men did vnderſtand
               (As did this Augure) to haue ſcan'd
               And well obſeru'd the nouell change
               Of heauenly ſignes, how they did range,
               Then all the world might plaine haue ſeene
               (As well as hee) Pharſalia's teene.
               O worthy wights by Fate reſeru'd,
               Of all the world to be obſeru'd,
               Whoſe deſtinies to bring to end
               
                  The whole heauens leaſure did intend!
               If after ages heare the ſame,
               And to our Nephewes come their fame;
               Or if to men of great eſtate
               Our labours care Time ſhall relate,
               So as their mindes it recreate;
               
                  A pretty conceit of the Authors for thoſe that ſhall read his booke.When as theſe ciuill warres they read,
               It will provoke both hope and dread,
               And draw ſuch wiſhes from their thought
               As ſhall be loſt, and profite nought.
               For reading, they will be diſtracted,
               As though theſe were not matters acted;
               But as if they were ſtrifes depending,
               Whoſe Fates as yet had not their ending,
               And all that while wiſh from their heart
               The beſt ſucceſſe to Pompeys part.
               ¶ As ſoone as Pompey's armed bands
               March't towards the Pharſalian lands,
               The ſhining Sunne-beames bright aſpect
               Againſt their armours did reflect;
               So as the valleyes and the hilles
               All round about with light it filles.
               
                  The order of Pompeys ArmyThey did not raſhly take the field,
               The hapleſſe Army order held;
               
                  
                     Lentulus had the left wing.And Lentulus had for his part
               The ordring of the left wings Mart,
               And thoſe two Legions therewithall
               That of the Campe was principall,
               The firſt and fourth they did them call.
               
                  
                     Domitius had the right wingAnd vnto thee Domitius ſtout,
               Was giuen in charge the right wings rout;
               All-be-it with vnlucky hand
               Thou for thy Countries cauſe didſt ſtand.
               The middle battaile ſtrong compact,
               With thick rang'd troops that were extract
               
                  
                     Scipio had the middle.Out of the Cilician hoaſt,
               That came with Scipio from that coaſt:
               Who heere held but a Souldiers place,
               Though Affrick after did him grace
               As chiefe Commander in the field,
               
                  The mountaine Capadocians held,
               Their Cohorts rang'd in ordred rankes
               On Enipheus riuers bankes;How the re
                        •
                     t of Pompeys aids were beſtowed.
               
               And with them all alongſt that flood
               That Pontus large-rain'd horſe-men ſtood:
               In moſt of all the drier lands
               The Kings and Tetrarchs Army ſtands;
               And with them all the Princely ſwarmes,
               And Tyrants with their troopes of Armes,
               That to the Romans homage ought,
               And now in Latiums quarrell fought.
               There likewiſe the Numidians meet,
               And thoſe Cydonians ſent from Creet;
               The Archers from Iturea preſt,
               There mingled ſtood amongſt the reſt.
               And valiant Gaules were there to ſhow
               Their mallice to their ancient foe.
               The Spaniards with their narrow ſhields,
               Did range their troopes amidſt thoſe fields.
               O Deſtiny now take away
               Theſe Nations from the victors pray;
               And when great Pompey is laid low,
               Conſume all triumphes at that blow!
               ¶ This day (as it fell out by chance)
               
                  Caeſar his Enſignes did aduance,
               And left his ſtation in the morne,
                     Caeſar ſending his Troopes in the morning to gather corn, diſcouers Pompeys Army marching in battaile.
               
               Ranging the coaſt to gather corne
               With all his troopes; when ſuddainly
               He ſaw the armed enemy
               Marching alongſt the Champian plaine,
               As he would battaile entertaine.
               The time he now ſees offred faire
               For which he had made many a praire;
               Whereby he might (at once for all)
               Vnto an end this quarrell call.
               He mourn'd theſe long delayes to bide
               Rauiſht with loue of Regall pride:
               And ciuill warres began to hate,
               As too ſlow drawing to their date;
               Becauſe he had this little time
               
                  Beene held off from this bloudy crime.
               For now he plainly did deſcry
               The hazards of them both drew nye;
               And ſaw the ruine of their ſtates
               Muſt be committed vnto Fates.
               His fury now did ready ſtand
               His conquering Armes to take in hand;
               He no whit faints, nor makes a doubt
               Which way the world would turne about:
               His daring minde told him no leſſe,
               But that he ſhould haue good ſucceſſe.
               
                  His Fate to dread affoords no ſcope,
               
               
                  Nor Pompeys nouriſht any hope.
               
               Feare laid aſide, with manly words
               He ſtirres his troopes to truſt their ſwords.
               
                  
                     Caeſars oration to his Souldiers before the battaile of Pharſalia.
                  ¶ Braue Souldiers that the world do tame,
               The fortune of my riſing fame,
               Behold that long-deſired ſight
               To yeeld you meanes to come to fight:
               For that day need you wiſh no more,
               With your owne Armes your fates explore,
               It now doth reſt vpon your hands,
               In what tearmes Caeſars fortune ſtands.
               This is the day I call to minde
               That you to me your faiths combin'd;
               In truſt whereof we Armes put on,
               And marched ouer Rubicon:
               In hope that by your martiall might
               We ſhould obtaine our Triumphes right,
               With-held from vs with ſuch deſpight.
               This is that day whoſe ended broyles
               Shall fully recompence your toyles;
               And ſhall againe your ſtates reſtore,
               And you eſtabliſh as before
               Free Citizens, by force of Mart
               This day ſhall witneſſe whether part
               By Fates iuſt doome, had beſt pretence
               To take vp Armes for rights defence.
               This battaile now will him conclude
               As heynous moſt that is ſubdu'd.
               
                  If for my ſake you did deſire
               To yeeld me right by ſword and fire,
               Now valiantly performe the ſame,
               Let conqueſt free your Armes from blame.
               No martiall hand can guiltleſſe goe,
               That ſhall be cenſur'd by the foe.
               'Tis not my Priuate that I ſeeke,
               But all your liberties a like;
               And that you may dominion beare
               Ouer all Nations farre and neare:
               For I affect a private life,
               Free from tempeſtious cares and ſtrife.
               And as a Burger of Romes Towne,
               Clad in a meane Plebeian gowne;
               I nothing will refuſe to bee
               So your aduancements I may ſee,
               Rule all and raigne in ſcorne of me.
               Much bloud you ſhall not need to ſpend
               For that great hope that yee attend:
               The Grecian youths that vs oppoſe,
               Out of the Fencing-ſchooles they choſe:
               And many from their fields of games,
               Slow wraſtlers whom no Mart enflames;
               But ſuch as neuer yet bore Armes,
               Mixt barbrouſly with diffring ſwarmes;
               Such as when troopes to fighting falles,
               And Trumpets ſounds to battaile calles,
               Will be afraid of their owne cry;
               Few hands this ciuill warre will trye.
               The world will ſoone be rid of moſt
               Of all that rabble in their hoſt:
               They will but peſter and encumber
               Our Roman foes with ill-rang'd number.
               Pierce through theſe men that are vntrain'd,
               And kingdomes that ſuch fame retain'd:
               And when your ſwords ſhal firſt them greet,
               Throw downe their glory at your feet;
               And by your valour make it plaine,
               That thoſe that in his boaſting vaine,
               
                  Pompey before his Chariots lead,
               
                  (As mighty Nations vanquiſhed)
               So gloriouſly through ſtreets of Rome,
               
               Do not deſerue one Triumphes doome.
               Thinke you that any friendly loue
               To warres, did theſe Armenians moue?
               As though that they tooke any care
               Of Romes eſtate, or her well-fare;
               Or any thoſe Barbarian Kings
               That to theſe warres their forces brings,
               Would now for Pompeys Latium good
               Be at the coſt of too much blood?
               Oh no, they hate vs Romanes all,
               And chiefly thoſe that made them thrall.
               
                  Fortune, that neuer me deceau'd,
               To my friends hands hath me bequeau'd,
               To thoſe with me that witneſſe are
               Of many fights in Gallicke warre.
               What Souldiers ſword doe I not know,
               What trembling dart can any throw,
               But whilſt that through the aire it flew,
               I ſoone could tell whoſe arme it threw?
               So as ſince that I you behold
               Your Captaine that led you of old,
               And thoſe braue Enſignes by you borne
               That neuer yet receiued skorne,
               Your manly lookes with courage fraught,
               Your threatning eyes that terror brought,
               The day is yours, and now me ſeemes
               With bloudy gore that riuers ſteemes;
               Their Kings vpon the earth are ſpurn'd,
               The Senators lye toſt and turn'd:
               The leaders and the Souldiers ſlaine
               In ſlaughtred troopes vpon the plaine;
               But now I do my Fates delay
               Your armed hands with words to ſtay,
               Giue warres approch his owne full ſway.
               My heart is ouer-ioy'd with hope,
               Neuer ſaw I like Fortunes ſcope
               So neere my reach; neuer before
               The Gods to me ſuch bounties ſtore
               
                  Did ſeeme to giue,
                     Caeſar doth promiſe himſelfe victory. a little ground
               Doth vs from our great wiſhes bound:
               This battaile fought I am the man
               That onely by my fauour can
               Freely beſtow the treaſur'd gold
               That Kings and many people hold.
               O heauens, what planets influence,
               What ſtarre this motion did commence,
               That now on this Pharſalian land
               So great a queſtion ſhould be ſcand!
               This day there is for me prepar'd
               Either great paines, or great reward
               Thinke but on Caeſars tortur'd ſtate,
               The chaines that ſhall him captiuate,
               His head vpon the Roſtrum plac't,
               His members rack't, torne and defac't;
               And you your ſelues will finde like feaſts,
               In pinfolds pent, ſlaughtred as beaſts,
               Since he with whom we warres maintaine,
               A Captaine is of Sylla's traine:
               Therefore regard your owne eſtates,
               For me I will preuent ſuch Fates
               
               By vertue of my dreadleſſe hand,
               That at their mercy skornes to ſtand:
                     Caeſars reſolution.
               
               For he that this day ſhall not ſee
               Vs victors of our foes to be,
               Shall ſee this ſword of mine diuorſe
               My breathing ſpirit from my Corſe.
               Yee Gods that from the heauens hye
               Vouchſafe to bend your carefull eye
               Vnto this baſe inferior ſoyle,
                     Caeſars pious requeſt to the Gods.
               
               To looke vpon the Roman toyle.
               Let him the victory obtaine
               That ſhall from cruelty refraine;
               And will not deeme it but offence,
               Except in pitty he diſpence
               To take away the liues of thoſe
               Whom he ſubdues, although his foes.
               Though Pompey in his cruell mood
               Did glut his ſword with Roman blood,
               
                  When he our troopes at vantage tooke,
               Pent vp within a narrow nooke,
               Who out of valor choſe to dye
               
                  
                     Caeſars mercifull charge to his ſouldiers going to the battaile.Rather then from their ſtation flye.
               But my braue youths I you intreate
               Shew no ſuch rigor in your heate.
               Kill not a man that ſhunnes your eyes,
               Deeme him a Citizen that flies;
               But whilſt their weapons they doe vſe,
               Let not fond pittie you abuſe:
               Nor be then mou'd vnto remorſe,
               But flat reſiſt your parents force;
               Yea on their faces turne your ſwords,
               Whom reuerent yeares gray hairs affoords:
               If any ſhould his kinſman finde,
               And in his breaſt his ſword hath ſhrin'd;
               Or elſe ſo deere a friend ſhall wound,
               To whom for fauours he ſtands bound,
               Whilſt they againſt you ſhew their might,
               Account your ſelfe from guilt acquite,
               As free as if he were a foe,
               That you before did neuer know.
               And now throw downe your Trenches wall,
               And fill the ditches therewithall,
               Whereby imbattail'd as it ſtands,
               The Army may march with full bands,
               And runne not out at little coopes,
               Diſperſed into petty troopes:
               Your owne pauillions do not ſpare,
               For to that Campe wee marching are
               From whence that Army doth diſcend,
               Whereof we ſoone ſhall make an end.
               Scarcely had Caeſar ſpoken all,
               
                  
                     Caeſars troopes ſally diſorderly out of their campe to the battaile.But each one to his charge did fall,
               And ſuddainly they all did Arme
               Throughout the campe, and took the larme.
               Downe went the Trench and Tents in haſte,
               The troopes are not in order plac't.
               According to their Chiefetaines Art,
               To Fates they doe commit this Mart.
               
                  But if they all had Caeſars bin,
               And ſuch as did affect to win
               The Roman Empire as their owne,
               By martiall art and valour ſhowne;
               They would not then haue headlong preſt
               To fight a Battaile for their reſt.
               ¶ When Pompey ſaw his foes draw out,
               Bending to him with all their rout,
               And that the warre would no delay,
               But that the Gods deſign'd this day.
               He ſtood amaz'd, his heart grew cold,
               The which in Armes miſhap foretold,
               That feare ſhould ſuch a captaine thrall;
               Like dread did his whole hoſt appall.
               Then he a loftie horſe beſtrides,
               And through his troops and cohorts rides,
                     Pompeys oratiō to his ſoldiers before the battaile.
               
               The day (quoth he) that your braue ſprights
               Preſt on to end all lingring fights,
               Is now at hand, therefore expoſe
               Your vtmoſt force againſt your foes.
               This is the vpſhot now for all,
               One houre will vs together call.
               He that his countries cauſe reſpects,
               Or his deare houſhold Gods affects;
               He that his children and his wife,
               And all deare pledges of his life,
               Doth ſeeke to haue and hold againe,
               Muſt with his ſword the ſame obtaine.
               For all is now by God prouided
               In this one field to be decided.
               And we muſt hope, that haue the right,
               The heauenly powers for vs will fight;
               They ſo will guide our weapons fierce,
               That they ſhall Caeſars bowels pierce;
               It is their wills that with his blood,
               
                  Romes ſacred lawes ſhould be made good.
               Had they deſign'd to Caeſars fate
               The world and all the Romane ſtate,
               By Deſtinies and their decree,
               My elder yeares might ſhortned be.
               
                  But ſince the Gods by their high doome,
               Both of the people and of Rome,
               
               Haue Pompey plac't as leader chiefe,
               Tis no ſigne of their wroth or griefe.
               All means that may bring victorie,
               We haue prouided ſeriouſly.
               And many a Prince and noble Lord,
               Our fortunes run with free accord.
               The ancient bands of martiall wights,
               With graue aduice on our part fights.
               And if vnto our later yeares,
               Fate had reſeru'd thoſe worthy peares,
               The Curij, and Camilli ſtout,
               The Decij that did make no doubt
               Freely to ſacrifice their blood,
               Thereby to gaine their Countrie good,
               All theſe on our ſide would haue ſtood.
               The nations that are farheſt Eaſt
               Vnto this ſeruice now are preſt.
               And many cities of account,
               So as our forces do ſurmount
               All other armed troopes by farre,
               That euer yet attempted warre:
               The whole worlds ſtrength at once we haue
               The ſouldiers and the leaders braue,
               That both the Tropicks do containe
               From Southerne pole to Northerne waine.
               We able are (our wings ſtretcht out)
               To cloſe our enemies about.
               Few hands to conquer will ſuffiſe,
               Our troops will dant them with their cries.
               
                  Caeſar with his bare feeble hoſt
               To fight with vs can be but loſt.
               Thinke that vpon Romes walls there ſtands,
               With dangling locks, and caſt vp hands,
               The Roman Matrones in your ſight,
               Calling on you brauely to fight.
               And thinke the Senate, thoſe graue Peeres
               Vnfit for Mart through aged yeeres,
               Following our Campe, do at your feete
               
                  Proſtrate their ſiluer haires with greete▪
               
               And that Romes ſelfe you do encounter,
               Fearing a Tyrant ſhould ſurmount her.
               Thinke that the Romanes of theſe dayes,
               And thoſe that future times ſhall raiſe,
               With one voyce altogether praiſe,
               In freedome to receiue their birth,
               And ſo returne vnto the earth.
               And after theſe ſo deare reſpects,
               If Pompey might mone your affects,
               He and his children, and his ſpouſe
               Would at your feete caſt ſelfe ſame vowes▪
               
               If lawfull twere reſerued free,
               The Empires ſacred maieſtie.
               And leſt we conquer them in fight,
               
                  Pompey is but a baniſht wight.
               And but his father-inlawes baſe ſcorne,
               And to your ſhame a man forlorne.
               My elder yeares I now ſhould nate,
               And longer loath to draw my date,
               To bring hoare haires to ſeruile ſtate.
               The heauie words their captaine vſde
               Hath all their minds with rage enfuſde
               The Romane valour it doth moue
               Rather a preſent death to proue,
               Then thoſe ſuſpects ſhould true be found
               That in his ſpeech he did propound.
               Then both the armies ruſht together,
               With equall furie ſhew'd by either.
               Feare doth one ſide to courage ſtraine,
               The others hope to rule and raigne,
               And now their hands do that deſtry
               Which no age can againe ſupply.
               Nor euer any humane paine,
               Will be of powre to raiſe againe.
               Although from armes they ſtill refraine.A compaſſionate ſpeech.
               
               For this one onely battell day,
               Will future Maurood much decay,
               And will thoſe peoples births deſtroy
               That after worlds might elſe enioy.
               
                  So as the noble Latine name
               Will be a by-word of defame,
               The Albane and Laurentine bowres,
               The Gabine, and the Veian towres,
               And Coram rotted all with ruſt,
               Will not be ſeene for ruines duſt.
               The Country voide and deſolate;
               So as the Senatorian ſtate,
               Vnwillingly will their remaine,
               Longer then night ſhall them conſtraine.
               And that to do they oft repine,
               Though one of Numas lawes diuine,
               But tis not age that this hath done,
               Nor putrifaction ouerrun
               Such mighty frames, but ciuill broyle
               Hath laide ſuch citties with the ſoyle.
               What is become of all the ſtore
               Of humane races but of yore,
               That in the world were borne and bread?
               The townes are vnrepleniſhed?
               The champian vninhabited?
               One citie now vs all containes,
               The fields manur'd by ſlaues in chaines.
               The mouldy howſes neuer airde
               With their foundations vnrepaird,
               Do euerie minute mouldring fall:
               Whilſt in them no man dwels at all.
               The Romane walls do not embrace
               The citizens of her owne race.
               The ſcum of euery nation
               There now takes vp his ſtation.
               Theſe ſlaughtring warres hath this affected;
               And now it needs not be ſuſpected,
               
                  He deplores the miſerable eſtate of the Romane Empire.That Rome is able in long time,
               To act againe a ciuill crime.
               For theſe harmes thanke Pharſalias field,
               To it may bloody Cannas yeeld,
               And Allias calamities,
               Long kept in Latium memorie.
               
                  Rome leſſer harmes in Annals ſets
               
                  But willingly this day forgets.
               O griefe! the deſolation,
               That comes by aires infection,
               That peſtilent diſeaſes breeds,
               That from dire famines rage proceeds:
               Or Townes with rapting fiers burning
               Or fearefull earthquakes ouerturning
               Whole cities, all ſuch great decayes
               Theſe men might well repaire and raiſe.
               Whom Fortune brought frō euery quarter,
               In this fell warre to ſlay and martyr.
               And laid them proſtate in this field
               That many yeares did breede and yeeld,
               Of ſouldiers and of captains braue,
               That in theſe armies ſo did raue,
               And by their wracks did ſhew withall,
               How great Rome was, when ſhe did fall.
               For by how much her powre was ſpread
               Ouer huge nations vanquiſhed,
               The faſter her proſperitie
               Now ranne vnto calamitie.
               Her warres each yeare to her did giue
               Nations did that her ſtore relieue.
               
                  Tytan as he his chariot roles,
               Thy Empire ſees in either Poles.The largenes of the Roman Empire.
               
               And of the Eaſt ſmall deale remain'd
               That by thy conqueſt was not gain'd.
               So as the circuit of thy might,
               Was alwaies vnder day and night
               The wandring Planets in their rounds
               Did neuer paſſe the Empires bounds.
               But now Emathias diſmall day,
               Her glorie did ſo proſtrate lay,
               As that on wracke to ruine brought
               What many yeares had ſet aloft.
               For by that day to paſſe it came
               That Iudea dreaded not our name,
               Nor that the Dakes would giue conſents
               To liue in Townes and leaue their tents.
               Nor that our Conſuls guirded round,
               
                  Should guide the plowſhare on the ground
               To cut Sarmatian cities bound.
               Nor that we could due vengeance haue
               On Parthians as their ſcorns did craue.
               And that our libertie in dread
               Of ciuill Tyrannie is fled
               Beyond the Tygris and the Rheine,
               
               Without hope to returne againe:
               Although by vs ſo often ſought
               With our liues blood to haue bin bought:
               A good denyed vs to gaine
               Which Scythes and Germans do retaine,
               But neuer more will turne her face
               To looke vpon the Romane Race.
               I would our ſtate had neuer knowne
               That Augurie by vultures ſhowne,
               When firſt with their ſiniſter flight,
               Our wals foundation deepe was pight
               By Romulus, that did ſurround
               A diſmall groue within their bound,
               But that Romes fate had bene held backe,
               Till after this Theſſalian wracke.
               ¶ O Fortune needs I muſt complaine,
               How Brutes their valours loſt in vaine!
               Why with ſuch reuerence and ſuch awe
               Haue we obſeru'd our ancient law?
               And euermore, as new yeares came,
               Did ſtile them by the Conſuls name?
               Ye Meads, and Arabes are bleſt,
               With all the nations of the Eaſt,
               That haue bene vſde perpetually
               Vnto the rule of Tyranny.
               For now mongſt thoſe of any age,
               That kings haue held in vaſſalage,
               Our deſtenie is to be laſt,
               And ſeruile ſhame our glory blaſt.
               There are no Gods to be obaid;
               The world is but by blind chance ſwaid:
               Tis falſe that men of Ioue haue ſaid.
               Could he (from out the lofty skie)
               
                  Theſe ſlaughters ſee of Theſſaly,
               
               And hold from them his thundring might,
               When he Pholoen ſo will ſmite?
               And Oeton ſcorch with lightning flame.
               And Rhodops groue, ſo free from blame?
               How doth he blaſt the ſtately pine?
               What muſt this worke be brought to fine
               By Caſsius hand? and muſt he quell
               The Tyrants head that ſo doth ſwell?
               The ſtarres denide to lend their ſhine
               Vnto Thyeſtes odious line:
               And Argos cittie reſt of light,
               Beclowding it with ſodaine night,
               And will the heau'ns daylight afford
               Vnto Theſſalias bloody ſword?
               Whereas ſo many brethren meete
               With blood that do each other greete,
               And children that their parents ſlay,
               No mortall harmes the Gods do way.
               Yet of reuenge, ſo much we hope,
               As heauen can to the earth giue ſcope.
               Theſe ciuill warres ſhall Deifie
               New powres, like to the Gods on hie.This is ſpoken in deriſion of the Caeſars that were ſo Deified and called Diui.
                  
               
               Theſe Images ſhal be ſet out
               With blazing ſtars, that beames do ſprout
               About their heads, and in their hands
               
                  Ioues thunderbolts and flaming brands.
               And in the Temples Rome ſhall ſweare
               By Caeſars ghoſt with ſacred feare.
               ¶ Now whilſt both armies face to face
               With ſpeedy march ſhortned the ſpace
               That ſundred them from fatall blowes,
               And were ſo neare as each one knowes
               Which way his deadly pyle ſhould ſtraine,
               And what hand threatned bane againe,
               They ſaw that then was come the time
               That needs muſt act a monſtrous crime.
               The ſonnes againſt their fathers ſtands,
               Brothers confront with armed hands,
               No man that time his place would change
               
                  And yet with all a faintneſſe ſtrange
               Did them ſurpriſe; which pittie made,
               
                  Craſſine the firſt man that charged at this battell.And cold blood did their hearts inuade
               So as the cohorts on both parts
               Forbeare to throw their ready darts.
               
                  Craſsine the Gods on thee beſtow
               An end that may no ending know.
               Not ſuch a death as all men trie
               But death that liuing ſtill ſhall die.
               That with a lance from thy ſtrayn'd arme
               Didſt firſt begin this ciuill harme,
               And with the blood of Roman wound,
               Didſt firſt diſtaine Pharſalian ground.
               O heady rage and murdrous minde,
               Who would haue thought a hand to finde
               So prone to bloud, or elſe ſo bold
               Whilſt Caeſars ſelfe his hands did hold.
               Now with ſhrill noyſe the aire doth ring,
               The Cornet her ſtrain'd notes did ſing,
               The Trumpets to the battell ſounds,
               The clamorous cries confuſde rebounds
               From earth vnto the vaulted skie,
               Whereas the clouds do neuer flie,
               Nor where the thunders do engender;
               And then theſe ſhouts thēſelues do render
               Vnto the vales nere Tempes groues,
               And thence againe it fleeting roues
               With doubling ecchoes, that lowd raues
               From hollow vaults of Pelian caues,
               So as therewith mount Pindus grones,
               And trembling ſhooke Pangean ſtones,
               
                  Oeteus hil doth houle likewiſe
               And ſo the furie of theſe cries
               Doth all about thoſe quarters flie
               That their owne noyſe them terrifie
               ¶ A multitude of darts are caſt,
               And with them diuers wiſhes paſt,
               Some hope that they their foes ſhal wound
               Others wiſh they may fall to ground:
               And that no blood ſhould ſoyle their hands
               
                  All now on hap and hazard ſtands.
               Vncertaine Fortune leades the dance,
               The guiltie now are made by chance.
               Of thoſe that fall, how great a part
               Are ſlaine with flying ſhafts and dart?
               Now muſt the ciuill hate be ſhowne,
               But by the murdring ſword alone.
               The Romane blood is onely ſhed,
               With their owne glayues embowelled.
               
                  Pompey now his battalions flankes
               With thicke and double filed rankes.
               Poldron to poldron faſt combin'd,
               And Targateeres vnto them ioyn'd.
               So as they ſcarſe had roome the whiles
               To vſe their hands or caſt their piles.
               They fear'd they were ſo nearely preſt,
               That their owne ſwords would them infeſt.
               But Caeſars Veterans withall
               Headlong on theſe thicke troopes do fall:
               And through this preſſe of armed foes,
               They hew a paſſage with their blowes.
               Eu'n where their habergions and maile,
               Moſt ſafely did their bodies vaile.
               For (notwithſtanding thoſe ſtrong coaces)
               They pierc't their bowels and their throats.
               So as amongſt theſe troops of armes,
               Each one pertaker is of harmes.
               One army doth ſuſtaine the fight:
               The other doth expreſſe his might.
               The ſwords are cold on Pompeys part:
               But Caeſars ſteeme in bloody mart.
               Neither did Fortune long delay
               The ballance of theſe broiles to ſway▪
               
               But like a torrent reuell keepes,
               And multitudes in moments ſweepes.
               ¶ But herewithall foorth Pompey brings,
               His troopes of horſe ſtreatcht out in wings:
               And plac't them on his battaile flankes,
               And after them diſperſed ranks
               Of light-arm'd bands, to giue ſupply,
               
                  Who on the foe with furie flie.
               And all his nations preſsing hither,
               Their weapons mingled then together.
               And now the Roman blood is ſought
               VVith fire, ſtones, darts, much ſcath is wrought,
               And through the ſpatious aire there flies
               The bullets that with motion fries.
               Then the Arabians, and the Meades,
               
               And Ithyrans their ſtout troops leades
               Vnto the fight with bended bowes,
               That to their ſhafts no leuell ſhowes:
               But onely ſhoote vp to the skies,
               Which then with deaded force down flies:
               So as the head is ſeldome found
               To do great harme or make deepe wound.
               Of pyles the deadly blowes they feele,
               The aire is arched all with ſteele.
               The darts and ſhafts ſo thicke do haile,
               That on the feeld they draw nights vaile.
               Then Caeſar did begin to doubt
               His vantguard might be put to rout.
               Therefore to ſtrength his front prouides
               Some cohorts from thoſe oblique ſides
               That were behind the enſignes plac't,
               And thoſe he thither drew in haſt.
               
                  The Barbarians firſt put to flight by Caeſar.VVhere the Barbarian horſemen ſwayd,
               VVhom his vnlookt for troops aſſayd,
               His wings ſtood faſt not diſarayd,
               Theſe men he quickly put to flight,
               Amazde they had forgot to fight.
               And cowards ſhame they nought regarded.
               No care was euer well awarded,
               Nor charge in any ciuill harmes
               Vnto Barbarian fearefull ſwarmes.
               No ſooner did their palfries feele,
               VVithin their breſts the ſticking ſteele,
               But in a rage their riders flings,
               And with their feete their brains out dings.
               Then all the horſe troops took their heeles.
               Squadrons of youths together wheeles,
               
                  And from the foe they turne their heads,
               And their owne footmen ouertreads.The vantguard of the army in a rout.
               
               The ſlaughter now exceeded meaſure,
               Reſiſtance was no more at leaſure.
               The warre held now vnequall lots,
               One ſide was ſwords, the other throats.
               But Caeſars hoaſt was much too ſlight
               To ſlaughter all thoſe troopes outright,
               That he ſubdude and put to flight.
               O would this goare that in thee lies
               (Pharſalia) might thy thirſt ſuffiſe,
               That theſe Barbarian breaſts haue ſhed,
               And no more ſtreames of blood be ſpred!
               And that their bones (in heapes ſo ſtroad)
               Might be enough thy fields to loade.
               Or if that thy deſire be more
               To glut thy ſelfe with Romane gore;
               O then ſpare theſe Barbarians,
               
               The Galates, and Syrians,
               
               The Gaules, and Capadocians,
               
               Th'Armenian, and Cicilian realmes,
               The Spaniards in the worlds extreames!
               For when theſe ciuill warres are dated,
               Theſe ſhall be Romans then created.
               So now this little feare begunne
               Doth through all Pompeys army run.
               And now the Fates a courſe prouide,
               That Caeſar all may rule and guide.
               ¶ For now the fight was come at length
               To Pompeys greateſt troope and ſtrength,
               Where his maine battaile ranged ſtood.
               The former ranks (with mazed mood)
               About the fields were ſcattring ſcard,The maine battell reſiſts awhile.
               
               But here awhile the warre went hard.
               And Caeſars fortune ſtood debard.
               The youths (that in this battell ſtands)
               Were no auxiliary bands,
               The kings to this aſſiſtance brought.
               The Roman hands and ſwords then fought.
               One finds his brother in this place,
               
                  Another ſees his fathers face.
               Here rage and furie now exceeds,
               Here Caeſar are thy hainous deeds.
               O let this pageant of the warre,
               Be from my mind eſtranged farre!
               Let it to darknes be deſign'd,
               No age ſhall in my Poeme find,
               Diſcourſes of ſo wicked kind,
               To teach hereafter and to ſhow
               What ciuill warre can ouerthrow.
               And rather let all teares be loſt,
               And all complaints at ſo deare coſt.
               Therefore ô Rome what did betide
               In this laſt conflict, I will hide:
               
                  Caeſar, that thunderbolt of rage,
               That ſpur, that furie doth engage,
               Did heare about the cohorts ride,
               Leſt any miſchiefe of his ſide
               Should be to ſeeke or left vndone,
               Incenſing thoſe headlong to run
               To bold attempts, whoſe hote deſiers
               The rage of warre already fiers.
               Their murdring fauchions then he eyde,
               Which of them moſt in blood was dide:
               And which of them but ſlightly baynd,
               
                  Caeſar whets on his ſouldiers.And onely at the point diſtaind.
               What hand the ſword did trembling trie:
               What darts or piles do faintly flie,
               And what were throwne couragiouſly:
               Who onely by compulſion fights:
               And who in ſlaughtring wars delights:
               Who did relent his bloody vaine,
               When he a Citizen ſaw ſlaine.
               Thus ouer all the field he flies,
               Where ſlaughterd bodies heaped lies,
               And many of his men he found,
               Whoſe ſtreaming blood guſht from the wound
               When he himſelfe would then aſſay
               With his owne hand the blood to ſtay.
               VVhich way ſoeuer that he went,
               
                  He ſeem'd the likeneſſe to preſent
               Of ſterne Bellona, that did ſhake
               Her bloody whip, that makes men quake.
               Or as if Mars were in the field,
               Arm'd with the ſtrong Palladian ſhield,
               With boyſtrous batton in his hand,
               Vrging a fierce Biſtonian band,
               Whereas the whirling Charrets ſtand.
               Here ſlaughters riſe, and cruell fight,
               That dimmes their eyes like miſty night.
               Here now are hear'd huge grones and cries,
               With ſounds from claſhing Arms that flies,
               As men fall on each others backes,
               Whilſt faulchions, faulchions hews, & hacks.
               And Caeſars ſelfe with his owne hands
               Supplies with ſwords and darts their bands:
               And bids them (as they deale their blowes)
               Strike at the faces of their foes.
               He faſter then drew on his troopes,
               And ſtirres them vp that fainting droopes.
               And thoſe that dragge he makes aduance,
               Puſhing them forward with his lance.
               The common rout he biddes them ſpare,Why Caeſar would haue his Souldiers aime at the Senate.
               
               And ſhewes them where the Senate are.
               He knowes the Empires chiefeſt blood,
               And where her nobleſt members ſtood.
               Who vanquiſht, Rome was then his owne,
               And her laſt freedome ouer-throwne.
               Then ſecond rankes of Peeres he boords,
               Piercing their reuerent breaſts with ſwords.
               The Lepidi fall in this place,
               And thoſe of the Metellan race:
               The Coruins likewiſe taſte the ſame,
               And the Torquati Kingly name.
               The leaders and the chiefe are ſlaine,
               Whilſt Pompey yet did ſafe remaine.
               ¶ O Brutus (that thy head didſt maske
               But with a meane Plebeian caske,Alluding to the ſword that after ſlue Caeſar.
                  
               
               And ſo wert to thy foes vnknowne)
               With what ſword was thy valour ſhowne?
               
                  Thou glory of the Empires ſtate,
               Chiefe hope of Senatorian fate,
               Laſt of that race that baniſh't Kings,
               Whoſe name throughout all ages rings;
               O do not here (with too great ſpright)
               Againſt thy foes expreſſe thy might▪
               
               Doe not thereby thy end aduance
               Before the dire Philippian chance.
               In thy Theſſalia thou muſt fall;
               
                  Becauſe that the fields of Philippi are in Theſſaly.
                  Here canſt thou doe no good at all,
               Although thy ſword for Caeſar wait,
               He is not yet come to his haight;
               Nor to that ſupreme humane pride
               That will all honour ouer-ſtride.
               Then will his noble death beſeeme
               The Fates, that him ſo worthy deeme.
               O let him liue, and proudly raigne,
               And then by Brutus ſword be ſlaine.
               ¶ Here now our Countries glory dies,
               Here in a heape confuſed lies
               
                  The maine battaile loſt.The old Patrician Roman gore,
               Mixt with Plebeian bloudy ſtore;
               And yet amidſt this butcherie
               Of Heroick Nobilitie,
               
                  Domitius ſtout that death of thine
               Aboue the reſt moſt cleare did ſhine;
               Whom fate did oft oppreſſe and toſſe:
               For Fortune ſtill did Pompey croſſe,
               Where thou madſt one, and ſtill hadſt loſſe.
               So often wert thou Caeſars pray;
               But now haſt cloſ'd thy lateſt day
               With liberty preſerued free,
               Which makes thoſe many wounds to thee
               Pleaſing, whereof thou now muſt dye,
               And no more Caeſars pardons try.
               But Caeſar chanc't that way to paſſe,
               
                  
                     Caeſar inſulteth ouer Domitius at the poynt of death.Where he in gore blood wallowing was,
               And tauntingly vnto him ſpake;
               
                  Domitius, thou that ſoughtſt to take,
               My charge from me, and gouerne Gaule,
               
               
                  
                  Pompey thou canſt not ſerue at all,
               Without thee this warre we ſhall trye.
               No more he ſaid; Then to reply,
               His panting breaſt him life affoords,
               And thus pronounc't his dying words;
               
                  Caeſar thou haſt not yet the meed
                     Domitius laſt words to Caeſar
                  
               
               Of thy accurſed wicked deed.
               Doubtfull as yet doth ſtand thy fate,
               And leſſe in ſhew then Pompeys ſtate.
               I one of Pompeys traine doe goe
               Freely vnto the ſhades below:
               And ſafely thither doe I wend;
               And yet (by that theſe warres haue end)
               I well may hope, when I am dead,
               Wracke ſhall befall thy wretched head;
               And vengeance due ſhall on thee light,
               And yeeld both me and Pompey right.
               So hauing ſaid, did life reſigne,
               And deaths darke hand cloſ'd vp his eyne.
               ¶ In vaine alas what ſhould I ſhed
               Teares here vpon the thouſands dead
               Of thoſe, that from the worlds each part
               Did finde their ends in this dire Mart?
               Or why ſhould I but ſingle out
               Some priuate fates in this huge rout,
               Whoſe bowels pierc't with deadly wounds
               Their lateſt liuing dayes confounds?
               Or who on earth dead bodies ſpurnes?
               Or who their bloody ſwords poynts turnes
               Vpon their breaſt, that gaſping lye
               To free their ſoules that lingring dye?
               Or who at one blow downe is caſt?
               Or who with hewd limbes ſtandeth faſt?
               Or who with darts doth bodies wound?
               Or with his launce nailes men to ground?
               Or whoſe veins pierc't whence blood flies out
               Into the aire, and doth beſprout
               The Armour of his murdring foe?
               Who ſlaies his brother at a blow,
               And, as a ſtranger, doth him ſpoyle,
               
                  Cuts off his head, and in the ſoyle
               Doth hide the ſame to hide his guilt;
               Or who his fathers bloud hath ſpilt:
               And mangled hath his face the while,
               The lookers on ſo to beguile:
               And doth it with ſuch ragefull ire
               As twere ſome foe, and not his ſire.
               No one mans death can claime lament;
               To waile men now no time is lent.
               The ſlaughters of Pharſalias field
               Is nothing ſuch as others yeeld.
               There priuate Fates the warres attends:
               Here Rome and all her people ends.
               There warre to death doth ſouldiers call;
               But here at once whole Nations fall.
               The Grecian peoples bloud here ſtreames,
               The Ponticke and Aſsirian realmes:
               And now the bloud of Romans ſlaine,
               In torrents fleets on that againe;
               And with her ouer-flowing ſtore
               Sweepes from the fields Barbarian gore.
               More people in this battaile ſlaine
               Then our age can ſupply againe.
               Tis more then life and health that's loſt;
               It hath the whole world ruine coſt.
               The ſword vpon thoſe bodies rages,
               That ſhould haue ſerued future ages.
               What haue our children yet miſdonne,
               That they to ſeruile ſtate muſt runne?
               Or what fault in poſterity,
               Borne to be thralles to tyranny?
               Haue we ſo cowardly borne Armes,
               And offred vp our throats to harmes?
               The burthen of anothers feare,
               Vpon our ſhoulders muſt we beare?
               O Fortune! if thou needs wouldſt call
               Our ſonnes to be a tyrants thrall,
               Thou ſhouldſt haue giuen them warres withall,
               ¶ Now doth vnhappy Pompey finde
               The Gods, and Roman Fates vnkinde:
               
                  And (ere the fight was throughly ended)
               His curſed fortune he condemned.
               Whilſt in the field hee ſtood on hye
               Vpon a hill, and thence did eye
               The ſlaughters and the troopes ramuerſt
               Throughout Pharſalias field diſperſt.
               The which the fight before did hide,
               He multitudes ſees on his ſide
               Of weapons, and of bodies loſt,
               And his owne wracke, at their blouds coſt;
               Yet did he not (as wretches will)
               Deſire the whole with him ſhould ſpill.
               Nor in his ruine wrap them all,
               But on the heauenly powers did call,
               That yet the greateſt part might thriue
               Of Latium blood, and him ſuruiue:
               This is his comfort in annoy.
               O Gods (quoth he) doe not deſtroy
               So many Nations at a clappe:
               The world may ſtand free from miſhappe,
                     Pompeys praier to the Gods.
               
               And Rome may many ages flouriſh,
               Although that Pompey ſinke and periſh.
               But if it ſo your likings pleaſe,
               More woes on me to heape then theſe;
               My wife and children yet ſubſiſt
               For Fates to do with what they liſt.
               Hath not this ciuill warre coſt deere,
               If I and mine muſt periſh heere?
               May not ſuch wounds be deemed wide,
               Though all the world eſcape beſide?
               O Fortune! why doſt thou ſo racke
               And labour to bring all to wracke?
               Nothing is mine, I all things lacke.
               So hauing ſaid, he rides about
               The Enſignes, and the Armes in rout.
               And in each part throughout the lands
               Sees how his ſquadrons broken ſtands:
               Whom he retraits, and doth reſtraine
               From running to their deaths amaine.
               He values not himſelfe ſo much,
               
                  That for his ſake harme ſhould them touch.
               And yet his courage did not faile
               The ſwords and weapons to aſſaile,
               Or put his life to hazards chance,
               Or vnto death his breaſt aduance.
               He fear'd if Pompey there ſhould dye,
               The Souldiers would no dangers flye,
               But on his body heaped lye.
               Beſides, he fouly did deſpiſe
               To lye a ſcorne to Caeſars eyes.
               Yet if thy father-in-law affect
               To caſt his eyes on that proſpect,
               Thy head to him will be preſented,
               It cannot be by place preuented:
               And thou his wife wert partly cauſe
               Why from this ſlaughter he with-drawes
               To ſee thy face; for Fates ordaine
               That in thy ſight he ſhould be ſlaine.
               
                  
                     Pompeys flight.Then he a Courſer ſwift beſtrides,
               And poſting from the battaile rides.
               Feare makes him not to turne his backe,
               His heart did neuer courage lacke:
               In moſt diſtreſſe his minde was ſtout,
               Nor plaints nor teares he powreth out;
               But ſuch a reuerent griefe expreſt
               As with a Maieſty fits beſt
               For him, at that time to beſtow
               On Roman fortune brought ſo low:
               And with like conſtancy beheld
               The downe-falles of Emathia's field.
               Nor proſperous wars could make thee proud
               Nor ouer-throwes thy courage cloud,
               That faithleſſe Fortune (flattring thee
               With glorious pompe in triumphes three)
               Thou now doſt ſcorne with leſſe account,
               And makes thy minde her force ſurmount.
               Securely thou from hence doſt part,
               Freed from the cumbrous cares of Mart.
               And now at large thou leaſure haſt
               To ruminate thy glories paſt.
               
                  Ambitious hopes (neuer ſuffiſ'd)
               From thee are fled, and now deſpiſ'd.
               Now maiſt thou ken thy fortunes ſcope;
               Fly warres, and in the Gods haue hope.
               None now (that Armes doe vndertake)
               Will ſpend their liues for Pompeys ſake.
               Whether it be of Affricke ſoyle
               The lamentable bloody broyle,
               Or Munda's battaile ſtain'd with gore,
               Or ſlaughters on Aegyptian ſhore,
               Yet after thee there will remaine
               A great part of Theſſalian traine.
               And Pompey will not haue his name
               So popular with worldly fame,
               As for thy ſake like warres to wage.
               But from hence forth (in euery age)
               The faction of the warre will be
               Twixt Caeſars ſtate and libertie:
               And though that thou the warres doſt flee,
               The Senate to the death will fight
               To hold their owne and freedomes right.
               ¶ Canſt thou in this finde no reliefe,
               That thus repulſt thou ſhunſt the griefe
               To ſee the ſlaughtred heapes that lye?
               Looke backe againe, and caſt thine eye
               Vpon the riuers crimſon ſtaine,
               Clotted with gore of bodies ſlaine:
               Be-pitty then proud Caeſars vaine.
               Thinke what remorſe will ſtraine his breaſt
               When he ſhall enter Rome, oppreſt
               With griefe, for her deare people loſt,
               Gain'd to Pharſalia at her coſt:
               When thou therefore thy ſelfe ſhalt ſee
               Baniſht in forraigne Realmes to bee,
               What euer fortunes thou ſhalt finde,
               Endure it with a manly minde:
               And whatſoeuer miſery
               (Vnder the Pharian tyranny)
               Shall thee befall, with patience dure:
               And in the Gods thy hopes aſſure.
               
                  
                  They are more vnhappy that offer an iniury, albeit with ſucceſſe: then thoſe that repell an iniury, although with loſſe of their blood.And as the Fates affoord their grace,
               Beare with the changes of times ſpace.
               The conqueſt would haue harm'd the more:
               Do not therefore thy hap deplore.
               Forbid the people to lament;
               All teares and lamentations ſtent.
               The world will Pompey as much good
               In his low ebbe, as in his flood.
               O doe not now (with lookes deiected)
               Behold thoſe Kings thou haſt ſubiected:
               Suruey the Citties wonne by thee,
               And kingdomes that thou gau'ſt in fee.
               
                  Aegypt and Lybia thou maiſt trye;
               Chuſe out the land where thou wouldſt dye.
               ¶ Lariſſas Citty was the place,
               That firſt beheld thy noble face,
               After this foyle by Fortunes ſcorne:
               Yet ſaw thee not as one forlorne;
               
                  The Lariſſans loue to Pompey.
                  Her Citizens and chiefe eſtates
               With all their force paſſe through their gates
               To meet thee, as thy loyall frends,
               And wayling many preſents ſends:
               Their houſes and their Temples vaſt
               They did ſet open as he paſt:
               And wiſh't that they had partners beene
               With him, in all his bloody teene.
               So as a great deale yet remain'd
               Of that great name he earſt retain'd.
               Though leſſe now then thy ſelfe alone,
               Thy power may once againe be ſhowne:
               And Nations with thee led from farre,
               So to reſtore thy ſtate by warre.
               But oh! (quoth he) what ſhould a man
               Whom Fates from victory do ban,
               The aid of men or Townes receaue?
               Vnto the Conquerour bequeaue
               Your faiths, and to his fauours cleaue.
               ¶ But Caeſar thou doſt ouer-ſtride,
               And march as yet on euery ſide
               Vpon the bowels and the breaſts,
               
                  As they in heaped ſlaughters reſts
               Of thine owne Countries wofull fall;
               Thy ſon-in-law now quits thee all.
               Away the Courſer Pompey beares,
               Follow'd with many ſighes and teares;
               And on the cruell Deſtinies
               
               The people powre out curſed cries.
               Now Pompey doſt thou truly finde
               The faith that thy deſerts did binde:
               For now the fruits thereof they ſhow,
               
                  Proſperity no loue can know.
               
               ¶ When Caeſar ſaw of Latium gore
               The fields did flote with ample ſtore;
               He bids them now forbeare their ſwords,
               And to poore ſoules he grace affoords:
               For all was ſubiect to their hands;
               Twas vaine to kill thoſe hope-loſt bands
               That for their liues at mercy ſtands.
               But leſt the ſtanding Campe might be
               A ſafe retrait to thoſe that flee;
               And to enioy the quiet night
               VVithout alarmes, or new affright;
               He meant to vndertake the venter
               On Pompeys Campe,
                     Caeſar entreth Pompeys campe and it to enter
               VVhilſt fortune now was hot in blood,
               And all in maze and terror ſtood;
               Not doubting but his men were preſt,
               Herein to yeeld vnto his heſt,
               Although that they were all growne faint
               VVith long fight, and with heate attaint.
               
                  But ſouldiers ſmall perſwaſions need
               
               
                  To lead them to receiue their meed:
               
               
                  Or to prepare them to a pray;
               
               Yet Caeſar thus to them did ſay:
               Souldiers (quoth he) your valiant proes
               Hath wonne full conqueſt on your foes:
               And for the blood drawne from your vains,
               Rewards and Honors now remaines.
               VVhich to performe, I hold my part,
               
                  Yet that which due is to deſart
               
               
                  
                  I will not tearme a gift to bee:
               
               Each one ſhall giue himſelfe his fee.
               Behold the Tents before your eyes,
               Where gold and ſiluer heaped lies;
               Here is lockt vp (in many a Cheſt)
               The treaſure taken from the weſt;
               The pretious Eaſterne Implements
               Doth ſtuffe and cloy their glorious Tents:
               The Fortunes that are gotten hither
               Of Pompey, and of Kings together,
               Doe but attend to be a pray
               Vnto the victor; haſte your way
               To come before them to the place,
               Whom now you following haue in chaſe.
               He ſaid no more, but their deſire
               Whom greedy gaine had ſet on fire,
               Did head-long driue them without feare,
               Thorow the ſwords their way to teare;
               And on their fathers bones to tread,
               Spurning the Captaines that lay dead.
               What Ditch or Rampart could ſuffiſe
               To hold them out whom ſuch a prize
               And booty of the warre inuites?
               They now wold know to eaſe their ſprights
               The gaines of all their bloody fights.
            
            
               ¶ And here lay lodg'd (to maintain mart)
               Many great treaſures ſet a part,
               Heap't vp together in a whoord,
               Spoyles that the whole world did affoord.
               Yet for all this, they could not finde
               Sufficient to content their minde.
               What gold is found in Ibers ſands,
               
                  All the rich ſpoyles that Caeſars Souldiers found in Pompeys camp could not content their greedy minds.Or Tagus caſts vpon her ſtrands:
               Or all thoſe heapes of pretious graines
               Dig'd out of Arimaſpus vaines,
               Is made their ſpoyle, and yet they thought
               It not enough, but deerely bought.
               For now their conquering hopes deuoures
               The ſpoyle of the Tarpeian Towers,
               
                  And promiſe to themſelues a day
               That Rome and all ſhall be their pray.
               But yet therein they are deceiu'd,
               The Tents are to their ſpoyle bequeau'd.
               The wicked ſouldiers, and baſe Slowches
               Do ſleepe on the Patrician Couches.
               The Kings pauillions, and their beds
               Are roomes for ſlaues to lay their heads.
               Their brothers Cabins ſome inveſted,
               Some where their fathers lately reſted
               Their ſlaughtring bloody members neſted
               And thoſe whom rauing ſlumbers haunts,
               And frightfull dreames in ſleeping daunts,
               Doe toſſe in their afflicted ſprights
               The cruell late Pharſalian fights:
               Their bloody facts poſſeſſe their eyes,
               The rage of Armes their mindes agriſe:
               And without ſwords about them goes
               Their hands, as they were dealing blowes.
               ¶ A man would thinke the very fields
               And balefull lands, thoſe viſions yeelds:
               And that ſome apparitions ſtrange
               Of ghoſts, that putred aire did range:
               And that by night the fearfull ſhapes
               Of Stygian ſprights their ſences rapes.
               This victory with heauy ſtraines
               Requites the victors worthleſſe paines.Terrible dreames affright Caeſars ſouldiers in their ſleepe.
               
               Hiſſing of Serpents in their dreames,
               And firie flames caſt forth huge ſtreames:
               Slaine Citizens to them appeare,
               And each one hath his priuate feare.
               One ſees in ſleepe an old mans face,
               And other luſty youths in place:
               One doth his brothers corps behould
               Pale and diſ-figured on the mould;
               Another in his dreame diſcernes
               His fathers wounds, whereat he yearnes.
               And all theſe ſprights, and helliſh feares
               Then Caeſars guilty conſcience teares
               
                  No leſſe then did thoſe hagges of hell
               Within Oreſtes ſpirits dwell,
               That with affrights his viſage vrg'd,
               Till Scythian Altars him had purg'd.
               Nor yet Pentheius in his minde
               More furious gaſtly fits did finde;
               Nor mad Agaue in her kinde.
            
            
               
                  
                     Caeſars feareful apparitions in his dreames.¶ For all the ſwords that bloud did ſtaine,
               Now ſhed on the Pharſalian plaine;
               And thoſe reuenging ſwords withall,
               That ſhould in future on him fall
               By force of Senatorian ſpight,
               In dreames oppreſſed him this night;
               So doe the furies him affright.
               How liues this wretched man in feare
               That doth ſuch guilt in conſcience beare,
               That in his dreames he ſeemes to ſee
               The Stygian ghoſts about him flee,
               With all the foule infernall traines
               Whilſt Pompey ſtill aliue remaines?
               Yet this no whit his conſcience ſtraines.
               But when cleare day (with ſhining beames)
               Bewraid Pharſalia's bloody ſtreames,
               The horror of that vgly ſight
               Did not his gaſping eyes affright,
               Nor turne them from thoſe lothſome lands,
               But lookes how thicke the riuers ſtands
               Clotted with gore, and how likewiſe
               As high as hilles the bodies riſe,
               That on the Champian heaped lies.
               Of Pompeys men a tale he takes,
               And in that place a feaſt he makes.
               He pries amongſt the bodies there,
               What faces knowne vnto him were;
               And herein great contentment found.
               He could not ſee Emathias ground,
               Nor caſt his eyes vpon the plaine,
               Hid with the bodies that lay ſlaine.
               
                  There ſaw he how his fortune ſtood,
               And all his Gods clothed in blood.An inuectiue againſt Caeſar for not allowing Pompeys ſlaine ſouldiers a funerall fire.
               
               And for becauſe he would not loſe
               This pleaſing proſpect on dead foes,
               Still madding in his wicked ire,
               He would not giue them funerall fire.
               But let them rotting there to reſt,
               
                  Emathias aire ſo to infeſt.
               He might haue learn'd by Hanniball,
                  Hanniball buried Marcellus his enemy with great magnificence.
               
               That gaue our Conſull funerall:
               And how he humane rites beſtowes,
               (In Cannas fields) vpon his foes.
               With pyles of wood to burne the dead,
               Which Lybicke torches kindled.
               But that ſterne wroth that him enrag'd
               The ſlaughter had not yet aſſwag'd.
               For he remembred in his minde
               The Romans were to him vnkinde,
               But now we do not here deſire
               For euery one a ſingle fire:
               Or any glorious funerall:
               Beſtow but one fire on them all.
               We do not ſeeke that they ſhould burne
               In parted flames and ſhared vrne.
               Or if thou Pompey more wouldſt ſpite,
               All Pindus woods then hew downe quite,
               And the Oetean oakes lay waſt,
               And make of all one pile ſo vaſt,
               That he may from the ſeas deſcrie
               
                  Pharſalian flames ſtreame in the skie.
               ¶ This rage of thine auaileth nought,
               By whatſoeuer meanes tis wrought,
               That theſe dead bodies may conſume:
               For be it with a fierie fume,
               Or elſe with time that they do rot,
               And turne to duſt it skilleth not.
               
                  For nature (in her louing wombe)
               
               
                  Doth freely mortals all intombe.
               
               
                  All bodies that do breath and liue,
               
               
                  
                  Their end to her as debt muſt giue.
               
               
                  And though that Caeſar, in diſdaine,
               
               
                  Their funerall fire from them detaine;
               
               
                  Yet when the Earth and Ocean vaſt
               
               
                  Shall be conſum'd with flames at laſt,
               
               
                  One common fire the world ſhall haue,
               
               
                  And ſtarres with humane bones engraue.
               
               And vnto whatſoeuer place
               
                  Fortune thy flitting ſoule ſhall chaſe;
               Theſe ſoules the ſelfe-ſame way ſhall wend:
               No higher ſhall thy ghoſt aſcend,
               But lodge in Stygian ſhade below;
               No better manſion ſhalt thou know.
               
                  From Fortunes freakes death frees vs all,
               
               
                  
                     Lucans opinion of the laſt diſſolution of the world.
                  What earth doth yeeld, earth doth recall;
               
               
                  And he that lies vnburied,
               
               
                  With heauens high cope is couered.
               
               And thou that doſt whole nations wrong
               From burials, that to them belong;
               Why doſt thou loth theſe ſlaughtred bands▪
               
               And ſhunne theſe ſoild contagious lands?
               
                  Caeſar doe thou theſe waters drinke,
               In this aire breath that ſo doth ſtinke.
               But theſe corrupted bodies ſlaine
               Doe take from thee Pharſalia plaine:
               And in deſpight do hold the place,
               And thence the conquerours do chaſe.
               ¶ But to this carnage for their food
               Thither repaires with rauening mood
               The Thracian wolues, that vent from farre
               The bloud of this Aemonian warre:
               The Lyons come from Pholoen,
               
               And doe forſake their haunted denne
               To quench in gore their thirſting iawes,
               Whom ſent of ſlaughter thither drawes.
               The griſly Beares do leaue their caues,
               And on theſe feſtred bodies raues:
               The filthy dogges forſake their homes,
               And all about theſe fat fields romes:
               
                  And whatſoeuer elſe by kinde,
               With ſenting noſe can ſauors winde,
               When as the aire is putrifide
               With carkaſſes long mortifide.
               And hither flocks of fowles do throng,
               That both the camps had followed long.
               And thoſe ſame birds that change the aire
               Of Thracian cold, and do repaire
               Vnto the gentle Southerne blaſt,
               Where they the ſtreames of Nylus taſt.
               So many vultures thither flie,
               As neuer earſt did clowd the skie.
               With other rauenous foules of pray,
               Which euery wood ſent day by day.
               And to the branches, boughs, and leaues,
               The clotterd gore and bowels cleaues
               That theſe birds brings, and oft withall,
               Vpon the victors heads doth fall.
               And on thoſe wicked enſignes borne,
               The fleſh and guts that they had torne,
               Which from their weary talents ſlip,
               Hauing got more then they could grip.
               Neither could they ſo ſharke and ſhare
               The fleſh, whereby the bones were bare.
               All was not made a pray to beaſts,
               They were ſo glutted with theſe feaſts,
               As that they now began to loath
               The inwards and the marrow both.
               And onely on choiſe morſels feede,
               Moſt of the lims of Latium breede.
               Vnto long time to wet and heate
               They left to rot and would not eate.
               So as whole troops in heaped bands,
               Lay feſtring there, and dung'd the lands.
               O Moſt vnhappy Theſſaly!
               
               How haſt thou wrong'd the Gods on hie,
               That thou ſhouldſt be ſo peſtered
               With cruell ſlaughters and bloodſhed?
               What future age or tract of time,
               
                  May well repaire this bloody crime,
               Or lodge this in obliuous graue?
               VVhat corn bringſt thou that ſhal not haue
               (Vpon his blade) a bloody ſtaine,
               To ſhew theſe ſlaughters in thy graine?
               VVhat plow-ſhare can here furrows rend
               But they will Roman ghoſts offend?
               And yet new armies here ſhal meet,
               And with like rage each other greete:
               Before that euer thou canſt drye
               The blood, that in thee now doth lie.
               Should we our fires ſepulchers rake.
               And of their tombes a ruine make?
               Searching the depth to find the cheſt,
               And lay all open where they reſt?
               More cynders yet there would be found
               Turnd vp in the Aemonian ground,
               By force of crooked cultors ſhare,
               VVhen as the plowman tilleth there,
               And more bones ſpuing out their marrow,
               Cruſht with the iron-toothed harrow.
               No marriner though tempeſt toſt
               VVould euer anchor on this coaſt.
               No tilſman would plow vp theſe fields,
               That vnto Romans buriall yeelds.
               Their ghoſts wold cauſe the peaſants quake
               The droues the paſtures would foſake.
               The ſhepheards durſt not be ſo bold
               Their fleecie flocks to feede and fold
               That they their hunger might ſuffiſe
               On graſſe, that from our bowels riſe.
               But thou Emathia as forlorne
               VVouldſt humane races hold in ſcorne.
               As if thou wert that torrid ſoyle.
               That Phoebus beams doth alwaies broile.
               Or elſe that frozen ycie land
               That vnderneath the pole doth ſtand.
               Vnknowne ſo wouldſt thou lie vnman'd.
               Had this bene but thy firſt wars blame,
               
                  Not ſeconded with like defame:
               O Gods if that we may deteſt
               A land were wickedneſſe doth reſt!
               Why doth this ſoyle the world oppreſſe,
               And ſo bring mankinde to diſtreſſe?
               The bloudy battell fought in Spaine,
               
               The horrors on Pachinus maine,
               
                  Mutinas, and the Lucan fleetes
               Do wipe away Philippos greetes.
            
            Finis Libri Septimi.
         
         
            
            Lucans Pharſalia. The eighth Booke.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  POmpey repulſt and put to flight,
               By ſecret waies in great affright,
               Himſelfe firſt at Lariſſa ſhowes,
               And then by ſeas to Lesbos goes.
               Where all that people him bewailes,
               Thence with his mournfull wife he ſailes
               Vnto Caelicia, whither came
               His ſonne, and other Lords of name.
               There they conſult what land to ſeeke,
               Accuſed Aegypt beſt they like.
               Where he no ſooner did arriue,
               But king and Councell did contriue
               His preſent death; and to that end
               They thaiterouſly Achilles ſend,
               Who in the preſence of his wife,
               And of his ſonne, bereft his life.
               
                  Codrus his ſeruant with his hands
               Scrapes him a graue amongſt the ſands.
            
            
               NOw Pompey forward haſting poſts
            Ouer the Herculean coaſts
            Then thorow Tempes woody waies
            
               Aemonian forreſts he diſplaies,
            
               And deſart paſſages aſſayes.
            His ſteede, though ſtroken with the ſpurre,
            Would ſcarcely forward go or ſturre.Pompeys fears and ſuſpitions in his flights
            
            So was he ſpent and ouer heate
            With running long, and faint with ſweate.
            Beſides amaze him ſo did fright,
            That he ſtood doubtfull in his flight,
            What courſe to take, or where to reſt,
            But in and out his way doth wreſt.
            The murmuring that the winds doth make
            Amongſt the woods when leaus did ſhake
            Cauſde him for very feare to quake.
            His traine that follow him behind
            A terror are vnto his minde.
            And thoſe that gallop by his ſides,The iealouſly of feare.
            
            Perplexe him alſo as he rides.
            For though he were from that high place
            Throwne downe, and out of Fortunes grace
            Yet therewithall he vnderſtood,
            That no baſe priſe was worth his blood.
            But mindfull of his former ſtate,
            He knew twas yet at ſo hie rate
            That Caeſar would giue for head,
            As much as he then valued
            The price of Caeſar to be ſlaine,
            And would beſtow his head to gaine.
            But now he finds no ſecret place
            Could ſerue to hide his honoured face.
            For many that do take his part,
            Now comming to Pharſalias Mart
            (The fame as yet not being blowne,
            That all was loſt and ouerthrowne)
            Were much amazed in their mind,
            
               Pompey in that ſame place to find.
            And ſcarcely would beleeue the truth
            That he himſelfe relates with ruth.
            But grieuous was all company
            To him in this calamity,
                  Pompey affects a retired life hating all popularitie.
            
            No peoples concurſe he deſir'd
            But from the world to liue retir'd.
            
               In ſafetie with obſcured name:
            But Fortune that vnconſtant Dame
            On him poore man her frowns doth caſt
            To blanch her many fauours paſt,
            So as the waight of his renowne,
            His happineſſe doth more preſſe downe,
            And with the more offenſiue hate,
            His former bliſſe doth exprobate.
            
               The remembrance of former felicities is grieuous in aduerſitie.For now he thinks his honors paſt,
            Were heaped on him too too faſt.
            And doth accurſe thoſe Syllan bayes,
            The glory of his youthfull dayes.
            It irkes him now, deiected wight,
            To thinke vpon his Nauall fight,
            And thoſe braue enſignes that he wonne,
            In Pontycke kingdome ouerrunne.
            
               Long life doth manly courage bate,
            
            
               And he that in empiring ſtate
            
            
               No man happy but in his end.
               Hath alwaies liu'd, except withall
            
            
               In bliſſe he cloſe his funerall.
            
            
               And doth with ſpeedy death preuent,
            
            
               The change that fortune would preſent.
            
            
               He hath but liu'd to ſee his ſhame,
            
            
               And hath outliu'd his honors name.
            
            
               For who would fortunes fauours trie
            
            
               Except he can reſolue to die.
            
            ¶ Now hath he to the ſhore attain'd
            Whereas Poeneius ſtreame diſtain'd
            
               Peneius riuer that runs betweene Olympus and Oſſa.With blood of the Pharſalian fields,
            Her Tribute to the Ocean yeelds.
            There fearefully he takes a boate
            Vnfit in winds and waues to floate.
            Which ſcarcely ſafe did him conuey,
            Vpon the riuer, to the bay.
            For yet ſhe coaſted with her oares,
            
               Corcyras and Leucades ſhoares,
            This Cylicke, and Lyburnicke Lord,
            In thoſe lands earſt ſo much ador'd,
            Embarks him here with mickle feare,
            Into a little Paſſenger.
            
            
               And with a mind fraught full of cares,Pompey embarks himſelfe for the Iſle of Lesbos.
            
            His courſe for Lesbos he prepares.
            Where thou Cornelia didſt reſide
            And there more heauy dayes hadſt tride,
            Then if thou hadſt encamped laine,
            With Pompey in Pharſalias plaine.
            Preſages great of future ill,
            Her vexed thoughts do fright and fill.
            And in in her ſleepings heauineſſe:
            Oft trembling fits did her oppreſſe
            She ſees Theſſalia field by night.
            And when that Phoebus ſpreads his light.
            Vnto the loftie Cliffes ſhe hies,Cornelias care of Pompeys
            
            And to the ſhore that vtmoſt lies
            Where on the maine ſhe caſts her eyes,
            And if ſhe will firſt of all diſcouer:
            If any ſayles do that way houer.
            And yet to aske ſhe is a dread,
            How Pompey in the warre hath ſped.
            ¶ But now behold his ſhip doth ſtand
            Full with the hauen of this land,
            And with all ſayles doth hither preſſe,
            Thogh with what news thou canſt not geſſe.
            Till at the length greefe to reuiue,
            Thy conquered husband doth arriue.
            The heauie meſſenger of warres,
            The Harrold of hearts-wounding ſcarres.
            Why doſt thou now loſe time to wayle,
            When thou maiſt weep, feare doth preuaile
            But as the ſhip drew neare at hand,
            In haſt ſhe runs vnto the ſtrand.
            And there ſhe quickly did deſcrie,
            The cruell blame of Deſtinie.Pompey after the ouerthrow arriues at Leſbos where Cornelia was.
            
            Her Lords diſcolloured deadly face,
            Whoſe hoarie haires about it trace,
            Rough and vnkombt; and his attire
            Daſht and beſprent with duſt and mire.
            Wherewith this poore aſtoniſht wight,
            Was ouercome with deaths darke night,
            That from her eyes depriu'd the light.
            
               Faint ſorrow did her ſprites inueſt,
            Downe right ſhe ſinkes life leaues her breſt.
            
               Cornelia fals into a ſwoone with ſorrow.Her lims were ſtarke, her heart grew colde,
            A deadly trance her hope doth holde.
            By this their Anchors being caſt,
            Were with their cables mored faſt.
            
               Pompey beholds the vacant ſand,
            Where as his faithfull ſeruants ſtand.
            Who ſecretly their griefs do ſhow,
            Amongſt themſelues with inward woe,
            And mournfull ſighs which they beſtow,
            Such as well ſorted with his fate.
            And therewithall they eleuate
            In vaine their miſtreſſe from the ground,
            That there halfe dead lay in a ſound.
            Whom Pompey colleth in his armes,
            And her lims with embracements warmes.
            ¶ Then as the blood return'd againe,
            And did begin to ſtrength each vaine:
            Her husbands hand ſhe felt withall,
            And to her mind his face did call.
            
               Pompey comforts Cornelia with a braue ſpeech.He wils her not to ſtoope to fate,
            Nor yet her griefs to aggrauate.
            O why ſhouldſt thou a woman borne
            Of ſo great blood, like one forlorne?
            Thy noble heart and comfort breake,
            With the firſt blow of Fortunes freake,
            A meane is offered now to raiſe,
            Thy glory to all future daies.
            The praiſe wherein thy ſex hath part,
            Is not for letters, nor for Mart.
            Thy honor is thy conſtancie,
            Vnto thy ſpouſe in miſerie.
            Lift vp thy ſprites with pious thought,
            Set all the ſcornes of fate at nought.
            Me (though ſubdude) loue as before,
            Thy glory ſhall be ſo much more.
            Now that my honors all are fled,
            And that I am abandoned.
            Of all the Senates ſacred troope,
            
               And of great kings that late did ſtoope
            Vnto my heſt; Now be thou knowne
            
               Pompeys deare conſtant frend alone.
            Too much thou greeueſt with Pallid face,
            Since that thy husband is in place.
            Thy ſorrow now is at that height
            As greater cannot vexe thy ſpright,
            But to bewayle thy Pompey ſo,
            Should be the laſt loue thou ſhouldſt ſhow
            Vnto him dead; as yet no harmes,
            Accrewes to thee by ciuil armes.
            
               Pompey in health doth liue as yet,
            Though fortunes fauours from him flit.Meaning for the loſſe of his glory.
            
            To that therefore thy loue was bent,
            For which thou mak'ſt ſo great lament.
            ¶ VVhen theſe words in her ears did ſound
            Her faint lims ſcarſe ſhe lifts from ground.
            VVhen as her voyce at laſt ſhe ſtrains,
            And in this ſort her ſtate complains.
            VVould God I had bene deſtined
            To Caeſars wracke; in mariage bed.Cornelia replies to Pōpey
            
            Then had not both my nuptiall ioyes,
            Twice wrongd the world with theſe annoies
            
               Erynnis firſt in wedlocke ſtate,
            To Craſſus did me conſecrate:
            And ſo deuoted to his hands,
            I brought the wracks of Parthian lands,This was Craſſus ſonne, a braue yong nobleman ſlaine in the Parthian wars with his father the rich Craſſus a Roman Senatour.
            
            Amongſt the Roman martiall bands.
            Now ciuill harmes do follow me,
            And thy iuſt cauſe; the Gods do flee
            By my default; O worthy Pheere,
            My hapleſſe match thou boughtſt too deare.
            Had Fortune power to ſhew ſuch ſpight
            Vpon ſo great and braue a knight.
            Accurſed wretch, why did I match
            My ſelfe to thee, theſe harmes to hatch,
            Now let me thereof bide the paine,
            VVhich I will take without diſdaine,
            And that the ſeas may be more milde,
            And faith of kings reſt vndefilde.
            
               And all the world to thee ſtand faſt,
            Into theſe deepes my body caſt.
            For would my head were damn'd to die,
            So thou mightſt conqueſt gaine thereby
            Now Pompey make thy loſſes knowne,
            
               Iulia the daughter of Caeſar, Pompeys late wife.And Iulia let thy ſpight be ſhowne.
            Where ſo in ciuill camps thou haunt,
            And on my bed thy vengeance vaunt.
            Be preſent here me to torment,
            Let thy wroth on me wretch be ſpent.
            Thy Pompey ſpare: ſo hauing ſaid,
            Her grieued head againe ſhe laid
            Vpon her husbands wofull breſt,
            And in his armes awhile did reſt.
            Theſe words cauſd many a waterie eye,
            Amongſt the troops of ſtanders by.
            And Pompeys heart euen duld with cares,
            For ſecond ſorrow now prepares.
            Thus Lesbos from his eyes did ſtraine,
            Teares, that Pharſalia could not gaine.
            
               The oration of the citizens of Mitilen to Pompey.¶ By this from Mitilen great ſtore
            Of people came, that fill'd the ſhore.
            And ſaid to Pompey in this wiſe,
            Great honour muſt to vs ariſe
            For euermore, and to our ſtate,
            So to be truſted with the Mate
            Of noble Pompey, as whoſe thrals
            We now deuote our eitty wals
            With ſacred vowes; and do thee pray
            That thou one night with vs wouldſt ſtay,
            And vs vouchſafe thy hoſts to be,
            Our houſhold Gods ſhall welcome thee.
            O Pompey by this grace of thine,
            Make vs to future ages ſhine.
            That Roman gueſts that ſeeke this ſhore,
            May for thy ſake loue vs the more.
            No cittie in this conquered ſtate,
            Now better ſorteth with thy fate.
            All places now in hope may ſtand,
            For fauour at the victors hand.
            
               Already we haue run the raceThe Mitelens hopeleſſe of Caeſars fauour.
            
            That vs hath brought in his diſgrace.
            What though our Iſle lye in the maine;
            Can Caeſars Nauy vs conſtraine?
            Of Senators the greateſt part
            Some certaine place will hold for Mart.
            Thou maiſt againe repaire thy fame
            In ſome one coaſt of noted name:
            The treaſures of our Temples hold,
            Our Gods to thee ſhall giue their gold.
            Our men and ſhips as thou ſhalt pleaſe,
                  Mitelen wholly deuotes it ſelf to Pompey.
               
            
            Shall be imploy'd by land or ſeas.
            And Lesbos worth what it can make,
            Vſe as thy owne and freely take.
            And leſt that Caeſar it poſſeſſe,
            Take it to thee in thy diſtreſſe.
            And this ſuſpect take from our land,
            That haue deſir'd it at thy hand.
            That as when thy eſtate was hye,
            Thou in our faith didſt truſt affye.
            So now in thy aduerſity
            Seeme not to doubt our loyalty.
            This deere deuotion of their part,
            Did greatly comfort Pompeys heart▪
            
            And vnto him no little ioy,
            To finde ſuch faith in moſt annoy.
            No land that's vnder heau'n (quoth he)
            Hath deerer been then yours to me.
                  Pompeys anſwere to the Mitelens.
               
            
            And ſuch my truſt I did approue
            With this great pledge of my hearts-loue,
            For I to Lesbos truſty ſtate
            Committed my deere ſpouſed mate:
            Here was my ſacred manſion,The confidēce that Pompey had in the Mitelens.
               
            
            And Gods of my deuotion.
            Another Rome to me this was;
            And when my ſhip to ſeas did paſſe,
            To this place firſt I tooke my flight,
            And on no other ſhore would light.
            Now ſince I know that Caeſar hath
            Againſt this ſtate conceiued wrath,
            
               Becauſe that during this our ſtrife,
            You ſafely guarded Pompeys wife.
            Thinke you that I would now refraine
            To put my truſt in you againe,
            As though that now you ſtood in awe,
            
               
                  Pompey acknowledgeth the Mittilens to be in Caeſars diſgrace for his ſake.
               Caeſars diſlikes on you to draw?
            When as I know that for our ſakes,
            Already he as foes you takes.
            No, now about the world muſt I
            New forces ſeeke, and fortunes try.
            
               
                  Lesbos famous for faith to Pompey.
               ¶ Alas! how happy Lesbos name,
            Will through all Ages flye with fame?
            Whether by thy example led,
            I ſhall by Kings be ſuccoured:
            Or elſe that Lesbos hath alone
            To Pompey ſo great kindneſſe ſhowne.
            For now I haue reſolu'd my minde
            To trye where I may comfort finde,
            And who to me will be vnkinde:
            And if that any Gods there be,
            That the protection takes of me:
            
               
                  Pompeys requeſt to the Gods.To them my laſt petitions are,
            That they the peoples hearts prepare,
            As faithfully to me to ſtand,
            As doe the people of this land.
            That though I now be put to flight,
            Yet for all that in Caeſars ſpight,
            Their gates may be reſerued ſtill
            For me to come and go at will.
            So hauing ſaid, euen with that word,
            His wofull wife he takes aboord:
            
               The griefe of the Mittilens for Cornelias departure.The Mitelens ſuch mone then make
            That one would thinke they did forſake
            Their natiue ſoyles; for on the ſtrands
            They cry and waile, and wring their hands.
            But Pompeys fortune leſſe they mournd,
            Then hers that with them had ſoiourn'd
            So long in all this ciuill broyle,
            So as the people of this ſoyle
            Lamented, as if they had loſt
            
               A Citizen they loued moſt.
            The Matrons all held her ſo deere,
            That had ſhe gone vnto her Pheere
            In happy ſtate, with conqueſt gain'd,
            Yet had they not from teares refrain'd.
            So had ſhe with her kinde reſpects
            Oblig'd to her their deere affects,
            Her vertue and her modeſt grace,
            Her milde aſpect and louely face
            In all their hearts had tane ſuch place.
            For ſhe was of ſuch humble cheere,
            Though wife to ſuch a mighty Peere,The loue and honour that the Mitelens bare to Cornelia for her ſweet behauiour.
            
            That ſhe to them gaue no diſlike,
            But liued as a gueſt full meeke;
            As though that ſhe for ſuccour came,
            And not as noble Pompeys Dame
            
            Left there when he his fortunes ioy'd,
            But as the wife of one deſtroy'd.
            ¶ Tytan began now to decline,
            So as one halfe of his bright ſhine
            Was hid from vs within the ſeas;
            The other halfe th' Antipodes
            
            Did then behold; ſo as nor wee
            Nor they, could then his full eye ſee.
            But Pompey now could take no reſt,Cares impediments to quiet ſleepe.
            
            So many cares torment his breaſt.
            Sometimes he calles vnto his minde,
            How many Cities were combin'd
            By league vnto the Roman ſtate,
            How many Kings confederate
            Of diuers humors, tooke their part,
            Whom he might draw againe to Mart.
            Sometimes he thinkes vpon the South,
            Whoſe lands the Sunne hath parch't with drouth.
            And thus a world of cares and toyle
            In his perplexed breaſt doe broyle.
            Sometimes in hope to leuy Armes:
            Sometimes in dread of future harmes.
                  Pompey conferres with his Pilot about his courſe.
            
            Then with the Maiſter he confarres
            About the motions of the ſtarres;
            
               And how the Coaſts and lands doe lye,
            The ſignes of weather in the skye,
            And when 'tis fit to hull or trye:
            Or elſe with ſailes to cut the deepes,
            What ſtarre the Syrian quarters keepes;
            Or what ſtarre in the waine beſt ſtands,
            To guide a courſe for Lybian lands.
            ¶ This skilfull Pilot that had oft
            And long, theſe Nauall Courſes ſought,
            And ſecret myſteries of the skies,
            In this ſort vnto him replies:
            
               The Pilots anſwere to Pompey.
               We neuer (wretched Mariners)
            Do make our recknings by thoſe ſtarres
            That wandring ſtill rowle to and froe,
            We might be much deceiued ſo.
            But ſuch as do not range nor role,
            But are ſtill fixed neere the pole,
            And neuer in Neptunus deepes
            His fiery twinkling torchet ſteepes:
            But alwayes ſhines in one ſet place,
            By it we doe direct our race:
            And when this ſtarre aloft doth tend,
            And that the leſſer Beare is kend,
            Iuſt poynting on my maine yards end.
            The Boſpheros maine we doe explore,
            And Seas that Circle Scythias ſhore.
            But if Arctophilax diſcend,
            The leaſt poynt from our Top-maſts end,
            
               The Pilots obſeruations.And that the little Beare appeare
            Vnto the ſeas ſomewhat more neere,
            For Syrias ports our courſe we ſteere.
            But with Canopas, South we runne,
            For he the Northerne clime doth ſhunne.
            Or if he keepe our Larbord ſide,
            And ſo our helme for Pharos guide:
            Then in the middle of that maine,
            Our ſhips vpon the Syrts might ſtraine.
            ¶ But now I would be glad to know
            Your will, and whither you would goe:
            And what coaſt fits beſt your auaile,
            
               Accordingly to ſet our ſaile.
            
               Pompey to this vnconſtantly
            With doubtfull humour doth reply.
            Alwayes (quoth he) for our behoofe,
            See in thoſe ſeas you keepe aloofe
                  Prmpey directs his Pilot what coaſts to ſhun
            
            That are from Theſſaly remote,
            And neere Heſperia do not flote.
            Shunne you thoſe ſeas or ſhores to finde,
            Commit the reſt vnto the winde.
            My wife aboord with me ſhall ſtay,
            From Lesbos I tooke her away;
            Thither I did a due courſe bend,
            But Fortune now a port muſt lend.
            Thus hauing ſaid, the Pilot hailes,
            The Marriners do cut their ſailes.
            The ſheats that equally inclin'd,
            But ſpooned iuſt before the wind.
            He veares now to the larboord ſide,
            One tacke vnto the prow he tide,
            The other on the ſturne belayes,
            And to Aſsinas coaſt aſſaies;
            And where the ſurging billow ſhockes
            Alongſt the Iſle of Chyos rockes.
            Now angry Neptune frothing chides,
            Whilſt that the ſhip thus ſtemmes the tides;
            And all the while ſhe holds her courſe,Vpon the conſtruction of this Simile all the Commentators do vary & are doubtfull.
            
            He roring fometh worſe and worſe.
            With no ſuch eaſe and ſpeedy change
            The Coach-man can his Charret range
            From right hand to the left hand ſide,
            When he his trampling ſteeds would guide;
            And circling wheeles about doth trend,
            Firſt to attaine his races end.
            
               Phoebus vnto the world giues light,
            And dimmes the ſtars that ſhines by night▪
            
            When thoſe that now did ſcattring flye
            From this late ſtorme in Theſſaly;
            With all ſpeed after Pompey runne,
            And on the ſeas he meetes his ſonne;
            Yet ſcarce cleare of the Lesbian coaſt,
            
               And then more Princes of his hoaſt,
            That earſt to him had faithfull bin,
            And in this ſtate he now was in;
            A fugitiue and ouer-throwne,
            Did ſtill to him their loue make knowne.
            
               The Eaſterne Princes ſtand firme to Pompey in his diſtreſſe.And many Kings with martiall traines,
            That in the Eaſterne clymats raignes,
            And other Lords of powerfull ſtates,
            For all his wracked exil'd fates,
            Stood firme his faithfull conſtant mates.
            King Deiotarus, one of thoſe
            That ſcap't away with Caeſars foes,
            Did follow Pompey in his flight,
            And was employ'd to raiſe new might.
            To him his charge in theſe words giues;
            
               
                  Pompeys words to king Deiotarus.
               Thou faithfulſt king to me that liues,
            Since that the Roman power and hoſt
            In the Aemathian fight is loſt;
            Go try the fauour of the Eaſt,
            As thoſe that need feare Caeſar leaſt:
            The Nations that the waters drinkes
            Of Euphrates and Tygris brinkes.
            To Pompey it ſhall be no griefe
            In this diſtreſſe to craue reliefe
            Of Medes, whereby to wage new warre,
            And Scythians, though remote ſo farre;
            But vtterly to change our clyme,
            And vſe requeſts in this hard time
            To proud Arſaces for his aid,
            And if old leagues be not decay'd,
            But ſtill in memory are borne:
            Then by that God that I haue ſworne,
            The thundring Ioue of Latium land,
            And by that holy reuerent band
            Of Magi, that your oathes did binde,
            Prepare your ſelues in warlike kinde:
            Your quiuers fill with ſhaft and dart,
            And your Armenian bowes for Mart,
            Bended with ſtrings of Getan Art:
            And if (ô Parthians) heretore
            
               To warre on you I haue forbore:
            When I did range the Caſpian maine,
            And with my Army did conſtraine
            The fierce Alani to my yoke,
            And neuer did the Parthes prouoke.
            None did deſtroy, or ſeeke their ſoyle,
            Nor did enforce them to entoyle
                  Pompeys fauor to the Parthians.
               
            
            Themſelues, their children, and their wiues,
            For ſafe-gard of their goods and liues,
            Within the Babylonian walles,
            Nor euer ſought to make them thralles.
            But when I conquer'd Perſean Realmes,
            And the Caldean vtmoſt ſtreames.
            Swift Ganges and Hydaſpis fierce,
            That through the Eaſtern lands doth pierce,
            Waſting Nyſeas ancient walles,
            And ſo into the Ocean falles;
            Where Phoebus lifts his ſhining face,
            I neerer Parthes then Perſia was.
            Yet when I had ſubdu'd all theſe,
            My Armes in nought did them diſeaſe.
            Nor yet were they, mongſt all the reſt,
            For honour of my triumphes preſt.
            They onely were exempt by me
            Of all the Eaſterne Kings as free:
            With ſuch deſert I did them binde,
            And ſhall I Parthes vngratefull finde?
            Nay more then this Arſaces race
            At Pompeys hand hath found like grace.
            For after that ſame bloody ſtrife,
            Where Craſsus loſt his hoſt and life,
            What Romans could their hands containe
            From Parthes, that all our hoſt had ſlaine?
            Oblig'd to me by ſuch deſarts,
            Let them the like ſhew on their parts.
                  Pompey for reuenge would ioyne with the Parthes the moſt inueterate enemies of the Romans ſtate.
            
            Now let the Parthes with Trumpets ſounds
            Breake out in force beyond their bounds:
            And Zeugma that ſame Palean Towne,
            Let them ſurpriſe, or batter downe.
            Yee Parthes for Pompey conqueſt gaine,
            
               To conquer Rome is worth your paine.
            The King did no refuſall make
            This hard requeſt to vndertake;
            But preſently aſide did lay
            His Royall Robe and rich array:
            And in the habit him attires
            Of one of his inferior Squires.
            
               Tis ſafe for Kings in ieopardie
            
            
               To counterfeit baſe pouerty.
            
            
               How much therefore doth lowly need
            
            
               For ſafety greateſt Kings exceed,
            
            
               Freer from dangers and from dreed?
            
            The King in this ſort ſet on ſhore,
            
               Pompey then plies both ſaile and oare,
            Till he th'Icarian cliffe had paſt,
            
               
                  Pompeys nauigation, his wife beeing with him.From Epheſus he bends his maſt;
            And Colophonas pleaſant waues,
            And Samos rockes that foaming raues.
            And then a gentle puffing gale
            His ſailes from Coōs coaſts did hale.
            
               Gnydon he leaues, and Rhodes doth ſhunne,
            That voue their Altars to the Sunne.
            Then that great bay Telmeſydos
            
            Aloofe he flies, and ouer-goes:
            And from the middle of the maine
            
               Pamphilias coaſt appeared plaine.
            But yet he would not make aduenter
            Within a walled towne to enter.
            
               
                  Phaſelis, a little Iland in the Mediterane.Little Phaſelis was the coaſt
            That Pompey firſt did make his oaſt.
            The ſlender habitation there
            Made him the leſſe the place to feare:
            The empty houſes people needed,
            His ſhip their troope by farre exceeded.
            From hence againe his courſe he bends,
            And ſees how Taurus mountaine trends,
            Whence Dypſas to the ſeas diſcends.
            ¶ Would Pompey euer this ſuſpected
            When he the Pyrates force ſubiected,
            Or euer in his minde haue thought
            
               That to this ſtreſſe he ſhould be brought
            For ſafety ſo to range the maine,
            In one poore ſhip with ſo ſmall traine.
            But now the Senates greateſt part
            Eſcaped from Pharſalias Mart,
            Together met, though put in rout,
            And at the length found Pompey out;
            At anchor in the little port
            
               Calendrys hight,The Senators eſcaped from the battaile, come to Pompey.
                where great reſort
            Of ſhipping paſſeth to and froe,
            As Selyns ſtreame doth ebbe or flow.
            
               Pompey at length with heauy cheere,
            Deſired them theſe words to heare;
            Companions deere in warre and flight,
            The modell of our Countries right:
                  Pompeys oration to the Roman Lords that eſcaped from the battaile.
            
            Although that now to this bare coaſt
            By wretched Fortune we be toſt,
            Conſulting on Cylicias ſtrands,
            Not guarded with our armed bands:
            Yet now we muſt begin againe
            New proiects, warres to entertaine.
            To your braue mindes good comfort yeeld,
            All fell not in Pharſalias field:
            Nor am I ſo with fate oppreſt,
            But that I can raiſe vp my creſt,
            And ſcorne the blow that vs diſtreſt.
            Could Marius in the Lybicke ſoyle
            Repaire againe his bitter foyle,
            And win to him a Conſuls ſtate,
            And fixe his fame in Roman date?
            And thinke you I through Fortunes ſpight
            Will be ſuppreſt with leſſer might?
            In Grecian ſeas for my auaile
            I doe retaine a thouſand ſaile,
            And haue as many Captaines more
            That will attend me on the ſhore.
            Our force this battaile rather parted
            Then any way the ſame ſubverted.
            My fame that is of ſuch account,
            Can eaſily this loſſe ſurmount.
            
               The whole worlds force I ſoone will moue,
            My onely name ſo much they loue.
            Do you conſider and aduiſe
            What Realmes or States moſt fitteſt lies
            
               
                  Pompey deſires them to giue their opinions for aids to bee ſought.To ſerue vs now for our availe,
            Whoſe force and faith will not vs faile:
            Whether that Lybia be the place,
            Or Aegypt now as ſtands the caſe,
            Or Parthians friendſhip we embrace.
            Which of all theſe you eſtimate
            Worthieſt to aid the Roman ſtate.
            For me, my Lords, I will diſcloſe
            In my conceit what I ſuppoſe:
            And all my reaſons lay downe flat
            
               
                  Pompey ſets down his conceit for ſuccours.That leads my minde to this or that.
            The Nylus King is but a youth,
            And that makes me to doubt his truth;
            For conſtant faith more ſure doth reſt
            Within a graue and manly breaſt.
            The Moore I do no whit applaud,
            We all do know them full of fraud.
            And how that wicked Carthage race
            Hath alwayes practiſ'd Romes diſgrace
            We right well know; and that there reſts
            More Hanniballes yet in their breaſts.
            And as for the Numidian Kings,
            That now from baſtards races ſprings,
            Whoſe murdrous hands the blood diſtaines
            Of their true lawfull ſoueraignes;
            And did of late with ſo great pride
            
               Varus that led our force, deride;
            
               Meaning king Iuba.
               Who ſought his aid, and with diſgrace
            Alotted Rome a ſecond place.
            This makes me thinke tis beſt we proue
            Our friends by Eaſt, and truſt their loue.
            Great Euphrates with his vaſte ſtreames
            Diuides and boundeth many Realmes.
            The Caſpian ſea hath limits large,
            And harbours ſafe within his varge.
            In other ſort the heauens aſpects,
            
               Th' Aſsirian dayes and nights directs.
            That ſea is of another ſtaine,
            And flat ſecluded from our maine:
            Their people conquering humors beare,
            And for the warres large Courſers reare.
            VVith ſtronger bowes they battaile wage,
            The yong and old, and euery age
            Affects his vigrous draught to ſhow,
            Each arrow giues a deadly blow.
            The Parthes were firſt that brake the rankes
            Of Alexanders piked ſlanks.
                  Craſſus extols the Parthian forces.
            
            And Bactra that ſame Citty great
            VVonne from the Medes, their Regal ſeate,
            And Babylon with walles ſo hye,
            That doth Aſsiria dignifie.
            Our Piles the Parthians holds ſlight,
            And in the field with vs dare fight:
            And with what force Scythes arrowes flye,
            
               Craſsus defeat too well did try:
            They haue not onely heads of ſteele,
            VVhoſe piercing force their foes do feele;
            But poyſon on thoſe heads they fixe,
            So as if any place it prickes,
            The ſmalleſt wound death with it brings,
            And all the blood with venomemings.
            ¶ VVould God no cauſe did me encline
            To truſt to proud Arſaces line.The Parths enemies to the Romans
               
            
            Theſe Parthes with their ſubſiſting fate
            Our Empire ſtill did emulate:
            And all the heauenly powers with grace
            Haue lookt vpon the Parthian race.
            But I would alſo ſend for bands,
            And valiant troopes from other lands,
            The furtheſt Eaſt I would incite
            To ſend to vs their Martiall might.
            But if the Eaſterne faith refuſe,
            So as their aid we cannot vſe,
            And the Barbarian leagues doe faile,
            Let Fortune ſtrike my ſhip-wracke ſaile,
            And me conuay to vnknowne coaſts,
            
               Neuer ſubdu'd by Roman hoaſts.
            
               
                  Pompey ſcorns to ſeeke to thoſe Nations that he hath triumphed ouer.I neuer baſely meane to pray
            Their aid, that earſt did me obay.
            Twill comfort me when as I dye,
            That in ſtrange climes my limbes ſhall lye,
            Whereby proud Caeſar ſhall not haue
            The power to grace or wrong my graue.
            And I will onely meditate
            The glory paſt of my liues fate,
            Which that worlds part did celebrate.
            What was beyond Meotis lake,
            And what ſcope Tannais did take
            With her ſtreames trending in the Eaſt,
            
               
                  Pompey famous in the Eaſt parts of the world.So farre hath my renowne encreaſt.
            To what lands hath my name more runne
            For famous conqueſts by me wonne?
            Or elſe from whence hath my deſarts
            More triumphs gaind then from thoſe parts?
            ¶ O Rome! my enterpriſe now guide,
            VVhat greater boone can heauens betide
            To thee, then in this ciuill Mart
            To ſee the Parthians beare a part;
            So to conſume them with our Armes,
            And mix their wrackes amongſt our harmes.
            
               A reaſon why to take aid of the Parthes.
               For when that Caeſars forces ſtands
            Encountring with the Parthian bands,
            
               Fortune muſt me the victor make,
            Or elſe for Craſſus vengeance take.
            Thus ſaid, he ſaw the Senates minde
            Stood not to his aduice enclin'd.
            But Lentulus amonſt the reſt
            VVhom vertues courage forwards preſt,
            And noble griefe for Roman fate
            He holding then the Conſuls ſtate,
            
               A braue oration of the Conſull Lentulus in anſwere of Pompey.
               His worthy voyce did eleuate.
            ¶ Hath ſo this late Theſſalian blow
            Thy minde deiected and brought low?
            Hath one dayes fate the world oppreſt?
            Muſt we amongſt our ſelues conteſt?
            Now after this Aemathian wound,
            
               Doth that all hope of helpe confound?
            Hath Fortune Pompey all bereft,
            That he in Parthians hands is left?
            Why ſhouldſt thou as a runnagate,
            So range the world to mend thy fate?
            In forraine climes, and in ſuch lands
            As to our ſtate malignant ſtands?
            And ſtars that vs no good lucke bods
            Wilt thou adore Chaldean Gods?
            And with Barbarian rites polluted,Lentulus reprooues Pompeys humour to the Parths.
            
            Be now the Parthians thrall reputed?
            Why did we firſt to armes diſcend,
            Our libertie but to defend?
            O wretch thou didſt the world delude
            If thou canſt liue in ſeruitude.
            Shall Parth that thee beheld with hate,
            A ruler in the Roman ſtate?
            That ſaw thee from Hyrcania leade
            Great kings thy captiues; and with dread
            Beheld the Indians conquered.
            See thee deiected and caſt downe,
            And baſely yeeld to fortunes frowne.
            Whilſt they puft vp in mind with pride,
            Do but the Latium name deride.
            And value Rome leſſe then their ſtate,
            To ſee thee ſo degenerate.
            O Pompey in thy ſpeech we finde,
            Nought ſuting with thy worth or mind,
            The Parth that doth not vnderſtand
            The language of the Latium land,
            When thou of him doſt aide requeſt,Abaſe reproch to Pompey.
            
            By teares thy mind muſt be expreſt.
            Shall we this wounding ſcorne endure,
            That Parths ſhall our reuenge procure?
            Rather then Rome with her owne armes
            Shall remedy Heſperias harmes.
            Did ſhe for this thee chieftaine make,
            That thou no more regard ſhouldſt take,
            But ſpread abroad with ſuch diſgrace,
            Her maymes vnto the Scythian race,
            
               And ſecret ſcarres; her to deface.
            What wilt thou teach the Parthian ſwarmes,
            The way to vexe vs with their armes?
            Hath Rome the hoped comfort loſt,
            Of ſuch a warre and ſuch an hoſt?
            Becauſe no kings ſhe would obey,
            But that her Citizens ſhould ſway?
            And wilt thou now the wide world range,
            To bring whole nations fierce and ſtrange
            To ranſacke Rome? that will diſplay
            Thoſe enſignes that they wonne away
            From Craſſus, when they vanquiſhed,
            And muſt from Euphrates be led,
            And here to our diſgrace be ſpred?
            That king that vs his aide denide,
            When as our Fortune was vntride,
            
               The vnlikelihood of Parthian aides.And came not to Emathia field,
            To vs will he now comfort yeeld,
            And ſo prouoke the victors ſpight,
            Whom he doth heare to be of might.
            And now will Pompeys fortunes runne;
            Such truſt with them did neuer wonne.
            The nations of the Northerne climes,
            Where fals the dewes and foggie rimes,
            Are ſtout in warre and feare not death,
            But thoſe that in the Eaſt take breath,
            And leade their liues in warmer ſoyles,
            Luld in ſweet aire, hate martiall broyles.
            You ſee what looſe attires and vailes
            Their men do weare that flit like ſailes,
            The Parth vpon the Median fields
            And Sarmates downes that large ſcope yeelds
            And on thoſe plains by Tygris bankes,
            
               The nature & manner of Parthias fight.VVhen they in length may ſtreach their ranks
            And at their pleaſure come and goe,
            Cannot be vanquiſht by a foe,
            But where the ſoyle is full of hills
            Theſe horſmen come not by their wills,
            Their roaming bow can make no fight,
            In buſhie ſtraights, or in the night
            
               When need requires they neuer guides
            Their horſe to ſwim from ſides to ſides,
            Nor with their armes ſtem ſtreaming tides.
            Nor yet will they their fight make good,
            When as their bodies bathe in blood:
            Nor yet endure the parching heate,
            Nor in the duſt to toyle and ſweate.
            They haue no engins for the warre,
            For rams they know not what they are,
            They want the art a trench to fill,
            And he the Parth repulſeth ſtill;
            And as a wall doth him oppoſe,
            That can keep out weake arrowes blows.
            His battell weake, his warre is flight,
            His troops ſtill ranging and but ſlight,
            A ſouldier fit to quit a place,
            But not to put his foe to chace.
            His armes defilde with poyſons art,The Parths no ſouldiers diſciplined.
            
            He dares not come to handy Mart,
            A farre off he his ſhafts doth dart.
            VVith euery blaſt of wind they flit
            And as it blowes they miſſe or hit.
            ¶ The ſword is of more great import,
            And beſt with valiant men doth ſort,
            The Fauchion ſharpe; but the firſt fight
            Diſarmes the Parths of all their might,
            For when their quiuers emptied are,
            They do retire and end their warre,
            They neuer truſt vnto their hands,
            In poyſned ſhafts their furie ſtands.
            O Pompey in the chance of warre,
            Thinkſt thou it doth nor make nor marre,The ſword the chiefe weapon of all armes.
            
            VVhether the ſouldier do prouide
            A truſty ſword girt to his ſide?
            And doth thy caſe thee ſo conſtraine,
            That thou wouldſt worthleſſe aid retaine?
            And nations ſo remote wouldſt trie,
            And out of thine owne countrey die?
            Is ſome Barbarian land deſign'd,
            The place where thou thy graue muſt find?
            
               There ſome baſe ſhrine thy lims ſhall haue,
            Since they would not vouchſafe a graue,
            To Craſſus that his fate complaines,
            But better hap for thee remains.
            For our laſt paine with death is fled,
            Which manly hearts do neuer dread.
            For death Cornelia needs not care
            That wicked King her life will ſpare.
            We well do know the barbarous rites▪
            
            That they do vſe in loues delights,
            And how like to the brutiſh beaſts,
            All humane laws their luſts deteſts.
            With wiues they neuer contracts hold,
            
               The luxury & impudent venery of the Parths.But like to ſwine they do vnfold
            The ſecrets of the nuptiall bed,
            And that ſame Tyrants court is ſped
            With thouſands for his concubines,
            After his feaſts and change of wines.
            One man prouoketh his delight
            With ſundry women euery night,
            The brothers with the ſiſters weds,
            The ſonnes defile their mothers beds,
            That wicked rumour that doth run
            Of Oedepus that Theban ſonne,
            How doth the world condemne and loth,
            Although vnwitting to them both,
            How often hath Arſaces race,
            That holds in Parth the regall place,
            By this inceſtious ſauage moode
            Commixed bene with ſlauiſh blood.
            
               He ſpeakes of Cornelias danger and diſhonour to liue amongſt the Parthes concubines.So as great Scipios noble child,
            Shall not all onely be defilde,
            But with a thouſand more be wed,
            As wiues to this Barbarians bed.
            Although his kingly luſt and flame,
            Stird vp with beauty of the dame.
            And glory of her husbands name
            Will make him more to her incline,
            Then any other Concubine.
            For how much more the Parth delights,
            
               In humane wrackes and foule deſpights,
            He wil know her for Craſsus mate,
            As deſtin'd to the Parthian fate,
            And deeme that ſhe her ſelfe muſt owe
            A captiue for that ouer-throw.
            O let that miſerable foyle
            Of Eaſterne wounds, in thy breaſt boyle▪
            
            And bee not onely thou aſham'd
            That to a baſe King thou haſt fram'd
            Petitions, for to lend thee aid;
            Bu
                  •
                be thou all as much diſmaid,
            That firſt thou ciuill armes diſplaid:
            For no fault more the people loth
            Acted by thee and Caeſar both,This ciuill wars did hinder the reuenge of Craſſus and his army loſt.
            
            Then that you two by ciuill warre
            Reuenge for Craſſus doe debarre.
            Our Captaines all ſhould then haue tryde
            Their force againſt their Parthian pride,
            And rather then haue Armies wanted,
            The Northern climes ſhould haue diſplantedA braue ſpeech.
            
            And from the Dakes and from the Rhene
            
            The Roman Legions withdrawen cleane,
            And ſo ſtrong forces to prouide,
            Haue bar'd the Empire on that ſide.
            Vntill perfidious Suſis towne,
            And Babylon they had throwne downe.
            To ſerue the Craſsi for their tombe,
            As monuments to honour Rome.
            
            To fortune we our prayers ſend,
            That with the Parths our peace may end.
            And if Theſſalias battell paſt,
            Hath giuen this ciuill warre his laſt,
            Let him that conqueſt doth enioy,
            Againſt the Parths his force employ.Lentulus reſpects the honor of Rome more then his mallice to Caeſar.
            
            That nation of the world alone
            I could be glad were ouerthrowne
            By Caeſars armes, and that for it,
            He might in triumphs charret ſit,
            Thinke that ere thou with ſucſt an hoſt
            Couldſt paſſe Araxes frozen coſt.
            
               Old Craſſus ſhade with heauy cheare,
            
               A ſuppoſition of that Craſſus ghoſt ſhould ſay to Caeſar.Stitcht full of darts would firſt appeare
            Before thy face; and thus would ſpeake
            O thou that ſhouldſt due vengeance wreake,
            For this huge ſlaughter on vs made,
            Thou whom we did our hopes perſwade,
            Wouldſt giue our naked bones a graue,
            That now in mould no reſt can haue,
            Camſt thou a league and peace to craue:
            Then will thoſe ſlaughters memories,
            Preſent themſelues before thine eyes,
            When on the walls with ſtakes yborne,
            Thoſe heads thou ſeeſt ſet vp in ſcorne,
            And Euphrates that did confound
            So many Lords in her ſtreames drownd,
            And Tygris that our bodies ſlaine,
            Did vnder earth a time retaine,
            And then diſgorged them againe.
            If with thy mind thou canſt diſpenſe,
            To paſſe by theſe without offence,
            
               A tant to Pompey.As well maiſt thou ô Pompey yeeld
            Thy ſelfe vnto Pharſalias field,
            Where Caeſar ſitting Conquerour.
            Thou mercy maiſt of him emplore.
            But better weigh our Roman cauſe,
            If thou doſt feare thoſe Tyrants paws,
            That in the South haue reſidence,
            And Iubas faithleſſe inſolence.
            
               Lentulus allowes that ſuccours may be ſought of Ptolomey.Let Pharus King of vs be prayd,
            And Lagus Realme to yeeld vs ayd,
            The Lybicke Syrts do ſafely bound
            Vpon this ſide Aegyptian ground.
            And Nylus from all forreine foes,
            With his ſeuen heads doth it incloſe
            On tother ſide; and tis a land
            That of it ſelfe can liue and ſtand
            Contentedly; and needs not craue
            Her neighbors helpe; nor ſhowres to haue
            
               Nylus doth ſo her paſtures laue.
            Whoſe ſcepter Ptolemie a boy
            
               And regall crowne doth now enioy.Ptolomey a ward to Pompey.
            
            Beſides to Pompey he doth reſt
            Oblig'd, and by his ſires bequeſt
            Thy pupill is, then who would feare
            A name that doth b
                  ••
                ſhadow beares.
            His age as yet from guile is free,
            Such faith you could not looke to ſee,
            Such lawes or ſuch integrities,
            Nor ſeruice to the Deities.
            In that kings court that raigned laſt,He meanes that the old king was fuller of wiles and impieties.
            
            
               Long rule all right doth ouercaſt.
            
            
               Vnder a king that newly raignes,
            
            
               All things are milde, noe force conſtraines.
            
            No more he ſayd, this ſwaid their mind,
            What libertie laſt hopes do finde?
            To Pompeys cenſure none enclinde.
            ¶ Then they Cilician coaſts forſake,
            And ſaile for Cyprus Iſle doe make,
            Where Venus mindfull of that place,Ciprus, Venus Iland.
            
            In Paphos for the Ilands grace
            Her Altars keepes whence ſpring her race.
            
               If we may thinke that on the earth,
            
            
               The heauenly powers may take their birth.
            
            
               Or that the Gods (as ſome do raue)
            
            
               Like humane wights beginnings haue.
            
            When Pompey from this harbour wends,
            About the Cyprian cliffes he trends,
            And Southward doth his way direct,
            But with contrary tides was checkt
            That do alongſt thoſe channels ſweepe,Pharos a tower where a great lanthorne was ſet to direct ſhips by night on thoſe coſts.
            
            Neither doth he a ſtraight courſe keepe
            Towards mount Caſsium, by the light
            That Pharus tower ſets out at night.
            But fell with Aegypts loweſt ſhore,
            Scarce ſtemming tides with ſayle and oare.
            And hardly thither got withall
            Where Nylus parted greateſt fall
            With her ſeuenth ſtreame and mighty ſway,
            Doth fall into Peluſium bay.
            It was the ſeaſon and the time
            
               When Libra being in her prime,
            Indifferently the ballance ſwayes,
            With equall lengths of nights and daies.
            And Autums ſolſtice now requits,
            By lengthning her enſuing nights,
            The houres that were tane away
            By ſprings ſolſtice increaſing day.
            Now when that Pompey had deſcride
            That Egypts king did then reſide
            Neare Caſsius mount he tacks about,
            Seeking a way to find him out,
            For yet did neither daylight faile,
            Nor had the ſhip yet ſtroken ſaile.
            
               The ſcouts on the coaſt diſcouer Pompeys ſhips.¶ Forthwith the horſe ſcouts that did ſtand
            For Centinels alongſt the land,
            Alarums gaue to all the ſhores
            And ſild the court with great vprores.
            The ſudden comming of this man,
            For Counſell ſmall time gaue them than.
            Yet all the vipers of that Court
            
               The Aegyptians go to coū
                  ſell.To conſultation did reſort
            Amongſt the reſt of all which Peeres,
            One Achoreus full of yeeres,
            A reuerent ſire, whom ſchooling age
            More modeſt made, and free from rage.
            He was a natiue of that ſoyle
            That flowing Nylus doth entoyle.
            In Memphis he receiu'd his lore,
            That doth vaine Rites ſo much adore,
            VVhere hee had long time exerciſ'd
            (As Prieſt) the lawes they had deuiſ'd,
            
               
                  Apis was a Bull that the Memphites honored as a God, whō they ſuffered to liue but ſome few yeares, & then tooke another in his place. Some name him Oſyris.
               In honour of that horned beaſt
            VVhich they with deity inueſt:
            To whom for name they Apis giue,
            Many of which hee did out-liue.
            This Achoreus counſell gaue,
            That faith and merite ought to haue
            A great reſpect vnto it borne,
            And that they ought not hold in ſcorne
            The plighted league and vowes of loue
            That this Kings father did approue.
            
               And vnto Pompey ſtill profeſt,Here it ſeems the Authour was defectiue by iniury of time and Achoreus ſpeech loſt, which the tranſlator ſupplied, as pertinent.
            
            By whom his kingdome he poſſeſt,
            For what quoth he can mortals bind
            To friendſhip in a higher kind,
            If kings and ſtates no faith maintaine,
            How ſhall the vulgar truth retaine?
            
               When they by higher powers are taught
            
            
               All loyall truſt to ſet at naught.
            
            Why do all kings their ſubiects ſweare
            Fidelitie to them to beare,
            If that the kings owne actions teach?
            Of vowes and leagues to make a breach?
            When due reſpects failes in the head,
            How will the members be miſled,
            We ſee that all the world is bent
            To ſeeke the way that Princes went.
            All kings by Ceremonies ſtand,
            By lawes they rule with powerfull hand.
            But if thoſe lawes they vioalate,
            They weaken then their owne eſtate.Order and iuſtice the ſupport of regall power.
            
            For where we ſetled order ſwayes
            Who there can rule, or who obayes?
            Where Iuſtice force doth ſtrike no ſtroke,
            It there diſſolues ſubiections yoake.
            When kings themſelues lawleſſe grow,
            They hazard then to ouerthrow
            Their owne eſtate; and teach that mind
            That is ambitiouſly enclind,
            How to aſpire by fraud or might,
            To reaue away their ſoueraignes right.
            He that no good deſerts obſerues,
            The like at others hands deſerues.
            Thy father did by Pompeys grace
            Of Soueraigntie obtaine this place,Pompey eſtabliſhed Ptolomeys father in the kingdome.
            
            And ſo thy ſelfe enioyes this land,
            VVhich he receiu'd at Pompeys hand.
            For it he dy'd in Pompeys debt,
            VVhich fauour thou maiſt not forget.
            For thereby ſhall the Romane ſtate,
            Eſteeme thee but a Prince ingrate.
            
               And Caeſars ſelfe condemne thy mind
            As moſt diſloyall and vnkind.
            
               And thinke how much thou wouldſt him ſcorne,
            
            
               Ptolomy wold haue done as much by Caeſar if he had bene in his mercie.If he in like ſtate were forlorne;
            
               And forc'd thy royall aid to craue,
            
            
               Of whom a friend no helpe could haue.
            
            In his braue mind he will thee deeme,
            A Prince of worth and more eſteeme
            For fauouring Pompey in diſtreſſe,
            That at thy hands deſerues no leſſe,
            Then now to vſe him with diſdaine,
            In hope thereby Caeſar to gaine.
            A foe that man will dignifie,
            That helps his friend in miſerie:
            Though treaſons act ſecure his ſtate,
            Yet Caeſar will the traytor hate,
            
               Ptolomey at the firſt aided Pompey againſt Caeſar.And thinke that thou to none doſt beare
            Good will, but ſuch as grows by feare,
            And therefore will the Roman ſtate
            Deeme that thou didſt both parties hate.
            But do not enuy'd courſes proue,
            Thy greatnes rather ground on loue.
            With kings the noble Lyons port,
            Then Foxes wiles, doth better ſort.
            
               Pompey againe his head may raiſe,
            
               Marius baniſht recouered his honor againe in the Roman ſtate.As Marius did in former dayes:
            Or if not ſo, yet are we ſure,
            The Romane Empire will endure,
            For her foundation doth not ſtand,
            By Caeſars or by Pompeys hand.
            Her Peeres, her people, and her powre,
            One battell cannot ſo deuoure;
            That we ſhould thinke we may diſdaine
            Her Empire that doth ſtill remaine.
            The bloody field at Cannas fought,
            More ſlaughter then Pharſalia wrought.
            And though that the Trebeian fight,
            And Tracimene did giue them flight,
            Yet Romes eſtate ſubſiſted ſtill,
            And did reuenge her ſelfe at will.
            
               For Hannibal was vanquiſhed,
            And Carthage Empire ruined.
            Though thou no aide to Pompey giue,
            Yet like a king his wants releiue,
            And giue him ſafetie in thy lands,
            That cuſtome with all Nations ſtands.
            For Caeſars ſelfe hath tride like grace
            When he did flie from Syllas face,
            And for the ſafetie of his head,
            Vnto king Nichomedes fled,
            And therefore doth by practiſe know,
            That kings in honour ought to ſhow
            Remorſe on him that comes a gueſt:Kings in honor ought to releeue diſtreſſed Princes for that it may be their owne eaſe.
            
            
               For kings themſelues may be diſtreſt.
            
            And Ptolomie thy father late,
            Oppreſſed by his fathers hate,
            Was aided by the Roman ſtate.
            Though Caeſar for a time may raigne,Rome euer an enemy to Monarchy.
            
            Yet Rome doth Monarchie diſdaine.
            And her braue ſpirits that ſtill liu'd free,
            To vaſſallage will not agree.
            Meane while defile not thou thy youth,
            Vngratefully vnto that truthIngratitude reproued.
            
            That heretofore hath ſhewde ſuch grace
            To thee, and to thy kingly race.
            Thy dying father did commend
            The care of thee as to a frend,
            To Pompeys truſt, which in iuſt ſort
            He did diſcharge and thee ſupport.
            If this may not oblige thy mind,
            Who right of thee can hope to find.,
            Be well aduiſd and ſtand in awe,
            The worlds defame on thee to draw
            In thy yong yeares, for ſuch a ſtaine
            Will all thy life on thee remaine.
            The veſſell alwayes holdeth faſt
            The ſent wherof it firſt did taſt.Young yeares are apt to be diſtalned with ill manners & euer to retain the taſt therof
            
            But if thou wilt nor Pompey lend
            Thy aides; that Caeſar may offend;
            Nor in thy kingdome let him reſt
            
               For ſafegard of his life diſtreſt,
            Nor with thy bountie him relieue
            That to thy ſire this Crowne did giue.
            Yet him diſmiſſe in courteous ſort,
            When he ſets ſaile to leaue this port.
            Harme not his life, he was thy frend,
            For that would men and Gods offend
            
               He diſſwades the king from vſing any violence to Pompey by the example of Buſuris king of Egypt.All thoſe that ſuch vile acts haue done,
            Into the like miſhaps haue runne.
            
               Buſyris that with bloody vaine
            All ſtrangers ſo did entertaine:
            Was vſde at laſt with like deſpight
            Reueng'd by the Herculean might.
            
               He that with blood vpholds his ſtate
            
            
               The moſt do feare, and all do hate:
            
            
               And he that hated is of all
            
            
               Is ſure into miſchance to fall.
            
            That Counſellor that would thee good,
            Will thee dehort from Roman blood.
            For though the Romans now do iarre,
            And entertaine a ciuill warre.
            Long will they not be ſo beguilde.
            That mallice will be reconcilde.
            Meane while this warre vnto them ſhowes
            Both fained friends and ſecret foes.
            And miſchiefe then will ſure betide
            To thoſe that plaid on either ſide,
            For when this ciuill ſtrife is dated,
            And forraine wrongs ſhall be debated,
            O then will they reuengement haue
            Of all that in their blood did raue.
            Therefore it thee concernes ô king,
            To looke what future change may bring.
            And not alone to meditate
            
               That it behooues Princes to loue & eye to the future as well as to the preſent.The preſent ordring of thy ſtate.
            The skilfull Pilot will not truſt
            The glaring Sun, but doubts a guſt,
            And doth accordingly prepare
            To haue his ſailes and tackling yare.
            O Ptolomey then gouerne ſo,
            
               To giue no vantage to the foe.Giue no aduantage to a foe, nor offēce to a true frend
            
            Nor yet to ſerue thy preſent ends,
            Too careleſſe bee of tried frends.
            ¶ To this Photinus, prone to ill,
            (Who better knew with flattring skill
            To draw a Prince to tyrannize)
            In hate of Pompey thus replies.
            
               Rightfull reſpects (ô Ptolomey)
            
            
               Brings many Princes to decay.
               
                  Photinus wicked oration.
            
            
               Obſerued faith ſo much commended,
            
            
               Hath with repentance often ended,
            
            
               When men will ſtriue to eleuate
            
            
               That Fortune meanes to ruinate.
               Machiauels Maiſter.
               
            
            
               The Fates and Gods obſerue aright
            
            
               Thy wretches damn'd by their deſpight;
            
            
               Combine thou with the happy wight.
            
            
               As farre as is this earthly ſcope,
            
            
               Diſtant from high heauens vaulted cope,
            
            
               And fire and waues repugnant are:
            
            
               So truth and profite euer iarre.
            
            
               The power of Scepters then decayes,
            
            
               When truthes regards their actions ſwayes.
               Truth & profit repugnant.
            
            
               Tis truly ſaid that fooliſh pittie
            
            
               Hath oft confounded many a Cittie.
            
            
               Sly pollicie with ſearching ends,
            
            
               Envied Kingdomes ſtates defends.
            
            
               Except the ſword thou often draw
            
            
               Thou canſt not make thy will a law:
               A perſwaſion to cruelty.
            
            
               Do that and hold them all in awe.
            
            
               O let him from a court depart,
            
            
               That hath a pious tender heart.
            
            
               Milde modeſty and mighty power
            
            
               Cannot reſide in one ſelfe bower.
            
            
               Feare ſtill accoſts Regality
            
            
               That is aſhamd of cruelty.
            
            Not without ill intention borne,
            
               Pompey thy yong yeares ſo doth ſcorne;
            To thinke that thy vnconquer'd might
            From theſe ſhores cannot him affright.
            Such gueſts may not depriue thy throne,
            
               Heires thou haſt neerer of thine owne.
            If Aegypts Scepter thou abhorre,
            
               Meaning Cleopatra, then in diſgrace with her brother.Thy baniſht ſiſter then reſtorre.
            We will defend the kingdomes right
            Againſt the proud Italian might.
            What Pompey heretofore had not,
            Shall neuer be the victors lot.
            But now that Pompey is forlorne
            Of all the world, and Fortunes ſcorne;
            And no where intreſt hath at all,
            He ſeekes with what land he may fall,
            His ſence theſe ciuill broiles doe ſtall.
            
               Caeſar alone doth not him fright,
            But he doth ſhun the Senates ſight;
            Of whom the greateſt part and powre
            
               Theſſalian vultures now deuoure.
            And all thoſe Nations he doth dread
            Whoſe bloods together for him ſhed,
            He baſely hath abandoned.
            And ſhames of thoſe Kings to be knowne,
            
               He inuighes againſt Pompey.
               Whoſe Fortunes he hath ouer-throwne.
            
               Theſsaly hath him guilty tride,
            Not knowing where his head to hide.
            He now accoſteth Aegypts ſoyle,
            Which yet he hath not brought to ſpoyle.
            And giues vs by this vile pretence,
            Iuſt cauſe againſt him of offence.
            For why ſhould he engage vs ſo
            That now reſt free from warre or foe;
            And ſeeke to bring our land and ſtate,
            So deeply into Caeſars hate?
            Is ours the Realme on which in ſpleene
            Thou faine wouldſt lay Pharſalias teene,
            That with thy wrackes we ruin'd beene?
            Iuſt cauſe doth vs good leaue affoord
            To free this perill by the ſword.
            But where 'tis vrg'd at thy requeſt,
            The Senate did our King inueſt
            With this Crowne; we for that againe,
            With aids, thy quarrell did maintaine.
            
               But now this ſword worne by my ſide,
            Which fate now bids me to prouide,
            O Pompey muſt not thee offend,He ſpeakes as indifferent, not caring if both parties were ruined.
            
            But through the bowels ſhall tranſcend
            Of him that conquer'd was of late,
            I wiſh it rather Caeſars fate.
            We driuen are to go that way
            That Fortune goes, who all doth ſway.
            Doubtſt thou (O Pompey) if it be
            A courſe moſt needfull now for me
            To violate thy wretched life,
            When lawfull tis to free all ſtrife?
            With what hope didſt thou (haples wight)
            Deſire vpon our coaſt to light?
            When we are not prepar'd for warre?
            Our people ſcarcely able are
            With ſpades to delue thoſe clayie lands
            That Nylus ſoftens to our hands.
            Tis fit to meaſure our owne force,
            And of our ſelues to take remorce.An argument againſt the aiding of Pompey, and wiſely to conſider their owne eſtate.
            
            Thou Ptolomey maiſt (if thou wilt)
            Mend Pompeys wracke that lies now ſpilt,
            When Rome it ſelfe dures for his guilt.
            Dar'ſt thou Theſſalias aſhes reare
            And call in warres thy realme to teare?
            Before theſe late Pharſalian broyles
            We kept our ſelues from martiall toyles.
            Would Pompey new warres vndertake
            With our hands, ſince all him forſake?
            Would he prouoke the victors might
            Againe, that hath put him to flight?
            And pitty tels vs (as you ſay)
            We ſhould helpe wretches in decay.The humor of true worldlings.
            
            But wiſedome ſayes, we ſhould affect
            To like thoſe Fortune doth reſpect.
            What fooliſh truſt would leagues combine
            With friends, in pouerty that pine?
            ¶ This wicked counſell all allowd,Euill counſell ſoone folowed
            
            The boyiſh King was likewiſe proud
            To haue the honour him decreed
            
               As lawfull to act ſuch a deed,
            By Sycophants that ſooth his minde,
            Whereto Achillas was deſign'd.
            And to the ſeas ſide they repaire,
            A wicked ſhore for this affaire.
            O this was that ſame trayterous land,
            That borders on the Caſsian ſand,
            Whereas on Aegypts coaſts a ſhelfe
            Neere to the Syrts doth ſtretch it ſelfe.
            There they a little frigget mand
            With armed monſters in a band.
            O heauens! how could the riuer Nyle
            
            And barbarous Memphis ſo defile
            Themſelues; and that ſame tender breed,
            That the Canopian Ile doth feed,
            
               The people about Nylus tē
                  der and not martiall.Haue hearts to act ſo vile a deed?
            Doth ciuill fate the whole world ſtaine?
            Muſt Roman Rulers thus be ſlaine?
            Doth Aegypt ſlaughters new affoord?
            Muſt Pharus on vs vſe the ſword?
            O ciuill warres, to your owne Armes
            Reſerue our proper Countries harmes:
            And do reuenge your own blood ſpilt,
            Chaſe from you odious forraine guilt.
            If noble Pompey were deſign'd
            
               How diſgracefull it was to Rome to haue her Peeres ſlaine by her tributary princes.By Caeſars ſword his date to finde.
            Durſt Ptolomy ſo traiterouſly
            Doome one of ſo great name to dye?
            And thou Achillas halfe a man,
            Thou Eunuch whom the world doth ban,
            How durſt thou ſo with hands prophane
            (Whilſt heauen did thunder) work his bane?
            Hee that the world by Armes hath tam'd,
            Him that three Triumphes ſo had fam'd,
            The Champion of the Senates ſtate,
            The victors ſonne-in-law but late.
            This might alone for reaſon ſtand
            To ſtay the Pharian Tyrants hand.
            He was a noble Roman borne,
            With thy ſword muſt our breaſts be torne?
            
               Little knowſt thou (vnhappy boy)He reproues yong Ptolomy for this treachery.
            
            Little knowſt thou thine owne annoy;
            How ficklely thy fortune ſtands,
            That by no right now holdſt thy lands;
            Since him thy wicked ſword hath ſlaine
            By whoſe grace thou didſt rule and raine.
            ¶ Now Pompey ſtrooken had his ſaile,
            And in his ſhip, for more auaile,
            His Marriners fell to the Ore,
            So to convey him to the ſhore.
            Thus paſſing on with his ſmall fleet,
            A little Gally did him meet,
                  Pompey prepares to goe a land in Aegypt
            
            That was with wicked villaines mand,
            VVith ſhew to bring him to the land.
            Then Aegypts kingdome they profeſt
            VVas to his loue and ſeruice preſt.
            And therewithall they offer makeThe pretēded ſhew of loue from the Aegyptian king to Pompey.
               
            
            That he the benefite would take
            Of their ſmall skiffe to come a ſhore
            From his tall ſhip that could not more,
            Nor on thoſe channels ſafely ride
            And very hardly ſtemme the tide;
            By reaſon that the checking waue
            Did with contrary currents raue:A ſlight vſed to draw Pompey into their skiffe.
            
            And to all ſhipping perilous
            That on thoſe coſts were venterous.
            ¶ But had not deſtiny ordain'd
            And that which could not be refrain'd,
            The doome of the aeterne decree,
            To which his fate muſt needs agree;Deſtinie ineuitable.
            
            That Pompey to this ſhore muſt wend
            There to receiue his wofull end.
            He wanted not aduice of thoſe
            That were his friends, to doubt theſe foes.
            For that if they good faith had meant,
            And that the King with true intent
            VVould welcome him vnto that land,
                  Pompeys frends aledged a reaſon of ſuſpition.
            
            Giuen to his ſire by Pompeys hand.
            The Tyrant then with all his fleet
            In ſtate with honour would him meet.
            
               But he to deſtiny giues way,
            And as they wild he did obay.
            Leauing his ſhip he their skiffe enters,
            And ſcorning feare he death aduenters:
            Wherewith Cornelia headlong flies
            Into the hoſtile skiffe likewiſe,
            Seeing her husband ſo gone out
            
               
                  Cornelia diſtaſteth Pompeys aduenture.Tranſported with the carefull doubt
            That they did plot ſome villany,
            And therefore kept him company.
            Raſh woman ſtay behind (he ſaid)
            And ſo to do his ſonne he praid;
            
               
                  Pompeys perſwaſion to his wife & ſonne.And bids them there aloofe expect
            Of this aduenture the effect:
            And well obſerue with what faith led
            They now will entertaine his head.
            But all in vaine he charmes deafe eares,
            For now Cornelia, mad with feares,
            Her hands lifts vp with frighted brow;
            Cruell, without me, whither now
            
               
                  Cornelias words of impatience to Pompey.
               Meanſt thou to goe? muſt I againe
            In ſolitary ſort remaine,
            And reſt the company of thee
            Now from Theſſalian dangers free?
            We wretches neuer ſundred are
            But there enſues ſome heauy care.
            Why didſt thou not thy ſailes diuart,
            And flye into ſome other part,
            And leaue me (wretch) in Lesbos plac't
            If from all lands I muſt be chac't.
            Thy company I cannot pleaſe,
            But onely on the raging ſeas.
            When ſhe in vaine had thus complain'd,
            In doubt her owne ſhip-ſide ſhe ſtrain'd.
            With dread amaz'd her eyes ſhe rold,
            And did not Pompey then behold.
            Theſe in the ſhippes did doubtfull ſtand
            
               The counſaile of Pompeys friends for his landing.Of Pompeys fortune on the land;
            Not fearing feare or treachery,
            But doubting that too humbly
            
               He would that King for aid entreat
            To whom he gaue that Regall ſeate.
            But as he meant a ſhore to paſſe,
            He ſuddenly ſaluted was
            By one, a Roman ſouldier,
            That in a Pharian boate drew neere,
                  Septimius, a Roman ſouldier, that ſerued Ptolomy, deſcribed.
            
            
               Septimius hight (ô heauenly ſhame)
            That he his Countrey ſhould defame
            One of the guard to Ptolomey
            
            As his baſe weapon did diſplay.
            His Roman pile was ſet aſide,
            Fierce, violent, enrag'd with pride:
            No ſauage beaſt could him exceed
            For ſlaughter, or for bloody deed.
            A man would thinke that Fortune meant
            That ſo much blood ſhould not bee ſpent,
            Nor yet ſo many people wrack't,
            Becauſe the warre his right hand lack't.
            And that his murdrous ſword ſo farre
            Was baniſh't the Pharſalian warre.
            But Fortune ſuch thou ſpread'ſt abroad,
            That ciuill ſlaughters might be ſtroad
            In euery coaſt, to bring defame
            Vnto the victors cruell name.
            And that thy ſtories iuſt complaint
            Should all the Gods with ſhame attaint.
            So did this Roman ſword obay
            The King, and Pompey thou mayſt ſay,
            This Palean Princox did not dread
            With thine owne ſword to reaue thy head.
            And future times ſhall ſtill record
            
               Septimius name to be abhord.
            But with what tearmes to be expreſt,
            If Brutus fact the world deteſt?
            Now his laſt houre approached on,
            For hee with Pharian barge is gone,
            And of himſelfe the power had loſt,
            The Tyrants monſters him accoſt
            With naked ſwords vpon him bent,
            And when he ſaw their vile intent,
            
               
               
                  Pompey couers his face with his cloke when hee ſaw the traytors preſſe vpon him.With weapons preſt to giue the ſtroke,
            Vpon his face he throwes his cloke.
            Diſdaining that his bared head
            To fortune ſhould be offered.
            And therwithall he cloſd his eyes,
            His ſpirit he ſuppreſt likewiſe,
            
               
                  Pompeys reſolution.Becauſe hee would no moanes expreſſe,
            Nor teares to make his vertues leſſe.
            ¶ But when Achillas (damned wretch)
            With murdrous glaiue he made a breach
            
               
                  Achillas and Septimius doe murder Pompey.
               Into his ſide, with gaping wound:
            Nor ſigh nor grone yet did he ſound.
            But manfully the ſtroke did bide,
            And onely turn'd his face aſide.
            And from his place he neuer moues,
            But dying ſo himſelfe approues.
            And thus reſolues within his thought,
            Who then this villany had wrought.
            All after times that vs ſucceedes,
            And doe record the Romans deedes,
            This wicked act will not obſcure,
            But whilſt the heauen and earth endure
            To all parts of the world will flye
            This ſippe and Pharian perfidie.
            But Pompey now thy fame intend,
            
               Fate long thee happy life did lend:
            And didſt thou not, by dying, trye
            The valour that in thee doth lye?
            How ſhould men know that as thou liſt
            Aduerſity thou couldſt reſiſt?
            Giue then no way to others ſhame,
            Nor yet this actor onely blame.
            Though others hand thy life hath wrack't,
            Beleeue it to be Caeſars fact.
            
               The Authors bitterneſſe in taxing Caeſar.
               Let them my carkaſſe rent at will,
            O Gods I ſhall be famous ſtill!
            No power this happineſſe can rend,
            Though Fortune bee no more my frend,
            I am not wretched in my end.
            My deere Cornelia and my ſonne
            
               Doe ſee this ſlaughter on me done,
            And therefore Sorrow I thee pray,
            Shut vp my woes, and all diſmay.
            But if my wife and ſonne ſee this
            With griefe, their loue the greater is.
            Such was the fortreſſe of his minde
            Thus ſtout in death he life reſign'd.
            ¶ But now Cornelias patience
            Could not ſo eaſily diſpence
            To ſee this deed on Pompey done,
            As if her ſelfe that hap had runne.
            So as with wretched ſighes and cries,
            She dimmes the aire, and filles the skies.
            O my deere husband I am ſhe
            That thus hath bred the wracke of thee,
            When Lesbos Iſle with fatall ſtay
            Drew thee ſo farre out of the way.
            Then Caeſars plots arriu'd before
            Thy ſelfe, on damned Nylus ſhore.
            For who elſe durſt take liberty
            On thee to ſhew ſuch cruelty?
            But whoſoeuer that thou bee
            Ordain'd thereto by heauens decree;
            Or elſe by Caeſars heſt deſign'd:
            Or from thine owne corrupted minde,
            Vpon his head ſuch rage to ſhew;
            O cruell! thou doſt little know
            Where noble Pompeys heart doth reſt,
                  Cornelias complaint for the murdering of Pompey.
               
            
            Come with thy ſword and pierce this breaſt
            That vnto him is vowd and bent
            That more then death would him torment
            Shew, my head ere his life be ſpent.
            I am not guiltleſſe of this warre,
            As other Roman matrons are;
            For neither I vpon the maine,
            Nor in the Campe did him refraine.
            I ſtucke to him in miſery,
            VVhen Kings did ſhunne his company.
            Haue I (O husband) this deeſeru'd,
            In thy ſafe ſhip to be preſeru'd?
            
               
               A bitter interrogation.Vngratefull man, thou ſpard'ſt thy wife!
            Was I then worthy of my life
            When death on thee his force would trye?
            No, I in ſpight of Kings will dye.
            O Marriners ſtay not my veaze,
            Headlong to plunge into the ſeas.
            Or with your hands prepare a twine,
            That ſtrangle may this throate of mine:
            Or ſome one that was Pompeys frend,
            
               
                  Cornelia deſires to dye.Come with thy ſword and my life end.
            Thou ſhalt doe that for Pompeys ſake,
            Which Caeſars fury elſe will take.
            O cruell wights! why ſhould you giue
            Me longer life, that loath to liue?
            But husband mine, thou art not dead,
            Of my ſelfe yet I am not head.
            Of theſe, my death I cannot craue,
            The victor muſt that honour haue.
            So hauing ſaid, amidſt them all
            Rapt with a trance, ſhee downe did fall,
            And thence was borne in mazed plight
            In her owne ſhippe, that then tooke flight.
            ¶ But thogh their ſwords from ſide to ſide
            Had pierc't him through with gaſhes wide;
            Hee ſtill retain'd within his face
            A ſweete aſpect and reuerent grace:
            
               
                  Pompeys ſweet aſpect after he was ſlaine, and lay dead.His browes againſt the Gods hee bent,
            And when his life was gone and ſpent,
            Yet in his lookes, or in his cheare,
            No change at all there did appeare,
            As they themſelues did make report
            That ſaw him murdred in that ſort,
            For cruell hee Septimius,
            
            To make his act more odious,
            His ſacred face laid open bare,
            
               
                  Septimius vncouers Pompeys face after he was ſlaine, and hackes off his head.The couering vaile hee rent and tare,
            And whilſt the head yet breathes with ſweat
            Hee takes it vp, and thwart a ſeat
            The lithy hanging necke hee puts,
            And ſo the veines and ſinewes cuts.
            
               Then long he hackes the knotty bone,
            To cut it cleane he Art had none.
            But with his hewing that he makes,
            From off the corpes the head he takes.
                  Achillas vſeth Septimius baſely, and takes the head from him.
            
            The which Achillas from him teares,
            And in his hand it proudly beares.
            O Roman Souldier, ſlauiſh baſe,
            That woulds thy ſelfe ſo much diſgrace
            To be an vnderling to ſuch.
            For ſince thy hand had done ſo much
            Vpon that head of ſo great fame,
            Thou ſhouldſt thy ſelfe haue borne the ſame.
            O ſhamefull Fates! this boyiſh King,
            When they to him the head did bring,
            That he might know his manly looke
            The ſame in his right hand he tooke,
            And by the haire he did it hold,
            Thoſe reuerent lockes now hoary old,
                  Ptolomy viewes Pompeys head, holding it by the haire.
            
            That had ſo many Kings controld,
            And ſhadowed his comely brow,
            This noble head he pitcheth now
            Vpon a Pharian ſharpned ſtake,
                  Pompeys head borne on a ſtake by the Aegyptians.
            
            Whilſt yet with life the cheekes did quake.
            And whilſt with throbs the ſpirits beat,
            And ere the eyes were throughly ſet.
            So was this honored head abuſd,
            That neuer peace for warre refuſd.
            The Countries lawes, the armed field,
            And Roſtrum did him reuerence yeeld.
            That noble face, that braue aſpect
            The Romane fortune did affect.
            But yet this wicked Tyrants heart
            Was not ſuffiſd with this vile part,
                  Pompeys head embalmed, & preſerued to be preſented Caeſar.
               
            
            For he deſires his villany
            Might goe beyond his perfidy:
            And when they cleanſd his head and braine,
            So as no humors ſhould remaine
            To putrifie, then Art they vſe
            To keepe the face, and balme enfuſe.
            ¶ Thou off-ſpring laſt degenerate
            
               Of Lagus line, art neere thy date:
            
               Meaning Cleopatra, Queene of Aegypt, after Ptolomy her brother.For thy inceſtious ſiſters hand
            Shall reaue thy ſcepter and thy land.
            Muſt Pompeys corpes with ſo great ſcorne
            Lye on the ſands mangled and torne;
            And thence be caſt from ſide to ſide
            Againſt the rockes with euery tide?
            Whilſt that thy Macedonian race
            
               He inueighs againſt Ptolomy for not bringing Pompeys body.In ſacred ſepulchers haue place:
            And that their aſhes quiet reſt,
            With Graues and Monuments poſſeſt;
            And damned ghoſts of wicked mood
            Come from the Ptolmean brood,
            Be cloſd in Pyramids of fame,
            And with Mauſolas worthy frame.
            Was it a worke of ſo great paine
            To let the corpes entire remaine,
            That Caeſar might behold it plaine?
            Hath Fortune, after all her ſmiles,
            Thus Pompey foyl'd with her laſt guiles?
            Are all thoſe glories him aſſignd,
            Shut vp with death of ſuch a kinde?
            O cruell dame! muſt all thy threapes
            Fall all on him at once in heapes,
            That neuer earſt did feele miſ-happe,
            
               
                  Pompey neuer vnfortunate but now at his laſt, after the battaile of Pharſalia.
               But alwayes dandled in thy lappe?
            
               Pompey is hee that this can ſay
            Hee neuer yet ſaw lucky day,
            Mingled with any croſſe diſmay.
            His happy fate without ſtoppe goes,
            None of the Gods did it oppoſe.
            But when his ruine was decreed,
            They laid on load, and made quicke ſpeed.
            Fortune ſometimes did him aduance,
            And by the hand leades him in dance.
            But now on ſands hee lyes ore-flowne,
            And on the rockes with billowes throwne.
            And as a ſcorne in ſeas is drownd,
            Where waues make gutters through each wound:
            No forme in him is to bee found.
            
               
               Pompey hath no marke to be knowne,A ſtrange marke to be knowne by.
            
            But that his corps a head hath none.
            ¶ And yet before the Conqueror
            Arriued on the Pharian ſhore,
            Fortune for Pompey tooke ſome care
            And did in haſt his tombe prepare,
            Whereby he ſhould not want a graue,
            Although no fitting buriall haue.
            For Codrus that there hidden lay,
            Came fearefully downe to the bay.
            This man that crept ſo from his den,
            Was one of Pompeys hapleſſe men,
            And lately made his Treaſurer,
            When they put from the Cyprus ſhore.
            He durſt come out in darke of night,
            And loue vnto his feare gaue might.
            To ſeeke the body in the maine,
            To bring it to the land againe,Codrus Pompeys ſeruant entends a funerall ſire for his maſters body whē he had found it.
            
            And to the ſhore his Pompey traine.
            The Moone a little glimmering lent,
            Which through the duskie clouds ſhe ſent
            Whereby the body he diſcouerd,
            That with a differing colour houered
            Vpon the waues, that ſtrugling make,
            When in his armes he did him take,
            And being tired with the fraight,
            He hop't the wane would lift the waight.
            The which it did, and with that aid
            The corps he to the ſhore conuaide.
            And on the land where it lay drie
            Vpon the body he did lie,
            And wailing there twixt griefe and feares,
            He euery wound did fill with teares,
            And to the Gods and ſtars in skies,
            He thus poures out his wofull cries.
            ¶ Thy Pompey doth not of thee craue
            O Fortune, any glorious graue,Codius complaint againſt Fortune,
            
            Nor yet that gums of pleaſant ſent
            Vpon his funerall be ſprent,
            Nor that the fat his members yeelds,
            Mixt with the drugs of Eaſterne fields
            
               With orders ſhould perfume that aire,
            Which ſmoaking to the skies repaire.
            Nor that with loue the Romans led,
            To their deare parent being dead.
            Should him vpon their ſhoulders place,
            His day of funeral to grace.
            Nor that the pompe of his laſt date
            Should all exceed in glorious ſtate.
            Nor that the court with heauie notes,
            Should ſinging ſtraine their wailing throtes.
            Nor that the armie in a file
            Should march about the flaming pile,
            And throw their weapons down the while.
            Giue Pompey but a common cheſt,
            Wherein his bones may ſafely reſt,
            And that his rent torne lims may burne
            Together, and to aſhes turne.
            And that I miſerable wight,
            This to performe may want no might,
            A worthleſſe man his fire to light.
            It is enough ô Gods diuine,
            That there is wanting at his ſhrine
            
               Cornelia with diſheueled treſſe,
            And that ſhe cannot here expreſſe
            Poore ſoule, to him her lateſt vowes,
            With deare embracements of her ſpouſe.
            And on his face her teares deplore,
            Though farre ſhee be not from this ſhore.
            ¶ As ſoone as he theſe words had ſpoke
            Farre off he ſpide a fire and ſmoke,
            VVhere ſome baſe body was a burning,
            VVithout attendance, or friends mourning.
            From thence ſome fire he takes away,
            And brands that with the body lay.
            VVho ſo thou art (quoth he) that heere
            Neglected burnſt, to no man deare,
            Then Pompey yet thou happier art
            Be not diſpleaſed for thy part,
            That my laſt hands do thus beguile,
            Some portion of thy funerall pile.
            
               And if that any ſence remaineCodrus makes hard ſhift for fuell and fire to bury Pompeys body.
            
            In mortals that deaths dart hath ſlaine.
            Then giue me leaue I thee deſire,
            To take this pittance from thy fire.
            I ſhame to ſee thy Cinders burne,
            Whilſt fire ſhall want for Pompeys vrne.
            So ſaid the kindled brands he takes,
            And for the corpes a fire he makes,
            Which then the tide had well neare reacht
            But ſome part on the ſtrand lay ſtreacht.
            From it the ſands he wipes away,
            And then together he doth lay
            The broken fragments of a boate,
            (With fearefull hand) which there did float
            In a foule ditch ſomewhat remote.
            No heaped ſtacke of oaken piles,
            Theſe noble lims did preſſe the whiles,
            Vnder the corps no wood was laid,
            But to this ſlender flame conuaid
            A loft the body burning ſtaid.
            ¶ He ſitting downe hard by the flame
            Thus ſaid, O Captaine great of name,
            Chiefe maieſtie of Roman fame.
            If that the toſſing of the ſeas,Codrus ſpeech to Pompeys ghoſt whileſt the body was burning.
            
            And no graue would thee better pleaſe
            Then this poore obſequie of mine,
            Let thy braue ſpright and ſoule diuine,
            Theſe my endeauours nought eſteeme,
            But iniury of Fate it deeme.
            That I haue thought this lawfull done,
            Thereby thy bodies ſpoiles to ſhun.
            From monſters of the raging waues.
            And from thoſe beaſts on fleſh that raues,
            And from the vultures greedy mawes,
            And from the wrath of Caeſars pawes,
            Therefore in worth accept of me
            This laſt fire that I offer thee,
            If ſo it with thy honor ſtand,
            Now kindled with a Roman hand,
            But if that Fortune do recoyle,
            
               And bring thy friends to Latium ſoyle,
            Thy ſacred Cyndars may find grace
            To be lodg'd in a worthier place,
            So as Cornelia, Pompeys ſpouſe
            May yeeld to thee more glorious vowes.
            And with my helpe that now thee burne,
            May put thy cinders in an vrne.
            Meane while to ſhew where is thy graue,
            Some litte ſtone a marke ſhall haue;
            Vpon this ſhore, that if ſome frend
            Thy greater honor do intend,
            And would thy death more eternize,
            He may know where thy body lies.
            And to great Pompey here laid dead,
            He may againe reſtore the head.
            Thus hauing ſaid, doth fuell adde
            To this ſmall fire that burnes ſo ſad.
            And then the fat that in it fries,
            Doth cauſe the flame aloft to riſe,
            And to the fire giue freſh ſupplies.
            By this Auroras bluſhing face,
            
               Codrus hauing performed his laſt office to his maiſter, hides himſelfe againThe glittring ſtars away did chace.
            And he poore ſoule with maze afright,
            Diſorderly breakes of this right,
            And in a corner ſhuns the light.
            ¶ Vaine man what feare doth thee diſtract
            For thy performance of this act,
            Whereby vnto all future dayes,
            Thy fame with honor thou doſt raiſe,
            Since wicked Caeſar will commend
            Theſe bones ſo buried by a frend?
            Go ſafely and deſire to haue
            The head likewiſe to lay in graue.
            For pietie bids thee not ſhun,
            To end this duttie well begun.
            Then doth he take theſe bones halfe burnd
            And members not to aſhes turnd,
            Which he together doth diſpoſe,
            And in a little pit incloſe.
            Then leſt the wind the ſand ſhould raiſe
            
               Vpon the graue a ſtone he layes.
            And that no Marriners ſhould bindCodrus buryes the cinders & layes a ſtone with an inſcription on it.
            
            Their Cable where this ſtone they find
            About the ſame, and it diſplace,
            Vpon the top he did inchace
            The ſacred name with a burnt brand,
            
               Pompey lies buried in this ſand.
            
            Where Caeſar rather would he lay,
            Then want his graue or funerall day.
            But ô raſh hand that doſt ſuppoſe,
            In ſuch a ſepulcher to cloſe
            Great Pompey and his wandring ghoſt,
            That rangeth ouer euery coaſt,
            As farre as any land extends,
            And to the vtmoſt Oceans ends.
            The Empire large and name of Rome,
            
            The true tipe is of Pompeys tombe.
            Remoue this ſtone for very ſhame,
            Which to the Gods imputeth blame.
            If Hercules muſt needs haue all,Hercules and Bacchus tomb
            
            Mount Oete for his funerall,
            And Bacchus muſt with like accompt
            Take all Parnaſſus ſacred mount.
            Why then ſhould one Egyptian ſtone
            Suffiſe for Pompeys tombe alone.
            All Egypt ſhould ſtand for his graue,
            If no ſtone his inſcription haue,
            We Romans ſhalbe ſtill in dread,
            Leſt we on Pompeys aſhes tread,
            When we do range about thoſe lands,
            And doubt to march on Nylus ſands.
            But if ſo reuerent a name
            Thou wilt inſcribe vpon the ſame,
            His noble acts therewith conſort,
            His great atchieuements of imports.
            And there to that rebellious iarre,
            That he ſuppreſt in th' Alpyn warre
            VVhen as proud Lepidus conſpirde
            And how a Conſull he retirde,A breefe recitall of Pōpeys noble acts.
            
            Cald backe when he had put to foyle,
            
               
               Setorrius in his Spaniſh broyle.
            When for it he in Triumphs pride,
            Through Rome with great applauſe did ride.
            And how he gaue the world commerce,
            When he the pirats did diſperſe.
            Adde thereunto the nations wonne,
            And the Barbarians ouerrunne.
            With whatſoeuer in the Eaſt,
            Or in the Northerne parts did reſt,
            Shew that he euer armes laid downe
            His conqueſt done; and tooke the gowne,
            That thrice he had in Triumphs ſate,
            And gaue great ſpoyles vnto the ſtate.
            What graue can this mans worth containe
            His tombe lies leuell with the plaine.
            His wretched hearſe thou doſt not raiſe
            With titles equall to his praiſe,
            Nor yet thoſe holy orders write,
            That Roman Callenders recite.
            Which on the ſtately pillars ſtand,
            Of Gods the Patrons of our land.
            Nor with thoſe glorious trophees grac't,
            That are on temples arches plac't.
            Alas our Pompeys ſepulcher,
            
               The baſenes of Pompeys Tombe.Leuels the Egypt ſands ſo neare,
            And lies ſo flat vpon the ſhore,
            To reade it men muſt ſtooping pore.
            Which any Roman that goes by,
            But being told will hardly ſpy.
            ¶ We were not cautious as we ought
            Of that Cumana Sybill wrote,
            
               Sybilla Cumana her prophetes.Who warn'd vs in all ciuill broyle,
            To ſhun the harmes of Egypts ſoyle,
            And that no Roman chieftaine ſhould
            Come neare to Nyles Peluſian mould,
            But ſhun that ſommer ſwelling ſhore.
            What diſmall fate may I implore,
            Againſt that cruell land that durſt
            Attempt and act this deed accurſt.
            Let Nylus bacward bend his head
            
               And ſtay whereas his ſpring is bredA curſe againſt Egypt
            
            And let this parched ſoile remaine
            VVithout all helpe of winters raine,
            And let ſuch burning heates it roſt,
            As fries the Aethiopian coaſt,
            Thy Iſis Aegypt, for thy ſake,
            We did into Romes temple take;
            And curriſh Demigods withall,
            On whom with Cymbals you do call,Iſis the wife of Oſiris one of the Egyptian Gods.
            
            And thou Oſyris whom with plaint,
            As but a man your ſelues depaint.
            But Egypt thou in ſcorne doſt hold
            Our ſpirits in baſe duſtie mould,
            And thy ſelfe Rome that with ſuch ſtate
            Didſt thoſe braue Temples dedicateMeaning Caeſar, whom they accompted a tyrant for taking ſuch power to him ouer the Empire.
            
            Vnto the wicked Tyrants name,
            Haſt not yet ask't, for feare of blame,
            The aſhes of thy Pompey ſlaine,
            VVhoſe ghoſt doth baniſht ſtill remaine.
            And though at firſt that fearefull age
            VVere ouer-awd by Caeſars rage,
            Yet now take vnto thee at laſt
            Thy Pompeys bones, ſince feare is paſt.
            Except that the encroaching maine,
            Do them and all that ſhoare detaine.
            Elſe who needs doubt his graue to turne,
            VVith ſacred rites to grace his vrne.
            O would that deed were made my taske,
            And Rome at my hands would it aske▪
            
            O happy I and too much bleſt,The Authors loue to Pompeys merit.
            
            Might I remoue that ſacred cheſt
            And bring the ſame to reſt in Rome,
            
            If lawfull tis to force his tombe!
            ¶ But yet ô Pompey it may chance,
            That if ill ſeaſons dearth aduance,
            Or that contagious plagues oppreſſe,
            Or fearefull fires ſhould Rome diſtreſſe,
            Or earthquakes put vs in a fright,
            Theſe miſeries to baniſh quite;
            Vnto the Gods we make requeſt,
            
               And thereupon by their beheſt,
            Thou maiſt againe to Rome returne
            To expiate theſe with thy vrne.
            And that the chiefe Prieſt we ſhall call
            To beare thee to thy funerall,
            But now what paſſenger goes by
            
               Syenen that the heates do frie,
            Of Cancers parched torryd zoane;
            Or vnto whom is Nylus knowne,
            That coſts her Thaebas burning ſands,
            Which vnder ſhowring Plyades ſtands:
            Or who the red Seas gulffe doth trade,
            Or trafficks vſing to be made,
            About the rich Arabian ports,
            
               Pōpeys graue ſtands in the high way of thoſe that trade frō many nations.Or elſe for marchandiſe conſorts.
            With thoſe that come from Eaſtern ſhore,
            But Pompeys graue he will explore.
            And ſeeke to ſee that reuerent ſtone
            That lies his low lodg'd tombe vpon.
            And turne a ſide out of the way,
            To ſee thy cynders if he may,
            That on the ſands perhaps do ſtray,
            And therewithall will take delight
            To ſacrifice vnto thy ſpright,
            And will thy worthie name preferre
            Before the Caſsian Iupiter.
            
            So as this little paltery ſhrine,
            Will more aduance that fame of thine,
            Then if thou hadſt a Tombe of gold,
            Such as our Temples vſe to hold,
            For here interred lies with thee
            
               Romes liberty buried with Pompey.The Fortune of Romes libertie.
            So as a farre more happie ſtone,
            The Lybicke waues ſhall beate vpon,
            Then are thoſe Altars to be priſde,
            Whereon the victor ſacrifiſde.
            For thoſe that often are ſo bold,
            Their incenſe offrings to withhold,
            From the Tarpeian Deities
            Will ſhew their loues and charities.
            
               Vnto the ſhrine of thy ſweete ſoule,
            Here raked vp in this duske hole.
            ¶ Hereof the fame of future dayes,
            More glory vnto thee will raiſe,The authour meanes here that if Pompy had no tōbe at all, & the place of his ſepulcher forgottē, that then future ages wold (by conſidering his acts) thinke he were deified.
            
            Then if thy monument were built
            With ſtately marbles caru'd and guilt.
            And that the meaſure of thy graue,
            A huger height and ſcope might haue.
            For now a little time will chace
            Thy heaped cinders from this place,
            When as theſe ſands away ſhall fall,
            That couer now thy buriall.
            And ſo the knowledge will decay,
            How thou camſt to thy fatall day.
            Then ages happier will liue,
            Which will no truſt nor credit giue
            To any, that this ſtone ſhall ſhow,
            Which yet the world ſo well doth know.The Aegyptiās will obſcure this vile treachery from their ſucceſſors, & report ſo of Pompey as the Cretans did of Iupiter.
            
            But Egypt will diſproue this reed,
            Vnto her children that ſucceed,
            And make the Death and Tombe likewiſe,
            Of Pompey but ſuch tales and lies,
            As were thoſe of the Cretan Ile,
            Whence thundring Ioue doth take his ſtyle.
            Finis libri octaui.
         
         
            
            Lucans Pharſalia. The ninth Booke.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               FRom Earth great Pompeys bleſſed ſpright,
               Vnto the heauens doth take his flight.
               
                  Cato the remnants of the hoſt
               Tranſports vnto the Lybian coſt.
               
                  Cornelia wailing, grieues and mournes,
               And Pompeys robes to aſhes burnes.
               
                  Cnaeus his ſonne reuenge intends:
               
                  Cato his noble minde commends.
               The ſaylers fall to mutinie,
               Whom Catos ſpeech doth qualifie.
               About the Syrtes his nauie trades:
               And Lybia then his hoaſt inuades.
               Thence through the wilderneſſe he trends:
               And vnto Hamons Temple wends.
               
                  Caeſar Pharſalia now forſakes,
               And towards Nyle his iourney takes.
               Where Pompeys head they him preſent:
               The which with teares he doth lament.
            
            
               BVt yet the ſoule aloft aſpires,
            
               Pompeys ſoule receiued into the lower ſpheres.And ſtaid not in the Pharian fires.
            Such flames could not his bleſſed ſpright
            Reſtraine from their high mounting flight.
            
               But from the funerall it flits,
            And thoſe halfe burned members quits;
            That baſe vnworthy tombe it leaues,
            The thundring vault the ſame receaues.
            Whereas the duskie aire confines
            Next to the orbes that loweſt ſhines;
            And where the diſtance ſpacious
            Is ſpread betweene the Moone and vs.
            Where ſoules and demi-gods doe dwell,
            Whoſe ſhining vertues did excell:
            And vpright liues did them prepare,
            In this low element to ſhare.
            Whereas his bleſſed ghoſt it reares
            To reſt in the eternall ſpheres.
            Thoſe come not thither that are plac't
            In perfum'd tombes beguilt and chac't.
            And when he was in this faire ſeate
            With ioyous perfect light repleat;
            He viewes the wandring ſtarres in skies,
            And fixed planets Markes likewiſe:
            And ſees (in value of that light)
            Our brighteſt dayes are but as night.
                  Pompeys ſoule contemplates the earthly paſſages.
            
            And of thoſe ſcornes he makes but mirth,
            That they doe to his Trunke on earth.
            From hence Emathias field hee eyes,
            And Caeſars bloody Enſignes ſpies.
            Then flittes hee ouer all the maine,
            Where flotes the ſparſed Nauies traine:
            Then ſits in Brutus ſacred breaſt,
            Where for this guilt reuenge doth reſt.
            And thence hee flittes a place to finde,
            In worthy Catos dreadleſſe minde.
            ¶ He (whilſt the ſtrife in doubt depended,
            And that the queſtion was not ended,
            Whom this ſterne ciuill warre would call
            To bee the ſupreame Lord of all)
            Did Pompey hate;Cato diſliked Pompey. although his part
            He tooke, as fellow in this Mart;
            Led thereto for his Countries cauſe,
            And to obſerue the Senates Lawes.
            
               But when Pharſalias field was fought,
            Then Pompeys courſe did rule his thought:
            And into his protection takes
            His countrey, that a guider lacks:
            
               Cato takes on him the protection of his comely.And to their fearefull hands affords
            Weapons againe, that left their ſwords.
            But neither ſeeking ſoueraigntie,
            Nor that he fear'd ſeruilitie,
            Did he new ciuill warres erect,
            It was not for his owne reſpect,
            But (after Pompey loſt his life)
            For libertie was all their ſtrife.
            And (leſt that Caeſar might inueſt
            Himſelfe, of all the troopes diſtreſt
            By his ſurpriſes ſuddenly,
            After his gained victorie.
            They being ſo diſperſt in rout
            Through all the countrey round about)
            He to Corcyra did reſort,
            And thither to a ſecret port,
            He all the ſcattered fragments led,
            That from Emathias ſlaughter fled.
            A thouſand ſhips he fill'd with theſe,
            And thence he put vnto the ſeas.
            ¶ Who would haue thought the ſcattred traines
            That of Pharſalias wracke remaines,
            Suffiſd ſo many ſhips to fill?
            Or that the Seas were ſtuffed ſtill
            
               Cato aſſembles all the ſcattred Romans of Pharſalia.With ſuch a fleet, prepar'd for Mart,
            Belonging to the conquered part,
            Hence he to Malean Doris goes,
            And vnto Tenerus, that ſhowes
            The way to hell, and therewithall,
            On the Cytherean coſt doth fall.
            And ſo alongſt he leaueth Creete,
            
            
               Catoes Nauie and his nauigation.The Northwind driuing on his fleete.
            And (vrged by the ſhrinking tides)
            
               Dictaean ſhores he ouer ſlides.
            Thence to Phycunta he reſorts,
            That held his nauie from their ports.
            
               But puts that Towne to great diſtreſſe,
            And ſackes it, that deſeru'd no leſſe.
            Thence did a fitting winde procure
            Him to thy ſhore, O Palinure;
            For thou doſt not alone retaine
            Thy monuments on Latium maine:
            But Lybia's quiet ports do tell,
            They pleaſ'd the Troian Pilot well.Palinurus, Aeneas Pilot.
               
            
            Then they aloofe a fleet deſcride,
            Which did with doubts their minds diuide;
            Whether it did conſiſt of foes,
            Or of the fellowes of their woes.
            The victors great celerity
            Still held them in perplexity:
            And what ſhips on the ſeas they ſee,
            They ſtill thought Caeſar there to bee.
            But thoſe poore hulles alas did beare
            Nothing, but wofull plaints and feare:
            Yea ſuch as mournfull ſobbes might wreſt
            From Stoicke Cato's hardned breaſt.
            ¶ For after that (with vaine requeſt)
            
               Cornelia had her Pilots preſt,
                  Cornelia deſires to ſtay on the Aegyptian coaſt.
            
            And ſon-in-law (that would away)
            A longer time neere Nyle to ſtay;
            Becauſe her husbands Corpes ſhee thought
            Might to the weltring waues bee brought
            By ſurges of the raging maine,
            That on the Pharean ſhore did ſtraine.
            For proofe whereof ſhee ſaid withall,
            His corpes had no right buriall.
            Of Fortune then (quoth ſhee) was I
            So worthleſſe that thou ſhouldſt deny
            Mee meanes, and leaue for to attend
            My husband at his funerall end?
            And on the cold limbes of my ſpouſe
            To ſtretch my armes with lateſt vowes?
            And my torne lockes with him to burne,
            And place thoſe aſhes in an vrne
            That now the waues doe toſſe and turne.
            And that I might powre floods of teares
            
               Into thoſe wounds his body beares?
            And on my garments caſt at once
            The hot burnt cinders of his bones?
            And whatſoeuer lawfull were
            From out his funerall to beare,
            With my hands might be gathered,
            In Temples of the Gods to ſpread?
            But out alas his funerall
            No flaming honour had at all;
            Perhaps ſome hand of Pharos coſt
            Perform'd that act, griefe to his ghoſt.
            O Craſsian cinders yee were bleſt,
            That ſtill vncouered doe reſt!
            For ſeeing Pompey had that flame,
            The Gods repute it greater blame.
            
               To bee buried in that treacherous land was a diſhonor to Pompey.
               Shall my hard deſtiny ſtill finde
            Such diſmall woes to vex my minde?
            Shall neuer I the fortune haue
            To lay my husbands in a graue?
            Nor preſent be when as they dye,
            To fill their vrnes with flowing eye?
            But what need I ſeeke them a graue,
            Or inſtruments (O griefe) to craue?
            Vaine woman, doth not Pompey reſt
            Intombed in thy faithfull breaſt?
            Doth not his image fixt remaine
            In thy grieu'd ſoule, and euery vaine?
            Let after ages then (for me)
            Seeke where his cinders ſcattred be.
            Yet now me ſeemes I ſee his fire
            With a malignant flame aſpire.
            And ſomething dazles in mine eyes,
            That from the Pharian ſhore doth riſe,
            That to thee (Pompey) doth pertaine,
            And now that flame is out againe;
            And yeelds a ſmoake that Pompey beares
            
               The land where Pompey is interred, deerer to Cornelia then any other land.In vapours to the Eaſterne ſpheres.
            Whilſt ſpitefull windes do me betray,
            And beares our ſailes another way.
            No lands by Pompey conquered,
            
               Nor where his triumphes Carres were led
            Alongſt the ſtreetes (with glorious bayes)
            To the high Capitolean wayes,
            More deere to me (ſince reft my breaſt)
            Then Pharian ſands where he doth reſt.
            Tis Pompey I would haue ſo faine,
            Whom Nylus doth from me detaine.
            And that makes me not loath to ſtay
            Longer, within this wicked bay.
            The heynous fact that I deplore▪
            
            Is that, that now adornes this ſhore.
            If euer I did Pompey loue,
            I would not from this coaſt remoue.
            ¶ Do thou (O Sextus) warres purſue,
                  Cornelia perſwades Sextus to Armes.
            
            And ouer all the world renew
            The Enſignes of thy famous ſire:
            Such was his will and his deſire,
            That he in charge to me did giue;
            Which words within my ſoule ſtill liue,
            Pronounced with his lateſt breath,
            The houre that queld me with his death.
            My ſonnes, ſee that you vndergoe
            This ciuill warre againſt our foe,
                  Cornelia deliuers Pompeys words and charge to his ſonnes.
            
            Whilſt any of our name or birth
            Remaines aliue vpon the earth,
            Admit not Caeſars tyranny,
            Moue ſtates that ſtand for liberty,
            And mighty Townes that doe the ſame,
            And him reſiſt with glorious fame.
            Theſe parts to you I recommend:
            Theſe Armes I would you ſhould entend.
            Which of my ſonnes the ſeas likes beſt,
            Shall finde a Nauy ready preſt.
            My heire likewiſe (in following Mart)
            Shall Nations finde to take his part.
            Onely remember that you beare
            True noble mindes deuoyd of feare.
            And know tis fit that you obay
            Onely to Cato, if he ſway
            For liberty, and hold that way.
            
               O Pompey! thus doe I diſcarge
            Thy truſt, and tell thy will at large.
            But thy deceits haue done me wrong,
            Forſaken thus, I liue too long:
            And yet will not with perfidy
            Forbeare thy words to teſtifie.
            But now deere ſpouſe, where ſo thou be,
            
               Here he ſpeaks according to the opinion of Seneca, with whom hee was brought vp.I am reſolu'd to follow thee
            To Chaos vaſt, and vnto hell
            (If ſuch there bee, as old ſawes tell)
            But yet to me it is vnſure
            How long this life of mine ſhall dure.
            And therefore anguiſh ſhall preuent
            My liuing ſoule, from my ſoule ſent.
            And ſince to death it could not flye,
            When (Pompey) it thy wounds did eye,
            With griefe and wailings ſhee ſhall dye.
            In bitter teares ſhe ſhall be drownd,
            The ſword ſhall not our dayes confound,
            No ſtrangling halter will I trye,
            Nor head-long breake-necke from an hye:
            For me twere baſe to want the might
            By ſorrowes ſtraine to leaue this light.
            ¶ So hauing ſaid, her noble head
            With a blacke vaile ſhe ouer-ſpred:
            
               
                  Cornelias ſolitary griefes.And then retires her to the darke
            In hollow cauernes of the barke.
            And there vnto her ſelfe enioyes
            Her reſtleſſe teares, and griefes annoyes;
            And onely (in her husbands place)
            Doth woes and wofull plaints embrace.
            Shee ſcornes the raging ſeas and clouds,
            And Eurus whiſtling in the ſhrowds,
            And cries that Mariners doe make,
            When they with dreadfull dangers quake.
            To theirs ſhe makes contrary vowes:
            Reſolu'd to dye, ſhe ſtormes allowes.
            Her ſhip firſt ſeiz'd the Cyprus ſhores,
            Whereas the thundring billowes rores.
            And then to ſea they put anew,
            
               With Eaſterne winde that calmer blew.
            And lighted on the Lybicke Land,
            Where that time Cato's Campe did ſtand.
                  Cornelias fleete arriues on Lybia, where Cato was incamped
            
            Then wofull Cnaeus did eſpy
            His countrey fellowes, proaching nye
            The Affricke coaſt, and as thoſe mindes
            That dread afflicts, preſages findes;
            When he his brother Sextus ſaw,
            Neere to the ſeas ſtrand he doth draw,
            And head-long wades into the maine.
                  Cnaeus Pompeius words to his brother Sextus
               
            
            Deere brother now to me explaine
            Where is our Sire, and in what plight
            Stands our affaires? are we of might
            As yet, or elſe abandon'd quite?
            Hath Pompey Romes laſt fortune tride?
            So ſaid, his brother thus replide.
            ¶ O happy thou whom Fortune guided
                  Sextus anſwere to his brother.
            
            To other coaſts, from vs diuided!
            Thou onely miſeries ſhalt heare,
            Whereof mine eyes the witneſſe were
            When on the ſword our father dide,
            Though Caeſars hand he hath not tride.
            The Author of his funerall
            Deſerues by mines rage to fall.
            With that vile King, that in his hands
            Doth hold the fruitfull Nylus lands.
            He hop't ſome due reſpects to finde
            Of Hoſpitatious friendly kinde;
            For many fauours of his loue
            That this Kings anceſtors did proue.
            But (for requitall of that Realme)
            As ſacrifice his blood they ſtreame.
            Whilſt I alas beheld (with paine)
            Our noble Father by them ſlaine.
            Whereas I thought that Pharian King
            Durſt not attempt ſo foule a thing.
            But did preſume that Nylus land
            Would loyally vnto him ſtand.
            But neither me, the old mans wounds,
            Nor his ſhed bloud ſo much confounds,
            
               As when we ſaw his head forlorne,
            Throughout the traytors Citty borne,
            Fixt on a lofty pole in ſcorne.
            And now tis kept (by fames report)
            The wicked victors eyes to ſport.
            And ſo the tyrant feedes his minde
            For this foule fact high grace to finde.
            But whether that the Pharian dogges,
            The rauenous foules, or filthy hogges,
            Haue with the body fild their maw?
            Or whether that the fire we ſaw
            To cinders did the ſame conuart,
            I doe not know? but for my part
            I ſay, what euer fatall ſcorne
            Thoſe worthy limbes away haue borne;
            The blame vnto the Gods I giue,
            But his kept head me moſt doth grieue.
            When Cnaeus heard this heauy newes,
            He did not then his griefes infuſe
            With childiſh teares, nor idle plaint,
            But with iuſt piety attaint
            Inrag'd, thus ſpeakes with words not faint.
            ¶ Yee mariners, with haſte lay hands
            
               
                  Cnaeus reply, & ſpeeches of reuenge for his father ſo murdred.To draw your ſhips from theſe dry ſands,
            And with your oares, (without a ſaile)
            Againſt the aduerſe windes preuaile.
            Braue leaders now come follow me,
            No ciuill warre can iuſter be;
            Not ſo great praiſe as to interre
            Their naked ghoſts, that wandring erre.
            This tyrant boyes blood muſt ſuffiſe
            Great Pompeys ghoſt for ſacrifice.
            Shall I his Pelean Towres not drowne,
            And all thoſe monuments throw downe,
            That ouer Alexander ſtands
            In Mareotis foggy ſands?
            And raze to ground the Pyramis,
            
            Their monument of Amaſis?
            
            And make all thoſe their buried Kings
            To ſwim in midſt of Nylus ſprings?
            
               They all ſhall want and naked lye,
            (Pompey) thy Tombe to edifie.
            
               Iſis ſhall now bee rap't with fire,
            Whoſe God-head Nations do admire.
            And their Oſyris (clad in vaile
            Of linnen) common ſlaues ſhall traile.
            And Apis, their Bull-god, I'le burne
            A ſacrifice to Pompeys vrne.
            Vnder his head theſe Gods ſhall lye
            Wherewith the funerall ſhall frye.
            Theſe wrackes that wretched land ſhall taſte:
            Their fruitfull fields I will lay waſte,
            None left to plow, to digge or plant,
            For Nylus to relieue their want.
            None ſhall ſubſiſt, nor her gifts take,
            Depopulate I will her make.
            Thou onely Pompey, and thy graue,
            That Kingdome to thy ſelfe ſhalt haue,
            When all their Gods away are chac't.
            Thus ſaid, the Nauy then in haſt
            Prepares it ſelfe vnto the ſeas;
            But Cato did the wrath appeaſe
            Of this braue youth;
                  Cato appeaſeth the wrath of yong Cnaeus.
                yet in the end
            His noble ſpirit did commend.
            ¶ Meane while through all the coſt is ſpred
            The bruit of Pompey murdered.
            And therewithall a grieuous ſhout
            Of cries, did flye the aire about.
            No griefe did like example ſhow:The great lamentations of the people for Pompey.
               
            
            For neuer any age did know
            The people to ſuch plaints to fall,
            For any great mans death at all.
            But more, for as Cornelia, went
            Out of her ſhip to make diſcent
            Her viſage worne, and waſt with teares,
            And dangling treſſe about her eares,
            A doubled ſhout the people reares.
            No ſooner was ſhe ſet a land,
            Whereas the ſhore was next at hand:
            But Pompeys robes ſhe gets together,
            
               His Enſignes, and elſe whatſoeuer
            
               
                  Cornelias great piety towards Pompey
               Of Armes, or like abiliments,
            And all ſuch glorious ornaments
            (Richly imbrodered all with gold)
            As he was wont to weare of old.
            Then (three times caſting vp her eyes
            Vnto the heauens, and ſtarry skies)
            All this together ſhe did caſt
            Into a funerall fire at laſt.
            Theſe cinders ſhe (poore ſoule) did make
            The which ſhe kept for Pompeys ſake,
            Whereby the reſt example take.
            For preſently, throughout the ſhore,
            Of ſacred fires were made huge ſtore:
            Which they vnto thoſe ghoſts did yeeld
            Late ſlaine in the Pharſalian field.
            Such flames doe the Apulians raiſe
            When as the froſty winter daies
            Their fields of greene graſſe hath depriu'd;
            
               The cuſtome of ſome countries in burning their lands to make them fruitfulAnd with ſuch heate is new reuiu'd.
            So the Gargarians vſe their grounds.
            So Vulturs vales with corne abounds.
            And luke-warme Matyns vſe like ſlight,
            With boxen buſhes flaming bright.
            ¶ Nothing was done in all the hoſt
            More gratefull vnto Pompeys ghoſt,
            (Although for him the heauens they blame,
            And to the Gods vpbraid his name)
            Then were the words Cato expreſt,
            Proceeding from a ſpotleſſe breſt.
            
               
                  Catos Oration in the praiſe of Pompey.
               A Citizen (quoth he) is queld,
            That others heretofore exceld
            For skill in ſcanning of the lawes;
            But in this age for Iuſtice cauſe
            He profited the Roman ſtate:
            His reuerence chaſed dire debate.
            
               Freedome he aw'd not with his might,
            
            
               But euermore ſubſcrib'd to right.
            
            
               In priuate ſort he actions ſwayd,
            
            
               Although the people him obay'd.
            
            
               
               And though the Senate hee directed,
            
            
               Yet to their power himſelfe ſubiected:
            
            
               By armed force hee nought effected.
            
            
               What to obtaine his heart was bent,
            
            
               To bee deny'd he was content.
            
            
               Great wealth and honors he poſſeſt;
            
            
               But did the ſtate with more inveſt.
            
            
               Though to his ſword they gaue renowne,
            
            
               Yet knew hee when to lay it downe.
            
            
               Hee Armes beyond the Gowne approu'd,
            
            
               Yet na'thleſſe Armed peace hee lou'd.
            
            
               Hee Armies willingly receaues,
            
            
               And all as willingly them leaues.
            
            
               A ciuill houſe from ryot free,
            
            
               No fortunes gain'd by briberie.
            
            
               With forraine Nations hee had fame,
            
            
               Who reu'renced his noble name.
            
            
               And in like grace at home hee ſtood,
            
            
               For ſeruice to his Countries good.
            
            
               The conſtant courſe of liberty
            
            
               Was ſubiect to ſeruility,
            
            
               When they receiu'd in Rome againe
            
            
               The Marian and the Syllan traine.
            
            So, ſeeing Pompey is bereft
            No ſhew of freedome now is left.
            
               Men doe not bluſh at tyranny:
            
            
               No colour now of Empery:
            
            
               None weigh the Senates Maieſty.
            
            O happy Pompey to be dead
            As ſoone as thou wert conquered!
            And that the Pharian guilt thee brought
            That ſword, which elſe thou muſt haue ſought!
            If not thou mightſt haue liu'd perchance
            Vnder proud Caeſars gouernance.
            To dare to dye is high grace gain'd,
            And next to that, to be conſtrain'd.
            But if that Fortune ſo betide,
            We muſt be thralles to tyrants pride.
            Then Fortune grant, that Iuba bee
            Another Ptolomey to mee.
            
               What need I feare my foe to ſerue,
            When death can me from that preſerue?
            ¶ Theſe words did greater glory raiſe
            In all mens eares to Pompeys praiſe,
            Then if the Theaters had ſounded
            With plaudits, ecchos that rebounded:
            Whereby the honor of his end
            Did to his gentle ſoule aſcend.
            But now the people mutter rumors,
            And fall into diſcordant humors.
            For warres and Armes they doe deteſt:
            Since Pompey in his graue did reſt,
            And Tarchon then did vndertake
            
               Catos new Enſignes to forſake.
            He with the ſhipping ſuddenly
            That vtmoſt rode, away did flye:
            Whom Cato thus did vilefie.
            
               
                  Catos words to Tarchon a Seaman.O greedy Cilix moſt vntrue,
            Wilt thou the ſeas go ſcoure anew,
            Now Pompey is by fortune ſlaine?
            Muſt thou turne Pirate once againe?
            Then of them all he takes a view,
            That mutin'd in this rogiſh crew:
            Mongſt whom one lad did courage take,
            And to the chiefetaine boldly ſpake.
            
               The oration of one of the ſeamen to Cato.
               
               Cato (quoth he) diſcharge vs now,
            Our faith to Pompey we did vow:
            For his ſake we did take vp Armes,
            And not for loue of ciuill harmes.
            In his behalfe we did our parts;
            But he is dead that held our hearts.
            He whom the world lou'd more then peace,
            With whom our cauſe of warre doth ceaſe.
            Permit vs now to leaue to roame
            To ſee our houſhold Gods at home,
            That we ſo long time haue forborne,
            And our ſweet children thus forlorne.
            For what date ſhall this warre vs yeeld,
            If that Pharſalias bloody field,
            Nor Pompes death can giue it end,
            Our liues in endleſſe toyle we ſpend.
            
               Let vs goe quiet to our graue:
            Let age his fitting funerall haue.
            For ciuill warres can ſcarce affoord
            A Sepulcher to any Lord.
            We conquerd men are not to fight
            Againſt the great Barbarian might.
            Fortune doth not our ſtate prouoke
            With Scithian or Armenian yoke.
            I ſerue a gowned Citizen,
            Vnder his law free Denizen.
            Who Pompey liuing ſeconded,
            To me is firſt, now Pompeys dead.Meaning Caeſar.
               
            
            To Pompeys ſacred worthy ſpright
            I will performe all reuerend right;
            But to his ſoueraigne power I yeeld,
            That conquerd at Pharſalias field.
            Thou Pompey, my ſole Captaine wert,
            I followed onely thee in Mart.
            Now will I follow Deſtinie:
            And yet, to finde proſperity,
            I neither may, nor will I hope:
            Since Caeſars fortune ſwayes the ſcope.
            His conqueſt quaild Aemathian ſwords,
            Who to vs captiues helpe affoords.
            He onely in the world ſubſiſts,
            That will and may (euen as he liſts.)
            Rue on poore vanquiſht men in griefe,
            And vnto wretches yeeld reliefe.
            All hope in ciuiil warre is vaine,
            Since Aegypts ſword hath Pompey ſlaine.
            Who liuing, carried vs with loue;
            But if the publique cauſe do moue
            Thee Cato, and thy Countries ſtay;
                  Caeſar was then Conſull.
            
            Let vs theſe enſignes then obay,
            That Roman Conſull doth diſplay.
            So ſaid, his ſhip he doth aſcend,
            And ſwarmes of youths do him attend.
            Thus Romes affaires did ſeeme to end.
            For all, that loued ſeruile bands
            Did mutine there vpon the ſands.
            
               When Cato (from his ſacred breaſt)
            In theſe words his free minde expreſt.
            
               
                  Catos anſwere to the mutinous mariners¶ It ſeemes you then indiffrent were,
            On whether ſide you Armes did beare.
            You were at firſt for Pompeys part,
            For Rome you did not wage your mart.
            And ſo you doe deſire it ſtill,
            To haue one Lord to rule at will.
            You did not tyranny oppoſe:
            You car'd not your free ſtate to loſe.
            The Senate you refuſe to ſerue;
            Neither recke you well to deſerue
            Of any ſide to end this ſtrife,
            But would in Idle ſpend your life.
            
               Meaning that Pompey beeing dead, if they were victors, there remained none to tyranize.Now ſafer tis our cauſe to gaine,
            You baſely would the warres refraine.
            And now (devoyd of true reſpect)
            Your owne free neckes to yokes ſubiect)
            And cannot liue without a King
            Not now, when as a worthier thing
            Calles men to hazard of the warre;
            Your ſwords and perſons you debar
            For Roman freedome to be vſd,
            Which Pompey mought perchance refuſd,
            And for himſelfe your bloods abuſd.
            Fortune almoſt hath tyrants reft,
            
               
                  Meaning Craſſus, Pompey and Caeſar.Of three Lords now but one is left.
            The Parthian bow, and Nylus ſhore
            For our free lawes haue done the more.
            Goe you degenerate, exceed
            The Ptolemeian guift and deed.
            Who elſe will thinke that euer you
            In theſe warres did your hands embrue?
            But rather prone to turne your backes,
            And firſt that fled Emathias wrackes.
            Go ſafe, for you doe well deſerue
            That Caeſar ſhould your liues preſerue.
            Hee needs muſt take of you remorſe,
            Subdued nor by ſiege nor force.
            O ſercile race vnworthy moſt!
            
               Now (that you haue one Tirant loſt)A diſdainfull manner of ſpeech that Cato vſed to the reuolting Seamen.
            
            His ſucceſſor you will accoſt.
            You ſhould no greater grace aſpire,
            Then life and pardon for your hire.
            And Pompeys wofull wife conuay
            Into your ſhips, beare her away.
            (Metellus child) a noble pray.
            And liuing ſonnes of Pompey breed.
            Striue Egypts preſent to exceed,
            Then take my head with you likewiſe,
            So odious to the tyrants eyes.
            He ſhall no meane reward receaue,
            That Catos head will ſo bequeaue.
            And know you all tis worth your paine,
            To follow me my head to gaine.
            
               Proceed you therefore and be bold,
            
            
               To purchaſe grace let blood be ſold.
            
            
               Barely to run away were baſe.
            
            So ſaid, his words then tooke ſuch place,
            That all the Pirats (in ſuch ſort)
            Brought backe the ſhips into the port,
            From out the Seas, as Bees do vſe,
            When they the waxen hiue refuſe.An apt compariſon of Bees.
            
            Where they haue made their honny combes,
            And ranging leaue their little homes.
            Not mind full now in ſwarmes to flie:
            But each one his owne way doth hie.
            Not ſetled yet to ſucke and ſmell
            The bitter Thyme, they loue ſo well.
            When ſuddenly the tingling ſounds
            Of Phrygian kettles them confounds
            With maze, they ſtop their ſudden flight:
            And backe returning, all do light
            Vpon their hiues, where with their skill
            Their flowring labours they diſtill,
            And combes with bleſſed honny fill.
            At whoſe returne the clowniſh royle
            Is glad to ſee them in his ſoyle:
            And on Hyblean graſſe to ſwarme;
            The treaſure of his little farme.
            
               Euen ſo did Catos powerfull words,
            Vnto iuſt warre draw on their ſwords.
            And their looſe minds, whom pleaſure feeds,
            He then recals to martiall deeds,
            And patiently warres brunt to beare
            With induſtrie and free from feare.
            ¶ And firſt of all vpon the ſands,
            He traines and drawes them out in bands.
            Then next to that they do inueſt
            
               Cyrenas wals and it poſſeſt.
            And though that towne had him refuſde:
            Yet he on them no rigor vſd.
            For Cato no reuenge would take,
            To conquer did his anger ſlake.
            Thence he his ſpeedie march deſignes
            To Iubas kingdome, whoſe confines
            Confront the Mauritanian lands.
            But that the Syrts his courſe withſtands
            Amidſt his way; although he thought
            All difficulties might be brought
            
               A digreſſion from the matter to the nature of the Syrtes.To paſſe, by vertues dantleſſe prowes.
            When nature did at firſt diſpoſe
            Theſe Syrts, and ſhapt their figure out;
            She left it to the world in doubt,
            Whether it ſhould be land or ſeas,
            For vtterly it doth not pleaſe,
            To ſinke it ſelfe beneath the maine:
            Nor yet the land can ſo reſtraine
            The waues; but they will haue a ſhare,
            And ſuch a dangerous place prepare;
            That there to trauell none ſhall dare.
            For here the Sea doth channels ſtraine,
            And there the lands do riſe againe.
            Here is a long ſtretcht tracke of ſhore,
            And there the ſwallowing whirlepooles rore.
            So nature wretchedly deſignde
            This portion of her proper kinde,
            Vnto no vſe, or elſe of old
            Thoſe Syrts more waues in them did hold
            And with the Seas were ouer rowld.
            
               But that atractiue Titans beames
            (Feeding vpon the ocean ſtreames,
            That to the torrid zone were nie)
            Some of the weltring waues did drie.
            And yet the Ocean in deſpight
            Reſiſteth Phoebus parching might.
            But yet his beames (as they draw neare)
            And wearing time thoſe ſeas will cleare,
            And make the Syrts firme land appeare.
            For ſcarcely now a little boate
            Can on the ſuperficies flote,
            Of thoſe drown'd ſands where water ſtayes,
            And more and more that ſea decayes.
            ¶ As ſoone as by the helpe of oares,
            The fleet was gotten from the ſhores
            Into the deepes, with all their fraight,
            The blacke Southwind blowing a haight
            Out of his region ſtormy gales,
            Farre from her courſe the nauie hales.The deſcription of a cruell tempeſt on the Seas.
            
            And with huge tempeſts that he ſends,
            Thoſe ſeas attempted now defends.
            Farre from the Syrts the waues he beates,
            Againſt the cliffes the billow freates.
            And all the ſhips that ſailes did beare,
            The tempeſt from the yards did teare.
            In vaine the tackling and the ſhrouds,
            Their ſailes deny'd to thoſe fierce clouds.
            But ouer boord away are borne,
            Fluttering at large their ſhips they ſcorne.
            And if that any ſayler ſtout
            Vnto the yards do goe about
            To fixe the ſailes with cordage faſt,
            He's borne away with whirlwind blaſt,
            And from the naked yard is caſt.
            But all thoſe ſhips found better chance,
            That in the lofty billows dance.
            And ſtill aloofe their courſe did keepe
            Amidſt the channels in the deepe.
            And by the boord did cut their maſts,
            Leſſe ſubiect thereby to the blaſts.
            
               So as the tides had power on them,
            And in deſpight with force did ſtemme
            The puffing windes full in the mouth,
            And bare thoſe veſſels to the South.
            The other ſhips the water ſailes,
            Their Keeles vpon thoſe hye ſands trayles,
            That lifts it ſelfe aboue the flood,
            So as in doubtfull ſtate they ſtood.
            The ſhelfe the one part doth detaine,
            The other part hangs in the maine.
            And as the billowes comes more thicke,
            The faſter in the ſholes they ſticke.
            For though the forcing Southerne racke
            Rowles one waue on anothers backe:
            Yet all thoſe waues could not ſuffiſe
            To drench the ſhelfe where it did riſe.
            This hugy heape of cluttered ſand
            Vncouered now lay farre from land,
            And higher vnto ſight was rear'd
            Then Neptunes rugged backe appear'd.
            The wretched Saylers there are grounded:
            The ſhips vpon the ſhelfe confounded
            So farre, that they no ſhore can ſpye,
            And in the ſeas thus beating lye.
            Yet of this fleet the greater part
            (With bitter ſtirrage) got the ſtart
            Of theſe, and ſafely ſcap't away,
            Taking their beſt courſe as it lay,
            With skilfull Pilots that did know
            The coaſts, and where the channels goe.
            And ſo at length by chance they light
            
               A Riuer in Affricke.On that ſlow ſtreame thats Tryton hight.
            ¶ That God (as old reports do tell)
            Which with his ringing Trumpe of ſhell
            Makes all the maine his ſound to heare
            With windy notes ſo ſhrill and cleare,
            
               Tryton, Neptunes Trumperer.Of riuers all loues this moſt deare.
            And Pallas like eſteeme did make
            That of Ioues braine her birth did take.
            For that ſame Lybian Region
            
               Was firſt land that ſhe trode vpon.
            And is vnto the heauens moſt neare:
            As by his heates it doth appeare.
            In whoſe ſmooth waters chriſtall ſhine
            She then did ſee her face diuine.
            And there her plants ſhe did diſpoſe,
            And to her ſelfe the name ſhe choſe
            Of Trytoneſſe, where this ſtreame flowes.
            Neare which (as fame reports) likewiſe,
            The ſilent Laethe doth ariſe:
            That with infernall veines is fed:The riuer Laethe.
            
            By which forgetfulneſſe is bred.
            Here alſo was conioyn'd to theſe,
            The garden of Heſperides:
            
            Deſpoiled of her leaues ſo bright,
            Kept by the waking Dragons might.
            
               That man is ſpitefull of condition,
            
            
               That will detract from old tradition.
            
            Or call the Poets to accompt
            For ought which may the truth ſurmount.
            This golden groue of treaſures ſtore,
            (Whoſe boughs ſuch ſhining apples bore)
            A troope of virgins guarded ſtill,
            Whoſe gliſtring ſtreames the aire did fill.
            And that ſoule Serpents charge to keepe,The fable of Hercules that tooke away the golden Apples from the gardē Heſperides
            
            Whoſe eyes are aye debard of ſleepe.
            And with his taile the trunks infold,
            That ſtoope with ouerwaight of gold.
            But great Alcydes tooke away
            From theſe rich trees the pretious pray.
            And did thoſe ſhining apples bring
            To Euriſtaeus Argiues king.
            The nauie (ſo caſt on this caoſt,
            And from the Syrts ſo clearely toſt)
            Paſt not as yet beyond the ſhore
            Of Gaeramants, where as they more.
            But Sextus with his troops ſtaid there,
            Where Affricks climes more pleaſant were.
            Though Catos valor brooks no ſtay:
            But with his cohorts takes his way,
            
               Through coaſts vnknown where dangers lay.
            His confidence in armes did ſtand,
            And circuits all the Syrts by land.
            And this the winters wroth perſwades,
            That then did barre thoſe ſeas of trades.
            Beſides, the fires of Phoebus rayes
            The falling ſhowres then much allayes.
            So as his iourney he might hold,
            Neither oppreſt with heate nor cold.
            For where the flaming heate did rage,
            The dewy ſeaſon doth aſſwage.
            So through the barren ſands he venters,
            And vſd this ſpeech before he enters.
            ¶ O ye that with one common will,
            
               Catos oration to his ſouldiers before hee takes his iourney into the deſarts of Lybia.(Dauntleſſe to hold your fre edome ſtill)
            Do follow me with ſuch content,
            Let now your minds be wholy bent
            To vndergoe this valours taske,
            That toyle and conſtancy doth aske.
            We goe into the barren fields,
            Of clymats ſcorcht, that nothing yeelds.
            Where Tytan parcheth all the ground,
            And fountaines rarely to be found.
            Whereas the lands in plenty brings
            Forth ſerpents with their poyſnous ſtings.
            A iourney that with horror rings.
            Let therefore thoſe (whom deare loue drawes
            To freedome, and his Countries cauſe)
            March on through Lybia with mee,
            And ſearch out wayes that wayleſſe bee.
            If ſo be they haue no deſire
            To leaue our Enſignes, and retire;
            But are reſolu'd for vertues hire.
            For it is no part of my minde
            Mens eyes with fallacies to blinde:
            Nor yet the Souldiers hearts to cheere,
            By cloking dangers that draw neere.
            For I of ſuch mates muſt bee ſped,
            That freely are by dangers led,
            By ſuch as Roman worth eſteeme,
            
               And hardeſt haps, the braueſt deeme,
            That can indure the toyles of Mart,
            Whilſt I a witneſſe ſhare my part.
            But for that ſouldier that ſhall need
            One to aſſure him happy ſpeed,
            And holds his life at ſo deare rate,
            That he will euery doubt debate;
            Let him another leader ſeeke,
            And finde a way he more may leeke;
            Before that I do take in hand
            This iourney through this parched ſand,
            And march vpon this duſtie land.
            And let theſe parching heates firſt light
            On me, withall their fierie might.
            And let the Serpents me aſſaile
            With poyſned teeth, and venom'd taile.
            Let all thoſe perils (that you dread)
            Be tried firſt vpon my head.
            Let him, that ſees that I am drie,
            Refreſh himſelfe as well as I.
            Or that the wooddy ſhades I ſeeke:
            Let him (then panting) do the like.
            Or ſees that I a horſebacke ride,
            And ſo my troops of footmen guide:
            Let him likewiſe for eaſe prouide.
            Or if (as chiefetaine) I doe craue
            Any prerogatiue to haue
            Before the ſouldier vnder me,
            But cheeke by cheeke his mate wilbe:
            Theſe drouths, theſe thirſts, theſe ſnakes, theſe ſands
            Chiefely with valors liking ſtands.
            
               Patience takes ioy in bitter bands.
            
            
               A worthy act holdes greateſt ſtate,
            
            
               When it is bought at deareſt rate.
            
            And Lybias clime ſuch ſtore doth yeeld
            Of miſeries in euery field,
            As that it may (without defame)
            Become braue men to ſhun the ſame,
            So he theſe ſouldiers fearefull ſprites
            To valarous attempts encites.
            
               And to the loue of Martiall broiles
            In deſert paths he wandring toiles.
            Through endleſſe wayes a paſſage made,
            He doth the Lybian coaſt inuade.
            So dreadleſſe Cato (in ſhort date)
            
               Cato enters the deſerts of Lybia.Lights on a place to cloſe his fate.
            Whereas a ſlender tombe ſhall ſhrine
            (Within her wombe) his name diuine.
            The third part of this maſſie round
            (If we beleeue what fame doth ſound)
            Is Affrica; but if we take
            The ſame, as heauen and winds do make,
            Of Europe then it is a ſhare.
            For Nylus ſhores no further are
            From Gades (as firſt it was a land)
            Then Scythian Tanais doth ſtand.
            And whereas Europe is deſcyded
            From Lybs, it was by ſea deuided·
            But Aſia did Europa paſſe,
            And in his circuit greater was.
            So whilſt theſe two do iointly ſend
            South-weſterne blaſts, that Noth-eaſt tend,
            
               Aſia alone (on lefter hand)
            Coniynd to Boreas chilly land:
            And on the right to that South ſtreame,
            The confines of Egyptian realme;
            From theſe two limits is poſſeſt
            Of all the title of the Eaſt,
            The parts of Lybia chiefe and beſt,
            Enclining is vnto the Weſt.
            And yet no fountains there are found,
            And ſeldome ſhowres to moiſt the ground,
            That from the Artick clime proceeds.
            Yet our dry winds their moiſture breeds.
            That mould in it no wealth doth hold,
            Either of braſſe, or yet of gold.
            No wicked mines therein haue birth:
            But all the ſoyle is ſollid earth.
            In Mauritania trees do grow,
            Whoſe worth the people did not know.
            
               But to themſelues contentment giue,
            Vnder the Cytrons ſhade to liue.
            Our axes ſince theſe woods haue feld,Mauritania & the manner of that nation.
            
            That meerely were vnknowne to eld.
            And from the worlds remoteſt ſide,
            We brought our luxurie and pride.
            ¶ But all the coaſts both neare and farre,
            (That with the Syrts inuiron'd are)
            With too much heate are ouer-run,
            And parched with the neighbor Sun.
            As that their graine it doth deſtroy,
            And all their Vines the duſt doth cloy.
            No moiſtned roote the ſame doth feed,
            Nor vitall temper it will breed.
            The Gods that ſoile do not reſpect,
            And nature (ſtupid with neglect)
            That land of comfort doth depriue.
            Thoſe dead ſands no ſpring can reuiue.
            And yet in this dull barren ground
            Rare herbs and plants are often found,
            The which the Naſamons finde out,The Naſmons that liue vpon ſea wracks.
            
            And gather vp; a people ſtout
            That naked are, and thoſe coaſts keepes,
            Which frontiers all alongſt the deepes;
            And with the wracke themſelues do nouriſh,
            Of ſhips, that on the Syrts do periſh:
            For alwaies they in waite do ſtand
            For pillage on the Ocean ſand,
            When as the ſhips cannot attaine
            The port, their wealth, and ſpoyle they gaine.
            So as theſe Naſmons hold commerce,
            And trade with all the Vniuerſe.
            (In manner of Barbarian kinde)
            By wracks that on their ſhore they finde.
            This wretched way Cato ſeekes out,
            There to lead on with courage ſtout,
            And there his ſouldiers to inure,
            More ſtormes then on the ſeas endure.
            For that the Syrts ſouthwinds do cauſe
            Vpon thoſe ſands moſt harmefull flawes.
            
               For there no Lybian mounts ſuffiſe
            To ſtay the furie that doth riſe.
            Nor yet the rocks their force aſſwage,
            But in the aire thoſe whirlewinds rage.
            Amongſt the woods they do not fall,
            Rooting vp hugie trees withall:
            But flie alongſt the parched plaine,
            (Without reſiſt) with might and maine,
            And on the ſands their rage beſtowes,
            The which it violently blowes.
            And neuer is alaid againe
            With any clouds of ſhowring raine.
            But ſweeps in heapes the ſands on hie,
            Which hang and doe not ſcattring flie.
            ¶ The wretched Naſmons thus behold
            Their kingdome ſtill with tempeſts rowld,
            Their houſes to the earth downe throwne,
            Their roofs (with whirlewinds fury blowne
            From off their Garamantine frames)
            Towring as high as hugeſt flames.
            And as the ſmokes aſcention
            Vnto the middle region,
            Which darkeneſſe to the day procures,
            So clouds of duſt the aire obſcures,
            The Roman troops began to finde
            The outrage of this whirling wind,
            More furiouſly them to aſſaile:
            
               The furious effects of the Lybian winds.So as their footing did them faile.
            For euen the very ſands did fleete,
            And ſlip from vnderneath their feete.
            The earths foundation it had rac't,
            And from his proper ſeate diſplac't.
            If that theſe winds had made their birth
            Within the Cauerns of the Earth,
            And crept into the hollow docks,
            That are ſurcharg'd with Lybias rocks,
            But for becauſe the flitting ſand,
            Doth not the forcing wind withſtand,
            Nor make reſiſtance with firme ground,
            The ſoyles foundation did ſtand ſound.
            
               And that which fled before the winde,
            Were vpper ſands, looſe, vncombinde.
            But there withall ſo forciblie,
            The violent blaſts amongſt them flie,
            As that from them it takes and teares
            Their ſwords, their casks, their ſhields, and ſpeares,
            And through the vacant aire them beares.
            The which to other coaſts might ſeeme
            A prodigy of ſtreaming eſteeme.
            As though thoſe armes from heauen did fall,
            To terrifie the world withall.
            And that which from mens hands was hent,
            The Gods downe to the earth had ſent.
            Surely thoſe armes fell in ſuch wiſe,
            Whilſt Numa was in ſacrifiſe,
            The which (in a religious feare)
            The chiefe Patrician youths did weare.
            So now their armes our ſouldiers loſt,
            By South or Northerne tempeſt toſt.
            ¶In this ſort all our Romane troopes
            (Scar'd with theſe winds) down proſtrate droops:
            Fearing the rapture of each blaſt,
            Their garments they gird to them faſt.The perils of the Lybian ſands.
            
            And thruſt their hands into the mould.
            Their own weight ſeru'd not them to hould.
            But they were forc't all helps to proue:
            And yet the winds would them remoue.
            And therewithall orewhelm'd be they,
            With heapes of ſands whereas they lay.
            Which duſt on them ſo heauie lies,
            That they ſcarce able were to riſe,
            But ſticke faſt in the heaped ſand.
            And when they get vpright to ſtand,
            The ſame ſo thicke about them flotes,
            That they ſtand buried to the throates.
            Stones from the wals are taken out,
            And through the aire are borne about,
            And caſt farre off (moſt ſtrange to ſee)
            Whoſe fals to many harmfull bee.
            And where no houſes can be found,
            
               Huge ruins lie vpon the ground.
            
               Men trauel on land by the helpe of the ſtars as on the Seas.There did appeare no way nor path,
            The ſoile at all no difference hath.
            But as vpon the ſeas you ſaile,
            So muſt the ſtars your courſe auaile,
            And by them ſeeke to finde your way.
            And yet ſtarres do not ſtill diſplay
            In circuite of the Lybian skies:
            For many ſhine not to their eyes,
            But vnder their horizon lies.
            ¶ Now when the heates had nere appeaſd
            The winds, whoſe rage the aire had ceaſd:
            And that the daies more feruent grew,
            And did more ſcorching beames renew;
            Through ſuch a countrey then they paſſe,
            As by the Gods deſigned was
            Of mortall wights to be vnknowne:
            Plac't vnderneath the torrid zoane.
            Where noght is found but parching drouth,
            All moiſture tending to the South.
            Their lims and ioynts in ſweat do melt,
            Their mouths and iawes with thirſt do ſwelt.
            Yet heare a little vaine they ſpie,
            Of putred water running by.
            The which the ſouldiers ſcarce could get,
            So did the ſands the current let.
            But yet out of the pudled ſpring
            
               A ſouldier brings Cato water in his helmet.One fils his Caske, and doth it bring
            To Cato (Chieftaine of the hoaſt)
            When all with drought were then emboſt.
            Who firſt a little ſay did take,
            And then in anger thus beſpake.
            Thou ſouldier baſe, what doſt thou ſee,
            That is of ſo ſmall worth in mee?
            That I alone (of of all this troope)
            For want of continence ſhould droope?
            Haue I of nyceneſſe ſhewd ſuch ſigne,
            That I ſhould firſt at thirſt repine?
            Nay thou that blame doſt more deſerue,
            That drinkſt whilſt all for thirſt do ſterue.
            
               Therewith he ouer-turn'd the Caske:
                  Catos continencie. So did Alexander.
               
            
            All were ſuffiſd, none water aske.
            ¶ Then they vnto that Temple came,
            That ſerues for all the Libian name:
            And where rude Garamants doe dwell,
            They haue no other ſacred Cell.
            And here (as old report doth runne)
            The horned Iupiter doth wonne.
            But thunder-bolts he none doth beare:
            Nor is like Latiums Iupiter.
            
            With wretched hornes his head is dight;
            And Ammon Iupiter he hight.
            The Lybians this Temple hold,
            Endowed not with gifts nor gold;
            Nor Iewels of the Eaſterne morne
            (with gliſtering) did this place adorne.
            And yet the Aethiopians,
            
            And all the rich Arabians,
            
            With thoſe in India that liue,
            To Ammon onely God-head giue.
            Yet for a God he is but bare,
            In no age he for wealth had care.
            His Temple he from that reſtraines,
            Vnviolate with greedy gaines.
            And (as it was the ancient guiſe)
            That God-head did the gold deſpiſe
            That in the Roman Temples lies.
            And that ſame place doth witneſſe well,
            That there ſome heauenly powers do dwell.
            For onely there is to be ſeene,
            That Lybian ſoyle doth bring forth greene.
            For all the reſt of parched ſands,
            Diuided from the temperate lands
            Of Berenice, and Leptis ground,
                  Berennicis and Leptis two Cities.
            
            Nor graſſe nor leafe is to be found.
            
               Ammon alone greene groues retaines,
            And thoſe are cauſd by ſpringing vaines,
            Which in that place the earth refines,
            And with thoſe ſprings the ſands combines.
            ¶ Here nothing doth withſtand the Sunne
            
               When he his higheſt pitch doth runne,
            In equalling their nights and dayes:
            
               A relation how the ſignes and poles doe lye to thoſe parts of Lybia.
               For then the boughes ſcarce ſhade diſplayes
            Vpon the body of the tree,
            The ſunny beames ſo ſhortned bee;
            By reaſon that they downe-right ſtrike,
            And therefore cauſe no ſhade oblike.
            And this is thought to be the place
            Whereas the Sunnes high circling race
            Doth cut the line that beares the Signes,
            In middle where the Solſtice ſhines.
            For then they go no whit a ſcance,
            Nor Taurus righter doth aduance,
            Then Scorpio, in his ſphericke dance:
            Nor Aries doth preſcribe the times
            To Libra, when his height he climes.
            Nor yet Aſtraea doth require
            Slow Piſces downe-ward to retire.
            
               Chyron the Centaure equally
            Is oppoſite to Gemini:
            And moiſtie Capricorne the ſame
            In diſtance, as is Cancers flame.
            Nor Leo (with his fiery eyes)
            Doth higher then Aquarius riſe.
            But vnto thee, who ſo thou art
            Of any Nation, that apart
            Is ſequeſtred from Lybian beames,
            The ſhadow euer South-ward ſtreames;
            But contrary with Northerne Realmes.
            Thy ſight the North-ſtarre vndergoes,
            And Vrſa Maior to thee ſhowes;
            As if that all his vnwet waine
            Were ouer-whelmed in the maine.
            And each ſtarre, that is moſt of light,
            Seemes (by the ſea) hid from thy ſight:
            And either Pole this Region
            Makes equall with thy Horizon;
            Where all the Signes (in their ſwift force)
            In midſt of heauen do run their courſe.
            ¶ Before this Temple gate did ſtand
            
               The people of the Eaſterne land,
            Attending there to know their fates,
            Which Ammons Oracle relates.
            But yet to Cato all gaue way;
            And his owne Captaines doe him pray,
            That of this God he would explore
            (Whom Lybia did ſo much adore)
            His doome, what fortunes and what chance
            The future Ages ſhould aduance.
            And he that Cato moſt importunes,
            To ſearch the knowledge of their fortunes,
            And counſell of this God to take,
            Was Labienus, that thus ſpake:
                  Labienus ſpeech to Cato.
               
            
            The happe and fortune of our way
            Hath offered vs this lucky day,
            To learne from this high power diuine,
            Of our ſucceſſe the fatall fine.
            For by ſo great a guide as he,
            We may a right directed be
            Through Syrts, in wandring neare and farre:
            And know the chances of this warre.
            For vnto whom ſhould I beleeue
            The heauenly powers would ſooner giue
            True knowledge of their ſecret heſt,
            Then vnto Cato's holy breaſt?
            For thy iuſt life God hath reſpected,
            And beene by lawes diuine directed;
            And vnto thee tis granted ſtill
            With Ioue himſelfe to ſpeake at will.
            Enquire of wicked Caeſars fate,
            And what ſhall be our Countries ſtate.
            Whether the people ſhall retaine
            Their lawes, and liberties againe;
            Or ciuill warre ſhall vs ſtill ſtraine?
            Fill now thy breaſt with ſacred voyce,
            Thou that in vertue doſt reioyce;
            Learne what our valour may atchiue,
            And how our honeſt courſe may thriue.
            ¶ He (alwayes fild with grace diuine,
            That in his ſecret ſoule did ſhrine)
            
               Theſe worthy ſpeeches from his heart
            (Like Oracles) doth now impart.
            O Labienus to me ſhow,
            What thou woldſt I ſhould ſeek to know.
            
               Where I in Armes had rather dye,
            
            
               Or liue a ſlaue to tyranny.
            
            
               Whether we may a life it call,
            
            
               That is not dated long withall?
            
            
               Where diffring age doe oft auaile,
            
            
               Where rigor can true goodneſſe quaile?
            
            
               Where fortune doe her threats but looſe,
            
            
               When ſhe doth vertues might oppoſe?
            
            
               Whether that it may vs ſuffice
            
            
               Praiſe-worthy deeds to enterpriſe?
            
            
               And whether that it be ſucceſſe
            
            
               Makes honeſt actions more or leſſe?
            
            
               This we already know as well
            
            
               
                  Catos diuine conceits.
               As Ammon can the ſame vs tell.
            
            
               Vpon the Gods we all depend;
            
            
               And though this Temple had an end,
            
            
               Yet otherwiſe nought can ſucceed,
            
            
               But by Gods ordinance decreed.
            
            
               His mighty power no voyce doth need.
            
            
               The Author of all mortall kinde,
            
            
               Hath once for all declar'd his minde,
            
            
               Our knowledge is by him confin'd.
            
            
               Theſe barren ſands are not his choyce,
            
            
               Where he will vtter forth his voyce.
            
            
               Nor in this duſt doth hee conceale
            
            
               Thoſe truthes, that he meanes to reueale.
            
            
               The ſacred ſeates of God are theſe,
            
            
               The Heauens, the Aire, the Earth, the Seas,
            
            
               And vertues ſelfe; why ſhould wee proue
            
            
               To ſearch beyond the Gods aboue?
            
            
               What ſo thou ſeeſt, where ſo thou art
            
            
               Of Iupiter himſelfe is part.
            
            
               Let faithleſse minds theſe witch-crafts need,
            
            
               And ſuch as dread what ſhall ſucceed.
            
            
               No Oracles can me ſecure,
            
            
               But death it ſelfe that is moſt ſure.
            
            
               
               The Coward, and the valiant Knight
            
            
               Muſt fall at laſt, and leaue this light.
            
            
               And now for all may vs ſuffice,
            
            
               That Ioue himſelfe ſpeakes in this wiſe.
            
            So hauing ſaid, with faiths repoſe,
            The Temples Altars he forgoes;
            And Ammons counſell doth diſdaine,
            Leauing it to thoſe people vaine.
            ¶ Then in his hand he takes his pile,
            And march't a foot himſelfe the while
            Before his troopes, that panting went;
            He ſhewes them how to be content
            To ſuffer toyle, without conſtraint;
            Since labour could not make him faint.
            He is not on their ſhoulders borne,
            A Charret he did hold in ſcorne.
            Small reſt and ſleepe he vſd to take,
            And laſt of all his thirſt would ſlake.
            For when by chance a ſpring they met,
            The thirſty Souldier (dry with heat)
            Conſtrained was to drinke, then he
            The laſt of all the troope would be
            That tooke his ſhare,
                  Catos temperance. and did forbeare
            Vntill the Scullions ſerued were.
            If great renowne be deemed due
            To goodneſſe, that is meerely true;
            Or if that naked vertues praiſe
            (That wants ſucceſſe) men rightly waighes;
            What euer was ſo much renown'd,
            That in our anceſtors was found
            Were fortunes gifts, that did abound?
            For which of them (for happy Mart)
            Could challenge that as their deſart?
            Or who could claime (as his owne good)
            The fame, they wanne with others blood?
            But this mans triumph I would more
            Deſire to follow on this ſhore
            Whereas the Syrts doe dangers threat,
            And thorough Lybias parching heate;
            Then thrice in Pompeys Carre to wend,
            
               And to the Capitoll aſcend:
            Or gIuurths warre to bring to end.
            Behold him that true father is
            Vnto his Countries cauſe and bliſſe.
            When Rome may thinke fit to aſpire
            Vnto her Altars ſacred fire.
            To honor whom ſhe needs not ſhame
            To ſweare and vow by his deere name.
            And whom (if euer Rome ſhould ſee
            Her ſtate reſtor'd from dangers free)
            Hereafter him to glorifie
            His name ſhe well may deifie.
            Now march they through a wretched ſoyle,
            That feruent heates doe parch and broyle.
            A clymate neere the torrid zone,
            Which heauens wold haue to men vnknown:
            Here water rare was to be found,
            And yet (amidſt this duſty ground)
            One fountaine large the Souldiers ſpide,
            Where many Serpents did reſide,
            So thicke that they the waters hide.
            
               Two ſortes of venemous ſerpents.Vpon the brinkes the Aſpickes ſit,
            And in the midſt the Dipſa's flit.
            ¶ When Cato ſaw his men oppreſt.
            VVith heates, and thirſt, this fount deteſt,
            He ſaid, O Souldier (whom vaine feare
            Of death, makes thee this ſpring forbeare)
            Thou needſt not doubt thy thirſt to ſlake,
            Theſe waters ſafely thou maiſt take.
            The Serpents peſt no dangers brings,
            Except when as with blood it mings.
            His ſting from it doth poyſon ſend,
            And with his bite doth life offend.
            The fountaine holſome is and pure.
            
               
                  Cato drinkes firſt of ſuſpected water.So ſaid, he drinkes, them to aſſure
            The water that they poyſnous thinke.
            But ſtill (before) he vſd to drinke
            The laſt of all, during the time
            That they had ſpent in Lybias clime.
            Our care and labour cannot finde
            
               The cauſe, why Lybia is enclin'd
            To aire of ſuch contagious kinde:
            Where many plagues abounding ſwarmes,
            Fruitfull in nought but deadly harmes.
            Nor yet what ſecret nature did,
            When in that ſoyle ſuch faults ſhe hid;Meaning the fable that followes.
            
            Except it be that fabling lye
            That ouer all the world doth flye:
            The which doth euery age deceiue,
            When for a truth they it receiue.
            ¶ In the extreames of Lybias ſoyle,
            Wheras the ground with heat doth broyle;
            And where the Ocean it confines,
            Warm'd with the Sunne when he declines.
            Thoſe fields and Countries all abrode
            With foule Meduſas filth was ſtrode.
            No greene-leau'd woods did yeeld a ſhade,
            Nor Coulters there had furrowes made.
            But (with their Miſtreſſe baleſull eyes)The fable of Meduſa.
               
            
            There onely ſtones and rockes did riſe.
            Hence hurtfull nature firſt drew ſeedes,
            That mortall plagues in bodies breedes.
            About her eares there dangling hung
            The hiſſing ſnakes, with ſtinging tongue;
            Which (like a treſſe) her backe behinde
            Did ſpred, as haire of women kinde.
            And, whilſt about her necke they crawle,
            The fell Meduſa ioy'd withall.
            Then all their heads, vp-right in ranke,
            Her brow did like a frontlet pranke;
            But when ſhe comb'd her crawling crowne,
            The viprous venome trailed downe.Theſe twelue tranſlated verſes are ſo ambigious in the Latine, as that it reſts to the beſt and moſt probable conſtruction that can bee made thereof.
            
            "Curſed Meduſa taxleſſe pries
            "On whom ſhe liſt, with fatall eyes:
            "For who can feare this monſters face,
            "VVhen to dread death they haue no ſpace?
            "For where her ghaſtly looke ſhe bends,
            "They are tranſ-form'd before their ends.
            "And rap't away from doubtfull fate,
            "Preuenting feare before their date.
            
               "The bodies metamorphoſed
            "Retaine the ſpirits captiued,
            "And (buried ſo within the bones)
            "Turne ſtupid, like to ſenceleſſe ſtones.
            The Furies (with their gaſtly haires)
            Did onely ſtirre vp franticke feares:
            And Cerberus (that helliſh hound)
            
               Orphaeus calm'd with muſicke ſound.
            And Hydra, Hercules beheld,
            When he that vgly Serpent queld;
            But this vile monſter did affright
            
               Phorcus her father with her ſight.
            
               Phorcus that next doth rule and raigne
            To Neptune on the raging maine.
            
               Ceto her mother, with her looke,
            
               They were two other Gorgons her ſiſtersShe ſcarres; her ſiſters cannot brooke
            Her vgly ſight: the ſeas and skies
            She can make ſtone with her ſterne eyes.
            She vttterly can raze from earth
            The worlds whole race of humane birth.
            Amidſt the aire (from lofty flight)
            The winged fowles do fall downe-right.
            The wilde beaſts, and the horned Harts,
            She into craggie rockes conuarts.
            And all the people in the ſcope
            That bounds next vnto Aethiope,
            
            She hath transform'd (from fleſh and bones)
            Into hard rugged Marble ſtones.
            No creatures can her ſight abide,
            Her hairy ſnakes behinde her hide,
            And will not of her eyes be ſpy'd.
            The mighty Atlas (Tytans ſonne)
            That by Heſperian ſtraights did wonne,
            
               
                  Atlas metamorphoſed by Meduſa.
               She turn'd into a hugie rocke.
            The Gyants of Phlaegraean flocke,
            (That with their Serpents feet ſometime,
            Did ſtriue into the heauens to clime)
            She lofty mountaines of them fram'd;
            Whereby that Gyants warre was tam'd,
            When Pallas in her ſhield did place
            
               This griſly Gorgons hideous face.
            Now after that Mercurius wings
                  Mercury the founder of the Arcadian harp, and of wraſtling.
            
            (The firſt concorder of thoſe ſtrings,
            That on th'Arcadian harpe doe ſound,
            And firſt likewiſe that wreſtling found)
            Had Perſeus borne vnto this place,
            (That tooke from Danae his race
            When Ioue, tranſ-form'd to golden ſhowre,
            Into her lap himſelfe did powre;)
            He tooke vnto him ſpeedily
            The trenchant glaine of Mercurie:
            That glaine embrued with the ſtaine
                  Perſeus borne of Danae, and the golden ſhowre.
            
            Of hundred-eyed Argus ſlaine,
            The watch-man of that haifer white,
            That did Ioues fancy ſo delight.
            Then Pallas (that ſame martiall maide)
            Did giue her winged brother aid,
            Whereby this Gorgons head to gaine;
            And charged him his flight to ſtraine
            Toward Lybiſsas vtmoſt land:
            But that his looke ſhould Eaſtward ſtand.
            And, flying, hold a weſtward race,
            When he through Gorgons realme did trace.
            Then on his left arme ſhe did binde
            Her brazen Targe, that brightly ſhin'd:
                  Pallas Target.
            
            And bids him ſo the ſame direct,
            That vpon it there might reflect
            
               Meduſas ſtone-creating eyes:
            Which heauy ſleepe ſhould ſo ſurpriſe,
            And rap't her ſences chiefeſt ſtrength,
            To bring dire death on her at length.
            But yet part of her ſnakie treſſe
            This ſlumber could not ſo oppreſſe;
            But that ſome ſerpents ſtood an end,
            And did her dulled head defend,
            Whilſt ſome her face did ouer-ſpred,
            And vail'd her eyes in darkneſſe bed.
            Then Pallas lent her powerfull charme
            To fearfull Perſeus trembling arme:
            And did his fauchion Harpe guide,
            
               
               
                  Perſeus with harpe, the fauchion of Mercury, cuts off Meduſas head.That ready was to turne aſide;
            Wherewith he ſtraight in ſunder ſmoat
            Her ſpatious ſnake-bearing throat.
            What face had Gorgon then I wonder,
            When that her necke was cut a ſunder
            With that ſame crooked wounding blade?
            What poyſon did her gorge vnlade?
            How many deaths from her eyes ſtreames?
            
               Pallas could not endure thoſe gleames:
            Nor Perſeus (though he turn'd aſide)
            Had ſcap't from being ſtonifi'd,
            If Pallas had not (with her Targe)
            Her feltred lockes diſperſt at large,
            And ſo be-clouded all her face
            With Snakes, that ouer it did trace.
            ¶ The winged Perſeus (being ſped
            With this fell Gorgons vgly head)
            Did minde to heauen to make repaire,
            And cuts the region of the aire:
            But (leſt through Europes Clyme he might,
            With dammage to thoſe coaſts, take flight)
            
               Pallas enioyn'd him, with her heſt,
            That fruitfull ſoyle not to infeſt;
            Nor yet that people to moleſt.
            For who would not admire the skies,
            When through them ſuch a wonder flies?
            From Zephyrus he turnes his wings,
            And ouer Lybia's coaſts he flings:
            Where was nor graine nor tillage vſd,
            But all with Phoebus flames enfuſd.
            For there the Heauens and Tytans ſteedes
            Burnt all, ſo that no greene it breedes.
            And no land in the earth doth riſe
            (With mighty ſhade) more neere the skies
            Nor Cinthia's light doth more ſurpriſe:
            If that (forgetfull of her way)
            From the right ſignes ſhe trend aſtray.
            For that high land caſts neuer ſhade
            Vnto the South, or Northerne glade;
            And yet it is a barren ground,
            
               Wherein no goodneſſe can be found.
            But now it was with poyſons fed,
            That drop't downe from Meduſa's head.
            And thoſe vilde dewes corrupt the fields,
            That her invenom'd ſanguine yeelds.
            The which the heates more noyſome makes,
            When in the putred ſands it bakes.
            ¶ The firſt corruption that aroſe,
            And in the duſt his head out-ſhowes,
            The Aſpicke was; that brings dead ſleepe,
            And with a ſwelling necke doth creepe.The diuers kindes of ſerpēts that were ingendred in Lybia by the drops of blood that fell from the necke of Meduſa, according to fabulous antiquity
            
            With Gorgons blood he was repleate,
            The clottred poyſons in him fret.
            No ſerpent is more poyſonous,
            Nor in extreame more frigidous;
            Who (wanting warmth) doth alwayes ſhun
            The Clymes remoter from the Sunne.
            And all alongſt the bankes of Nyle
            
            Thoſe ſands he likewiſe doth defile.
            But how great ſhame to vs acrues
            (Whom couetiſe doth ſo abuſe)
            That we from Affricke do not ſpare
            To marchandize that noyſome ware?
            Here alſo doth that hugie beaſt
            (Haemorrhois) raiſe vp his creſt.
            And whom he ſtings, from out the vaines
            All the life-feeding blood hee draines.
            Then the Cherſydros double kinde,
            That in the ſholes of Syrts are ſhrin'd.
            And the Chelydri in their dennes
            Amongſt the muddy ſteaming fennes.
            And Cenchris alwayes when he ſlides,
            (Not wriggling) ſtraight his paſſage guides.
            Whoſe ſpeckled body (full of ſtaines)
            More diuers colours ſtill retaines,
            Then are the Theban marble vaines.
            And the Ammodites, whoſe hue
            From parched ſands men hardly knew.
            And the Ceraſte roming wide,
            Whoſe winding backe each way can glide.
            
               And Scytale, that winter-worme,
            That in cold dewes doth make his furme:
            And in that ſeaſon caſts his coate.
            Then Dipſas, that is all as hot.
            
               Amphiſibena, harmfull fiend,
            That hath a head at either end.
            The Water-ſnake, that felly ſtings,
            And Darting Serpents, that haue wings.
            And Pharias, that doth not traile,
            But euer goes vpon his taile.
            And greedy Praeſter, that all rapes,
            Whoſe frothy Iawes ſuch wideneſſe gapes.
            VVith Seps, that in contagion ſwelts,
            And very bones with bodies melts.
            Then that ſame Baſiliske, whoſe hiſſe
            Vnto all Serpents fearfull is:
            So as from him they flye or hide,
            And come not where he doth reſide.
            Hee lethall is before he ſting,
            His hiſſing deadly harme doth bring:
            
               Therfore called Baſiliſcus of the greek word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               Sole in the ſands he raignes as King.
            And torrid Affricke likewiſe breedes
            Thoſe plaguie Dragons, that exceedes
            For miſchiefe, in moſt cruell kinde,
            VVhich other nations neuer finde.
            VVhoſe ſcalie backes doe ſhine like gold;
            And when aloft their flight they hold,
            (Amidſt the aire with ſtretched wings)
            The heards of cattell cluſtring thrings.
            For mighty Bulles become their pray,
            That in their tailes they ſweepe away.
            Huge Elephants ſcape not their pawes:
            All things to death their fury drawes:
            So as no poyſnous humor needes
            To act the miſchiefe of their deeds.
            ¶ Cato (with his ſtout martiall bands)
            Doth march alongſt theſe parched ſands
            That do ſuch mortall poyſons yeeld;
            And there with griefe he oft beheld
            The vncoth deaths, that ſo abounds,
            
               Amongſt his troops of little wounds.
            The Serpent Dipſas turnes his head
            On Aulus, that on him did tread,
            And bites this youth of Tyrrhen race,The poyſon of Dipſaes.
            
            That held an Enſigne-bearers place.
            He ſcarcely any whit was paind,
            Nor any ſigne of bite remaind.
            Within his lookes no death appeard,
            Nor threatning danger to be feard.
            But yet the ſecret poyſon workes:
            The fire within the marrow lurkes:
            And ſuddenly the venome heates,
            Whilſt burning gripes his bowels freats.
            This peſtilence diſperſed ſinks,
            And all the vitall humours drinks.
            His pallat and his iaws grow drie;
            His tongue with ſcorching drought did frie:
            His wearie lims (with labouring heate)
            Did not as earſt yeeld moiſtie ſweate.
            No teares at all fall from his eyes.
            All moiſture from the poyſon flies.
            No reu'rence of the Empires awe,
            Nor Stoicke Catos martiall law,
            Could this incenſed man affray:
            But he his Enſignes would diſplay,
            And all about the fields did raue,
            Seeking where he might water haue,
            The which his thirſty heart did craue.
            Had he beene into Tanais caſt,
            Or Rhodanus that runs ſo faſt,
            Or into Poe that ſpreads ſo vaſt,
            Or into Nylus, that doth range
            Alongſt ſo many countries ſtrange;
            And of all theſe had ſoakt his fill:
            Yet would his lights haue burned ſtill.
            The fury of the parched ground
            Did make his deadly drought abound,
            And adde more deaths to Lybias blame,
            But doth detract from Dipſas fame,
            As not from her that all this came.
            
               He now at laſt the ſands doth trie,
            Where any filthie puddles lie.
            And then vnto the Syrtes returnes,
            And bathes in floods his mouth that burnes.
            The ſtoare of waues did him delight:
            Yet nought aſſwag'd his thirſtie plight.
            His kind of griefe he nothing knowes,
            Nor that his bale from poyſon flowes.
            He thinks thirſt onely his diſeaſe,
            The which the better to appeaſe,
            With his owne ſword he cuts his vaines,
            And with the blood his mouth he baines.
            ¶ Cato forthwith commanded than
            To take the enſigne from this man.
            And ſo twas handled that none durſt
            To ſay this ſickeneſſe came of thurſt,
            But ſtraight againe another dies
            More grieuouſly before their eyes.
            For loe a little Seps their lights
            On poore Sabellus thigh and bites:
            Who with his hand away did plucke
            This worme, that by the teeth then ſtucke.
            And with his pyle, that he did beare,
            
               The poyſon of the SepsVnto the ground he naild it there.
            A little Serpent tis God knowes,
            But whence moſt cruell poyſon flowes,
            And none doth bring more deadly throes.
            For all about (where he had bit)
            The skin and fleſh away did flit:
            So as the bone all bared lay,
            The carkaſſe likewiſe melts away.
            One naked wound all did diſplay.
            His members all with venome ſwell:
            His brawnie calues then from him fell:
            The ſynews of his hams Were reft:
            No skin or fleſh about them left:
            The verie muskles of his thighs
            Did rotting drop away likewiſe:
            His flancks to blacke corruption turnd:
            The midriffe ſhriueled vp and burnd:
            
               So as his bowels burſt withall,
            And yet the body did not fall
            Together, to the ground at once:
            But by peace-meale dropt from the bones.
            Thus (with a little poyſned bite)
            Death ſuddenly all parts did ſmite.
            The venome had ſuch ample ſcope,
            That nerues and ſinews it laies ope.
            The ribs it did vncouer quite:
            The hollow breſt it rots outright.
            The vitall veines that feed the heart,
            And what elſe was of this mans part,
            That Nature gaue, when he tooke breath,
            Abandond lay to this ſtrange death.
            His ſhoulders drop, and his ſtrong armes,
            His necke and head receiue like harmes.
            The thawing ſnow melts not more faſt,
            That feels the warmth of Southerne blaſt:
            Nor yet the waxe againſt the Sun
            Doth to more liquid humors run.
            But this is nothing that I ſay
            That poiſons heate melts fleſh away:
            The fire can ſhew the ſelfe ſame power,
            But what flame ſo can bones deuoure?
            For heare euen as the marrow melts,
            The bones likewiſe conſuming ſwelts.
            It ſuffers no ſignes to remaine.
            A rapting fate ſo all doth ſtraine.
            Of all the plagues (that Affricke tries)
            Thy ſelfe alone ſhalt haue the prize.
            The reſt do bring but life to end:
            But thou both life and bones doſt ſpend.
            And now behold another kind
            Of ſwelling death, they likewiſe find.
            The firie Preſter (with his ſting)
            
               Naſidius to his end doth bring.
            
               Naſidius that (with his plough ſhares)
            The Marſian fields for graines prepares.The poyſon of the Preſter.
            
            His face is colourd furie red:
            His puft ſwolne skin at large is ſpred.
            
               All forme and ſhape his lookes hath loſt
            The tumor ſo his corps imboſt.
            And ſo his veins the poyſon feeds,
            That human meaſure he exceeds.
            One lumpe doth all his parts confound,
            Within a formeleſſe body dround.
            His habbergon was not of ſpace,
            His ſwollen carkaſſe to embrace.
            The boyling caudrons frothy ſcum,
            Doth not in bubbles riſe ſo plum;
            Nor yet the ſaile doth ſwell ſo vaſt,
            When it is puft with windy blaſt.
            The miſhapt corps could ſcarce containe
            The lims, that ſo with ſwelling ſtraine.
            And that ſame trunks confuſed heft,
            They durſt not to the funerall weft,
            But to the foules vntoucht it left,
            And for a pray vnto wild beaſts,
            If thereon they durſt make their feaſts.
            For now the ſwelling corps they leaue,
            Before the fulneſſe it receaue.
            ¶ But ſpectacles of more diſmay
            The Lybian poyſons yet diſplay.
            The ſharpe Hemorrhois hath impreſt
            His venom'd teeth, that did infeſt
            
               The poyſon of the Hemorrhois.
               Tullus, that noble hopefull youth,
            A follower of Catos truth.
            And as we ſeethe Saffron ſtaine
            The cloth, through which the ſame we ſtraine
            So did this poyſons ruddy taint
            (Like blood)) his body all depaint.
            The teares (that from his eyes then fell)
            Were drops of blood, wherewith they ſwell.
            And all the paſſages beſides,
            Through which the bodies humour ſlides,
            Huge ſtreams of blood by thoſe vents flowes,
            So from his mouth, and from his noſe,
            He liquid blood doth likewiſe ſweate,
            Wherewith his members were repleate,
            That through the ſwelling veins did freate.
            
               And ſo his bleeding did abound,
            That all his body was one wound.
            ¶ But on thee (Leua) wretched wight
            The Nylus ſerpents rage did light.The nature of the Aſpicks poyſon.
            
            Whoſe poyſon fixt remedileſſe,
            The heart root ſtrings did ſo oppeſſe,
            That of his bite no paine was felt,
            Yet ſuddenly in death didſt ſwelt,
            And in a ſlumber tookſt thy end,
            And ſo to Stygian ſhades diſcend.
            The poyſon gathered vnawares,
            (That fatall Sabeas ſo prepares,
            When they a harmefull twig do chuſe
            For francumcenſe, which they would vſe)
            Doth not with that ſtrong potion
            Haſt death with ſo ſwift motion.
            But now behold from farre doth flee
            (Out of a hollow withered tree)
            A cruell ſerpent, like a flight,The nature of the ſerpent called a Iaculum.
            
            That deeply wounds where it doth light.
            And (whirling with a courage fierce)
            Through Paulus temples it did pierce.
            A Iaculum they do it call,
            It poyſons not the part withall;
            But whomſoeuer that it wounds,
            There preſent death the life confounds.
            By this experience we may know,
            That vnto this a ſling is ſlow,
            And (in compare how this doth pierce)
            The Scythian ſhaft flies not ſo fierce.
            ¶ What helpe at all doth it aduance,
            That Murrus hath (with his ſharpe lance)
            The Baſiliske pierc't thorow quite;
            When as the deadly venoms might
            Alongſt the lance ſo faſt doth creepe,
            That it within his hands doth ſteepe?
            Which he lifts vp finding the harme,The nature of the Baſilisks poyſon.
            
            And inſtantly cuts off his arme
            With his owne ſword, which fell to ground.
            And he by this experience found
            
               (The hand cut off that he endures)
            His life thereby to him aſſures.
            But who would thinke the Scorpions ſting
            Had ſuch like force in poyſoning,
            And preſent death with it could bring?
            He cruell is in deadly bites,
            And mortally his taile he ſmites.
            The which the heauens themſelues explaine,
            In honor of Orion ſlaine.
            
               Salpuga a kind of poyſnous Ants.Or who would doubt that earth to treade,
            Where thou Salpuga mak'ſt thy bed?
            And yet the fatall ſiſters three
            No little power haue giuen to thee,
            Our vitall twiſts to ſhred in twaine,
            By force of thy ſtrange poyſnous vaine.
            ¶ Thus neither by the dayes faire light,
            Could they find reſt, nor in darke night.
            Theſe wretched men were ſtill in dread,
            Vpon what ground to reſt or tread.
            For neither heapes of leaues they take,
            Nor bundled reeds their beds to make:
            But euen as men, to fates expoſd,
            Vpon the bared ground repoſd:
            And to the vapors, that do riſe
            Where their warme bodies heaped lies,
            The chilly ſerpents do repaire
            (Offended with the nights cold aire.)
            Amongſt their lims their skins they warme
            And all that while they do no harme.
            The cold dew doth their venome charme.
            Meane while the ſouldiers do not know
            What wayes to ſeeke, or where to go.
            But are directed by the skies,
            
               The murmuring and repining of the ſoldiers againſt their miſerable iourney.And in this maze powre out their cries.
            O Gods (ſay they) let vs be led
            Vnto the field, from which we fled.
            Bring vs againe to Theſſalie:
            Our hands to armes we deſtinie.
            
               The Serpents of Lybia.Why languiſh we in miſerie?
            The Dipſaes here for Caeſar fight,
            
               And the Caeraſtes plead his right.
            Alongſt the torrid zoane we run,
            And clymates burned with the Sun.
            We are well pleaſd (in our diſpaire)
            To lay the blame vpon the aire.
            And then againſt the heauens to crie,
            As deſtin'd in this ſoyle to die.
            But, Affricke, we accuſe thee not,
            Nor nature with this fault do blot.
            Thou haſt this hatefull ſoyle deſignd
            To ſerpents of a monſtrous kind.This part of Lybia not ordained for man to liue in.
            
            And therefore hence it firſt did chace
            All meanes to nouriſh humane race.
            This earth thou barren didſt ordaine,
            Vnfit for tillage or for graine.
            And in this ſort thou didſt decree
            That men from poyſons ſhould be free.
            But we take vp the Serpents roomes,
            For which we haue theſe heauy doomes.
            And thou ô God who ſo thou art,
            That doſt diſlike of this our mart,
            (Thereby to make our errour knowne)
            On this ſide ſetſt the torrid zoane:
            And on the other ſide doſt place
            The marine Syrts, with doubtfull race:
            And in the midſt this noyſome coaſt,
            Where we by ſundry deaths are loſt.
            ¶ The ciuill warre his armes diſplaies
            Alongſt theſe deſart vncouth waies;
            And now the ſouldiers well are taught,
            What miſeries the heauens haue wrought.
            The worlds deepe ſecrets they haue ſought
            But now, perhaps, ſome things more ſtrange
            They yet may meet where they will range.In this part of the world both the Poles do ſeeme to be as low as the horyſon.
            
            For there the Sun fals in the Seas,
            And, hiſſing, doth his flames appeaſe:
            And there the nature of the Poles
            (Oppreſt to ſeeming) downward rolles.
            But no land further doth extend
            Vnto the Weſt where this doth end.
            
               But Iubas realme, whoſe fatall name
            To vs is onely knowne by fame.
            There we ſhall ſeeke and chance to finde
            Lands, breeding ſerpents of this kinde.
            This comforts yet the heauens do giue,
            That in this ſoyle ſome of vs liue.
            We do not wiſh nor yet deſire
            To our owne countrey to retire.
            
               Europe nor Aſia we affect,
            Where other ſtars lend their aſpect.
            But Affricke where haue we thee loſt!
            Vnder what skie or in what coſt!
            Art thou obſcured from our hoſt?
            For but euen now the winters cold
            We found vpon Cyrenis mold.
            Is ſo much the yeares ſeaſon chang'd
            In this ſmall way, that we haue rang'd?
            We croſſe this Axle of the world,
            And with the ſphere about are whorld:
            And now againe we turne our backe
            Once more vnto the Southerne racke.
            
               There opiniō then of the Antipodes.So as, perhaps, the Roman land
            Iuſt vnderneath our feet doth doth ſtand.
            This onely comfort fate vs grant,
            That our foes ſeeke vs where we hant,
            That Caeſar (ere this warre be done)
            May follow on where we haue run.
            Such wofull plaints remedileſſe
            Their ſuffring patience did expreſſe.
            But that their captaines noble heart
            Made them all pains take in good part.
            The bared ſands was ſtill his bowre;
            He tempted Fortune euery howre.
            
               Catos prsiſe.In all aſſayes he ſtill made one,
            And runs when he is cald vpon.
            His worthie carriage comfort gaue,
            To ſouldiers, readie for their graue.
            And more then health did them reuiue,
            For they in greateſt pangs would ſtriue
            To hide their plaints and death defie,
            
               As long as he was preſent by.
            What power on him had any griefe,
            That ſo to others gaue reliefe?
            Whilſt he lookt on his men he taught
            The greateſt woes to ſet at nought.
            ¶ Fortune (that wearie was almoſt
            With plaguing of this wretched hoaſt)
            A little taſt of comfort giues
            And them at laſt (though late) releeues.
            A people in the world there be,
            That are from ſerpents poyſon free.
            
               Marmarida that land is nam'd:
            
               Pſilli the people, that haue fram'd
            Their tongues all venoms rage to dead,
            As well as hearbs, that earth hath bred.
            No poyſons force can be enfuſd
            Into their blood, though no charms vſd.
            The place (by nature) doth prouide,
            That ſafe mongſt ſerpents they recide.The nature of a people in Lybia called the Pſilli that cure the bites of Serpents.
            
            It profits them to leade their life
            In ſoyles, where ſerpents are ſo rife.
            With them death ſeldome is at ſtrife.
            Their blood ſo poyſon houlds in ſcorne,
            That when a childe is newly borne,
            They vſe this meanes wherewith to trie
            If it be free from Baſtardie.
            By prouing of the Aſpicks byte,
            To know where it be falſe or right.
            And as Ioues Eagle ſcans the doubt
            Of thoſe warme egs the dam brings out
            By taking his vnplumed race,
            And them againſt the Sun doth place,
            And thoſe that can (with conſtant eye)
            Behold the beames aſſuredly,
            And will not twinckle at the light,
            When Tytan ſhewes his face moſt bright,How the Pſilli try their wiues chaſtitie.
            
            As his owne breed thoſe he affects:
            But euery wincking ſquall reiects.
            Such triall doth the Pſiilli make
            If their ſmall babes dare touch a ſnake,
            
               Or if the infant do but play
            With ſerpents, laied in his way.
            ¶ Theſe people doe not onely care
            How to preſerue their own welfare:
            But ſtrangers likewiſe they intend,
            And from thoſe monſters them defend,
            And to our ſouldiers helpe did lend.
            One of the Pſilli did accoſt
            An Enſigne, of the Romane hoſt,
            And with our campe along he went,
            And when the Chieftaine pitcht his Tent,
            He all the hoſt did circuite round,
            Intrenched on this ſandie ground.
            That done his muttring charmes he ſpake,
            And all without great fiers did make.
            A medcine venoms force to ſlake.
            
               Medicines againſt the ſerpents poyſon.In it the Dane-wort hiſſing heates:
            And Galbana there frying ſweates:
            The Thamarix, of ſullen plight:
            And Coſtrum, that hearbe-Mary hight:
            With Panacea, moſt of might:
            Then the Theſſalian Centorie:
            And Maid-wort, that doth crackling frie:
            
               Long-wort, and Larix therewithall,
            And that, which Southernwood we call,
            Whoſe ſmoake the ſerpents ſo diſtaſt;
            And then an old Harts-horne at laſt,
            So all the night they ſafely paſt.
            For poyſons, that do dayly hant
            That people magicke wonders chant.
            Great ſtrugling ſtrife theſe Pſillans make,
            When they would taken-venom ſlake.
            For firſt of all the ſtinged ioint
            With ſpittle they do round annoint,
            Which doth the ſpreading venom draine,
            And in the wound the ſame containe.
            Then many charmes by them are ſung,
            Still muttring with a froathie tong.
            And from their mumbling if they ceaſe,
            The venoms rage will then increaſe.
            
               No minute may they hold their peace.
            Thus often do they with theſe charmes,
            Diſſolue and quench thoſe poyſnous harms,
            That in the marrow feſtring lies.
            But if this courſe do not ſuffiſe,
            But that the lingring poyſon ſtay,
            And to their charme will not obay;
            Vpon the cure he flat doth fall,
            And licks the pallid wound withall.
            The venom with his mouth he drawes,
            And ſoakes the artires with his iawes.
            So from the chilly corps he fets
            The deadly dram, and out it ſpets.
            And hauing ouercome the might
            Of this vile ſerpents mortall bite,
            The Pſilli by the taſt do finde
            The poyſons force, and of what kinde.
            And by this meanes the Romane troope
            Are freed from that, which made them droop
            And now about theſe diſmall lands
            They dare diſperſe their ſcattring bands.
            
               Belphoebe twice was in the wane,
            And twice her full light ſhe had tane,
            Whilſt Cato wandring in this coaſt
            Her nightly ſheene had found and loſt.
            ¶ Now more and more the mouldring ſand
            Grew firme, and chang'd to ſolid land,
            And then a farre the ſouldier ſees
            The lofty woods and greene-leau'd trees,
            And litle cotes with loame vp-patcht,
            The roofs whereof with reeds were thatcht.
            O what a comfort this poore hoaſt
            Conceiu'd, to finde a better coaſt!
            When firſt they one another ſhow
            Fierce Lions ranging to and fro.
            Then vnto Leptis next they came,
                  Leptis a good citie on the frontiers of Lybia.
                  He now returns to ſpeak of Caeſar.
               
            
            Where they their winter ſtations frame.
            A quiet place and fruitfull mould,
            Neither oppreſt with heate nor cold,
            ¶ Caeſar now (hauing coold his ire
            
               In Pharſale blood) doth thence retire.
            And all the waight of his affaires
            Againſt his ſon-inlaw-prepares,
            And him purſues (although in vaine)
            Whoſe troops were ſperſt on land & maine.
            But Pompeys fame the ſeas had ſpred
            Thither his army Caeſar led.
            And goes vnto the ſtraights of Thrace,
            
            Whoſe waues Leanders loue did grace.
            Where ſtands that fatall wailing towre
            Of Hero, his deare Paramour.
            That Helleſpontus hath to name,
            From Helle drowned in the ſame.
            A ſhorter cut cannot be found
            Twixt Europe, and the Aſian ground.
            Although the maine, that doth diuide
            
               Bizantium, from Calcedons ſide,
            Do run but with a narrow tide.
            And ſo Propontis (that doth take
            His current from the Euxine lake)
            Doth but a ſlender channell make.
            Here he the fame doth now explore,
            That runs of this Sigaean ſhore.
            And Simois, that noble fount;
            
               Here was Achilles his Tombe.And that braue Greeke of ſuch account,
            That buried lies in Rhaetus mount.
            And many other worthy ſprites,
            Oblig'd vnto the Poets writes.
            He circuits then that worthy name
            Of Troy, deſtroyd by Graecian flame.
            And thoſe old ruines he ſeeks out
            Of Phoebus wals ſo large about.
            But rotten trees and barren land
            Now hides the place where they did ſtand.
            And with their burthen do preſſe downe
            The buildings of Aſſarac's towne,
            And all their Temples ſo diuine
            The ſpreading rootes do vndermine.
            All Troy is thus with brambles cloyd,
            Yea euen her ruins are deſtroyd.
            
               
               Heſions rockes he likewiſe viewes,Heſione, Laomedons daughter.
               
            
            And where Anchiſes erſt did vſe
            (In woody ſhades) his ſports to proue,
            Coying that powerfull Queene of Loue:
            
            And whereas Paris being iudge,
            Did on him draw great Iuno's grudge:
            And where that Boy was rapted vp,
            That now for Ioue doth beare the cup;Ganimed.
            
            And where the Troian youth did reſt,
            When he was Nymph Oenone's gueſt.Paris.
            
            Each place is with ſome fame poſſeſt.
            ¶ Now vnawares doth Caeſar paſſe
            That twining ſtreame, that dryed was,
            Which Zanthus he did call of yore,
            And careleſſe treades that graſſie ſhore.
            When as a Peaſant of that Coaſt
            Bids him not tread on Hectors ghoſt:The words of a Peaſant to Caeſar.
               
            
            There all abrode lay ſcattred ſtones
            Of that braue Tombe, that held his bones,
            Whereof no forme did now remaine.
            And then this Peaſant ſaid againe,
            What doſt thou Hectors Tombe diſdaine?
            
               O great and ſacred Poëts toyle,
            
            
               That doſt preſerue what death would foyle!
               The praiſe of of Poëſie.
            
            
               And to the world this boone doſt giue,
            
            
               That mortall men ſhall euer liue.
            
            O Caeſar! doe not thou repine,
            To ſee the power of fame diuine.
            For if that we may promiſe ought
            That may by Latium Muſe be wrought;
            As long as Smyrna's Poet laſts,
            And on deſerts due honours caſts:Homer.
            
            So long ſhall after ages fame
            Record my verſe, and read thy name.
            And our Pharſalia ſhall ſubſiſt
            In ſpite of darke obliuions miſt.
            ¶ When Caeſar feaſted had his eyes
            VVith ruines that there heaped lies
            Of reuerent monuments of fame,
                  Caeſars ſacrifice at Troy, and his vowes.
            
            There he of turfe in haſte did frame
            
               A ſacred Altar, where did flame
            The pretious gummes, that ſmoke did raiſe,
            And not in vaine in this ſort prayes.
            Yee ghoſts diuine, whoſe aſhes cold
            The Troian ruines do infold,
            Whence my Aeneas tooke his race,
            That in Lauinia now hath place,
            And in the Alban bower ſoiournes,
            Where Phrygian fires ſtill ſhining burnes:
            And where that famous pledge doth lye
            (Concealed ſtill from mortall eye)
            Of Troian Pallas which we haue
            
               
                  Caeſar doth challenge his deſcent from the Troians.
               Shrin'd in a Temples ſecret caue.
            Behold before your Altars here
            A glorious Off-ſpring doth appeare,
            Deſcended from the Iulian line,
            Who offers vp his vowes diuine:
            And yeelds your Rites in this ſelfe place,
            That whilome you were wont to grace;
            Grant my deſignes a happy fate,
            I will againe reſtore your ſtate:
            And Italy, the walles of Troy
            
            Shall gratefully raiſe vp with ioy.
            So Roman Pergamus ſhall riſe
            With lofty Turrets to the skies.
            Thus ſaid, vnto his Fleet hee goes,
            And all his ſailes a faire winde blowes.
            For he deſir'd to make amends
            For that time, which on Troy he ſpends.
            Then mighty Aſia's coaſts he cleeres,
            And paſt Rhodes foamy waues he ſteeres.
            So as (within ſeuen nights at moſt)
            He did arriue on Aegypts coaſt,
            
               
                  Caeſar ſailes towards Affricke.
               With ſuch a friendly Eaſterne gale,
            That they nor tacke aboord did hale,
            Nor euer did a ſheet let flye,
            Till Pharos Lanthorne they eſpye.
            And yet the day was new begunne,
            And that night lampe dyn'd with the Sunne:
            Before hee did approch the Port
            
               Where flocking people did reſort
            With muttring dinne, and ſtrange report.
            And therefore now (for his behoofe)
            Forbeares to land, and keepes aloofe;
            Doubting (at firſt) himſelfe to truſt
            With ſuch a Nation, moſt vniuſt.
            But now dire preſents from that King,
            The Captaine of his guard did bring,
            And comes aboord the Roman fleet,
            And on the ſeas doth Caeſar greet:
            With him he carries Pompeys head,
            With Pharian vaile all ouer-ſpred.
            And firſt of all he laud affoords
            To his foule fact, in theſe vile words.
            ¶ Great Conqueror of all the earth,
            Chiefe ornament of Roman birth,
                  Pompeys head brought to Caeſar, with an Oration.
            
            That which as yet thou doſt not know
            The Aegypt King doth here beſtow
            Security vpon thy ſtate,
            By cutting off great Pompeys date:
            Whereby thy labours and thy warre
            By land and ſea, now ended are.
            And that which only wanting was
            At Pharſals field, is brought to paſſe.
            The ciuill warre thou didſt entend,
            Is in thy abſence brought to end.
            The ruines of Pharſalias fight,
            (That Pompey ſought againe to right)
            Is by our ſword extinguiſht quite.
            Thy fauour, Caeſar, that we ſought,
            VVith this great tryall we haue bought.
            And with this blood confirmd we haue
            The league, that we of thee do craue.
            Receiue this kingdome as thine owne,
            For which thou haſt no dangers knowne.
            Receiue the right of all this Realme,
            The fruitfull ſoyle of Nylus ſtreame.
            Receiue all that which thou wouldſt giue
            For Pompeys head, whilſt he did liue:
            And in thy Campe now let vs bee
            
               As faithfull followers to thee;
            Since by the Fates it was decreed,
            That we ſhould act ſo great a deeed.
            And do not thinke this merit vile,
            That we our hands ſhould ſo defile
            With ſlaughter of ſo deere a gueſt,
            By whom this kingdome we poſſeſt:
            When our Kings Father was put downe,
            
               Pompey reſtor'd him to his Crowne.
            What is there more for me to ſay?
            What name can ſuch a worke diſplay?
            Search all the world records that are,
            They all come ſhort of this by farre.
            Thy debt is more, if this be blame,
            That for thy ſake did act the ſame:
            From thee we taken haue the ſhame.
            So ſaid, the head he did diſplay,
            And from it takes the vaile away:
            But deaths pale hue his lookes eſtranged,
            The features of his face were changed.
            ¶ Caeſar at firſt did not deſpiſe
            This gift, but turn'd aſide his eyes;
            And muſing ſtaid, the truth to ſound
            
               
                  Caeſars behauiour at the ſight of Pompys headOf this foule fact, which when he found,
            Twas fit he thought, that they all ſaw
            He was a pious Father-in-law:
            Wherewith he fained teares did ſhed,
            And ſighes for that, his comfort bred.
            Hoping this way to be the beſt
            To cloke thoſe ioyes that in him reſt,
            And did the Tyrants fault deteſt.
            And would the Treaſon rather blame,
            Then ſeeme indebted for the ſame.
            He that before with ſcorne did tread
            Vpon the Senators laid dead:
            And that with dryed eyes beheld
            The ſlaughter of Pharſalias field;
            Now dares not, Pompey, thee deny
            A deepe-fetcht ſigh, and weeping eye.
            O curſed lot of diſmall fate!
            
               Haſt thou purſu'd this dire debate,
            (O Caeſar) and in that preuail'd,
            That now deſerues to be bewail'd?
            The contracts of thy ſon-in-law,
            To no compaſſion doth thee draw:
            Nor yet thy daughter makes this mood,
            Nor little Nephewes of their blood:
            But thou doſt hope thy teares will moue
            The people (that did Pompey loue)
            Thy Armes the rather to approue.
            Or elſe perchance thou doſt enuy
            This traytor tyrants deſtiny:
            That any hand ſuch power hath ſhowne
            On Pompeys bowels, but thine owne:
            And grieu'ſt ſuch meanes to others left,
            VVhereby reuenge from thee is reft:
            And that the end of Pompeys bane
            From the proud victors ſword is tane.
            But whatſoeuer humor twere.
            That made thee ſigh, or ſhed a teare,
            It did no pious meaning beare.
            Didſt thou (with ſuch an eager vaine)
            Expoſe thy force by land and maine?
            And didſt not meane withall, that hee
            In any place ſhould ruin'd be?
            O well did death this act fulfill,
            That left it not vnto thy will!
            VVhat ſhame and blame hath heauy fate
            Remoued from the Roman ſtate?
            That would not ſuffer Pompey liue,
            That thou (wretch) ſholdſt him pardon giue?
            And yet thou darſt (with outward ſhowes)
            To blinde the world in that it knowes:
            And fained ſorrowes face doſt frame,
            To gaine to thee a loyall name.
            ¶ Souldier, that vnto me do'ſt bring
            This direfull preſent from thy King,
            Depart my ſight, beare it away:
                  Caeſars words to him that preſented Pompeys head.
            
            For thou doſt Caeſar more betray,
            And worſe of him it merited,
            
               Then of great Pompey murthered.
            For this proud fact doth vs bebarre
            The greateſt glory of our warre;
            Which is, that mercy might be ſhowne
            By vs, vnto our vanquiſh't fone.
            And did not this vile tyrant hate
            His ſiſter, partner of his ſtate?
            I quickly could thy King requite
            VVith equall ſcorne, and like deſpight.
            And, Cleopatra, ſend thy head
            Vnto thy brother for blood-ſhed.
            VVhat mou'd him thus with ſecret might
            
               Caeſar reproues Ptolemey.So to entrude his ſwords deſpight
            In actions, longing to our right?
            Haue we to this end conqueſt ſought
            At the Pharſalian battaile fought;
            That we ſhould lawleſſe power affoord
            (In this kinde) vnto Aegypts ſword?
            Muſt we our ſtate and ſafety gaine
            By fauours, that your kingdomes daine?
            Shall I (that would not brooke for Mate
            Great Pompey, in the Roman ſtate)
            Endure thee, Ptolemey, my Peere?
            Then, what are we a whit the neere,
            So many Nations to haue led
            Vnder our Roman Enſignes ſpred,
            If in this world there ſhould be knowne
            Any, but Caeſars power alone?
            Or if the earth could parted bee
            Twixt any other man and mee?
            VVe ſhould now turne our Latium Ores
            Aloofe from theſe Aegyptian ſhores;
            But that our honours are denayd:
            For then perhaps it would be ſaid,
            That we for feare did Pharus ſhunne,
            And not as loathing this deed done.
            But do not you perſwade your minde,
            That you the victors eyes can blinde;
            But that he knowes (had heauens heſt
            So driuen him to be your gueſt)
            
               He ſhould haue taſted the like feaſt.
            And that my head is not ſo vſd,
            
               Pharſalia's fortune hath excuſd.
            I ſee that we haue waged warre
            More perilous to vs by farre,
            Then euer yet our minde did feare:
            To baniſhment we ſubiect were.
            Then Pompey vs purſu'd with hate,
            And threatnings from the Roman ſtate:
            So as if we had been diſtreſt,
            Then Ptolemey had vs oppreſt.
            But with his youth we do diſpence;
            And pardon him for his offence.
            But to the Pharian King make knowne,
            A greater grace cannot be ſhowne.
            See therefore you entombe the head
            Of ſuch a worthy Captaine dead.
                  Caeſar giues cō
                  mandement for Pompeys funerall.
            
            But faſhion not his funerall
            As though his acts were criminall,
            Deſeruing to be hid from ſight:
            But Incenſe giue him flaming bright.
            Of his wrong'd ghoſt appeaſe the mones,
            And gather vp his burned bones,
            That on your ſhores lye all defac't,
            And in an vrne let them be plac't.
            So let him thereby vnderſtand
            His father-in-law came to this land:
            And let his ſoule heare, therewithall,
            My feeling ſorrow for his fall.
            Although before our vowed loue
            He did all other things approue:
            And rather choſe his Pharian ward,
            Then our due grace his life to guard.
            Whereby the people reaued beene
            That happy day, they might haue ſeene.
            And that ſame concord was ſuppreſt,
                  Caeſar pretends a meaning to haue been reconciled to Pompey.
               
            
            That had reſtor'd the world to reſt.
            But ſo the heauens did now ordaine
            That my deſires ſhould be but vaine;
            Who meaning heare to lay aſide
            
               Thoſe conquering Armes, that I haue try'd
            VVith friendly hands, and enterview,
            VVe might our ancient leagues renew;
            And (free from grudge and ciuill ſtrife)
            In thoſe true tearmes haue wiſht thy life.
            Thinking my paines at full rewarded,
            To be thy equall peere regarded
            Then had I (with this loyall peace)
            Brought it to paſſe that thou ſhouldſt ceaſe
            To blame the Gods for warres diſgrace,
            And thou haue made Rome me embrace.
            But all theſe words no paſſion bred
            Amongſt his mates, nor one teare ſhed:
            Neither did they at all beleeue,
            That he ſpake as his minde did giue.
            All ſighes and ſorrowes they ſuppreſt,
            Their faces ſhewd ioy in their breaſt.
            O pretious liberty, the while
            That they with merry lookes durſt ſmile,
            VVhen Caeſars ſelfe did waile and rue
            That bloody ſpectacle to view!
            Finis libri noni.
         
         
            
            Lucans Pharſalia. The tenth Booke.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  CAeſar arriues at Pharos Bay,
               And doth with dreadleſſe face ſuruay
               Their Temples and their Monuments:
               The King with him in league aſsents.
               There Cleopatra pleades her right,
               And fauour findes in Caeſars ſight.
               Then feaſts and banquetings enſue,
               And Aegypts treaſure ſet to view.
               Whilſt Achoreus doth diſcourſe
               Of Nylus ſprings and flowing ſourſe.
               
                  Photinus doth with force employ
               
                  Achillas, Caeſar to deſtroy.
               Againſt the Court their Armes they bend,
               Which Caeſar brauely doth defend;
               And in the ſecret of the night,
               By ſhip to Pharos takes his flight.
               Where being ſtraighted by his foes,
               From thence by ſwimming ſafely goes.
            
            
               AS ſoone as Caeſar (being led
            By him that offred Pompeys head)
            Had brought his Nauy to the land,
            And trode on Pharos wretched ſand;
            
               The Fortune of this conquering gueſt
            Did with falſe Aegypts fate conteſt:
            Whether that now the Lagian ſtate
            The Roman Armes ſhould captiuate;
            Or that the Memphit murdering gleaue
            Should trayterouſly the world bereaue
            As well of him that conquered,
            
               The Cōmentators do vary in opinion vpon the conſtruction of theſe 4. verſes, wherein I doe follow the expoſition of Hortenſius, as moſt probable.As of the other vanquiſhed.
            "Thy death (O Pompey) did much good
            "To Caeſar, and preſeru'd his blood
            "By loſſe of thine, whereby the Nyle
            
            "Should not the Romans truſt beguile.
            Hence he to Alexandria Towne
            Goes ſafely, and (for more renowne)
            His Enſignes are before him borne,
            And that dire pledge their wicked ſcorne.
            
               Meaning Pompeys head.But he perceiues that in their breaſts
            A ſecret ſpleene, repining refts
            Amongſt that people, that did hate
            And murmure ſo to ſee their ſtate
            Subiected to the Roman guiſe
            With fagots borne, which they deſpiſe,
            He ſees their mindes, and thereby try'd
            Twas not for his ſake Pompey dy'd.
            Yet in his lookes no dread appeares,
            But paſſeth on (deuoyd of feares)
            Vnto their Temples, and ſuruayes
            The Monuments that they did raiſe
            Of old, vnto Macedons praiſe.
            But with no pleaſure ſees thoſe ſights,
            
               
                  Caeſar viſits the Aegyptian monuments.Nor in thoſe golden ſhewes delights.
            Their garniſht Gods feaſt not his eyes,
            Nor their huge walles that ſtately riſe.
            He willingly diſcends to ſee
            The vault, where their Kings tombed bee.
            There he beholds the body laid
            Of that ſame Fury, that diſmaid
            
               
                  Meaning Alexander the GreatThe worlds Comerce, whereon he praid
            VVith happy mart ſo ouer-run,
            That Pollean Spring old Philips ſonne.
            
               Whoſe twiſt of life reuenging Fate
            Hath ſhortned with vntimely date.He enuies bitterly againſt Alexander the Great.
               
            
            And now his bones interred are
            Within an holy Sepulcher;
            Whoſe aſhes rather ſhould be ſtrode
            Throughout the aire, the world abrode.
            But Fortune ſo his ghoſt did frend,
            That there a Tombe ſhe did him lend,
            Vntill this kingdomes ſtate did end.
            ¶ For if the world ſhould once retaine
            Her ancient liberty againe,
            His memory would be a ſcorne,
            As fruitleſſe to all Nations borne.
            That poſſibly ſo many lands
            Should ſubiect be to one mans hands.
            
               Macedons ſoyle he did forſake,
            The ſeate where he his birth did take;
            And conquer'd Athens he deſpiſd,
            Whoſe ſtate his father had ſurpriſd:
            And carried on by fatall rage,
            With bloody ſlaughters warre did wage,
            And Aſias people did engage.
            His ſword each where is exerciſd,
            And ouer all he tyranniſd.
            Strange Riuers he with blood engraines,
            The Perſian Euphrates he ſtaines,
            And Ganges, that doth India trend:
            On earth he was a raging fiend;
            A lightning, that ſuch flames did caſt,
            As did all lands and people blaſt.
            A ſtarre malignant vnto Realmes;
            With fleetes he cuts the Ocean ſtreames:
            And then he Nauies did prepare
            To ſearch the ſeas that vtmoſt are:
            Neither the waues, nor ſcorching gleed,
            Nor barren Lybs, where Serpents breed;
            Nor Ammons Syrts could him withſtand,
            He pierc'd them all with powerfull hand.
            Nay he was wending to the weſt,
            Whereas the Sunne declines to reſt.
            
               To either Poles his heart was led,
            And would haue drunke at Nylus head;
            
               Death preuēts Alexanders deſignes.But that his lateſt day him met,
            And Nature onely bounds could ſet
            To the ambitious haught deſire,
            That this fierce Prince had ſet on fire.
            And with like enuie workes his bane,
            As he vnto himſelfe had tane
            The whole worlds Empire for his owne,
            Leauing behinde him no heire knowne;
            Whereby great Citties, and rich ſoyles
            Abandon'd were to wrackes and ſpoyles.
            In his owne Babylon he dy'd,
            A terror to the Parthian pride.
            O ſhame! theſe Eaſterne nations all
            
               Macedon Pykes did more appall,
            Then now thoſe people ſtand in feare
            Of Roman Piles, that we doe beare.
            And though the North wee ouer-awe,
            And Weſterne clymes to tribute draw,
            And to the South preſcribe their law;
            
               The Parths alwayes infeſtious to the Romans.
               Yet from the Eaſt we haue diſgrace
            Affronted by Arſaces race.
            
               Craſſus (with all his Roman hoſt)
            Was hapleſſe on the Parthian coaſt:
            Whilſt Macedon, that little ſtate,
            Securely did ſuppreſſe their hate.
            ¶ Now was this boy (the King) come down
            From that ſide of Peluſium Towne,
            Where Nylus fall doth make a Bay:
            Then he the mutinie did ſtay,
            That this vnwarlike people make,
            And he himſelfe doth vndertake
            To be the hoſtage, and procure
            All peace and quiet, to ſecure
            
               Ptolemy comes to ſee Caeſar.
               Caeſar himſelfe, and all his traine,
            Whilſt in his Court they did remaine.
            Then Cleopatra giues in charge,
            To fit for her a gally barge,
            Wherein ſhe doth her ſelfe imbarke
            
               And findeth meanes, that in the darke
            The chaine, that doth the hauen barre,Cleopatra comes to Caeſar by ſtealth.
            
            The Pharus keeper ſhould vnſparre;
            Whom ſhe corrupts, and ſo ſhe paſt
            To Caeſars lodgings in great haſt.
            VVho thereof neuer thought nor knew
            Before her preſence he did view.
            O Egypts impudence and ſhame!
            
               Erynnis fierce to Latium name!
            A ſtrumpet to the Roman ſtate,
            Vnchaſt, our fuell of debate!
            Looke how much woe and wretched toyle
            Fell out vpon the Grecian ſoyle,
            And with what wracks and ruine wrought
            That Spartan face, the Troians bought;
            In no leſſe fury, and miſhap
            Did Cleopatra Latium wrap.
            She frighted (if I ſo might ſay)
            The Capitoll with Syſtrons bray.The Syſtron was an inſtrument of warre vſed by the Egyptians in ſtead of a Trumpet. Meaning the battell betwin Auguſtus and Anthonie.
            
            And would our Roman ſpoiles haue bore
            Vnto Canopo's coward ſhore.
            And Caeſar then haue captiued,
            And him in Pharian triumphs led.
            For doubtfull twas, at Actium fight,
            VVhat hand ſhold ſway the Empires right,
            And whether that our Matron Rome
            
            Should rule the world with her ſole doome.
            Theſe humors that night brought to paſſe
            VVhen firſt this Ptolomean laſſe,
            Did with inceſtious armes imbrace
            The chieftains of our Roman race.
            ¶ O Anthonie who will diſproue
            Thee, for thy lawleſſe filthy loue.
            Since Caeſars haughtie heart ſo fries,Anthony loued Cleopatta and forſooke Octauia.
            
            VVith this bewitcing harlots eyes;
            As that amidſt the rage of armes,
            Amongſt theſe broiles and ciuill harmes,
            And in this court, where Pompeys ghoſt
            Did crie for vengeance on this coaſt,
            And whilſt as yet thou wert beſpred
            
               With blood, at thy Pharſalia ſhed,
            Thou wouldſt admit vnto thy bed
            This foule adulterous venerie,
            And mixe thy armes with bauderie;
            And ſo didſt ſeeke to raiſe thy line
            Vpon a ſtrumpet concubine.
            O ſhame! to Iulia this is ſcorne,
            That though her Pompey be forlorne,
            Thou her of brothers wouldſt prouide,
            Begotten of a Baſtard ſide.
            Thou doſt conſtraine thoſe Roman troops,
            That vnder Pharſals ruins droops,
            
               Caeſar had iſſue by Cleopatra and a ſonne called Caeſareon.To roame about the Lybian coaſt,
            Who ſtill from place to place are toſt;
            Whilſt thou thy time doſt ſo miſpend,
            And Egypts filthie Iuſt entend,
            And rather pardon'ſt Pharos ſpight,
            Then ſubiect her to Roman might.
            ¶ To Caeſar, Cleopatra goes,
            And in her beautie truſt repoſe,
            Her lookes demure and ſad withall:
            
               Cleopatras manner and ſpeech to Caeſar.But yet no teares ſhe did let fall.
            A fained ſorrow in her face,
            Which vnto her gaue greater grace.
            Her curled lockes, in careleſſe wiſe,
            Dangling about her ſhoulders flies,
            She thus her ſpeech begins to frame.
            Moſt mightie Caeſar, great of fame,
            If noble birth may purchaſe gace,
            Behold one of the royall race
            Of Egypts blood, king Lagus childe,
            That am diſtreſt and liue exilde.
            From my paternall lawfull right,
            I am withheld by maiſtring might;
            And if thou wilt vouchſafe therefore
            With powrefull hand me to reſtore
            Vnto my former ſtate and place,
            I will a Queene thy feet imbrace
            That art a plannet ſent by fate
            To render iuſtice to our ſtate.
            
               Why ſhould not I a woman raigneThe crown of Egypt as capable of a Quene as a King.
            
            On thoſe chiefe Citties, that pertaine
            To me by right in Nylus land?
            No ſexe our cuſtome doth withſtand,
            But that it hath bene often ſeene
            This kingdome hath obeyd a queene.
            Reade but my fathers laſt bequeaſt,
            And that will ſhew he did inueſt
            Me with his kingdome equally,
            And me eſpouſd to Ptolomey.
            
            But let him as a boy approue
            Me as his ſiſter in his loue,
            And in his wedlocks choiſe reſt free;Cleopatra affects not to mary her brother as her father appointed
            
            But his affects muſt ruled be
            According to Photinns word:
            For in his hand he holds the ſword,
            I nothing do deſire to haue,
            But what my Father to me gaue:
            And that our family be freed
            From any foule inceſtuous deed,
            And that thou wouldſt the powre abate
            Of Photyne, that doth wrong our ſtate
            And do appoint (by thy beheſt)
            The king to rule as fits him beſt.
            But his baſe ſeruant is with pride
            So puffed vp and magnifide,
            Becauſe that he the plot did lay,She inueies againſt Photinus.
            
            That Pompeys head hath reft away.
            And now the like (but Gods defend)
            Againſt thy ſelfe he doth entend
            That haynous deed, that all doth loath
            Hath wrong the world, and Caeſar both:
            Whilſt Photyne prowdly doth exact
            To merit glory for the fact.
            ¶ And now leſt that her words might faile
            With Caeſars hard eares to preuaile;
            Her geſture doth her ſpeeches grace:
            She ſupplicates with flattring face,
            And with her chambring by night
            She charmes her iudge to rue her plight.
            
               So as when they had peace obtaind
            At Caeſars hand, with great guifts gaind;
            They feaſted then the Roman Lord
            In ſhew of ioy for this accord.
            Then Cleopatra ſhews her port
            With luxurie and great reſort,
            And there ſuch ſumptuous pride was ſhowne
            As earſt in Rome was neuer knowne.
            The place a royall fabricate
            Was as a temples type in ſtate;
            Whoſe match for beauty future date
            Will hardly raiſe; the fretted ruffe,
            Compoſed was of richeſt ſtuffe.
            As for the beames and timber frames,
            Were couered thicke with golden lames.
            The parget of the walls did ſhine
            With ſnow white marble poliſht fine.
            The Agat ſtood inlayed there,
            Commixt with purple ſtones each where.
            And euery floore they troad vpon
            
               The ſumptuous entertainment the Egyptians gaue vnto Caeſar.Was paued with the Onyx ſtone.
            The Mareoticke heben wood,
            No where for outward building ſtood,
            But as huge poſts to a beare waight
            Vnder thoſe frames, that did them fraight.
            It was not vſde the houſe to grace:
            That timber they accounted baſe:
            The Yuory the frounts did face.
            Vpon the doores enlaid with art
            The ſhining ſhels of Indias mart,
            Were fixt vpon the backer part.
            The bedſteads were with gems ſet out,
            Spotted with Emrald round about.
            The implements were all bedight
            With yeallow Iaſper gliſtring bright.
            The couerlets and carpets ſpred
            Colourd like Tyrian ſcarlet red:
            Whoſe die was long to take the ſtaine,
            And more then once boyld in the graine.
            One part did ſhine like glittring gold,
            
               Th'other a purple hue did hold:
            As do the Pharean weauers vſe,
            That mingled changes can enfuſe
            In wouen ſilkes of ſundry hues.
            Then numbers of attendant maids
            And pages, that the ſeruice aides,
            Diſcolourd blood diſtinct appeares
            In ſome, and ſome by diffring yeares.
            A part of them haue Lybian haire:
            And other yeallow treſſes faire.
            So as that Caeſars ſelfe could ſay,Some of the Egyptians haue faire colourd haire.
            
            In all thoſe ſoyles where Rhene doth ſtray,
            He had not ſeene, amongſt the flocks
            Of German laſſes, fairer locks.
            Some of their heads were friſled blacke,
            And from their foreheads turned backe▪
            
            There were withall another ſort
            Of hopeleſſe youths for Venus ſport,
            Whoſe manly parts the knife had hent:
            But others, of a ſtronger bent,
            Stood their in place; yet ſcarce begins
            A ſigne of downe on all their chins.
            ¶ Then did the King and Princes all,
            Vpon their beds to feaſting fall.
            But Caeſar (as the chiefeſt gueſt)
            Had higheſt place amongſt the reſt.
            There Cleopatra ſets to view
            Immodeſtly her painted hew:
            So to enchant the gazers eyes.
            Her ſcepter doth not her ſuffiſe:
            Nor yet to be her brothers wife.
            About her necke there hangeth rifeCleopatras attires.
            
            The red ſeas ſpoiles, and in her heire
            Thoſe pretious iewels gliſtring were.
            Her rifing breſts, that ſnow white beene,
            Through the Sydonian lawns are ſeene:
            Whilſt it a vaile doth ouerſhade,
            That with the Nylan neelde was made,
            Moſt curiouſly with threds compact:
            Yet with the combe ſo nycely ſlackt,
            
               As that ſome places being thinne,
            It did bewray her lilly skinne.
            Before them all round tables ſtood,
            (Fram'd of the rare Atlanticke wood)
            On treſles made of Iuorie,
            
            Such as againe of Caeſars eye
            Were neuer ſeene, though Iubas ſoyle
            Soone afterwards fell to his ſpoyle.
            O blind and mazde ambitious rage,
            
               The Egiptians folly ſo to diſcouer their abundant treaſures to CaeſarThat ſets thy treaſures on a ſtage
            To him, that ciuill warre did wage;
            So to Prouoke with riches charmes
            A gueſt, ſo powrefull great in armes!
            For though he were not then in caſe,
            With wicked warre to run the race,
            That might with wracke the world conſtrain,
            For riches ſake and greedy gaine;
            Yet were thoſe captains, that of old
            In poorer times great names did hold,
            Subſiſting now in woonted mood,
            
               Fabritians, and the Curian brood,
            And that braue Conſull, that was tane
            (In haſt for need to ſaue Romes bane)
            From plowing the Hetrurian lands,
            Where he was toyling with his hands;
            Thoſe would haue gladly giuen their doome
            To bring ſuch triumph ſpoiles to Rome.
            
            ¶ Their coſtly cates were ſeru'd in gold,
            
               The exceſſe of a feaſt.What euer might be bought or ſold,
            That earth, or aire, or Ocean yeelds,
            Or Nylus flood, and fruitfull fields,
            Or whatſoeuer could be found
            To make this luxurie abound,
            Ambitious pride made it be ſought,
            That in the world was to be bought:
            Not onely hunger to ſuffiſe,
            
               Alluding to the Idolatrous Egyptians that worſhipped beaſts & bird
                     •
                  .But for to feaſt their wanton eyes
            With beaſts, and birds of ſundry ſtore,
            Which (by their ſacred rites of yore)
            Th'Egyptians did as Gods adore.
            
               The water, for to waſh their hands,
            In cleareſt criſtall baſons ſtands:
            The bowles, wherein they drinke their wine,Mareotis a little Prouince in Egypt that yeelds the beſt wines.
            
            Were made of pretious ſtones that ſhine:
            But Mareotis grape pleaſd not:
            A nobler wine then it they got,
            That had bene kept for certaine yeares,
            And with the age the ſtrength appeares.A place where the pleaſant Muſcadine grapes do grow.
            
            
               Falermums fragrant wine it was,
            That froths and ſpurtles in the glaſſe.
            Then Garlands muſt their heads encloſe
            Of pleaſant Nard, that greene ſtill groes,
            And neuer ſheeds his flowring roſe.
            When on their balmed haire they throw
            Thoſe pretious powders that do grow
            In Eaſterne Inde,
               The Egyptian Ladies did vſe to pouder their haires as now a daies is vſed. that had not loſt
            The ſent and ſauour of that coſt,
            Mixt with Amomum gatherd new,
            Brought from the countries where it grew.
            Here Caeſar learnes to take the ſpoyles
            Of all the whole worlds richeſt ſoyles,
            And now the warres hee doth deteſt,
            That his poore ſon-inlaw oppreſt,
            Wiſhing withall that ſome debate
            Might turne his Mart on Egypts ſtate.
            ¶ When now at length they all were fild
            With pleaſant wines, that they had ſwild,
            And daintie meates of ſundry taſt,
            With banquetting cloſd vp at laſt;
            
               Caeſar begins (for more delight)
            With talke to entertaine the night,
            And with ſweet words and pleaſant grace
            To Achoreus (of the race
            Of Egypts breed, who in that place
            Did ſit vpon a bench of ſtate)
            In this ſort did his mind relate.Caeſars word to Achoreus The Egyptian prieſt.
            
            O reuerend ſire, that for thy part
            To ſacred rites deuoted art,
            That with the Gods haſt ſuch eſteeme,
            As by thy aged yeares may ſeeme;
            
               To me the firſt beginning ſhew,
            From whence th'Egyptian race did grow,
            The climate of this fruitfull land,
            And how the peoples cuſtomes ſtand,
            And of your Gods the forms and rites,
            The which your old records recites:
            And what ingrauen is in ſtone,
            Vpon your Pyramides make knowne:
            Reueale your Gods, that would be ſhowne
            If your fore-fathers did their art
            And ſacred myſteries impart
            To Plato, of a Grecian name;
            Then may you well reueale the ſame
            To Caeſars ſelfe; for where can reſt
            In all the world a worthier gueſt
            To whom your skill may be expreſt?
            I muſt confeſſe that Pompeys name
            Was ſome cauſe, that did make me frame
            My iourney to the Pharian coaſt:
            And yet when all my warres were moſt,
            I euermore did giue my mind,
            The motions of the ſtars to find:
            My thoughts were to the heauens enclind.
            
               Caeſar reduced the yeare to a iuſter account then Eudoxus did.So as Eudoxus Calender
            
            Shall not ſurpaſſe my framed yeare.
            And therefore, as within my breſt
            A great and true deſire doth reſt
            Of knowlegde, and of vertues lore:
            So nothing do I couet more,
            Then to finde out the ſecret courſe
            From whence this riuer takes his ſource:
            And where his fountaines head appears,
            
               Caeſars deſire to find out the ſprings of Nylus head.That lies vnknowne ſo many yeares.
            O I will hope at laſt to ſee
            Where Nylus ſprings for certaine be,
            And ſo from ciuill warre reſt free.
            So Caeſar makes an end to ſpeake,
            And this graue ſire did ſilence breake.
            ¶ Caeſar I thinke that well I may
            Theſe myſteries to thee bewray,
            
               That our great Fathers hidden kept,
            And in their thoughts obſcured ſlept,Achoreus anſwer to Caeſars demands.
            
            Reſerued from the vulgar waies
            From age to age to theſe our daies.
            Let others thinke it pietie
            To ſilence any myſterie:
            But I do deeme the Gods aboue
            The worke as gratefull will approue,
            That their great wonders ſhould be ſhowne,
            And ſacred rules to all made knowne.
            When firſt an order was ordaind,
            Whereby the world ſhould be maintaind,
            A diuers motion to the ſtarres
            Was giuen to hold concordant iarres,
            That they the orbs might onely ſway
            And temper in their whirling way,
            Contrarie to that rapide Pole,
            That firſt of all doth mouing rolle.
            The Sun doth ſtill diuide and ſteare
            The times and ſeaſons of the yeare,
            And ſo the daies to nights doth change,
            And doth reſtraine the ſtars to range
            About their orbs with powrefull rayes.
            His ſtation ſtaies thoſe wandring wayes.
            The Moone her alteration breeds
            Vpon the ſeas, and earthly ſeeds.
            Old Saturne his empiring holds
            On freezing zoanes and ycie colds.
            And Mars with wrathfull looke abaſhes
            The boiſterous winds and lightning flaſhes.
            Great Ioue no tempeſts doth procure,
            But keepes all in milde temperature.
            And fruitfull Venus of her grace
            Doth cherriſh ſeeds in euery place.
            Whilſt Mercurie with charming vaine
            Doth moderate the wild vaſt maine.
            ¶ Now when Cyllenius doth appeare
            In that part of the wheeling ſpheare,
            Where Leos ſparkling torchets are
            In enterchange with Cancers ſtarre,
            
               Where Syrius with his ſcorching ray,
            Contagiouſly enflames the day,
            And where the circle that doth change
            The yearely ſeaſon; iuſt doth range
            Betwixt the Tropicks equally,
            Vnder whoſe couert Nyle doth lie.
            Which when this powre (I ſay that keepes
            An order in the raging deepes)
            Doth touch with his ſtarres influence;
            
               Nylus as hauing thereof ſence,
            His channell lifts with ſwelling creſt,
            Scorning within his banks to reſt.
            Iuſt as Neptunus Empire flowes,
            When Phoebes horned viſage growes.
            Nor doth he call his ſtreames againe
            In their old harbour to remaine,
            Vntill the Sun by his decline
            Do vnto the night thoſe houres reſigne,
            (That halfe the yeare he kept away)
            To make her equall with the day.
            The olde conceit is but a dreame
            Of this increaſe of Nylus ſtreame,
            That Aethiopias molten ſnowes
            Is cauſe of her great ouerflowes.
            For in thoſe mounts the Northern ſtowre,
            Nor Boreas blaſts haue any powre.
            And to aſſure thee that is true,
            Marke but the peoples Sun-burnt hue.
            And thoſe warme vapours that they find
            Perpetually from Auſters winde.
            
               He refels their opinions that do thinke the fals of the molten ſnow to be the cauſe of Nylus increaſeThen for more proofe adde this likewiſe,
            That euery riuer that doth riſe
            By falling of the molten yſe,
            Doth then begin to be emboſt
            When ſummers ſpring firſt melts the froſt.
            But Nylus neuer waxeth hire,
            Before the Dog-ſtarre breaths his fire.
            Nor euer doth her waues reſtraine,
            To keepe within her banks againe:
            But when as Libra with iuſt paiſe.
            
               Doth equallize the nights and dayes.
            Againe thoſe rules do beare no ſway
            With Nyle, that other ſtreames obay.
            For winter giues to him no pride.
            His fountaines then their forces hide.
            But when the temper of the skies
            Moſt feruently with burning fries,
            Amidſt thoſe heates then out he flies.
            And cooles thoſe lands that fire would waſt,
            Which vnderneath the line are plaſt.
            So Nylus helps the world to ſwage
            The ſcorching flames of Leos rage
            And being cald doth giue redreſſe
            To his Syene in diſtreſſe:
            When Cancers heates do it oppreſſe.Syene a cittie vpon Nylus.
            
            And from theſe fields draws not his ſtreams
            Vntill the force of Phoebus beames
            In Autumns ſeaſon do decline,
            And Neroe do ſhade the ſhine.
            Now who can hereof tell the cauſe?
            But ſo great Nature giues her lawes,
            That Nylus thus ſhould range his flood,Diuers opinions for the flowing of Nylus.
            
            And needfull tis for humane good.
            But former times haue vainely gueſt
            This cauſe; of winds blowne from the weſt,
            Who with great force the aire doth chace
            With long continuance in one place.
            And that this occidentall blaſt
            Doth driue the watrie clouds ſo faſt
            A thwart the South: and their in ſhowres
            Downe right vpon the Nylus powres.
            Or that the ſeas, ſo often toſt,
            And beating on the Zoylan coaſt,
            The very furie of the maine
            Repels the riuer backe againe.
            So as (reſtrained of his way
            By the vaſt Oceans powrefull ſway)
            Aloft beyond his bounds doth ſtray.
            There are againe that do ſuppoſe
            That his great inundation growes
            
               Of moiſture, breathing from the earth,
            Whoſe ſteaming vapors haue their birth
            Within the concaues of the ground,
            And belcht out where great rifts are found.
            And that theſe moiſtures meerely are
            By ſecret courſes drawne from farre,
            Out of the Northerne Region,
            By the attracting middle zoane:
            When Titans arrows (ſhot down right)
            On Meroe do parching light;
            And to the burned land it brings
            The waters from farre riſing ſprings.
            
               Ganges and Padus ſend their ſtreames
            In ſecret thorow many realmes.
            Then Nylus powres out by one vaine
            All riuers that he doth retaine.
            But many outlets makes of theſe,
            When he conuaies them to the ſeas.
            Another fancy many holds
            That the vaſt Ocean, which enfolds
            The circuit of the earth about,
            Flowing from farre at laſt breakes out,
            With violence, where Nyle doth range,
            And (with long tracke) at length doth change
            The ſalt ſea ſtreames to waters ſweete,
            Whilſt through earths bowels they do fleet.
            Some thinke againe that theſe maine waues
            Rapt by the Sun when Cancer raues
            Into the middle regions height,
            VVhich cannot well retaine their weight,
            The nights do them againe diſtill
            On Nylus flood, and his banks fill.
            But I (ô Caeſar) do beleeue
            (If I may be ſo bold to giue
            My cenſure in ſo great a doubt)
            VVhen many ages were run out;
            After the worlds firſt fabricate;
            Some wattery waues but new create
            VVithin the earth; by fatall ſtroake
            Brake out, which God did not prouoke:
            
               And ſome againe there being had,
            When this great All at firſt was made:
            Which the Creator high doth ho
                  ••
               d
            Vnder a conſtant law controld.
            ¶ But that deſire that leades thee ſo
            (Great Roman Lord) the cauſe to know
            Why Nylus doth thus ſtrangely flow,
            The Pharian Tyrants heretofore,
            And Greekes, and Perſians did explore,How many great Kings ſearched to know the ſecretes of Nylus and his fountaines.
            
            And euery age deſir'd the praiſe
            Of leauing vnto future dayes
            The knowledge of this myſtery:
            But Nature ſtill with ſecreſie
            Conceales it from diſcouery.
            That great Macedon, King of Kings,
            (Whoſe high renowne our Memphis rings)
            Did Aethiopian men ſelect,
            To ſearch the cauſe of this effect.
            In ſcorne of Nylus thoſe hee ſends
            To ſuruey Affrickes vtmoſt ends.
            But loe! the Torrid Zone with heates,
            Held them from doing of thoſe feates,
            To ſee what ſprings warme Nyle repleates.
            Then to the Weſterne furtheſt land
            
               Seſoſtris goes, and takes in hand
            This buſie taske, and with great pride
            To draw his Charrets, Kings he tide.
            But Rhodonus and fertile Poe
            
            Your Riuers he might ſooner know,
            Then euer he could come to drinke
            At Nyles concealed fountaines brinke,
            Then fierce Cambyſes Eaſterne throng,
            Comes where the people liue ſo long:
            But his huge traine was ſtaru'd for meate;
            So as at laſt themſelues they eate:
            And then return'd with nothing gain'd,
            
               Nyles ſprings to him vnknowne remain'd,
            No fables euer yet did dare
            The head of thy ſprings to declare.
            But whoſoeuer thee hath ſeene,
            
               Yet are to ſeeke where thy heads beene.
            No nation hath attain'd the fame
            To know from whence thy riſing came.
            But yet ô Nyle I will relate
            So much of thy diſcouered ſtate,
            As that great God ſhall giue me leaue,
            From whom thou doſt thy courſe receaue.
            Thou riſeſt from the Southerne Pole,
            And with thy ſwelling ſtreames doſt role
            Againſt hot Cancers fiery face,
            And forth-right North doſt run thy race,
            Amidſt Boötes wheeling chaſe.
            Somtimes thy ſtreams doth weſtward trend:
            And ſometimes to the Eaſt doth bend.
            Sometimes thou ſeeſt Arabia's lands,
            And ſometimes ſhar'ſt with Lybias ſands.
            
               What theſe Seres are, all the Commentators are doubtfull, and doe think the word to be miſtakē. But ſuch there are towards the North-pole.
               The Seres firſt of all thee ſee:
            Yet whence thou art vncertaine be.
            Through Aethyopia thou doſt ſtray;
            But from what fount they cannot ſay.
            No land that to the world is knowne,
            Can claime thy birth to be her owne.
            
               Nature hath not diſcouered
            To any wight thy ſecret head:
            Nor euer, in a ſlender ſtreame,
            Wert thou ſeene run through any Realme.
            For Nature, that thy fountaine hides
            Within her boſomes, ſo prouides,
            Men rather ſhould admire thy courſe,
            Then know from whence thou tak'ſt thy ſource.
            Thy waues permitted are to clime,
            The Solſtice being in his prime.
            A winter ſtrange makes thy increaſe:
            Then thou beginſt when others ceaſe:
            Onely to thee is granted grace
            From Pole to Pole to run thy race.
            Towards the South thy head doth riſe,
            
               
                  Neroë the greateſt Iſland that is in Nylus.
               And in the North thy current dyes.
            
               Neroë (that blacke people breedes)
            Thy riuer there diuided feedes.
            
               And doth that Iſle inuiron round,
            VVhere pleaſant Heben doth abound;
            VVhich trees, altough ſtill full of greene,
            Yet ſhelters not with ſhade the ſheene:
            For on it with a downe-right line
            The Lyon bands his fiery eyne.
            Thou ſhewſt thy face to Phoebus rage:
            And yet thy ſtreames doe not aſſwage.
            The barren ſands thou meetſt in length;
            Sometimes collecting all thy ſtrength,
            And branches into one ſelfe ſtreame:
            And then againe through Aegypts Realme
            Thou doſt diſperſe them all abrode:
            Thy bankes with eaſe are ouerflowd.
            Then thy ſlow chanell calles amaine
            His ranging riuelets backe againe,
            Where Phile,
               
                  Phile, a Citty neere Nylus.
                that doth frontring ſtand
            On borders of Aegyptian land,
            Doth from Arabia diuide
            That kingdome, through which thou doſt glide.
            Then through thoſe deſarts thou doſt cut,
            That all that great comerce doth ſhut
            Betwixt that ſea of ſcarlet ſtaine,
            And the earth middle cutting maine,
            Running but with a gentle traine.
            But who (O Nylus) now would wot
            That thou, which here doſt mildly flote
            Shouldſt ſuddenly enraged fret,
            With ſuch a violent out-let?
            For when the rugged broken wayes
            Thy falling water-courſes ſtayes,
            And ſteepy Cataracts from hye
            A gentle paſſage doth denyThe Cataracts of Nylus.
               
            
            Thy waues, that no reſiſtance finde,
            Scorning that rocks their race ſhould bind,
            Do ſpit their foame into the winde,
            And with the bruſhing that they make,
            The very aire and ſhores doe quake.
            With murmuring rut the mountains ſound,
            And this ſtreames froth doth ſo abound,
            
               As that (with ſtrain'd reſiſtleſſe might)
            His boiſterous billowes all turne white.
            Here is that Ile of Abatos,
            
            
               
                  Abatos, an Iland by Memphis, not to be approched for quick-ſands, as ſome write.As reuerent ancients did ſuppoſe,
            A mighty land, and whereas firſt
            Thoſe thundring roarings out doe burſt.
            And where the rockes (as they haue ſaid)
            With ſpringing vaine this ſtreame doth aid.
            For proofe whereof this ſigne is plaine,
            That here he ſwels anew againe:
            Here Nature doth with hilles encloſe
            Theſe ſtickle ſtreames, that wandring goes,
            Which doth thee Nyle from Lybia hold,
            And thy huge heaped waues enfold
            Within a ſpacious valley deepe,
            Through which thy ſwelling chanels ſweep.
            Then Memphis to thee freedome yeelds,
            By lending thee her open fields,
            And doth forbid within her land
            That any bound ſhould thee withſtand.
            ¶ Thus they the time ſecurely ſpent,
            Till mid-night vail'd the Element,
            And as in peace tooke their delight;
            But yet Photinus trayterous ſpright,
            Since he that ſacred blood had ſpilt,
            Prepared was for any guilt:
            And thought that no fact was vn-milde
            Now Pompeys death had him defilde:
            Whoſe ghoſt did broyle within his breaſt,
            And him with murdrous mood poſſeſt.
            The Gods likewiſe (with vengeance due)
            Stird vp in him preſumptions new:
            For he his abiect hands reputed
            Worthy with blood to bee poluted
            
               
                  Photinus conceiues a practiſe of treaſon vpon Caeſar.
               Of Caeſars ſelfe, that was the man
            By Fortunes heſt deſigned than
            The powerfull Roman reuerent ſtate
            To ouer-awe, and captiuate.
            The ſcourge that ciuill warre ſhould haue,
            And vengeance, that the Senate craue,
            
               Was almoſt left vnto a ſlaue.
            But O the ruling Fates we pray,
            To turne from vs that fault away,
            That Caeſar may not haue his meed,
            If Brutus hand doe not the deed.
            For elſe the Roman Tyrants blame
            Shall chaſtiſd be, vnto our ſhame,
            By Aegypts ſword, and thereby ſhall
            Iuſtice example quaile withall.
            But ſtill this viper Fates prouoke
            To giue this tyrants necke the ſtroke;
            And yet he doth not now prepare
            With ſecret plots his life to ſnare:
            But openly meanes to aſſaile
            The Captaine, whom no Mart could quaile.
            Such hope his wickedneſſe hath bred
            To triumph ouer Caeſars head;
            And will (O Pompey) do his beſt
            That Caeſars fate with thine may reſt:
            And by a ſecret ſeruant ſends
            Theſe lines, to ſhew what he entends,
            And to Achillas them commends,
            That was his partner in the deed
            VVhen Pompeys murther was decreed.
            This man the boyiſh King did call
                  Achillas the Generall of Ptolemeys forces.
            
            To be Lieuetenant Generall
            Of all his force, and in his hand
            He puts the ſword, and all command;
            Exempting nothing from his might,
            No not himſelfe by Kingly right.
            Reſt quietly on thy ſoft bed,
                  Photinus letter to Achillas.
            
            And with ſweete ſleepe be thou fat fed.
            Yet now (quoth he) be well aduiſd,
            For Cleopatra hath ſurpriſd
            The Palace, and is there obay'd;
            The Realme not onely is betray'd,
            But giuen to her, as proper right,
            By Caeſar, and his Roman might.
            Wilt thou forbeare, thus hard beſted,
            To violate thy Miſtreſſe bed?
            
               The wicked Siſters nuptiall vowes·
            Eſtabliſh't her, her brothers ſpouſe:
            And now this Lord of Roman race
            Doth her his Concubine embrace.
            So as betweene her husbands twaine,
            On Aegypt ſhe will rule and raigne,
            And well deſerueth Rome to gaine.
            VVith charming poyſons ſhee knew how
            To her to make the old man bow.
            And if thou (wretch) do truſt the boy,
            VVhom if one night ſhe doe enioy,
            And once with her bewitching face
            VVithin her Armes do him embrace;
            So that if he once draw the fires
            Of her inceſtious hot deſires:
            For euery kiſſe ſhe will entice
            That our two heads ſhall pay the price.
            And if his ſiſter him delight,
            Thoſe loues will turne to our deſpight.
            
               
                  Cleopatras hate to Photinus & Achillas.
               The King her husband will obay,
            Adulterous Caeſar ſhe can ſway.
            So both of vs (I muſt confeſſe)
            Shall ſtand condemn'd remedileſſe.
            If ſhe ſhould bee our cruell iudge,
            That long hath borne vs mortall grudge.
            VVhom doth not Cleopatra hate
            Of vs, as hainous to her ſtate?
            From whom hath ſhe her loue reſtrain'd
            And held her chaſtity vnſtaind?
            And for thine owne ſake I require,
            And by that deed wee did conſpire,
            VVhereby our ſelues we did engage
            (VVith mutuall league) to Roman rage,
            For Pompeys blood, which we haue ſhed.
            Plucke vp thy ſpirits, and caſt off dread:
            Raiſe ſudden warre and tumults broyle:
            Breake in with force, and put to ſpoyle
            Their chambring ſports, and nuptiall flame,
            And murder that inceſtious Dame
            Euen in her bed, where ſhe doth reſt,
            
               And whoſoeuer is her gueſt.
            And let it not our courage bate,
            The Fortune of this Roman mate.
            For ſhe hath raiſed his renowne,
            And made him tread the whole world down.
            That glory we will ſhare alone,
            When he by vs is ouer-throwne.
            And we already are renown'd
            For Pompey, whom we did confound.
            Behold with hope the Pharian ſhore,
            As witneſſe of that bloody gore:
            Conſider by thoſe waues diſtain'd,
            What liberty to vs remain'd.
            See there a ſlender heape of ſands,
            That for a Tombe to Pompey ſtands.
            So as the ſame doth ſcarce ſuffiſe
            To heale his body where it lies;
            And yet this man ſo ſcorned heere,
            To him thou fearſt was equall Peere.In ſcorne hee tearms Pompey Caeſars equall.
            
            What though no Royall blood we haue?
            The ſubiects wealth we do not craue;
            Nor after Kingdomes do we raue.
            This onely fact our ſtate will raiſe:
            
               Fortune to vs theſe men betrayes.
            And ſo then in the necke of this
            There is prepar'd a greater bliſſe.
            The ſecond ſlaughter will vs make
            Belou'd of Rome for freedomes ſake.
            And this aduantage we ſhall gaine,
            If Caeſar by our hands be ſlaine:
            Thoſe we for Pompey did offend,
                  Photinus hopes to gratifie the Roman ſtate by murdering Caeſar, as he hop't to pleaſe Caeſar by killing Pompey.
               
            
            Will loue vs for this Tyrants end.
            Why ſhould his name giue vs affright?
            What need we feare his martiall might?
            For if his troopes doe from him fall,
            Him but a ſouldier wee may call.
            This night ſhall end theſe ciuill warres,
            And expiate Pharſalias skarres:
            And ſend vnto the ſhades below
            His head, which he the world doth owe.
            
               Then to this worke with courage fall,
            And ſo cut Caeſars throat withall.
            Let Lagean youths performe this thing,
            As due, for ſafety of their King,
            And liberty to Rome to bring.
            In any wiſe vſe no delay:
            For thou ſhalt take them at a bay,
            Feaſting themſelues with dainty meate,
            Quaffing ſweet wines in Bowles repleate,
            And ſo prepar'd for Venus heate.
            Doe thou but dare, and make no doubt,
            The Gods will bring it ſo about,
            That Brutus vowes, and Catos will
            Shall reſt in thy hand to fulfill.
            
               Achillas was not ſlowly bent
            To this bold fact to yeeld conſent.
            No publique Enſignes he diſplayes,
            As was the vſe his force to raiſe;
            
               
                  Achillas prepares forces to ſurpriſe Caeſar.
               Neither did he his troopes draw out
            With Trumpets ſounds, or Souldiers ſhout;
            But ſuddenly his martiall bands
            Do take their weapons in their hands:
            Whoſe greateſt part, that Armes did beare,
            The trained Latium Souldiers were,
            Who had their duties much forgot,
            That ſuch corruption ſo ſhould blot
            Their honour, and their Countries fame,
            To follow one of ſeruile name.
            And as their Captaine to obay
            A man, in mercenary pay:
            When Aegypts King was not of worth
            Himſelfe in warres to lead them forth.
            ¶No faith nor pietie remaines
            
            
               In thoſe that follow camps for gaines,
            
            
               For hired hands payes hope retaines.
            
            
               And commonly they will accoſt
            
            
               The leader, that doth giue them moſt.
            
            The ſlender pay they had before
            
               No truſt in mercenary Souldiers.To armes prouokes them now the more.
            And not that Caeſars head they ſought,
            
               But great rewards their aid had bought.
            O Liberty growne too too baſe!
            Such is the wofull Empires caſe,
            That euery where her cankred mindes,
            For ciuill ſtrife ocaſion findes.
            This Army (from Pharſalia led)
            On Nylus ſhore new rage hath ſpred.
            Like ciuill ſtrife in Latium bred.
            What more durſt Aegypts force haue done
            If after Pompey they had runne?The Romans apt to ciuill diſſention
            
            For all their hands they doe combine
            To act what higher powers deſigne:
            No reſt remaines for Roman line.
            So hath it pleaſd the Gods of late
            To rent the limbes of Latium ſtate:
            Nor Pompeys, nor yet Caeſars cauſe
            Theſe people now to fury drawes.
            A Pharian Captaines larger payes
            This ciuill ſtrife anew doth raiſe.
            And here his force Achillas bends,
            Who Roman liberty pretends.
            And had not deſtiny ordain'd,
            That their hands ſhould not be diſtaind
            With Caeſars blood (by Fates protected)
            Their purpoſe then had beene effected.
            
               Photinus and Achillas both
            Were preſt to ſcoure this Court of ſloth,
                  Caeſar his careleſneſſe whilſt he was in Cleopatras company.
            
            That ſo with feaſting was poſſeſt:
            Where all ſorts did ſo careleſſe reſt:
            Treaſon might chooſe what time was beſt.
            The Bowles, that on the Cup-boords ſtood
            Might haue beene fild with Caeſars blood.
            And to the Table of the King
            His head they eaſily might bring.
            But that theſe Captaines then did doubt
            The hazard of a nightly rout;
            Leſt that confuſions murdrous might
            Shold wrong the work that they would right▪
            
            For if this rage to chance were left,
            Thy life (O King) might ſo be reft.
            
               
               It is ill truſting to the moderation of the ſword in the fury of fight.So hard it is to rule the ſword,
            When fury freedome doth affoord.
            Thus they refuſd to take that time,
            For to effect their bloody crime:
            And do the beſt occaſion loſe
            To act the worke they did propoſe.
            But theſe freſh-ſouldier-ſeruile lowts,
            Of fitter ſeaſons make no doubts:
            And therefore did that houre delay.
            By night they would not Caeſar ſlay;
            His date was kept to ſee day light,
            And by that meanes gaue him this night.
            
               Opportunity in martiall affaires once loſt is hardly recouered.Thus by Photinus onely grace,
            
               Caeſar did run a longer race,
            Whilſt Phoebus ſhew'd againe his face.
            ¶ By this the meſſenger of day
            Bright Lucifer did then diſplay
            His glittring face, from Caſsium hill,
            And Phoebus firſt gan to diſtill
            His warmth vpon the Pharian coaſt,
            When from the walles they ſaw the hoaſt
            A farre off marching on the ſands,
            Not rang'd abrode in ſingle bands,
            
               Their fooliſh diſcipline in ſeeking to ſurpriſe Caeſar.
               Nor yet in ſeuerall cohorts ſpred;
            But in one ſquared front were led,
            As if they ſhould now charge their foes
            In armed bulke with preſent blowes.
            But Caeſar puts no truſt at all
            Of ſafety in the Citties wall.
            The Palace his defence he makes,
            And baſe by-wayes he vndertakes.
            For all the Court (in this hot Mart)
            Did not to him their aid impart.
            
               
                  Caeſar dangerouſly engaged.Therefore a little place he guards,
            And thither all his force awards.
            Then feare and fury him poſſeſt,
            Doubting the place might be oppreſt.
            And yet to dread he did deteſt.
            So doth the noble Lyon rage,
            When he is pend within his cage.
            
               And with his tearing teeth hee tries
            To force the priſon where he lies.
            And ſo, O Mulciber, like vent
            Would thy flames ſeeke for their aſſent,Apt compariſons.
            
            That in Scycillias cauernes blaſt,
            If Aetnas top were cloſed faſt.
            He that of late by Aemus mount,
            At Pharſals field, made ſlight acccount
            Of all Heſperias noble traine,
            And did the Senates force conſtraine,
            (Though Pompey did their Army guide,
            And ſmall hope in his right affide)
            All feare at that time did diſdaine,
            And hop't a wrongfull cauſe to gaine;
            Yet this man ſo a captiue ſlaue
            (With hazard of his life) did braue,Small things do oftentimes more annoy men then greater.
            
            And in the Court where he did reſt,
            VVith darts and weapons him oppreſt.
            He whom the fierce Alani's might,
            Nor Scythians rage could ought affright,
            Nor yet the Moore, that killes in ieſt
            VVith wounding darts, his friendly gueſt:
            Yea he that could not bee content
            VVhen all Romes Empire he had hent.
            But thought all thoſe dominions ſmall
            From Inde, to Tytans weſterne fall;
            Now like a boy, in warres vntrain'd,
            Or woman-like, with walles reſtraind,
            VVithin a houſe for ſuccour flyes,
            And ſo (to reſcue life) relies
            Vpon the hope of ſhut vp wayes,
            And in and out vncertaine ſtraies.
            But with him doth the King retaine,
                  Caeſar holds Ptolemey with him for his ſecurity.
            
            To be partaker of the paine,
            And as a ſacrifice be ſlaine,
            If Caeſar muſt his life reſigne.
            For (Ptolemey) that head of thine
            Shall pay the price, if ſword or fire
            Cannot ſuppreſſe thy ſeruants ire.
            So did that ſauage Colchis Queene
            
               (With murdrous ſword) expreſſe her ſpleene
            Vpon her brothers members ſhred,
            Fearing reuenge, becauſe ſhe fled,
            When as her father and the ſtate
            Purſued her with deadly hate.
            But Caeſars laſt hope that remain'd,
            Was that a peace might be obtain'd;
            And ſends one of the Tyrants guard
            To check thoſe men that thus had dar'd,
            And from the King, and in his name
            To diſallow this heynous blame,
            And learne the Authors of the ſame.
            But lawes of Nations were reiected:
            And he that was for peace directed
            (As legat from the Tyrant ſent)
            Thought that thoſe vipers neuer meant
            The holy lawes of leagues to hold,
            Nor that thoſe monſters vncontrold,
            Which thy ſoyle (wicked Aegypt) breedes,
            VVould Iuſtice keepe in their falſe deedes.
            But neither the Theſſalian warre,
            Nor Iubas kingdome ſtretching farre,
            Nor yet the force of Pontus Realme,
            Nor thoſe dire Enſignes, that did ſtreame
            Amidſt Pharnaces armed hoaſt,
            Nor toyles of the Iberean coaſt,
            
               Luxury and pleaſure dangerous to great men.Inuiron'd with the circling maine,
            Nor Syrts with their Barbarian traine,
            Could Caeſars fate ſo much diſtreſſ,
            As banqueting and wantonneſſe.
            VVith force on all ſides he is preſt,
            And ſhowres of darts the houſe moleſt,
            The buildings ſhake, and yet no ſtroke
            Of battring Ramme did them prouoke:
            The walles they would haue ouer-throwne,
            But Engines for the warre had none:
            Nor fireworks, that ſhould make the way.
            The giddy rout do gadding ſtray,
            And round about the Palace runne:
            All is without direction done.
            
               And no one place for all their rage
            With one maine ſtrength they do engage.
            The fates forbid, and fortunes hand
            Doth as a wall for Caeſar ſtand.
            ¶ The court likewiſe on all that ſide
            Whereas the ſeas with ſwelling tide
            Vp to the banke doth bring his waues,
            And that laſciuious ſtructure lanes,
            The armed ſhips aſſalting braues.
            But Caeſar at defence doth ſtand,
            In euery place with valiant hand.
            Some with the ſword he doth affray,
            And ſome with fire doth chace away.Caeſars valor.
            
            During this ſiege, in all affrunts,
            Himſelfe ſuſtaines the chiefeſt brunts.
            His reſolution neuer quaild:
            Such courage in his mind preuaild.
            Then he commands his men to greet
            With wild-fire bals the neighbor fleete,
            And flaming darts amongſt them throwes,
            Which they of pitch and tarre compoſe,
            And ſuch like ſtuffe, that ſoone would take,
            And where it lights quicke riddance make.
            The ſailes and ropes are all on flame,
            The decks and ore-lops do the ſame.
            Each where the pitch and tarre that melts
            Amongſt the timbers burning ſwelts.
            And in a trice the fier doth flit
            Vnto the Benches, where doe ſit
            The Gally ſlaues, and then likewiſe
            Vnto the yards and maſts it flies.
            So as the ſhips, burnt paſt the brinke,
            Amidſt the ſeas downe right do ſinke.The ſhips fired in the hauen.
            
            And now the foes, and all their armes
            Vpon the waues do flote in ſwarms.
            Neither the ſhips alone do frie,
            But all the houſes (ſtanding nie
            The ſhore) are with theſe flames oppreſt,
            Ann with the wind the rage encreaſt.
            Whoſe blaſts diſperſe the ſparks aloofe,
            
               And ſo do creepe from roofe to roofe·
            Which through the aire caſts blazing beams
            Like to a fierie Meteors ſtreames,
            Whoſe ſubſtance being ſpent and gone,
            Yet flaſhes in the aire alone.
            ¶ This raging wracke and burning rut
            
               The citie of Alexandria fired, at which time the famous library was burnt.Out of the Court (ſtill being ſhut)
            Doth peoples aide from thence deſire,
            To free the cittie from this fire.
            And Caeſar now the meanes doth take,
            And of this fright aduantage make,
            The time he doth not ſleepe away,
            But ſafely doth himſelfe conuay
            Into a ſhip, by darke of night,
            Vſing therein a happy ſleight.
            His wont was ſuch in all his mart
            To vſe diſpatch, and take the ſtart
            When as occaſion was preſented.
            Whereby the foe he ſtill preuented.
            And Pharos now he doth ſurpriſe,
            Which barre before the hauen lies.
            Whilom an Iland, but it ſtood
            In midſt of that ſame Pharion flood,
            When Proteus their Prophet was.
            But now this Ilands heaped maſſe,
            (With trackt of time and ſands that fall)
            Stands nearer to the citties wall.
            
               Caeſar, when he the place did take,
            A double vſe thereof did make,
            It ſtops the purſuit of his foes,
            
               Caeſar for ſafety takes Pharos Photinus put to death. Here it ſeems that in the former parts ſome thing is wāting for no relation is euer made how Photinus came within Caeſars power.And can the hauens mouth diſpoſe.
            Now when at firſt he had ſuruaide
            The ſea, made free to bring him aide;
            He then reſolu'd, without delay,
            
               Photinus head the price ſhould pay,
            But therein Caeſar nought obſeru'd
            The rigor that the wretch deſeru'd.
            Vnto no torment was he put,
            Nor yet amongſt wilde lyons ſhut,
            Nor liuing was with fire blaſted:
            
               He died, but neuer torture taſted,
            They him to good a death afford:
            His necke but ſundred with the ſword.
            A wretched worke it was, God wot,
            That Pompeys death ſhould be his lot.Arſinoe the ſiſter of Cleopatra.
            
            Now had Arſinoe obtaind
            Her libertie, that was reſtraind,
            By ſecret ſlights along time ſought,
            Which Ganimed her ſeruant wrought.
            And then with Caeſars foes takes part.
            Who wanting one to rule their mart;
            She (as the daughter of their king)
            Aſſumes thereof the managing.
            And to that Tyrants murdrous ſlaue,Achillas ſlaine
            
            
               Achillas ſhe due iuſtice gaue:
            And from his corps his head did ſhaue.
            So now another ſacrifice
            To thee (ô Pompey) bleeding lies,Reuenge obſerued for Pō
                  peys murder.
            
            For expiation to thy ghoſt:
            But fortune will beſtow more coſt.
            And heauens forbid this ſhould be all
            The offrings for thy funerall.
            The tyrants ſelfe of worth is not,
            Nor all his Realme to cleare that blot.
            And till the Senatorean ſtate
            On Caeſars bowels venge their hate
            
               Pompeys reuenge will be in date.
            But yet this broile and martiall rage
            Theſe leaders deaths could not aſſwage
            For now againe freſh ſtirs ariſe
            From Ganimed, with more ſupplies,
            Which fiercely doth on Caeſar preſſe,
            And giue a charge with ſhrewd ſucceſſe.
            This one daies danger was ſo great,
            That Caeſars fortune it did threat
            And ſo mought Ganemedes name
            Throughout the world haue flown with fame
            For whilſt that Caeſar doth prouideCaeſar in great danger.
            
            (In emptie ſhips from tother ſide)
            Some armed troop and old cohort
            
               Vnto this Ile for his ſupport;
            Vpon a ſodaine many foes
            With armed force do him encloſe.
            On this ſide hoſtil ſhips do keepe
            The ſhoares, and barre him from the deepe.
            Behind his backe the traitors bands
            (In filed ranks) with weapons ſtands.
            No hope of ſafetie doth remaine:
            No place for flight, all valour vaine.
            And (that which did him moſt offend)
            Scarce meanes to find a glorious end.
            No force he had whereby he might
            In martiall ſort frame any fight.
            Now Caeſars fortune muſt be loſt:
            And yet nor fight, nor ſlaughter coſt:
            Coopt vp, whereas the place affords
            No triall there for bloody ſwords.
            Thus doubtfull muſing whether tweare
            Fitter to die or baſely feare;
            He ſternely caſts his eyes behind,
            And ſees his foes in troops combind.
            Wherewith he cals vnto his mind
            
               The force of braue examples in extremitie.
               Scaeua his ſouldier, that with fame
            Had purchaſt ſuch a glorious name.
            For that braue end and dantleſſe ſpright
            Which he ſhewed at Dyrachium fight.
            Where he alone the Rampart kept,
            And neuer once retiring ſtept,
            When Pompey had the walles beat downe,
            Yet from them all did win renowne.
            
               In the Lattin copie theſe verſes, to the end were ſupplied by Sulpitius and ſo tranſlated.¶ This memory of Scaeuas Mart
            Puts courage into Caeſars heart,
            And nobly hee reſolues to dye
            VVith fame, that through the world ſhold fly
            But his deſigne the Fates gaine-ſay,
            
               Fortune ſhewes him a ſafer way.
            For, as he caſts his eye aſide,
            Vpon his left hand he eſpide
            Ships of his friends, that there did ride.
            To ſwim to them he doth entend,
            
               And therewith ſaid, what ſhall we end
            Our Fortunes here by villaines ſlaine?
            Or rather ſinke amidſt the maine?
            Then ſhall this Eunuch Ganimede
            
            No conqueſt gaine on Caeſars head.Caeſar ſaues himſelfe by ſwimming.
            
            So hauing ſayd; he brauely leapt
            Into the ſea, but ſafe he kept
            His bookes within his left hand drie,
            And with his right the waues doth trie.
            So through the deeps he ſafely ſwamme
            Vntill amongſt his frends he came▪
            
            Who him receiue with ioyfull cries,
            That to the Heauens with Ecchos files.
            Finis libri decimi.
            
            
            
            
         
      
   