
      
         
            
            
            A TREATISE OF CHARITIE▸
            
               


               
               I Am welle mynded to stycke to my promesse, of Charitie, by cause you can not myslyke my writyng, how rude ly so euer I wryte, oneles you diminisshe your owne charitie. For charitie taketh al thinges in good worthe, and considereth more the good wyll of the werkeman, then the beautie of the werke. Herevppon I am bolded to shewe my mynde in fewe wordes, what is charitie, and howe we maye kepe charitie. A sayenge moche vsed with euery man and woman, but not so welle perceyued, as it is cō
               monly spoken. Spekers of charitie be plentie, kepers of charitie be very scase, al though you wold make serche through out all religious cloysters. To be withoute



malice and hate is not inough, yet very fewe be founde so clene: nor it is not inough to loue in a slight or a common, or in a meane wise. If you kepe in you Charitie, ye be spotles of all gruges, and therwith ye loue in the moste hyghest degree of louynge bothe god and man, god for hym selfe, and man for goddis sake.
            But here nowe me thinketh we be to sodemely entred with a skyp to the middes of this mater: let vs make som conuenient beginning, and thereafter lette vs procede. For both you shall with the more ease gather the fruite of this lesson, and I shal the better se what is taught, if the sentences be layd in their due ordre.
            And for as moche good syster as this thinge that we here take in



hande to treate of, is all holy, all godly, all heuenly, farre passinge the reliques of sayntis, farre passynge the halowed chalices: Let vs I praye you, beware of presumption,Beware of presumption. to touche this matter with foule fingers. It is our part to wasshe our handes cleane, I meane as the matter is spirituall, so our spirite must be prepared in a due reuerence, accordyng to the highe dignitie of this vertue, the water that clēseth our spirite and mynde, is mekenes. Herewith IMekenes. say we must prepare vs, both you to here, and I to speke of holy cha ritie: bycause Christe saithe, that in charitie is conteyned al the law of god: And goddis lawe dothe chiefely enforce. ii. thinges, one to make vs, by thretenyng of peynes to flee from syn, an other to cause



vs, by promysinge of ioyes to folowe vertue. It muste nedes thenWhat cha rite causeth. be true, that Charite maketh men do bothe these thinges, to forsake synne, and to embrace vertue. This is to sey, by Charitie we refuse euyll, and take good, by charitie we flee doinge noughtly, and cleue to doinge welle, by charitie we escape disprayse, and deserue praise, by charitie we duely bothe feare and loue god, fynally by cha ritie, we be ryd from the bondage of our ennemy the prince of this worlde, and be franke in the libertie of goddis kingedome.
            ¶In this speakynge of charite, there semith to be an other strēgth in the word, than comenly we vnderstonde in our englishe tonge: and surely the truthe is soo, that farre aboue our comen vnderston



dynge, this worde sygnifieth the hole perfection of a cristen man.Charitie is the hol perfection of a christen man. It is a word borowed with vs of the latyne called Charitas. If you nowe wyll considre, what is the founteyne lyfe and soule of mans vertue, the spacinge and rote of al his good werkes: you shall see, that it is only the tru loue of god. For who so euer hath his mynde inwardly ameled, bakē, & through fyred with the loue of god: he is the blessed man, that kepeth goddis worde, that fulfylleth al goddis lawe, that neuer wylleth doinge euyl, and euer willeth doing well, in the perfect forme, fashon, shappe, and kynde of well doing.What is charite.
            
            This loue of god, that causethe suche perfections in man, is called Charitie. But remembre, it maye not be taken in the weake



cōmon maner: for all they haue not this charite, that sey they loue God: nor all they loue not God, that so sey. We be not as our seyinge soundeth, but as god seeth our thoughtes, so we be. None of vs loueth god, that enforceth to wylle any thynge besydes goddis will. He loueth not god perfetly, that thynketh any thynge besyde god: he loueth not god perfitely, that doth any thing without god. The perfecte loue of god can not stande with any care or studye for this lyfe: the perfyte loue of god abydeth not the couplynge with any other loue: the perfect loue of god knoweth none affectiō to kin red, it knoweth no difference betwene pore and riche, it knoweth not what meneth myn and thyne, it canne not diuyde a foo from a



frende. For he that truly and perfectly loueth god, muste loue god alone, nothynge besyde god, nor with god: but loue al indifferently in god and for god.
            We that say we loue god, when we scant ones in a day remembre god, and yet neuer remembre we God in suche a maner, but that more often and more ernestly we remembre other thynges, in sayinge we loue god, & doinge thus, we can not ꝓue true that we sey. For the perfect louer of god is so wedded to god, that ī his thought nothynge abideth, but the quicke remembrance of god. Our spirites and sensis be occupied with so many other matters, that scante we haue leyser to think on god, so farre we be from this charite: the whiche I seye, is a vertue of that



dignitie, power, and maiestie, that by it selfe, it conteyneth al the preceptes of the patriarches, all the lawes of the prophetes, al the doctrine of Christe, all the rules of the apostles, all the inuentions of the holy churche: ye more then all this, charite hath a libertie of power ouer bothe the olde and the newe testament. For the true louer of god, the whiche is the charitable person, is vnder no reule: but he is a lorde aboue all lawes, all inuentions, all preceptis, all commandementis, that god hath gyuen to man. For charitie hathe no bonde.
            But alwey sister remembre, that charite is not perfect, oneles that it be burninge. It is not a quenched loue, a colde loue, a loue growinge in the tethe or lyppes, that



is charite: but the hotte feruente burnynge hartes affect towarde god, is the loue that is vnderstād in the name of charitie, the which (as is sayd) doth not only conteyn all the doctrine of Christe, but also it is aboue all lawes, to rule rather than to be ruled.
            The ende of all the course and walkynge of the sonne of god in this worlde, was to leue amonge men this charitie. The marke, wherto our sauiour in all his prechynge and teachynge loked, was to haue men indued with charite. For our diuine mayster sawe, that there neded no rehersal of sinnes, the whiche were to be eschewed, nor yet of vertues, that were to be folowed, if man could take cha ritie, that is by it selfe sufficiente for all, bothe to kepe menne from



stumbling in the wey, from wanderynge out of the wey, and finallye to conducte men to the blessed wayes ende. Here you se, that the compasse and circuite of charite is large and wyde, in as moche as it comprehendeth al that can be spo ken, either agaynste vice, or with vertue.
            You peraduenture thought, that charite was nothynge els, but to kepe pacience, and not to be disple sed nor angry. It is trouthe, this poynt is one part of charitie: but it is not all. For what so euer the loue of god prouokethe vs to, or the feare of god dryueth vs from, all in one summe is concluded to be vnderstonde in charite.
            Whervpon I maye, if you kepe charitie say, that you be the very doughter of god, and moste dere



syster of Christe. But I feare me, you haue more ofte spoken the worde charitie, then you haue studyed to lerne, what thynge shulde be Charitie: and therby ye saye peraduenture of your selfe more then you doo. For I haue noted your mynde to be somwhat troubled with certayne fantasies, the which could haue no place in you if you were fylled with this charitie. For here a lyttell more in fewe wordes, what is the playne defini tion of this vertue, as I fynde it written of a greatte holy man, & a commen doctour.
            Charitie (saythe he) is a good and a gracious affect of the soule, wherby mans harte hath no fantasye to esteme, valour, or pondre any thynge in this wyde worlde, beside or before the care and study



to knowe god. For who so euer is inclyned to loue these erthly thynges, it is not possible for him euer to atteyne (so longe as he so doth) to the assurid constant & perfit vse of this charite: bicause his mynd hath so manye and so diuerse lettes, that hyndre and withdrawe hym from takynge the possession of this great treasure, wherin be couched the heapes of al vertues. And a lytel nowe to speke of these impedimentes and lettes, it shall moche apperteyn to our purpose: for we shall the quycklyer come to charitie, if we can knowe and escape all the blockes, that lye in our waye to lette vs: not onely to lette vs to come to charite, but to dryue and chase awaye frome vs this vertue, that neither we canne come to it, nor that to vs.
            
               The perfyte loue of god hath inThe perfite loue of god. it a meruaylous quietnes & reste, it is neuer moued, styred, nor caried away by no storme of worldly troubles: but sytteth faste and sure in a cōtinual calmnes, ayenst al wedders, al blastes, al stormes. No rocke is more stylle, then is the mynde of a charitable man, when the worlde tūbleth, rolleth, & tosseth it with the fomy wawes of temptations, the which drowneth the myndes of all vs, that be weke or sicke in charite. I wolde therfore syster, that you diligently lerned, what be these blastes, that turmoylen our myndes out of the reste, the which charite requireth.
            You shall vnderstand, that there be certain motiōs called passions, that soore assaulte our soule, and bringeth our spirite to moche vnquietnes:



as to be moued with an ger is a great roling of the mynd, to brede enuie, to fede rancour, to norishe malice, to be myndefull of any iniurie, to be studious of auē
               ginge, to be greued with euil spekinge, to fume at backebyting, to grudge at compleyntes, to frette with chyding, to striue for shame, for sclaunder. These be the thinges, that suffre no mynde reste, any of these passions troubleth the mynde continually from one fantasy to an other: so that no quietnes can be had.
            Agayne to studie for promotion, to care for mariage, to fishe for riches, to be gredie of honour, to be desirous of fauour, to couette pre ferremente, to gape for prayses: these also be sharpe spurres, that chasen the mynde, and kepen the



mynde euer styrrynge and voyde of quietnes.
            Lykewise to ensu a delite of dein ty and swete fedynge, to be taken with pleasure of the body, to be ouer throwen with sorowe, to perche vp with gladnes, to holde vp the chyn to hygh in prosperite, to hold downe the heed to low in ad uersite, to be in bōdage vnder the fierse rules of cēsual lustes, whose crueltie ouer man hath no pitie, measure, nor ende. These and suche other be thynges, that so troublen and disquieten mās minde, y• quiet charite can not abyde there. For loke a lytel vpon the vnmercifull man, that can not forgyue, see how he boyleth in his appetite to be auenged. Loke vpon the enuious stomake, howe he without rest freteth, in couetyng the syghte



of his hurte, whome he spyteth. Looke vppon the glotton, howe beastly he purueyeth bealy chere. Loke vpon the lecherer, how busy he is in his vngracious thoughtes. Loke vppon the couetous wretche, howe without reason he scrapeth and shrapeth for gaines. Loke vpon the ambitious felow, howe he besturreth hym to gette worshippe. These men throughe their corrupt fantasies, be no lesse gredie to satisfye theyr desyres, then the hungry & the thursty bodyes, through naturall necessitie seke to be refresshed. Wherof we may se, that slepyng and wakyng these mens myndes rolle without takynge reste. Suche wrastlynge phantasyes, suche inordinate appetites be called passions, the whi che moue and styrre the soule contrary



to his nature, either by loue without reason, or by hate without measure, when we wyllyngly consent to the wynde of these sensible thynges.
            The mother of al these passions is a parciall loue, that we beare to our selfe, that is to sey the loue of this carcas, and of this lyfe. To kylle in vs this mother of all mischefes, our master Christe techeth vs to hate this lyfe, and to set our bodye at nought: He sayth, it isMat. 16. Mar. 8. the nexte way to fynde lyfe, if we sette nothynge by the losse of this lyfe: he saith, the caring for our bo dy importeth & bryngeth with it a mistruste of goddes prouidence, as though god had better prouyded for the state of byrdes, than for man, whome he hath created after his owne image. Now then



to gette this reste, that therby we may gette charitie, we muste caste aweye the loue of this lyfe: the whiche causeth all the sayde ruffelynge passions, by the whiche our soule standeth in peryll of dethe. For lerne you, that to the soule it is a soore deathe, to be seperated from god. And these passions be they, that onely plucke the soule from god, and causeth the soule to forgette heuen in the busy occupations of this worlde, the whiche worlde swarmeth full of deed soules, that night and day trauelyn and sweatte in the workes of darkenes, from whens they shall departe into an other darkenesse endles, neuer to se the face of god. And this is the conclusion of the passionat soule, that lieth in the fet ters of filthy lustes without reste,



drawen nowe hyther nowe thyther in a continuall waueryng of vayne fantasies. But on the other syde the quicke lyuinge soule, that quietly resteth in the loue of god, dryuethe from hym by the power of grace, wherewith he is indued, all these vnquiete passions. If he stonde in feare to be moued with vncomely appetites, he fastethe, he watcheth, he laboreth. The mā (I say) or woman dothe this, in whom suche a blessed soule beareth rule.
            Likewise ayenst angre, wrathe, and vayne glorye, he setteth atte nought bothe honour and dishonour, shame, sclaunder, and worshyppe in this worlde be nothyng in his reputation. Ageynste remē
               braunce of displesures he prayeth for his euyll wyllers. Suche a



maner charitie teacheth and courageth this blessed soule to be occupied in meynteynynge and defendynge the myndes quietnes, a thynge aboue all thinges in this worlde to be kept warely.
            The reste that aungels in heuen haue is none other but this, not to be mouid nor sturrid with these passiōs, of louyng, of hating, of be ing plesed, of being disesed, of tru sting, of lustyng, of abhorryng, of coueting, of refusing, of reioysing of lamentynge, of innumerable suche other, that scourgethe and whippeth mans mynde by reason of the corrupte affection and loue that he beareth in his ytchyng bodye, a loue most contrary to charitie: the whiche hathe as moche ease, as that hathe trouble. You shall here a lesson of our mayster



Christe, the autor and preacher ofMat. 5. charitie: He aduysethe, counsayleth, and commaundeth me, if I be his disciple, not to resist ayenst euil, to offre my left cheke to him, that hathe be blowed me on the right, to leaue my gowne to hym that hath taken from me my cote, to walke two miles with him that hath vexed me, and compelled me to walke one myle.
            The forme of this lesson, that Christe here gyueth, is to enstruct and warne all christen men, to regarde nothynge of the bodye or of the worlde, aboue the reste & quietnes of the mynde: but that we shulde suffre the losse of our goodes, with the hurte, ye with the dethe of our bodyes, rather then we shulde lose any smalle porcion of charitie, to be moued with any



passion of mynde, wherby oure loue towarde god, myght decaye.
            It is not possible, after Christes doctrine, to take in this worlde by any kynde of violence so great damage or hurte in bodye or goodes, as is the leest droppe of trou ble in the mynde, where no tyrant nor the deuyll hym selfe hath any dominion. For there onely ruleth our owne free wylle: so that if we wyll disordre our mynde with any passion, we be to our selfe more violent and cruell, than the deuylle can be. Wherfore my good sister, let vs beleue our maister Christe, and to the deathe, lette vs neuer breake peace with god. For if we do, fare well all rest. We breake peace with god, when we tourne vs for anye cause to the care of this lyfe.
            
               If you fele your selfe inordinatlye moued with displeasant wordes, with angry countenances, with euyll reportes, with dispray ses, with rebukes, with false sclan der, with vntrue compleyntes: beware syster, for surely you be not in charite with god. If you mumble vpon coniectures, if you fede vpon suspicions, if you gnawe vpon shrewed tales, if ye delyte to geue taunt for taunte: beware agayne good syster, for withoute doubte, god and you be tweyne. And if you beleue the son of god, your selfe with your owne wylle, do more then any fierce prince ouer you coulde do, all thoughe he brought you to extreme wretchednes, and at the laste to the dethe tourmented your body. It is with out comparison worse, to be beset



with these passions, than it is to suffre the panges of dethe. But at this pointe peraduenture you wil say & aske me: whether we shulde forsake all the cōmodities of this worlde: whether we shulde make no force to gette suche thinges, as kepeth vp the welthe of oure body: whether we shulde vtterly refuse all thynges ordeyned for this lyfe: whether we shulde be cleane careles of good name? No no, syster not so. Holy scripture forbedeth vs nothynge, that is for vse or profytte: as by Christes lawe it is not forbed to eate, to drinke, to haue and gette, wherwith suche sustinance maye be maynteyned, to gette children, to haue money, to haue possessiones, to be in honour, to be regarded: but the worde of god suffreth not glottony,



and a delyte in the bely chere, nor lechery, and an vnlauful plesure in bodyly lustes: nor couetousnes, nor a gredy desyre to be ryche: nor vayneglory & a proude desire tobe magnified. Like wyse the commaundement of god forbeadethe vs not the thynkynge of these and of suche other thinges: but it is playne contrarye to the wylle of god, that we shulde with any great intention, solicitude, or carefulnes of mynde, prosecute these bodylye necessities. And in the hauynge of the goodes, promotions, and honours, we maye not iudge to be any higher at all, then is to haue thinges for mans necessitie: So that towarde them we may not beare any maner of loue or affectiō, but only we must with suche a mynde take them to



help forth this lyfe, as the craftes men take the instrumentes and toles to helpe theyr handye workes, that in the hauynge of ryches, our minde considre nothing, but a plenty of thynges apperteinynge to our vse and necessitees, both for our selfe & for our neighbours. And thus we maye bethynke vs welle, howe we shall lyue: but it maye be no care nor yet any erneste studye, leest therby our charitie with god be diminis
                  •
               hed. For holde faste my systerTo kepe Charitie with god. in your remēbrance, that to haue and kepe charitie with god, is to loue god with your hole harte, with your hole mynde, with your hole power. If anye smalle parte of your harte, or of your mynde, or of your wyt, be bestowed in any affection or loue toward this life:



ye mynishe the perfection of your charitie with god, the whiche requireth of you all and hole, to be without a felowe by hym selfe alone loued.
            You may right well syster putte youre mynde and wytte to gette these thynges, that meinteine this lyfe, but it must be done without all loue and affection: there maye be no parte of loue spent in suche matters, for your mynde can not with ani loue and affect labour to get and to holde this worldly cō
               modities, but in the meane seson your charitie with god is greatly decayed and welnyghe broken: Also you betray your selfe, to mystrust the promission of god, with the whiche mistruste god is most displeased. For there be thre causes noted, that shuld chiefly moue



mens mindes to desire these worldely goodes: One is the loue of welthe, ease, myrthe, and plesure: an other loue of worshyppe, honour, and glorye: the thyrde the doubtefulnes and mistruste of lyuyng here, the whiche mistrust I saye, is worste of all, and moche more to be blamed then the other two. For a felowe set to his pleasure, loueth money to serue him to make merye, and to make therwith good chere: the other set vpon honor louith the present goodes, bycause by them he wolde be regarded. Both these men spende as faste as they gette, and smalle store they putte in the vylenes of money: but he that vpon mistrust seketh goodes, loueth thē to hyde them, to kept them as well from hym selfe as from other, beinge euer



in fere, either of famine, scarce nes, or of olde age, or of sikenes, or of tribulations: and moche better confidēce and trust he putteth in his owne policy and prouision, then he dothe in the goodnesse of god, that made all, and that norissheth vs all, not leauynge the smallest gnatte, the leaste worme or flye withoute dispensacion to haue conuenient sustenance: and of manne he clerely is myndefull, yet man can not trust hym. wherfore the loue of this worlde vpon a mystruste of lyuynge, is a thing in the sight of god moste detestable. This I say we may vse this worlde, but we may not abuse it, whan for the worlde we breake charitie with god. And if our hert be not holly geuen to loue god, we haue not god with perfyte charitie:



god hath not our holle harte, yf the worlde haue any parte.
            This is the wey to come to perfit Charitie, to kepe our harte, oure soule, oure mynde, oure witte all holle for god: the whiche kepyng of our harte and mynde hole, is the reste and quietnes of the soule from the sayde temptations and passions. And this is the driuing awey of the lettes and unpedimen tes, to atteine charite, wherof now here a litle more.
            This perfecte loue of god maketh (as we haue sayd) the minde strong to withstond the thrusting and shulderyng of synne, and the same bringeth forthe consequently the ioyfull rest & quietnes from the forsayde passions: whiche the corrupt loue of this lyfe bredeth. So that this calmenes of mynde



is a certayne effecte and worke of charitie. And hope in god maketh vs fyrmely to awayte for the fulfillynge of the promesse of god in vs, and to vs: which hope is gotē by pacience, that is a constant endurynge of aduersitie, the whiche paciente endurynge is purchased with abstinence, that is a stronge resistinge ageinst euill enticementis. And feare of god causeth courage to flie & to absteyn from euil, the whiche feare of god groweth of an vndoubted beleue in our ma ster Christes techyng. Thus from faythe we come to fere, from feare to fleinge of synne: and in fleinge of sinne we take a pacient mynde to suffre, wherby we take hope & trust in god, through the whiche Hope our soule syttethe in a sure 
                  •
               hayre of a certayn expectacion of



that, whiche is layde vp in stoore for vs in heuen: And therof finally cometh in vs this charite, whiche causeth vs to loue god for his infinite goodnes in the same promesse makynge, wherof now we wayte for the fulfyllynge: the whiche is also the thynge that enforceth & ordreth all our thoughtes, in suche a due rule, that oure life therby rendreth in al his actis a swete sauour bothe to god and to man. But ageyne let vs ones repete the effect of this lesson: who so euer beleueth our master, he fereth his punysshment, and he that feareth to be punisshed of Christe, refreyneth hym selfe from sensual lustes, the whiche be the causes of punysshement: he that kepeth of suche causes: abydth wel and suffreth tribulation: he that paciently



suffrith tribulation, hath a blessed hope and trust in god, the whi che drawethe and pluckethe the mynde from worldly affections: and the mynde ones frely discharged of all loue to this worlde, streight taketh the pure burnyng charite toward god, and that maketh quietnes reste and peace in our consciences. Thus euery way we muste resolue our selfe to reste finally in the possession of charite, or elles we neither can beleue nor feare Christe as we ought to doo, nor refrayne euyll lustes, as we ought to do, nor suffre tribulatiōs as we oughte to do: nor hope in god as we ought to do, nor leaue the loue of these worldly dregges as we oughte to doo: but in the same we shall be drowned bothe night and daye durynge the space



of this lyfe, from whens we shall passe into miserable condition of body and of soule, to endure without ende the indignation of god, whome after this life we neuer se, oneles we can nowe for his sake dispise this worlde: the whiche thing passeth the power of mans feblenes to do, excepte he vse the puisaunt myghte of Charitie, the which bringeth so feruent a desire to loue god, that nothinge beside is regarded: and suche a swetenes feleth the charitable mynde in his desyre, that he wil not forgo or diminish any part therof, although he shuld suffre a thousand hurtes and iniuries.
            Here the louīg disciple of Christ, saincte Stephan, howe he inflamedSaynete Stephan. with charite prayeth aloude for his tourmentours, & craueth



of god remission of their synnes, alledgynge their ignoraunce for their excuse.
            The bearynge of Christes crosse is made by this Charitie a swete yocke and and an easye bourden. For he that with god is locked in charitie, saith in all tribulations, with the prophet Hieremy: Non sum turbatus domine sequens te pastorē, Oh lorde in folowing the my ruler I can not be discomforted. For as our eien see not nor persceyue not any sterres in the brode sky, when the sonne is vp, in lyke maner if the mynde be sette with charitie in god, it neither feleth him selfe, nor vtterly seeth any thynge elles in this world besydes god, in whom & for whome al his thoughtes be consumed. I saye in god and for god, charite kepeth his hole cours



without interruption of any lette in this worlde. And touchynge charite in god, the whiche is vtter ly to forsake al loue of this world, that therby we maye clene be ryd from all passions to loue and honour god alone, lette this that we haue hitherto spoken be moughe.
            Nowe a lyttell harken, what iswhat is to kepe charitie. this sayinge to haue and kepe cha ritie. Cruely it is to deriue and to take out from our loue in god, an other loue towardes man for god. For he that hath perfect charite in god, loueth for goddes sake all men as hym selfe, by cause in man he knoweth is the image of god, the whiche image of god the charitable hart embraceth indiffe rently in the hole kynde of man, withoute makynge exception of frende and no frende, of well willers



and ennemyes, of kynsfolke and strangers: but as the figure of god is equalle in all, soo he equally fauoreth all. For thoughe with obstinate synners and with men wedded to theyr passions he be displeased, yet his displeasure be cometh hym as a louer that soroweth his frendes hurt. Wherfore if he be a synner amended or conuerted, he is full of gladnes, and neuer cesseth he layenge his waite & watche to do man good, so that by his charite toward man for goddis sake, he continuallye myndeth man well: and therof he neuer s
                  •
               aketh. In visytynge the sycke, in clothynge the naked, in feding the hungry, in refresshyng the pore, in comfortinge the miserable, in prayinge for synfulle, in al workes of mercy, pitie, & deuotion,



he laboureth with pleasure, by reason of his fast loue toward god. He freely and gladly forgyueth all maner displeasures, of in iuries, of rebukes, of hurtes, & so depe he is in loue, that nothig can cause him to hate. For it is a true sayenge, that who so euer felith in his harte any poynt of hatred, for any maner of cause, ageynste any maner a man, this person may be assured, that he is not in charitie with god. For our maystre Christ sayth: He that loueth me, kepethIo. 14. &. 15. my commaundmente: my commaundement is, that one of you loue another. Wherfore he that loueth not his neighhour (euerye manne is neighbour vnto other, dwellynge in the smalle compasse of this erthe) kepeth not our maisters commaundemente: and he



that kepeth not the commaundement, canne nat loue our mayster Christ, whom he that loueth not: loueth not god. Wherfore he that loueth not his neighbour, halteth in his charitie towardes God.
            Thus we maye see, that charite in god techeth what is to be done of vs towarde man, and euer we be assured to work wel, if we kepe in vs this holy charite: the whiche onely can kepe, and knoweth the waye howe to kepe goddes worde. It is our mayster Christe,Mat. 5. that byddeth vs loue oure ennemies, to do welle with them that haten vs, to praye for theym that persecute vs. Christe thus commandeth vs, to thentent he wolde clense and rydde vs from hatred, from doinge iniuries, from being myndeful of displeasures, to haue



vs pure from hate, rancour, angre & grudgynge: he commandeth vs to loue without exception as well our fo, as our frende. He wolde haue vs of our charitie in god, to loue man after the ensaumple of god, the whiche wold haue al men indifferently to be saued and come to the lyghte of trouthe, lyke as his sonne shyneth ouer the good and euylle, his rayne fallethe as well vpon the vniust, as vpon theIbidem. iuste: so wolde Christe haue vs in differentely sprede our affections to all men, after the free liberalle distribution of charite. For and if you be in this case, that some persones ye loue, some you hate, som you nother loue nor hate, somme you loue so so, in a meane facion, some you loue verye ernestly: by this inequalitie of louyng, lerne,



that you be farre from perfect cha ritie with god, the whiche perfecte charitie indifferentely loueth all mē for goddes sake, the good sorte of men as his dere frendes, the euyll sorte, as them, of whom may be made dere frendes. In charitie is no knowledge of any difference betwene ryche and poore, betwene mayster & seruant, betwene bonde and free, betwene faithful and vntrue, betwene male and female, be twene kynne and no kynne: the charitable spiritie loketh vppon mans symple nature, the whiche in all men is lyke and one thinge: wherof he conceiueth in his mind one indifferent contēplation of al, and at all seasons he is well mynded, euer welle disposed to doo all men good, with whom is neyther englysshe, nor scottisshe, aquayntaunce



nor straunger: but with hym one is all and in all, Christe Iesus alone, whome and whose crosse he knowethe, and nothynge elles.
            Thus by our Charitie with god, we lerne what is our duetie towarde man. But here in louynge your neyghbours and bretherne, loke you deceiue not your selfe, for hit is not inoughe to loue youre neighbour, but ye must in the ordre and rule of charite loue hym, that is onelye or chefely, to loue hym for goddes sake. There be fyue wayes noted of louynge one of vs an other, of the whiche num bre one way is praysed, thre be vtterly dispraysed, and one neyther praysed nor dispraised. Firste I may loue my neighbour for goddis sake, as euery good vertuons



man loueth euery man. Second I maye loue my neyghbour of a naturall affection, bycause he is my son, or brother, or kynsman. Thirdly I may loue for vayn glo rye, as if I loke by my neyghbour to be worshypped or auaunced to honour. Fourthly I may loue for couetousnes, as when I cheryshe and flatter a ryche manne for his goodes, when I make moche of them that haue done me pleasures & may do me mo. The fifte waye, I maye loue for my sensuall luste, as when I loue to fare delicately, or els when I madde or dote vppon women.
            The fyrste waye to loue my neighFyue maner of loues. bour, for the loue I haue to god, is onely worthy to be praysed.
            The second way naturally deserueth neither prayse nor disprayse.



The thyrde, the fourthe, and the fyft to loue for glory, aduantage, or plesure, al thre be stark nought. Therfore syster, oute with youre loue, and considre well, in what way youre harte is gyuen to loue your neyghbour. Charitie hath but one waye of louynge a man truly and welle, that is onely for goddes sake.
            To conclude nowe this matter, the which of hym selfe is in sight, lette vs knytte vp Charitie with this generall knotte, that man is made absolute and perfecte in all vertues, through this one vertue of Charitie. But when I saye all vertues, loke that you vnderstōd what is ment in the name of vertue: orelles this generalle clause may deceyue you. Wherfore you must lerne, that the body hath his



propre vertues, and the soule lyke wyse hath his owne a parte from the other. The vertues of theVertues of the bodye. body be, as to faste, to watche, to goo on pylgremage, to traueylle with hande and fote, for to helpe their neyghboures, to distribute youre goodes in almes dedes, to buylde vp churches, wherin the people may here the word of god, and com to gether to prayer, to pu nysshe the fleshe with rough heer, to slepe vppon the harde grounde to socour the nedy, to ayde the miserable, and other such actes bodi lye men doo for the loue and honour of god. The vertues of theVertues of the soule. soule be of an other sorte, as mekenes, pacience, abstinence, hope, faithe, charitie, pitie, mercye, and other lyke. Nowe if it so be, that of some infirmite I can not faste,



nor watche, for lacke of money I can not do any almes, for lacke of bodily strength, I canne not traueyle, yf suche necessary and true considerations make vs wante the vertues of the bodye, we be without blame, and had excused before god, the whiche beholdeth the secrete and priuie cause of our default. But in the vertues of the soule, we haue no maner of defence, if it be so that we lake anye of them. For they haue no necessitie, nor constraynt of any thynge, but all be frely vnder the election and choise of our free wyl. And whan it is generally sayde, that charite maketh a man absolute and perfecte in all vertues, ye muste vnderstonde in all the vertues of the soule: the which be very vertues, to speke and to name the truthe.



Wherby the bodye canne haue of hym selfe no vertue, nor nothinge can be done of the body worthy of prayse, onles the acte be coupled and ioinid with the vertues of the mynde. But contrary, the soule is perfecte in his vertues without all assistence and helpe of the body. Then boldly we may say, that from charitie cometh all vertues, and none other werke there is of charitie, then to make and bringe forth in vs vertu. It is holy scriptures testimony, that charite can not be ydle. Alwaye than a charitable spirite is doing, & what so euer he doethe, it muste nedes be a good werke. For what can com from the loue of god, but it shall sauer and smelle of god? the whiche sauour is the onelye thynge, that geueth to mans acte all the



goodnes.
            Nowe then my entierly beloued syster, to obserue and kepe this mooste precious and mooste holy charitie with god, you shal in few wordes haue a shorte reule. TheA ru
                     •
                  e to kepe charitie. beste waye to kepe you frome fallynge out of charitie with god, is neuer to suffre your christē neighbour to slepe in a displeasure with you, and agayne that you neuer slepe in a displeasure with youre christen neyghbour. Remembre, we all be knytte in a faste kynrede vnder one father in heuē, the whiche commaundeth vs to loue together as brotherne and systerne, without regarde of high or lowe, pore, or riche, whether your neigh bour be in defaulte, or you, this is to seye, whether he be displeased with you, or you with hym, make



therof no question, care not for the begynnyng of wrathe, but study euer for the ayde, and incontinently folowe alwaye the counsell of our mooste charitable mayster Christe: labour alway to make agreement, that at all seasons you maye be redy to offre vppe to god your swete smellynge sacrifice, the which is in goddis sence the delectable sauer of a charitable brethe: whose strēgth is so myghty in his pleasaunt sente, that it hathe his place amonge the incomparable sauours of heuen, where god with al his sainctes and aungels smelleth it.
            Do you beare awaye syster the shorte lesson, that I haue gyuen to you?
            
               SVSTER.
               Whiche shorte lesson meane you brother? For partly in writinge, partely in



communication I haue had many lessons of you: of the whiche some I beare well awaye, as yet it is out of my mynde, howe you haue proued to me, that a foole shoulde not lyue solitary, that I muste forgette displeasures, yf I forgyue theym: that I shoulde euer enclyne and obey more to rea son, then to any intreatie.
            
            
               BROTHER.
               It is welle good syster, that you haue of these thynges remembrance, but I thought not to aske you this: I wolde you reher sed to me, what you haue by me lerned of Charitie.
            
            
               SVS.
               Why brother, call ye that the shorte lesson, when it conteyneth so many lynes, that it weryed me thre days to rede them ouer?
            
            
               BRO.
               I thinke well, that you were weryed, more peraduenture with my vnsauerye



tellynge, then with the lengthe of the tale. For surely the tale was but short.
            
            
               SIS.
               If that be a shorte tale, I cōfesse to you brother, that I can not telle what is shorte and what is longe. For to me your lesson of charitie semed very longe.
            
            
               BRO.
               It is not syster, the numbre of wordes or of lynes, that ma keth a tale or a boke to be called longe or shorte. But the matter that is intreated maketh bothe: so that of some matter you maye in verye fewe wordes here a verye longe tale, and ageyn of som mater a great heape of wordes maketh but a shorte tale. Like as we saye of tyme, that it is but a littell while ago, sins Fraunce was vnder our rule, and that paper, printynge of bokes, gunnes, be thynges inuented within fewe yeres,



and that the. iiii. orders of freres beganne in christendome within a lyttell tyme paste: yet in eche of these forsaide sayinges, we vnderstonde more then a hundred yeres. Contrarye wyse ye will saye that my lady princes hath lyen a great whyle atte Eltham, and yet her grace hath not lien there one yere. So you wyl say, that it is a longe season syns you and I were to gither: & yet I was with you with in this moneth. Whan you knok at a doore, and tarye one houre, you saye you haue very longe taried there. Thus you may see, it is the dignite & the worthynes of the thynge, that causeth the tyme to be named longe or shorte, and not the tyme of his owne space.
               In this maner it is in your lesson of charite, the which is a matter



so plentiful, so copious, so lōg, so large, so depe, so highe, that no tale therof can be called longe, onles the teller tryfle in vayne wordes, and then you maye saye his tale is long, bicause he telleth and sheweth his folysshenes: but spekynge directly of charite, he neuer can saye to moche. For whan we haue saide all that we can, yet shal the matter of charitie lye in hepes infinite to be spoken more of. For syster, what tongue or penne of man can make an ende in tellinge the smallest portion of goddis sub stance? this charitie is god, and God is this charitie. Therfore thynke not youre lesson longe of charitie. For al that I haue sayd, is in effecte nothynge.
            
            
               SIS.
               You haue somewhat made me knowe, what is a long tale and what is a



shorte: but yet brother, by cause the common prouerbe is trewe, that womens wyttes in dede be shorte, I praye you, if it be possible, lette my lesson be rehersed in fewe wordes.
            
            
               BRO.
               It is a thing sister, sone done, to comprehend in a few lynes al that you haue hard of me. For the sūme of the hole is: This charitie conteyneth all the lawes of god, and techeth vs our duetie bothe towarde god and man: the which charite requireth a quyete spirite, and no spirite is quiete, that is subiecte to any passion. Wherfore to haue charitie we must chace from vs al passiōs, to rest so in our loue of god, that nothyng withdraw vs nor plucke vs inordinately to any thoughte besyde god: wherof shulde folow, that in this worlde, we wold rekē


                  
laughyng to be wepinge, sorowe to be myrthe, ryches to be pouertie, misery to be welthe, wisedome to be foly, honour to be shame, so depely we shuld be buryed in god, that to this lyfe our senses shulde lye deed, and quycke onely in the loue of god. From the whiche true and entier loue of god, we shulde take a loue with all hertes affecte to the hole kynd of man, in whom beholde spiritually the image of god: For the whiche image sake we shulde beare no lesse fauour to man, than were sufficient to resiste and vtterly vaynquishe all hate, without the remembrance of any grudge to be taken with any maner of occasion, to be euer with all men ioyned in harte through our loue in god, as fast as kynred ioyneth a few persons through a naturalle



loue: yea faster knytteth mens hartes to gethers charitie, than nature can do.
               This is the some of our lesson sister. The whiche you shall haue agayne made shorte, if you wyll.
            
            
               SIS.
               Nay brother, I pray you let this be no shorter. For in my mind it is all redy somewhat to shorte. For I wolde disire you to lette me in ordre to aske you a repetition of myn hole lesson, that I may in a shorte forme lerne, what was fyrste, what was seconde, and so forthe to the conclusion of youre tale.
            
            
               BRO.
               I do not yet wel perceyue, what you wolde haue me do, but aske me what you wyll, & I shal therto make answere.
            
            
               SIS.
               Then brother tell me, what was the fyrste poynt, that you tolde me of Charitie.
            
            
               BRO.
               Fyrste I shewed



to you the signification of theThe repe tition of this treatise. worde, that Charitie was not only taken for peace, paciēce, mercy, and pitie, as in our englishe tonge commenly we vse it for nothynge elles, as whan I saye I wyll not breake charite, I wyll kepe charitie, I wyll forgiue hym for charite, trouth it is that charite signi fieth all these, and as I shewed to you, moche more: for the worde is the same, that is in latin called Charitas, the whiche signifieth an ordynate loue, and a due rule towarde god and man, the whiche ordinat loue the soule hath, when he holly with al his power is wed ded to god: so that besyde he neyther wyllethe nor desyrethe anye thing. By the which feruent loue in god, he exerciseth amonge men all the kynde of vertue. And this



was the fyrste thynge suster, to haue you to knowe, whatte the worde of charitie signifieth.
            
            
               SIS.
               Me thought brother, that fyrst of all you shewed, that charitie conteyneth all goddes lawes.
            
            
               BRO.
               I dyd so in dede, to brynge you to the syght of the greatte compasse, that was in the name of Charite: whereby you myghte the better lerne, that in englysshe tongue we conceyue but a lyttelle portion of this infinite vertue, whan we cō
                  menly speake therof. But how so euer I begonne, the fyrste poynte of youre lesson was to lerne the strength of charities name.
            
            
               SYS.
               I wold nowe aske you the secōde, if it cam not in my mind to doute, whether charitie and loue be not all one, as in communication I haue harde some clerkes saye they



be.
            
            
               BRO.
               I thinke well som clerkes wyll so say. For I note in the last englysh trāslation of the gospels out of laten, the translatour alway for Charitas wryteth Loue: wherin I canne not consent with hym. For after myn opinion there is as moche difference betwene loue and charite, as is in your occupation betwene threde and twined threde. For you wyll say, that all twined threde is threde, but al threde is not twyned threde: So this worde Loue is more cōmen & more general then is charitie. For trouthe it is, that all Charite is loue: but it is not trouth, that all loue is charite. In greke charite is agape, and loue is eros, as in latine loue is amor, and charitie Chae ritas. In al these thre tonges there is the same difference in the tone



worde from the tother, that is a penne and a quylle. All our pennes, for the most parte be quilles: but al our quilles be not pennes: The quille is that remayneth in his nature, without any other facion or forme put to it: the penne is a quyll shaped and formed, and made apt to write. Likewyse loue is the common affecte of fauour: charitie is loue reduced into a due order towardes god and man, as to loue god alone for him self, and to loue man for goddes sake. Do you perceyue syster what I saye?
            
            
               SIS.
               Me thynketh brother, that you meane as I wolde saye, that betwene charite and loue is a like difference, as is betwene my pereles and wyres. For I see that my pereles be wyres, but they haue a facion by my labour putte to, the



whiche facion wyers haue not. And here may I say as you sayde of Charitie and Loue, that all peerles be wyers, but all wyers be not peerles. But brother, if all charite be loue, what defaulte put you in the translator, the whiche wryteth loue for Charitas?
               
            
            
               BRO.
               The same defaulte I put in hym, yt you wold put in one, the whiche doth giue to you wiers for perles, or quilles for pēnes. But sister, re membre, you wolde haue me be short.
            
            
               SIS.
               It is trouth brother: but the beste shortenesse is to be playne. For when I vnderstonde my lesson, I canne soone make it shorte. Nowe then if you wylle, I preye you telle me the seconde poynte.
            
            
               BRO.
               The seconde was to shewHow charitie i
                        •
                      had. you, that charite could not be had



without the assured myndes quietnes, as an effecte folowynge the same, the which stedfast quietnes of mynde is not to be inordinatly styred or moued with passions.
            
            
               SIS.
               Sauyng your tale brother, I pray you tell me some englyshe worde, what you calle passion. For truly I know none other passion, but the passion of Christe.
            
            
               BRO.
               Then I haue loste manye wordes. For I thought I hadde sufficiētly declared vnto you, that any mouynge of the mynde in to an vngodlye desire, was called a passion, as malice, rancour, yre, enuy, ambition, couetousnes, lechery, glottony, pride, hatred, study of prayse, study of auengyng, and suche other whiche styrre vp and moue the mynde oute of his naturalle reste, to loue or to hate



without reason and mesure: As whan our bodye suffreth any torment, we sey, we be in a passion: so when our mynde suffreth any suche inordinat desires, we haue the myndes passion: and euery suche motion of mynd out of due cours is called a passion. The mynde is moued out of his due corse, as often as it is stirred with these affectes, that be engendred of our principall loue to this lyfe, as to be dispraised with our disprayses or sclanders, is a thynge that rysethe in vs from the loue of this lyfe: where if we study to be magnified, we be in a sore passion agaynste reason, the whiche teacheth vs to seke our glory in more stable thinges, then can be found in this life. But bicause you speke of the worde, shortly as you say,



it is no very englysshe word: how be it whan we be driuen to speake of thynges that lacke the names in oure tonge, we be also driuen to borowe the wordes, that we haue not, sometyme out of latin, sometyme out of greke, euen as the latin tonge doth in like necessitie borowe & take of other. And though now at the fyrst heryng, this word stondethe straungelye with you, yet by vse it shall waxe familiar, specially when you haue it in this maner expressed vnto you.
               Nowe than to opteyne this restTo op
                        •
                     ein re
                        •
                     e of mynde. of mynde, the chefe effecte of charite, we must beware that no passion rule in vs, but alwayes in all thynges we muste ordre our desires by the draught and trayne of this one desire, the which we haue of louynge god alone with al our



holle hartes, power, wyttes, & intelligēce, neuer suffering aduisedly the corrupte loue of this false flaterynge lyfe, to haue any smal place in oure soule, wherby we shulde waxe the weker in the fulle vnyenge and knittinge of all our intentions to the wylle and pleasure of god. And sister, it was the seconde parte of your lesson.
            
            
               SIS.
               Ye brother I wolde I had lerned well, that I might euer be quiete, howe so euer I were handeled, rightwisely or vnrightwisely, wel or euyll, gentily or chorlysshely. It were an angels condition to be nothynge changed or moued with wel or woo: but to be continually none tenure, in one temperature, neither hering, nor seinge, nor felynge, nor smellyng, nor tastinge, nor wysshynge, nor myndyng any



erthely thing besides god, but hauinge continually a feruent desire to knowe, to loue, and to honour god. But brother, what meane you by this, to speake thus, as though it were possible, to make of men angelles, and more ouer to make of this worlde heuen? as long as man is man, and as long as this worlde is this worlde, I reken hit not possyble to kepe vs thus clene from passions, as you sey the perfecte rest of charitie requireth.
            
            
               BRO.
               You entre with me nowe syster, into a matter of a longe communication, but at this tyme I wyl make you therto a very short answere.
               Christe wold neuer teache man to praye, and to aske of god thynges impossible to be opteyned: He instructed vs to sey in our prayer,



                  Adueniat regnum tuum, Oh lorde god let thy kyngedome be here amongest vs. Where the kynge dome of god is, there god reignethe ouer suche subiectes as be worthy to haue suche a kyng: and pleinly there is heuen, where so euer is the kyngdome of god: So that of this world, there might be made an heuen.
               Ageyn our maister and sauiour taught vs to pray, Fiat uoluntas tua sicut in coelo et in terra, Oh good lord graunte, that thy wylle maye be fulfylled in this worlde, as it is in heuen: that we men may in euery thought and acte agre with thy wylle, as angels do: that we in this lyfe make no moore resistence agaynste thy pleasure, then the blessed cōpany of heuen doth. This petition can not take effecte



onles man be made lyke an angel, all pure & cleane from the dreggy appetites of this lyfe: that is to say, vtterly rydde from all passions, the which euer stryue ageinst the wyll of god.
               Nowe then in as moche as I beleue, that Christ biddeth vs aske nothynge, but the same maye be: I think it possible to make of this worlde the kyngdome of god, and to make men the kepers of goddis wyll: The whiche two thynges, to lyue in the kyngedome of god, and to obserue and kepe goddes wyll, I recken to be a perfection of aungels lyfe in heuen. But syster, remembre, Christe biddethe vs not to attempte to performe this perfection by our own power: for that were playnly impossible, but it is our masters instruction,



that we shulde turne vs in prayer to god, and of his infinite goodnes craue and aske his grace, wherby we shal be comforted, susteyned, and coraged to say atte the laste with saynte Paule. We be able to do all in hym, that helpeth vs Iesus Christe. This were to haue our spirite holly giuen to serue god, to knowe god, to loue god, and nothynge els. And if you wolde say, that saint Paule cam not to this perfection, nor none of the sayntes, but the beste men were synners, lette it so be: yet be assured if man duely applye his wyl, to be without synne, so that in his wyll be no lacke, nor faynynge, this man before god is an aungell. And sister, as he shoteth nerer the marke, than he doth that seeth none, and shoteth at all



aduentures: so you seinge nowe and knowynge the very perfection of charitie, you shall the better enforce towarde it, thenne if you were beset with blynde ignorance. Of al this mater sister, with you I wyl not reson out of your Pater noster, y• which I think is inough for your requestes at this tyme.
            
            
               SIS.
               I holde me contented brother, and pray I wyl firste, that I may thynke possible to be thus perfect. Nexte that I may haue grace to enforce thitherward the vertuous power of my harte.
            
            
               BRO.
               There is no more required of you, but this applienge of your wyl to get grace, but grace shall you neuer gette, but if you aske it withoute any doute or mystrust in the good nes of god, who is euer redye to gyue, when he hereth one that accordyngly



asketh.
               And to shewe you what praier is shaped accordyngly to goddis eares, it were a matter for no lyttell boke. Therfore sister, be contented to leaue your digressions, and retorne to your purpose.
            
            
               SIS.
               I haue no purpose, but to lerne, and lerne I shulde, if you taughte me to praye. Yet leste I trouble you to moche, I wyll goo forth, to require of you what was the thyrde poynte in my lesson of charitie.Charitie is not like one vertue.
               
            
            
               BRO.
               It was to shewe, that charitie is not lyke one vertue, but it is suche a thynge, that by manye degres of diuerse vertues, it must be gotten, as a finall conclusion of all labour and trauaille in vertue. As firste we muste be endued with an vndoubted Feyth, to beleue perfectlye the history of our



sauiour: whose doctryne brought first into this worlde this charitie for an absolute cōclusion of all lawes. After this faithe we must entreFeare of god. into a fere of god, not the feare of vile bōdmen, the which haue no mind to kepe their maisters pleasure but only loke vpō the punish ment, our feare muste be a reuerence to god, lyke as louing childrē feare to displese their fathers. By this reuerent and louing feare we muste procede to Abstinence,Abstinēce. that is to sey we must beare suche feare & reuerence to god, as shall cause vs for the honour of god, to refreyne the sensuall inticementes of sinne, the whiche bespotteth, deformethe, and defeateth the ymage of god in vs, the greattest euyl that man hath. To kepe this abstinence we muste gather pacyence,Pacience.


                  
a vertue that maketh strōge our soule, to suffre the violence of al resistence to vertue, by the whiche pacience we shal take an hope to be parte takers of goddes mercyfulnes, and to enioy a rewarde, that passeth al the powers of men, to shewe it. Out of this springeth a feruente loue to god, whiche is called charitie, through which the mynd shal be setteled in such a qui etnes, that all the chaungeable and sondry blastes of this worlde, shall nothynge moue vs from our desire to rest in god: And this min des reste & perfect quietnes is the princypall effecte of charitie, the conclusion and finalle perfection of all vertue.
               I wyll nowe ende these maters, with a wonderful prayse, that the chosen vessell of god saynt Paule



wryteth of charite, of the whiche prayse I wolde haue you syster note and marke diligently, what a dignite is in charite, to be aboue al thinges pondred and regarded of al Christen men: This apostle sayth in effect thus. If al mighty god, the father, wolde gyue to me all giftes of his grace, as to endue me with the holy spirite of prophe cy, to make me a priuie counseilor of al the secrete misteries in heuen, to cause by the power & strengthe of faith to worke wonders, to do miracles, in quickenyng the deed, in geuinge sight to the blinde: yet all this not withstondynge I am not in the way of saluation, If I wante charite. Howe moche then shulde man bestowe, endeuour, enforce and exercise all his wyttes to gette and to kepe the possession



of this high vertue, the which is the soule of lyfe, the grace of graces, the one thing that ioyneth mā in fauor with god, & that god onli requireth of man for al his goodnes toward man? It is suche a thinge this charitie, that by thauctoritie of holy writte I wyl not only cal this vertu a godly thing, but I say it is god hym selfe, that who so euer kepeth in hym charitie, he hath god with hym, and he in god dwelleth, that dwelleth in charite. For bothe is charite and charitie is god: to whome nowe and euermore be all glory, prayse, and honour. Amen.
            
            FINIS.
            ¶ Thus endeth this treatise of Charitie.
         
      
      
         
            
            LONDINI IN AEDIBVS THOMAE BERTHELETI. M. D. XXXIII. CVM PRIVILEGIO.
            
         
      
   