
      
         
            
            
               
               AN Eaſie, certaine, and perfect method, to cure and preuent the Spaniſh ſicknes. Wherby the learned and skilfull Chirurgian may heale a great many other diſeaſes. Compiled by Peter Lowe, Arellian: Doctor in 
                  〈…〉
                of Chirurgy in Paris; & Chirurgian ordinary to Henry 
               
                  〈…〉
                the moſt Chriſtian King of Fraunce and Nauarre.
            
            AT LONDON, ❧ Printed by Iames Roberts. Anno Dom. 1596.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONOVrable Robert Deuorax, Earle of Eſſex, Vicount Herefford, Knight of the moſt noble order of the Garter. &c. Peter Lowe wiſheth good ſucceſſe in all his woorthie enterpriſes, and high attempts.
            
               ALthough (right honorable) this Treatiſe be far diſſonant from your ſtudies, yet I haue emboldened my ſelfe to let it paſſe, vnder your honourable patronage, for by Gods aſsiſtance, I intend heereafter to publiſh diuers other Bookes of Chirurgie, all which ſhall bee ſhrouded vnder your honourable ſhield, and protection, in regard of your manifold curteſies, and liberalitie to all Strangers bountifully extended, whereof you ceaſe not euery day to giue experiment, but eſpecially in reſpect of your honours valiant proweſſe, and rare Martiall exploits in ayding my dread Soueraigne, & Maiſter, the moſt victorious King of France, ſo that in honoring him, I muſt loue you, and for your heroicall vertues, admire your wiſedome, and courage, in proſecuting all venterous, and hard attempts: as lately hath beene experimented to the terror of the Enemie, peaceable welfare of this Realme, and immortall fame vnto you, & your poſteritie for euer. Then foraſmuch as the dedication heereof, cannot bring, any addition of credite vnto you, but rather, be the more acceptable, vnder the tytle of your honourable patronage, moſt humbly with my ſelfe, I preſent the ſame vnto your honours good lyking, as one, that daylie intermitteth not, to wiſh the aduauncement of your honourable eſtate.
            
               Your Honours in all dutie moſt affectionate▪ Peter Lowe.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE COVRTEOVS Reader.
            GEntle Reader, I haue taken ſome paines in making thys booke, to doe the ſicke pleaſure, and the whole profit, that thereby the diſeaſed may recouer theyr health, and ſound men may preſerue themſelues from thys maladie. And albeit that diuers heretofore of ſundry Nations, haue publiſhed Treatiſes of this ſubiect, whereby at this preſent many coppies are extant, ſo it may ſeeme ſuperfluous to reiterate the 
                  〈◊〉
                Yet ſeeing I by mine owne diligent practiſe, and conference with learned men in this 
                  〈◊〉
               , haue found out, diuers waies to cure this diſeaſe, more eaſie, certaine, and ſpeed
                  •
                
               
                  •
               hen hath been put in vre by any of this age, and that learned Artiſts, and skilfull Practitioners in all ages, haue written their ſeuerall iudgements, almoſt vpon euery particulet ſubiect, I thought it pertinent and neceſſary for the aduauncement of knowledge, and caſe of many afflicted with this maladie, to impart my skill herein, for the better inſtruction of the Common-wealth. For as this diſeaſe is diſperſed throughout all Nations, Prouinces, Citties, townes, and priuate houſes, yea, & ſo many kindes thereof daily increaſed and multiplyed, whereby men that know the nature of the maladie, complexion of the Patient, age, ſeaſon, climate, and other circumſtances in the like caſe conſidered, are of neceſſitie many times vrged to varie from the common cure, and for the better extirpation of newe ſorts hereof, to deuiſe, vſe and apply, new remedies: ſo it is needfull, for the behoofe of the weale publique, enlargement of knowledge, and acquitall of euery mans particuler dutie, whereby he is bound ſo much as in him lyeth, to aduaunce and further the Common-wealth, to publiſh his experience, in, and touching the premiſſes. The foreſayd reaſons moouing mee there-vnto, I haue ſet forth to the view and reading of al men, ſuch knowledge herein, as by long ſtudie and experience I haue gotten: to the intent that a further learning might be added to the Artiſts skill, and ſuch as haue no learning at all, may be inſtructed, without any other teaching. As in this ſubiect I haue manifeſted my cunning for your benefit, ſo I purpoſe heereafter, (if GOD prolong my dayes with happie ſucceſſe,) to make you pertakers of my labour in the whole courſe of Chirurgerie, and my Booke De partu mulierum: by whoſe helpe, I doubt not, but many women ſhall eaſe, & ſhorten their courſe in trauaile. And thus (gentle Reader) I wiſh your furtherance of knowledge, both in this, and all other needfull Arts.
            
               P. L.
            
         
         
            
            THE PROEM.
            IT is a poynt knowne of all the Philoſophers, and confirmed by their common confent, that the vſe and practiſe of euery Arte, is better and of more excellencie, then the ſimple ſpeculation and contemplation of the ſame; as that for the which all rules & precepts of Sciences are ordained, and to the which they are referred, as to the chiefe end: the which may more amply appeare by Ariſtotle, Primo Ethicorum; et pri. Topicorum, & diuers other Phyloſophers, throughout their whole works: For amongſt all humane Arts, the practiſe of Girurgerie is the moſt excellent and profitable, for 
                  •
               o much as it preſerueth man in health and good conſtitution of bodie, in preuenting ſickneſſes to come, by meet & fit medicins; and beeing ſick, doth reſtore him againe to the forme eſtate, which (if it were not ſeene vnto by the skilfull and expert Chirurgian) would tend to the diſſolution & deſtruction of nature. The naturall inclination and diſpoſition of man, by the gift of other humane Sciences, is onelie bettered and made more prompt. As for example, Logick furniſheth nature, & teacheth to reaſon well: Rethorick to ſpeake eloquently; the Law ſhewoth the way to maintaine poſſeſsions purchaſed, and to recouer that whereof men are defrauded. Theſe gifts are in great eſtimation amongſt men: but in reſpect and compariſon of life it ſelfe, which by the learned Chirurgian is maintained and prolonged, diſeaſes, and maladies cured, they are of little account or value. For what auaileth it vnto a man to bee a cunning Aſtrologian, a learned Lawyer, rich and mightie, yea, a Monarch of the whole world, and in the meane time haue no ioy, nor pleaſure thereof, by reaſon that he is daily vexed with cruell paine, and deadly torments of maladies, ready euery howre to giue vp the ghoſt? Is not man then greatly beholding vnto Phiſick and Chirurgerie? The 
                  〈◊〉
                wherof, cauſeth him to enioy and gather the profit of all other worldly Sciences.
            Heereof it proceedeth, that Aeſculapius, Apollo, and other inuentors of our Art, haue euer (for the excellencie of that Science) beene deified and eſteemed for Gods, meaning thereby, that like as diuine Authors doe farte exceede worldly inuentors, ſo this Art found out by the Gods, is worthy to be preferred by man, to all other worldly Sciences. For this cauſe the Greeke Poet Homer, doth prefer the profeſſors of this Art, to all other profeſſors, how excellent ſoeuer they be. Heere vpon, I being mooued by the former reaſons, & loue that I beare to the Common-wealth, I intend to intreate of a diſeaſe, whoſe cure pertayneth to the Arte of Chirurgerie, commonlie called the diſeaſe of Spaine or Naples. The more generall the diſeaſe is, and incident to all Nations, the greater ought the carefull diligence of the expert Chirurgian be, to preuent and cure that maladie, Nature, by reaſon of appetite and inclination to carnall copulation, doth argue (the more is the pitty) the vniuerſall raigne and common infection, of this contagious diſeaſe, throughout all Nations, Citties, and Townes. Therefore, he that would preſcribe an eaſie, perfect, and true way to oute this diſeaſe, ſhould greatly benefit the Publique weale, in preſeruing the life of an infinite number of people, who vndeſeruedly, by infection from others, are greeuouſly oppreſſed, with this deteſtable maladie. Now, by daily and long practiſe, & conference with men of learning in this matter, I haue found out diuers remedies and medicins, neuer ſette forth by any before this time. Neuertheles, to make my worke more perfect, I will firſt intreate of the ordinarie cures practized by others, which diuers men, haue written in diuers manners, to the great hurt of the Patient, and diſcredite of the Chirurgian, not knowing, the true cure, which is the cauſe that manie make a miſerable end of their life, which ſhall appeare to the diligent Reader in this my Treatiſe following.
         
      
      
         
            
               The firſt Chapter of the definition of the Spaniſh ſicknes.
               THIS Spaniſh ſicknes, is one indiſpoſition againſt nature, bred cheefely by carnall copulation, & contagion ioyned with venenoſitie, as ſaith Ioh. Sueſſanus. Or it may be defined, to be an euill intemperature, hote and dry in the liuer & vaines, as ſaith Francantianus, yet more dry then hote, and therefore of more difficill curation: but becauſe that euill temprature may be without matter, and is proceſſe

of time with matter and ſolution of continuitie, the which penetrateth and corrodeth the ſecret parts of men and women, with certaine puſtulls in the head and forehead, with other externall parts of the body, which in time cauſe greefes in the night, hardnes on ye bones, (we call them Tophes or Nodoſities) with corruption both of the bones, and other ſpermatick parts: yet this chaunceth ofteneſt in the ſecret parts of men, becauſe they bee laxe and ſoft, and therefore eaſie to receiue infection: as alſo, becauſe it doth enter into the capacitie of the Matrix, whereof for the moſt part, proceedeth the originall of this diſeaſe. Thys part being infected with that venim, it entereth into the little vaines, and afterwarde into the great, and laſtly into the liuer, where it changeth the naturall temperature, and ſo infecteth all the members, corrupting the naturall humors in the liuer, which ſhould paſſe for the nouriſhment of the whole body which if they be very vehement, & byting, they ingender aboundance of externall vlcers and puſtls, falling of haire, both of head, browes, and beard: griefe in the ioynts, head, leggs, and armes, with diuers euill accidents, according to the varietie of the humor: yet chiefely in the night, and at ſuch times as the humor is accuſtomed to make his paroxiſmes and motions, which is moſt commonly betwixt 3. of the clock in the after-noone, and 9. at night, as ye ſhall heare at length in our Chirurgie in the Chapter of humors.
            
            
               The ſecond Chapter of the originall and names of the Spaniſh ſicknes.
               THere are diuers learned men of diuers opinions, and for the moſt part, doubtfull, of the originall of this diſeaſe. Amongſt whom the Theologians be of opinion, & hold it for a Maxime, that for error commeth punition, and for ſin, death: and ſo they thinke, that GOD doth ſend it, for a ſcourge to the people for whordome. There are alſo many famous Authors, that haue written of diuers ſtrange ſickneſſes, which diuers times haue happened in Italie, Fraunce, and other Countries, like as wee ſee ſomtimes in our owne Country: the originall wherof are vnknowne vnto vs. But generally according to their opinion, we may (no doubt) attribute the originall of all diſeaſes vnto the indignation of God, as the firſt cauſe, who recompenceth euery man according to his works. For to refraine the filthy luſts of men and women, God hath permitted thys ſicknes to raigne among them, as a puniſhment for ſinne: like as we ſee in the 6. of Exodus, that he cōmaunded Moſes to caſt powder in the ayre, in the preſence of Pharao, to the effect, the beaſts and people of Egipt, ſhould be puniſhed and afflicted with Apoſtums and Vlcers, for their ſinnes and diſobedience. But becauſe I will not intermedle holy things with prophane, I will not inſiſt further in this matter. The Aſtrologians are of opinion, that it commeth and hath the originall from t
                     ••
                   influence of the ſtarres, and eclipſes of the Sunne: as chaunced at that time, in the Ile of Calecute, when and where it began. There are others that think it to be ingendered of a Fornicator and a Lepre, in the Weſt Indies, Anno Dom. 1490. The moſt probable of all, is the opinion of the Spaniſh Hiſtoriographers, and alſo diuers other learned men that haue written of the ſame: vvho doe report, that it was brought among the Chriſtians, after ye natiuitie of our Lord, 1492. by a Spaniard called Christophorus Columbus, with many other Spanyards, accompanied with ſome women, who came from the new found Iles occidentalls. For this ſicknes is as common, or rather rifer amongſt them, then any other diſeaſe with vs, and doth infect, as contagious ſickneſſes doe among vs. So diuers Souldiers were infected, who after their returne, not onely infected their owne Country, but alſo diuers others. Anno 1493. in the Moneth of December, (as Nicholaus Leonitius reporteth, writing of thys diſeaſe) when K. Charles the viij. of Fraunce beſieged Naples with a puiſſant Armie, where hee remained certaine Moneths, ſome of the Spanyards came to him, of the which Chriſtophorus Columbus was chiefe, and ſpred this pernitious ſeed, and termed it the Indian ſicknes, which, hath had his courſe ſince, not onely amongſt the Spanyards, who call it the Italian ſicknes, but alſo among the Italians, who call it the maladie of Naples, not without cauſe: for it began firſt to floriſh in Naples. Amongſt the Frenchmen it is called the Spaniſh ſickneſſe, in Enland the great pocks, in Scotland the Spaniſh Fleas, and that for two cauſes, the one, becauſe

it began firſt amongſt the Spanyards: the other, becauſe when the infection ſpreadeth firſt forth in the body, it is like vnto red ſpots, called flea-bitings. Some call it the vnder foote, becauſe that infection often cōmeth by treading with the bare foote vpon the ſpettle of the diſeaſed with this contagion. There are ſome ignorant malicious people, who call it the French ſicknes, without any cauſe or reaſon. The moſt part call it the Venerian ſicknes, becauſe moſt commonly, it proceedeth of the act of Venus. Some call it Pudendagra, becauſe in many people it breedeth firſt in thoſe parts in both ſexes. Now it may be called generall ſicknes, becauſe it is generally ſpred throughout all the world: but for that theſe things, concerning the originall and names, are not greatly materiall, I wil paſſe thē ouer, and onely ſhew thoſe things that are moſt neceſſarie for the true curing of this ſicknes; declaring firſt the cauſe. For not knowing the cauſe, it is impoſſible to find out proper remedies for the cure, ſeeing in all diſeaſes, the cauſe muſt firſt be taken away, or elſe the true cure cannot enſue.
            
            
               The third Chapter, of the cauſes of the Spaniſh ſicknes.
               HAuing intreated of the definition and originall of this maladie, nowe it followeth to ſhew the cauſes of the ſame, which are eyther externall or internall. The externall conſiſt not onely in things manifeſt, but alſo in occult and hidden thinges, which lye as you haue heard in the former Chapter. Heere we will content vs to ſay onely, that this maladie proceedeth cheefely from the act of Venus, whē men haue to doe with women polluted with that infection, though ſometimes it be but ſmall. For by reaſon that the compoſition of the ſecret parts of both ſexe, are compoſed of rare fleſh, and ſpongious, it happeneth by the frication they are eaſily heated and rarified, and ſo the ſooner infected. And for thys cauſe, thoſe that doe the act ſoone, are not ſo eaſilie infected, as thoſe who are long in dooing, by reaſon that the long heate dooth extenuate thoſe parts. Likewiſe they which haue the skin fleane of their ſecret parts, take not ſo eaſilie the maladie as others, becauſe beeing alwaies vncouered, it is not ſo tender and delicate, and therefore not ſo apt to receiue infection. It proceeds alſo by lying in vncleane lynnen, by wearing the garments of them which are infected, and by lying with ſuch as haue any ſpyces of it. So that we ſee many by that meanes infected, without any company of women. Moreouer, it proceedes alſo by ſucking the Nurſe any way diſeaſed with this ſicknes, by drinking after them which haue Vlcers in their throat, by kiſſing or receiuing the breath of ſuch as are infected, and by ſitting on the priuie after them, & ſometimes by treading bare-footed on the ſpettle of thoſe which haue beene long corrupted. Whervpon I will ſette downe mine owne experience, as followeth. I ſaw, Anno 1589. in Monſier Coiutret his houſe, Principall of the facultie of Chirurgery in Paris, the number of 26. men, women, and children, infected, which were ſent vnto him by the Iuſtice, to diſcouer from whence came the originall of it, becauſe it was thought, that one infant did infect all the reſt: Whoſe Parents and Nurſe being both cleane, made the cauſe more difficult to be found out. Yet by diligent enquirie, the infection was found to haue his beginning frō the Midwife, who of a long time had been infected with that diſeaſe, and by receiuing ye child, infected it, by firſt breathing vpon the ſame, as beeing tender & delicate, ſo the more eaſie to receiue ſuch infection. Thereafter ſucking the Nurſe, did infect her, and ſundry other Nurſes, one after another, who by giuing ſuck to other chyldren, did infect them, and finally, the children did infect their Parents. So it was prooued, that by that chylde, there were infected to the number of threeſcore, leſſe and more: which perſons I ſaw, & cured the moſt part of them my ſelfe. I haue knowne diuers to haue been infected onely by kiſſing, of which nūber I haue healed one in Paris, who was infected by kiſſing a young Gentleman a ſutor of hers, who had Vlcers in his throat, proceeding from the ſame diſeaſe, in ſuch ſort, that ſhortly after all her hayre did fall, with externall paine of the ioynts, whom I healed, with the help of God and my confection. The ſaid Gentlewoman afore her comming to me, dyd infect ſundry chyldren, by lying, kiſſing, and drinking with them. Some infected onely by drinking with thoſe that were infected afore, as you haue heard: ſo that

it behoues vs to refraine familiar frequentation with ſuch people. I cured alſo a Gentlewoman in Paris, of a great Family, a virgin (as I found by my viſitation) which was infected with thys diſeaſe: the cauſe whereof I found to haue come by ſitting on a Priuie after an infected perſon. Likewiſe I healed a boy in Paris of the age of 15. yeeres, who was infected by going bare-foote vpon his Maſters ſpettle.
               
                  Gallen ſayth, Lib. de Febribus, cap. tertio, that it is daungerous to accompany thoſe that be in a conſumption and ſtincking breath'd, and thoſe that bee infected with the Plague, Leproſie, and ſuch other ſicknes which come by contagion, as thys doth. Many others I haue ſeene, which for briefenes I will omit. Now let vs come to the internall cauſe of this malady, which is corrupted meats, that doe ingender a putred flegmaticke nurature, or a burnt mellancholy; as diuers ſorts of hearbs, roots, fiſhes, fruites, with ſuch lyke rotten foode, where-with the French Army was nouriſhed at Naples, where thys malady began firſt to be knowne among Chriſtians. Yet will I not affirme, that the flegmatick or mellancholick humor is the onely cauſe of thys diſeaſe, but alſo other humors: yet the neerer that mens complexions approch to the flegmatick, the apter they are to receiue thys infection; which ought to be obſerued. For we ſee fewer Chollerick or Sanguins infected with thys dyſeaſe then the Mellancholick or Flegmatick: likewiſe more difficult to be cured, as we finde ordinarily by our experience. VVherein we muſt note, that after the Flegmatick complexion, followeth the Mellancholick, next the Sanguine, laſt of all the Chollerick, the which in deed is leaſt altered, becauſe among all the humors, it ſimbolizeth leaſt with the ſayd Pituitous humor, The humor ſo altered and corrupted, dooth actually let the action, eyther animall, vitall, or naturall: or two of them together, or all thē three, as well generally throughout all the body, as particularly in one member, as ordinarily happeneth in ſuch dyſeaſes. Some are of opinion, that it commeth of the imbecilitie of the vitall ſpirits, and naturall, like as ſomtyme wee ſee by experience. I knew, (when I vvas Chirurgian ordinary to the French and Spaniſh Regiment in Paris,) that 35. ſouldiers had carnally to doe wyth a woman infected, yet of the ſayde 35. onely ſeauen were infected with the fore-ſaid woman; which ſeauen were cold and weake men of complexion, and long in performing that act: the reſt were hote and robuſt, ſoone diſpatching the act, hauing the faculty ſtrong to withſtand the venim; and for this reaſon they were not inſected therewith. Diuers ſuch accidents haue I known. Fallopius is of the opynion, that the cauſe of thys infection, commeth often of the paſſion of the minde: for when a woman loueth not that man ſhee hath to doe with, ſhe heateth not her ſelfe, but lieth quietly, and ſo thruſteth not forth the venim, as ſome whores doe. In this I thinke it a manifeſt occaſion, that ſome bunglers and olde men, are not ſo commonly infected, as ſome young men, albeit they haue all to doe with one woman: becauſe alſo old men are dry, hauing the skin hard, the Gland therefore not ſo eaſie to receiue venim, as yee haue heard. In lyk manner women very common, gyue not ſo eaſily thys euill, as other women, who are leſſe infected, and not ſo common. The cauſe is, that common women take not ſo great pleaſure, becauſe they beeing accuſtomed night and day to exerciſe venerie, doe not excitat the humor ſo much as the other, who take greater pleaſure therein, by reaſon that they vſe not the act ſo often. I haue often knowne men infected therewith, who haue beene extreamly well loued of the woman, by reaſon ſhe tooke pleaſure with him, and ſo the vertue expultrixe was the ſtronger to put forth yt which was venomous, to the great hurt of the man. All theſe occaſions doe infect many, which infection, if it remaine any ſpace in the body, ſheweth certaine ſignes, as ye ſhall heare in the Chapter of ſignes.
            
            
               The fourth Chapter of the differences of the Spaniſh ſicknes.
               THE originall, and cauſe of this diſeaſe beeing knowne, it followeth to intreate of the differences of the ſame: touching the which we muſt vnderſtand, that it is ſomtime gentle, and moleſteth nothing, other whiles by little infection it doth ſodainly augment, and come to the ſtate of the maladie: ſomtime they paſſe many moneths and yeares, before it be knowne, eyther to the infected or to the Chirurgian, ſomtime

it occupieth onely the liuer, and conſequently the vaines, ſomtime it is ſpread ouer all the body, ſo that the hart and braines are ſomtime vexed with great accidents, according to the varietie of the venim, and of the body wherein it happeneth, ſometime with great ſimptoms, ſomtime ſmall. That, which occupieth the haire of the head, beard, & browes, without any feeling and hurting of the body, is the moſt ſimple ſort. The ſecond kind is worſe, which occupieth the skin with little ſpots, which waxe greater, ſomtime red, ſomtime yellow, which cannot be well extinguiſhed, except that the roote of the ſicknes be taken away. The third kind is greater, the which not onely maketh little ſpots, but alſo Puſtulles, and Tubercules, firſt, in the temples, forehead, and head, thereafter through the whole body, theſe are round and dry without matter Purulent, yet in time, if they be neglected, they increaſe, and become vlcers Virulens, and ſordides chiefely about the throat, noſe, and fundament, becauſe theſe places are more tender, and therefore ſo much the more eaſie to be vlcered. The fourth kind is that which is infixed in the ioynts and naturall parts, which makes great dolour, ſomtime ſpaſme and contraction of one member, or of diuers members together. The fifth kind is that which makes ſuch relaxation, that paralize followes in one member, or generally taketh away the motion of the whole body. The ſixth kind, is when it is inueterated, ſo that it poſſeſſeth and corrupteth the ſolide and firme parts, as bones, ſinewes, membrans, and tendons. The ſeauenth kind is that which cauſeth diſlocation of one, or diuers articles. The eight kind is that which maketh ſuch corruption & fracture in the midſt of the bones, ſomtime accompanyed with Herpes, and Darters furfurous, of the which ſome appeare in the ſoles of the feete, ſome in the head, ſome in the hands, and ſome through all the body. The ninth kind is that which occupieth diuers parts of ths head with extreame paine, but chiefely in the night, ſomtime with alteration of the ſcull. The tenth kind is that which cauſeth deafenes with difficultie of ſmelling, and alſo ablation of the fiue ſences naturals. The eleauenth cauſeth leproſie, which is incurable. The twelueth kind is, when the ſicke becommeth Ethick, & dyes in a conſumption. There are a number of others differences of this diſeaſe: Antonius Muſa ſayth, that there are two hundreth thirtie and foure kinds, but theſe which I haue ſet downe, are the moſt common, vnder the which all the reſt are comprehended. Furthermore, we muſt vnderſtand, that when this diſeaſe doth degenerate into leproſie, it happeneth in thoſe, who often times haue been vndiſcreetly handled by ignorant perſons, and when the body is ill prepared, eyther by intemperancie of lyſe or otherwiſe. VVhen it doth degenerate into a conſuming Feauer and doth become Ethick, which the Latines call Tabid, and that it is neere the noble parts, it happeneth in thoſe that haue beene often handled onely by Sudorfficks, and dry nouriture, as many ignorant perſons doe, thinking to drie vp the euill humors that way, and ſo drie vp the humor radicall, which of neceſſitie cauſeth the patient to become Ethick.
            
            
               The fifth Chapter of the ſignes of the Spaniſh ſicknes.
               THE ſignes of this diſeaſe doe commonly follow the temperature of the body diſeaſed. As if a perſon of the Sanguine temperature be infected, ſuch a one ſhall haue ordinarily paine and heauines in the head, but chiefely in the forehead, and rootes of the eyes, in the necke, and ſhoulders, in the arme, and often times in all the articles, great pulſation in the temples, appetite to vomit, with dulnes of the fiue naturall ſences, laſſitude of all the body, chiefely, when the partie ſleepeth, and after ſleepe the mouth clammie, the vaines of the eyes red, vlcers ſordids both in the ſecrets and other parts of the body, with inflamation and rednes diuers puſtulles in the head, face, and neck, and ſomtimes through all the body, (which for the moſt part are red, and inflamed) great aboundance, of ſweat, very ill ſauours, the vrine very red and thicke, great paine at ſuch time, as the humor Sanguine raigneth, which is from three in the morning, till nine, as ye may ſee in our Chirurgie in the Chapter of humors. If he, who is infected with this ſicknes, be of the humor bilious or Chollerick, he ſhall haue great drought with want of appetite, punctions throgh all his body like poynts of needles, paine in the right ſide of the head, the body becommeth leane, the face and eyes euill coloured, the mouth euill taſted, falling

of haire through all the body, with aboundance of drie puſtulles, which are more plentifull in theſe two humors, than in the other two, by reaſon, that theſe humors be more liquid, and ſo paſſe more eaſilie from the centre to the circumference of the body. He hath vlcers virulent in diuers parts of the body, chiefely in the yard, codds, and roofe of the mouth and throat, great paine at ſuch time as the humor chollerick raigneth, which is from nine in the morning, till three in the after-noone. If the patient be of temperature pituitous, or phlegmatick, he ſhall haue paine with heauines of the hinder part of the head, neck, armes, and legs, in all the articles, and ioynts, dimnes of ſight, little appetite, little drought, great coldnes in the head and ſtomack, debilitie of the parts neruous, trembling palſie, vvith attraction of ſome parts of the body, the mouth homide and clammie, the face and extremities ſwelled, great aboundance of white puſtuls without itch, ſo that the phlegme be not ſalt. If the phlegme be ſalt, there happen Serpins and impetigines, which we call commonlie Dortors furfurons, or cruſtous chiefely in the hands, and ſoles of the feete, and in the head, and ſomtimes in all the parts of the body: alſo great vlcers euill coloured, large, and hard round about, oftentimes Tophes and Nodoſities on the bones, great paine at ſuch time, as the humor raigneth, which is from three in the after-noone vntill nine. If the patient be of the humor mellancholike, eyther by nature, or accident, he ſhall haue paine in the left ſide of the head, alſo in his ſhoulders heauines in all the body, debilitie of the ſtomack. The body becommeth leane, or at the leaſt ſome part of it, all the body is euill coloured, but chiefely thoſe parts which are moſt infected with it, vnſauorie taſt in the mouth, falling of haire, the puſtls be hard and deepe but fewe in numher, many vlcers, and Canchors in diuers parts, ſwelling of the bones in the head, but eſpecially in the forehead, hemerands, deficultie of vrine, with aſtrection of the belly, the ſleepe is intercepted with great dolour, at ſuch time as the humor gouerns, which is from nine at night, vntill three at morning. Theſe be the ſignes ſimple, and particulerly for the knowledge of this ſicknes according to euery humor: to the end that euery one may haue better & more eaſie knowledge of this diſeaſe, I will ſet downe certaine generall ſignes, by the which ye may knowe the perſon to be infected, oft what complexion ſo euer he be. The firſt, and moſt common is hard vlcers in the ſecret parts of both ſex, ſwellings in the flanke called vſually Bubons or Apoſtumes virulens, running of the raines, voyding an infected humor, which proceeds from the kernels, called by the Latines Proſtata and Paraſtata, dolours of the head, legs, armes, and ſhoulders, chieſely in the ioynts, accompanied with ſwelling and hardnes, running along the Muskels, Nerues, Tendons, Perioſte, and other parts Neruonſe, in ſuch ſort that the ſicke is out of patience, ſo that he can neyther reſt, walke, ſleepe, nor lift his arme to his head. And this happeneth ſomtime in one part, ſomtime in diuers, alſo vlcers in the mouth and throat, with difficultie of ſwelling, puſtules about the forehead, which we call commonly the golden crowne, likewiſe in the rootes of the haire, and all ouer the head. More-ouer, in the Emunſtoires of the noble parts, as alſo other parts glandulous, and humids, and ſomtime ouer the whole body, falling of the haire of the head, beard, browes, and eye-lids, defluxion on the eyes, corruption of the teeth, and the pallet of the mouth. Somtime the whole vnula is conſumed, ſo that the diſeaſed ſpeake alway in the noſe, and and ſometime there is diſtention of the Perioſt, which is the membran that couers the bones vniuerſally. Furthermore, ſomtime the patient is drouſie, yet cannot ſleepe, chiefely at ſuch time of the night when the humor is in motion, the which happeneth rather at that time then at any other, for two cauſes, the firſt, becauſe the humor is moſt commonlie cold as the night is, the ſecond becauſe the poares are cloſed in the night, ſo that the euill humor doth not voyd, which by the opening of ye poares in the day doe purge. Yet al theſe ſignes doe not happen to euery diſeaſed perſon, nor yet in this order as you haue heard, for ſome appeare in one part, ſome in others, and in diuers perſons ſooner then in others, which falleth out according to the temperature of the diſeaſed. Often times there is but a fewe of theſe tokens found together, and therefore it behoueth to haue good iudgement. As for example, if there be vlcers in the yeard, being hard at the roote, and not deminiſhing by any application of particuler remedies, the malady is to be ſuſpected. Likewiſe

the running of the raines, and heate of vrine, accompanied with diuers accidents, as particuler convulſion, chiefely in the night, where there is erection of the yeard. More-ouer, vlcers in the necke of the bladder, in all the which if ordinary remedies doe not extinguiſh the venim, they are to be ſuſpected, as alſo tumors in the flanke, called Bubones which if they ſticke inward without breaking forth, they are euill. And in all theſe things I find no ſure remedie, but from the particuler cure, to the generall. Yet ſomtime men may haue this diſeaſe not hauing any of theſe tokens aboue mentioned, ſauing only little vlcers of a ſmall breadth, ſomtimes on the thighs, or on the codds, likewiſe women in the paps, and children in the fundament. Therefore in all theſe things there is required a good iudgement, to conſider the qualities and nature of ſuch vlcers, and to dreſſe them after the mnaner, which yee ſhall vnderſtand heereafter.
            
            
               The ſixth Chapter of the prognoſtick of the Spaniſh ſicknes.
               HAuing ſpoken of the tokens preſent and paſt of this diſeaſe, we muſt likewiſe ſpeake of the Future, to the effect that we may iudge of the cure, in what time it may be helpt, or whether it be incurable. Firſt then, wee muſt conſider that eyther the ſicknes is recent, or inueterate: if it be recent with fewe ſimptomes externall, as Puſtulles, falling of the haire, ſome vlcers in the ſecret parts, accompanied with great paine on the ſhoulders and articles. In this caſe, if the perſon be young, of good conſtitution, and the time conuenient, like as in ſpring-time, or Sommer, then thou mayſt prognoſtick that the true cure may eaſily follow, by vſing of ſuch familier and eaſie remedies, as ye ſhall heare in the cure. But if of long time, for great dolor, the members be retired, except that great remedies be vſed with great diſcretion, they remaine ſo. If it be old, inueterate with many ſimtomes, like as great dolors of all ſorts, as in the head, ſhoulders, and articles, Tophes and Nodoſities, with corruption of the bones, and vlcers maligne in diuers parts, the bodie extenuate and imbecill, and of euill temperature, full of euill humors, and ſcabbs of diuers ſorts, like vnto leproſie, and hath beene often cured, which happeneth through the ignorance of them, who take vpon them to cure the ſame, vſing onely one remedie, which is rubbing with quick ſiluer, for all the kinds of this diſeaſe, thou ſhalt prognoſtick that the curation will be hard and long. This ſomtime happeneth alſo by learned Chirurgians, who haue done their indeuour, yet the infection being ſo great, and occupying the vaines which be neere the lyuer, and the lyuer it ſelfe, and other noble parts, the ioynts and other parts ſpermatick, that hardly it will obey any remedie, and in this poynt thou ſhalt alſo prognoſtick, that the curation will be hard and long. Thoſe that eate and drinke much, lyuing without dyet and obſeruation of the vnnaturall things, albeit they be young, and of good temperature, yet they are as hardly cured as thoſe that are weake, drie, and conſumed with other ſickneſſes, and are healed with great difficultie, or elſe not at all. If the places and veſſels neere the hart be occupied, as I haue noted in ſundrie patients, and after that remedies be vſed, the ſicke become Ethick, and in a conſumption, then thou ſhalt iudge it to be incurable, and in that caſe thou ſhalt vſe no remedies, but Palliatiue, as in the Elephanticks, leproſies, and diuers other ſuch like diſcaſes. Neuertheleſſe, be diſcreete in giuing thy iudgement, for I haue cured Spaniards and French, both men and women, of diuers temperatures, who had often been treated both in Spaine, Lowe Countries, and Fraunce, accompanied with many greeuous Simptomes, Nodoſities in diuers parts of the body, vlcers in the mouth, and throat, ſo that the roofe of the mouth was falling, as alſo the pype which wee call Plectrum Vocis, the noſe, accompanied with diuers ſickneſſes on the eyes, greeuous torments, and all kind of dolors, which may be reckoned to be moſt intollerable, the articles all ſwelled, chiefely the knees, great paine in the extremities with vniuerſall extenuation, ſo that the parties become altogether Ethick. Although theſe haue beene ſeemed incurable, yet by vſing certaine medicines, but chiefely my confection, I haue healed them, contratie to many mens expectation. Truly the cure is difficill, Quoniam eſt eronica et cum malignitate coniuncta, but thoſe, who mend, become fat, albeit they were leane before, becauſe the blood is more purified, by the medicaments and

evacuations, as ſayth Nicholaus Maſſa. Now it reſteth to ſpeake of the curation, ſeeing we haue ſufficiently ſhowne the cauſes, ſignes, differences, and prognoſticks. But firſt I thinke it expedient to ſet downe the nature of ſome medicines, moſt commonly vſed, for the extirpation of this maladie.
            
            
               The ſeauenth Chapter of the nature of medicines moſt commonly vſed for the Spaniſh ſicknes, and firſt of Gaiac.
               THere are diuers remedies, which haue beene vſed by our Auncients, and approued very good, which we vſe at thys preſent for the curation of this diſeaſe, alwaies diuerſifying them, according to the temperature, the time and varietie of the Symptoms; which albeit they be diuers, yet heere we will onely ſpeake of thoſe which are moſt common, and neceſſary for the curation hereof, beginning at the Gaiac tree, which we call Lignum ſanctum. Conſolanus a Spaniſh Hiſtoriographer ſayth, that in the occidentall Indies, in an Ile called S. Dominick, thys tree groweth to a great height, moſt lyke the Walnut tree: the leafe thick and broade, bearing a fruite round and hard, & of a reaſonable greatnes, which is eaten of chyldren, and thought to be very wholſome for thoſe that are of a weake complexion. Iohannis Leonis Africanus, ſayth, that it beareth a certaine flower and ſeede, but becauſe we ſee none of it in thys Countrie, and it is not profitable for our purpoſe, we will ſpeake no more at this preſent of that matter, but will intreate onely of the tree it ſelfe. It is to be knowne, that of this tree there are three kindes, as ſaith Ioh. Monardus, in his 17. booke Epiſt. 3. The firſt is that which hath the fruite very great, and black within, interlaced with little vaines, of the which there is great aboundance in the Ile of S. Iohn. The ſecond kind is not ſo great, neither hath it ye hart ſo black, yet it hath like rayes as the other. Conſolanus ſayth, that thys hath great vertue in diuers other ſickneſſes, as Gouts, Sciaticks, paynes of ioynts, Catarrhes, Epilepticks, Pulmonicks, Hydropicks, and diuers diſeaſes of the kidneys and bladder, and generally for all cold diſeaſes. The third kind is ſmaller then eyther of the precedents, and is all white both within & without: the vaines in it are ſmaller then in ye others, as ſaith Sueſſanus Neapolitanus. That which is of the beſt ſort is of a meane greatnes, recent, dry, & vncorrupted; which beeing put in the fire, the ſubſtance doth appeare gummie, the collour yellow, with a meane palenes within, the barck cleauing hard to the tree. In the choyce of the tree you muſt obſerue theſe properties. In like manner there are three ſubſtances to bee obſerued in the tree, the firſt is the skin or barke, which drieth much, the ſecond is the rinde, and is white in culler, & not ſo drying, being more gummy: the third is the blacke within, called the hart, and hath more gummy humiditie, and leſſe drying; and that we vſe in delicate bodies and of rare texture, where there is no need of much drying. The ſecond we vſe in them that are weak, and the third, which is the barck, in ſtrong perſons, as the moſt drying. The greateſt is meeteſt for our vſe, which groweth in an Ile of Hiſpaniola noua, called Inſula beata, or Diui Iohannis, as ſaith Gartius Abortus, and hath great vertue for many diſeaſes. It diſſolueth & maketh thin, it mundifieth, it prouoketh ſweat, it ſtayeth vrin, it dryeth and corroborateth the ventricle, and all the reſt of the entralls, it conſumeth the ſtinck of the mouth, it is good for the euill temprature of the lyuer, and cold, that commeth eyther of colde drinck or meate; it is good for obſtructions and Hydropſies. It diſpatcheth the ſuperfluous & colde humors of the body: it is good for Catarrhes of the head, all kinds of Goute, all diſeaſes of the Nerues, all Vlcers, and moſt excellent for many kinds of the Spaniſh ſicknes by reaſon of the ſecret vertue which is in it.
            
            
               The eyght Chapter, of Salſperill.
               THys which we call Salſperill is a plant that hath many rootes, and beareth neither flower nor fruite, & is brought from the Indies, of the which there are two ſorts, the one hath the barck thick & fat, the other thin and dry, which are both good, beeing dry, recent, & not putrified. It hath great vertue for vlcers that remaine, after the cure, for Fiſſures about the fundament, Tophes on the head, legs, and

armes. It is thought by ſome to haue more vertue thē the Gai
                     ••
                  , it offendeth not the ſtomack, it procureth ſomtime looſnes: it groweth for ye moſt part in the Country of Peru; it is hote in the ſecond degree. There is no paine ſo vohement, which the dedoction heere of, (being taken in tyme) doth not mittigate; which decoction is good alſo in diuers other dyſeaſes, as Catarrhes, diſtilling from the head, in hidden cauſes of Tumors, which are hard to cure, and ſcrofulus, and from a cold ſtomack it breaketh winde. It is beſt vſing of it in the Spring, or Autum.
            
            
               The ninth Chapter. Of Chine.
               CHine is a certaine roote, which cōmeth out of the Eaſt Indies, or region of China, for the which cauſe it is called Chine. It is 3. hand-bredth hie, all knotry, and browne of cullor, white without, & red within, of a meane weight if it be good, it hath few leaues, it groweth neer the Sea, or grounds that are mirie, ſome in woods, the roote is knotty, of a hand-bredth hie, fat, well taſted. It is in great eſtimation among the Indians, thought to cure great difficult ſickneſſes, but chiefely the Venerian. Alſo for old Vlcers and wounds, Tumors, Chirrus, paines of the articles, head, and ſtomack, defluxion, and Catarrhes: old diſeaſes of the Nerues, and parts Neruous, alſo all cold and mellancholike ſickneſſes, and is more dry then Gaiac. It conſumeth all kindes of excrements, clenſeth the entrailes, and healeth the obſtructions; it is excellent for diſlocations that happen of internall cauſes, it both dryeth and comforteth.
               We read that Charles the fift Emperour, being greeued with the Gout, was cured by the decoction hereof. It is reported by men of credite, that in Countries where it groweth, it healeth the Spaniſh ſicknes, and all the ſymtoms that follow thereof, without vſing any other remedy. We ſee by experience that it far paſſeth Gaiac. It hath vertue to make fat, thoſe that are leane, as commonly they are who haue been tormented with this ſickneſſe. Theſe vertues and ſundry other are ſette downe by Garcius Abortus, Mediciner to the Vice-roy of the Indies. It may bee giuen to all ages and temperatures, alſo in Feuers, which may not be doone with Gaiac. There is another kind of it brought out of Florida, which is not altogether of ſuch vertue as thys.
            
            
               The 10. Chapter. Of the nature of Quick-ſiluer, and the true preparation thereof.
               IFinde great diuerſitie of opinions amongſt the Auncients, touching Quickſiluer, for the moſt part eſteeme it to be cold and humide. Auicen in his ſecond canon, noteth it to be cold and moyſt in the ſecond degree. Gulielmus Placentinus, Arnaldus de villa nouae, and Placarius, thinks it to be cold in the fourth degree, which may eaſily be perceiued, for it is troth that it repelleth the humor from the circumference to the centre, & cauſeth by the great coldnes hereof, Palſie and trembling, and the members to be inflexible, as ſayth Plinie, Dioſcorides, and Palmarius. Auicen ſaith, that it cauſeth a ſtincking breath, with dimnes of the ſight, falling of the teeth, which we ſee to be true in ſuch as haue thys ſicknes, and haue often been rubbed therewith. Some eſteeme it to bee hote and dry, but few approued Authors are of that opinion. There are two kinds of it, naturall and artificiall, the naturall is found in the vaines and denns of the earth, as ſayth Plinie and Dioſcovides, and is called by them, Hydargirus. It is found alſo amongſt Mettals, as reporteth Dioſcarides in his firſt booke. The artificiall is made of Minium, and ſcrapings of Marble, as writeth Vitruvius in his ſeauenth booke of his Architecture. Some of it is found & drawn out of Lead, and is eaſily knowne from the other, being of cullor browne, and black, and of ſubſtance thick, leauing ſome reſt behind, like the excrements of Leade, which is not meete forthys purpoſe. That which is cleane white and ſubtile is good. Neuertheleſſe, hauing choſen the moſt proper for our vſe, it muſt be yet prepared and purified after this ſort folowing. Firſt you ſhal take ſo much of it as you will vſe, and boyle it 6. or 7. howres in water, putting in ſuch things with it as haue the vertue to coroborate & comfort the parts netuouſe, as alſo to purifie it, like as Sage, Roſemary, Camomell, Melilot, Tyme, with other

neruall hearbs. That being done, ſtraine it through a cloth, then after extinguiſh it, according to the maner which you ſhall heare hereafter; and incorporate it with a little Swines greace. Being well compounded, you muſt melt it on the fire, thē taking it of, you ſhal perceiue the Quickſiluer ſeperated from the greace: the excrement and leaden ſubſtance ſhall remaine in the ſame greace: Hauing ſo done, you ſhall ſtrayne it through a peece of Leather, to the end that it may be very pure, then after, extinguiſh it againe, to the effect that you may the better incorporate it with other Swines greace, or with ſuch medicaments as you ſhall heare. If you will haue your oyntment white, and neither blacke nor gray, you muſt make it after thys order inſuing. Take your Quickſiluer and beate it in a morter with Vinegar and ſalt, then poure out that Vinegar and ſalt, and put in new, and ſo beat it with 3. or 4. ſundry ſhyftings, and ſo your oyntment ſhall be white. But to extinguiſh the ſame, you muſt put into the morter with it a little ſyrop of Roſes, or oyle of Petroly, or iuyce of Lemmons, or faſting ſpittle, or a little oyntment wherein Quickſiluer hath beene put, for that is the beſt, and will ſooneſt extinguiſh it. Then beate them together, till ſuch time as there be not any apparence of the Quickſiluer, leaſt that beeing not well extinguiſhed, it ſhould returne to the old forme. So being well quenched, as is requiſite, you ſhall make your oyntment (hauing likewiſe prepared the Swines greace) in thys manner. Melt it on the fire, and boyle it with the hearbs before mentioned, or with others of like vertue, beeing all chopped ſmall: then all being boyled together, you ſhall ſtraine it through a cloth, and mingle with it a little Iris of Florence, which wil take away the ſauour of the greace, then after, compoſe the oyntment thus.
               
                  Recipe axungiae ſuilae lib. 1. olei Cammomillae, et Anetini an vnc. i. Radicum anulae parum cō
                     trito, vnc. quat. therebentinae venetae, vnc. ſs. Argenti viui preparati, vnc. quat. Incorporentur omnia ſimul ſpatio viginti quatuor horarum, fiat linementum vt decet.
               
               I vſe alwayes in ſtead of the Swines greace, the oyntment called Roſatum meſeuis, and put to one pound of thys oyntment, fiue ounces of Quickſiluer, oyle of Bayes and Anniſeede, of eyther halfe an ounce, ſo with that I gyue euery day one friction, or once in two dayes, according to the temprature and ſtrength of the Patient, the which muſt be conſidered by the skilfull Chirurgian.
            
            
               The 11. Chapter. Of the generall cure of the Spaniſh ſicknes.
               AS for the curing of thys diſeaſe, it ſhall be requiſite to vſe all the 3. parts of Phiſicke, which are Chirurgery, Dyet, and Pharmacy: firſt of all we muſt obſerue the dyet, which is the forme of life, for as Auicen ſayth, the diſordered courſe of life, may corrupt the beſt complexion, & being well gouerned, may correct the worſt. Then let vs begin the cure of thys diſeaſe by good gouernment of lyfe in the ſixe vnnaturall things, which are, the ayre, the meate and drinke, and all that wee vſe for our ſuſtenance, the motion and reſt of our body, vnder the which is comprehended venerie, ſleepe, and waking, the retention, and repletion, the affections of the minde: theſe thinges muſt be obſerued, for without the obſeruation of them, it will be hard to cure this ſicknes. The ayre muſt be cleane, pure, and temperat. The meate ought to bee nouriſhing, and of eaſie digeſtion, that neither ingenders thicke nor ſharpe humors. It muſt be more dry then moyſt, abſtayning from fiſh, ſalt fleſh, all kinde of ſpyces and fruites, becauſe theſe ingender euill humors. Abſtaine alſo from all manner of Pulſe, as Peaſe and Beanes, alſo from Beefe, Swines fleſh, Goats, Hares, and Rammes fleſh; from all ſort of Water-foule, Onyons, Colewoort, and all kind of rootes, theſe are hurtfull, and breede euill blood. Eate onely Mutton, Veale, Kid, Chickins, Doue, Partridge, & ſuch like: you may alſo vſe the broth of them. Your bread muſt be of Wheate, eyther Bisket; or at the leaſt well baked. Abſtaine from Wine, for it is an enemy to thys dyſeaſe; vſe onely the decoction of Gaiac, Salſparill, or Chine, according to the temperature of the diſeaſed. Vſe a little exerciſe, for reſt is hurtfull, except there be great payne in the ioynts, or in ſome other part; Let not the exerciſe be violent, for it diſſolueth the naturall heate, ſleepe not long, becauſe it fills the head with vapors. VVe muſt alſo obſerue the paſſions of the minde, chiefely mellancholy.

Be alwaies merry, for then the naturall heate doth preuaile, and ſo helpeth much to the cure. Greefe, feare, and anger, do much hinder the operation of the Medicines. We muſt take heed to the excrements, that the vapors aſcend not to the head and other principal parts. So the Patient muſt haue often Clyſters made after thys manner. Recipe maluae Althea violarea, et Mercurialis an ma. i. Beulliant ad lib. 1. Addendo olei Violati vnc. quat. Caſſiae vnc. i. Salis drag. i. fiat Clyſter. Which you muſt vſe at the leaſt euery three dayes: or euery foure dayes foure drams of my confection.
               Next, vnder the Pharmacie, we ſhall obſerue all kindes of medicins taken inwardlie, namely, Decoction, Syrrops, Apoſymes, Iuleps, Purgations, Conſerues, Electuaries, Clyſters, Gargariſmes, Peſſers, and Baths, which ſhall be made onely of running water, warmwiſe, which we call Balneum aquaedulcis: yet ye may copoſe it according to the diuerſity of the accidents, and temperature of the diſeaſes, as ye ſhall heare at large in my ſurgery, in the chapter of Baths. Yet commonly we make them of water wherein is put Mallowes, Violets, Pellitory of the wall, Fumitory, Patience, Plantine, Cammomell, Mellelot, dry Roſes, of each a handfull: and it ſhall be well done to ſeeth thoſe hearbs a little before you put them in the Bath. The Medicins which be applyed outwardly, are comprehended vnder the Pharmacy, like as oyntments, playſters, Serots, Oyles, Kataplaſmes, Embrocations, Fomentations, Epythemes, Saſſats, Synapiſmes, and Perfumes, the which things muſt be vſed according to the kind of the ſicknes, for to take away the euill humor contayned in the body. But firſt the body and humors muſt be prepared with conuenient remedies, as hereafter you ſhall heare, to the end the euacuation may be the eaſier & ſurer. Firſt of all the body ſhall bee gently purged with Confection Hamet, or ſome ſuch lyke thing; the next day, open the vaine moſt apparant a reaſonable widenes, if there be plenitude. Afterward vſe the remedies ſet downe by Ioh. Deuigo, cap. de morbo Gallico, for the preparation of the humors: or this that followeth. Recipe Syru. de fumo terrae minori, vnc. 1. de ſucco Endiuiae, drag. 6. Aquary Endiuiae, capil. ven. et fumit. vnc. 1. The Patient ſhal vſe of thys the ſpace of three or foure dayes, one ounce euery day two howres before meate. Afterward he ſhall be purged with thys medicine. Recip. ſol. ſenae mund. vnc. ſs. ſem. foenic. dulcis drag. 1. Bullian in ſ. q. decocti pectora. Et in col. diſſole diapr. ſol. drag. 2. Syr. roſ. ſol. ex agar. & ſena, vnc. 1. fiat potio, quam cap. 3. horis ante inſculum. Afterwarde, hee ſhall bathe himſelfe 3. or 4. dayes, and ſweat a little in the bed when he is come out of the bath.
               Theſe things being done, he ſhall vſe thys ſyrrop the ſpace of fiue or ſixe dayes. Re. Fumit. cicor. capil. ven. Enula Camp. Bugloſsi, Endiuiae, an m. 1. ſs. Pollitrei. m. ſs. Polipod. paſſul. Sebeſten an vnc. 1. Prunor. dam. num. 25. Pomor. acetoſori vnum tantum parum. conquaſſatu
                        ••
                      vini Granatori. lib. ſs. Aquam Endiuiae, Fumit. Bugloſsi, an lib. 1. ſs. Bulliant omnia ſecundū artem, ad conſumpt. tertiae partis: deinde colentur. Et col. add. Zacli. q. 5. Cum vnc. 2. Succi Fumit. et Endiuiae. De quo patiens ſumet in aurora, vnc. 1. ſs. Vel vnc. 2. Cum aquis capil. ven. et Endiuiae atque Fumiterrae. The humors being ſo prepared, the body ſhall bee purged after thys manner. Recipe Cathol. drag. 10. diſſol. in decoct. cicor. Agrim. Borag. in quo bullierint fol. Senae drag. 2. Cum ſem. foenic. dulcis, addendo ſyr. Roſ. Pallidari. vnc. ſs. fiat potio ſumenda. 3. horis inſculum. The next day hee muſt bee let blood in the Baſilike or median dexter. Theſe things beeing well performed, are very needfull for the preparation of the humors. And theſe things muſt alwaies be vſed before the generall cure. The Chirurgian, which is the thyrd, putteth in execution theſe thinges, if hee be learned and wiſe, as hee ought, and well furniſhed with things belonging to his Art, knowing not only the Chirurgery, but alſo the principles of Phiſick, as well in the Theorick as Practick, by reaſon that it is requiſite for him, to ordaine both dyet and pharmacy, otherwiſe, hee is vnperfect. Gallen ſaith in his introduction to Phiſick; that Pharmacie hath neede of Diet and Chirurgerie, in lyke manner, Chirurgerie hath need of Diet and Pharmacie. There are three other things to be obſerued of the Chirurgian, to wit, the eſſence, the cauſe, and ſymptoms of the maladie, as ye haue heard, the diueſitie of the temperatures, and the fit remedies for curing hereof, for theſe things beeing vnknowne, the true cure hardlie followeth: but onely by hazard and not by rules of Arte, as the blind man caſteth his ſtaffe.
               
                  
For theſe cauſes wee muſt not meruaile at the malignitie and crueltie of thys ſickneſſe, nor the ſore torments of the ſick; for there are manie euill diſpoſed perſons in all Countries, who endanger a great manie Patients, by not vſing of fit remedies, taking one medicine for all ſorts of this diſeaſe, which is much againſt reaſon. For according to the temperature and nature of the parties diſeaſed, the remedie muſt bee changed, as Gallen hath written at large in his bookes De locis affectis. There are alſo many who profeſſe to knowe ſecrets, and diabolick charmes for curation hereof, but all ſuch things are falſe, & the Authors there of are worthie to be moſt greeuouſly puniſhed, for ſuch things cauſe the ſicknes to waxe more rebellious, ſo that hardlie afterwards it obeyeth anie remedie, and then the poore Patient dieth moſt miſerably. Theſe things happen by not knowing the nature of the maladie, and remedies, not the varietie of the bodies, and the nature of the partie infected. VVee muſt vnderſtand, that ſtrong people, as Labourers, Marriners, and ſuch as are vſed to ſore labour, endure more violent remedies & ſtronger euacuations, then thoſe which are weaker and more delicate, as women, ſick folks, tender children, Eunuches and ſuch like: for ſuch perſons the medicine muſt be gentler, and the euacuations leſſe, otherwiſe, in vſing of ſtrong remedies, ye put them in danger of death. Heereby it may eaſilie appeare, that according to the temperature we muſt diuerſifie the remedies: for in ſanguine and chollerick complexions, we muſt vſe other medicins then in the phlegmatick and melancholick. So that thoſe which ſay they haue ſecrets and drinks for all ſorts, are rather to be called deceiuers and Iuglers, then true miniſters of our Art.
            
            
               The twelueth Chapter ſheweth how by nine diuers wayes this diſeaſe may be cured.
               THere are diuers learned men, who of long time haue ſought out, and put in practiſe diuers remedies, as well generall, as particuler, for the extirpation of this maladie, of the which our ordinarie practiſioners vſe commonly foure. Firſt, by decoction of Gaiac, ſecondly by vnctions, thirdly by emplaſters, fourthly by perfumes, or ſuffumigations. But becauſe theſe wayes for the moſt part are both dangerous and and vncertaine, as I haue often prooued, beeing alſo a thing that bringeth infamie to the diſeaſed, by reaſon, that this manner of cure, yea, though it were certaine, could not be performed without the knowledge of many. Therefore I haue taken paines, both by daily practiſe and obſeruation, as alſo by conference with learned men touching this matter, to find a way more certaine for the curation, and not ſo dangerous, nor painfull for the patient, which may be performed, without keeping eyther bed or chamber, and that without knowledge of any man, except it be inueterate. And it is performed by Pils and decoction of white wine, decoction of Salſparel, by electuarie, & by my Arabick powder, which before me haue not beene practiſed: and I may aſ
                     •
                  ure them all to be moſt certaine for the curation of this diſeaſe, & to haue beene experimented by me, in moe than two hundred patients of diuers Nations, in curing of whom, there happened no accident, but perfect health. I can, by the like meanes, and inuention of mine, cure Children of two moneths old. Now ſeeing, by Gods helpe, I haue found out things ſo profitable for the recouerie of health, in an infinite number of people, I will not hide it, but publiſh the ſame ſo plainly, that euery man by his owne induſtrie, may attaine to the knowledge heereof. But firſt I will ſet downe the common way, daylie practiſed, beginning with the firſt, which is the decoction of Gaiac, and ſo proceede with the reſt, after the ſame order, to the end, that all men may knowe, both the vulgar and auncient way, and alſo the newe, found out and practiſed by mine onely dilligence.
            
            
               The 13, Chap. to cure the Spaniſh diſeaſe by decoction of Gaiac, which is the firſt way.
               AS for this manner of cure, that is done onely by decoction, you ſhall heare the forme hereof, after the manner that is ordinarilie vſed, like as I haue often proued my ſelfe. But that I euer healed any onely by that way, I will not ſay, not withſtanding that there is no Surgion in Fraunce that hath cured that diſeaſe, more then I. Neyther coulde I euer learne of any famous Surgion that would affirme

it to be a true cure. Yet the Spaniards and Italians be of an opinion, that it may be done. Their reaſon is, that the firſt Spaniard that was infected there-with in the occidentall Indies, in an Ile called S. Dominick, hauing an Indian to his ſeruant who profeſſed to heale this diſeaſe, onely by that decoction was healed by him, who did alſo heale many others. So by his example diuers others doe vſe yt way. But I anſwer: At that time the ſicknes was not ſo venimous as now, neyther gaue they it leaſure to inueterat as we doe, nor yet was the people of our temperature, being for that cauſe more eaſie to be healed. Among the foure wayes to heale this diſeaſe, I eſteeme this to be the moſt weake & moſt vncertaine, the which opinion is confirmed by all thoſe that haue written, and practiſed in this matter. Neuertheleſſe by our experience we find it a remedie, albeit not altogether ſufficient for the exturpation of this ſicknes, yet a great helpe to it, as alſo to many other diſeaſes, where neede is to heate, attenuat, prouoke ſweat, and drie moderatlie. So that I thinke it ſhould be rather called a preparation to the cure, then a perfect or true cure. For ſeeing it is not ſufficient for the cure of a ſimple ſicknes, as of a defluxion or Catharre, (this we ſee by our daylie practiſe) the which is healed by ſimple remedies, then much more it muſt be weake for the taking away of this ſicknes: the which is of ſuch nature, as ſayth Palmanius, that often it receiueth no curation, notwithſtanding the vſe of all proper remedies, which make a great euacuation, as well laxatiue as others. Yet I confeſſe, that there is ſome hidden facultie that helpeth much, by reaſon that it heateth, rarifieth, and prouoketh both vrine, and ſweat, and is alſo ſomwhat propper againſt the venim, conſuming a part of the humors that be moſt ſubtill, ſo appeaſeth the dolor for a certaine time, but the primitiue cauſe doth remaine with the moſt part of the humors which be deepe, thicke, and groſſe, of the which commeth Tophes, and Nodoſities, in diuers parts of the body, chiefely in the leggs, armes, and head, accompanied with dolors. Alwayes let it be vſed with a good method & regime, with preparation of the humors, as you haue heard in the generall Chaprer. So doing, the venim is almoſt withdrawne, if the ſicknes be recent and the patient of a good temperature. Therefore I will briefely ſet downe the preparation of this decoction; the time propper to vſe it, and the forme how it ſhall be vſed, with the regime that ſhould be obſerued in the vſage heereof, at all times. As touching the preparation, after it be put in powder, ſo much as you will vſe, you muſt ſteepe it 24, houres in water, for by the long ſteeping, it receaueth more force, the water muſt be warme, and vpon one pound of the tree, put ten pounds of water, eyther Fountaine, or Riuer, as counſelleth Montanus of Hermodact. Drag. ij. That beeing done, it may be made in diuers manners, but the moſt part doe ſeethe it in a weake fire, in a pot of earth or Copper, well couered, ſo that no ayre auoyde: let it ſeethe till the ſecond, or third, or fourth part be conſumed, which ſhall be done according vnto the indication, and temperature of the perſon. Some doe make it by diſtillation. But whatſoeuer faſhion you make it of, a little before the full concoction, add ſome Licorice ſmall broken, to the effect it be more pleaſant, ſo retire it from the fire, and being refreſhed, ſtraine it through a cloth, and keepe it cloſe in bottels for thine vſe, the vvhich ſhall be in the morning, at ſuch time as thou wilt ſweat. Therafter thou ſhalt make a ſecond decoction, to drink in the meales, and in other ſuch houres, as ſhall be found to be expedient. It ſhall be made in this forme. Put to the grounds at the reſt of the other decoction, as much water as before, and ſeethe it as the other, but let it not conſume ſo much, by reaſon you ſhall vſe long, and much of it. VVe put to it, for the corroboration of the ſtomack, Coriander, Anniſeed, Cinamon, & ſuch like. The time moſt propper to vſe the firſt decoction, is in the morning and after-noone, long time after meate, taking a greater meaſure in the after-noone, then before noone. If the patient be ſtrong, and the ſicknes great, let the quantitie be greater, and in Winter, more then in Sommer, and in cold folkes, more then in hote folkes. The forme how it ſhall be vſed, is after this manner: that he that vſeth it, muſt be in bed warme, and in a hote ayre, or if the weather be cold, the Chamber muſt alwayes b
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  ote, and verie cloſe, and the ayre rectified by odorifferous things, the patient muſt not goe forth, for it is dangerous to expoſe the body to the ayre, the poares being open, as alwayes happeneth

after ſweat. It muſt be taken warme, to the end it may doe the office the better, as alſo that by the cold, it hurt not the concoctrix vertue of the ventricle. The quantitie you ſhall giue, is Vnc. viij, or vij, or vj. Hauing ſo taken it, the patient muſt be couered with clothes, which muſt be warme and light. The ſweat muſt not be violent, for by our experience we ſee, that albeit it be not violent, yet it weakeneth the body in ſuch a ſort, that we are oft forced to leaue the propper cure, and giue order to the accidents: and the like may happen by the exceſſiue heate of the Chamber, ſo that good iudgement is required in that matter. Somtime for the thicknes of the skin, nature doth not eaſilie prouoke ſweat, for the prouocation wherof it ſhall be well done▪ to put to the feete and ſhoulders, bottels or bladders full of the ſame decoction, that be very warme. So couer well the head, as alſo the reſt of the body, in ſuch ſort that nothing be vncouered, ſauing onelie the mouth and noſe. Before that you take the potion, it ſhall be well done to make light frictions with hote clothes, chiefely on the parts moſt dolorous, to the end the poares be the eaſier opened, and alſo to prouoke ſweat. After he hath ſweat one houre or two, as hee may eaſily indure, you ſhall drie him with hote clothes, beginning firſt at the parts which be oppoſit to the dolours, next to the parts dolents, and through the reſt of the body: tub well the head, and in time of ſweating, drie oft the face, according as you perceaue it to be moiſt. Being ſo dryed, and the hote clothes taken from him, hee ſhall refreſh him ſelfe as before, in his bed, keeping him well from the cold, which might cauſe obſtruction of the poares and paſſages, and might bee occaſion to hinder the ſenſible and inſenſible tranſpiration. Two or three houres after he be refreſhed, and the motion ceaſed, he may dine, vſing aliments of good iuice, and according to the regiment hereafter ſet downe. Then foure houres after meat he ſhall take a draught, as before of this decoction, vſing them as before, and ſo continue 10, or 20, dayes, according vnto the forces of the patient, and nature of the diſeaſe, vſing euery three dayes eyther Gliſters, or ſome potion laxatiue, according vnto the nature of the humor that domaineth. For often by the great ſweats, the belly not being looſe, the excrements doe-drie, and ſo doe much offend. Thoſe that vſe to cure by this way, make their decoction ſtronger in the end, to the effect it be more deſiccatiffe, as alſo the regime of life more ſtraight and rigorous, and this way they continue fiue or ſixe weekes, ſweating euery day once or twice, the ſpace of 25. dayes, the reſt of the time they vſe good regime, and drinke no other drinke, for in that time ſay they, albeit he ſweat not, yet the poares that are opened ſhall alwayes vapour out ſome vapours or ſprites venimous, ſo in that time they eſteeme them to be healed. But the truth is, as I haue oft ſeene, that this forme doth nothing, ſaue onely hide the ſicknes, and appeaſe the dolors for a time, ſo that it is alwayes recidiue, and oft times by the long and violent vſage heereof, the humors are rendred more drying, maling, and burned, of the which come miſerable ſimptoms, as I haue often ſeene. In this time the regime is very ſtraight. VVhereof commeth great hurt for the ſtraightnes heereof, ordayning onely ſo much bread, with ſuch a number of plums, as is not ſufficient to entertaine nature: For in long ſickneſſes (as ſayth Hippocr. in his 1, Booke, 4, Apho.) that ouer-ſtraightnes of lyfe is alwayes dangerous, ſpeciallie in people that are accuſtomed to eate much. For (as ſayeth the ſame Author) cuſtome is a ſecond nature. Therefore they muſt not be reſtrayned ſo ſoone, nor ſo much from their wonted vſe. In like manner, that ſtraight way of lyfe with the decoction, doth drie and burne the blood, and other good humors, and doth onely conſume a part of the ſubtileſt of the euill humor, and the groſſeſt remaineth. So by this forme of proceeding, the moſt part of the people may not, nor hath not, the force to endure that hard intertainment, albeit it were vailable.
               I haue ſeene ſundry, who by the great vſage of this, are become altogether vncurables. Theſe faults are committed by ſome ſimple Barbers, and other ignorant fellowes, who although they knowe themſelues to be ignorant, yet beeing moſt arrogant, not onely in this, but alſo other ſickneſſes, doe take vpon them to cure and heale euery diſeaſe, hauing their onely recourſe to the dyet, by the which they ruine infinit number of people, ignoring the maladie, the remedies, and the temperature of the patient; not conſidering whether

the ſicke haue force to ſupport that manner of traitment or no: and alſo whether the humors be prepared, or if they neede prepatation, or if their dyet be propper for the diſeaſe, vſing the ſame remedie in children and old folks. Aske them the reaſon, they will aunſwer you, that they haue cured many, but neyther doe they ſpeake of the reaſon, not of thoſe that they haue killed. God defend all Chriſtians from ſuch a kind of Empirickes. The true regime that we ſhould vſe in this ſicknes, muſt be wiſely done, as well for the nature of the maladie, as for the malice of the accidents. As for the nature of the maladie, the age, the region, the time of the yeare, with diuers other circumſtances, are to be conſidered. And according vnto these things, the regime of life muſt be obſerued, eyther by adding, or by diminiſhing. In like manner, in theſe Countries that be cold, the naturall heate, retireth to the centre of the body, ſo that the concoction is done the better, and therfore they haue better appetite, as ſayeth Hippocr. in his 15, Aphor. & firſt Booke. Alſo Gallen in his Commentarie, where he ſayeth. In Winter and Spring-time the ventricle is naturallie hote, and therfore at that time the body ſhould be more nouriſhed. For oftentimes the lacke of nuriture doth conſume the radicall humiditie, by the action of the ſame heate, therefore our nuriture muſt be of a reaſonable quantitie, and alſo of good iuice, like as Mutton, Veale, Kidds, Capons, Chickins, Feſſants, Partriches, and little Birds commonly vſed, leauing all water Fowles: the which ſhall be ſomtimes roſted, and ſomtimes ſodden, as it ſhall be found expedient. All things muſt be of light digeſtion, and of little excrement. You ſhall abſtaine from plums, for although the decoction hereof be cordiall, the plumme it ſelfe is terreſtre, and melancolick. Alſo abſtaine from meate that ingender groſſe humors and vitious, like as fiſh, the which is of nature pituitous, and full of crudities, like as ſalt meate, Spicerie, Onyons, Muſtard, and ſuch like, which may heate and inflame the blood, and lyft vp hote and ſharpe vapours to the head and braines. The bread muſt be of wheat, well baked, for ſo it remayneth longer in the ventricle. It ſhall be well done to put with it the powder of Anniſeede, and Coriander, for the ſtrengthning of the ſtomack. Some men counſaile to vſe onely two or three ounces a day, the which wee obſerue not in our diets: for this our diet is as who would ſay, Proba victus ratio, that is, good nuriture, and ſuch a quantitie as agreeth with the temperature of the bodie, with the nature of the ſicknes, and with the time of the yeere, ſo that no man can ſet downe definitlie any diet, vnknowning both the Patient and the diſeaſe. Let him eate ſodden fleſh at dinner, and at ſupper alſo, if he be of a very hote temperature, or els hee ſhall vſe roſted at ſupper, in little quantitie, or in ſtead of that, ſome reaſonable quantitie of Reiſons, the which doe corroborate the entrals. His ordinary drinke ſhall be of the ſecond decoction; compoſed as you haue heard, drinking as much as he thirſteth. If at any time he be weake, and accuſtomed to drink Wine or Ale, he may vſe a little Wine, mingled with the ſaid decoction. He muſt abſtaine frō ſleepe in the after-noone, for it filleth the head with vapours and exhallations, augmenteth the dolors and Catarrhs. Vſe reaſonable exerciſe, & abſtaine from all affections of the minde that troubleth or inflameth the ſpirits and humors. It ſhall be well done to abſtaine altogether frō the act venerian: for it is a chiefe cauſe which hindereth the ſenſible and inſenſible tranſpiration, and euacuation of humors vicious, but reuokes them to the inward part, and weakeneth much the parts neruous. After thys forme ſometime remaineth intemperature in the liuer, which is for the moſt part hote, & in that we ordaine ſuch things as haue the vertue to refreſh and temper theſe parts. Sometimes it happeneth, that through the great ſweat and much charging of clothes, that the externall parts of the body be verie excrementous, and in that, wee bathe the Patient to clenſe him. For the ſame purpoſe wee vſe the decoction of Chine, the which hath vertue to prouoke ſweat in like manner, and dryeth and maketh fat thoſe that be leane. In making of this decoction, you muſt cut it in ſmall peeces, and take 2. ounces of it and ſteepe it in 8. pynts of warme water, the ſpace of 24, howers, then ſeeth it in an earthen pot till the thyrd part be conſumed, and keepe it cloſe and warme by the fire. Vſe 8, or 10, ounces of it in the morning, and alſo in the after-noone, obſeruing the regime aboue ſpecified, & make in like maner a ſecond decoction of this as of ye other. This is ye way ye I vſe to cure by decoction.
            
            
               
               The 14. Chapter ſheweth the way to cure by friction, which is the ſecond way vſed by our Auncients.
               THis way of cure which was moſt commonly vſed by our auncients to all men, is done by frictions and vnctions, the which things are conuenient for ſome people, ſuch things obſerued as you haue heard in the generall Chapter, and that the Vnguent be well compoſed, after the forme of Ioh. Carpenſis, who was the firſt inuenter of vnction with Quickſiluer. Yet was it neither thought by himſelfe, nor by oothers, meete to be vſed at all times, nor for all ſorts of temperatures and diſpoſitions. For to ſome it weakeneth the entrals and ſolide parts of the body, remaining ſometimes in the body, which cauſeth leanenes, trembling, falling of the teeth, and diuers other accidents. Therefore it muſt be vſed with great iudgment, conſidering well firſt, if the ſick can vſe any other maner of medicine, and if the ſicknes be inueterat, ingendred of groſſe humors and vitious, and adherant to the ſolide parts, the which happeneth moſt commonly to ſuch as haue been oft cured afore; conſidering alſo if there be Nodoſities in the leggs & armes, vehemence of dolor in the head & ioynts, the which accidents render the body and vertues hereof weake, by reaſon of the vehement and continuall dolors. When ſuch things doe happen, the friction may be vſed to the inferior people, that hath no great meanes to gette deerer cure: yet alwaies the body and humors muſt be prepared, as ye haue heard in the generall chapter; and the frictions vſed with diſcrerion, as ye ſhall heare, and not to rub immoderatly, as do many ignorants, who doe miſchiefe to the people by their vnskilfulneſſe, thinking to take away thoſe humors that doe moleſt the body, and in the meane tyme, doe conſume the good humors and radicall humidity, of the which appeare greater accidents then before. Therfore it ſhall be well done, that no man preſume to cure thys way, except he know wel the temperature of the perſon, the kinde of ſicknes, the time moſt proper, & the true method to do the ſame, after this forme folowing.
               Firſt of all, the way of life muſt bee ordained as you haue heard, after that, the Patient muſt be purged with medicaments proper to the humor that offendeth, alwaies vſing ſuch things as are ſet downe in the generall chapter for the preparation of the humors, not forgetting the ſections of the vaines, with the baths, in the which muſt be put ſuch thinges as are ſet downe in the generall chapter, or els warme water alone, in the which you may put 2. or 3. gallons of Milke, the which is good to appeaſe the dolors and ſoften the skin. Yee ſhal enter the firſt day once, afterward twiſe euery day, remaining one houre, or ſo long as ye may wel endure, obſeruing alwaies before, after, and in the bath, ſuch things as I haue ſet downe in my Chirurgerie chap. of baths. Thus yee ſhal continue 5. or 6. daies, as ſhall be found needful. If the body be dry and hote, accompanied with nodoſities & hardnes in diuers parts, & retraction of the members, as ſomtime happeneth either being inueterat or oft vnder cure before, in cold weather & not warmly kept. In that caſe we ad diuers ſorts of hearbs, which haue vertue to ſoften: namely, Mallows, Violets, Pellitory, Patience, Fumetory, Cammomell, and Roſes; take of each a handful & ſeeth them a little in water before ye put them in the bath: afterward, being gon out of the bath, he ſhalbe dryed and put in a warme bed, afterward annoynt him with ſuch things as haue the vertue to looſe and ſoften the hard parts, like as Axungia humana, Anatis, Anſeris, et Galline, an vnc 2. Axungie porci, butyri recentis ſine ſale, an vnc 1. Medulle vituline, et cernine, vnc ſs. Cum gummatū ammoniaci bdellij, Galbani, et Oppopanacis, vnc 2. ſem. malue lini, et Fenugr. an vnc ſs. Olei Liliori, Violari, et Lumbric. an vnc ſem. fiat linementū. With this you ſhall rubbe the parts affected euerie time you come out of the bath. Being ſo continued a certaine ſpace, wee adde to ſome of theſe Axungies, a medicament which is eſteemed by our Authors to haue a proprietie, manifeſt or occult for this diſeaſe, the which is called Hydrargirō; or Quickſiluer. But by reaſon that of it commeth diuers accidents as ye haue heard, beeing either euill of himſelfe, or euill prepared, therefore, when thou ſhalt make the vnguent, haue recourſe to the Chapter of Quickſiluer.
            
            
               
               The 15. Chap. Of the forme of the Friction.
               THE body and humors being prepared as you haue heard, the Patient ſhall be put in a place naturally warme, or in the cold weather it ſhall be made warme by Art, exempt of all cold and wind, which may penetrate in the body, and hinder the operations of the medicaments. For this cauſe, thoſe that doe meddle with thys ſort of cure, ſhould haue a little cloſe Chamber with a chimney, where alwaies ſhould be fire, the which muſt be great in the time of the friction, and that in the morning at 5. or 6. of the clock, as time moſt propper. If the Patient be weak, giue him an Egge, or ſome other thing of light digeſtion, an houre before, & halfe an houre after, a drink of the firſt decoction warme. That being done, there muſt be a reaſonable fire, the which the ſi
                     ••
                   ſhall ſtand before, turning alwaies about, to the end the heate may penetrate in all ye ſides, and vniuerſally throughout the body. Put a cloth about his head, another about his belly, to the end the vnguent touch neither of theſe two parts: then yee ſhall begin the friction at the articles, as hands, ſhoulders, elbowes, & knees, afterward, vniuerſally throughout the whole body, excepting alwaies the head & the belly, the which is annoynted by ſome ignorants, cauſing thereby death, or ſome cruell accidents. Rub wel, to the end it may penetrate the better, and let the friction be more copious in the parts affected then in the reſt. The vnguent being ſoked in a part, you muſt haue a hote ſheete & put it about him, ſo laying him in a hote bed, which ſhall be well couered with many clothes, not heauie, there he ſhall ſweat an houre or two, or as long as he may endure. If the ſweat come not ſufficiently, put to his feet and ſhoulders ſome hote ſtones, or pots of earth, or of glaſſe, or ſome bladders full of the ſame decoction warme, as ye haue heard in the cure by decoction. Thē hauing ſweat ſufficientlie, rub him wel with warme dry clothes til he be almoſt dry, ſo take the ſheete from him, and after that rub him a ſpace with warme linnen, till he be perfectly dry. Be diligent in rubbing well his head, afterward let him refreſh himſelfe ſoftly: ſo two howrs after he may dine, and doe the like after-noone, and other times when ye ſhall annoynt him. Yet there muſt be both mediocritie and method in the annoynting: for like as our ſoft annoynting is not able to open the poares, in like manner the ouer-ſtrong dooth open the poars of the skin, making dolor, attraction, and commotion of the parts. Take alwaies heede to the forces of the ſick, & beware of that which is cauſe of all dolors and recidiues: that is, the number of the frictions, by reaſon that ſome giue ouer-few, fearing theſe accidents, and to the contrary, ſome others that gyue ouer-many, in ſuch ſort that I haue heard men vaunt themſelues, to haue rubbed the poore Patient 37. times. Before I had found out other waies for the cure of this dieaſe, I haue rubbed to the number of 5. or 6, times, and oft-times but twiſe or thrice. Neuertheleſſe, the time may not be iuſtlie limitted: but for the greatneſſe of the ſickneſſe, and temperature of the ſicke, wee vſe the frictions till we perceiue a reduction of the venimous humors, eyther by fluxe of mouth or of belly, or of vrine, and ſometimes by inſenſible reſolution, but that is ſeldome and not certaine. If we ſee in bodies ſtrong and hard, that nature will not worke nor obey the frictions by once a day annoynting, then they muſt be twice, that is, at 6. of the clocke in the morning, & two or three in the after-noone, ſo that one day that way, doth more profit then two daies other waies. In weake and tender perſons yee muſt annoynt but once a day, and ſomtimes but once in two dayes, by reaſon that in ſuch people, the ouer-oft annoynting, maketh a reſolution of the ſpirits, and maketh nature weake. VVhen the ſicke beginneth to ſpet, it is a token that the humors are prepared to auoyde, and then once annoynting wil doe more then twice before, and it ſhall be well done to rubbe but once, or twice at the moſt afterward. So when nature giueth leyſure to expell the venim, if we perceiue that the euacuation doth not cōtinue till the whole malice be euacuated, thē to make it continue, wee apply Emplaiſters on the necke and ſhoulders, compoſed after the forme as ye ſhall heare in the chap. of the cure by Emplaiſters; ſo that it ſhall continue the fluxe to the perfect euacuation. For the ſame effect we may vſe one Pill or two, compoſed as you ſhall heare in the cure by Pills. In like manner, 8. gra. of my powder, called Puluis

Arabicus, which ſhall be taken in Conſerue of Roſes. Somtimes the fluxe of the mouth is ſo great, that we are conſtrained to ſtay it by Emplaſters aſtringents, as of Maſtick, Contra rupturum, de bolo, and ſuch like, on the neck and ſhoulders ventouſes: alſo frictions with hote clothes; in like manner Gargariſmes, as ye ſhall heare in the chapter of vlcers in the mouth: In like manner by Clyſters emolients, to diuertiſe the humor to aſcend to the ſuperior parts: ſomtimes by vſing all theſe remedies, the criſe is imperfect, ſo leaues ſome reſt, the which by little & little doth corrupt the whole maſſe, and ſo maketh worſe accidents then before. Somtimes it remaineth in the body halfe a yeere, or a yeere, ſometimes 8. or 10. yeres, chiefely in perſons mellancholick and cold. So the moſt part of thoſe dieth moſt miſerably, by reaſon of the great internall corruption before any external apperance.
               But to returne to our purpoſe, we muſt take heede, that the remedies be neyther ouer violent nor indiſcreetly applyed, by reaſon of the great accidents which enſue there-vpon, and chiefely excoriation and corroſion of the inteſtins, conſumption of the humor radicall, whereof the ſicke becommeth tabid, or getteth vlcers, ſordids, and putrids in the mouth, which oft conſumeth a great part of the muſcles that moue the iawes, ſo the action doth decay. To ſome the iawes goe together, ſo that afterward they are ſcarcely able to open their mouth, as in Paris a Boy that had beene handled that way, his teeth did all fall, and his iawes growe together, in ſuch ſort that nothing could enter into his mouth, ſo was I conſtrained to make inciſion through all the gums, and ſo I healed him, yet could he not come to the perfection to eate any hard thing. Some degenerat in gangrens, ſo that diuers dye miſerablie. As for the corroſion of the guts, which often happeneth, you ſhall vſe Cliſters remollients, as this, Recipe maluar. Violar. an M. 1, fiat decoctio ad lib. 1, diſſol. vitellor. auor. duo olei viol. vnc. 2, butiri recentis vnc. 1, ſs. fiat Cliſter, which ſhall be vſed 2, or 3, times euery day. As for the vlcers of the mouth, haue recourſe to the propper chap. of vlcers. I haue found out an inuention for the vſage of the friction, the which is both more pleaſant and profitable, then that which you haue heard, as heere followeth. In ſteed that ſome put before the fire, I put them in a hote ſtoue being warmed with decoction of things propper, to ſoften and rarifie the poares, ſo by that meanes all the parts are all a like hote, the which is not before the fire, by reaſon that one ſide beeing warme, the other is cold, beſides that there be ſome who would be aſhamed to be ſeene naked, and in the ſtoue they are not ſeene. Then the patient being there hote, with a cloth about his head, you ſhall giue him a little of the vnguent by a hole made for the purpoſe, and let him rub him ſelfe in ſuch places, and after the forme that you haue heard. That being done, put him in a hot ſheete in bed, and couer him as before. By this means he ſhall haue the fluxe of the mouth as the other, and in a ſhorter ſpace. During the time of the which fluxe the patient muſt be nouriſhed with things licquid, and of good iuice, and light digeſtion, like as ſoft Egs, pottage, made of yolke of Eggs, conſumats made of extremities of Calfes, or of Fowles, French barley, Horge Munde, of the which you ſhall vſe little, and oft, waſhing alwayes the mouth after, remembring that neyther before, nor in the time of the fluxe muſt bee vſed any waſhing, or drinke, or any cold thing, the which things all doe ſtay the fluxe. If the patient be weary of theſe things, you may infuſe white bread in wine, and mingle with it a little barley water, thereafter ſtrayning the bread, that the ſubſtance remayne in the wine. If in this time the patient be conſtipat, vſe ſomtymes Clyſters, Lenitiues, or Suppoſitories.
            
            
               The 16, Chap ſheweth the way to cure by Emplaſters, which is the third way that our Auncients did vſe.
               THE Emplaſters are thought to haue the ſame effect that the liniments haue, if the body be prepared, as you haue heard in the generall Chapter. Neuertheleſſe the operation is ſlowe and very vncertaine in many, yet for thoſe that doe vſe them, they muſt be compoſed, not onely of things written by Iohn de Vigo, but alſo other things mingled with them, that haue the vertue to ſoften, reſolue, and dry, according to the nature of the humors, which ſhould be euacuated and ſimptoms, if giuing alſo

that, there be alſo ſome Quickſiluer mingled with it, prepared as you haue hearde, the which hath vertue againſt the venim, which is cauſe of the ſicknes, the Emplaſters haue great vertue on the part where-vpon it is applied, both by reaſon of the ingredients, as alſo becauſe they remaine alwayes adherent to the part, ſo their actions are continuall, and are ordinarily applied where the humors are groſſe and vitius, adherent to the part ſolides, like as Tophes and Nodoſities, they alſo mittigate the dolors, and reſolue the hardnes, ſo that they remaine a certaine time: for lyke as that venim is rooted for a time, in like manner time muſt be had for the extirpation of the ſame. So in that they be moſt profitable. Neuertheleſſe I thinke not the Emplaſter or cerot hath force to make euacuations ſufficient, for the extirpation of the ſicknes. I haue ſomtimes proued it, and haue cured ſome that way, others I haue beene conſtrayned to ſeeke an other way of cure. I conſeſſe in all perſons being vſed it doth take away a part of the euill, ſo it hideth the ſicknes for a time. I find them moſt propper to be vſed when the malady is recent, ſpecially in the firſt, ſecond, or third kind in young folkes, and ſuch as be eaſie to moue, alſo in ſhamefaſt people, and ſuch as will not ſuffer the friction. To ſuch I vſe this method. Firſt preparing the body and humors, as you haue heard in the generall Chapter, next ſweat fiue or ſixe daies, after that method as is ſet downe in the Chapter of the decoction, thereafter he ſhall remaine in bed vſing ſuch regime, as you haue heard in the laſt Chapter: alſo before the fluxe of the mouth as in the time of it. Your Emplaiſters ſhall be made after this forme.
               
                  Recipe Emplaſtri Iohannis de vigo lib. 1, de meliloto et oxicroij an lib. ſs. argenti viui, preparati vt dictum eſt vnc. viij, olei de ſpica parum, fiat Emplastrum: the which ſhall be put on leather or ſtrong cloth, that ſhall couer the armes from the hands to the ſhoulders, and the ſhoulders, and about the necke, on the leggs from the knees to the toes, and alwayes muſt it be more thicke in the articles, then in other parts, letting them remaine till ſuch time you perceiue nature begin to make eduction of the humors venimous. If nature be long in working, it ſhall not be euill done, to make little particuler frictions in the bed once or twice, to the effect the euacuation be more eaſie. In ſome perſons if the humors be well prepared, & in good ſeaſon, the Emplaſters begin to make eduction of the humor, in 3, or 4, dayes, moſt commonly by the mouth, the which ſomtimes is ſo violent, that we are conſtrained to ſtay it: firſt by taking away a part of theſe Emplaſters, and after that ſtay the violent fluxe by ſuch meanes as you haue heard in the Chapter of frictions. The vlcers that enſue there-vpon ſhall be cured after the method ſet downe, in the Chapter of vlcers of the mouth. If there happeneth prurit, or bliſters, in the part where be the Emplaſters, they ſhal be remoued, and foment theſe parts with hote wine, in the which Camomell, Roſes, and ſuch like haue beene boyled, the which hath the vertue to conſume that which is cauſe of the ſayd prurit: afterward the place beeing dryed, applie the ſame Emplaſter againe. Furthermore you ſhall vnderſtand that by the application of theſe Emplaſters, nature doth ſomtimes diſcharge by flux of belly & vrine, but I neuer ſaw it diſcharge by flux of the belly ſaue one time, neyther is it ſo certaine as that of the mouth. I haue vſed them to ſome men and women who had no euacuation, notwithſtanding all preparations of the humors, ſo was I conſtrayned to vſe other forme of cure. By all theſe things you may cleerly iudge, what the vſage of this cure may auaile to the moſt part of Patients.
            
            
               The 17, Chap. to cure by perfumes and ſuffumigations, which is the fourth way, vſed by our Auncients.
               PErfumes which were vſed of old, and now alſo by ſome ignorant people, for the curation of this malady, the which in no maner are to be approued for that intention, being not poſſible to cure the ſicke that way. They be moſt ſtrong and vehement, of the which come great accidents, and oftentimes death, ſpecially to thoſe that are leane and of temperature hote and dry, as I haue oft ſeene. In Paris in the time of the troubles, there was great companies of Spaniards and Neapolitans, amongſt the which was a Barber Neapolitan, who profeſſed to heale al diſeaſes, but chiefely this, by the means of his perfumes, ſo that it happened him one time to haue eight vnder cure, of the which

fiue dyed, three lyued, and of them three, two became paralatick, and one deaffe, and manie others dyed in his hands. I haue ſeene infinit others dye by the ignorance of ſuch curers, who handle men lyke Horſes, vſing onely one method to all men, little and great, ſtrong and weake. Of this little number that eſcapeth ſome become tabid, ſome hidiopick, for they are moſt hurtful to the lungs, & maketh great reſolution of the ſpirits, which haue great conximitie with the braines, ſo that the ſpirits animall is deprauated and diminiſhed: to diuers happeneth contraction of the ſinewes, paraliſie, trembling, apolexie, with diuers other euil accidents, of the which, if time would permit, I ſhould giue many examples. For theſe cauſes and diuers other, I thinke it not meete, eyther to ſhewe the way or the iuſt doſe of their poyſonable ingredients, like as Orpin, Calcant, Cinnaber, and ſuch like, by reaſon that perhaps ſome men will be ſo vnhappy as to vſe them. Neuertheleſſe I doubt not, but perfumes ſuch as we vſe, are a great help for ſome perticuler affections, which remaine after the cure done by any of the three wayes precedent, as deafnes, payne in the head, ioynts, leggs, and armes, falling of haire, and ſuch like. Wherein I haue knowne them to haue done great good, both to tenuat and inciſe: as alſo to expell out by ſweat, that which remaineth; the which nature, (eyther deprauated or hindered,) could not caſt forth, by reaſon of the ſicknes and tenacitie of the humor, and alſo of the skin and narrownes of the paſſages. So, if the vertue to prouoke ſweat, as alſo to looſe the belly, be alwaies moderatly vſed, and compoſed onely with ſuch things, and after the maner as ye ſhal heare, (the which ſhall not be ſtrong, to the end they may make no reſolution of the vertues, neyther hinder them, nor depriue the action of the parts:) then they ſhall be made of the rootes of Dictam, Peonie, Tormentil, Iris florentie, Cinamon, Francumcens, Maſticke, Oliban, Ladanum, an drag, 2. Turpentine of Venice, Calam arematieke, Garyefillate, Nutmeg, Semen citri, Ceruſe, Sandolor. ſpecies, an drag, 1. Amber, vnc ſem. Let all theſe be put in powder, and kept for your vſe. There be diuers others, ſette downe in many Authors, and eſpecially by Fallopius in his Treatiſe De morbo Gallico. To performe thys, yee muſt haue a tubbe, with a tent or pauillion, or at the leaſt ſome thing that ſhall couer it, that no ayre enter. The tub muſt be hote before he enter in, he muſt be all naked, and ſitte on a ſtoole, putting on either ſide of him an inſtrument of yron or braſſe, wherein ſhall be little cleere coales, vpon the which ye ſhall caſt of theſe powders here named, to ye weight of one dragm or two, and ſo ſhall continue a certaine ſpace, or ſo long as hee may endure, to receiue the fume of the ſame, till ſuch time as he ſweat. If it be poſsible, he ſhall keep his eyes cloſe, and put out ſomtimes his head. If the vapour be ouer-great, beware that hee ſwound not, as many doe. Therefore as ſoone as yee ſee him growe faint, retire him, and put him in a bed, wrapping him in a warme ſheete, and put hote clothes on his ſtomacke and belly, ſo he ſhall ſweat eaſily an howre or two without violence. Afterward dry him, and vſe him in ſuch ſort as yee haue heard in the Chapter of decoction, & as alſo touching the way of lyfe. But thys muſt be done in the morning, as time moſt propper, continuing 3. or 4. dayes, as ſhall be found needfull. If peraduenture he be found weake, giue him an Egge, or a toſte in wine an howre before he enter in.
               Theſe Perfumes yee muſt vſe as well perticulerly as generally, to any part where anie thing doth remaine, as a leg, or an arme, or the ſecret parts, nothing being diſcouered ſauing the parts affected, ſo of it come great commodities. For the ſame purpoſe I vſe dry ſtones in ſtead of the bathing tub, with a perſume of thys decoction folowing. Take of Fountaine water, lib, 20. white wine, lib, 4. mingle them with theſe hearbs folowing. Rec. Saluie, Eetanice, Stecados, Sambuci, Origani, Folior. lauri, Roriſmarini, Minthe, Flor. Cammomille, Meliloti, et Anethi, Hyprici, an m. 3. Seminum aniſi, Feniculi, Radicum cyperi, Calamiaromatici, Iris florentiae, an vnc 1. Omnia frustulatim conciſa. Seeth all theſe in the pot, and let the vapour paſſe by the conduit, ſo receiue the vapour ſo long as you finde it expedient, & ſweat in your bed therafter as before. If the paine be particuler, in one part, you muſt receiue the vapour onely on that part, couering well the reſt of the body: and this wee vſe in diuers other maladies, which ſhall be ſette downe at large in my Treatiſe called The poore mans guide. Alſo, I vſe the ſame perfume in the bathing tub like as the firſt, where I haue any ſuſpition

that any venim remaineth, to the end the parts may be corroborat and comforted, the which ſhall be compoſed in the ſame manner, adding onelie to them a little Aqua vita, the which ſhall be put on the hote ſtones in the ſaid bathing tub, on each ſide of the ſick; ſo receiue the fume thereof as of the perfume, ſweating and drying as before: and ſo continue for 3. or 4. dayes, the which moſt commonlie I vſe to all ſolkes in the ende of the cure, by the which I haue found great help.
            
            
               The 18. Chapter, to heale this diſeaſe by Pills of Mercure, which is the first way that I haue vſed.
               HAuing ſufficientlie ſhewed the foure waies commonlie practiſed, by our ordinarie practiſioners for the curation of this diſeaſe, I will in like manner let you vnderſtand, in ſo ſhort tearms as may bee, the waies which I haue vſed during theſe tenne yeeres: whereby I haue cured manie, and that verie eaſilie and with ſmall paine, as ye ſhall heare. Firſt of all to performe this cure by Pills of Mercure, the bodie muſt firſt be prepared, purged and bled, with other ſuch like things as ye haue heard in the Chapter precedent: alſo making the ſick to ſweat 4. or 5. daies, either by ſuch a decoction as ſhall be found to be conuenient for the habitude of the diſeaſed, or els by my powder, called Puluis indicus, ſet downe in The poore mans guide, verie propper for manie other diſeaſes alſo. In the meane time, the diet ſhall be of meates of good digeſtion, ſodden at dinner, and roſted at ſupper, alwaies obſeruing the temperature as yee haue heard. His ordinarie drink ſhall be wine, wel mingled with decoction of Chine or Salſparil. Hee may drinke ſomtime of Chine alone, alwaies the firſt drink at meales ſhal be of wine, for the corroboration of the ventricle. All theſe things being dulie performed, he ſhall vſe of theſe Pills the ſpace of 30. or 40. daies, taking euerie day one after his firſt ſleepe, keeping him alwaies warme, that ſhall prouoke a fluxe of mouth in ſhort ſpace without violence, the which ſhal not be perceiued but as in a man that hath a Catharre. Somtime happeneth fluxe of bellie, the which for the moſt part is violent, wherefore we vſe Clyſters, wherein hote yron or ſteele hath been oft extinguiſhed, giuing him leaue to reſt a day or two, vſing one of the firſt Pills. If by this meanes the violence ceaſeth not, ye ſhall vſe ſuch remedies as ye haue heard in the Chapter of friction, or els 4. graines of the confection called, Requies Caroli quinti, which is moſt excellent for all flux of the belly. Afterward, the violence being ſtaied, giue the reſt of the Pills, euerie day one, which ſhall weigh 2. drag. Thus ye ſhall doe, if the ſicknes be inueterat, and the body robuſt and difficult to be mooued, onels it ſhall be ſufficient to vſe 20. of the ſaid Pills, the which ſhall be made as followeth. Res. Salſparil, et Sene mundate, an vnc 1. Turbith, Hermodict. Agarici, et Rhubarb electi an vnc ſam. Colocynth, Subtiliter puluerate drag, 6. Hydrargyri bene preparati, vnc 4. Extinguatur diligentiſsime cum terebint, vnc 1. Addatur theriace, vnc 1. ſem. Syr. Roſ. lax. q. ſ. Ambari grisij, drag 1. Miſce et fiat maſſa. Cap. drag. 2. aut 3. according vnto the forces. In like maner ye may vſe theſe that follow, to the ſame effect. Rec. Mercurij, drag 25. Muſci; drag 2. Puluis Arab. drag 10. Scammonij, drag 3. Cum ſucco Limonū, reducantur ad formam ſolidam. Ex quibus dabitur ſcru. 1. ſingulis diebus. In the meane time it ſhall be well done to vſe this Opiat, which is cordiall, made after this manner: Rec. Conſ. Nenupharis, Violati, Bugloſsi, Borage, an vnc ſem. Cori. citri conditi. drag 2. Diamar. frigidi, ſcru. 4. Raſure corni cerui. ſcr. 1. Metridatij veteris drag. 1. Cum ſyr. Viol. fiat opiata, cap. ſcru. 4. Mane et taneundem ante cenam.
               
               This being done, ye ſhall purge the Patient, and afterward cauſe him to ſweat 5. or 6. daies, in a dry Stoue, taking alwaies a drink of the decoction of Salſparill, before he enter in. And when he hath remained halfe an howre or three quarters, (as hee may eaſilie endure,) he ſhal be put in his bed to ſweat. So by this meanes, nothing of the venoſitie ſhall remaine. Be diligent to excitat the head to ſweating, and dry it well, by reaſon that oftentimes, by the negligence hereof, extreame paine of the head followeth, and defluxions on the eyes, deafnes, and ſuch like: the which things I attribute to the little ſweating of the head. I neuer heard any man complaine either of the head or of the articles, after thys ſort of cure. If peraduenture the temperature of the perſon cannot agree with this kinde

of remedie, as ſometime it happeneth, I change my cure, according to the temperature of the Patient diſeaſed with this ſicknes.
            
            
               The 19. Chapter, to cure by decoction of White wine, which is the ſecond way that I vſe.
               THis way of cure is verie expedient for thoſe that are newlie infected, if they bee of good habitude, and of good conſtitution, but not for all kinds hereof, nor for all diſpoſitions, nor yet at all times: for the ſicknes being inueterat, compoſed with groſſe humors and vitious, adherent to the par
                     •
                   cold & ſolid, which is the bones and other ſpermatick parts, as it happeneth in thoſe that haue been handled often before, and haue Nodoſities and dolors inueterat of the head & articles, in ſuch ſort that the parts be rendred weake, and therefore nature diſchargeth vpon them that which is contrarie, whereof an euill habitude is engendred in the bodie, and the vertue is rendred weake, by the continuall and vehement dolor. Theſe things (I ſay) bening ſo, this way is not ſure: therfore yee muſt wiſely conſider of the Patient and of the ſicknes, and thereafter the bodie and the humors muſt be prepared, as ye haue heard in the general chapter, not forgetting the purgations and ſections of the vaines, with good regime, as is ſaide in that Chapter. Afterwardes you ſhall vſe 5. or 6. dayes a decoction Sudoriffick, & ſweat according vnto the method ſet downe in the Chapter of Salſparil.
               This being duly performed, the reſt of the time, which will be 15, or 20, dayes, you ſhall vſe this decoction that followeth taking a good draught euery morning, and a brotle an houre after, made of butter and fine hearbs, as Succory, Sorrell, Lettice, Purſlaine, Burrage, Buglos, and ſuch like. The decoction ſhall be made in this forme. Recipe medulle Gaiaci bene pulti. lib. 1, chine teſsillatim exciſae lib. ſs. Salſeparile vnc. 5, ſenne mundante vnc. 4, Hermodact. vnc. 1, macerent. omnia preter Hermodact. et ſennam, in 12, pintis Scoticis vini, ſpatio 16, horar. bulliant ad conſumpt. quarte partis, imponendo ſennam et Hermodact. per dimidiam horam ante quam finiat ea conſumptio. In fine decoctionis adde aliquid liquiriti. Auferat ab igne et coletur. If the time be eyther cold or in Winter, goe not forth, if other wiſe, goe forth, and drinke alwayes when you are drie, but ſpecially take a good drinke an houre before ſupper. This way is moſt ſure as I haue oft proued, chiefely to women and children, but then your decoction muſt be weaker, as you ſhall conſider by your good iudgement. If you perceiue it to worke much, vſe it onely in the morning & before ſupper, but at meales and other times vſe the decoction of Salſparill, which ſhall be compoſed of two ounces of Salſparill ſodden in eight pints of water, till the fourth part be conſumed, and drinke of that when you are dry. After the cure you ſhall purge againe with ſome medicament proper, and drawe blood of the vaine moſt apparant, if there be plenitude. Afterward returne to your former dyet by degrees.
            
            
               The 20, Chap. to heale the ſicknes by the decoction of Salſparill and Chine, which is the third way that I vſe.
               THis is a way of cure that I haue oft experimented with good ſucceſſe, chiefely in people of good temperature, and the malady not being yet entred into the ſolide parts. Then to performe the cure to ſuch as it is conuenient, the body and the humor muſt firſt be prepared, with purgations, letting of blood, and ſweating, as it appeareth in the generall Chapter. The regime ſhall be obſerued, as is ſayd in the Chapter of the decoction of Gaiac. Afterward you muſt vſe of this decoction the ſpace of 20, or 30, dayes, as you ſhall find expedient, the which ſhall be compoſed after this forme. Recipe Salſparile, vnc. 4, que ſit tenuitur in ciſa, Rad. Chine per teſſellas exciſe vnc. 2, macerentur ſpatio 24, borars in 10. pintis Aque fontane, Bulliant lento igne ad conſumpt. mediepartis coletur. Of this you ſhall take a good draught euery morning, according vnto the ſtrength of the Patient, ſweating there-vpon in bed, as you haue heard in the Chapter of the decoction of Gaiac, doing the like in the after noone, and ſo continuing euery day, during the time aboue ſpecified, excepting alwayes the 7, or 8, day, in the which you ſhall vſe ſome thing

laxatiue, or at the leaſt ſome of the ſame decoction made laxatiue after this forme. To a pint of the decoction add halfe an ounce of Sene, 2, dragmes of Hermodact, and a little Lycoris, after the full ebullition add an ounce of ſirop of Roſes laxatiue. This you ſhall take in the morning, and a broth an houre after, made of fine hearbs and butter. If this be not conuenient enough, you ſhall take three graines of my pouder called Puluis Tartarianus, or elſe halfe an ounce of mine electuary. The preparation of both is ſet downe in The Poore mans guide. The day of the purgation hee muſt neither ſweat, nor goe forth. The reſt of the time he may goe forth if the weather be warme. Neuertheleſſe he muſt not riſe out of bed till two houres after the ſwea
                     •
                   be paſſed. To ſome it ſhall be enough to ſweat once a day, and ſo 18, or 20, dayes ſhall be ſufficient. It hath greater vertue then Gaiac, and more propper for thoſe that are of hote temperature. Of the grounds of the reſt of this decoction you may make an other, putting to it fiue pints of water, and fiue pints of whie wine, if the ſicke be weake, or elſe all water, ſeeth it till the third part be conſumed, and drinke of it ordinarily. It hath the vertue to reſtore thoſe that be weake. The firſt decoction is moſt excellent in many other ſickneſſes, as Catharres that diſtill from the head, obſcure Cankers, tumors difficult to diſcuſſe, good for a cold ſtomack, diſcuſſeth flatuoſities, moſt excellent for old vlcers, but beſt of all for this diſeaſe, as I haue oft proued to the contentment of many who vſed that remedie.
            
            
               The 21, Chap. to heale this diſeaſe by my Electuary, the which is the fourth way that I vſe.
               THis manner of cure which I haue oft vſed to my ſpeciall friends, for the taking away of this venim, eyther beeing recent or inueterat, is done after this manner. Firſt purge the body with ſome light purgation, afterward let blood. Next prepare the humors as you haue heard in the generall Chapter. Afterward purge agayne with thys medicament, Recipe decoct. pect. ad doſim infun
                        ••••
                      cathaliconis duplic drag. 10, ſir. Roſ. pallidar. ex agarigo et ſenna vnc. 1, fiat potio, quam 
                        〈…〉
                     , horis ante iuſculum. Afterward you muſt let him blood in the other arme, 
                     〈…〉
                   there-vpon to reſt a day, purging him after that with an ounce of Caſſe, and an ounce of Sirrop of Succory compoſed with Rubarb. Afterward 
                     〈…〉
                   5, dayes: and going out of the bath, take a drinke of the decoction of Salſparil 
                     〈…〉
                   after the forme as you haue heard in the precedent Chapter. In the meane time 
                     〈…〉
                   beginning to the end, you ſhall vſe the regime ſet downe in the Chapter of Salſparil 
                     〈…〉
                   ordinarie drinke ſhall be of the ſecond decoction of Salſparill. He muſt neyther drinke wine nor Ale or Beere, during the time of the cure, which will laſt 25, or 30, dayes, during which time, he ſhall vſe euery morning halfe an ounce of my confection, the deſcription wherof is clearely and brifelie ſet downe in the treatiſe intituled The Poore mans guide, with the ſorme howe it ſhould be vſed for many diſeaſes that it is approbriat to. As for the vſage thereof in this diſeaſe, there is onely to be obſerued, that you muſt neyther eate 3, houres after nor 3, before the taking therof. And if the taking of it in the morning doth not ſufficiently worke, you may take as much in the after-noone. Somtime by vſing of it twice a day it worketh too faſt, wherefore you muſt well conſider and take it but once in one day, or once in two dayes, according as you find it work, and if it worketh as it ought to doe, it ſhall be 5, or 6, times euery day without violence. This is a remedy moſt excellent to be vſed both Sommer and Winter, as well to young as to old. It healeth perfectly, as well the inueterat as the recens, albeit the time be ſomwhat longer, being no neede to keepe the lodging, nor to alienat the ſicke from any affaires, the which things are all performed without the knowledge of any man. Among other excellent vertues that it hath, it is moſt profitable for the poore people, for many reaſons. VVherefore albeit it be a very precious iewell vnto me, yet for the loue that I haue to the common wealth, I will not hide it. It hath alſo many and diuers vertues pertayning to the infantment of a woman, the which I haue plainely declared in mv treatiſe of The Infantment, the which by Gods help ſhall be ſhortly put in print, and dedicated to the moſt vertuous Princeſſe the Queenes Maieſtie of Scotland.
            
            
               
               The 22, Chap. to heale this diſeaſe by the Arabick powder, which is the fift way that I vſe.
               TO performe this manner of cure, the body and the humors muſt be well prepared by ſirrops or decoctions, purgations, and letting of blood, Bathes, and good regime, as you haue heard in the precedent Chapter. It ſhall be expedient, that the ſicke ſweat 5, or 6, dayes, vſing the decoction of Salſparill, Chine, or Gaiac, the which ſhall be diuerſified according to the diuerſity of the temperature, as you haue often heard before. Afterward during the time of the c
                     •
                  re which ſhall be 20, or 25 dayes, he ſhall vſe things of good nuriture, and drinke ordinarily decoction of Salſparill, abſtayning from all cold drinke, either actually or potentially. Theſe things being performed, ye ſhall vſe of this powder euery day once, or once in two dayes, according as yee ſhall perceiue the effects thereof, the which ſhall be miniſtred after this order. Firſt take 10. graines of the ſaid powder, and mingle it with conſerue of Roſes, or of Nenuphar, which ſhall bee made in forme of a little Pill, taking it in going to bedde, 2. howres after meat. Doe the like in the morning, obſeruing the ſame order, and that night in like maner: taking onelie 5. or 6. graines of the ſame powder, mingled with the ſaid Conſerues, and ſo continuing euery day, or euery two dayes once, till the perfect euacuation of the venim be perceiued, which will be, during the time aboue ſpecified, as ye ſhall cleerely perceiue by the ſignes of perfect health. You ſhall marke that ye working of this medicament is often by the mouth, and ſeldom by the belly, and that like as it is ſeldom, it is alſo very long. Therefore obſerue ſuch cautions in the miniſtring hereof, that ye prouoke fluxe of the mouth, rather thē of the belly. Yet whether of them ye perceiue nature tend moſt to, you ſhall doe well to follow nature, and doe the beſt to continue that euacuation, giuing no occaſion in the cō
                  trary for the hinderance hereof. Thys is a reamedy which I haue vſed ſomtimes to great Perſonages, as a thing moſt propper for them, for two reaſons, firſt, becauſe it is pleaſant, and worketh thorowly, ſecondly, becauſe it is more coſtly: and therefore not ſo cō
                  uenient for the common people, whoſe abilitie is vnſufficient to beare the charge thereof. The compoſition of it, which will endure the ſpace of three moneths, with the true adminiſtration of the ſame in diuers ſickneſſes, are ſet downe in my Treatiſe called The poore mans guide.
               
            
            
               The 23. Chapter ſheweth the way to cure young infants infected with this diſeaſe, and firſt practiſed by mee.
               SEeing that in the formsr chapters I haue plainly ſhewed, after what method our Auncients, and I my ſelfe in like manner haue cured old folks of this diſeaſe, now in like manner I will ſet downe the way to cure young Infants. True it is, that diuers Practicioners haue of a long time taken paines to find out ſome certaine method for the ſame, ſeeing the great number that daily were infected, partly by their Parents, partlie by their Nurſes, and ſuch other cauſes, as ye haue heard in the Chapter of the cauſes of this diſeaſe. But no true or perfect, curation could be found by them, becauſe they were contented with ſome Paleatiue remedies, whereby the chyldren ſeemed to bee healed tyll they came to be 2. or 3. yeeres old: in the which time, by the acrimonie or ſharpnes of the maligne humor, the bones doe conſume, the roofe of the mouth and noſe doe fall, ſo that not one amongſt a thouſand eſcapeth miſerable death. Whereupon, I conſidering theſe things, (and as I had found out ſome eaſie way for old folks, ſo being requeſted by many of my ſpeciall freends, and diuers other honeſt men, whoſe children were infected, to ſette out ſome certaine method for the deliuery of ſuch young infants, who vndeſeruedly were deſtroied with this diſeaſe,) after long trauaile I found out 2. or 3. waies, the which in deede are good, but very painfull, ſo that afterward, by mine owne diligence, and diligent conference with ſome of the Docters in Chirurgerie in Paris, I founde out thys vvay, which is moſt ſure and eaſie, if it be done with good iudgment, and with the method that followeth. Firſt, if the Nurſe be infected, the child ſhall be taken from her and nouriſhed

with other womens milk, or Goates milke; otherwiſe, if eyther the Nurſe be little infected, or els the child ſo young that it may not be ſo nouriſhed, in that caſe purge the Nurſe with Confection Hamech, vſing alwaies good regime, like as ye haue heard in the Chapter of electuarie. Shee ſhall alſo vſe a decoction ſudoriffick the ſpace of three or foure daies, & after that, a decoction of Salſparil during the time of the cure, which ſhould be three weekes or a month, vſing euery day till the firſt ſixe dayes be paſt, an ounce of my electuary, taking it in the morning, like as in the proper chapter, or els ſixe graines of the powder Arabick, which ſhall be taken as ye haue heard, continuing alwaies till you perceiue ful eduction of the venim. In the meane ti
                     •
                  e, the child ſhall take a little ſyrrop of Succorie compoſed with Rubarb; afterward, you ſhall make an oyntment of Roſat Meſues, or ſuch like, putting to a pound of it an ounce of Hydrargire, well prepared and extinguiſhed, adding to it, halfe an ounce of Turpentine, and incorporating all together in forme of liniment. This being done, you ſhall cauſe the Nurſe or your ſelfe, to rub the liske, which is the part betweene the thigh and the body, the firſt daie. After that, reſt a daie or two, and rub the thighes a little: this will prouoke a fluxe of the belly. Then reſt two or three dayes, to the end the flux be not ouer-violent, and then rub a little the armes, reſting there-vpon 2. or 3. dayes againe: next, the feete and leggs, and reſt 2. dayes: next, the back. Heere you muſt marke, that according as you perceiue the working of the medicament, you muſt abſtaine ſomtimes 4. or 5. dayes betweene euerie friction, ſo that the flux of the belly muſt be entertained without violence, for if it were done euerie day, it would bee both violent and dangerous. In this time the virulencie of the venim ſhall auoide, yet wil it render the child extreame weake, by reaſon of the great euacuation, and therefore it ſhall be moſt requiſite to vſe this water following: Rec. Medullae Gaiaci, vnc 2. Saiſaparile vnc 4. Macerentur p
                        •
                     r diem in libris 8. Aque fontanae, et fiat decoctio ad libras 6. in col. ponatur in alembico, addendo conſeruae Bugloſsi, Borrag. Enule Campanae, Anthoſ. an vnc. 1. ſem. Cardui Benedicti, Sumachi, Aniſ
                        •
                     , Cardomoni, an drag. 3. Mithridatij, opt. et Theriacis antiquae. an drag. 2. ſem. Citri et Cort, citri conditi, an vnc ſem. Zach. albiſsimi. lib. ſem. Cinam
                        •
                     mi, vnc. 1. dictillentur in balneo. M. Et ſumet puer ſingulis diebus, cochlearia tria per diuerſas horas. By this meanes I haue cured many of diuers ages, and ſome that were not foure months old. The time of the cure will be 15. or 20. daies. It ſhall be well done euerie 6. or 8. daies to purge the Nurſe, ſo in thys time the cure ſhall be performed in both perſons.
            
            
               The 24. Chapter ſheweth the tokens of perfect health.
               AFter the generall & particuler cure of this diſeaſe, there remaineth ſome reſt which tormenteth the bodie, and maketh the ſicknes recidiue, yet ſomtimes verie vneaſie to be known, if the ſick be perfectly cured: for this cauſe (as alſo to the end if anie thing remaineth, you may giue order for the taking away of the ſame) yee ſhall heare certaine ſignes moſt aſſured of perfect health, and that nothing remaineth. The firſt and chiefe ſigne is the ceaſing of the dolors both vniuerſall and particuler, ſpecially in the night, and the regeneration of that which was loſt, as the haire & bones putrified, deſiccation of the vlcers, ſoftening of the hard parts, and returning to the natural cullour. In like manner, the appeaſing of all the ſymptoms ſubiect to that diſeaſe, helping of the members, as before, doing all wonted actions without any impediment or hinderance. If theſe ſignes bee certainly perceiued, you may aſſure your ſelfe that there remaineth nothing: and ſo wee end thys Treatiſe.
            
         
         
            
            The ſecond Treatiſe ſheweth the way to cure the accidents of the Spaniſh ſickneſſe.
            
               The first Chapter.
               SEeing I haue ſufficientlie ſhewed in the former Treatiſe, of the curation of thys dyſeaſe, which generally happeneth throughout all the body, by the which all men that doe profeſſe anie learning, and cheefely Chirurgia
                     •
                  s, may eaſily cure the ſame. Now in like manner will I ſhew the true cure of the accidents of this ſicknes, which ordinarilie we call the Venerian ſicknes perticuler: yet of theſe there be alſo many ſorts, for ſome goe before the malady, and if it be not yet confirmed, ſome follow, & ſome happen in the cure, and ſome after the cure vnperfectly performed. Of thoſe which goe before, which we call precedents or forriders, is vlcers and cankors of diuers faſhions in the yeard, burning of vrine, Chaudepiſſes, Carnoſities, Pulluines, and ſuch like. Yet ſomtimes any of theſe may happen without the ſicknes. Thoſe that followe, bee puſtuls and vlcers throughout all the bodie, cheefely in the ſecret parts, and alſo in the forhead, and diuers other parts of the head, in the emunctories, in the mouth, throat, and fundament, falling of hayre, dolors and nodoſities of the ioynts. Thoſe that happen in the cure, are lack of appetite and walking, vlcers in the mouth, inteſtins and conduit of vrine, with diuers others, which happeneth in diuers manners, according vnto the varieties of the waies of cure. Thoſe that happen after the vnperfect cure, make diuers euill accidents, as the fixed greefe of the whole head, or ſome part thereof: alſo of the legs, armes, and ioynts, nodoſities, with putrifaction of the bones, deafenes, defluxions of the eyes, filthy and creeping vlcers, Fiſſures, and Darters in the hands, feete, and diuers other parts of the body, diminution of ſubſtance, ſo that the body becommeth leane and atrified. Of theſe ſymtoms, ſome be cured by the generall cure, but heere we ſhall content vs to ſpeake of thoſe which are cured by particuler cure. If not by dulie adminiſtring of propper remedies, the part affected becommeth rebellious and obeyeth no remedies, the Patients are tobe ſuſpected to haue great venenoſitie in the bodie: where-upon, for greater aſſurance, to ſaue them from the vniuerſall ſicknes, I cauſe them to vſe euery morning, of my electuary halfe an ounce; by that meanes, the euill humor doth auoy de which did entertaine the ſicknes, & ſo is healed eaſily. If it chaunce otherwiſe, it ſhall bee well done to cauſe the ſicke to vſe good regime the ſpace of 10. or 15. dayes, during the which time, yee ſhall vſe a decoction of Salſparil, or Gaiac, according to his temperature, and ſome liniment particuler on the part affected, as alſo on the parts adiacents: the which liniment ſhall be compoſed of Axungie, roſat Meſues, or Butter, adding ſuch quantitie of Mercure as ye ſhall finde expedient. By thys linement and the decoction, ye ſhall haue a great help in the cure.
            
            
               The ſecond Chapter ſheweth the way to cure thoſe vlcers that happen in the yeard.
               HEere we ſhall begin at the maligne vlcers in the yeard, which take their originall by carnall coniunction, laying a part for this time, thoſe that happen by diuers other occaſions, as by hauing to doe with women in the time of theyr flowers, and alſo by the great confrication of ſome women that be ſtraight & hote, the which for the moſt part may be healed of themſelues, notwithſtanding we ſhall ſpeake of ſome part of them. Of thoſe vlcers which be maligne, ſome happen in the gland, called by the Latins, Balanus, and when they be moſt copious, they be leaſt maligne. Others happen in the Prepuce, which is the vtter skinne that couereth the gland. Thoſe vlcers, for the moſt part be few in number, but more dangerous, ſomtimes complicked with virulencie or corroſion, with blew or blackiſh cullour, accompanied with calloſity, & ſometimes with filthines or rottenneſſe, & euill habitude of the body. All theſe accidents must be corrected, or els the vlcers cannot be healed, the which being neglected, in ſhort ſpace become cacoethick and maligne.
               
                  
Some doe ende in gangrene or mortification, and then we are conſtrayned to cute the whole member, or at the leaſt, ſome portion thereof. For the which you may haue recourſe to my Chirurgie, Chapter of gangrene. Somtimes theſe vlcers doe degenerat into Carcinomes, which if ſo happeneth, you may haue recourſe to the Chirurgie, Chapter of Carcinomes. It ſhall be well done, not to neglect the ſimpleſt vlcer in the yearde. For oftentimes by the neglecting of the vniuerſall curation in the beginning, and vſing onelie ſome repercuſſiue and aſtringent remedies, the diſeaſe is healed but for a time, ſo that afterwards it returneth within halfe a yeare, or a yeare, or two yeares, ſooner or later, according to the habitude of the perſon diſeaſed. I handled in Paris a Gentleman, who tenne yeares afore had a ſimple vlcer in his yearde, and being euill cured by ſorce of repercuſſiues, the venim did retire to the center of the body. So after the ten yeares vlcers and puſtuls appeared in his yearde and at the perineum, the prostats and paraſtats became all putrified, and in like manner the whole ſcrotum. So he dyed miſerably, notwithſtanding all remedies, as many doe, when the humor virulent is retired and hidden long time in the body, the which may chaunce in old folks. For in ſuch it conſumeth inwardly before any appearance without. But to returne to our purpoſe, for the curation of maligne vlcers in the yearde, we muſt vſe ſome light purgations, letting of blood, good regime, according to the temperature of the body, vſing alſo decoction of Gaiac and Salſparill, abſtayning from all ſtrong purgatious, alſo bleeding of the arme or any ſuperior part, by reaſon that the ſtrong medicines doe reuoke the humor to the centre of the body, the which nature would diſcharge by the vlcers, letting of blood in the armes, or any ſuperior parts doeth the ſame. So that if theſe things be not well obſerued, the generall ſicknes followeth: for this cauſe the purgation ſhall be weake, and the letting of blood in the inferior parts, as in the leggs or feete, alſo with ſuch method that the part affected be not irrited. As for the ſimple vlcers, that be not maligne, but come onely by great rubbing on women that be hote, or by great violence on little Maides, or by ſome women yt are ouer-ſtraight, (which ſeldome happeneth) or by women that haue their purgations, and ſuch other as you haue heard, we vſe onely drying medicaments, and without mordication, like as pouder of Tutia prepared, Terra Sigillata, burnt lead, Bolus Vera, and ſuch like. You ſhall put eyther of theſe alone, or diuers together, mingled with ſome medicament, as Pompholix, Cerat Galien, reſſat Meſue, oyle Roſat. and apply it on the vlcer, it ſhall preſently be healed, like as any other ſimple vlcers, being vſed after the ſame ſort. If the vlcer be ioyned with ſome other euill affection or intemperie, the cure muſt begin at the taking away of the ſame. But by reaſon the euill temperie may be cold, hote, dry, or moiſt, we muſt diuerſifie the remedies, according to the intemperie of the humor. And if the intemperie be hote, you ſhall vſe cold things, like as fomentation of iuice of Plantin or water of the ſame, Nightſhade, Knotgraſſe, Paſtorſpurſe. Theſe, or eyther of them ſhall be applyed on the part, and about the part a cloth wet of Oxicrat, or Emplaiſter of Dyapalma, malaxed with oyle Roſat. cerat Galien, Nutritum, de bolo, and diuers others of like quality. If the temperie be cold, vſe things contrarie, like as fomentation of Claret wine, in the which ſhall be ſodden, Sage, Origanum, Time, Calaminte, Mariorum, Fenell, Melilot, and ſuch like. If the intemperie be very cold, add to it a little of Aquae-vitae. The dry intemperie is cured by fomenting the part with hote water, continuing till it groweth red, which ſhall humect it. If the intemperature be humid, it muſt be dryed, as much as it aboundeth in moiſt. For therebe ſome parts that be humid of them ſelues, & theſe muſt be more dryed then other parts which be leſſe moiſt. As for example the Balanus muſt be more dryed then the prepuce that couereth it, by reaſon it is more humid. The intemperie being taken away, we come to the curation of the vlcer, for the which we diuerſifie the remedie, according to the nature of the ſayd vlcer. Then firſt you ſhall perceaue if it be virulent, which is leſſe ſuſpected then the ſordid. The vlcers virulent and corroſiues doe proceede of corrupted bilious humor, the which taketh the origine from the vlcers which are in the conduits of women, being irrited eyther by great confrication, or elſe by ſome venim in the capacitie of the matrix, which newlie hath beene receaued by ſome man infected with Gonorrhea

Virulent, or vlcer in the yeard, the which humor being rendered more maligne and adherent, ſticketh preſently to the poroſities of the yeard, and there-vpon falleth a great heat and dolor pricking and corrodent, which vlcereth the part, the cullour whereof is yellow towards the midſt, the borders be pale or red, the figures vnequalls. For the curation of the which, firſt you ſhall order good regime, purgations, letting of blood, obſeruing alwayes ſuch cautions, as you haue heard, auoyding to vſe no medicine that be of ſacultie repercuſſiue, for in theſe we muſt take heede that we ſhould not chaſe the humors to the noble parts, or to any other part: for nature ſending that way, if you put it backe with repercuſſiue medicaments, vndoubtedly the Spaniſh ſi
                     •
                  knes will followe. Therfore you ſhall hold from the part affected, (as alſo from other parts neere to it) remedies repercuſſiues, for ſuch reaſons as you haue heard. In the beginning vſe ſuch as haue the force to dull the arcimonie of the humor, like as to touch it with water of Sublimat, or ſtrong water, or the blew water, which is commonly vſed, or pouder of Mercury, or a little of my pouder ſet downe in The Poore mans guide, called Puluis Neapolitanus, moſt excellent for diuers vlcers. That being done, you ſhall prouoke the fall of the Eſcare, the which ſhall be done by the application of theſe remedies, like as Vnguent Baſilicon, Butter, Muſcilages of the ſeede of both Mallowes, and of Line, and ſuch like. Yet beware that the ouer great vſage of theſe remedies ſhould not render the vlcers filthie and rotten. Alſo haue care of the body, for if it be plethorick or cacochimick, the acrimonie of theſe remedies may irrit the vlcers, and ſo cauſe them to degenerat in. Vlcers, Maligns, Gangrens, and Carcinomes. Therefore if you perceaue the vlcers irrited by the venenoſitie of the humor, ſo that there be no remedie, make a particuler rubbing on the adiacent parts, compoſed of things that haue the vertue to reſolue, heate, and conſume, but alwayes you muſt mingle with it a little of Mercure well prepared. For the ſame effect you may vſe particuler perſumes and ſuffumigations: ſuch as is ſet downe in the Chapter of perfumes. Then the malice being corrected, and the virulent humor digered, and become white and thicke, which are ſignes of good nature, mundifie the vlcer, and dry it with proper medicaments, as with pouder of Aloe, Thus, Sarcocolle, Mirth, burnt Lead, Pompholix, the which you may vſe alone, or mingled with ſome oyntment, as Pompholix, Album Raſis, Deſiccatinum Rubenum, or this, Recipe battature eris, & eris combuſti, vnc. 1, terre sigillate, vnc. 3, olei Maſtic. et Cidon. vnc. 2, fiat Vnguentum. If by the vſage of theſe remedies the vicers heale not, be aſſured that the body is ouer-charged with humors, and that the generall diſeaſe will followe. Therefore when you perceaue ſuch things, cauſe the ſicke to vſe of my confection, the ſpace of 15, dayes with a decoction of Salſparill or Chine, according vnto the temperature. VVhen the vlcer is betweene ye Prepuce and Balanus, it cauſeth ſomtime ſuch inflamation and tumor in the Prepuce, that hardly or not at all the Glande can be diſcouered, to ſee thoſe vlcers, and then in ſtead of Emplaiſters and Vnguents we vſe diſtilled waters, collires, decoctions, whereof we make iniections with ſiringu
                     •
                  s or other wayes. Neuertheleſſe thoſe things muſt be compoſed according to the diſpoſition of the malady, eyther to cleanſe, reſolue, ſoften, or drie. The iniections being ſo compoſed, you ſhall vſe refrenants, like as iuices of hearbs, Oxicrat, Cerat Gallien, Vnguentum Nutritum. Afterward clenſe the vlcers with ſcouring waters, like as Plantine, Eupatory, Wormewood mingled with Syrrop of Abſint, or of Roſes, or of Honny, or a little of Egiptiac. Other-wayes this that followeth, which is both cleanſing & drying. Recipe vini albi lib. 1, Aquar. Roſ. & Plantag. an quartam vnam, Auripigm. drag. 2, Virid. aris drag. 1, Aloes & Mirrhae ſer. 2, terrantur ſubtiliſſime & fiat Collirium. So by the vſage of theſe remedies the vlcers ſhall be cleanſed and dryed.
            
            
               
               The 3, Chap. ſheweth the way to cure the Venerean Bubons, which are commonly called Pullains.
               THE body being oppreſſed by this venim and chiefely the Liuer, nature doth force it ſelfe by the vertue expultrice of the ſayd Liuer, to caſt out that which is hurtfull on the parts moſt weake of our body, which are ye little glandes betwixt the thigh and the body, whereof certaine byles and apoſtumes doe proceede, commonlie called Pullains or Bubons, the which for the moſte parte, are colde tumors, of a matter thicke and vitious, and are long in opening. There be other that proceede of humor hote and ſharpe in theſe parts, which doth make great tumor, with great inflamation accompanied with extreame paine. Theſe doe open ſooner. Now of theſe tumors ſome appeare neere the glands, ſome in the membrance that couereth the glands, & ſome in their propper ſubſtance, and of theſe ſome doe apoſtume, others not, and ſome degenerat in vlcers virulens and corroſiues; the which are healed by the generall cure, ſome are cured by particuler cure, ſome retire to the internall parts, and are ſimptoms, precedents, or forreyders to the generall diſeaſe, like as oft we ſee. As for the curation of thoſe tumors, firſt the regime vniuerſall muſt be duly obſerued in the ſixe vnnaturall things, abſtayning from ſuch things as be contrary, according vnto that which you haue heard in the generall chapter of the former treatiſe: purge lightly with ſome ſuch things which ſhall onely purge the firſt vaynes, and helpe nature to chaſe the euill humors to the Emunctories. Beware of ſtrong purgations, for they reuoke the humor to the centre of the body, and the letting of blood in the arme doth the ſame effect. Therefore vſe onely ſuch medicines as doe meekely purge, and let onely blood in the legg or foote. As for the topical remedies, they ſhall be neyther reſolutiue nor repercuſſiue, as ſome doe, by reaſon that the reſolutiue doe onely conſume the more ſubtill, and the thicker doth remaine, which is cauſe afterward of the vniuerſall ſicknes, and the repercuſſiue doe reuerberat thoſe maligne and venimous humors into the inward parts, whereby the vniuerſall ſicknes may alſo be cauſed. Therfore thou ſhalt abſtaine from ſuch things, cauſing the ſick to make light exerciſe, for that maketh the humors diſcend and auoyde more eaſily. Alſo for the prouocation of the ſame, yee ſhall applie ventouſes and drawing medicaments, according vnto the nature of the humor. Neuertheleſſe, begin at things more weake, by reaſon that all ſuddaine and violent motions are hurtfull and dangerous to nature, by making ſuddaine or violent attraction, as alſo for that the tenuitie of the attractiues may make euacuation of a part, the reſt may irrit, & not obey the attractiues. For this cauſe, ye ſhall mingle with the attractiues ſome emplaiſtrick medicament, which ſhall be made in this forme following: Rec. Ficuum pinguinum, num. 6. Paſſular. mundatar. vnc ſem. Rad. Althaeae, et Brionae an vnc. 1. Coquantur & adde cappar. ſub cineribus coctor. capitū lilior. albor. an vnc. 3. Cum fermento, ſale, et vitellis oner. vel Axungia, et fiat Cataplaſmum. If yee thinke good, to mingle therewith Gumme Ammoniack, Galbanum, Bdellium, & Oppopanax, it ſhall be well. For the ſame purpoſe ye may vſe the emplaiſter Diachilon magnum cum Gummis, Apoſtolicum Nicolai, de Melileto. This beeing done, and the humor drawne to a circonference, it ſhall be neceſſarie to vſe ſome ſuppuratiue medicaments, as this, Rec. rad. Althaeae, et Lilior. an vnc 3. Fel. Maluae, Biſmaluae, Parietariae et Violar. ſub Prunis coctar. an vnc 1. Coquantur et terrantur, addendo axungiae porci, vel Buturi ſine ſale, vnc 3. Oleor. Lilior. & Violar. an vnc 2. Vitellos anor. duos, et formetur Cataplaſma, the which if ye eſteeme not ſtrong enough, vſe this, Rec. Rad. Lilior. Brionae, Althaeae, figilli beatae Mariae, an vnc 1. ſem. Lapathi, Cepar, et allior. ſub Prunis coctor. an vnc 2. Coquantur, et conterrantur, addendo axungiae porci, anſeris, Gallinae, an vnc 1. Gummi Ammoniaci, & Galbani in aceto diſſoluti, an drag. ſem. Olei Lilior. et Lumbricor. an vnc ſem. Fermenti acerrine, vnc 1. fiat Cataplaſma. With theſe things, and other ſuch like remedies, yee ſhall continue till ſuch time the humor come to full ripenes, in the vſage whereof, ye ſhall put alwaies an Emplaiſter of Baſilicon, the breadth of a groate, and apply it on the part more iminent vnder the Cataplaſma.
               
                  
Then the perfect maturation being done, it may be opened three waies, to wit, by the Lancet, by the Cautere actuall, and by the Cautere potentiall, the which apertion muſt be made according to the rectitude of the Fibres and that ſhal be done by the potentiall Cautere, by reaſon that the heare thereof helpeth the ſuppuration of the cold humor. Make good opening, to the effect the thicke humor contained may auoide more eaſilie. Defer not long the apertion, by reaſon that oftentimes, the matter contained, lifteth vp vapours of the ſame nature to the noble parts, & the long ſtay maketh the humors take theyr courſe to the center of the bodie, cauſing thereby the generall ſicknes, the which if you perceiue, apply attractiues, and doe what you can to comfort and corroborate the noble parts, vſing alſo good regime. For by theſe meanes, nature putteth the humors forth, eyther in the ſame place, or in the emunctories of the hart, as I haue ſeene in one that I haue cured, to whom theſe accidents did happen. The ſuppuration and the opening made, as it ought to be, ye ſhall produce the fall of the Eſcare, either by freſh Butter, Axungie, or Baſilicon, or common digeſtiue. Afterward, mundifie and cicatriſe the vlcer, as in others. That being done, purge well the body, and let blood alſo, according vnto the habitude. If it happeneth that the vlcers ſuppure not well, but remaines hard, tumified, and ſordid, the borders turned ouer, reſiſting all common remedies, you ſhall iudge the ſicknes to follow: whereuppon you ſhall vſe good regime for a certaine ſpace, with decoction of Gaiac, and ſome other medicament, to corroborate the noble parts, to the end they may the better chaſe ſorth that which is hurtfull: the which if all be not ſufficient, we come to the generall cure of the diſeaſe, and this is the order that yee ſhall vſe in the curation of theſe tumors.
            
            
               The 4. Chapter ſheweth the way to cure the Chaudepiſſe Virulent, called Stranguria Virulenta.
               I Haue heere determined to ſpeake of the fluxe Spermatick and Gonorrhea, virulent or Chaudepiſſe, which is moued by the contagion of thoſe that are infected with that venerian venim. Chaudepiſſe is an inflamation of the glands proſtates and paraſtates, ſituate in the beginning of the necke of the bladder, the which are proper domicils to the Sperme, before it be caſt forth. But Chaudepiſſe or Gonorrhea virulent, differeth ſomewhat from Gonorrhea not virulent, becauſe (as ſaith Gallen,) De locis affectis. Gonorrhea, is an inuolentarie emiſſion of the Sperme, without eyther putrefaction or vlcers, but in the Chaud
                     •
                  piſſe virulent, is a continuall extention of the yeard, with retraction of the ſame: in like manner, emiſſion not onely of the Sperme as is in the vlcers, but alſo of humors putride. Neuertheleſſe, it ſhall not be amiſſe to ſpeak ſomewhat of Gonorrhea not virulent, becauſe it hath ſome affinitie with the other, as alſo becauſe they happen both in thoſe parts. Whereof there is two ſorts, to wit, that which is done by repletion, and that which is done by inanition. By repſetion, as thoſe that haue great aboundance of ſperme, the which ſometime nature of her ſelfe doth expell for to be diſcharged, and ſomtimes it may be diſſolued againſt the heate of the ſunne, and by ſetting the backe long againſt a hote fire, & alſo by riding a trotting horſe, as by all other motions excalefactiues. which inflame thoſe parts, and make fluxion, and ſometime by the vſage of Beere and all foodes vaporous, thick, and vitious, the which make inflamation, and doe cauſe attraction of humors: in like manner, by paine and weakenes of the part, which receiueth not onelie the ſeede, but alſo the euill humors of the parts adiacents, the which putrifie & follow continually by the yeard. Sometime, (as ſaith Arnaldus,) it may happen, that it Apoſtumeth by reaſon of the great aboundance of humore, which doe putrifie the proſtates, and that without any outward appearance, as I proued in Paris in a Turke, bond-ſlaue to the Embaſſadour of Spaine, who had ſuch a fluxe for plenitude and lack of womans help, of the which came dolors intollerable inwardly and outwardly, with two great vlcers in the perinium, & ſuppreſſion of vrine, the which accident happened to this man two ſundrie times in three yeeres. It is ſomtime accompanied with great inflamation of one part of the Scrotum, ſomtimes it ſuppureth, other-whiles it reſolueth, which happeneth ſeldome.

When this happeneth, neither is the erection of the yeard dolorous, nor the making of water, by reaſon that ſeldom chanceth vlcers in the conduit of the vrine, as alſo little habitation with women, which might haue brought the matter that way, & excoriat thoſe parts, by the acrimonie and putrefaction. So by thys and diuers other conſiderations, wee may cleerely know, that the ſeede muſt be euacuated, eyther by ordinory meanes or extraordinarie, or els it becommeth putrified, and put forth by ſome Apoſtume, otherwiſe it remaineth within, of the which come many greeuous maladies.
               The ſecond kind of Gonorrhea not virulent, is done by inanition, and happeneth oft to thoſe who doe think profoundly of loue, or that haue fine wiues, or elſe that the veſſels ſpermaticall haue receiued ſome ſtroke, or by ſitting vpon colde ſtones, alſo by rubbing with cold liniments, by falls and ſtrokes vpon the loynes, by ouer hot bathes, for by all theſe the veſſels are rendred weake. Furthermore the ſperme being ouer ſharpe and thinne, doth likewiſe ſometime cauſe that accident, which may alſo be cauſed by hauing ouerſoone vſed the act venerean. All theſe make heate and inflamation in thoſe parts, wherby happeneth attraction of the humor, which being drawne, paſſeth continually, partly by the heat, and partly by the weaknes of the vertues retentrices of the ſayd parts. So that oftentimes it paſſeth ſanguinolent, halfe elabred, being ſometimes pure blood, the which maketh men become Ethick and Tabids, ſo bringeth death to many of them, by reaſon of the great and continuall euacuation of the vitall ſpirits which paſſe with the ſeede. So that in no way this is to be neglected. Somtimes this happeneth to men for one of theſe three cauſes, the which are all but friuolous. The firſt is to appeaſe the great appetite of that carnall loue which they beare to their wiues, not hauing their minds occupyed in any affaires, but in thoſe vanities, & ſuch men are better willing then their hability ſufficeth. Secondly they doe it to vaunt their ſelues, to be ſo mighty in the action that no man can approach them, & this is a fooliſh vaunt without profit: nay it is very hurtfull to the body. Thirdly they doe it for the great affection that they haue to get children, thinking by oft vſing their wiues, that they ſhall ſooner procreat, wherein they are much deceiued. For not gyuing leaſure to the ſeede to be ſufficiently elabored, ſo that it is no more profitable then water, for that effect. There be two properties which the good ſeede ought to haue, as I haue amplie ſet downe in the Treatiſe of The ſicknes of women, in the Chapter of the cauſes, and the cure of ſterilitie. Firſt, there muſt be a reaſonable quantitie of the ſeede: next it muſt be well digeſted, gluent, and full of ſpirits, the which two poynts fayleth in thoſe that returne to it ſo oft. For neyther haue they quantitie, nor giue they leyſure to digeſt the ſame. So that they proue ſooles, to ruine their bodies without eyther honor or profit. This ſicknes is called in our tongue the Reples, for the curation whereof, (as alſo of Satyriaſis & Priapiſmus) you ſhall heare at length in the Treatiſe called The poore mans guide. But to returne to our purpoſe, the Gonorrhea or Chaudepiſſe virulent, the which is done by ſome venimous ſprite that infecteth thoſe parts: The cauſe is by hauing to doe with women that are vncleane, whereby men get the infection of that venenoſitie which hath aſſoped and infected ſuch parts. The ſimptoms are extreame dolor in making water by the acrimonie of the humor, which maketh eroſion and vlcers, chiefely in the proſtats, and alſo neere the balhnus or gland, by reaſon of the ſimpathie, that theſe parts haue one with an other, and great payne in the erection of the yeard, which maketh contraction of the ſame. Of the which doth often follow the generall ſicknes, and that oft by their owne negligence, neglecting the remedies, thinking that by ſuffering the ſame runne a long time, the humor venimous ſhould be euacuated, not thinking that the venenoſitie doth alwayes augment it ſelfe by the acrimonie of the humor, which doth communicat to the noble parts, or at the leaſt doth degenerat into maligne vlcers in thoſe parts, which be very difficult to heale. VVhich accidents doe alſo happen ſometimes by carnoſities in the yeard, hindering the vrine to paſſe, ſo that oft commeth death, if ſuddaine order be not taken. As for the cure of Gonorrhea virulent, the vniuerſall things muſt be obſerued according to the habitude of the body. Beware eyther of ſtrong drink, or of ſtrong purgation, or bleeding in the 
                     〈◊〉
                   leaſt you reuoke the venim to the noble parts. Keepe good regime, and abstai
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
ſtrong drinke, all hote meates, and ſuch as you haue heard of before, as all things that haue vertue to heare the blood. It ſhall be well done, to vſe decoction of Salſparill and Chine, and alſo the remedie that heere followeth, which hath the vertue to open, & make education of the humor that followeth, as alſo to cleanſe and looſe. Recipe terehent veneta drag. 3, lauetur in aqua ſ Cabioſae & Cicorei pul. liquerit. drag ſem Rhubarb. ſcr. 2, formentur pilulae. Let the Patient take it all at once in the morning, and repete it euery day till the acrimonie of the humor be paſſed, vſing ſomtimes drag. 6, or vnc, 1, of Caſſe. Alſo Emulſions, which ſhall be compoſed after this forme that followeth. Recipe ſeminum ſrigid. maiorum an drag. 2, Amigdal, dul vnc. ſem, aquarum Port
                        •
                     lacae, & Plantag. ana vnc. 2, decoct. liquerit. lib. 1, ſir. viol. e
                        •
                     iuiubus, ana vnc. 1, ſem. Let him vſe this euery day day, morning and euening. Alſo he ſhall vſe this remedy moſt ſoueraigne for his purpoſe, which hath the vertue both to conſume the venim, to cleanſe and cicatriſe the part which is vlcered, made after this forme, Recipe Carabis & oſſis ſepiae and drag. 6, Salſaeparillae recentis, Cortic
                        •
                      Gaiaci, Ligni Rhodij, Santali Citrini, Ligni Aloes, ana drag. 2, inedulae 4, ſeminum maior. frigidor. & ſem Carthami an drag, 1, Rhubarb. drag. 2, ſem, Cinam
                        •
                     mi, Macis, Flor. Cordialium, an ſcr. 2, Hidrarg. Deſpumati, drag ſem. Pul. Dianiſi & Diambrae, Raſ. Eboris, cornu cerui non vsti an drag. 2. farinae hordei Biſcoctae drag 6, terebent. q. ſ. fiat Maſſa Pilular. Capiat drag 1, ſingulis matutinis per 3, horas ante iuſculum. So hee ſhall continue to the perfect curation. Moreouer for the ſame purpoſe he may vſe 20, or 30, graines of the powder Arabica, taking of it foure times ſixe graines euery time. As for the topicall remedies we muſt vſe no repercuſſiue, for ſuch cauſe as you haue heard. Vſe onely ſuch remedies as haue the vertue to dull the malice of ye humor, wherof iniections ſhall be made, as this that followeth. Recipe Bugloſſi, Borrag, Scabioſae, Roſar. an M. 1, raſurie medul. ligni ſancti vnc. 1, macerentur per 24, horas in decoct. herbar. predictar. Hidrargiri bene extincti & cum theriaca diſſoliti drag 2, Diſtillr. in balneo M. & vſui ſeruentur. If this cauſeth paine or heate, you may vſe in the beginning ſuch things as haue the vertue to obtund the dolor, like as theſe Muſcilages that followe. Recipe Muſcilag. ſem maluae, Lactucae, Pſillij, Cydonior. & Lini, extractae in aquis Biſmaluae & Roſar. vnc. 3. If the temperature be cold, applie the Emplaiſter of Vigo cum Mercurio on the Perineum, and rub thoſe parts, as alſo the Scrotum with the Roſat M
                     •
                  ſues, wherewith ſhall be incorporat a little of Fugitiue. The doſe ſhall be according vnto vnc. 2, of Fugitiue in the pound of the reſt. If the temperature be hote and bilious, vſe Ceratum Sendalinum on thoſe parts to hinder the inflamation. But becauſe by communication the kidneyes be ſomtime inflamed, and in that, we do annoynt theſe parts with Oxirhodinum, or Ceratum Refrigerans Galeni, and alſo this liniment which followeth. Recipe Axungi
                        •
                      Galiinae recentis ſexies lotae in aquae Roſatij Aquae Violariae vnc. 2, vel 3, olei de papauare & Muſcilag ſem. Pſillij extractae in aqua Lactucae an vnc. 1, ſucci vmbilici veneris & ſemperuini minoris vel maiorit ana vnc. ſem Camphorae drag ſem cere q. ſ. ſiat linimentum. For the ſame purpoſe in broad plattine or blade of Lead, being rubbed with Quickſiluer, & applyed to the loines. Then after we haue vſed theſe remedies a certaine ſpace, to obtund the vehemencie of the venim we come to iniections deterſiues, which ſhall be made of the water aboue written, ſo that you mingle with it a little of ſyrop of Roſes, or Hony, or Abſint, vſing alwayes the liniment on the region of the kidneyes and perineum. If this iniection doth not cleanſe ſufficiently, you ſhall add to fiue ounces of it, two dragmes of Egiptiack, ſo being mundified, you ſhal paſſe to remedies deſiccatiues, & Cicatriſents compoſed of decoction of Plantine, Solanum, Burſapaſtoris, of each a little, and boyle them in Smiths water, thereafter ſtraine it throgh a cloth, & put to it a little of Terraſigil. or Vitrioli Albi, or Albi Raſis wt a little of ſyrop of Abſint. Somtimes the kidneyes are offended, the which if ſo be, they remaine ſo without any curing. Theſe be for the moſt part the ſimptoms that happen to this diſeaſe, the which are both maligns, cacoethick, and difficult to heale. Yet the generall ſicknes doth not alwayes follow. There happeneth oftentimes vehement dolor in the parts affected, for the which euacuat the body, and vſe liniments anodius of Axungia humana, Auſeris, & Galline, ana vnc. 1, ſs. Hidrarg. preparati drag. 3, fiat linimentū. Alſo a Cataplaſme of Medulla Panis Tritici in Lacte cocti, and diuers others of lyke vertue, after the method

compoſed, as yee ſhall heare more at large in my fore-named Chirurgerie Teatiſe of Remedies for the ſame.
            
            
               The fift Chapter. Of the carnoſitie or exereſcence of fleſh that happeneth in the wand or yeard.
               THIS which wee call carnoſitie, is an excreſcence of the fleſh, which groweth in the conduit of vrine, or channell of the wand or yeard, the which happeneth by reaſon of ſome vlcers, or excoriation in thoſe parts, cauſed by acrimonie of humor and vrine: the which corrodeth and vlcereth the paſſage of vrine in men, & the necke of the matrixe in women, of the which come moſt grieuous ſickneſſes, and oftentimes death, if that the learned and skilfull Chirurgian giue not the better order for the curation hereof, which ſhall conſiſt in remedies vniuerſall and particuler, as alſo medicaments. Cathareticks, which be moſt propper for the conſumption of the fleſh. Yet in the applying of the ſame, there muſt be good iudgement vſed, by reaſon that the parts about it be ſoft and delicat, and ſo eaſie to excoriat, alſo very ſenſible and dolorous. For this cauſe, firſt of all we muſt well conſider if the Caruncle be olde or recent, for beeing old, oftentimes it happeneth that they be ſo hard that the medicaments cannot worke effectually. Then muſt the body be prepared by vniuerſall remedies, as yee haue heard in the former Treatiſe, becauſe the bodie being full of humors, the vſing of hote medicaments, ſuch as are the Cathereticks, make eaſily new fluxions on the part affected. Next, we muſt ſoften the carnoſitie inwardly, with iniections which haue the vertue to ſoften, as this following.
               Take rootes of Althea, leaues of Mallowes, & wilde Mallowes, Parietarie, Mercuriall; and ſuch like. Make a decoction in water or milke, of the which make iniections in the yeard. Outwardly we make fomentations with the ſame decoction, adding to it fat Figgs, ſem. lini et Fenugreci, with a little of Spodium. Alſo in ſtead of the fomentation, make a Semicupium, wherein ye ſhall bathe thoſe parts a certaine ſpace, and dry them well afterward. Yee ſhall make an embrocation or linement of Axungia humana, Gallinacea, Ceruina, Vaccina, Vitulina, cum Gummis Galbani, Ammoniaci et Bilelij, et olei Lumbri
                     •••
                   Camomille, et Amygdalar. dulcium. That beeing done, apply the Emplaiſter of Vigo ſine Mercurio, in oleo Liliaceo, et irino diſſolutum, or in place of that, Ceratum Philippi, Philaggrij, or Dyalthea: ſo continue with theſe and ſuch like, till ſuch time the carnoſitie be ſoftened, and brought to the quality of the recent: the which beeing done, you ſhall haue a wax-candle for the purpoſe, rub it with a little of roſat Meſues, or ſyrrop of dry Roſes, and minge therewith a little of the powder of Sabine. If that the candle may not paſſe, we vſe an inſtrument of Lead, made in the ſame forme, which may be put in more rudelie, alwaies being rubbed with Quickſiluer, cheefely in the part of the carnoſitie. In people that be robuſt, I haue vſed for the conſumption of the fleſh, roſat Meſues incorpored with a little of Sublimat, of the which I haue founde good ſucceſſe; alſo thys that followeth. Take a little of Orpiment, the ſhells of Eggs burned, the ſhells of Muſcles put into very ſmall powder, and mingle it with roſat Meſues, Cerat Galien, or a little of Oyle of ſweet Almonds. This remedy folowing is very good for tender people. Take Pompholix well waſhed with water of Plantine, mingle with the ſame a little of the powder of Sabine, and put on the little waxe-candle. If for the vſage of theſe remedies, dolor or inflamation doe happen, or if the carnoſitie be conſumed, yee ſhall vſe this water following, which is moſt excellent, both for the appeaſing of all dolors, and alſo for drying. Roc. Album on
                        •
                     r. q. ſ. Agitentur diu, deinde excipiatur illa aqua, qua remanet, poſea mitte aquā Plantag. et roſ. bis tantum quantum ex ouis Camphora par. Viridis eris parum. Theſe beeing ſo incorporat altogether, it ſhall be paſſed three or foure times through a cloth, and then put it vp in Glaſſes for your vſe. It is excellent for diuers things, but chiefely for the ci
                     •
                  atriring of theſe vlcers, which come of carnoſities. In the end of the cure it ſhall be requiſite to purge the body, to the end it may be well clenſed of all the venim that may happen. So

by dealing theſe waies thou ſhalt haue good ſucceſſe. In the meane time you may doe well to vſe of my conſection ſome ſixe or eight dayes, for it is moſt excellent and neceſſary for thys purpoſe, as I haue often proued.
            
            
               The ſixt Chapter. Of the ſwelling of the bones, which are called Tophes and Nodoſities.
               IN thys place I ſhall ſpeake of certaine tumors, which doe occupy the bones, commonlie called Tophes, or ſwelling of the bones. Theſe ſwellings for the moſt part be engendred of an humor petuitous, thicke, tardiue, and viſcous: ſoked in, not onelie in the parts neere the bones, but alſo in the proper ſubſtance of it ſelfe, ſometime on the Perioſt, which is the membran that couereth the bone. Sometimes, the bone dooth rotte, and then the cure is more difficult and long. Neuertheleſſe, whether there be corruption or not, you ſhall heare the true cure in few words. Firſt and formoſt, if you find tumor without corruption in the bone, and done by maladie, yee ſhall cure it after the generall method, and by the application of the emplaiſters of Iohn de Vigo, cum duplici aut triplici Mercurio. If it come by depoſition, and the tumor very great, it ſhall bee cured after this forme following. Rec. Radicum Altheae, Brioinae, Cucumeris agreſtis, tenuiter inſciſar. at mundatar. an vnc 1, ſem. Folior. maluae, biſmaluae, Pariecarie, Mercurialis, et Enulae Campanae, an m. 1. Flor. et Folior. Cammomillae, et Meleloti, Roſar. et Anethi, an vnc, 2, Seminis Altheae, lini et foenugreci, an vnc ſem, fiat omnium decoctio in ſ. q. aquae, quae ſeruitur pro fotu, cum ſpongis, vel filtro ad ruberem vſque.
               
               After the fomentation vſe thys that followeth: Rec. vnguenti roſ. Meſues, vnc 3. Fugitiui exticti, et preparati vt decet, drag, 6, Agitentur ſimul, et fiat linementum. That being done, vſe the emplaiſter of Ioh. de Vigo, vnc 1, ſem. Emplaſtri filij Zacchari, vnc 1. Argenti viui, drag. 3. fiat emplaſtrum extenſum ſuper aluten. It ſhall be well done to mingle with it a little of Ireatum, as counſaileth Francantianus. Thus by the vſage of theſe remedies, with a iuſt forme of diet, the ſicke ſhall be healed perfectly. Nowe, if there bee corruption in the bone, notwithſtanding the vniuerſall cure which ſhall proceede, wee muſt come to another forme of cure particuler, whether it be in the legges or armes, in the crane, in ye noſe, or in the roofe of the mouth. Take good heede to the corruption which happeneth in the noſe or mouth, by reaſon that thoſe bones are ſpongious of themſelues, & by that meanes doth eaſily corrupt and fall, and then the ſicke ſhall feele dolor, and ſpeake alwaies in the noſe. Alſo that which he taketh by the mouth, for the moſt part doth come forth by the noſe, ſpecially things that be licquid. Then for the curation of theſe corruptions, we muſt firſt diſcouer the bone, eyther by Raſor or medicament Cauſtick. Afterward, touch it with the Cautere actuall, or hote yron, or with oyle of Vitrioll, or of Sulfur, but alwaies the Cautere actuall is the moſt ſure. It worketh ſuddainly, corroborateth the part, and conſumeth the maligne humor, and doth in ſhort ſpace, prouoke the ſeperation and falling of the bone putrified: therefore for thys purpoſe wee muſt haue Cauteres of diuers ſorts, as ſome round, ſome inciſiues, ſome long, ſome pointed, ſome triangles, according to the figure of the bone. The firſt muſt be inciſiue, called Culteller, the next round or long, as ye ſhall finde expedient: and being made red hote, yee ſhall rub the bone, till ſuch time as ye perceiue the moſt part of the humiditie and purrefaction to be conſumed. This being done, you muſt apply medicaments anodines, and ſuch as haue vertue to prouoke the fall of the ſcarre, as things vnctuous, like as is Butter, yolkes of Egges, mingled with oyle of Roſes or Violets, or ſome vnguent ſuppuratiue. The ſcarre beeing fallen, it muſt be mundified with this remedie. Recipe Therebint, Venetae lotae, vnc 4. Farinae hordei, & Orobi an drag. 2. ſyr. de Abſitio, Mel roſ. an drag, 1, Myrrhe, et Ireos Florent. an drag. 1, miſceantur. The part being clenſed, yee ſhall apply dry medicaments, the which dryeth without byting, and vſe of this powder that followeth, the which is of great force: Recip. Ariſtol. Myrrhe, Ceruſae, Plombini vſti ſaepiens in Aqua vitae, loti an dragme 2. Pul. Ostreor. combustor vnc. ſem. Terant tenuiſsime. Thys powder is excellent, being put on the ſore. It cauſeth to ſeperate

the rotten bones frō the whole: yet is it not the beſt way to pull the rotten bone by force from the whole, like as we doe in thoſe which are rotten becauſe externe, but rather let it fall of it ſelfe: notwithſtanding, forget not ſometime to ſhake the ſame, for by that meanes it will fall away the ſooner. You ſhall know when it will ſeperate by the comming 
                     •
                  oo
                     •
                  th of the blood. Nature before it doth ſeperate the corrupted from the whole, engendereth a certaine fleſh vpon the whole bone, to the end that when the corrupted dooth fall, the ayre ſhall not alter the whole, the which is a great prouidence of nature. If it be long in ſeparating, it ſhall be well done to bore the rotten bone in diuers places, till ſuch time as yee ſee the blood to come forth at 
                     •
                  hoſe holes. Nature doth helpe by the tranſpiration, to engender that fleſh which cauſeth it to ſeperate the ſooner. For the generation of that which is loſt, the foreſaid powders be very good, if there be mingled with them ſyrrop of Roſes, or of Abſint: and after all is well regenered as it ought, you ſhall conſolide & cicatrice the vlcers, like as in all other vlcers.
            
            
               The 7, Chapter of the Warts that come on the extremitie of the yeard, betwixt the prepuce and balanus.
               THere happeneth oftentimes certaine little excreſſence of fleſh like Warts betwixt the gland and prepuce, of the which there are two ſorts. The one proceedeth of the venerian ſicknes, the other not: yet neyther of them both for the moſt part dollorous, but very much troubleſome, by reaſon of the great number of them. The cauſe of ſuch as are venimous is the euill indiſpoſition of women accompanied with ſome infection. Thoſe which are not venimous happen by hauing to doe with women in the time of their purgations, of the which happeneth not onely that, but alſo many other greeuous diſeaſes both to the men, & alſo the children, which are conceaued at that time, for eyther they become Leapors vniuerſally, or ſome particuler part, which we call Elephanciaſis particuler, or if this happen not, yet the child is alwayes ſickly, and of ſhort lyfe: for this and diuers other cauſes it was forbidden in the 18, Chapter of Leuiticus to vſe the company of women at that time. But to returne to our putpoſe for the curing of theſe parts, whether they happen of the venerian ſicknes or otherwiſe, we muſt firſt conſider whether they be recent and ſoft, or inueterate and hard, as ſomtime it happeneth. If hard and inueterat, they muſt be ſoftened by ſuch remedies as you haue heard in the Chapter of Carnoſitie, and being ſoftened, they muſt be conſumed with powder of Sabine and Ocre well puluerized with an Emplaiſter of Cerus and a little Quickſiluer: being conſumed, vſe for the cicatrizing ſuch as you haue heard in Carnoſitie. Our Ancients, and chiefely Aetius, did cure them by cauſtick medicaments, the which are cruell, and not in vſe amongſt vs. I haue often cutte them with the ſheares, afterward conſumed them with powder Allumenus or water of the ſame, if they be very great, I knit them as well betwixt the perpuce and gland, as alſo without the prepuce. Touching which, I will recite a rare hiſtory, which happened to me in Paris in time of the laſt troubles. A certaine Noble man of Spaine hauing on the ſide of the prepuce exterieure, a creſſence of the quantitie of a great plum, and when the erection of the yeard was, it waxed as bigg as a tennis ball, ſo that hee could neuer accompany with any woman, in ſuch ſort that no Chirurgian neyther in Spaine nor Italie would take it in hand, at laſt he ſent for me, and after I had conſidered thereof, I vſed remedies roſolutiues for a time, but finding ſmall profit thereby, I did knit it in the preſence of Mounſier Le Fort, and Mounſier Pineau, Doctors in Chirurgie, and healed it with good ſucceſſe: after the ſame maner, you may cure all ſuch warts, which happen in any part.
            
            
               
               The 8, Chapter of falling of the haire.
               OFtentimes of this ſicknes commeth falling of the haire of the head, beard, and browes with great deformitie, for which we muſt giue order, both to take away the cauſe, and alſo to bring newe haire. The cauſe of this ſimptom is eyther that the aliment, wherewith the haire is nouriſhed, is corrupted and conſumed, or that the skin is dryed and preſſed together, ſo that it may not ingender that aliment fuliginous, whereby the haire is ingendred and nouriſhed. For the cure we muſt euacust the euill humor generally through all the bodie, or at leaſt of the parts affected, which may be done two wayes, to wit exterior and interior. Interior by maſticators to prouoke ſpitting, as Pereter, Maſtick, Pepper, after which we vſe exterior medicines, to cauſe the head to ſweat, by laying many clothes on the Patient, I find no remedie better for it, than by a hot houſe, or the reflex of heate which goeth from the fornis to the place where the head ſhall lye. If after euacuation the body be infected, there muſt be generall euacuation for that purpoſe, & herein you ſhall vſe the decoction of Salſparill and Gaiac for the ſpace of 15, dayes, with a little of my confection euery day, which is ſufficient to euacuat the humor, which offendeth. After this prouoke newe haire where it wanteth, which may be done ſundry wayes, yet ſomwhat painfull, for the which I will impart vnto you a very rare ſecret for growing of haire, and of great vallue, which I haue vſed in helping of diuers great men, when all their haire hath beene fallen, and within a ſhort ſpace it grew againe by helpe of this remedie, made after this manner. Take the rootes & leaues of Mallowes put of them in a ſtill one bed, then a bed of Honney, and ſo forth, one bed of them, and an other of Honney, till the ſtill be full. In the meane time you ſhall cut two or three Horſeleaches ſmall and mingle therewith, afterward diſtill all with a very ſoft fire, then diſtill that water againe in Balmo Marie, and let it ſtand in the Sunne the ſpace of 15, dayes, afterward rub the parts moſt voide of haire with that liquor 5, or 6, times a day. Alſo this remedie is very well ſet downe by Fumanellus, which is, Recipe apes crematas cum melleque commixtas et locum ſuperponito. Or this Vnguent. Recipe apum viſtarum, Adianti Vſti, Olei Roſati, quantum ſufficit, et fiat Vnguentum. Or this that followeth written by Marinellus. Recipe cineris cicadarum vstarum, cineris apum vstarum, Olei Myrtini, vel Axungiae, quantum ſufficit, muſte et fiat Vnguentum. Or this, Re. ſtercorum murium, et apum ana vnc. ſs. Vnguenti Populeonis vnc. ſs. miſte et fiat Vnguentum, de quo vngatur locus, ſed prius remoueantur crines. So by the vſage of theſe remedies, the haire ſhall eaſily-come againe.
            
            
               The 9, Chapter of Darters which happen in diuers parts of the body.
               OFtentimes after the vniuerſall cure of this ſicknes, there commeth in the face and palmes of the hands, feete, and through all the body certaine chaps and dry vlcers, which oftentimes are very large, and are commonly called Darters or Fiſſures ſetpiginous, which ſomtime be dolorious, other whiles not, ye parts where they are, be more thicke and dry, than the nature of the place is, and in rubbing of the part you ſhall perceaue white things like beaten ſugar. The cauſe of the which is a ſalt pituitous humor and chollerick, burnt by the intemperat heat of the lyuer ioyned with ſome venimous humor, which riſeth in the part, as chaunceth to them, who haue vſed too hote medicines in the cure of the generall diſeaſe, or elſe becauſe there remayneth ſome little portion of the venim in the body, the which is ſent to the externall parts at ſuch certaine times of the yeere, as the humor raigneth. For the cure heereof it is ſome-what hard, chiefely being inueterate, by reaſon that the liuer is affected, yet for the extirpation of the ſame, in ſo much as may be, we giue firſt order for the intemperie of the liuer, as wel by purgations and bleeding, as Apozemes and Opiats, or Conſerues to corroborat the liuer and rectifie the blood. The particuler remedies ſhall be in things that ſoften with ſome aſtriction, like as water of Allom or Sublimate, or thys which followeth: Rec. Aquae Maluarum,

Branci vrſini, Lapathi, an vnc. ſs. aquae Alcumiſtarum, vnc ſs. 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   all theſe well together, and rub the place affected.
               As for that which is inueterate, we muſt vſe perfumes and lineaments after the forme yee haue already heard, hauing alwaies conſideration of the perſon and time, as yee likewiſe often heard before: for it is not onely ſufficient for the Chirurgian to knowe the remedies, but he muſt alſo know the way to vſe them, according as precepts of Arte doe commaund. For the ſame purpoſe thys vnguent following is very good. Take Goates Greace, Ceruſſe of Venice, or a little powder of Vermillion, and rub the parts. Notwithſtanding all theſe remedies, they are ſometimes ſo difficult to heale, that we are conſtrained to vſe the generall remedy to bring them to a perfect curation.
            
            
               The 10. Chapter. Of vlcers in the mouth.
               THeſe vlcers and inflamations which come in the mouth and throat, happen by the motion of the venim to thoſe parts, and not by the vnguents, and perſumes, as ſome late Writers haue affirmed. Howſoeuer they happen, they muſt be cured after this manner following, which differeth ſomewhat from the curation of other vlcers, for we muſt in no wiſe vſe repercuſſiues, although there be ſome inflamation. Firſt, we muſt vſe anodine medicaments, as well to mittigate the great paine, if any be, which commonly happeneth through the acrimonie of the humor, as alſo to purge the groſſe humor, which cleaueth to the internall parts of the mouth, which augmenteth the vlcers. This ſhall be eyther done with milke, or decoction of Barley, mingling there-with a little ſyrop of Violets, which muſt be holden a certaine ſpace in the mouth, to mittigate the paine. Alſo the Muſſilages of Maluae, Althae, Lini, Spilij, et fenugreci extracti in aqua hordei, parietarie, et maluae. Beware alwayes in the beginning to vſe things too much cleanſing, for it cauſeth dolor: ſomtimes by the great fluction the parts are ſo ſwolne by the aboundance of the humor, in ſuch ſort that the ſpirits are ſuffocated, and cannot ſhew them ſelues; whereby there comes often mortification and gangrene, which when it happeneth, we vſe aſtringent medicines, as Decoctionis Hordei, Platage, Burſae Pastoris, Solani, cum Siro: Roſarum, et Violarum, Papaueris et Hyoſiami, you may likewiſe vſe this decoction deterſiue. Recipe hordei mundi Ma. 1, Buliant in ſuffiente quantetate aquae ad conſumptionem mediae partis, deinde adde mellis vel ſiropi Roſati, vnc. duas, if the putrifaction be great and this remedy not ſufficient, we add vnto it a little Calcantum, Aegiptiacum: or this which followes. Recipe Decoctionis, Hordaei, Plantagenis, Pimpinellae, Agramoniae, Roſarum, an. lib. 1, deinde diſſolue mellis Roſati et Diamoron an. vnc. ſs. And make a gargariſme, the vlcer being cleanſed, and the putrifaction ſtayed, we add Man. 1, of the hearb called Cauda Equina, to the decoction of Barly aboue ſpecified. Aquae Ferratae et Plantagenis an. lib. ſs. Allumenis Rochei drag. 8, coquantur omnia ſimul ad codſumtionem mediae partis, and with this decoction waſh the mouth 3, or 4, times a day, then the vlcers beeing dryed and the ſimptoms ceaſed, you ſhall purge the body gently, becauſe that often times a little corruption remayning in the body the ſicknes is reſediue, that being done we vſe perſumes of hearbs, like as you haue heard in the Chapter of perfumes, for that hath the vertue to expell that which is offenſiue, and alſo to corroborat the parts, and to cloſe the poares and cundits of the skinne.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   