
      
         
            
            
            THE MASSACRE of Money.
            Terunteo seu vitiosa nuce non emitur.
            LONDON Printed by Thomas Creede, for Thomas Bushell. 1602.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE WORshipfull, vertuous, and most worthy Gentlemen, M. VVilliam, and M. Frauncis Bedles, health, and theyr hearts content.
            
               ALthough your worthinesse may seeme in all mens iudgements to merit a more polisht stile, or better contriued plot, then you are likely to finde here: yet that my affection may bee somewhat answerable to your great deseruings, I make bold to tender you this youngling Poesie: which for the worth is not equiualent to your dignitie, yet being the first fruites of my labours, I trust will be accepted of you; which if I finde, when my riper yeares shall attaine to better knowledge, I will endeuour to make my proceedings answere

more fully to your merits. Till then let this slender worke be a true signall of the dutious affection I beare you, which to augment, I will endeuour continually.
            
               
                  Your approued friend and seruant: T. A.
            
         
         
            
            Proemium.
            
               THou silent nurse of still securitie,
               That do'st in hollow closets sh
                     ••
                   mine eyes,
               Mother of darkenesse, Queene of secrecie,
               Pleasing grim labour, with restes liberties.
               Thou that death-like enfeeblest euery sence,
                     Nox terrae vmbra.
                  
               
               The shadow of this earth's circumference.
            
            
               Bereaue my pen of all amazing feare,
               Turne disturbation forth to mutinies,
               Let me be bold in this darke Hemispheare,
               A thought conceiued dreame to canonize.
               And whiles pale Cinthia courts her Paramour,
                     Mu
                           •
                        s amica requies.
                  
               
               Muse, sing my dreamed Moneys Massacre.
            
            
               Dread Pallas teach me to anatomize
               The hidden inside of close errours maske:
               Let me descry the ranke absurdities,
               That Folly sets her schollers for a taske.
               Folly, blind Folly, is inthronized,
                     Regmar stultiti
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                  
               
               And for a Queene by fooles authorized.
            
            
               Ye foule dissembling frye of flatterers,
               Coner your faces from my speedie glance,
               Ye fawning Gnathoe's, ye damn'd pilferers,
               I will vnmaske your hooded countenance.
               Ye gold-intombing hellish vsurers,
                     A
                           •
                        ari morientur amissa pecuni
                           •
                        .
                  
               
               Foresee yours, and your moneys massacres.
            
            
               
               I am in labour, and the time expect▪
               
               To be deliuered of a 
                     〈◊〉
                   dreame,
               Good fortune as a midwife I respect,
               Fauour a nurse to cherish my young theame.
               
                  
                     Iudicium rerum probatio.
                  
"True iudgement in the schooles of equitie,
               "Weigh my compendious toyle and industrie.
            
            
               If Nicenes daughter, Curiositie,
               Offer to view these youngling lines of mine,
               Be bolde to tell her that her critique eye
               Had need weare spectacles, ere she can signe.
               
                  
                     Nox omnia condit.
                  "The clowdie acoents whose birth then was found,
               "When Negro night enuironed this round.
            
            
               If Aristarchus from his withered lippe,
               Let fall a drop of Aqua-fortis ho
                     •
                  ie,
               Or if in Satyres oyle his penne he dippe,
               And in the margeant paint an enuious spotte.
               
                  
                     Vultus Index animi.
                  "Tell him (my Muse) if he could see his face,
               "He would descry mine offred, his disgrace.
            
            
               But whosoe'r from his impartialleie,
               Will cast sweete lookes on these laborious lines,
               Weighing my accents with iust equitie,
               And so speake of them as in them he findes,
               
                  
                     Impareum iudicium rectissimum.
                  "Him as a fautour honour still will I,
               "And to his praise, ere bend my poesie.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The Massacre of Money.
            
               BEfore the heauen had put on heau'ns face,
               Or Neptunes waues a chanel'd sea had found,
               Before earth knew her now abiding place,
               Or ayre had residence aboue the ground,
               Or fire assum'd the highest place of all,Mundus non aeternus.
               
               To make her brightnesse more maiesticall.
            
            
               Before the Sunne knew his ecliptique line,
               Or the round balles of fire their wheeling spheares,
               Before the forked Moone began to shine,
               Or any Comet in the ayre appeares,Externa species rei decus.
               
               A clotter'd Chaos, and confused mould,
               Was all this glorious all, which we behold.
            
            
               But natures nature, God omnipotent,
               Bestow'd a formall shape on all this frame,
               Making each thing; erst shapelesse, competent,
               Creating man to celebrate his fame.
               Then did the golden age repleat with treasures,Aurea aetas.
               
               Bring in the Cornucopia of pleasures.
            
            
               No threatning lawe with sharpe spurd punishment,
               Gaue out edicts to curbe a lawlesse rowte:
               Blacke mutiny in prison then was pent,
               And outrage still was kept aloofe by scowte.
               No man came to the Iudge with cap in hand,St
                        ••
                      pro lege voluntas.
               
               The iudgement still of euery one did stand.
            
            
               
               The loftie Pines men on the mountaines finde,
               That now are plowing vp the Ocean,
               No sayles bigge-belly'd with the wanton winde,
               Hast to a farre remoued region.
               
                  Sua cuique regio rectissiana.Men knew no countreys but their natiue soyle,
               None offred to attempt an others spoyle.
            
            
               No towne was circled with entrenched walles,
               No trumpet gaue alarum to the fight:
               No sword was knowne, nor vsed: no Iron balles
               From out the wherring Cannons mouth tooke flight.
               
                  Sine vomere Fertilis ager.No plow did cut the entralles of the earth,
               Yet all of corne did neuer know the dearth.
            
            
               Where were your vines? (ye glutted Bacchanalls)
               What winepresse had you then to crush your grapes?
               Where were your iunkets? where your festiualls?
               Where were your ryots? where your virgin-rapes?
               
                  Qauls placent mesioribus ignotis.Men fed on hippes and hawes, curnels and cherries,
               Sloes, peares, and bulleis, apples, nuttes, and berries.
            
            
               Yet in this age was euery man a king,
               All freely wearing royall diadems,
               Content was held the chiefe and worthi'st thing,
               Exceeding riches, glory, gold, or iems.
               
                  Regnat quisit contentus.All men were peace-embracers and content,
               In euery minde sate Prince and President.
            
            
               The ground disdain'd the plowes vnciuill touch,
               It scorn'd all muckie putrifaction:
               Yet did it yeeld of fruite and graine as much,
               
                  Abundantia vini dulcedmē tolli
                        •
                     .As by the plough-mans toile some function
               The streames ran milke, and spatious flouds of wine
               Fill'd vp the shores, oh glorious happie time.
            
            
               
               But now Ioues father into Limbo thrust,
               The siluer age put downe the golden world,
               Pride swollen Iupiter iudge most vniust,
               This heape of pleasure to Auernus hurld.
               
                  Ioue dimming all golds glorious raies of sun-shine,Fauor summorum humillima extollit.
               
               Siluer in pride sets vp her glitt'ring moone-shine.
            
            
               Before of all things was continuall spring,
               But now foure seasons of the yeare are fram'd,
               (The date is out of euer-flourishing)
               Spring,Mens hominū mutationes auida. Sommer, Autumne, Winter they are nam'd.
               The ayre began with feruent heate to swelt,
               And Hiems nipping colde of all was felt.
            
            
               Then did the oxe with wearie labour hale
               The rough plough-share on Tellus harmlesse face,
               Then euery man gan digge on hill and dale,
               And in the furrowes throwe the corne apace.Quid non industria discit?
               
               The seas were filled with a frequent oare,
               That neuer knew the waight of ship before.
            
            
               The siluer age now bad the world adieu,
               Brasse next succeeding, beares supremacie:
               No sooner did the world his visage view,
               But straight resign'd him all authoritie.
               Though base of mettall,Aspirant humiles. yet in impudence,
               He did surpasse siluers preheminence.
            
            
               He brought the world to brazen ignorance,
               He taught the souldier to manage armes,
               He made true iudgement stoupe to arrogance,
               In euery eare he sounds deaths shrill alarmes.
               Neighbor seekes Neighbors,Gens inuida gen
                        ••
                     . Nation Nations woe,
               One countrey lusts an others ouerthrowe.
            
            
               
               Iron steppes in, and chaseth brasse away,
               Bid vertue now goe seeke a residence,
               Errour hath here set vp continuall stay,
               And who admires not errours eminence?
               
                  Placet omnibus Error.Who loues not folly? nay we may auerre.
               There is no man but willingly doth erre.
            
            
               Treason hath, built her nest amidst the cloudes,
               Leuelling with aspiring ayme at Ioue:
               
               Violence in an ambush Enuy shrowdes,
               Pride is associate with lustfull loue.
               
                  Habet ars quid fraudi
                        •
                      in autro.Craft here sets vp the art of cosening,
               Ignorance there of spurblind censuring.
            
            
               Euen then when Auarice had spred her wings,
               And couetous desire was waxen fligge,
               A company of ruder vnderlings,
               In the deepe entralls of the earth gan digge:
               
                  Placet mirabele cuiquam.Whē (as amaz'd they stood) vnto their sight
               Appear'd a woman all in siluer dight.
            
            
               No sooner had her beautie giuen a print
               In the soft table of these mortall hearts;
               No sooner had her fauour made a dint
               In their weake bosomes, but she plaies her part.
               
                  Verba mouent omnes.After her faire enticing countenance,
               With witching words she puts them in a trance.
            
            
               Mortalls (quoth she) whose toiles deserue some gaine,
               If for to digge me out the massy deepe
               You haue begunne and ended all this paine,
               Though ignorant who should my presence keepe,
               
                  O
                        •
                     bem Pecuni
                        •
                      regnat.Take me, possesse me, chalenge me your slaue,
               For hauing me, you seeme the world to haue.
            
            
               
               Out of th'infernall bowels of the ground,
               Neare to the Stigian horrour of blacke Dis,
               
               Where foule Cimerian darknesse streakes around,
               (Amidst those clowdie shades my mansion is)
               I come,Argentū luci
                        •
                      in antro. where Styx doth dimme the Fayries sight,
               Where all is darknesse, saue my splendours light.
            
            
               My beautie now approaching Phoebus rayes,
               Looseth the beautie of her shining lampe,
               Your eies are dim your mortal iudgemēt saies.
               The Sunne hath giuen me an eternall dampe.
               But purge the grossenes of your lying eine,Mendax hyperbole quidē.
               
               And you shall see me darken Phoebus shine.
            
            
               Whilst that my glory midst the clouds was hid,
               Like to a Iewell in an Aethiop's eare;
               Or as a spot vpon a christall lid,
               So did my brightnes with more pride appeare.
               My selfe most faire,Terra tenc
                        •
                      aurum. oppos'd to cloudes most fowle,
               Sate as an Eagle ore a formelesse owle.
            
            
               Ye tonguelesse cauernes of the earth adieu,
               Farewell blacke house of Styx-polluted ground:
               My glory hath bene much extold by you,
               In your deepe holes my brightnesse first was found.
               Now I haue got th'earth'superficiall.Antiquae oblita domus.
               
               Farewell darke Styx, blacke Phlegiton and all.
            
            
               No sooner had her sence bereauing eye,
               Bewitcht with loue and admiration,
               The Ideot sight of this rude company,
               (Oh palpable and grosse illusion)
               But first Auarus maister of the crew,Anarus suspicax.
               
               Beheld his followers with a iealous view.
            
            
               
               Straight he exclaimes, ye rude Mechanicalls,
               Do you not tremble at this wonderment?
               Ye more vnciuill then the Bacchanalls,
               Do you not stand amaz'd at this euent?
               
                  Suum 
                        •
                     ui
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      pulchrum.This is a Queene, behold her maiestie,
               Nay more, a goddesse, see her deitie.
            
            
               Blessed, diuine, glorious, immortall, pure,
               Sacred, vnspotted, and maiesticall,
               Whose high supremacie stands euer sure,
               Whose pedigree is true celestiall,
               
                  Par loui Pecunia.Whose power is equiualent to the gods,
               Who do'st exceed their maiestie by ods.
            
            
               Still let mine eyes be glutted with thy sight,
               Still let mine eares drinke thy harmonious voyce,
               Still let mine hands erect, to thee aright,
               Beg for thy presence, my desires sole choyse▪
               
               
                  Amatum visus prosequitur.Still, oh still, let my hand, mine eare, mine eie,
               See, heare, and touch thy royall dignitie.
            
            
               Gaze still mine eye on her, attractiue glory,
               Feed on her beautie, surfet on her grace,
               Be thou in lookes her due contributory,
               Glut thee with view of her resplendant face,
               
                  Aurum placet oculis.Contemplatiue desire let neuer rest,
               Til thou do'st learne her lookes be manifest.
            
            
               Harke still with true attention mine eares,
               When times require, performe your function,
               Her voyce more sweete then motion of the spheares,
               Or Philomell in her Pauilion.
               
                  Auris auri sonum appetit.Oh that mine eare mazed with such a sound,
               Might in a trance lye groueling on the ground,
            
            
               
               Hands if you durst with a small ciuill touch,
               Be witnesses of this heauens ornament,
               You would be proud your honour should be such,
               To touch a goddesse most omnipotent.
               Sufficeth me that I may please mine eye,Inops oblatum respuit aurum.
               
               Although mine hand touch not that maiestye.
            
            
               Goddesse, erect thy beautie from the ground,
               Too base a seate for such an Emperesse,
               Since Lady of such honour thou art found,
               Giue no disparage to thy worthinesse.
               Assume the place of thy great dignitie,Se totum Pecunia.
               
               And be the mistresse of this Emperie.
            
            
               No sooner had his lips dame silence clos'd,
               But in steps open-handed Prodigus,
               
               He with this Lady in an humour gloz'd,
               Vtt'ring more braues then minuck Roscius.
               
               At last in words,Bona verba quaeso. his humour to display,
               Swelling in pride, to her he thus gan say.
            
            
               Lady diuine, mistresse of golden mines,
               Earths precious iewell, heauens paramour,
               Whose beautie brighter then faire Cinthia shines,
               All able riches, sweete ambassadour.
               Gracious fore-runner of felicitie,Adulatio dabit amicos.
               
               Constant vpholder of high maiestie,
            
            
               With ioyfull newes leape to this open brest,
               A receptacle for thy worthinesse:
               In this hote borough build thy warm dry nest,
               Where being heated, thou wilt strait confesse,
               A surer couert thou hast neuer found,
               Within the massie roundure of the ground.Prodigus non habet suum.
               
            
            
               
               Thou shalt view countries that be farre remote,
               Thou shalt with me to our Antipodes,
               
               Thou shalt behold the Zones, cold, temp'rate, hote▪
               
               Thou thousand captiues shalt from bonds release.
               
                  Vrbes pecunia condit.Thou shalt appoint countries that now lie dead,
               With habitants to be replenished.
            
            
               Thou shalt a Iudge bribe with a benefite,
               Thou shalt rich countries and whole nations buy;
               Like to an Empresse thou by me shalt sit,
               Whilst I am graced with the Empery.
               
                  Sic vole sie Iubeo.Thy sentence as a grauen lawe shall stand,
               What case of lawe doth not lye in thy hand?
            
            
               Thou shalt a paire of foes congluminate,
               Yet amongst equalls breed dissention;
               None dares presume to be th'associate,
               What's not effected if thou wish it done?
               
                  Incendit pecunia bellum.Nations shall fight to see thy gracious fauour,
               Whilst thou secure sits laughing at their labour.
            
            
               Follow my colours, and thy glorious fame,
               To euery eare shall be a frequent sound;
               All tongues with wondrous loue shal speake thy name,
               Thy presence in all meetings shall be found.
               
                  Tu linguas incitus.Thy worthy name shall finish euery clause,
               Whē thou shalt cease to shine, all tongues shal pause.
            
            
               No sooner tooke his words a period,
               But Liberalis steps betwixt these two:
               Ill ere goes double championd gainst good,
               Vertue we see hath somewhat still to doo.
               No Prince that raigneth, but hath enemies,
               
                  Virtuti vitium.No vertue but endangered by vice.
            
            
               
               Ladie in truth, and faire in veritie,
               In pompe maiesticke, in show beauteous:
               In slie apparance full of dignitie,
               In liberall actions most bounteous.
               Though in thy selfe lyes no disaster crosse,
               Yet in thy vsage stands or good,Re dupley vsus in omni. or losse.
            
            
               We neuer knew that Natures holy Nature
               Created ought to a prepost'rous end,
               Good in it selfe we know is euery creature,
               And from it selfe doth good effects intend.
               Yet vsing vertue in an euill cause,Honorat causa actum.
               
               We guiltie are of breaking vertues lawes.
            
            
               Siluer is framed to a good entent,
               To be reducted to the shape of coine,
               So to buy corne, land, houses, nutriment,
               If any man bribe with it or purloine,
               Turning th'good creature to a wicked vse,Sub tegmine vsus abusu
                        •
                     .
               
               The creature's blameles: t'is the mans abuse.
            
            
               Giue ore thy selfe to my tuition,
               And in the Lappe of vertue build thy nest,
               This cottage is a secure mansion,
               Voyd of all trouble, euer louing rest.
               Follow my colours, in my ensigne shine,
               Ioyning thy vertue with this power of mine.Verba malorum haud placent.
               
            
            
               I will adict thee to a noble seat,
               Within the closure of a liberall purse:
               Out of thy treasure will I giue, and get
               Vnnumbred friends, mongst whom I wil disburse
               In lib'rall measure,Sic parce liberatis. yet with caution,
               The well got goods of my possession.
            
            
               
               When the poore tenant fearfully doth stand
               Carefull how to discharge his landlords rent,
               When Micholmas, or Lady-daye's at hand,
               Fearing for debt in prison to be pent,
               
                  Bona be
                        •
                     è.How shall a portion out thy treasury
               Release the poore man of his misery?
            
            
               Or whensoeuer steéle-armed pouertie
               Feeding vpon the entralls of a man,
               Driuing all shifts to such an extasie,
               That either he must steale or starue anon,
               
                  Egentibus opes.How shall a portion out thy treasurie
               Buy foode to ouercome his pouertie?
            
            
               Or when an Harbinger of iniury
               By force depriues a poore man of his right,
               He being of no strong abilitie▪
               
               To follow lawe, or keepe his owne by might,
               
                  Argentum iura dabit.How shall a portion out thy treasury,
               Recouer right, and beat downe iniury?
            
            
               Or when a bloodlesse agues hand doth presse
               On the weake lims of a diseased creature,
               His bags being emptie, bare, and monilesse,
               His sences feeble, weak his corps, fraile his nature.
               Thou canst commaund Phisitions helpe to cure,
               
                  Pecunia curat PodagramThe miseries and pangs he doth endure.
            
            
               Liue thou with me and loue my company,
               Leaue wantonizing with abhorred sin:
               Be thou no agent in foule brothelry,
               Be thou no denne for vice to harbour in.
               
                  Virtuti nulla au
                        •
                     is aperta.But liue with me in modest merriment,
               Yet if thou wilt not, I must be content.
            
            
               
               Peace Puritan, Auarus gins to crye,
               Fearing his worth should be reiected quite,
               Plead no more fondling, this slye simpathy,
               In showes like day, in truth as blacke as night.
               Nor canst thou with thy faith and troth precise,Landant quod 
                        •
                     mant.
               
               Blinde or deceiue this vertuous Ladies eyes.
            
            
               Wilt thou relieue a begger at the dore?
               Vngracious coine, on beggers to bestowe,
               To let that glorious honour we adore,
               Fall to the hands of a polluted shrowe,Quem quam non curat Auaru
                        •
                     .
               
               To let the fingers of a common trull,
               Siluer out of thy open purse to pull?
            
            
               T'is thou that setst idlenesse abroach,
               Feeding the lazie humours of a slaue;
               T'is thou that mak'st base men on vs incroach,
               Giuing to all what they desire to haue.
               Thou art an author of lycentiousnesse,Non videt manticae quae in tergo est.
               
               Feeder of riot, and of drunkennesse.
            
            
               Thou seruile bondman to a common groome,
               Thou that hast goods, to vse them know'st not how,
               Whose house to eu'ry runnagate giues roome,
               Whose eare to eu'ry puling crye doth bow.
               Thou that to loyt'ring churchmen oft do'st giue,Bona mali
                        •
                      contempta.
               
               More goods then I shall scrape vp whiles I liue.
            
            
               Do'st thinke this Lady is a seruants hire?
               Shall churchmen haue her to possession?
               No, first let her be molten in the fire,
               Let her downe to the earth, her mansion.
               Shame that her beautie so celestiall,
               Should be a runnagate from one to all.Pecunia sersper enn
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                  
               
            
            
               
               Nor you the sonne of carelesse diffluence,
               Brother to loosenesse and intemperance,
               Waster of thrift, maister of large expence,
               Whose wealth is of an houres continuance.
               
                  Prodigus ignorat 
                        〈◊〉
                     .That in one day throw'st more vpon the water,
               Then can be gather'd a thousand after.
            
            
               Thou like an Ideot, louing all but one,
               Hating that one thou should'st loue best of all,
               Caring for all, except thy selfe alone,
               Who of thy loue should be the principall.
               
                  Alios euehis te deuehis.Whilst most thy friends & flatt'rers thou mak'st rich,
               All thine owne wealth is bury'd in the dich.
            
            
               Foole, loue thy selfe, cherish thy lustie yeares,
               Be still propitious to thy selfe alone,
               Shake off those spaniel-fawning flatterers,
               Be louing to thine owne, or kinde to none.
               Loue others, but obserue this cauear,
               
                  Adj
                        •
                     fis amicus, ibi charusThy Loue to others doth not weake thy state.
            
            
               Lady, you see their sottish fopperie,
               Both dissipating what you heape together,
               Abiure, renounce, reiect their companie,
               Or you must wend through countreys euery whither.
               
                  Alata Pecunia volat.What nation in the worlds circumference,
               But through it in their purses thou must dance.
            
            
               Appeale to me, I am your zealous fauthour,
               One that will hugge you in my bosomes nest:
               Be you to me my comforts onely authour,
               And in this roome set vp your biding rest.
               
                  Auari ar
                        •
                     a lemper clansa▪
                  Though all the world after your presence gape,
               Yet hid with me, you from the world shall scape.
            
            
               
               As if thou muck-hill-scraping Claudian,
               Whose gowtie fingers fit a deluing spade;
               Thou ten degrees vnder a Gentleman,
               Continuall driuer of an halting iade.
               Thou simple hackney to a litle profit,Muka fers nulla ausers.
               
               Yet all being done, thou art got maister of it.
            
            
               Thou that to get a fat cheekt benifice,
               Wilt on thy knees creepe 
                     〈◊〉
                   the antique lawe;
               Thou that hast euen as much respect to vice,
               As birds with poison filling vp their crawe.Fratrum quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      gratia rara.
               
               Thou that art euer cosening one or other,
               Thou that for profit wil
                     •
                   deceiue thy brother.
            
            
               As if thy shallow bare simplicitie,
               Could be a pew fellow for such a Queene;
               As if thy mudde-polluted company,
               Were obiect fit of her eyes to beseen
                     •
                  ,
               Auant transformed Auar
                        •
                     ia,
                  Multos suscipit auar
                        •
                     ia sormas.
               
               Thou art an abiect of Petunia▪
                  
               
            
            
               Base are the thoughts that dote on thy affection,
               High is the minde of this vnblemisht creature;
               Deform'd are they which make thees hei
                     •
                   election,
               Reform'd thou seest 
                     〈◊〉
                   louely 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               No hope of 
                     〈◊〉
                   is expected there,Non 
                        〈◊〉
                      nubila stellam.
               
               Wherein there doth no likelihood appeare.
            
            
               Thou in the dust build'st thy felicitie,
               She sets her pleasure in high maiestie:
               Thou lowly Ant vpon the ground do'st lie,
               She mounts with Eagles plumes into the skie.
               Aspiring thoughts fit not humilitie,
               Basenesse and splendour are most contrarie.Cupit & simia esse generosa.
               
            
            
               
               If thou hast skill in some sweete Syramisme,
               Or thou canst traine thy tongue to eloquence,
               Or metamorphos rugged Barbarisme,
               Into smoothe phrases, and fine English sence;
               
                  Plus barbae quam ingenij.Or canst transforme that fustie beard anon,
               Into some new deuised fashion.
            
            
               If thou canst turne those flat venetians,
               Into a paire of faire Italian hose:
               If thou canst proue thy hat a gentlemans,
               Or chaunge the colour of thy sack-sok't nose.
               If thou suppose thy reed-thackt colonie,
               
                  Baucidis tectū celat louem.Be residence for this great deitie,
            
            
               Then it may be she will thy cottage visit,
               And thou shalt haue the presence of this Lady;
               It may be she will note the marke, yet misse it,
               It may be shee'le deceiue thee, and it may be
               
                  A
                        •
                     ro non pauper affinis.Sheel'e take it for an high indignity,
               That thou should'st offer her thy company.
            
            
               But thou base Puritan, who hast much wealth,
               And on the poore bestow'st it friuolously,
               Do'st keepe a dyet to maintaine thy health,
               Pray'st in the Church, and liu'st as modestly.
               
                  Apage Cupidinis ignem.As any maide that lies alone in bed,
               Fearing the shipwracke of her maidenhead.
            
            
               Thou pure Idaea of a womans face,
               Thou ciuill curber of incontinence;
               Thou that in gesture art as full of grace,
               As any Lobbe in this circumference.
               
                  Sue more nitere colinum.Thou that in plainnesse hast a good proportion,
               Thou that canst do all things without extortion.
            
            
               
               Goe bid the Clarke ring day-bell earlier,
               Bid the Church-warden mend the broken graue,
               Then goe consult with parish-minister,
               And see the poore mans boxe his due to haue.
               Dar'st thou aspire to be Pecunia's keeper,Omnia non omnes.
               
               Who then to th'ankles neuer wadedst deeper?
            
            
               No, sweete Pecunia, set thy resting place
               Within the compasse of my Indian chest,
               A seate conuenient for such a grace,
               Faire Queene, appoint there thy eternall rest.
               The maister of it was an Emperour,Caesaris olim.
               
               The next possessor be my Paramour.
            
            
               No more, no more leand vices ministers,
               (Quoth Liberalis) silence close your lips;
               No more let vice lin'd with those mockes of hers,
               Seduce your mindes with Errours doting slips.
               No more let Enuy in an angry frowne,Virtutis inuidia non mominerit.
               
               Attempt to throwe vnblemisht vertue downe.
            
            
               No more thou marshall vnto diffluence,
               Feed-leaudnesse in so bounteous a measure;
               No more be waster of such great expence,
               Nor fondly throwe abroad Pecunia's treasure.
               Pamper no more the gulfe of gluttony,Tandem fatur esto Milanus.
               
               No more be Bayliffe to foule Brothelry.
            
            
               T'is thou that feeds the humours of Curtezans,
               Making thy selfe a slaue to wanton lust:
               Through thee whole rowtes of cunning Artizans,
               Do still decrease, who on thy kindnesse trust.
               And when age makes their limbs vnseruiceable,
               Thou turn'st them out as drones vnprofitable.Non omni temporē val
                        •
                     s
               
            
            
               
               What needst thou cast away a hundred pound
               Vpon one sute, nakednesse couerture?
               What need thy knees with fortie crownes be bound▪
               
               A lower prised habit were as sure:
               
                  Iudis superbia sola est.Onely because thou would'st be counted gay,
               Thou cast'st in scorne a thousand pound away.
            
            
               Why's thy cloake set with wanton winding lace,
               As if a labirinth lay on the cape?
               T'is not the taylors credit, nor thy grace,
               But th'imitate of some fantastike Ape.
               
                  Etiam & mundus stultescet.Oh Ideot world, to what ripe foolerie,
               Now metamorphos'd is thy progenie▪
               
            
            
               The poore with weeping voyce salu
                     •
                  e thy doore,
               Sighing forth accents of calamitie;
               Yet sorrow nere so much, gets nere the more,
               Thou hatest to relieue deepe miserie.
               
                  Gnatonem amat.If any Gnato at thy elbow
                     •
                   stand,
               Thou dol'st vnto him with a bounteous hand.
            
            
               The Temple as a dungeon thou abhorr'st,
               The Church thou neuer gracest with thy shadow:
               Let vs goe kill a light-foote in the forrest,
               Or trace the hare alongst the chequer'd medow.
               
                  Venantucotiosi.Couple thy hounds, and congregate thy men,
               To hunt the shepheards 
                     •
                  oe out of his 
                     •
                  en.
            
            
               Hast thou a hound matcht in mouth like a bell,
               Whose eares will sweepe away the morning dewe?
               Hast thou an horse another Bucephall?
               Hast thou a proued hawke, pen'd in the mewe?
               
                  Resonabilis Echo.Vp to the groues, marke the discording sound,
               Of tatling Eccho, answering each hound.
            
            
               
               Take thou the pleasure of this apish world
               To be the portion of thy happinesse:
               Swel yet with pride, let thy fair locks be curl'd,
               Thy selfe with sweet water and musk addresse.
               Yet take pastime:Tempora mutantur. The day (I dread) wil come
               Thou wilt be glad to beg a mite or crumme.
            
            
               Its for the foule in ciuil cormorant,
               Who hopes in time to purchase all the earth,
               And make those things which now abound, be scant,
               Causing of all things a continuall dearth,
               Vnlesse some power celestiall do barie
               Thy mortal arme to stretch it selfe so farre.Dij prohibeant.
               
            
            
               What profit to the commons hast procured?
               How doth thy cou'tous humor please the land▪
               
               What paines to hinder all hast not endured?
               What close conueyance doest thou vse in hand?
               How often hast thou brib'd the Iudges with gifts,Quem non angulum pecunia.
               
               When thou art driuen to thy narrow shifts?
            
            
               Like to the Ape thou kill'st with cherishing,
               And thou would'st: hugge Pecunia to death:
               Thou would'st euen choake her midst thy pampering,
               And with thy kisses cleane sucke out her breath.
               In a close chest thou mean'st to haue her pent,Eadem arc
                        •
                      est carcer auarj.
               
               And keepe her there in lasting prisonment.
            
            
               But sure all we about a thing contend,
               To which we euery one haue certaine right:
               Let each man take the lot that God doth send,
               And the possessour yet be free from spight.
               Is euery man contented with her choyce?Quem saelis
                        •
                     m habebimus.
               
               Then Lady make one happie with thy voyce.
            
            
               
               Not so (qouth she) my skillesse ignorance
               Cannot diuine the vertue of you all:
               Nor is it wisedome to decide by chance,
               That which may cause repentance to befall.
               
                  Verbis non virgis.Each truly manifest his dignitie,
               Then will I iudge who has the victorie.
            
            
               
                  
                     Auarus.
                  I labour all the day yet rest at euen,
               After much sorrow finding pleasures gaine:
               Beginning worke at fiue, ending at seuen,
               Then rest is acceptable after paine.
               
                  Post labores gaudium.I plow my land with a long tedious toyle,
               Yet after reape the haruest of my soyle.
            
            
               
                  
                     Prodigus.
                  I all the day mongst gallant Ladies braue it,
               Or at some time-beguiling sweet delight,
               No pleasure in the land but I stil haue it,
               Harmonious lulls me a sleepe at night.
               No sport vnlesse I a spectator bee,
               
                  Prodigus historionem.No mirth, vnlesse I am in companie.
            
            
               Nor labour I the liue-long sommers day,
                     Liberal.
                  
               
               Yet stil am busied in good actions:
               Nor do I triflle out the time in play,
               Yet stil vse honest recreations.
               
                  Cum corpore mens.In minde I worke, whiles body is at leisure,
               In body I worke, whiles my mind is at pleasure.
            
            
               
                  
                     Auar.
                  Mine eyes loue obiects that to gaines are bent,
               Those showes be pleasing that are profitable:
               Mine eares loue sounds that are to gaines intent,
               A purchase or a bargaine commendable.
               
                  Dilligo dolum, domum, & donum.Mine eyes applaud a well spi'de benefit,
               Mine eares a craftie voice, or sharp-ey'de wit.
            
            
               
               Mine eyes do wish each obiect princely crown'd,
                     Prodigus.
                  
               
               A scepter or some sence-bereauing sight:
               Thine eares desire a kings maiesticke sound,
               High powers thund'ring voice, accents of might.
               Mine eyes applaud a sight-of Lordly pleasure,Mihi sola voluptas.
               
               Mine eare a musicall harmonious measure.
            
            
               Mine eyes a vertuous demeand Loue,
                     Liberal.
                  
               
               Sweet Poesie, delightfull Oratory:
               Mine eares are pleasde with words, that truth behoue,
               With some good carall in an auncient story.
               Mine eyes applaud nor benefit nor pleasure,Mihi comm
                        •
                     da virtus.
               
               Mine eares nor craftie wit, nor Musiques measure.
            
            
               I wish each ground mine eye surueys were mine,
                     Auarus.
                  
               
               Then count I thence what profit would arise,
               I thinke a voice that soundeth gaines diuine,
               No sweeter Musique then commodities.
               I couet not that which is not mine owne,
                     Liberal.
                  
               
               I neuer seeke that which I neer haue sowne.
            
            
               I wish each glory did belong to mee,
               Or my estate were farre beyond compare:
                     Prod.
                  
               
               I wish in me lay chiefe supremacy,
               Or none as I so featur'd, and so faire.
               Nor I to too much glory do aspire,
                     Libe.
                  
               
               Nor too much fauour beauteous desire.
            
            
               I steppe into no spendthrifts company,
                     Aua.
                  
               
               Money's incurable presumption.
               I scorne the Mysers rude societie,
                     Prod.
                  
               
               Good fellowship's damned contagion.
               I hate both spendthrifts & a mysers minde,
                     Libe.
                  
               
               Some spent, some gottē, yet no lesse I finde.
            
            
               
               
                  
                     Auarus.
                  I do not feed a strumpet with large gifts,
               The greatest of all humane misery.
               
                  
                     Prod.
                  I do not vse cos'nages vnlawfull shifts,
               An vpright conscience infect enemy.
               
                  
                     Lib 
                           •
                        .
                  Nor feede I strumpets, nor vse cosenage,
               But hating both, both's downfal do presage.
            
            
               
                  
                     Aua.
                  Gold is my life: then life what dearer is?
               Gold is my hart: who doth not loue his hart?
               
                  
                     Prod.
                  Glory's my comfort, shall I glory misse?
               Glory's my loue, shall loue from me depart?
               
                  
                     Liberal.
                  Gold's deare to me, yet farlesse dear thē life,
               Glory is good, vain glory breedeth strife.
            
            
               
                  
                     Auar.
                  That week's vnblest that doth not helpe me gaine,
               That day's accurst that doth decrease my number.
               
                  
                     Prod.
                  The place is Hell, that breeds my smallest paine,
               The time is fatall that doth worke my cumber.
               A time I hope for gaine, a time for griefe,
               
                  
                     Liberal.
                  One time breeds danger, other yeelds reliefe.
            
            
               
                  
                     Au
                           •
                        r.
                  Lady choose me, my riches do excell,
               And I wil make thee mistresse of them all.
               
                  
                     Prodigus.
                  Lady choose me, that in the citie dwell,
               Neare to the court, a place celestiall.
               
                  
                     Libe.
                  Lady choose whom thou wilt, content & I,
               Wil stand to our edict in destiny.
            
            
               
                  
                     Pecunia.
                  Nor must my treasures on the waters fall,
               Then wil they sinke and neuer more be found:
               I must not feed a spendthrift prodigall,
               Nor let my heapes of gold with him abound,
               
                  Vna dies dissoluit CraesumWho in a day dissolueth more in cheare,
               Thē the rich Indian Mines yeeld in a yeare.
            
            
               
               Nor must I liue with a nice Puritaine,
               One that doth feare to counterfeit or lye,
               One that nere vttereth a word in vaine,
               A precise master of simplicitie.
               Hence diffluence, auaunt poore puritie,
               For I cashier you both my company.Pura ma
                        •
                     odiosa.
               
            
            
               Come sweete Auarus, hug me in thine armes,
               Encrease my heapes by thy assiduall toile,
               Keepe me secure from life-pursuing harmes,
               Preserue my splendour from all spotting soile.
               Into thy bosome will I creepe my loue,Quis respuit anrum?
               
               And on thy breast lye like an harmles doue.
            
            
               Imbrace me, kisse me, I am onely thine,
               Fortune sayes so, who contradicts her will?
               Loue me, adore me, be thou onely mine,
               We louers are, and louers shalbe still.
               Let crab tree-might use all authoritie,Lex mea iura tenet.
               
               The lawe through bribes shall curbe his enmitie.
            
            
               Inraged Prodigus blushing to see
               (Euen mongst the wicked, pride hath ouerthrowe)
               A clowne prefe
                     •
                  d before his dignitie,
               Burning in wrath, and mad in outward showe,
               Drew the reuenger of all giuen disgrace,Quo tandem iracundia▪
                  
               
               His sword, and ranne it at Auarus face.
            
            
               Running, I knowe not what celestiall power
               Stopp'd the successe of his aduenturous case;
               But when his wrinckled 
                     〈◊〉
                   began to lowre,
               And his carier had budg'd one profer'd pace,
               Three Goddesses (their shapes did tell me so)An Iupiter aspicit Irum.
               
               Preuent 
                     〈◊〉
                   ill occasion d
                     ••
                  oe.
            
            
               
               The first was like to liues imperiall wife,
               Yet lesser both in name and dignitie▪
               
               Tis she that hath possession of the knife,
               Which cuts all humanes vitall threed: t'is she
               
                  Sua sint cui
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
                  That is the great commandresse of the fates,
               Giuer of noble worths, and lowe estates.
            
            
               Mistresse of chaunce, great Queene of destinie,
               Ordresse of lots, causer of alterations,
               The puller downe of Iouiall maiestie,
               And high erecter of base vsurpations.
               
                  Volubilis estsors.Whose mind a tott'ring carries hence,
               Proud of her owne high valued excellence.
            
            
               Her name is Fortune: on her right side stands
               A Nymph, that bore her euer turning wheele;
               On th'other side a King, who with his hand
               Held out a globe, which like a bowle, did reele.
               
                  Fortune had after her, attendants three,
               
                  Parcae ne domina pareunt.The fatall sisters of the Destinie.
            
            
               The next to her succeeds Vice swaggering,
               Her face being gilded ore, homes on her head;
               Her Nymphes support a faire tree flourishing,
               Laden with fruite, with guilt leaues honoured.
               
                  In
                        •
                     ertilis arbor.In euery graine, in euery braunch thereof,
               The gazers eye might well behold a scoffe.
            
            
               The last was Vertue, least in estimation,
               A coxecombe on her beauteous head was placed,
               Before a spotlesse white, behind, coronation,
               With crownes and louely girlands she was graced,
               
                  Non hominem vestis.Her robe full of bright-shining starres was set,
               By hands thrust out of cloudes as blacke as I eat.
            
            
               
               Three Nymphes in mourning vestures all araide,
               Brought out a tree, halfe greene, halfe withered,
               Vertue her selfe weeping (poore haplesse maide)
               To see all men vpon her worth to tread.
               Whiles she is proud to weare the scorne of sots,Nescit stultitia vorum.
               
               And haue her garment dight with enuious spots.
            
            
               Stand not amaz'd poore mortalls at this sight,
                     Fort.
                  
               
               Lift vp your eyes▪ if my great maiestie
               Dampe not you oplique sence: my radiant light
               Dull not your intellectuall perspicacie.
               Nay do not fall:Quem vult fortuna tradit. if I begin to frowne
               You need not fall downe, for Ile spurne you downe.
            
            
               See you this Globe, this little toy call'd world,
               Lying in due subiection to my powers?
               Sometimes my hand into the ayre it hurld,
               And then create I Kings and Emperours.
               Sometimes I turne it,Ex officina princeps. and inuest a clowne,
               Miraculously with a Princes crowne.
            
            
               Tis I that tumble honour to the ground,
               And in the earth hide royall maiestie;
               Tis I that an vnconquer'd foe astound,
               Giuing an Ideot best felicitie.
               I set a sottish cappe on Vertues head,
               I cause vice chiefly to be honoured.Vertus ignota
               
            
            
               I thrust a coward into honours chaire,
               And make a souldier bare-headed stand,
               Whilst they sit proudly scoffing his affaire,
               That dare not counterview an armed band.
               I lift vp fooles, and to the wiser send
               A most perplexed life,Haud longa sunt bona. and sudden end.
            
            
               
               I turne faire learning out to beggerie,
               And in ragg'd vestments clothe an vpright wit,
               I tread vpon the necke of royaltie,
               And vnto wisedome giue a raining bit.
               
                  Gallo dantur iemmae.I gild false browes with fairest diadems,
               And to the dung-hill cock giue richest iems.
            
            
               I (to conclude) am maistris of the world,
               All mortall things are in my regiment:
               Frowne, I crosse fortunes to the earth are hurld.
               Smile I, good happes answere each mans content.
               
                  Ventos non Iubee▪
                  I haue the foure windes tutourd in good awe,
               The world her breath doth from this bosome drawe.
            
            
               Vertue thou droop'st, the more we make thee mirth,
               
                  
                     Vice.
                  The more thou turn'st away thy scornefull face:
               If I looke vp to heauen, thou on the earth,
               If I on earth, straight thou on heauen do'st gaze.
               Laugh I, thou weepest: sigh I, thou art then merrie,
               
                  Flet virtus, rider vitium.And when thou seest me lustie, thou art wearie.
            
            
               As if this stubborne opposition
               Foolish contrarying of my humours choyce,
               Could get thee glories commendation,
               
                  Verba ventosa sapienti videntur.Or to thy laude bend but one onely voyce.
               Be of my schoole, and honour Vices meed,
               And thou shalt be adored wench indeed.
            
            
               Tis not this plaine domesticke achornisme,
               This imitation of the common lay,
               Tis not this sottish habit of precisme,
               Can make thee be beloued: no wench, goe gay,
               Flourish in new commenced fashions,
               
                  Sis nobis homo.And thou shalt worke strange operations.
            
            
               
               Because thine eyes be surer witnesses
               Then thy incredulous eare, tarry and view
               My well replenisht schooles, true worthinesse,
               The sight will make thee bid precisme adiew,
               And thinke this showe farre to exceed the LayIunonis nuptias excellit.
               
               That honour'd Iuno at her wedding day.
            
            
               The vsher that thou seest, doth guide the place,
               Teaching their steps indenting passages,
               Is Folly, loe in what conceited race
               She leades them on:Vix natum ingenium extinguitur. her vsuall offices
               Doth teach them fondnesse, wanton reuelling,
               Lightnesse of minde, and wits extinguishing.
            
            
               The first and primate of my schoole is this,
               He that hath wonne the golden prize away,
               All scraping couetousnesse, that would haue his,
               All that vpon th'earths massie round doth stay.Auaritia sinc fu
                        ••
                     .
               
               
                  Pecunia is his peculiar,
               Money his god, coyne his familiar.
            
            
               He thinkes ere long to be the worlds chiefe master,
               To bring all wealth to his subiection;
               Hee's euer getting, neuer found a waster,
               Tis he that Argentum hath in tuition.
               Faire Aurum's presence now the Indians mis,Sēper est pauper, tamen.
               
               For she hath sworne for euer to be his.
            
            
               The second scholler is his opposite,
               The eldest sonne to dissolution,
               Borne to great lands, yet in his head so light,
               That all is spent in dissipation.
               Scatt'ring that in a minute, which his father
               Was his whole life's time busied to gather.Vbi diffuis diploidem▪
                  
               
            
            
               
               He fathers all these new found fashions,
               And patronizeth all fantasticke showes:
               The very Ape of imitations,
               Yet wondred at, like to an owle mōgst crowes.
               His seruants are the Parasite and Pandar,
               
                  Danus tibi non Aedipus.And he to all such slaues, is a commander.
            
            
               
                   The third is Enuy, in whose Iron pawes,
               More sauage then was euer Mirmidon,
               
               Lies balls of wild-fire neare an heap of strawes,
               To burne in flambes who ere he cast it on.
               
                  Il
                        •
                     uidia volat.Arm'd with reuenge, he rangeth vp and downe,
               Tearing his haires from off his bared crowne.
            
            
               Two poysonous snakes within his fists he gripes,
               As if for anger he could sting his flesh:
               An Owle he keepes, to waken with her shrikes,
               To worke reuenge euen whiles his wrath is fresh.
               
                  Inuido placēt & nex & nox.Swifter abroad then Aeolus he rangeth,
               And all his plots to dire effects he changeth.
            
            
               
                   The fourth is sluggish-headed Idlenesse,
               His eyes sinke in his head through ceaselesse sleepe,
               His pace keepes pace with the snayles slothfulnesse,
               His sight doth an accustom'd closset keepe.
               
                  Inertia quanta?Snorting he lies all night, dreaming all day,
               So idely doth he passe the time away.
            
            
               He is the father of those dreaming fooles
               That creepe like worms (more vgly they then wormes)
               Trembling to do their office in the schooles,
               Frai'd with the least tempestuous windes or stormes.
               Heauier then lumpes of leade, or heapes of clay,
               
                  Plunbans esHarder then mountaines to be mou'd away.
            
            
               
               The fift is daintie-throated gluttony,
               
               Whose chiefe imployed seruants be all cookes,
               He studies new-deuised cookery,
               Straunge Iunkets, wondrous dishes:
               His house is nought but kitchin,Tune coqu
                        ••
                     
                   then I feare
               Himselfe at length wil proue a kitchiner.
            
            
               He loues no fellowes but good trenchermen,
               None follow him, but they are smel-feasts nam'd:
               A well drest supper he full soone will ken,
               Out of his house he quite hath hunger sham'd.
               Hunger exil'd,Testantur genae. depart vnto thy cell,
               His very lookes thy sharpest force wil quell.
            
            
               The sixt is Pride, clad like the morning Sunne,
               
               Whē mōgst the Pine trees on th'heauē-thretning moū
                  taines,
               He seeks his Clymene, his vestall Nunne,
               Or els at night hard by some nuptiall Fountaine
               Wearing a Iewel dangling at her eare,Cuius laetissima.
               
               Worth a kings reuenewes euery yeare.
            
            
               Ladies vpon her traine attend and wait,
               Like to some goddesse, or some Nimph diuine
               Her habite showes her: in her owne conceit
               Her glory doth obscure bright Phaebus shine.
               She deemes her selfe faire beauties quintescence,Venusne mortalis.
               
               Mistris of glory, Queene of Eminence.
            
            
               The seuenth and last of these superiour rowes,
               Is mine owne darling, hight licentiousnesse,
               That beauteous Syren that inchants with showes,
               The very soule of Vertue blemishlesse.
               Inticing bayt hung on a golden hooke,Piscibus sit esca.
               
               That can bewitch each doating gazers looke.
            
            
               
               Her brests lye open to display the nests,
               Where all the Graces make their residence:
               Faire smooth, dugge-rising, and descendant brests,
               Cleare snow white neck hedg'd with a silke soft fence.
               
                  Te videmus non tua.Thrice fairer then my tongue can render thee,
               The perfect mirrour of formositie.
            
            
               These be the chiefest schollers that I keepe,
               The firme vpholders of great vices seate:
               All these my fellow darlings Iy-cleape,
               Cause they as I be euer fortunate.
               
                  Vilorum est ne concordia
                        •
                     
                  Their powers be great, themselues are capitall,
               Their states alike, most vitious, one, and all.
            
            
               A rabblement of pettie graduates
               Fill vp the other angule of my seate:
               As malice cloystur'd in some lowe estates,
               Blasphemous oathes another corner get.
               
                  Hoc lingua illud mens.Lying sits stil inuenting truthlesse wonders.
               Swearing euacuateth oathes like thunders.
            
            
               Vertue if thou my scholler eke wilt be,
               Adioyne thy selfe to this societie:
               Race off this badge of leane-fac'd puritie,
               Assume to thee some princely maiestie.
               
                  Te
                        •
                     mine tegeris.Thy vertue thus obscur'd in the worlds eye,
               Doth giue disparage to thy dignitie.
            
            
               Think'st thou the world wil loue a dungeon,
               Whose entrance breeds no pleasure to the eye?
               Although within that loathed mansion
               Worlds of delights, ages of pleasure lye.
               
                  Specietne approbat.When th'outsides vgly showe mens eyes do greete,
               From it, strait from it, all their loue doth fleete.
            
            
               
               How are thy inward parts be beautifi'de,
               Be sure without to beare a proud apparance,
               Within set basenes, and without set pride,
               The badge of honour is true Iouisance.
               Put on some glorious beames that may enflame
               The hearts of men to honour thy great name.Labeius accipe plumus.
               
            
            
               Deare mistris (quoth the Nymphes) now be thy selfe,
               And like thy selfe shine in thy glorious feature:
               Chace hence this scumme, this drosse, this florisht pelfe,
               This out-adorned, in-polluted creature.
               Let the world laugh,Vitij olent intestina. fantasticke follies net
               Shall now be torne, all men shall Vertue get.
            
            
               Happie, thrice happie is that purer minde
               Whom wisedome keepeth an adopted heire:
               Oh sacred patron to a wit refinde,
               Valiant vpholder of a soule so faire.
               Vertue I serue,Virtutime. and seruing her I finde
               All loose affections slaues to my pure minde.
            
            
               Hapie content the curber of my will,
               Teaching necessitie to dance in woe:
               Giuing to forward thoughts a raine, to still
               The fickle humours, which eu'r changing goe.
               Vertue on earth sole monarch thee hath crown'd,Sorte mea contentus.
               
               Ouer all petiie vertues that are found.
            
            
               What a nice brawling keep these cattes precise
               Of pettie vertues and content of minde?
                     Vice.
                  
               
               First should these hands quite race out both these eyes,
               Ere Fortune me so ceremonious finde.
               Heer's much ado about a thing of noughts,
               Concerning quiet,Parturiunt montes. and the ease of thoughts.
            
            
               
               Cheek
                     •
                  -dimpling laughture, set thy merry foole
               Amidst the sadnesse of this drouping rout:
               Shew them a franklin dauncing in a hoole,
               Whiles his young squire singes hooby in and out.
               
                  Asinus asininum fert dominum.Show them a long-eard Asse his maister beating,
               Thou standing by, and both them Asses swearing.
            
            
               Show them a shauen rusticke, in whose beard
               
                  Hiems cold Ice, not Himens bloomes are rise:
               His gowtie fingerels enwristing ha
                     •
                  d
               The tender-ioynted roundure of his wife.
               
                  Aspice caput.Whiles she doth dally & his haires adorne,
               She plants vpon his head a goodly horne.
            
            
               See there a monkey (oh faire-featur'd beast)
               Creep to his mistris warme laps mansion,
               VVhere her owne husband (yet scarce he with rest)
               Once in one twelue month hath accesse vpon.
               
                  Bestia cum b
                        •
                     st
                        •
                     js.Thrice happy beast that graunted art that place
               VVhich men desire, yet stil kept off a space.
            
            
               Show them a Dyer wedding with a Beare,
               As if his colours could transforme the beast,
               Or to the corpes another feature reare,
               Or metamorphose her rugg'd hairy breast
               
                  Vetus Asinus nunquam sapiens.Into some smooth and amiable forme,
               But t'is impossible, shee's too much worne.
            
            
               How (ah how) can mine eares (Vertue began)
               Abide the hearing of these vitious euils?
               How can mine eyes behold base vice to scan
               The top of honour with these glorious diuels?
               
                  Ignoras pudorem.Iniurious strumpet hide thy face for shame,
               For heauen it selfe doth hate thy odious name.
            
            
               
               Think'st it a glory to behold those fooles,
               Climing by grees vnto the height of sinne?
               Tak'st thou a pleasure to behold thy schooles
               With Oceans of wit drownd sots to swimme?
               Thou horred mappe of vile inequitie,Ridet. Xanthus.
               
               Laugh'st thou to see thine owne impietie?
            
            
               If I would boast, I could arrest thine eyes
               With fairer obiects then thou yet didst see:
               I could acquaint thine eares with harmonies,
               Sweeter then Syrens-chaunting melodie.
               But who knowes not that who so Vertue loues,Borum & appeto & expeto
               
               Vice from his eyes as odious remoues.
            
            
               To counterchecke thy peacock-plumed pride,
               I haue a scholler call'd Humilitie,
               Though poore without, yet inly beautifi'de
               With hidden treasure, and faire dignitie.
               Pride is most rich in shewe, but bare in minde,
               But him in shewe poore,Simia quamuis ornata. in soule rich I finde.
            
            
               To counteruaile lusts great preheminence,
               And all the crew of those lycentious fires,
               I haue affection ruling continence,
               Honesties mistresse, Queene of chaste desires,
               A holy vestall,Vestalem te iudico. whose virginitie
               Parts not but with her soule from spotlesse body.
            
            
               The meane betwixt mudde-raking couetousnesse,
               And loosenesse offspring, carelesse diffluence,
               I haue this liberall sparing bounteousnesse,
               Free giuer, yet with equall conscience.
               Vertue on both sides stands enuironed
               With two extreames,Medina saepissime virtus. both vices chronicled.
            
            
               
               To contrary thy Enuies byting hate,
               And all the honour of maliciousnesse:
               I haue pure meeknes, who in all estate
               Is still content with humble lowlinesse.
               
                  Nec vis, nec lenitas.Hating ambitious Enuies angry sting,
               Louing a mild and equall censuring.
            
            
               If I would lay the glory of my schoole
               Open to euery vitious gazers eye,
               I should amaze the sottish doting foole,
               Quite ouercome with incredulitie.
               
                  Nescit me mundus.But since the world my vertue doth not knowe,
               They hate my walkes, and follow vice their woe.
            
            
               Whiles I alone do walke along'st the streetes,
               Each vassaile gins to spit at me in scorne:
               The more my honour, for ere this life fleetes
               He shall be bandyed, and of ioy forlorne.
               
                  Te propria reijciet domina.Be quite reiected of his proper dame,
               And die a death of vnrecouer'd shame.
            
            
               This is the ende of all thy minions,
               Most wretched, fearfull, and detestable:
               What's the precedent lifes progression,
               When the lifes ende is found so horrible?
               
                  Finis acta probar.An euil act, attracts an euil end,
               And by the issue stil the worth is ken'd.
            
            
               The ende to which each man the world doth see,
               Is to extoll our high Creators glory:
               Each of thy schollers doth the contrary,
               And to the diuel are contributary.
               
                  Sufficet esse 
                        •
                     eruum.Oh honourable seruice, office high,
               To vndertake Hobgoblins baylifry.
            
            
               
               Who but those men whom Follyes chaunting tong,
               Hath metamorphos'd vnto mindlesse sots?
               Who but whom Vices witching Syrens song,
               Hath quite transform'd to witlesse Ideots,
               Will flye from Vertue,Placent Nigerimia nigro. soules restoratiue,
               To cleaue to Vice, poisons ministratiue?
            
            
               
                  Cassandra thou presaging Prophetesse,
               (Thrice happie, if as soone beleeu'd as heard)
               Why breathest thou tydings of happinesse,
               Amidst a rocke of Adamants vpreard?
               Whose brest thy siluer newes cannot yperse,Bona non adminuntur.
               
               What credit they which Vertue doth rehearse.
            
            
               Deformed strumpet, or if vglier name,
               May to a most detested wretch be right,
               Blush monster, blush agent, to stubborne shame,
               The vnderprop of Sathans powerfull might.
               Seducing mischiefes,Tenebrosum est vitium. teaching ruder wights,
               That Vice doth rule by day, Vertue by nights.
            
            
               Though I haue like a pilgrim walk'd some-while,
               Meating by steps the earths circumference,
               With looser garments ouercasting still,
               The modest splendour of my Eminence,Numquam sero
               
               Trying if any brest that Vertue loued,
               Would haue this lump of sin from's heart remoued.
            
            
               But since my vertue was but modestie,
               And all my garments simple plainnesse deemd:
               Since my companion was integritie,
               Meekenesse my page, (basenesse of all esteemd)
               I'm so reiected,Quem mihi monstras that each man (oh greefe)
               Loues not himselfe, if I him seeme to leefe.
            
            
               
               But now nor thou presumptuous impudent,
               Shameles vpbraidor, tyrannizing dame.
               Shalt with thy sugred tongue to pleasure bent,
               Slurry with scandall Vertues glorious name,
               
                  Angelus in 
                        •
                     oro.Nor like an Angell canonized bee,
               Wiles I am beaten with deepe miserie.
            
            
               Nor thou dame crosse blisse, recling mistris chance,
               State alt'ring tyrant, who impuritie
               Vp to the height of honour do'st aduance,
               But tread'st with enuious foote on pietie.
               
                  Non semper Apollo valibisNo more shalt thou with mischiefs crosse my darling,
               No more shall Vertues seruants feare thy snarling.
            
            
               Learning shall flourish inaugre all thy power,
               Ripe wit shall scorne thy tyrannizing front,
               All shall disdaine thy hearts astounding tower,
               Not one shall recke thy lookes; looke nere so scont.
               
                  Contento placent etiam in fortunia.Meekenesse with smiling censure shall disdaine
               The fell infliction of disaster paine.
            
            
               Nor mistris Minx that hight Pecunia,
               
               Whom Vice constraines to be her feruitour,
               
                  Fortuna's darling, the worlds Helena,
               
               
                  Auarus life, liefe, loue, and nouriture,
               
                  Liberali non deest bursa.Shall cause a liberall purse emptie to be,
               And fill the bags of infrugalitie.
            
            
               Now what a railing mistris Vertue keepes,
               (Quoth Vice) stand'st thou vpō thy pantostes?
               Or do'st thou thinke that Vice and Fortune sleepes,
               And cannot heare thy rayling menacies?
               
                  Mens irritas
                        •
                     
                  Ile haue a bi
                     ••
                  e to taine that too free tong,
               Or else it will insult ore me ere long.
            
            
               
               Nay sure (quoth Fortune) she ouerthrowes vs all,
               Who knowes not but that Vertue can pleade well?
               For she hath hony'd Eloquence at call,
               And Rhetoricke euen at her becke doth dwell.
               But if her pride be ouer peremptory,Res fustibu
                        •
                      agi.
               
               Our hands and not our tongues shall win the glory.
            
            
               Vertue because thou deem'st thy power worth
               Beyond the estimation of compare,
               We meane to wring thy deepest power forth,
               And ere we leaue, leaue all thy glory bare.
               For why,Nolentem incitas. these insultations do spurre on
               Our forward force of indignation.
               The Chalenge.
            
            
               Vice and my selfe with all our followers,
               Whose power we certaine are thou canst not daunt:
               Will and commaund thee with thy seruiters,
               Either to our iniunctions to graunt,
               That is to yeeld thy selfe for Vices slaue,Te tua manus.
               
               Or with thy hand digge thy eternall graue.
            
            
               If thou refuse obeysance due to yeeld
               Vnto these articles; with speed prepare
               To meete vs with an army in the feeld,
               Where both shal try their powers in the warre.
               Arme all thy troopes,Iacente sole, emicat luna. for thou shalt honor vs
               By making our large force victorious.
            
            
               Proud Impe (quoth Vertue) these audacious words
               Argue in thee a most presumptuous spirite,
               Although no crab but some good iuyce affords,
               This plot doth both thy ioy and mine inherite.
               Wherefore ere Vertue stoope to be a slaue,Nescit virtus seruitudineo
                        •
                     .
               
               Shee'le die in field, and there expect a graue.
            
            
               
               The fittest place for warre let me assigne,
               (The weaker comb
                     •
                  tant may choose his ground)
               I know thou deem'st the conquest euen now thine,
               Thy hundreth souldiers to my one is found.
               
                  Ne angulo fiat.Then for pure pittie let me point the place,
               When I am to receiue mine owne disgrace.
            
            
               There is an Iland bordering by France,
               
               By auncient yore y cleped Albion:
               Worthy of selfe, whom worthyer Peeres aduance,
               Vnto the name of Honours mansion.
               
                  In
                        ••
                     la 
                        •
                     aelix.A royall seate of Iouiall Monarchie,
               Full of vnconqu'rd rule to soueraigntie.
            
            
               Time-honour'd Albion hauing lost this name,
               Is by the name of England famoused:
               
                  William the conqu'rour first wonne the same,
               Rude then, and sauage, scarce inhabited.
               
                  Hi
                        •
                      virtus.His royall issue haue enlarg'd the land,
               And made it famous by their conqu'ring hand.
            
            
               Thither repaire to bring thy troopes with thee,
               There will we try the fortune of the day:
               To whom great Ioue assignes the victorie,
               The conquered to them shall stoope and say,
               
                  Victoria certa est.Since heau'ns Creator, thee the victor made,
               I haue my corpes at thy feete captiue laide.
            
            
               This said, they parted: Fortune smiling still
               To thinke of Vertues future ouerthrowe:
               Vice merry walking with conceited will,
               Laughing sometimes to thinke on Vertues woe.
               Vertue was modest hoping victorie,
               
                  Modestia vincit.Trusting the Gods would giue her sou'raigntie.
            
            
               
               High-minded Fortune, Vertues enuious foe,
               Strait put a supplication vp to Ioue:
               
               That on her side the peeres of heauen might goe,
               And all from Vertue would their grace remoue.
               But Maya's sonne these Letters intercepted,Ingenium vir
                        •
                     uti amicum.
               
               And others in their roome to Ioue directed.
            
            
               As from his sister Vertue he did write,
               Crauing assistance gainst the Queene of chance;
               And gainst proud Vice her enuious opposite,
               
                  Ioue smil'd and said he Vertue would aduance.
               Nor should proud vice,Virtus non Furtunae in seruiet. nor haughtie mistris Chance
               Be able to withstand her puissance.
            
            
               With that he strait enioyned Mercury
               
               With winged speed to poast to Vertues tent,
               Bid her assured be of victory,
               For I haue vow'd that Fortune shall repent
               That euer she assumed Vices part,Quis non tremit frato Ioue?
               
               And swore that Vertue mistressed his hart.
            
            
               Swifter then lightling Tripos flies away,
               And preinformes her of what should ensue;
               Vertue reuiuing to him thus gan say,
               Celestiall brother I am bound to you,
               For being such my Fautour vnto Ioue,
                  Ioui mea omnia.
               
               To whom I owe both zeale and duteous loue.
            
            
               Sweete brother giue immortall thankes to him,
               Whose bountie farre exceeds a mortall boone;
               Vertue I trust now Vices power shall dim,
               And Vice lye dead that all this while hath shone.
               Oh blessed day, oh three times blessed hower,Vi
                        •
                     tus super omnia latidem.
               
               VVhen Ioue hath giuen Vertue celestiall power.
            
            
               
               This said, into the aire mounts Ma
                        •
                     a's sonne,
               When at his comming to Ioues closet doore,
               
                  Fortune he spi'd, who then to knock begunne,
               But Tripos staying her from knocking mor
                     •
                  ,
               
                  Non vacat exiguis Ioui.Told her that Ioue was quiet and at rest,
               Charging no wight his study shuld molest.
            
            
               
                  Fortune departs frustrate of her pretence,
               And now the day of battell is assign'd:
               Vertue now glitters in her excellence,
               Clad in most glorious habit, all refin'd.
               
                  Hic est pulchritudo.A louelyer Damosel neuer eye could view,
               Beautie in others fain'd, in her was true.
            
            
               The brest-plate that she wore was liuely Faith,
               That did repel all darts y-throwne at her:
               Hope as a fortresse fore her selfe she laith,
               To keepe away each vitious menacer.
               
                  Omnes haec fert testudo capus.Her head-peece is faire Comfort, which being on,
               She seems to scorne, dread, death, confusion.
            
            
               Next to her succeedeth Liberalitie,
               
               A valiant Captaine, warlike Collonell:
               With many Vertues in his companie,
               This a Lieutenant, that a Centinell.
               
                  Vim virtus habebit.Thus was her army fill'd on euery side,
               Whole troupes of soules vnto her hourely hi'de.
            
            
               Yet the least wing of Vices mightie hoast,
               Was three times more then Vertues to tall band:
               Till warlike Pallas did to Vertue poast,
               And promisde helpe with her all conqu'ring hand.
               
                  An Palladis arma?Vertue reioyc'd, and in most humble manner
               Desired Pallas to erect her banner.
            
            
               
               
                  Venus saw this, and made amaine to Vice,
               Vowing to lend her all her womans power:
               
                  Mars missing his sweet Venus, in a trice
               Departs to Fortunes band in angry stower.
               Where spying Venus,
                  Stygias iurauerit vmbras. strait by Styx he swore,
               To follow Vices colours euermore.
            
            
               
                  Ioue seeing this, tooke thunder in his hand,
               Descending all in lightning on the ground:
               Amazed and agast doth Vertue stand,
               Till Ioue doth waken out her drowsie stound,
               And bids her be of comfort,Phaebum hodiè obscuras. for this day
               She should outshine in Glory Phaebus ray.
            
            
               The battell ioyn'd, Vice held vp conqu'ring hand,
               Till Ioue disdaining further dalliance,
               Scatter'd his thunderbolts midst Vices band,
               Which cleane amaz'd the impious Queene of chance,
               To see her army groueling on the ground,Quis Ioui ne opponi
                        •
                     ;
               
               Scarce one aliue, yet not one dead was found.
            
            
               Vertue now hasteth vnto Vices campe,
               There taking all her seruants prisoners;
               Now Vertue Fortunes glory quite doth damp,
               She and her crew be only conquerers.
               
                  Fortune was made confesse,Vineuntur gigantes. and Vice to kneele,
               Both true to her, that scorn'd her at their heele.
            
            
               
                  Ioue gaue strait charge to haue them closely kept,
               For breaking forth to such vile outrages:
               
                  Pecunia now to Vertues lappey-lept,
               Begging for pardon for her stubbornesse.
               Vertue forgaue her,Vltionem nescit Arere. and forthwith disburs'd her
               To Liberatis charge who straighwaies-purs'd her:
            
            
               
               Vice they imprison'd, oh would they had slaine her,
               For she corrupted strait the Iaylors hart;
               Indeed what closest prison could detaine her,
               Who with such witching passions acts her part?
               
                  Vitium repit sancium.She crept abroad, though with a mortall wound,
               But in short space recouer'd and was found.
            
            
               
                  Ioue now departing, Vertue did command,
               In England to set vp her chiefest rest;
               She should finde fauour at Eliza's hand,
               With whom faire wisedome builded had his nest.
               
                  Virtus habet Elizabetham.The Gods ascend to heauen, Vertue departs
               T'our more then mortall Queene, ruler of harts.
            
            
               
                  Fortune now frets to see her selfe throwne downe,
               And Vertue lifted to such dignitie,
               Truth at the last attained due renowne,
               
                  Pecunia is disposed thriftily.
               
                  Anglia aetaten
                        •
                      habet auream▪
                  England thou art Pleasures-presenting stage,
               The perfect patterne of the golden age.
            
            
               Neuer be date of this felicitie,
               Neuer be alteration of this ioy.
               Neuer, ah neuer faile thy dignitie.
               Neuer let Fortune crosse thee with annoy.
               
                  Te sospite Anglia sospes.Neuer let Vertue by Vice suffer death.
               Neuer be absent our Elizabeth.
               
            
            
               Euer for euer Englands Beta bee,
               Feared of Forraines, honour'd of thine owne,
               Euer let treason stoope to sou'raigntie.
               Euer let Vice by Truth be ouerthrowne.
               
                  Viuat Regina.Euer graunt Heauens Creator, of our Queene,
               We still may say she is, not she hath beene.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   