
      
         
            
            
            ¶:This lytell
treatyſe compendiouſly
declareth the damage and
Deſtruction in Real mes / 
cauſed by the Serpente
of Diuiſion.
❧
            
            
               
                  depiction of castle and knights
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               WHylome as olde bokꝭ maketh
mencion: whan
the noble and famous Cite
of Rome: was moſte
ſhynynge in hys felicite
and flouring ī his glory / 
lyke as it is remembred in the bokes of
olde antiquite: in the pryme tēps of his
foundacion whan the walles were reiſed
on hyght by the manly and prudent diligence
of Remus and Romulus: the Cite
ſtode vnder gouernaūce of kynges tyll
vnto the tyme that Tarquine: ſonne of
Tarquine the proude: dyd the great outrageous
offence vnto Lucres / wyfe of the
worthy Senatoure Collatine. In punyſſhyng
of whiche treſpaſſe by the māly
purſuyte of Collatynes kynred and full
aſſente of all the Senate: the name of
kyngꝭ ceaſed ī the Cite of Rome for euer
more / & all the royall ſtocke of the foreſaid
Tarquyne was proſcripte & put in exyle.
❧ And after by the prudent aduyſe of the
Senate: the Cite was gouerned bytwene
Counſeylers / and ſo contynued vnto the
tyme that Pompey the proude was repayred
home agayne from the conqueſte
of Tyre / whiche by force he had made
ſubiecte vnto the empyre of Rome: where

as with great worthines of fame he was
receyued. So that for his great nobleſſe
he was choſen one of the thre for to gouerne
the Cite: aſſygned to hym other
two full renomed of knyghthode: Iulius
Cezar / and Marcus Craſſus / and thus
was the name of Counſeylers tourned in
to the name of Dictatours / whiche was
that tyme an offyce partinent to prynces
to gouerne other. And for a ſpeciall cauſe
this offyce and this occupacion of a Dictatoure:
by aſſente of all the hole Senate
was cōmytted vnto thre / that if one offended:
the other twayne ſhulde be myghty
and ſtronge to correcte the thyrde. ❧ And
an other cauſe was this. ❧ whyle that
twaine were occupied in warre outwarde
the thyrde ſhulde gouerne at home. And
thus all the whyle they were of one harte
of one aſſent / and voyde of variaunce amonge
them ſelfe: the nobleſſe of Rome
floured in proſperite. But as ſone as falſe
couetyſe brought in pryde and vayne ambicion:
The cōtageous Serpēte of Diuiſion
clypſed and appalled her worthynes / 
cōcludyng ſo
                  •
               hly as in ſentence that euery
kingdome ꝓued by diuiſion is cōueyed
to his diſtruction. And ſo for the ſurquedous
pryde on the partye of Iulius: and

after of the ſayd Cite of Rome: the contageous
couetyſe entremedled with enuy
on the partye of Pompey: made the famous
Cite of Rome fully waſt and wylde
nat onely of theyr iunumerable treaſure:
but cauſed thē alſo to be full bareyne and
deſolate of theyr men / where tofore of worthynes / 
of knyghthode / and of chyualry:
they were incomparable. ❧ And finally
the falſe diuiſion amonge them ſelfe: was
more importable vnto them: and cauſed
more the ruyne of the Cite / thā whā they
had warre with all the worlde / lyke as
this lytell ſtorye compendiouſly ſhall deuyſe.
¶And to conuey brefly the proceſſe
of this mater: ye ſhall fyrſte vnderſtande
that Marcus Craſſus was ſenre to the
parties of the Northe with ſyxe legions
of knyghtes agaynſte the kynge of Parthes.
¶And the manly man Iulius
Cezar with other ſyxte legions of people
was ſent downe paſſing the great bondes
of Lombardy / diſcending downe by hygh
Alpyes / & auaylyng downe by the large
plage of Germany and of Almaygne / tyl
by conqueſte: by his manly force and his
mortall ſwerde he brought all France in
to ſubiection / & all the lande of Burgoyne
Brabant / Flaunders / and Holande. In

whiche cōqueſt he cōtynued tyll almoſte
the ſpace of his Luſtre was waſted out.
That is to ſay: that was the ſpace limyted
of the Romanes: the whiche was called
a Luſtre / which is accōpted the ſpace
of .v. yere / & who ſo euer paſſed that ſpace
by accaſion of any cōqueſt & nat repaired
agayne at his tyme ſet & lymyted of fyue
yere: He was foriuged anone & dēpt asenemy
& rebell vnto the noble Cite of Rome
¶But this famous & manly mā Iulius
prudently demynge in his opyuyon that
tyme loſte whyle that fortune is blandeſſhīg
& fauourable: through the cōtageoꝰ
occaſyon of negligēce & of ſlouth: is afterward
ful harde for to be recouered. Wherfore
of knyghthode & manly proweſſe he
dyd ſet the Romanes ſtatutꝭ aſyde: & fully
purpoſed in his noble & knyghtlyherte
for to paſſe the bondes & the ſpace of his
Luſtre / and to enforce hym ſelfe with his
chyualry to wynne the bondꝭ of Bretain
and ouerſayle by force the weſte party of
our Occean. But for all his ſurquedous
pryde he was twyes beten of at his aryuale
by the worthynes of the Bretō king
called Caſſybelan. And playnly without
fauour to de
                  •
               iare & ſpecify the trouth he
migh neuer attayne to aryue at his luſte

and pleaſure: tyll this manly kyng Caſſybelan
and Androgenes duke of Cornewayle:
fell at debate amonge them ſelfe / 
wherby I may cōclude that whyles vnyte
and accorde ſtode vndefoyled & vndeuyded
in the bondꝭ of Bretaine: the mighty
conquerour Iulius was vnable and impotent
to vaynquiſſhe thē. ¶By whiche
enſample ye may euydently cōſyder and
ſe: that diuiſiō lyke as is ſpecified toforne
is originall cauſe in prouynces and regions
of all deſtruction: For whan Iulius
by fauoure of Androgenes recouered aryuale
into Bretayne: ſhortly after Caſſybelane
the manly kynge: proudely and
knyghtly met with hym / betwene whōe
there was a mortall warre. But lyke as
it is eſpecially remembred and recorded
by the wrytynge of the moſte worthye
and graduate clerke Euſebius that ſame
daye whan Iulius and Caſſybelan met
in the folde: this foreſayd Caſſybelane
had a famous and a paſſyng manly man
to his Brother: the whiche with his blody
mortall ſwerde neuer ceaſed to ſle and
oppreſſe the proude Romane knyghtes / 
ſo farforth that they fledde and eſchewed
his ſwerde as the deth. ❧ For as he
wente there was no reſyſtence. And

this contynued ſo longe that the Romanes
were impotent to reſyſte. ❧ But Oh
alas whan he was weried of fyght: it befell
caſually of Fortune whiche is ay contrary
and peruerſe: that he of aduenture
met with this manly man Iulius / and
both two lyke as made is mencion: fared
as Tygres and Lyons / eueryche woundyng
other full mortally / tyll ſodeynly by
diſpoſiciō of fate: Iulius with an vnware
ſtroke of his dredfull ſwerde rofe hym atwene.
❧ And by cauſe the ſtory maketh
no mencyon what this worthye knyght
hyght: I fynde none other name of hym
but that he was brother vnto the noble
Breton kyng Caſſybelan. ❧ The deth of
whome Bretons ought full well to complayne
/ by whoſe deth Iulius was made
victorious / and Caſſybelane brought to
ſubiection vnto the Empyre of Rome / &
conſtreyned by Cezar to paye for his truage
/ thre thouſande pounde euery yere. ❧
¶And in the ſygne of this conqueſte and
victory Iulius Cezar edified in this lāde
for a perpetuall memory to put his name
in remēbraūce: the caſtell of Douer / and
Caunterbury / Rocheſter / and the towre
of London / the caſtell & the towne of Cezariſbury / 
whiche nowe is called Saleſbury

And more ouer as ſaythe myne auctoure
he edifyed Cezaris Cheſter / that nowe is
called Chycheſter / & the caſtell of Exceter
¶And in the meane whyle that Cezar
thus proudely had holy & entyerly the gouernaūce
of Brutes Albyon: his felowe
Marcus Craſſus of whōe tofore is made
mencion: was ſlayne in the Eſt partye of
the worlde / whyle he made moſte cruell
warre agaynſte the fyers people of Parthes.
❧ And for his gredy vnſtauncheable
thurſte of couetyſe / his enemyes ſlewe
hym in this wyſe. ❧ They made melte
golde & poured it in to his mouthe / ſayng
to hym in this wyſe. ☞ Aurum ſitiſti:
aurū bibe. Thou haſt thurſted golde all
thy lyfe: nowe drynke thy fyll. ¶Lo
here ye may cōſyder and ſe the ſhorte and
the moment any tyme tranſytory and nat
abydyng of all the warriours. And as the
ſtory reherſeth alſo: as for lamētable kalende
of more infortune that after ſhulde
folowe: Iulta the noble wyfe of Pompey
and doughter to Cezar dyed of a chylde.
For whiche cauſe Pompeyus pretended
to fynde a cauſe to reuoke Cezar agayne
to Rome by aſſēte of all the Cenate to the
intent that he ſhulde come in his owne perſone
to reuenge in all haſte the deth of his

felowe Marcus Craſſus: as before is
ſayd ſo vengeably ſlayne in his cōqueſt
¶This ſame Pompey hauyng a ſecrete
drede in his conceyt leſt that Iulius Cezar
ſhulde waxe ſo myghty in his cōqueſt
that he ſhulde nat be egall of power / nor
able to reſyſte hym in his repayre / and
dredynge alſo in his ymaginacion leſte
that▪ Iulius wolde of preſūptuous pryde
vſurpe by tyranny to take vpon hym the
lordeſhype and the dominacion of Rome
But this manly man Cezar aduertynge
full prudently and perceyuyng the fraudulent
meanyng of Pompey on that one
ſyde: and the compaſſed ſteyght of the
Cenate of that other ſyde: full aduyſedly
gaue anſwere agayne that he wolde accomplyſſhe
and perfourme his conqueſte
whiche he had begon / and than mekely
and humbly at theyr requeſte repayre
home agayne. ❧ And in this wyſe entred
in the ſnake of wanhope and of diſcorde:
whiche cauſed eueryche to ſuſpecte other
and thus began to kyndle the fyre of enuy
/ enducing ſucceſſyuely warre & debate
among thē ſelfe / & here vpon without delay
to execute theyr purpoſe: & euydently
to ſhewe the ende of theyr intent: Pompey
& the Cenate of one aſſent without

reſpite or deliberacion foriuged Cezar gylty / 
diſobey ſante / rebell / and traytoure to
Rome / and gaue vpō hym a ſentēce diffinityue
of exyle & proſcripcion for euermore.
¶But Iulius nat cōſyderyng nor
hauyng no maner euydence ne ſuſpecion
of that malicious cōſpiracy that Pompey
and the Cenate wrought agaynſte hym.
But all īnocent and vnknowlegynge 
                  •
                of
theyr enuyous malyce by good and diligent
deliberacion of intent dyd ſende his
Imbaſſatoures: nat vnto his ſonne in
lawe Pompey: but alſo vnto all the worthy
courte of the Cenate / and to all other
of the Citezens of the Cite / requirynge
and prayng thē of equite / that for his meritory
deſerte: they ſhulde nat be cōtrary
agaynſte hym / nor for none occaſyon of
wylfulnes: to deny vnto hym his cuſtumable
guerdon the whiche is due of olde
antiquite to be gyuē to cōquerours: but
that they wolde frely & wylfully (vncompelled)
graūt him & put him ī poſſeſſiō of
the Palme & the triūph whiche ſo lōg by
knyghtly labour & māly diligence he had
for the encreace & the augmētacion of the
comon profite of all the empire of Rome
trauayled for. ¶Thā for to ſpecifye and
declare the honour & Triūphe whylome

vſed in Rome: Fyrſte ye ſhall vnderſtāde
that Triumphus by diſcripcion: is as
moche to ſaye in Englyſſhe as a treble
gladnes / or els a ſynguler excellency of
ioye / in thre maner of wyſe ordeyned for
victours: whiche through theyr hygh renowme
and māly proweſſe had brought
regions and cities by way of knyghly cō
               queſte
to be ſubiecte & trybutary vnto the
Empyre of Rome. ¶The fyrſte of the
thre worſhipes done to a cōquerour: was
this. ¶Fyrſte at his repayre vnto the
Cite: all the people of hye eſtate and of
lowe: ſhulde with great ioye & reuerence
in theyr beſt & richeſt aray: mete hym on
the way. And this was the fyrſte. ¶The
ſeconde was this / that all the pryſoners
and they that were in captiuite: ſhulde
fetred & manacled go roūde aboute enuiron
his charet: ſōe before & ſome behynde
¶And the thyrde worſhype done vnto
hym this was. That he ſhulde be clad ī a
purpurate mātell of Iupiter as god / and
ſyt with a crowne of Laurer vpō his heed
in a charet of golde / & about his necke a
maner of a cercle enuyron made of golde:
in ſymylitude & lykenes of a Palme. And
it ſo that his cōqueſte were perfourmed & accōplyſſhed
withoutē ſworde or ſhedynge

of blode: thā ſhuld the cercle of the Palme
be forged without pryckꝭ or pynnes. And
if ſo were that his victory was fynyſſhed
by the cruell fate of warre: thā of cuſtūe
his ſercle or his pectorall was forged all
full of ſharpe pryckīg thornes / to declare
and ſpecify that there is no cōqueſte accō
               plyſſhed
fully to the ende by mediacion of
warre: without that there be felte and
foūde therin the ſharpe thornes of aduerſue / 
& that outher by deth or els by pouerte.
And this royall victorious Charet to
foreſayd was drawen with foure whyte
ſtedes through the moſt royall ſtretes of
the cite to the Capitoly / he hauyng a ceptre
in his hande full rychely deuyſed: and
thervpon in ſygne of victory an Egle of
golde. And to ſhewe clerely that al worldly
glory is tranſitory & nat abydyng: and
euydently to declare that in hyghe eſtate
is no aſſuraūce: there was ſet at the back
of the cōquerour / behynde in the charet / 
the moſt vnlykely perſone / and the moſte
wretche: that in any countrey myght be
founde / diſfygured & clad in the moſt vglywyſe
that any man coulde deuyſe. ❧ And
amyd all the clamour & noyſe of the people
/ to exclude the falſe ſurquedy / vayne
glory / and ydle laude: this forſayd foule

and vgly wretche ſhulde of cuſtome and
of cōſuetude ſmyre the conquerour in the
necke euer and vpō the heed / & ſtandmele
ſaynge to hym in Greke: this worde
(Norys yolytos) whiche is to ſay in our
englyſſhe tong as (Knowe thy ſelfe) whiche
declareth vnto him that he nor none
other ſhuld for no ſuche worldly glory be
ſurquedous ne waxe proude. And that
day it was lefull without punyſſhyng to
euery man of hye eſtate or of lowe to ſay
to hym that was victoure / what that he
wolde whether it were of honour or worſhype / 
of reprefe or of ſhame. And this
was admytted for this cauſe / that he
ſhulde truely conſyder and aduerte that
there is none erthly glory that fully may
be aſſured without daunger of fortune.
And ſhortly to declare the difference betwene
Triūphus & Tropheū. Triūph is
a full & a cōplener ouercomyng of enemyes
by batayle. And Trophe is whan a
man putteth his enemyes to flyght with
out ſtroke of ſwerde. ¶But touchyng
this honour aforſayd whiche Iulius requyred
& aſked of ryght as for a guerdon
whiche him thought was meritory & due
vnto him. Anon this forſaid Pōpey with
full aſſēt of all the cenate denied all with

one voyce his requeſt: and of one accorde
anſwered agayne & ſayd hym platly he
ſhuld nat be accepted there vnto no ſuche
honour / but planly they bad hym knowe
that he hade rather deſerued to be deed
thā to attayne to any ſuche worſhipe / allegyng
agaynſt hym that he was both rebell
& traytour to the ſtatutes of Rome.
¶And whā Iulius clerely cōceyued the
ſhorte anſwere of the cenate & of this Pō
               pey
tofore ſaid / there kindeled a ful great
hote brēuyng fyre of enuy in his harte of
the fretyng hate ſpecially that he bare in
his breſte for to be reuenged of Pompey.
¶And as Lucau reherceth ī his poetical
boke: the deneyng of this worſhipe to Iulius:
was the chefe groūde & occaſion of
all the warre that began in Rome / rote &
begynning alſo of all the cōtageous diuiſion
among thē ſelfe. ¶But ſo as Lucan
lyketh to reherce & ſpecify in his boke aforeſayd
among other cauſes that he put
Lye in eſpeciall wryteth of thre whiche
were chefe begynnyng and rote of diuiſion
among thē ſelfe / prouyng by reaſon
in thoſe thre: that it muſt nedes be: that
the felicite & the proſperite of Rome muſt
abate & drawe to decline / the whiche thre:
Firſt he ſaith it was neceſſary that ſuche

aduerſyte ſhulde fall to Rome. Secondarely
he ſayth it was cōſuet adynary. And
thyrdly he ſaith it was volūtary. ¶Firſt
that it was neceſſary: he proueth by example
of nature in this wyſe. That lyke
as Phebus the ſonne: whan he aryſeth ī
the Orient: and by ſucceſſyue courſe aſcē
               deth
into the hygheſt poynte of the Mydday
ſpere: and of his kynde and naturall
courſe muſt diſcende: and hath his goldē
treſſed hornes in the weſtren wawes: and
than dymmeth & darkneth our emeſpery
by abſence of his lyght: & alſo eke whan
the ſame goldē wayne of Tytan: fro the
Ariet is whyrled vp to the hygheſt towre
of his aſcention in the celeſtyall ſygne of
the crabbe: and thā by the myghry compellyng
of natures ryght: he is conſtreyned
to diſcende downe & auale his charet.
Ryght ſo ſemblably there is no worldly
worſhype ſo bryght nor clere ſhynyng in
erth: but that it muſt enclyne and auale
downe as ſone as he hathe artayned to
the hygheſt & the moſt famous poynte of
his aſcencion. For lyke as the rage & the
haboundaūt flowe: whan it hath raught
his ſtourdy wawes to the hyeſt: ſodeynly
foloweth an ebbe & maketh him to reſorte
agayne. In the ſame wyſe whā any temporall

proſperite is moſt flowyng in felicite:
than is a ſodeyne ebbe of aduerſyte
moſte to be adrad. ¶Alſo in the ſame
wyſe as ye may clerely diſcerne and conſyder
at the eye: In trees and herbes / 
that whan the vegetatyfe vertue by the
confortable influence of the ſonne: is after
the colde wynter: In Ver by lytell
and lytell aſcended into braunches and
bowes: and cauſeth them for to budde &
to bloſſome newe: and alſo in herbes maketh
a luſty and a freſſhe coloure newly
to appere: And more ouer by proceſſe of
tyme with her holſome bawme aparaleth
thē with many folde ſondry coloure:
of red / whyte / and grene: and thā anon
after in diſcence of Appollo the ſonne:
the ſame vertue fro the crop aualeth agayne
in to the rote: ryght ſo there is no
felicite ſo flouryng / nor none ſo apparayled
with bloſſomes and blomes of tranſytory
rycheſſe: but as ſone as the ſhynyng
ſonne of her glory ſhedeth his beames
moſt clere: full vnwarely ere they
can aduerte or take hede: ben robbed and
reued of theyr lordeſhype and plonged a
downe dy occaſyon of ſome aduerſyte / 
brought and enduced into aduerſyte: outher
by ſeckenes or by deth. ¶And thus

that the fyrſte cauſe is naturall and neceſſary:
and that all worldly pompe and
pryde ſhall paſſe: myne auctour Lucan
hath proued by reaſon. Than touchyng
the ſeconde cauſe whiche is called cuſtom
able and conſuctudinary: ye may conſyder
that euer of cuſtome it falleth that
whan the blynde goddeſſe of varyaunce
Dame Fortune hathe enhaunced a man
hygheſt vpon her whyle: with a ſodeyne
ſyghe ſhe plongeth hym downe agayne.
¶Euidēt example ye may take of kyngꝭ
and prynces that haue ben tofore. And
thā touchyng the thyrde cauſe of diſtruccion
of the Cite: Lucan lyketh to call 
                  〈◊〉
               
in his poeticall muſes: voluntary. ❧
Whiche is as moche to ſay: as a cauſe roted
vpon wylfulnes without any ground
founded vpon reaſon. For onely of wylfulnes
they were ſo blynde: that thē lyſte
nat to knowe thē ſelfe: but thought them
ſelfe ſo aſſured in theyr felicite: that they
myght nat by no collaterall occaſyon of
aduerſite be perturbed ne put out therof.
¶And thus through falſe ſurquedraūce
they were made ſo wylfull that none lyſt
to obeye other. And ſo was brought in
obſtynacye: eueryche of them demynge
hym ſelfe egall to other. And thus of cō
               trarious
diſcorde amonge thē ſelfe: onely

of volunty: they ſtode diſſcuered and deuyded
/ whiche was one of the chefe occaſyons
of theyr deſtruction. And for this
ſkyll toforne declared. Lucan calleth the
thyrde cauſe voluntary: in as moche as
it was falſly founded vpon wyll. ¶And
thus fyrſte by a cauſe neceſſary: and by
the ſeconde cauſe called conſuetudynary
ſhewed tofore by example of cuſtume: and
by this laſte thyrde cauſe called volūtary
roted onely vpon wyll: The Romanes
amonge them ſelfe: ſtode in ſuche contrauerſye:
That they douted to whiche party
they ſhulde enclyne. ❧ And compendiouſly
to declare howe all theſe cauſes
of diuiſion. Howe the warre whiche of
clerkes is called Bellum Ciuile: whiche
is as moche to ſaye in englyſſhe: As a
warre among them ſelfe. ❧ For the clere
compendious proces of whiche: fyrſte ye
ſhall conſider that Iulius playnly enformed
of the malicious cōſpiracy cōpaſſed
and wrought agaynſte hym. Anon as he
in his repayre out of Albyon was paſſed
the bondes of Almaygne & had attayned
to high Alpies / whiche of auctours ben
called the colde froſty hylles / and the bondes
of Lombardy / & ſo holdyng his paſſage
by the flode of the ſturdy riuer called

of Lucan (Rubicanis) there appered to
hym an olde aunciēt lady heuy and drery
in a mantell of blacke / her face wympled
tofore in full dolorous wyſe: the treſles
of her hede for age full hore and whyte.
And for conſtreynt of her hartely wo: euē
vpon the tyme whan the blacke darke
nyght had ouer ſpredde theyr emyſpery
with the bordure of her vgly and her cloudy
cope. This wofull lady tofore ſayd
began her lament able complaynt to Iulius
in this wyſe. ¶Oh ye noble worthy
knyghtes moſte renomed of fame: Alas / 
whether purpoſe ye with ſo myghty apparayll
of Mars to procede / or where
caſte ye to fytche your ſtourdy ſtanderdes
or to diſplaye your ferefull pynons and
baners. Oh alas agaynſte whome haue
ye caſte fynally to execute the mortall
hate that brenneth in your harte / or agaynſt
wheme purpoſe ye in ſuche cruell
wyſe to proue your myght. Remember
in your thought that ye be vpholden by
the Senate of Rome? and your ſelfe accompred
as for noble and full worthye
knyghtꝭ of the Cite / and ſhewe nat your
ſelfe nowe enemyes to the Empyre / by
whoſe worthynes afore tyme it hath ben
ſuſteyned & mightely ſupported agaynſte

the aſſaute of all her fone. ❧ And Oh
alas aduerte and conſyder in your harte
the noble and the prudent ſtatutes of the
polecy of Rome / the whiche full playnly
doth crpreſſe that it is lefull vnto no mā
for to paſſe the bondes of this ſtreme: but
if he be mortall enemye and tebell vnto
Rome. ❧ Nowe ye therfore that haue
ſo longe bemn frendꝭ / and ſo many maynteyned
the honour of the cite: withdrawe
your fote and haſte nat to faſte: but let
good deliberacion reſtrayne your reynes
that haſty wylfulnes lede you nat to confuſion / 
nat onely of your ſelfe: but vnto
the originall ruyne of the Cite: by the haboundant
ſhedyng of blode that is lykely
to enſue. ¶And ſodeynly whan this lady
had brefly expreſſed the ſūme of her ſētēce
without more ſhe diſapered. ¶This
māly man and fortunate knyght Iulius
in party diſmayed of this vncouth apparence:
reſtreyned his hoſte: and made
them to fetche theyr tentes endelong the
ſtronde vpon the hynder parties of the
ryuer. ❧ And in his vncouthe affray: he
ſodeynly abrayd: ſayd in this wyſe.
            ¶Oh thou mighty Iupiter vnder whoſe
demayne Vulcanus forgeth the dredfull
ſownes of the thonder: and cauſeth hertꝭ

to aryſe with the fyre leuen: And oh ye
goddꝭ and goddeſſes that whylome hade
the gouernaūce of our aūceters in Troy:
and oh ye noble goddes Remus and Romulus
the famous founders & mighly
protectours and patrones of the Cite
of Rome? I as humble ſubiecte vnto
your deite full lowly beſeche and requyre
you of equyte and ryght to be well wylly
and fauourable to promote my true quatell
and cauſe / and benyngly of your boū
               teous
goodnes to fauoure and fortune
the hygh enterpryſe whiche of iuſte tytle
I purpoſe for lyfe of deth through your
fauoure to execute / and nat as enemye
nor rebell to Rome: but as a true Citezē
and a preued knyght caſt me fully to perſeuer.
With cōdicion that lyke as I haue
manly deſerued: I may be receyued / makyng
a proteſtacion that nat as enemye
but as full frende and ſubiecte to Rome
I wyll be ſounde ſtedfaſte and true. ❧
¶Wherefore ye mighty and noble Senatours
of Rome I requyre you of ryght
that ye nothing arecte nor aſcryue to my
gylte that I come with ſtronge & mighty
hande: that I entre the boundes of the emperiall
fraunchyſe. Makyng a full proteſtacion
that only with a clene cōſcience

nat entryked with none entente of euyll
meanyng: that I come to you of full purpoſe
to be receyued as for your frēde and
nat as your foo. Requiryng alſo to holde
hym (what ſo euer he be) for full enemye
to your noble cite: that of wyll and entēt
laboureth to make diſcorde atwene vs
twayne. For ſo that my meritory gwerdon
whiche that I haue in my conqueſte
iuſtely deſerued be nat denyed me: I am
and euer wyll be: for lyfe or deth? a true
knyght to the Cite: to my lyues ende.
¶And forthwith makyng no delay: lyke
a Lyon nat diſmayed nor afraied: Fyrſte
of all in his owne persone he paſſed the
Ryuer / the whiche ryuer lyke as Lucan
remembreth: the ſame tyme at the comyng
of Lezar: agaynſt his cuſtumable
courſe: was reyſed on heygh into a great
flode / & all the whyte Snowes of Alpies
were reſolued with the beames of Phebꝰ
where through the ryuers in the valyes
were reyſed ſo hygh that vnnethes any
mā might paſſe. But Iuliꝰ of no vncouth
aduētures afraied / but like a māly mā fulwell
aſſured in him ſelfe; ī the p̄ſence of al
his worthy knyghtes: ſaid in this wyſe.
¶Here I leue behynd all the olde cōfederacies
made betwyxte Rome & me / & here

I leue all the frendſhipe of olde antiquite
and onely folowe the traces of fortune:
and of hole intente begynne a ryghtfull
warre: for cauſe onely that by mediacion
of peace profered in my ſyde: I may nat
atteyne my tytle of ryght. ¶And anon
without more delacyon euen vpon the
ſpryng of the daye: whiche of clerkes is
called Aurora: he vnwarely with all worthy
multytude of his knyghtes entred in
to the cite (called of Lucan) Arimye / a cite
partment to Rome / and there he toke
fyrſte poſſeſſyon of the Empyre: none ſo
hardy to reſyſte nor to withſtande the fury
of his ſwerde / and all this whyle the
Romanes ſtandyng in doute to whiche
partye they ſhulde enclyne / whether to
Cezar or to Pompey. For of charite that
they had ot theyr wyues and theyr chyldren
and to the olde ſtatutes of the Cite / 
they were fauourable to Pompey / and of
drede that they had of Cezares ſwerde:
they ſtode in ſo greate ambiguite: that
they coulde nat deme what was beſte to
do. ❧ To howe the mortall enuye of
twayne was cauſe and occaſyon that / 
that noble cite whiche had all the worlde
in ſubiection / and was called Lady and
Empreſſe of all regions was brought in

to deſtruccion. ❧ For in theſe two: firſte
beganne the diuiſion whiche nuer after
myght parfytely be reſtored nor reconſiled
to vnyte / wherby as ſemeth vnto mē:
that all prudent Prynces whiche haue
the gouernaunce in prouinces and Regions
ſhulde take example what harme
and damage it is / and howe fynall a deſtruction
it is to be deuyded among them
ſelfe. ❧ And for to ratify by more Auctē
               tyke
example howe moche that vnyte
more auayleth thā diuiſion I wyll ſhortly
reherce and example the whiche Valerie
putteth / and it is this. ¶This auctour
reherceth that whylome whan the
Cite of Rome ſtode lykely to haue ben
deuyded of a debate that was newly begonne
amonge them ſelfe: there was a
wyſe Phyloſopher among them: whiche
of hygh diſereſſyon conſydered the great
peryll that was lykely to fall and folowe
and though he wolde of wyſdome voyde
that myght enſue. And in preſence of all
the ſenate and lordes of the cite: he made
bryng forth an horſe whiche had a longe
and a thycke tayle growē behynde. And
than he cōmaunded the myghtyeſt champion
of the towne to ſet on both his handes
and ſsaye if he myght by force pull

of the horſe tayle at a plucke. And albeit
that he plucked to the vttermoſte of his
myght: it wolde nat auayle. ¶And thā
anon this Philoſopher made call to the
preſence of the Senate: the moſt impotent
man of the Cite? a man vnweldy
and croked of age. And this Philiopher
made this olde man to plucke the one
heare after a nother of the horſe tayle / 
tyll by lytell and lytell: by ꝓces the taile
was waſted cleneaway / and the horſe naked
and bare behynde. ¶Beholde ſaid
the Philoſopher? That whyle the tayle
of the horſe was hole and one in it ſelfe:
and euer the heare with other (vndeuyded)
the myghtyeſt champyon of your
Cite myght do therto no damage. But
as ſone as euery heare was deuyded and
diſſeuered fro other: he that was leſte of
power among ye all: lefte neuer tyll the
tayle was cōſumed & brought to nought
¶By whiche example ſayd the Philoſopher?
Prudently aducrte and wyſely
caſte tofore: that as longe as ye be oue
in your ſelfe and of one harte: there is
none ſo ſtronge nor ſo myghty that may
auayle by force to attempte your worthynes.
But as ſone as amonge your ſelfe
one is deuyded from a nother: your enemyes:

thoughe they be full impotente of
power: they ſhall by proces of tyme pluck
away the moſt fayreſt and the moſt ſhene
fethers of your worthynes. ¶And by
this example the Philoſopher: 
                  •
               oforeſaid
reconſyled the Romanes agayne to vnite:
and voyded away diuiſion among thē
ſelfe. ¶Howe compendiouſly to reſorte
agayne to my mater lyke as the ſtory
maketh mencion: the Romanes ſtandyng
in great contrauerſy among them
ſelfe: to whiche party thgey ſhulde drawe
The goddes by many ſygnes and pronoſticacions
declared vnto them the greate
myſchefe that was lykely and very ſemblable
to folowe. ❧ For there appered
vnto thē many vncouth ymages of ſterres
/ ſome in brennyng haberions of fyre.
¶And ſome with bryght brondꝭ in their
handes caſtynge flame enuyron. ¶And
ſome with fyry dartes and ſharpe hoked
arowes ſhotynge in the ayre. ¶And in
eſpeciall there appered a large Comete
of ſtremes the whiche raught theyr braū
               ches
on the foure plages of the fyrmament.
¶And the ſonne alſo whan he
hone moſte bryghte in the meredionall
plage: the day vnwarlytourned to night.
¶And the pale mone againſt the comon

courſe of her kynde: ſodeinly ſhe was clip
ſed of her lyght. And forther the dredfull
Karibe
                  •
               s of the ſee Cycyle was tourned
in to blode. All the houndes alſo: beyng
in the boundes of Rome: lefte the noyſe of
theyr barkyng / and in ſygne of pronoſticacion
of great ſorowe that was to come
they howled and weymented that it was
pyte to here / and the ſuperſticious fyre:
whiche cōtynually tofore was wonte to
bren in the chaſt temple of the goddes called
Veſta: the flambe of the ſame fyre euer
beyng bryght vpon her aulters. Of
the whiche fyre: by olde tyme was prophecied
/ that as ſone as it deuyded and
departed atwene (as it dyd than) that
the feaſtes and the ſolēpnytes of Rome
ſhulde ceace. And lyke as the ſmokes of
the funerall fyre of the Theban brethern
departed at Thebes: Ryght ſo the departng
of fyre vpon theyr aulters: was
a true ſygne and a pronoſtyke of diuiſion
that ſhulde fal among thē ſelfe fynally
to declare to euery region that where as
the fyre of loue and parfyte charite ſtand
departed and deuyded among them ſelfe
it is a very euydence / that without remedy
it draweth to his deſtruction. Alſo an
euydent token that ſodeyne myſchefe of

diuiſion ſhulde folowe: the fomyng wawas
of the ſee ſurmounted the heyght of
Athlantys hylles. ¶ Alſo all the tythe
ymages in the Tēples of Rome: whiche
were made of golde / ſyluer / and dyuers
other ſondry metalles: ſo as they ſtode
in theyr ryche & coſtly tabernacles: they
were ſene thylke tyme of diuiſion wofully
cōplaynyng and wepyng / ſo ferforth:
that the teares of theyr eyen diſtylled a
downe into the earth / to compleyne the deſolacion
of theyr Cite onely cauſed by occaſion
of theyr cōtageous diuiſion amōg
thē ſelfe. ¶Byrdes alſo agaynſt the cuitome
of theyr nature: were ſene fleynge
vpō nyghtes. And beſtes alſo were herde
ſpekyng / and womē brought forth monſtruous
chyldren. And all theſe vncouth
wonders befell but a lytell tofore this
foreſaid diuiſion ī the noble cite of Rome
for the dredfull tyme approched full nere
of the whiche Cybyll ſo long had prophecied
afore: whan ſhe ſent the ſhorte ſūme
of her ſentēec to the Senatours of Rome
cōpendiouſly in the nombre of .vi. letters
Thre. R. R. R. and thre. F. F. F. whiche
were fully the pronoſticacion of .vi. myſchefes
that ſhulde of neceſſyre fall vnto
the cite of Rome: comprehended and included

in the .vi. letters ſpecifyed in this
wyſe. ❧ Regna / Rome / Ruent. Fero / 
Flāme / Fame. The Region of Rome by
thre thyngꝭ ſhall drawe to ruyne. Fyrſte
by the ſwerde of warre amonge thē ſelfe.
And nexte by fyre. And than by hunger.
The whiche thre myſthefes ſo contageouſly
ſhall aſſayle the Cite: that it ſhalbe
veryvnport able vnto thē. And the groūd
and ro
                  •
               e of all this confuſyon ſhalbe amonge
them ſelfe diſcorde and diuiſion.
            ¶Forthermore to declare ſondry pronoſticacions
that fell in theyr Cite Whā the
precſtes made ſacrefyce to theyr goddes:
theyr fyres ſodeynly quenched. ¶In the
graues and ſepulcres of deed men: there
were herde wofull and lamētable noyſes
and ſownes whiche dyd put the people in
very great drede. ¶And in this wyſe
the myſchefe and the ruyne was ſhewed
and declared. ¶Fyrſte by dyuers fygures
and ſondry lykeneſſes of ſterres ſhewed
in the heuen. And nexte by wonderfull
monſtres in the erth. ¶Alſo the
byrdes and the foules of the ayre came
homly and nat afrayde fleynge in to the
Cite / by the whiche ſygne theyr Clerkes
that be called Angures expounden it to
theyr confuſyon. ¶And they by many

folde mo ſygnes than I may or can declare:
the ſubuercion of the Cite full long
was ſhewed toforne / onely bygon of this
contageous diuiſion. ¶But ſhortly to
entreat the ſubſtaunce of the ſtory whan
that Cezar with ſtrong hande aproched
the bondes of Rome: after whan he had
wonne the Cite of Arimye: and had alſo
cōquered Rauenne: and Pompey for fere
was fled towarde the parties of Grece to
make him ſelfe ſtronge. They of Rome
had ſhortely determyned in ſentence that
Cezar nat entre the cite: but ſo were that
his hole retynue were lefte behynde. But
whā they knewe & ſawe him ſo paſſyngly
myghty & ſtrong / they began to quakē in
theyr hertes / and namely whā they were
deſtytute of an hede. Of whiche and for
that: ſome Dukes of Pompey drewe thē
to the parties of Italye into a Cite whiche
whylome was called Dirachiū. And
euer this worthye knyght Iulius with
his chiualry purſued after / and all that
withſtode he ſlewe. And the remenaūte
he put manly to flyght. And day by day
the power of Cezar gan multyply and encreaſe.
¶And maugre all hys enemyes:
of very force he entred the Cite.
And as ſome auctours expreſſe: whā the

Romanes (for drede) were redy to receiue
hym by theyr gates: he of indygnacion
and diſdayne: made breke the walles and
proudely entred as a conqueroure / and
iuſtefied the Romances as his. And holly
toke on hym the gouernaunce / nat onely
of the Cite: but of all the hole Empyre.
¶And maugre the Senate he brake the
braſon dore of theyr treaſure / and by vyolence
toke and taught it away / and plenteouſly
departed it among his knightes.
¶And in this meane whyle: full many
kynges of the Eeſt party of the worlde
came and aſſembled before the foreſayd
Cite called Dirachium. Of entent to ſuſteyne
the partye of Pompey agaynſte
Iulius. And as ſone as there was made
relacion to Iulius Cezar of this greate
aſſemble: He made no delay: but with
all his power paſſed by a coūtrey whiche
of myne auctour is called Epirum. And
ſo he entred in to the coſtes of Theſſalye / 
where as he founde Pompey: batayled
agaynſte hym with foure ſcore Cohortes
and eyght / departed in to thre wardes.
¶Nowe to declare the nombre and the
multytude of a Cohorte: ye ſhall vnderſtande
that there ben two maner of Cohortes
/ the more: and the leſſe. And the

more by diſcripcion of Auctours / conteyneth
fyue hundreth / and the leſſe: foure
hundreth. There were alſo on the party
of Pompey: fourty thouſāde of fote mē.
And ī the lefte wynge / there were beſyde
all this / ſyxe hundred knyghtes on horſebacke.
And in the ryght wynge: there
were .v. C. Amonge whiche as Vnicent
in his myrrour hyſtoriall maketh mynde
there were many kynges and prynces / 
and many other worthy ſenatours and
knyghtes of Rome whiche came in defence
of Pompey. ¶And as it is remē
               bred
alſo: Cezar had .lxxx. Cohortes / deuyded
and departed in thre wardes. And
with this he had .xxx.M. of fote men / 
without paſſyng great nōbre of knyghtꝭ
on horſbacke. And i this mortall batayle
all the party of Pōpey were put to fleght
and there were ſlaine on his ſyde .xii.M.
and of worthyleders whiche be called Lē
               turians:
were ſlayne .xxxiii. And Pompey
fled out of the flede / and for refuge
toke a Shype and paſſed by the bondes
of Aſye through Thyrye / and aryued in
Egypte. And there anon at his ariuayle
by the cōmaundement of Tholome king
of Egypte: he was beheded only for loue
and fauoure of Cezar. ¶And fro this

victory this forſayd Cezar haſted to the
partyes of Syrye / towarde the myghty
Cite of Alyſaundre. And there Tholome
kynge of Alyſaūdre helde a batayle with
Cezar / both on lande and on water. In
whiche warre were ſlaine .xxii. M.in the
felde. And .xii. hundreth Shypes diſcom
fyted and drowned. ❧ And Tholome the
kyng: as he wolde haue fled out of a ſhyp
(for haſte) he fell in to the ſee & was drowned.
And as his body was caſte to lande:
he was knowē and diſcouered by a gylte
Haberion / the whiche Haberion Iulius
Cezar made to be ſent vnto the Cite of
Alyſaundre / for drede of whiche: they of
Alyſaundre yelded the Cite vnto hym.
¶Thā he repaired agayne in to Egypte
and by occaſy on of the deth of Tholome:
he gaue the Septre and the Realme and
the hole gouernaunce of Egyte vnto the
quene Cleopatra. ¶And ſo after the Cō
               queſte
of many other Prouynces / Regions
/ and Landes: he made his repayre
agayne the ſeconde tyme vnto the Cite
of Rome. And there he dyd take vpō him
two offyces / both of Counſeyle & of Dictatour.
¶And frō thenſe he wente vnto
the Conqueſte of Affryke. And there began
a newe warre. In eſpeciall agaynſte

all the Alyaunce and the blode of Pompey.
And ſlewe all the Dukes that were
enclyned to be fauourable to the partye
of Pompey / among whiche were ſlayne
thre myghty Prynces / Fauſtus / Cilla / 
& Poſtumus. And Pompeya the doughter
of Pompey: iuged to be deed. ¶And
frō thoſe parties he entred with a myghty
and ſtrong hande into Spayne. And
there (ſo as Suetonius wryteth) he toke
vpon hym power to receyue the trybute / 
whiche on the party of Spayne was due
vnto Rome. ¶And ſo as this ſtory maketh
mencion he proceded ſo farre in his
conqueſt / ſo that he came to the Pyllers
of Gades. And there he entred in to the
temple of the ſtrong myghty Champion
called Hercules. And whan he behelde
in the ſame tēple a ryche ymage of golde
ſet vp for a memory of kyng Alyſaundre.
¶Anon this Cezar gan to ſygh and cō
               playne
in hym ſelfe: that he neuer might
attayne in his conqueſt to deſerue ſo victorious
a Palme of worthynes: as in
theyr tyme dyd Alyſaunder and Hercucules.
❧ And thus penſyble and heuy (he
yſſuyng out of the Temple of Hercules)
fully purpoſed him i his courage: knyghtly
to take vpon hym of manly courage:

ſome newe enterpryſes of hygh proweſſe
And whyles that he was thus ſuppriſed
in his beſt thought: The nexte nyght enſuyng / 
he had a wonderful viſion: whiche
was this. ☞ It ſemed vnto hym in his
ſlepe / that he medled with his owne mother.
Of the whiche dreme he full greatly
afrayd and horribly agriſed: made call to
his preſence / his wyſe Philoſophers and
piuinours / to gyue a playne and a clere
interpretacion vpon his dreme. ❧ And
they anon cōcluded in ſhorte ſentēce that
it was an euydent ſygne that he ſhuld be
fully put in poſſeſſyon to haue the Imperiall
dominacion ouer all the worlde. For
theſe prudent Philoſophers vnderſtode
nothyng by the fleſſhely cōiunction that
he had with his mother: but a knotte of
alyaunce / perfourmed vp betwene the
erth and hym. Vnderſtandyng in theyr
expoſicion: that the erth is primordiall
mother of all thyng / concludyng therby
that he ſhulde attayne to be lorde & Emperour
ouer all the partyes of the erth.
¶And thus in all haſt after the myghty
cōqueſt of Affryke / he repayred the thirde
tyme to Rome. And was made Emperoure
ouer all the worlde. And was ſo
farforth enhaunced on heyght: that the

Sonne of his worthynes was ronne ſo
farre vpon his ſpere that it attayned to
the hygheſt prycke of his exultacion. So
that of neceſſyte he muſt diſcende. ¶For
as the ſtory maketh mencion: he perſeue
red nat in his Empyre fully the ſpace of
fyue yere. ¶And for to reherce compeudiouſly
the prodigies and the wonderful
ſygnes that befell afore his deth. ¶It
is remembred that the ſame yere of Iulius
deth: In the yle of Capwey: there
was founde by Quarreours of the Countrey
a Riche Tombe of Stone. And ther
in was founde a lytell tablet of golde grauen
with letters of Greke / ſayng in this
wyſe. ¶: Whan euer it ſhall befall that
the Tombe of Capys ſhalbe opened: and
that his bonesſhable vncloſed / that ſame
yere ſhall the noble and worthy Conquetour
Iulius Cezar be murdred in the Capytoly
at Rome by the falſe conſpiracye
and ymaginacion of them that he hath
truſted moſt. ¶Nowe was this forſayd
Capys a worthy man and of great auctorite:
and the fyrſte founder and begynnynger
of the countrey of Capwey / and
named after him. And lyke as the letters
in Greke ſpecified it befell. ¶And the
ſeconde prodigy that befel tofore the deth

of Cezar: was this. ❧ Vpon the ſame
nyght tofore: that he was ſlayne on the
morowe: This noble Conquerour Iulius
had a reuelacion. ❧ Semyng vnto
hym in his ſlepe: that he was wynged
lyke an Egle. And howe he toke his
fleght ſo hygh / that he ſored aboue the
ſkyes / and aproched to the Celeſtiall ſee
of Iupiter: And fell downe vpō the right
hande of his god. ¶Another marueylous
ſygne or prodigy there fell. ❧ Alſo
his wyfe named Caliphurna: a lytell to
fore the deth of her lorde Iulius: had a
wonderfull dreme or viſion / ſemyng vnto
her whan ſhe was a ſlepe: That the
moſt hygheſt Pynacle of the Imperiall
palays: ſodeinly and vnwarely fel downe
and thervpon incontynently all the wyndowes
of the Chambre where ſhe ſlepte:
without hande of any man / ſodeynly
brake a two theyr barres of yron and opened.
❧ Of whiche noyſe ſhe beynge ſore
afrayde ī her ſlepe / and of feminine drede
full ſore ſyghed in her herte: as ſhe that
coulde nat conceyue in mynde what it
ment. ¶Alſo as Vnycent in his hyſtoriall
bokes maketh mēcion: An hundred
dayes before his pyteous murder: in the
large market place of Rome / where as

the ſtature and the great ymage of Cezar
ſtode vpon an hyghe pyller of ſtone: the
name of Cezar grauē with letters of gold
aboue his heed: whan the wether and the
attempre ayre was moſt clere and ſtyll / 
with a ſodeyne ſtroke of the fyry leuen / 
the fyrſte lettre of his name .C. was ſmyten
away. Declaryng by this pronoſtical
ſygne that lyke as this lettre .C. in nombre
betokeneth an hundreth: and was
alſo moſt craftely wroght and grauen as
for the chefe capitall letter of his name / 
to ſhewe openly that the raſyng away of
this letter by vyolence of the fyry leuen:
that he that was heed of all the erthe / 
within the ſpace of a hūdreth dayes next
enſuynge: ſhulde be vengeably murdred
in Rome. ¶Alſo the ſame day of his
murder: as he wente moſte ryally in his
Imperiall araye towarde the Conſyſtory:
a poore man named Tongilius toke
hym lettres of all the purpoſed cōſpiracy
by the Senate vpon his deth. But for he
was neglygent to rede the lettres and to
vncloſe them: the vengeable murder was
execute vpon hym. ¶By whiche example:
let no man be ſlowe nor neglygente
to rede his letters / leſt after for his necligēce
it may tourne him to great damage

whiche after may nat lyghtly be recouered.
☞ And the chefe cauſe and worker
of this murder: was Brutus Craſſus / 
aſſocied vnto him two hundred and ſixty
of the Senate: all hauyng Bodkyns in
theyr ſleues. ❧ And as it is in ſtory remēbred:
He had foure and twenty deedly
woundes as he ſat in the Capytoly.
And as ſayeth myne auctoure / he neuer
in all his ſmarte: made nouther crye nor
no noyſe / excepte onely a lamētable and
a dolorous ſyghe lyke a man that with
ſodeyne ſorowe were afrayed. ¶So
that touchynge the vengeable maner of
his pyteous murder: I may conclude
with hym that was Floure of Poetes in
our Englyſſhe tonge / and the fyrſte that
euer enlumyned our language with floures
of Rethoryque and of Eloquence. ❧
I mene my Maiſter Chaucer / whiche
cōpendiouſly wrote the deth of this
myghty Emperoure / Sayng
in this wyſe: as foloweth.
(⸬)⸫(/):❧
            
            ¶With Bodkyns / was Cezar Julius
            Wurdred as Rome / of Brutus Craſſus
            when many a region: he had brought full lowe
            Lo: who may truſte fortune any thorowe.
            
               
THus by wrytynge of my wyſe prudent
maiſter tofore ſayd: The frowarde
and the contraryous Lady Dame
Fortune: ſpareth neyther Emperoure
nor Kyng / to plonge hym downe ſodeynly
fro the hygheſt prycke of her vnſtable
whele. ☞ Alas that neuer man lyſte to
lyfte vp his hertes eye / and prudently to
aduerte the mutabilite and the ſodeyne
chaunge of this falſe worlde. ❧ And let
the wyſe gouernours of euery lande and
region make a myrroure in theyr mynde
of this manly man Iulius / and conſyder
in theyr hertes the contageous damages
and the importable harmes of diuiſion / 
and let them ſe aduyſedly / and take example
howe the ambicious pryde of Iulius
/ the freting enuy of Pompeyus / and
the vnſtauncheable gredy Couetyſe of
Marcus Craſſus: were chefe & primordiall
cauſe of theyr deſtruction. Executed
and accomplyſſhed by cruell deth. ❧ And
nat onely that theſe aforſayd thre abhomynable
vyces were cauſe of theyr owne
deth onely: but occaſyon of many a thouſande
other / many more than I can tell.
¶ ⸫ Thus the Cite of Rome nat onely
made bare and barayne of theyr olde ryches
/ and ſpoyled of theyr treaſure on the

               
                  •
               one ſyde: but deſtytute and beſolate by
deth of theyr knyghthode on the other
ſyde. ❧ Me ſemeth ought ynough ſuffice
to exemplify what it is to begyn a warre:
And ſpecially to conſyder the trrecuperable
harmes of diuiſion. And for this ſkyll
(moſte eſpecially by cōmaundemēt of my
maiſter) I toke vpon me this lytell
tranſlacion / and after my lytell
cōnynge: haue put it in
remembraunce.
❧
            
            
               ❧ 
               ❧ 
               ❧ 
               ❧ 
               ❧ 
               ❧
            
            ¶: Thus endeth this lytell
treatyſe entytuled the Damage
and deſtruction in Realmes.
            Newly and of late Imprinted
by me Roberte
Redman.
            Dwellynge at London in Flete
Strete at the ſygne of the
George.
            
               
               
                  THis is lytel proſe: declareth in fygure
                  The great damage: & deſtruction
                  That whylome fell / by fat all auenture
                  Vnto Rome / the myghty roy all towne
                  Cauſed onely / by falſe Diuiſion
                  Amonge them ſelfe / the ſtory telleth thus
                  Through Couetiſe / and vaine Ambicion
                  Of Pompey: and of Cezar Iulius.
               
               
                  ¶Chriſte him ſelfe / recordeth ī ſcripture
                  That euery lande / and euery region
                  Whiche is deuided / may no whyle endure
                  But tourne in haſte / to deſolacion
                  For whiche ye lordꝭ / & prices of renowne
                  So wyſe / ſo manly: and ſo vertuous
                  Make a myrroure / tofore in your reaſon
                  Of Pompey: and of Cezar Iulius.
               
               
                  ¶Harme don by deth / no mā may recure
                  Agaynſte whoſe ſtroke / is no redempcion
                  It is full harde / in Fortune to aſſure
                  Her whele ſo ofte / tourneth vp & downe
                  And for to eſchewe / ſtryfe and diſcencion
                  Within your ſelfe / be nat contrarious
                  Remembryng ay / in your diſcreſſyon
                  Vpon Pompey: and Cezar Iulius.
               
            
            ¶FINISH.
         
      
   