
      
         
            
            
            THE
CONFVTATION
OF
TORTVRA TORTI:
OR, AGAINST

                  •
               he King of Englands Chaplaine: for that
he hath negligently defended
his Kinges Cause.
            By the R. F.
MARTINVS BECANVS,
of the Society of IESVS:
AND
Professour in Deuinity.
            Translated out of Latin into English by W. I. 
                  •
               .
            ¶Permissu Superiorum. M.DC.X.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE
RIGHT REVEREND
AND
RIGHT HONORABLE
PRINCE, AND LORD,
LORD IOHN SVICARD,
Arch-bishop of the holy Sea of Mentz, Arch-chancellour
of the Sacred Roman Empire through
Germany, and Prince Electour:
His most Clement Prince, and Lord, Martinus
Becanus &c.
            
               THere came of late (right Reuerend
and right Honorable Prince) two
bookes out of England; one whereof
bare title of the Renowned King
Iames; the other of his Chaplain:
both which, as manifestly oppugning the Roman
Church, I haue, for the loue of truth, refuted as
modestly as I could. As for the former I haue dedicated
the Confutation therof to the Inuincible Emperour

               Rodulph, and the other renowned Kinges, &
Illustrious Princes of the Christian world (among
whome you are one:) But the later I haue thought it
not amisse to dedicate specially vnto your magnificēt
Name; and that for two reasons. The one, that
for so much as I haue taken this paines for defence
of the Catholicke faith and Religion; it seemes vnfit
that the same should be published vnder the Patronage
of any other, then your selfe who are so great a
professor and protector of the said faith in Germany.
The other reason is, for that your meritts and
benefitts towards our Archiepiscopall Colledge of
Mentz, do by a certaine right challenge, and exact
the same at my hands. You will, I trust, take i
                  •
               
in good part, and fauourably accept this my sincere
token of Duty and Reuerence.
         
         
            
            THE TRANSLATOVR
to the Reader.
            
               WHERAS (gentle Reader) in the
yeare of our Lord God 1607. there
being published, both in English &
Latin, a Booke, intituled Triplici nodo
triplex cuneus, or, An Apology for
the Oath of Allegiance, and this
without Name of Authour: the
same was answered very briefely & modestly in both
languages by the Catholicke party the next yeare following.
And first in English, by an English-man,
who also concealed his Name: and then in latin by
Card. Bellarmine, vnder the Name of Matthaeus Tortus;
Who not suspecting the said Booke to be his Maiesties
of Great Britany, (as indeed it was) but rather
of some of his Ministers about him, thought it not
fit to publish this his answere in his owne, but in the
name of the foresaid Matthaeus Tortus. But when in
the yeare 1609. his Maiesty (hauing now seene these
answers to his booke come forth) resolued to publish
anew his said Apology, with a large Preface or Premonition
To all Christian Princes &c. he therwithall
forthwith gaue commandement to two of the best
learned (as is thought) in his Realme, that they should
separately make Answer to both the fornamed Books,

written against his foresaid Apology, which presently
they did. And that in English he committed to M.
Doctor Barlow, who made Answere therto, and published
it the same yeare 1609. but how substantially
he hath performed the same, may perhaps be shortly
examined. The other in latin of the forsaid Matthaeus
Tortus, he recommended to M. Doctor Andrewes, a
man of great esteeme and litterature in our Countrey,
who the same yeare in like manner, set forth an Answere
therto, intituling it Tortura Torti: which Answere
of his comming forth in latin, F. Martinus Becanus,
of the Society of Iesus, and Professour in Deuinity,
hath, though briefely, yet substantially,
confuted, this present yeare 1610. And for that
the said Fathers Booke is very short, & written in
latin, I haue bestowed a few houres to translate
the same into our English tongue, for such, as eyther
vnderstand not the latin, or els haue not had the commodity
to come by any of the said Copyes of the former
edition, published in that language.
            
               W. I.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE
CONFVTATION
OF
TORTVRA TORTI:
OR, AGAINST
the King of England his Chaplaine.
            
               YOV haue written a booke
of late in defence of your
King, against Matthaeus
Tortus, intituled Tortura
Torti, (or the Torture of
Tortus.) You discouer not
your Name, but insinuate
your self to be a Chaplaine,
Alm-nour, or Tormentor. I
(because it is more honorable) wil cal you Chaplaine.
In the said Book you dispute principally of three heads.

FIRST, of the Oath of Allegiance, which your King
                  •
               
exacteth of his subiects. SECONDLY, of the King
                  •
               
Supremacy in Ecclesiasticall (or Spirituall) matters▪
THIRDLY, of the Popes power. If we consider
your words, yow are neat and elegant inough: if you
                  •
               
labour and diligence, I accuse you not of idlenes. But
many other things there are, which I do not so wel
                  •
               
approue; especially these. First, that you are exceedingly
giuen to reproaching and taunting. Secondly,
that you do euery where insert many falsities and absurdities.
Thirdly, that you rather ouerthrow, then establish
your Kings Supremacy, which you would
fortify: which is as foule a fault as may be. Of these
three heades then, will I treat in order.
            
               1. Of the Chaplaines Reproaches.
               2. Of his Paradoxes.
               3. Of the Kinges Supremacy ouerthrowne by
him.
            
            I trust you will pardon me, Syr, if I modestly set
before your eyes these three thinges; as well for your
owne benefit as others. For your owne, that hereby
you may know your selfe, and, if it be possible, become
hereafter more wise. For others, that they may
learne not so lightly to trust you, who haue so often,
and so fouly faultred in things of so great moment.
Heare me then patiently.
            
               
               THE
FIRST CHAPTER:
               Of the Chaplaines Reproaches.
               STRAIGHT then in the entrance of your Torture,
you reprehended Matthaeus Tortus, that he is
altogeather full of railings and reproaches. For
thus you writ of him: Per librum totum ita petulans,
ita immodestè immodestus, ita totus in conuitijs, facilè vt
quiuis, Matthaeum Tortum esse, possit intelligere &c.
                  Throughout all his booke so impudent he is, so imodestly
immodest, so wholy giuen to reproaches, that
euery man may easily perceaue him to be Matthew
Tortus &c. But you, Syr, do farre surpasse Matthaeus
Tortus in this kind. You spare no man. You prouoke
all with some reproach or other, where the least
occasion is offered. Pope Clement the 8. you call perfidious,
Cardinall Bellarmine, a Vow-breaker, D. Sanders,
the greatest lyer of all men liuing, Edmund Campian
and others who haue suffered martyrdome for the
Catholick fayth, you call Traytors. The Iesuites, Authors
of most outragious wickednes, the Catholicks you
tearme the race of Malchus, who hauing their right
eares cut of, do heare and interpret all with the left. I
pretermit, what you haue malepertly vttered against
Matthaeus Tortus.
               
               2. These and the like reproaches, which are very
familiar with you, as I perceaue, do not beseeme an
honest man; much lesse the Chaplaine or Almenour
of a King: yet perhaps do they not altogeather misbecome

a Tormentor. Neyther may you excuse your
selfe by the example of Matthew Tortus, as though he
had first prouoked you to these reproaches. First it is
nothing so: and secondly if it had byn so: what? do
you thinke it the part of a Christian man to requite euill
with euill? Truely the Apostle taught vs otherwise,
Rom. 12. 17. Nulli malum pro malo reddentes,
to wit, that we should not render euill for euill to any
man. And lastly, if you would haue done so,
why haue you not spared others? Was not one Tortus
inough for you to torture, vnlesse with the like liberty
you railed vpon others also? Hereafter therfore
abstaine from the like, and giue eare to that of the
Wiseman, Prouerb. 21. 23. Qui custodit os suum, &
linguam suam, custodit ab angustijs animam suam. He
that keepeth his mouth and his tongue, doth preserue
his soule from distresse. And againe Matth. 12. 35.
Ex abundantia cordis os loquitur. Bonus homo, de bono
thesauro profert bona; & malus homo de malo thesauro
profert mala. Of the aboundance of the hart the
mouth speaketh. A good man out of a good treasure,
bringeth forth good thinges: and an euill man out of
an euill treasure bringeth forth euill thinges. See then
what kind of treasure this of yours is, from whence
come forth so many reproaches. And beware, Quia
maledici Regnum Dei non possidebunt, 1. Cor. 6. For
that Raylers shall not possesse the Kingdome of God.
            
            
               
               THE
SECOND CHAPTER:
               Of the Chaplaines Paradoxes.
               AFTER your reproaches and railings, follow
your Paradoxes, which are many in your
booke: but especially these.
               1. That the Puritans in England doe sincerely
sweare to the Kings Supremacy.
               2. That the said Supremacy is to be giuen to the
King by all right.
               3. That no man hath yet denyed, but that the
Kings of the old Testament, had Supremacy in the
Church.
               4. That the Kinges of the new Testament are Pastors
of the flocke of Christ.
               5. That Kinges are often called in the Scripture
Christes, or, the Annoynted of our Lord; but Priests or
Bishops are neuer so called.
               6. That if the Pope were Head of the Church, besides
Christ; it should be a monstrous, and two-headed
Church.
               7. That if the Pope should haue power to depose
Kinges; Ethnicks (or Infidels) were better in condition
then Christian Princes.
               8. That if the Pope will haue a Temporall Kingdome,
it were to be persuaded that he went to the Diuell
for it.
               9. That power to excommunicate, was not giuen

to S. Peter, but vnto the Church.
               10. That the Prophesy of the Reuelation of Antichrist
is already fulfilled; and therefore is cleere, and
not intricate.
               11. That the Kinges of Denmarke and Sweueland, as
also the Princes of Germany agree with the King of
England in matters of faith.
               12. That it is not now free for the King of England
to change his owne, or to admit Catholicke Religiō
in his Kingdome, for that he hath sworne twice to
the contrary.
               13. That Cardinall Bellarmine is a Vow-breaker,
because of a Iesuite he is become a Cardinall.
               14. That Catholicks teach, fidelity not to be kept,
and falshood to be lawfull.
               15. That Catholickes are of the race of Malchus, because
they interprete nothing aright, but all sinistrously.
These few heades of many, are now briefly
to be examined
               
                  The first Paradoxe.
                  2. FIRST therefore you say, that the Puritans in
England do sincerely sweare to the Kinges Supremacy.
Your wordes are these pag. 379. towardes
the end of the page: Quos verò Puritanos appellat, si
Regium Primatum detestentur, detestandi ipsi. Profitentur
enim, subscribunt, iurant indies: sed & illi, quod faciunt,
ingenuè faciunt &c. 
                     Those whom he (to wit Tortus)
calleth Puritans, if they abhorre the Kinges
Primacy, they are to be abhorred. For they doe professe,
subscribe, and sweare dayly: And moreouer,

what they do, they do sincerely &c. that is to say, they
sincerely professe the Kings Supremacy, they sincerely
subscribe, they sincerely sweare.
                  3. But your king himself thinketh far otherwise of
them in his Premonition to the Emperour, Kings, and
Princes. For thus he speaketh: Praeclara sanè laus, praeclarum
encomium, quo Puritanos ornaui, cùm me plus fidei,
vel in illis efferis, cùm montanis, tum limitaneis latronibus,
quàm in hoc genere hominum inuenisse professus
sim. Surely I giue a fayre commendation to the Puritans,
when I affirme, that I haue found greater honesty
with the high-land and border theeues, then with
that sort of people &c. Behould now how greatly you
differ from your King, your Head, and Ecclesiasticall
Primate. Your King professeth, that he hath found
more fidelity amongst barbarous or cruell theeues, thē
amongst the Puritans: You on the contrary side affirme,
that the Puritans, what they do, they do sincerely.
So as those to you are sincere men, that to your King
are worse then cruell theeues.
                  
                  4. Againe, saith the King: Ego à Puritanis, non solùm
à natiuitate continuò vexatus fui; verùm etiam in ipso
matris vtero propemodum extinctus, antequam in lucem
editus essem &c. 
                     I haue byn persecuted by the Puritans,
not only from my birth, but almost extinguished
also, euen in my mothers wombe, before I was
yet borne &c. What say you to this? Will you still
chaunt your wonted songe, That the Puritans, what
they do, they do sincerely? To wit, forsooth, as you interprete,
they would sincerely haue extinguished the King
in his mothers wombe, before he was borne. And is this in
your Chapell, to be sincere indeed?
                  
                     
5. Moreouer the King saith: Ego in meo ad Filium Libro,
multò acriùs ac vehementiùs in Puritanos, quàm
Pontificios inuectus sum. 
                     I in my booke to my Sonne,
doe speake ten tymes more bitterly of the Puritans
then of the Papists &c. So as by the Kings owne iudgment
the Puritans are worse then the Papists: But you
call Papistes, Traytors: Ergo, the Puritans are worse
then Traytors. And yet notwithstanding you write,
that what they do, they do sincerely.
                  
                  6. Againe the King yet writeth thus: Mihi praecipuus
labor fuit, deiectos Episcopos restituere, & Puritanorum
Anarchiam expugnare. 
                     I haue laboured nothing so
much, as to depresse the Puritans Anarchy, and erect
Bishops againe &c. To wit, the Puritans affect an Anarchy
(or to be without a King,) they hate a Monarchy,
or Primacy: Contrariwise the King depresseth
this Anarchy, and establisheth a Primacy. Now I
demaund, if the Puritans detest this Primacy, how do
they then sweare thus sincerely thereunto? Ergo, eyther
the Puritans are no longer Puritans: or if they be the
men they were (to wit Puritans,) they affect Anarchy,
and detest Primacy: and so what they do, they do
not sincerely, but fraudulently.
                  
                  7. See then, how contrary in all these thinges you
are to the King. Whome he accuseth, you excuse; and
yet from impudency you cannot excuse them. And is
it not a great impudencie, and (if you will) imprudencie,
that the Caluinistes in Germany, and Holland,
who are nothing els but Puritans, should dare so often
to reprint the foresaid Premonition of your king, wherin
they are so manifestlie and sharpely touched? For
what could more belong to their ignominie or disgrace,

then to be accompted worse then theeues, & that
by the publike testimonie of a King: For as much as
they had conspired his death, being yet in his mothers
womb? And is it not impudencie, to diuulge in print
againe and againe this their shamefull ignominy, nor
yet heereby to feare their publicke infamie? And yet
neuerthelesse with you, what they doe, they doe sin
                        
                           •
                        urely.
                  
               
               
                  The second Paradoxe.
                  8. THE Primacy Ecclesiasticall, say you, is due
to Kinges by all Right: For these are your
wordes pag. 90. Primatus spiritualis debetur Regibus

                           •
                        mni Iure. The primacy spirituall is due to Kings by
all right. Let vs then see, if it be so. Right, or power,
as you know, is deuided into naturall, and
positiue: this Right againe is either diuine or humane.
Diuine power, is partly of the old Testament, and
partly of the new. Humane likewise, is partly Canonicall,
partly Ciuill. Will you then that the Primacy
Ecclesiastical be due to kings by all these kindes of
Right? It seemeth you would. But in another place
you confesse, that it is due by the only Right of the
old Testament: Ergo, not by all the former. For thus
you write pag. 363. Amore, instituto
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Israëlis orditur
Apologia: inde enim vim habet, atque neruos suos
quaestio haec omnis (de Primatu.) In Israele enim populo
suo regum instituit Deus, & Ecclesiam in regno ex mente
sua. Exemplum inde nolis sumendum est, cùm in Testamento
nouo nullam habeamus. Nusquam enim in vnum
coaluerunt Ecclesia & Imperium; procul se habuit

Imperium ab Ecclesia &c. 
                     From the custome and in
                           •
                        stitute
of Israell (to wit the old Testament) beginneth
our defence: because from thence hath all this question
her force, and strength (to wit of the Supremacy.
For in Israel did God erect a Kingdome for his people
and in that Kingdome did he found a Church to hi
                           •
                        
owne liking. From thence are we to take an example:
for so much as in the new Testament we haue
none. For no where haue the Church and Empire
byn ioyned togeather in one: The Empire hath kep
                           •
                        
aloofe of from the Church &c.
                  
                  9. I doubt not, you will acknowledg these your
words, which do condemne you. For if the Question
of Supremacy, as here you affirme, hath no other
force, then from the custome and institute of the
People of Israell; then is not this Supremacy due
to Kings by naturall Right; nor by diuine of the new
Testament; nor by Canonicall, or Ciuill. How then
is it due by all Right? Againe, if in the new Testament
the Church and Empire did no where consist
or ioyne togeather in one: Then by right of the new
Testament, it is not necessary, that they should consist
in one: Ergo, it is not due by all right. And truely,
if no where in the new Testament they consisted
togeather in one: how commeth it to passe, that
now of late in England they be thus vnited togeather
in one? Here you haue plainely brought your selfe into
straites.
               
               
                  
                  The third Paradoxe.
                  10. NO man, say you, hath yet denyed, but that
the kings of the old Testament had Supremacy
in the Church. For thus you write pag. 364. In
Israële autem, nondum os reperitam durum, quod negare
etiam auderet, praecipuas in re Religionis partes,
penes Regem extitisse. 
                     In Israell (to wit the old Testament)
could I neuer yet find any man so impudent
that durst deny, but that the principall offices in
matters of Religion, were in the Kings power &c.
But I haue found, not one, but many, that dare deny
the same. Of your owne Countreymen are found
that dare deny it, Nicolas Sanders in his second booke
Of the visible Monarchy of the Church, and 3. Chapter,
in solution of the 5. obiection of Protestants: and
Thomas Stapleton in his fifth boke of Doctrinall Principles
of faith, the 23. Chapter. Of our men are found
that dare deny it, Cardinall Bellarmine in his first booke
Of Councells, and 20. Chapter. Iacobus Gretzerus in his
second booke Of Considerations to the Deuines of Venice,
1. 2. & 3. Consider. Adam Tannerus in his first booke
Of the Defense of Ecclesiasticall liberty the 15. Chapter,
and others.
                  11. All these sayd Authors in the places here cited,
propose the argument, which you are wont to vse to
proue the Kings Supremacy in Spirituall matters.
And it is this: Moyses, Iosue, Dauid, Salomon, Iosias,
and other Kings of the old Testament haue had the Primacy
of the Church: Ergo, the Kings of the new Testament
haue it also. In the solution of which argument,

all deny the antecedent. They deny (I say) that the
kings of the old Testament (if precisely we respect
kingly power) had the Supremacy of the Church:
although they graunt, that some of thē had that power,
not by any ordinary Right, as being Kinges, but
for so much, as that they were both Prophets and
Priestes, by an extraordinary concession or graunt.
The wordes of Bellarmine are these: 
                        Respondeo primo,
Moysen &c. I answere first, that Moyses was not only
a Prince, but a chiefe Priest also, as is manifest out of
the 98. Psalme, Moyses & Aaron in sacerdotibus eius.
Moyses and Aaron were accompted amongst his
Priestes &c. Iosue, Dauid, Salomon, and some others,
were not only Kings, but also Prophets, to
whome God committed many things extraordinarily
which otherwise by office and Right belonged to
the Priests. And in this sort King Salomon remoued
Abiathar from his function of Priesthood, and appointed
Sadoc in his place. And this he did not as
King, but as a Prophet, by diuine inspiration. Secondly
I say (quoth Bellarmine) that diuers other
good Kings of the Synagogue, did neuer intermeddle
in the affaires or offices of the Priests: and if at any
time they did, they were sorely punished by God
for it &c. Thus farre Bellarmine. The like haue the
rest of the forenamed Authors.
                  12. This notwithstanding, I adde moreouer
(wherein you deceiue, or are deceaued) that some
of the foresaid Authors do not only deny the antecedent,
but the consequence of the former argument
also: and therfore they admit two solutions. The
first is this: We deny (say they) that the Kings of

the old Testament had Supremacy in the Church. The
later this: Although we should grant, that Kings of
the old Testament had the Primacy of the Church; yet
would it not follow, by consequence, that the Kings
of the new Testament haue the same also &c. For which
they assigne diuers reasons. Read what I haue said
in solution of the same argument, in my Confutation
of the King of Englands Apology, the 2. Chapter.
               
               
                  The fourth Paradoxe.
                  13. YOV say, the Kings of the new Testament are
Pastors of the flocke of Christ. And although
those wordes Pasce oues meas, (Feede my sheep)
were spoken to Peter; yet notwithstanding do they
belong to Christian Kings also: And for that there
were no Christian Kings in Christs time, to whome
the care of his flocke might be committed, therfore
they were not spoken to them. For thus you write
pag. 53. Rex noster est Dux gregis sub Christo Pastorum
Principe. Sunt & alij Reges Christiani ad vnum omnes,
sua si iura nossent, & vel vires illis, vel animus
non deesset &c. Our King (to wit of England) is Head
of the flocke vnder Christ the chiefe of Pastors. And
so are all other Christian Kings, not one excepted,
if either they knew their rights, or that their strength,
or courage failed them not &c. And yet more plainely
pag. 91. Neque quiquam ad rem, quod de Christo
addis, non Regem aliquem, sed Apostolum gregis sui Pastorem
designante. Certè, vt nec Regem sub lege, quia
nondum ibi Rex vllus; at vbi iam Rex, tum nec ei Pastoris

nomen negatum: Ita sub Euangelio, cùm non essent
Reges adhuc, qui tum nulli erant, Pastores esse non poterant.
At vbi Reges Christo nomen dederant, tum demum,
non minùs pastores hi, quàm olim Reges Israelis.
Quòd si autem ab initio statim nomen Christo dedissent,
nulla ratio, quò minùs Gregis Christiani Pastores designari
potuissent. 
                     Neither (say you) is that to any
purpose, which you (to wit Tortus) adde of Christ,
appointing not a King, but an Apostle the Pastor of
his flocke. Truly, as he appointed no King vnder the
law, for that there was yet no King, but when there
was a King, then the name of Pastor was not denied
him: Euen so vnder the Ghospell when there were
not yet Kings, for that being none, they could not
be Pastors. But when Kings once became Christians,
then at length were they no lesse Pastors, then
were of old the Kings of Israell. And if presently
from the beginning, they had byn Christians, there
can be no reason giuen, why they should not haue
byn designed Pastors of the Christian flocke &c.
                  
                  14. Heere is not one alone, but many Paradoxes,
or singular opinions. And first I demaund of you,
if in Christs time there had byn any Christian King,
whether Christ would haue said vnto him, Pasce oues
meas, feed my sheepe? If you affirme, yea, how
proue you it? Or who did euer affirme it before your
selfe? Or whether are you the first that haue reuealed
this mistery to the Christian world? If you deny it,
yow do well. But if Christ did not say to any Christian
King, Feed my sheepe; by what authority do
you say now to King IAMES Pasce oues Christi; feed
the flock of Christ? VVhat? Will you depose Peter
                     
from his Pastorall office, who was ordayned therto by
Christ, and suborne your King, who was not ordained
by Christ? Surely, a bould enterprize: and worthy,
no doubt, such a Chaplaine.
                  15. Againe I demaund, what meane these words,
Pasce oues meas, feed my flocke? You (in the 52.
page of your booke) expound them of the feeding by
Word and Doctrine. Be it so. But you your selfe (Pag.
380.) doe confesse, that your King doth not feed
the sheep of Christ by Word and Doctrine: Ergo, the
King, by your owne graunt, is not the Pastor of
the flocke of Christ. Neyther can those wordes,
Feed my sheep, in the sense that Christ spake them,
any way belong vnto the King. Heere you may
not so soone quit your selfe, I wot well. For of necessity
you must eyther confesse, that these words,
(Feed my sheep) are not vnderstood of the feeding
by Word and Doctrine; or els that it belongs to the
King to feed by Word and Doctrine: or verily, that
the King is not the Pastor of Christs flocke. But
all these 3. wayes are against you. You will haue
the wordes of Christ (feed my sheep) to be vnderstood
of feeding by Word and Doctrine. You
will haue your King not to feed the flocke of
Christ by Word and Doctrine: You will haue your
King to be the Pastor of Christes flocke. What
euasion then can you heere haue?
                  16. Thirdly I demand, why do not other Christian
Kinges take vpon them this Pastorall office,
if they be truly Pastors of Christs flocke? They
would doe it (say you) if eyther they knew their
rights, or that their strength or courage fayled them

not. And what, I pray you, is this, then as much to
say, that the King of England is wise, and the rest
are fooles? He hath force and strength, the rest are
weake and impotent? He is couragious, the rest are
fearefull and cowardly. Thus it commeth to passe,
that whilst you flatter your owne King, you become
contumelious against others.
               
               
                  The fifth Paradoxe.
                  17. KINGES, say you, in Scripture are often
called Christes, or the Annoynted of our Lord,
but Bishops and Priests are neuer so called: and therefore
Matthew Tortus did very ill to call the Pope by
that Name. Your wordes are these pag. 114. Mihi
verò multò magis improprium videtur, quòd Pontificem
nouo nomine, nec ei in Scripturis sacris vsquam attributo
CHRISTVM DOMINI indigitasti. 
                     Truly it
seemeth to me much more improper that you haue
intitled (or pointed out) the Pope with a new name, to
wit, The Annointed of our Lord, when as the same was
neuer attributed vnto him in Scripture. And a little after,
say you: Reges quidem reperio sic in sacris litteris saepè
saepiùs nominatos; Pontifici nomen hoc tributum ibi non
memini: Iuuet nos Matthaeus, & vel vnum locum designet
in toto volumine Bibliorum, vbi nomen hoc vlli Pontifici,
sacri illi scriptores attribuerint. 
                     Kinges do I often
find, to haue byn often so called in holy VVrit: but I
remember not, that this name is there attributed to
the Pope. Let Matthew (to wit Tortus) helpe vs to
find out, though but one place only, in all the volume
of the Bible, where this name hath byn giuen

to any Priest by any of those sacred wryters &c.
                  
                  18. But stay (my friend) there is no need that Matthew
should be sent for out of Italy, to shew you one
place. I my self, that am neerer at hand wil assigne you
more then one. Heare me then. First Exod. 29. 7. Oleum
vnctionis fundes super caput eius (Aaronis) atque hoc ritu
consecrabitur. Thou shall powre out oyle of Annoynting
vpon his head (to wit of Aaron) and with this
cerimony he shalbe consecrated. And Leuit. 4. 3. Si
Sacerdos qui vnctus est, peccauerit. If the Priest that is annoynted,
shall offend &c. Againe Leuit. 8. 12. Fundens
oleum super caput Aaron, vnxit eum & consecrauit. Powring
out oyle vpon the head of Aaron, he annointed
and consecrated him. And Leuit. 16. 32. Expiabit autē
Sacerdos, qui vnctus fuerit. And the Priest that is annointed
shall expiate, or reconcile. And Numbers 3. 3.
Haec nomina filiorum Aaron Sacerdotum, qui vncti sunt,
& quorum consecratae manus, vt Sacerdotio fungerentur.
These be the names of the Sonnes of Aaron, the Priests
that were annoynted, and whose handes were consecrated
to do the function of Priesthood. And againe
Num. 35. 25. Manebit ibi donec sacerdos magnus, qui oleo
sancto vnctus est, moriatur. He shall stay there, vntill
the high Priest, that is annoynted with holy oyle, do
dye.
                  19. Behould heere, you haue diuers places of Scripture,
in which Priests are called Annoynted; and therefore
Kinges are not alone so called. This yow might
haue learned out of S. August. vpō the 26. Psalme, concerning
the title therof, where he teacheth, that in the
old Testament, Kinges and Priests were annoynted,
for that both of them did prefigure one Christ (or Annoynted)

which was to be both King and Priest. The
wordes of S. Augustine are these: Tunc vngebatur Rex
& Sacerdos. Duae istae illo tempore, vnctae personae. In
duabus personis praefigurabatur futurus vnus Rex & Sacerdos,
vtroque munere vnus Christus; & ideo Christus
à Chrismate. 
                     Then was annoynted both the King &
the Priest. These two persons at that time were annoynted.
In two persons was prefigured to be both a
King and a Priest, one Christ in both offices: & therfore
was Christ so called, of Chrisme, &c. And againe
vpon the 44. Psalme about those words, vnxit te
Deus, God hath annointed thee &c. he writeth thus:
Vnctum audis: Christum intellige: Etenim Christus à
Chrismate. Hoc nomen quod appellatur Christus, vnctionis
est: Nec in aliquo alibi vngebantur Reges & Sacerdotes
nisi in illo regno, vbi Christus prophetabatur & vngebatur,
& vnde venturum erat Christi nomen. Nusquam est
alibi omnino, in nulla gente, in nullo regno. Thou hearest
(saith S. Augustine) 
                     Annoynted: vnderstand Christ:
For Christ is deriued of Chrisme. This name that is
called Christ, is a name of Annointing, or vnction.
Neyther were Kings and Priests annoynted in any
sort any where, then in that Kingdome, where
Christ was prophesied and annoynted, and whence
the name of Christ was to come. In no other place is
it at all, in no other nation, in no other Kingdome
&c. So S. Augustine.
                  
                  20. Therefore by the iudgment both of Scripture
and S. Augustine, no lesse Priests then Kinges, are
called Annointed. But you will say they are not called
the Lords Annoynted, as Kings are. First I answere, that
thats no matter. For we dispute not of wordes, but of

the matter signified by words. Moreouer these two
wordes Christ and Annoynted do signify one and the
same thinge: and, as S. Augustine speaketh, This
Name which is called Christ, is a Name of vnction. And
secondly I say, you assume falsly. For that Priests are
not called in Scripture Annoynted only, but also Christs.
And so we read in the second of Machabees 1. 10. Populus
qui est Ierosolymis, & in Iudaea, Senatusque & Iudas
Aristobolo Magistro Ptolomei Regis, qui est de genere
Christorum Sacerdotum, & his, qui in Aegypto sunt, Iudaeis,
salutem & sanitatem. 
                     The people of Ierusalem, &
Iudea, the Senate and Iudas, do send greeting to Aristobolus
Maister to King Ptolomey, who is of the race
of Christes (or Annoynted) Priests, and to the Iewes
that be in Aegipt, &c. Behould heere, Aristobolus is of
the race of Christes Priests, therefore Priests are called
Christs, that is to say, Annoynted.
                  
                  21. But you will yet obiect: All these things are vnderstood
of Priests of the old Testament: but I would
fayne see a place (say you) where the Priest of the new
Testament (to writ the Pope) is called Christ, or Annoynted.
Marry hearke you: And I in like māner would
as fayne see a place where Kinges of the new Testament
are called by that Name. Is it lawfull (trow
yee) for you to transferre this Name, which was of
old giuen to ancient Kinges and Priests by the holy
Ghost, to the King of England: and shall it not be
lawfull for vs likewise by the same right to transferre
it to the Pope? Heere you take vpon you too
much.
                  22. Moreouer I say, that once only this Name of
Christ, or Annoynted is to be found in the new Testament,

in that sense whereof we now treat, to wit
in the 2. Chapter of S. Luke vers. 29. where it is said:
Responsum acceperat Simeon à Spiritu Sancto, non visurum
se mortem, nisi priùs videret Christū Domini. 
                     Simeon
had receiud an answere of the Holy Ghost, that he
should nor see death, vnlesse he first saw the Christ
(or Annoynted) of our Lord. Here our Sauiour is
called the Christ of our Lord, to wit, Annoynted of
our Lord. He was annoynted both King and Priest
as S. Augustine aboue noted, not with corporall oyle,
as were the Kings and Priests of the old Testament;
but with spirituall oyle, to wit, of the holy Ghost.
For▪ 
                     vpō him rested the spirit of our Lord, the spirit of wisdom
& vnderstanding, the spirit of counsell and fortitude,
the spirit of knowledg and piety, as it is written in Isay
the 11. Chapter vers. 3. And this is that which Dauid
foretold Psalme 44. 8. Vnxit te Deus, Deus tuus, ole
                           •
                        
laetitiae prae consortibus tuis. God hath annoynted thee,
yea thy God, with the oyle of gladnes, before all
thy companions: That is to say, God hath annoynted
thee Priest and King in a peculiar manner, before
all other Kings & Priests. For he annoynted thee with
the holy Ghost, and them with corporall oyle only.
Heerehence I gather, that wheras the Kings & Priests
of the old Testament, were therefore annoynted with
corporall oyle, that they might be a Type or figure of
the Messias to come, who was to be annoynted both
King and Priest with spirituall oyle: so much the more
doth this Name Annoynted, or, Christ our Lord, agree
to Priests, then vnto Kings, by how much Christ
tooke vpon him the office of a Priest in this life, more
then of a King. Or els, if he equally tooke vpon him

both offices: then by equall right, Priests as well as
Kings may be called Annoynted, or, Christs of our
Lord And therfore I see no cause, why yow should
attribute this Name only to Kings, and take it away
from Priests, vnlesse it was, because it pleased your
fancy so to do.
               
               
                  The sixt Paradoxe.
                  23. YF besides Christ (say yow) the Pope should
also be head of the Church, it should be a mō
                     strous
and two-headed Church. For thus you write
pag. 331. of your Booke. Monstrosum verò corpus,
cui plus vno sit capite. That is a monstrous body, that
hath more heads then one. And then againe pag. 398.
Vnicum est caput vni corpori: Ecclesia vnum corpus. Nisi
bicipitem aquilam fingas, autem tricipitem Geryonem,
cui tot capita sunt, quot in mitra Pontificia coronae. Christus
ergo solus Ecclesiae caput, non Papa. 
                     There is but one
only head to one body: The Church is one body. Except
you imagine her to be a spread Eagle, or a triple
Geryon, who hath as many heades, as there be Crowns
in the Popes myter. Christ therfore alone is Head of
the Church, and not the Pope.
                  
                  24. But if it be so, as heere you would beare vs in
hand, that it is; why do you otherwhere affirme (not
a little forgetting your selfe) that the King is Head of
the Church? Do you not feare least the Church should
be double headed, if not Christ alone, but your King
also be head thereof? For thus you say pag. 338. Iam
verò vt nomen capitis ad Regem reuocetur, arte mirabili
non est opus. Praeiuit nobis voce Spiritus Sanctus 1. Reg.

15. 17. Nonne cùm peruulus esses in oculis tuis, caput in
tribubus Israel factus es? Inter tribus verò Israel, tribus
Leui. Caput ergo Rex vel tribus Leuiticae; qua in tributum
Pontifex Achimelech sub Rege capite suo. Chrysostomus
camdem hanc vocem Capitis reuocauit ad Theodosium,
eum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         dixit, non solum caput, sed quod in ipso
capite maximè sublime est, capitis verticem, id
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         omnium
in terris hominum. 
                     Now that the Name of Head may
be giuen to the King, there shall need no great art.
The holy Ghost hath gone before vs in this word, 1.
Reg. 15. 17. saying: When thou wast a little one in thine
owne eyes, wast thou not made head in the Tribes of Israel?
Amongst the tribes of Israel, is the tribe of Leui. Therfore
the King is head at least of the Leuiticall tribe: in
which Tribe was then the chiefe Priest Achimelech
vnder the King his Head. Chrysostome in like manner
attributed this Name of Head vnto Theodosius, and
called him not only Head, but (which is most high
in the head it selfe) the top or crowne of the Head,
and that of all men on earth &c.
                  
                  25. I wonder at your inconstancy: A little before
you said, that only Christ was head of the Church.
And why so? That you might exclude the Pope, whom
you hate. Now you will also haue the King to be head,
and not only head, but the top or crowne of the head
also. Why so? Because yow seeke to please and flatter
the King. And so it cōmeth to passe, that you will
easily endure a two-headed Church, if the King may
be one, but in no wise, if the Pope should be any. And
when you haue placed Christ and the King of England
as two Heads of this Church, then it seemes to you
a faire and comely Church: but if Christ and the Pope

be placed togeather, then is it deformed & monstrous.
Get you hence with this your Head, wherin the
Church hath one while one head, another while
two. It seemes that, that of Ecclesiasticus 27. 12. may
be fittly applied vnto you: Stultus vt luna mutatur.
A foole is changed like the moone. And that also of
S. Iames 1. 8. Vir duplex animo inconstans est in omnibus
vijs suis. A double dealing fellow is inconstant in all
his wayes.
               
               
                  The seauenth Paradoxe.
                  26. YOv say, that if the Pope should haue power to
depose Kinges; Ethnickes or Infidels, were
better in condition then Christian Princes: to witt,
for that these may be deposed by the Pope, the other
may not. For thus you write pag. 36. of your booke:
Hac doctrina semel promulgata, non multa pòst sceptra,
credo, Christo subijcientur. Quid enim? Rex Ethnicus
non potest deponi à Papa, Christianus potest: Meliori ergo
iure regnatur apud Ethnicos. Quis non dehin
                           •
                         iem (sic vt
est) manebit Ethnicus? Subditi, qui Ethnicisunt, officio
suo in Reges laxari nequeunt: at Christiani queunt.
Quis non subditos suos malit Ethnicos quàm Christianos?
Quis Christianus Rex esse velit? 
                     This Doctrine (to wit
of deposing Princes) being once set abroach, I beleeue
few Scepters will hereafter be subiected to Christ. For
why? An Ethnicke King cannot be deposed by the
Pope, a Christian King may be: therefore it is better
to be a King amongst Ethnickes. Who will not hēceforward
now (if he be so) remayne still an Ethnicke?
Subiects, if they be Ethnickes, cannot be absolued frō
                        
their obedience to their Kinges, but Christian Subiects
may. Who would not then haue his subiects
Ethnickes rather then Christians? Who would be a
Christian King?
                  
                  27. You neyther speake warily, nor Christianlike.
Not warily: for first what you haue sayd, may be thus
retorted vpon you. Yf the King of England should
haue power to depose Bishops (which you affirme;)
then were the Bishop; in Spayne, France, and Poland
better in condition then the Bishops of England: For
that heere they may be deposed at the Kings pleasure,
and there not. Secondly, for as we say that Christian
Princes may be deposed by the Pope, if they offend, &
not Ethnicks: so do you likewise confesse, that Christian
Princes may be excommunicated, and not Ethnicks:
Yet is it not wel inferred of this your Doctrine,
that Ethnickes are better in condition then Christians,
seing that it is a greater euill to be depriued of the spirituall
goods of the Church by excommunication; thē
of a temporall Kingdome by deposition. And therefore
can that be much lesse inferred out of our opinion.
                  28. You speake not Christianlike. For it is not a
Christian mans part thus to dispute: The offences of
Kinges are punnished amongst Christians, but not amongst
Ethnickes, Ergo, I had rather be an Ethnick
Prince, where I may not be punnished, if I offend,
then a Christian Prince, where I shall be punnished,
if I doe offend. Thus truly you dispute. If (say you)
Christian Kinges, when they deserue it, may be deposed,
and Ethnicks, although they do offend, cannot
be deposed; I had rather be an Ethnicke King

then a Christian. And so truly, you playnly shew, that
you more esteeme a temporall Kingdome, which you
would not loose, then a heauenly Kingdome, which
you doe not greatly care for.
               
               
                  The eight Paradoxe.
                  29. YF the Pope (say you) will haue a Temporal
Kingdome, it were to be perswaded, that
he went to the Diuell for it: seing that he hath power
to dispose of the Kingdomes of this world. For thus
yow write pag. 36. Quod si Pontifici animus est ad regna
mundi; est in Euangelio (memini) mentio de quodam,
qui regna mundi penes se esse, eaue disponendi ius habere
se dixit. Eum adeat censeo; cum illo transigat. 
                     And if
the Pope haue a mynd to a temporall kingdome, there
is mention in the Ghospel (I remember) of a certayne
fellow (to wit the Diuell) who sayd, that all the kingdomes
of the world were in his power, & that he had
right to dispose of them. I thinke it best he go vnto
him, and couenant with him &c.
                  30. Say, my friend, speake you this in iest or in earnest?
In whether manner you doe it, you eyther become
iniurious to your own King, or els contumelious
to the Pope neyther whereof doth well beseeme
you. The iniury you offer to your King, yow
cannot deny. For durst you (without iniury) haue
answered your king, eyther in iest or earnest, when
as, after the death of Queene Elizabeth, he demaunded
the Crowne of England, with these words: If you will
raigne in England, go to the Diuell, and couenant with
him, who is the distributer of all Kingdomes? I thinke

you durst not. For if you had, then farewell Chaplaineship.
Wherfore then dare you be so saucy to
speake thus to the Pope, but for that you list to raile
vpon him?
                  31. But, you will say, the Pope seekes a temporall
Kingdome, which is not due vnto him. Let him cō
                     tent
himselfe with a spirituall Kingdome. But what
if in like manner I should say of your King? He seeks
a spirituall Kingdome. Let him content himselfe with
a temporall. Moreouer I adde, that the Pope hath far
more right to temporal Kingdomes, then you King
hath to the Church: which thing I am to declare more
largely in another place.
               
               
                  The ninth Paradoxe.
                  32. YOv say, that power to excommunicate was
not giuē vnto S. Peter, but vnto the Church:
to wit, by those wordes, Dic Ecclesiae &c. Tell the
Church: and if he will not heare the Church, let him be
to thee as an Ethnicke. As also by those other wordes:
Quaecumque solueris &c. Whatsoeuer you shall loose vpon
earth, shall be loosed in heauen and whatsoeuer you bynd vpon
earth, shalbe bound in heauen &c. And yet notwithstanding
you adde, that the Church may transferre
this power to whome she please. For thus you write
pag. 14. of your booke. Potestas haec ibi, cui data?
Non Apostolo Petro. This power there, to whome
was it giuen? Not to Peter the Apostle. And againe:
Vt autem Petro potestas ibi non data censuram hanc vsurpandi;
ita nec Petro, si vsurparet, ratihabitio promissa.
Dicitur enim: Quoscumque ligaueritis. Non Petro igitur

vel Papae, sed Ecclesiae. 
                     And as power was not there
giuen to Peter, to vse this censure; so neyther if he had
vsed it, was the ratihabition (or approuing thereof)
promised to Peter. For it is said: Whomesoeuer ye shall
bind:
                      therfore it was not giuen to Peter, or to the Pope,
but to the Church. And yet againe, pag. 42. Res
ipsa, rei ipsius promissio, ratihabitio, vsus denique Ecclesiae
datur: ab Ecclesia, & habetur, & transfertur in vnum,
siue plures, qui eius pòst vel exercendae, vel denunciandae
facultatem habeant. 
                     The thing it selfe, the promise
of the thing it selfe, the approuing of it, yea the
vse therof is giuen to the Church. From the Church
it is both had, and transferred to one or more, who
shall afterward haue the faculty to exercise, or denounce
the same.
                  
                  33. Out of this your Doctrine it followeth: first,
that in the time of the Apostles, power to excommunicate
was immediatly giuen to the Church of the Corinthians,
and from thence transferred to S. Paul the
Apostle, that he might exercise and publikely denounce
the same vpon the incestuous person. But
this very point you openly deny in the same place, in
these wordes: Paulus congregatis Corinthijs, potestatem
censurae denunciandae facit. 
                     Paul hauing gathered togeather
the Corinthians, giues power to denounce the
Censure. Certes, if S. Paul giue power to the Congregation
or Church of Corinth to denounce the Censure
(vpon the incestuous person) as heere you affirme;
how had he then receaued the selfe same power from
the same Church? Or what necessity was there, I
pray yow, to giue that power to the Church, if the
Church had receaued it before from Christ, by those

words, Dic Ecclesiae, tell the Church? These things
do not agree togeather.
                  34. Secondly it followeth: that now at this present
in England the power to excommunicate is immediately
in the English Church, and not in the Bishops:
and from the Church the same may be transferred to
Bishops. But if it be so, why doth not the Church of
England giue this power to the King, her Head, and
Primate? Why doth she rather giue it to the Bishopes,
then to the King; when as the Bishops are subordinate
vnto the King in spirituall Iurisdiction, as you
will needs haue it? And is it not an absurd thing,
that you (to wit the Church of England) should giue
power to the Bishops, to excommunicate, and cast
out of the Church their King, their Head, their Pastor
and their Primate, and yet would not giue the
same power to the King to inflict the same Censures
vpon his subiects, to wit the Bishops? Surely, you
are eyther very cruell towardes your King, or els you
do not seriously, and in good earnest giue him the
Supremacy. One of the two must needs follow.
Therfore looke well with what spirit, you wrote these
wordes following in the 151. pag. of your booke;
Nos Principi Censurae potestatem non facimus: We do
not giue power to our King to exercise Censures vpon
vs. And wherfore do ye not, if you truly acknowledg
him for your Pastour & Primate? But let
vs go forward.
               
               
                  
                  The tenth Paradoxe▪
                  
                  35. YOv say, that the Prophesy of the reuelation
of Antichrist, is already fulfilled and therefore
it is so cleere, that it may be seene with the eyes.
For thus you write pag. 186. Minimè verò mirum, si ista,
quae dixi, tam vel claram, vel certam in scripturis
Patrum interpretationem non habeant: signatus adhuc liber
huius Prophetiae erat. 
                     It is no meruayle, if these things
which I haue sayd, be neyther cleere nor certayne in
the writinges of the Fathers. For as yet the booke of
this Prophesy was not vnsealed &c. And a little after,
say you: Mirari tamen non debeat quis, si non illis tam
adeo explicita omnia fuerint, quàm Nobis per Dei gratiam
iam sunt, qui consummatam iam Prophetiam illam quotidie
oculis vsurpamus. 
                     But yet let no man meruayle, if
all thinges were not then so vnfoulded vnto them, as
now by Gods grace they be to vs, who dayly see with
our eyes that prophesy (to wit of Antichrist) to be already
fulfilled &c.
                  
                  36. And is it so indeed? But your King thinketh the
contrary: For that in his Premonition he playnely auerreth,
that, That Prophesy of Antichrist, is yet obscure,
and intricate; and that by only coniectures it may
be disputed of. His wordes are these: Sanè quod ad definitionem
Antichristi, nolo rem tam obscuram & inuolutam,
tamquam omnibus Christianis ad credendum necessariam,
vrgere. 
                     As for the definition of Antichrist, I will not
vrge so obscure a point, as a matter of faith to be necessarily
beleeued of all Christians &c. And shall we
thinke that, that which is obscure and intricate to

your King, is dayly manifest to you? No▪ It followeth
in the Kings words. Id autem maximè mihi in votis est,
vt si cui hanc meam de Antichristo coniecturam libebit refellere,
singulis disputationis meae partibus ordine respondeat.
                     And my only wish shalbe, that if any man shall
haue a fancy to refute this my cōiecture of Antichrist,
that he answere me orderly to euery point of my discourse
&c. But for you, Syr, it shall not be necessary, to
answer thus to euery point: you may dispatch the matter
in one word, if you shall but say to your King: And
it shall please your Maiesty, you are deceyued in your coniecture:
that which is seene with the eye, needs no coniecture.
We all dayly see with our eyes this Mystery
of Antichrist: And are you the only man in England that
seeth it not &c? Yf you do but thus, you haue gotten
the goale.
                  37. But indeed, you are not onely contrary to the
King heerin, but to your selfe also. For if the Prophesy
of Antichrist were now already reuealed, and cleere
in all mens eyes (as you affirme:) who is then this Antichrist,
whome the prophesy meaneth? The Pope,
you wil say. And this also doth your King coniecture,
though he see it not with his eyes. Well, be it so. But
then in another place you say, That your King may be
excommunicated by the Pope, though not deposed, or depriued
of his Kingdome: Can therefore Antichrist excommunicate
your King? Take heed what you say,
and beware least whilst you please your King by flattery,
you displease him through imprudency.
               
               
                  
                  The eleauenth Paradoxe.
                  38. THE Kinges of Denmarke (say you) & Suetia,
as also the Princes of Germany with many
others, do agree with the King of England in matters
of faith. For thus you write pag. 53. of your booke.
Quod si praesentis instituti foret, edoceriposses, Serenissimum
Magnae Britanniae Regem, & qui cum eo sentiunt,
Reges Daniae, & Suetiae, Germaniae Principes, Respublicas
Heluctiae & Rhetiae, quiue per Galliam, Belgium,
Poloniam, Hungariam, Bohemiam, Austriam, Ordines à
nobis sunt, partem esse Dominici gregis: nec minorem, nec
minùs illustrem partem, quàm quae est pars Pauli Quinti.
                     But if it were our present purpose heere to declare, you
(to wit Tortus) might be taught to know, that the
Kinges excellent Maiesty of Great Britany, and they
which agree with him, to wit, the Kings of Denmarke
and Suetia, the Princes of Germany, the Comonwealthes
of Suitzerland and Rhetia, & all other States,
that adherre vnto vs, throughout France, the Low
Countryes, Polonia, Hungary, Bohemia, and Austria,
are part of the Lords flocke: and not a meaner, nor a
lesse famous part, then that of Paul the fifth &c.
                  
                  39. Yea although it were your present purpose, you
could neuer be able to teach vs, that which you hereaffirme.
And this I will shew you particulerly. For first
you say, your King agreeth (in matters of faith) with
the Kings of Denmarke and Suetia. But how can this
be? They be Lutheran Princes, and acknowledge
Christes Reall Presence in the Eucharist, which your
King doth vtterly deny. Secondly, you affirme the

same of the Princes of Germany, and States of other
Countryes. But these do not agree amongst themselues,
some being open Lutherans, and others Caluinistes.
How then can they, being deuided amongst thē
                     selues,
agree with your King? except your king (as
you insinuate he doth) professe Caluinian Religiō with
Caluinists, and Lutheran, with Lutherans: Omnibus omnia
factus, vt omnes lucrifaciat, being all to all that he
may gaine all. Thirdly, suppose this were so, though
it be not: and that all Princes and States, as well Lutherans,
as Caluinistes did agree among themselues, and
togeather with your king; how can it be verified, that
they are a part of the Lords flocke? This I vnderstand
not. I vnderstand it not (I say) how they are a part
of the flocke, and not the whole flocke: For eyther
there be yet others, besides those you haue named which
belong to the Lords flocke, or none. If there be others,
why then did you not name them? or who be those others?
I suppose, by your owne iudgement, they are
neyther Papists nor Anabaptistes. For these you reiect.
If there be no others, besids those you haue named before,
wherefore did you then call them a part, & not
the whole flocke of Christ? I will speake yet more
cleerely. If the kinges of England, Denmarke, and Suetia,
and other Princes and States which agree with
them, be but a part of Christs flocke, and not the
whole flocke; then followeth it of necessity, that besides
those, there is another part of Christes flocke
which agreeth not with them: and so Christs flocke
must consist of two partes, wherof one is deuided
from the other. Do you thinke so indeed? If you do
not, then explicate your selfe better.
                  
                     
40. But let vs graunt this also, that they are a part
of Christs flock that agree with your King in Religiō:
with what face dare you yet affirme, that part to be no
meaner, nor lesse famous a part, then that of Pope Paul the
fifth? This I vnderstand lesse then the other. For with
Paul the fifth, agree Rodulph the Emperour, the Kinges
of Spaine, France, Polonia, the Archdukes of Austria,
the Princes Electors of Mentz, Treuers, Cullen,
the Dukes of Bauaria, Lorayne, Brabant, Franconia,
Tuscany, the Bishops of Bamberge, Constance, Spire,
Wormes, Paderborne &c. to omit many others: and yet
dare you be so bould as to affirme that this is a more
meane, and lesse famous part, then that which agreeth
with your King in matters of Religion? You are totoo
intemperate in auouching: and I doubt not, but
your King, who is of no dull wit, will easily perceaue,
that you very grossely flatter him.
               
               
                  The tweluth Paradoxe.
                  41. YOV say, that it is not now free for the King
of England to change his Religion, or permit
the Catholicke in his Kingdome, because he hath
sworne twice to the contrary. For thus you write pag.
81. of your booke, speaking to Tortus. Nec in eo Regi audiendus,
qui consilium das de religione liberè habenda: integrum
hoc iam illi non est. Nam non semel periurus sit,
quin bis, si te audiat. Qua enim (siqua est fidei bis data
conscientia) vel conscientia, vel fide, ferret in regnis suis
ritus vestros, vel vsum eorum publicum, qui susceptâ
primùm Scotiae, susceptâ deinde Angliae Coronâ Regiâ,
vtrolique solemni ritu, Deo iusiurandum praestitit de conseruanda

                     in Statu suo illa colendi Dei formula, nec alia,
quàm quae in regnis suis tum publicè recepta, & vtriusque
Gentis legibus stabilita esset? 
                     Neither in this point
are you to be heard of the King, in that you giue him
counsaile to permit the free exercise of religion; this
being not lawfull for him now to do. For that therby
he shall not be once, but twice periured, if he heare you
herin. For with what fayth or conscience (if there
be any conscience of fayth twice giuen) can he admit
your cerimonies, or the publike vse therof, who when
he was first Crowned in Scotland, and after in England,
did most solemnely sweare to God in both places,
to mantaine in his Dominions that forme of
Religion, and no other, which was then receaued
publikely in his Kingdomes, and established by the
lawes of both Realmes &c?
                  
                  42. Truly I perceaue you threaten your King, that
he shall be accompted periured, if he permit the Catholicke
Religion in his Kingdome, or forsake his
owne, & imbrace another. What? do you not thinke
it lawfull for him to change his Religion, if he haue
sworne he will not do it? So it seemes, belike. But,
how if the Religion be false which he hath sworne to
mantaine? What shall he then do? Shall he persist
rather in his false Religion, then breake his oath?
Take heed what you say. An oath (say the Lawiers) is
no band of iniquity, and I may adde, nor of falsity.
And therfore notwithstanding an oath neuer so often
made, a man may change his Religion if it be false: he
may annull his pact or couenant, if it be vniust. This
is most certaine. What would you do if your King
should say, that the Religiō is false which he now professeth?

Would you vrge him vpon his oath? That, in
an euill act, is annulled. What? Would you persuade
him to forsake his false Religion, & imbrace the true?
I thinke you would. Why do you then dissemble?
Why do you so much vrge the King vpon his oath, as
though vpon no occasion or euent soeuer it were lawfull
to chang a Religion that is once confirmed by an
oath, although it be impious and false? Go too, gather
your wittes togeather a little better, and then speake.
43. One thing I would yet demaund of you, and
that is this: Your King in his booke of Premonition,
doth exhort Catholicke Kings and Princes, that they
should forsake the faith and Religion, which hitherto
they haue professed vnder the Pope, and imbrace the
English Religion which the King professeth. Now,
it is well knowne, that most of these Princes, in their
Coronation do sweare, that they will neuer do it,
to wit, change their Religion. Heere I demaund (I
say) whether your King hath lawfully and prudently
exhorted them to do it, or no? If he hath done it
lawfully and prudently, why do you accuse the Catholickes,
who do but the like in a better cause? If he
did it vnlawfully and imprudently; why did you not
admonish him, to surcease from such an, Exhortation:
seeing yow are his Chaplaine, and perhaps in
this matter, his Secretary? Thus you stumble at euery
blocke.
               
               
                  
                  The thirtenth Paradoxe.
                  44. YOv say, that Cardinall Bellarmine is a Vow-breaker,
because of a Iesuite he is become a
Cardinall. For thus you write pag. 56. At votum non
video cur à Mattheaeo (Torto) nominari debuit, nisi
si interposita voti mentione, Domino suo (Bellarmino)
gratificari voluit, quo olim Iesuita factus, voti se reum
fecit, & hoc votum iam fregit, postquam ostrum induit.
                     But I do not see how it can be called a vow by Matthew
(Tortus,) vnlesse, in mentioning of the same, he
would needes gratify his Maister (Bellarmine), who
being somtime a vowed Iesuite, hath now broken that
vow by putting on purple &c.
                  
                  45. It seemes you vnderstand aswell what it is to be
a Vow-breaker, as a periured person. And euen as a little
before you did pronounce your King to be forsworne,
if he should admit Catholicke Religion in his
Kingdome: So now you pronounce Cardinall Bellarmine
to be a Vow-breaker, because against his will he
admitted the Dignity of a Cardinal. Truly you are very
ready to vpbraid and taunt. And why, I pray you,
doe you not call Luther, a Vow-breaker, who of a
Monke became a married man (if he may be called a
married man, and not rather a sacrilegious fornicator
and adulterer?) Why not also a periured person, that
reiecting the ancient faith, which he had receyued
from Christ, the Apostles, and his Ancestours
most holy and learned men, and sealed with an oath,
did imbrace a new Religion, repugnant to Christ and
the truth?
                  
                     
46. That you may therefore vnderstand the matter,
heare then what followeth: It is one thing to vow, or
promise to God any thing absolutely and simply; and
another thing to doe it with a certayne limitation. He
that voweth after the first manner, is bound to performe
that which he promiseth: he that voweth after
the second māner may be quit of his band, when the limitation
therof doth suffer the same. Exāples herof we
haue in the old Testamēt. For the Daughters & Wiues
did vse to vow with this limitation, to wit, if their Parents
and Husbāds did consent therto. (Numb. 30.) The
Nazaraeans in like manner vowed with this limitation,
to wit, they bound themselues for a certaine time only,
& not for their whole life. (Numb. 6.) So likewise doe
we in our SOCIETY. He that bindeth himself by a
simple vow, is not thought to be otherwise obliged thē
at the arbitrement of his Superiours: So as if he should
be by them, for a iust cause, dismissed out of the SOCIETY,
the band or obligation ceaseth. But he that
bindeth himselfe by a solemne vow, dependeth on the
arbitrement of the Pope, who may take him from the
SOCIETY, and place him in any other Degree or
Dignity. And what new thing is this now I pray you?
The like is dayly exercised amongst you. You promise
your King Allegiance and Obedience, but with this
double limitatiō. First, as long as you remaine in England.
Secondly, as long as the King doth not chang his
Religion. For if it be otherwise, you thinke you are
not bound thereunto.
               
               
                  
                  The fourteenth Paradoxe.
                  47. YOV say, the Catholickes teach, fidelity
not to be kept, and falshood to be lawfull.
For thus you write pag. 156. of your booke. Vos qui
fidem non seruandam, id est, perfidiam licitam, legitimam
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
docetis; etiámne vos quicquam de perfidia audetis hiscere?
& in turpitudinem vestram, etiam vel nomen nominare?
                     You, that teach fidelity not to be kept, that is to say,
falshood to lawfull; dare you (I say) as much as once
open your lippes against falshood or perfidiousnes? or
to name the thing to your owne shame?
                  
                  48. But stay, my friend; who be they with vs that
teach this doctrine? If your set purpose be nothing els,
but to deale falsely and to calūniate, it is no great meruaile,
if you write thus. For (be it spoken with your
good leaue) this is a loudlye, and a manifest calumniation.
But if you be desirous of truth (as it becommed
you to haue byn;) why did you not examine the matter
first, before you wrote it downe? No doubt, but you
should haue found another kind of doctrine amongst
Catholicks. And if you yet please, you may see, what
I haue formerly written of this argument in my Disputation,
Of keeping faith (or promise) to Heretickes:
and in my Sundry mixt Questions of the same matter.
And there shall you find, what the Catholickes truly
and really thinke of this point; and vvhat our Aduersaries
do falsely calumniate.
               
               
                  
                  The fifteenth Paradoxe.
                  49. YOV say, that the Catholicks are of the race
of Malchus, for that they heare and interprete
all with the left eare, and nothing with the right.
For thus you write pag. 92. of your booke: Interea
tamen dextrâ datum, dextrâ positum, quicquid in Iuramento
positum. Quod dextrâ datum est, vos sinistrâ accepistis,
& de Malchi prosapia estis, cui praecisa auris dextra:
nec vlla vobis auris reliqua, nisi sinistra, qua auditis
omnia; omnium, quae à nobis dicuntur, sinistri auditores
& interpretes. 
                     In the meane while notwithstanding,
whatsoeuer is put in an oath, is giuen with the
right, is put with the right. That which is giuen with
the right, you receaue with the left, and are of the race
of Malchus, who had his right eare cut of: Neither
haue you any right eare, but a left, wherwith you heare,
all things; and become the sinister hearers and interpreters
of all things, that are said by vs &c.
                  
                  50. Thus you hould on, after your wonted manner,
either to trifle, or calumniate. But I care not. Let
vs graunt, what you say, to wit, that the Catholiks are
of the race of Malchus. What get you by this? Truly nothing
that makes against vs. For do you not know, out
of the Ghospell, that assoone as Malchus his right eare
was cut of, it was againe presently restored by Christ?
And to this end, that he should heare or interpret nothing
with the left, but all with the right eare? If you
therfor wil haue vs to be of the race of Malchꝰ, you must
confesse, that this was so brought to passe by Christ
for vs, that we should heare and interpret all with our

right eares, and nothing with our left alone.
                  51. But if I listed in like sort to iest, I would not
say, that you were of the race of Malchus, whose
eare was cut of; but rather of the race of the Iewes,
who haue eares, and yet heare not, according to that of
S. Matthew 13. 14. Auditu audietis &c. You shall
heare with you eares, and you shall not vnderstand; and
seeing, you shall see, and shall not see. For the hart of
this people is waxed grosse, and with their eares they haue
heauily heard: and their eyes they haue shut &c. and
the rest that followeth. But I will not deale so with
you.
               
            
            
               THE
THIRD CHAPTER:
               Of the Kinges Supremacy badly defended
by his Chaplaine.
               SEING you haue once determined to flatter
the King, you go about to defend and approue
whatsoeuer you imagine will please him. And
with this mind & desire, you are imboldned to defend
the Primacy of the Church, which he vsurpeth to
himselfe. But truly very vnluckily: For in this kind
you commit a double fault. First because you bring
many Arguments which do ouerthrow the Kings Supremacy,
which yet you do for lacke of foresight.
SECONDLY because the Argumentes you bring for
proofe of the said Supremacy in the King, are of so
small reckoning or accompt, as they seeme contemptible.

I will lay them both open before you: and for
that which belongeth to the first head or point, these
Arguments may be deduced out of your owne Principles,
against the Kings Supremacy.
               
                  The first Argument, against the Kings
Supremacy, taken out of the Chaplaines
owne Doctrine.
                  2. THE first Argument I frame thus: He hath
not the Primacy of the Church, who hath no
iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall, neither in the interiour
Court, nor exteriour: But the King, out of your
owne Doctrine hath no iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall,
neither in the interiour Court, nor exteriour: Ergo,
he hath not the Primacy of the Church. The maior
proposition is cleare of it selfe, because by the name of
Primacy, we vnderstand nothing els in this place, but
supreme Iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall. He then who
hath no iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall, neither internall
nor externall, hath not the Primacy of the Church:
But the King, by your doctrine hath none, neither
internall, nor externall.
                  3. Not internall: For that this Iurisdiction consisteth
in the power of the Keyes, or in the power or authority
of forgiuing sinnes in the Court of Consciēce,
which the King hath not, as you confesse pag. 380.
of your booke, in these words: Rex non assumit ius Clauium.
The King doth not assume, or take vpon him,
the power of the Keyes. And worthily. For that Christ

spake not to Kings, but to the Apostles, when he said,
Accipite Spiritum Sanctum &c. Receyue the holy Ghost:
whose sinnes you forgiue, shalbe forgiuen them: and whose
sinnes you retaine, shalbe retained &c.
                  
                  4. Not externall: For this I will euidently euince
out of your owne Principles, which are these three.
The first, that the Iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall of the
exteriour Court, is not founded vpon any other place,
then that of S. Matthew 18. 17. Dic Ecclesiae &c. Tell
the Church: if he will not heare the Church, let him be
vnto thee, as an Ethnicke and Publicane. Your second
Principle is, that the Iurisdiction which is founded
on that place, is nothing els, then the Right of Censuring,
or power to excommunicate. Your third is,
that the King hath not the Right of Censuring, or
power to excommunicate. I doubt not, but you will
acknowledg these your three Principles. And the last,
you set downe pag. 151. of your booke in these words:
Nos Principi potestatem Censurae non facimus. We do not
giue power, or authority to the King to vse Censures.
And againe pag. 380. Rex non assumit ius Censurae. The
King doth not take vpon him the Right or power of
vsing Censures. The former two Principles you in like
manner set downe pag 41. thus: Censura duplex est;
Publicani & Ethnici; minor & maior. Minor à Sacramentis
excludit modò. De maiore verò, quae arcet Ecclesia ipsa,
quae perinde reddit, vt Ethnicos, vix quisquam est,
quin fateatur, institutam eam à Christo, Matth. 18.
per verba, Dic Ecclesiae; si Ecclesiam non audierit, sit
tibi sicut Ethnicus. De exteriori foro ibi agitur. Exterioris
fori Iurisdictio, illo, nec alio loco fundata est. 
                     A Censure
is two-fold; to witt of the Publican & Ethnick;

the lesser and the greater. The lesser doth exclude frō
Sacraments for the present. But as for the greater,
which casteth out of the Church it selfe, and maketh
men like vnto Ethnicks, there is scarce any man, but
will confesse, that it was instituted by Christ Matth.
18. by these words. Tell the Church; if he will not heare
the Church, let him be vnto thee as an Ethnicke. And
in that place is it meant of the exteriour Court: the
iurisdiction of which exteriour Court is grounded on
that, and no other place &c. Marke well what heere
you say. The iurisdiction of the externall Court,
where is it founded in the Ghospell? In no other place,
(say you) then in Matth. 18. It is wel. I desire no
more.
                  5. Hence then do I thus now conclude: All Iurisdiction
Ecclesiasticall of the externall Court, is founded
in that only place, Dic Ecclesiae, tell the Church: But
the King hath not the Iurisdiction that is founded in
that place: Ergo, he hath no iurisdiction founded in
the Ghospell of Christ, but in the braynes of his Chaplayne.
Consider now well, how you will deale with
your King, who by your own Doctrine is deuested of
all Ecclesiasticall power: and recall those wordes of
yours, that you wrote pag. 90. of your Booke, Primatus
spiritualis debetur Regibus omni iure. The spirituall Primacy
is due vnto Kinges by all right. No truly, not by
all right: for, as now yow confesse, they haue it not
by right of the Ghospell, or new Testament.
               
               
                  
                  The second Argument.
                  6. THE second argument which I produce, no lesse
forcible then the former, is this: He hath not
the Supremacy of the Church, who cannot (by his
power Spirituall) expell out of the Church, any man,
although he be neuer so guilty or faulty: and yet himselfe,
if he be guilty, may be expelled by others: or
(which is the same thing) cannot excommunicate any
man, and yet may be excommunicated himself by
others. But your King, by your owne Doctrine cannot
excommunicate, or cast out of the Church any mā;
and yet himself may be excommunicated, and cast out
by others: Ergo, according to your Doctrine, he hath
not the Primacy of the Church.
                  7. The Maior is certayne, and is manifest by a like
example. For as he is not accompted a King, who
cannot banish or exile out of his Realme any man,
though neuer so wicked; and yet himselfe notwithstā
                     ding
may be banished and exiled by others, if he offēd:
euen so standeth the matter in this our case. Now
I subsume thus: But the King can excommunicate, or
cast out of the Church no man, because he hath not the
Right or power to censure, as your self speaketh: & yet
notwithstanding may he be excommunicated himself,
or driuen out of the Church, as you confesse pag. 39.
of your Booke in these words: Aliudest priuare Regem
bonis Ecclesiae communibus, quod facit sententia, & potest
fortè Pontifex: aliud priuare bono proprio, idest regno suo,
quod non facit sententia, nec potest Pontifex. Priuabit
censura Pontificis societate fidelium, quâ fideles sunt: bonum

illud enim spirituale & ab Ecclesia. Non priuabit obedientia
subditorum, quâ subditi sunt: bonum enim ciuile
hoc, nec ab Ecclesia &c. 
                     It is one thing to depriue a
King of the cōmon (or spirituall) goods of the Church
which the sentence (of Excommunication) doth, & perhaps
the Pope can: It is another thing to depriue him
of his owne proper good, to wit, his Kingdome,
which the sentence (of Excommunication) doth not, nor
the Pope can. The Popes Censure shall depriue, or exclude
him from the society of the faithful, in that they
be faithfull: for that is a spirituall good and dependeth
of the Church. But it shall not depriue him of the obediēce
of his subiects, in that they be his subiects: for this
is a ciuil (or temporal) good, nor doth it depend of the
Church &c. Then I conclude thus: Ergo, the King by
your owne sentence hath not the Supremacie of the
Church.
                  8. And by this Argument, which is taken out of
your owne Doctrine, I not onlie proue, the King to
haue no Supremacie Ecclesiastical: but also that himselfe
doth thinke far otherwise, in this point, then you
do. For you confesse out of your former wordes, that
the King may be excommunicated by the Pope: Ergo,
you must also confesse, that the King in this case is inferior
to the Pope. But your King in his Premonition
to all Christian Princes, denieth it in these words: Nā
neque me Pontifice vlla ex parte inferiorem esse credo, pace
illius dixerim. For neither do I think my selfe any waie
inferiour to the Pope, by his leaue be it spoken. Yf he
be no waie inferiour vnto him; how can he then be
excommunicated or punished by him? See then by
what meanes you will heere defend your King.
               
               
                  
                  The third Argument.
                  9. MY third Argument is drawne from your own
wordes pag. 177. of your Booke, which are
these: Duo haecregna, Reipublicae & Ecclesiae, quamdiu
duo manent, hoc ab illo diuisum, duos habent: postquam
in vnum cealescunt, non vt in ducbus duo, sed vt in vno
vnus Primus est. 
                     These two Kingdomes, to wit, of
the Common-wealth and the Church, so long as
they remaine two, this deuided from that, they haue
two Heades: but after they become one, not as two
in two, but as one in one, there is but one Chiefe
&c. This you would say: There be two distinct Kingdomes
in this world, one of the Ciuil Comon-wealth,
another of the Church of Christ: These Kingdomes
so long as they remaine two, haue two Primates, or
Heades: but when they grow into one, they haue but
one Primate or chiefe Head. I accept that which you
graunt, and do subsume thus: But in the new law,
which Christ instituted, there remayne two Kingdomes;
nor are they become one: Therefore in the
new Law, there must be two distinct Primates, or
Heads, one whereof must rule the Church, the other
the Ciuill Commonwealth: Ergo, the King of England,
if he belong to the new Law, doth not rule
both at once.
                  10. What can you heere now deny? Tell me, I pray
you, in Christes time, when the new Law was instituted,
were these two Kingdomes deuided, or were
they one? This later, you neyther can, nor dare affirme.
For if the Church and Common-wealth had byn one

in Christes tyme, then should there haue byn but one
Chiefe or Head of both, according to your owne doctrine.
And therefore eyther Christ should haue byn
Chiefe both of the Church & common wealth, which
you will not graunt; or els he should haue byn Chiefe
or Head of neyther, which is against Scripture. It remayneth
then, that in Christs tyme those two Kingdomes
were distinct & deuided, and had two different
Primates or Heads; to wit Christ, Head of the Church,
and the King or Emperour, Head of the Common-wealth.
                  11. But now if in Christs tyme, there were not one
and the same Chiefe, or Head, both of the Church and
Common-wealth, which you ought to graunt; how
then dare your King, who professeth the Institution
of Christ, vsurpe vnto himselfe both Primacies, to
wit, both of the Church, & commonwealth: vnlesse
you will say, that he followeth herin the custome of
the Iewes, and not of the Christians, & so in this point
is more like a Iew then a Christian. For this you doe
seeme to insinuate, when as pag. 363. of your Booke
you say: 
                        A more, institutoue Israelis orditur Apologia
&c. From the custome and institute of Israel (to witt
the old Testament) our Apology or defence beginneth,
and from thence hath all this question her force and
strength (to wit of the Supremacy.) For in Israell did
God erect a Kingdome for his people, & in that Kingdome
he founded a Church to his owne liking. From
thence are we to take example: for so much, as in the
new Testament we haue none. For no where haue the
Church and Empire byn ioyned, or vnited togeather
in one &c.
                  
                  
                     
12. Out of this your so cleare and manifest confession
I gather two things. The one is, that your
King of England doth vsurpe vnto himselfe the Primacy
both of the Church and Cōmon wealth, without
any example therof in the new Testament. The other:
that either your King of England must needs be deceaued,
or els that other Kings and Emperours are in errour.
For if, as you say, the Church and Empire no
where in the new Testament haue conioyned togeather
in one; & that yet now in England they are vnited
in one: it followeth necessarily, that hitherto all Kings
and Emperours haue erred in this point, & your King
only is the first that is vvise: or els, truely, (which
is more credible) that other Kings and Princes haue
heerin beene wise, and your King to haue beene deceaued,
and missed the marke.
                  13. But I see well, what may be heerto obiected,
and that is this: That the Pope, forsooth, in some part
of Italy doth vsurpe also the Primacy both of the Cō
                     monvvealth
and Church. I confesse it to be so. But
this conioining (to vvit, of temporall and spirituall
states) hath beene introducted by humane right only:
but you contend that your King hath both Primacies
by diuine right. And this you cannot proue.
               
               
                  The fourth Argument.
                  14. THE fourth Argument, is taken out of the
wordes of your Booke, pag. 35. & 36. where
you say: Christus enim, cuius hic vicem obtendis, non
sic praefuit, dum in terris fuit. Regnum quod de mundo
fuit, non habuit. Regni, quod non habuit, vices non commisit.
                     
                     Christ, vvhose office you pretend, did not so
rule, when he liued vpon earth: he had no Kingdome
which vvas of this world: He gaue not another his
place in a Kingdome, which he had not &c. And thē
againe a litle after say you: Est ille quidem Rex Regum,
sed quâ Regum Rex est, immortalis est; mortalem
nullum Proregem habet. Papa mortalis ipse, non aliter
Christi vicarius, quàm quâ mortalis Christus. 
                     He truly
(to wit Christ) is King of Kings, but in that he is King
of Kings, he is immortall: he hath no mortall Viceroy
(or Vicar.) The pope is mortall; nor he is otherwise
the Vicar of Christ, then in that Christ is mortall
&c.
                  
                  15. In these words you go about to proue, that the
Pope, although he be Christs Vicar; yet hath he no
temporall Kingdome. You suppose Christ to be considered
two manner of waies. First, as he is immortall,
or according to his Diuinitie: Secondly, as he is mortall,
or according to his humanity. This done, you
argue thus: Christ according to his Diuinity, or, in
that he is immortall, is King of Kings, and hath all
the Kingdomes of this world in his power, yet notvvithstanding
hath he no mortall Vicar or Substitute:
But the Pope is mortall: Ergo, he is not the Vicar of
Christ, in that Christ is immortall, or God. Againe:
Christ according to his Humanity (say you) or, as he
is mortall, hath no temporall Kingdome: and therfore
cannot haue any Vicar or Substitute in a temporall
Kingdome: Ergo, the Pope, although he be his
Vicar, yet is he not so in his temporall Kingdome,
but in his Spirituall.
                  16. This is the force of your Argument. But do

you not see that this may be in like manner retorted
backe vpon your King? Yea by the very same argument
your King may be deuested, both of his temporall
Kingdome, and his Supremacy in the Church.
Which I proue thus: If your King haue a temporall
Kingdome, he hath it either as the Vicar of God immortall
(which he pretendeth,) or els as the Vicar
of Christ mortall. But neither of these may be said.
Not the first: Because God, as he is immortall, hath
no mortall Vicar, as you freely affirme: But your King,
without all doubt is mortall: Ergo, he is not the Vicar
of God immortall. Not the later: Because Christ, as
he is mortall, hath no temporall Kingdome, and consequently
no temporall Vicar: Ergo, your King is
not the Vicar of Christ, in his temporall Kingdome.
And so, he is either deuested of all temporall dominion:
or if he haue any, he must needes be some other
bodies Vicar, then Gods immortall, or Christs mortall.
This, I know: you will not graunt, therfore the other
must be graunted.
                  17. Hence do I further conclude: Your King doth
not vsurpe vnto himselfe the Primacy of the Church,
by any other title, then that he is a temporall Prince
and the Vicar of God: But now I haue shewed out of
your owne doctrine that he is not a temporall King,
nor the Vicar of God: Ergo, by the title of a temporall
Prince, he cannot claime the Primacy of the Church.
Heere you had need to succour him, if you can.
               
               
                  
                  The fifth Argument.
                  18. THE fifth Argument may be taken out of
your owne wordes, before rehearsed, pag.
39. of your booke thus: Aliud est priuare Regem bonis
Ecclesiae communibus &c. 
                     It is one thing to depriue a
King of the commō 
                        (or spirituall) goods of the Church,
which the sentence (of excommunication) doth, & perhaps
the Pope can. It is another thing to depriue him
of his owne proper good, to wit, his Kingdome, which
the sentence (of excōmunication) doth not, nor the Pope
can. The Popes Cēsure shal depriue or exclude him frō
the society (or cōmunion) of the faithfull, in that they be
faithful, for that is a spiritual good, & depēdeth of the
Church. But it shal not depriue him of the obediēce of
his subiects, in that they be subiects; for this is a ciuil (or
tēporall) good, nor doth it depend of the Church &c.
                  
                  19. Heere you distinguish two sorts of good things
which belong to the King. Some you call Spirituall,
which depend of the Church: others Ciuill, which
depend not of the Church. You adde: These (to
wit Ciuill) are proper to the King, of which he
cannot, by Censure, be depriued: The other,
are the common goods of the Church, of which he
may be depriued. Now I demaund whether the Primacy
of the Church, which the King vsurpeth, belonge
to the common goods of the Church, or rather
to his owne eiuill or temporall goods? One of
these two must you graūt, if your distinction be good
and sufficient. If this Primacy belong to the common
goods of the Church, it followeth then, that euery

faithfull Christian, that is in the Church, is no lesse
Head of the Church, then your King. For that the
goods, which be common to all Christians being in
the Church, may no lesse be vsurped of one then of
another. But if this Primacy belong to the Ciuill goods
of the Church; then it followeth, that the King cannot
be depriued of the Primacy of the Church by any
Ecclesiasticall Censure: and therfore after that he is
excommunicated, and cast out of the Church, as an
Ethnicke, vet in him remaineth the Primacy of the
Church: which is most absurd.
                  20. The like Argument is taken out of your words
following, which are these pag. 40. of your booke.
Rex quiuis cùm de Ethnico Christianus fit, non perdit
terrenum ius, sed acquirit ius nouum; put â, in bonis Ecclesiae
spiritualibus. I tidem cùm de Christiano fit sicut Ethnicus,
vigore sententiae amittit nouum ius, quod acquisierat
in bonis Ecclesiae spiritualibus; sed retinet tamen
terrenum ius, antiquum ius in temporalibus quod fuerat
illi proprium, priusquam Christianus fieret. 
                     Euery King
when of an Ethnicke he is made a Christian, doth
not therby loose his temporall right, but getteth a new
right, to wit, in the spirituall goods of the Church.
In like manner, when of a Christian he is made an
Ethnicke (to wit by Excommunication) he, by force of
the Censure, leeseth his new right, which he had gotten
in the spirituall goods of the Church: but yet notwithstanding
he keepeth his temporall right, his ancient
right in temporalities, which was proper vnto
him, before he was a Christian.
                  
                  21. Heere also do you distinguish the double right
of a King: the one ancient and temporall, which a

King hath before he be a Christian; the other new and
spirituall, which he getteth, when he is made a Christian.
Now in like manner I demaund, whether doth
the Supremacy of the Church which your King vsurpeth,
belong to that ancient & temporall right, or rather
to this new and spirituall? If it belong to the ancient and
temporall right; it followeth, that Ethnicke Kings before
they be made Christians, haue the Supremacy of
the Church, which is absurd. If it belong to the new
and spirituall right; it followeth, that Kings, when
in baptisme they be made Christians, or members of
the Church, do receaue more in their baptisme then
other men; which in another place of your Booke you
deny. For you contend, that all men, of what sort
or degree soeuer they be, are equall vnto them, in those
things, which are obteined through baptisme.
                  
               
               
                  The sixt Argument.
                  22. THE sixt Argument you insinuate pag. 53.
of your booke, when you say: Nec enim Regum
subditi, quâ subditi, Ecclesiae pars vlla sunt, sed
Regni. Antequam de Ecclesiae essent, subditi erant; cùm
extra Ecclesiam sunt, nihilominus manent subditi. Quâ
fideles sunt, pars Ecclesiae sunt: quâ subditi sunt, Regni
ac Reipublicae p
                           •
                        rs sunt. 
                     Neyther are the subiects of a
King, in that they be subiects, any part of the Church,
but of the Kingdome. Before they were of the Church,
they were subiects: when they are out of the Church,
notwithstanding they remaine subiects. In that they
be faithfull, (or Christians) they are a part of the
Church: In that they be subiects, they are a part of the

Kingdome and Commonwealth.
                  
                  23. Heerhence do I argue thus: The Iurisdiction
of a King, doth not extend it selfe but to the subiects
of the King, in that they are subiects (for if we regard
them, in that they be not subiects, they cannot
be vnder the Iurisdiction of the King:) But the subiects
of a King, in that they be subiects, are not a part
of the Church, but only of the commonwealth, as
you affirme: So as the Iurisdiction of a King which he
hath ouer his subiects, in that they be subiects, cannot
be Ecclesiasticall, but Ciuill only: Ergo, they are
not subiect to the King in Ecclesiasticall affaires, but
only in Ciuill. Nothing is more certaine out of this
your owne Principle.
               
            
         
         
            THE
CHAPLAINES
Argument for the Kinges Supremacy.
            24. HItherto haue I shewed, that out of your owne
doctrine strong Argumentes may be drawne
to ouerthrow the Kings Supremacy: Now let vs see,
if your others be as forcible to the contrary, wherwith
you goe about to establish the same Supremacy in the
King. I will pretermitt those, which are common
to you, and your King, and are by me refuted otherwhere.
One, which is most peculiar and principall to
your selfe, I will heere discusse. Thus then you propose
it, in the 157. page of your Booke. Dixit autem olim
Iosue populus, in omnibus pariturum se ei, sicut &

Moysi paruerunt; paruerunt autem & Moysi in Ecclesiasticis.
Non intercessit tum Pontifex Eleazarus, ne in
omnibus, sed temporalibus. Quòd si quicquam interesse
putet, quòd Iosue verus Dei cultor fuit, ne in Orthodoxis
solis locum habere videatur; Rex Babel certè, haeretico
par, nempe Idololatra, cui tamen Propheta non modò
non dissuasit populo, sed author etiam fuit submittendi
colla sub iugo eius, eique seruiendi. Idem Pharaoni factum,
cuius absque veniâ, nec pedem mouere voluerunt de
Aegypto, vt Deo sacrificarent. Idem Cyro, cuius itidem
absque veniâ nec excedere Chaldaea, vt templum aedificarent
&c. 
               The people sometyme sayd vnto Iosue, that
they would obay him in all thinges, as they had obeyed
Moyses, but they obeyed Moyses in Ecclesiasticall
matters. Nor did the high Priest Eleazarus then meddle,
no not in any thing, but in temporall. But if any
man shal thinke this more to auayle, because Iosue was
a true worshipper of God, and least this right should
seeme to haue place in only Orthodoxall, or right-beleeuing
Kinges; Behould then the King of Babel, equall
to an Hereticke, to wit an Idolater, whome
notwithstanding the Prophet not only not dissuaded
the people to obay, but also was Author, that they
submitted their neckes vnder his yoke, & serued him.
The like was done to Pharao, without whose leaue,
they (to wit the Iewes) would not mooue a foot out
of Aegypt, that they might sacrifice to God. And the
same to Cyrus without whose leaue in like māner, they
would not depart out of Chaldaea, that they might build
their Temple &c.
            
            25. The force of your Argument is this, that not only
Orthodoxall Kings in the old Testament, but Gentiles

also & Idolaters had the Primacy of the Church▪
               Ergo, the same is to be said of Kinges of the new Testament.
The former part of the antecedent you proue
by the example of Iosue, to whome the people of the
Iewes said (Ios. 1. 17.) As we haue obeyed Moyses in all
thinges, so will we obey you. But they obeyed Moyses,
not only in temporall matters, but also in Ecclesiasticall:
Ergo, did they so obey Iosue. The later you
proue by the example of the three Gentile Kinges, Nabuchodonosor
in Babylon, Pharao in Egipt, and Cyrus in
Chaldaea, to whome the Iewes were subiect, euen
in Ecclesiasticall matters, because without their leaue,
they durst neyther offer Sacrifice, nor build their
Temple.
            26. That you may then see, of what small moment
this your Argument is; I will briefely examine euery
part therof. And first I will speake something of Moyses:
secondly of Iosue, who succeeded him: and thirdly
of the Gentile Kings which you haue cited. Concerning
Moyses then, it is certaine, that he was not
only a Temporall Prince, but an Ecclesiasticall also: or
if we speake all, he susteyned a quadruple person, or
the person of foure men. The first of a Temporall
Prince, the second of a Law-maker, the third
of a high Priest, or Bishop, and the fourth of a Prophet.
And this is testified by Philo lib. 
                     •
                  . of the life of Moyses
in the end, where he saith: Haec est vita, hic exitus
Moysis, Regis, Legislatoris, Pontificis, Prophetae. This
is the life and death of Moyses, a King, a Law-maker,
a high Priest, and a Prophet. And the same is plainly
euinced out of the Scripture. That he was a temporall
Prince or Iudge, it is manifest by that of Exodus 18.

13. Altera die &c. And the next day Moyses sate to iudg
the people, who stood by Moyses from morning vntill
night: which thing S. Augustine mentioneth in his 68.
quaest. vpon Exodus thus: Sedebat (inquit) iudiciaria
potestate solus, populo vniuerso stante. He sate (saith S.
Augustine) alone with power to iudge, all the people
standing. That he was a Law-maker, it is manifest, as
well by other places, as that of S. Iohn 1. 17. Lex
per Moysen data est. The law was giuen by Moyses.
That he was a Bishop or high Priest, is partly gathered
out of that of the Psalme 98. 6. Moyses & Aaron in
Sacerdotibus eius. Moyses and Aaron are numbred amongst
his Priests: and partly also by the Priestly fū
               ction,
that he exercised. For that (as it is written Leuit.
8.) he consecrated Aaron a Priest, he sanctified the
Tabernacle and the Aultar, he offered Sacrifice, Holocaustes,
and Incense to our Lord. And this was
not lawfull for any to do, but Priests, according to that
of 2. Paralip. 26. 18. Non est officij tui, Ozia, vt adoleas
incensum Domino, sed sacerdotum. It is not your office,
Ozias, to offer incense to our Lord, but the office
of Priestes. Lastly, that he was a Prophet, is manifest
by that Num. 12. 6. Si quis fuerit inter vos Propheta
Domini &c. Yf there shalbe among you a Prophet of our
Lord, in vision will I appeare to him, or in sleep will I
speake vnto him. But my seruant Moyses is not such a one,
who in all my house is most faithfull: for mouth to mouth
I speake to him, and openly, and not by riddles and figures
doth he see the Lord &c.
            
            27. Now as for Iosue, he succeded not Moyses in
all these offices. For he succeded him not in Bishoply
degree, or high Priesthood: Nor yet in law-making.

In Prophesy, whether he did or no, I dispute not. But
that he succeeded him in temporall Principality, it is
manifest out of Num. 27. 18. Dixitue Dominus ad Moysen,
tolle Iosue filium Nun &c. And our Lord said to
Moyses, take Iosue the sonne of Nun &c. And put thy hād
vpō him: who shall stand before Eleazar the Priest, & al the
multitude: & thou shalt giue him precepts in the sight of al,
& part of thy glory that all the Synagogue of the Children
of Israell may heare him. For him, if any thing be to be done,
Eleazar the Priest shal consult the Lord. At his word shal he
go out, & shal go in, and al the Children of Israel with him,
and the rest of the multitude &c. In which words three
things are to be noted which make to our purpose: the
first, that Iosue, was designed the successour of Moyses:
the second, that Moyses gaue him part of his glory, that
is to say, he gaue him not all the power he had, aswell
Ecclesiastical, as temporall, but temporall onely: the
third, that he should be subiect to Eleazar the High
Priest, and do euery thing at this commandement. For
this do those wordes signify, Pro hoc &c. For him (to
wit Iosue) if any thing be to be done, Eleazar the Priest
shall consult the Lord. At his word (to wit of Eleazar)
shall Iosue go out, and in &c.
            
            28. Heere may you playnely see, in how different
a sense you alleaged that place, Sicut in istis obediuimus
Moysi, ita obediemus & tibi: As in these thinges we obeyed
Moyses, so will we obey you. For you vnderstand
it thus; as who should say, the people of the
Iewes ought to obey Iosue, in all thinges both Ecclesiasticall
and ciuill, as they had obeyed Moyses. But
you are deceyued. First, for that in Ecclesiastical affayres
they were to obey Eleazar the Priest. Secondly,

because those words (as we haue obeyed Moyses) were
not vttered of all the people, but only of the Rubenites,
Gaddites, and of halfe the Tribe of Manasses. Neyther
did they say, that they would obey Iosue in all thinges
simply, wherin they had before obeyed Moyses (although
somtymes they murmured against him, & did
not obay him:) but in those thinges only, which were
appointed them by Moyses, to wit, that they should
leaue their wiues, childrē, & cattle in the place where
they then were, and arming themselues, togeather
with the rest of the Tribes, should passe ouer Iordan,
and fight against their enemies, vntil they being vanquished,
the rest of the Tribes should there make their
quiet possession. And this is euident out of the context
of Scripture it selfe Iosue 1. 12. in these wordes:
Rubenitis quoque & Gadditis, & dimidiae tribui Manasse
ait &c. 
               To the Rubenites also and Gaddites, and to
halfe the tribe of Manasses, Iosue said: Remember the
word which Moyses the seruant of our Lord commanded
you, saying: Our Lord your God hath giuen you
rest, and all this land, your wiues and children, and
cattle shall tarry in the land, which Moyses deliuered
vnto you beyond Iordan: but passe you ouer armed before
your brethren, all that are strong of hand, & fight
for them, vntill our Lord giue rest to your brethren, as
to you also he hath giuen; and they also possesse the
land, which our Lord your God will giue them, and so
returne into the land of your possession: and you shall
dwell in it, which Moyses the seruant of our Lord
gaue you beyond Iordan, against the rising of the sunne
&c. Thus Iosue to the people. So as that which immediately
followeth (to wit, Omnia quae praecepisti nobis

&c. All thinges that thou hast commanded vs, we
will do, and whithersoeuer thou shalt send vs, we will
go. And as we obeyed Moyses in all things, so will we
obey thee also,) is referred to that which went before.
But there is no mention made of Ecclesiasticall matters,
but only of taking armes against their enemyes,
who possessed their land.
            29. On this syde then, as you see, your Argument
falleth to the ground, & proceedeth from a false principle.
On the other side, that which you bring of Gentile
and Idolatrous Kinges, I do not see what force it
may haue. For that those three Kinges, which you
mention, were by your owne confession eyther Primates
of the Church of God, or they were not. I
hope you will not say that they were, because yow affirme
the contrary more then once in your Tortura:
and that worthily: to wit, that they who be out of
the Church of God, cannot be Princes and Rulers in
the same Church. Yf they were not Primates of the
Church, as certes they were not, how then will you
proue by this their example, that the King of England
is head or Primate of the Church? This only you may
conclude, that as the Iewes durst not go forth of Egypt,
to sacrifice to God, without King Pharao his
leaue, who had brought them into cruell bondage vnder
his yoke: So in like manner the Catholickes, that
liue in England, dare not go out to other Catholicke
Countries, where they may receiue the holy Eucharist
after the Catholick manner, without King Iames
his leaue, who will not suffer them so to do, without
his licence, vnder payne of death or imprisonmēt. And
the like may be said of the other two Idolatrous Kings.

But what is this to the Primacy of the Church? I
should rather thinke it belonged to tyrāny or impiety.
            
               The Conclusion to the Chaplayne.
               30. YOvv haue heere briefly, what I haue
thought concerning your Booke, which
you haue written in defence of your King:
You haue heere (I say) these three pointes: First, that
you haue oftentimes handled the matter not so much
in Argument, as in raylings or exprobrations. Secondly,
that you haue defyled euery thing with Paradoxes,
and false opinions. Thirdly, that you haue rather
ouerthrowne then established the Kings Primacy,
which you sought to fortify: and all these things haue
you done through a certayne desire you haue to flatter
the King. Therefore if you shall represse this your
desire, and behould the onely truth of the thing it selfe,
it will be very easy for you to amend your former
faultes, which I altogeather counsell you to doe. And
if you set God before your eyes (who is the first and
principall verity) you will doe it.
            
         
         
            AN APPENDIX,
            Of the Comparison betweene a King and
a Bishop.
            IN your booke you do so compare a King and a Bishop
togeather, that you manifestly depresse the
Authority of the one, and extoll the Dignity
(higher then is sitting) of the other. And therefore

what others haue thought before you concerning this
point, I will briefly lay before your eyes, that you may
choose whether, changing your opinion, you will
stand to their iudgmentes, or els retayning it, still persist
in your errour. Thus then haue others thought and
taught before you.
            
               Num. 27. 21. Pro Iosue si quid agendum erit &c. Yf
for Iosue any thing be to be done, let Eleazar the Priest
consult with the Lord. At his word (to wit Eleazars)
shall he goe out, and go in, and with him all the sonns
of Israel, and the rest of the multitude &c. So as heere
the secular Prince is commanded to do his affaires at
the descretion of the Priest.
            
            
               Deuter. 17. 12. Qui superbierit &c. He that shall be
proud, refusing to obay the commandement of the
Priest, who at that time ministreth to our Lord thy
God &c. that man shall dye, and thou shalt take away
the euill out of Israel &c.
            
            
               1. Reg. 22. 27. Ait Rex Saul Emissarijs &c. King
Saul said to his Seruants that stood about him: Turne
your selues, and kill the Priests of the Lord &c. And
the Kings seruants would not extend their hands vpō
the Priests of the Lord. So as, they made greater esteeme
of the Priests authority, then of their Kings
commandement.
            
            
               4. Reg. 11. 9. Fecerunt Centuriones iuxta omnia
&c. And the Centurions did according to all things,
that Ioida the Priest had commaūded them: and euery
one taking their men &c. came to Ioida the Priest &c.
And he brought forth the Kings sonne, and put vpon
him the diademe, and the couenant &c. And Ioida
commanded the Centurions, and said to them: Bring

forth Athalia (the Queene) without the precincts of
the Temple, and whosoeuer shall follow her, let him
be stroken with the sword &c.
            
            
               2. Paralip. 19. 11. Amarias Sacerdos & Pontifex
vester &c. Amarias the Priest and your Bishop shallbe
chiefe in those things, which pertayne to God.
Moreouer Zabadias, the sonne of Ismael, who is the
Prince of the house of Iuda, shalbe ouer those works,
which pertaine to the Kings office &c.
            
            
               2. Paralip. 26. 16. Cùm rob oratus esset &c. When
Ozias the King was strengthened, his hart was eleuated
to his destruction &c. and entring into the temple
of our Lord, he would burne incense vpon the altar
of incense. And presently Azarias the Priest
entring in after him, and with him the Priests of our
Lord &c. they resisted the King and said: It is not thy
office, Ozias, to burne incense to our Lord, but the
Priests &c. Get thee out of the Sanctuary, contemne
not, because this thing shall not be reputed vnto thee
for the glory of our Lord God. And Ozias being angry
&c. threatned the Priests. And forthwith there arose
a leprosy in his forehead before the Priests &c.
and in hast they thrust him out &c.
            
            
               
                  Ioan. 21. 32. Feede my sheepe &c. Matth. 16. 19.
To thee will I giue the Keyes of the Kingdome of
heauen &c. Act. 20. 28. The holy Ghost hath placed
Bishops (not secular Kings) to gouerne the Church of
God &c. 1. Cor. 4. 1. So let a man esteeme vs, as the
ministers of Christ, and the dispensers of the mysteries
of God &c. 2. Cor. 5. 20. We are Legates for
Christ &c.
            
            
               
                  S. Gregory Nazianzen, writing to the Emperours

of Constantinople apud Gratian. dist. 10. can. 7. saith:
Libenter accipitis &c. You do willingly heare, that
the law of Christ doth subiect you to Priestly power.
For he hath giuen vs that power: yea, he hath giuen
vs a Principality, much more perfect, then that of
yours &c.
            
            
               
                  S. Gregory the Pope writing to Hermannus Bishop
of Metz dist. 96. can. 6. saith: Quis dubitat &c. Who
doubteth, but that the Priests of Christ are to be accompted
the Fathers, and maisters of Kinges, and
princes?
            
            
               
                  Ioan. Papa, dist. 96. can. 11. Si Imperator Catholicus
est &c. If the Emperour be a Catholike; he is
a Sonne, and not a Prelate of the Church. What belongeth
to Religion, he ought to learne, and not to
teach. And then againe afterwards: Imperatores &c.
Christian Emperours; and Kings, ought to submit
their imployments vnto Ecclesiasticall Prelates, and
not preferre them.
            
            
               
                  Innocentius 3. in decret. de maior. & obed. can.
6. Non negamus &c. We deny not, but that the Emperour
doth excell in temporall things: but the Pope excelleth
in spirituall; which are so much the more worthy,
then temporall, by how much the soule is preferred
before the body &c.
            
            
               
                  Hosius Bishop of Corduba in Spaine, to the Emperour
Constantius, sayth: Desine, quaeso, Imperator &c.
Giue ouer, I beseech you, o Emperour: do not busy
your selfe in Ecclesiasticall affaires, nor in such things
do not teach vs, but rather learne of vs. To yow hath
God committed the rule of the Kingdome, but vnto
vs hath he deliuered the affaires of his Church &c.
            
            
               
               
                  S. Ambrose in his 33. Epistle to his Sister Marcellina,
writeth, that he had sayd to the Emperour Valentinian:
Noli te grauare Imperator &c. Do not trouble
your selfe, o Emperour, to thinke that you haue any
Imperiall right in those thinges which are diuine. To
the Emperour do pallaces belong; but Churches pertaine
vnto Priests &c.
            
            
               
                  Valentinianus the Emperour said: Mihi qui vnus
è numero laicorum &c. It is not lawfull for me, that am
but one of the number of laymen, to interpose my self
in such businesses, (to wit Ecclesiasticall.) Let Priests
and Bishops meet, about these things, wheresoeuer it
shall please them, to whome the care of such affaires
belong &c. This is related by Zozomenus lib▪ 6. hist. c.
7. and by Nicephorus lib. 11. cap. 33. by Ruffinus lib▪
1. cap. 2.
            
            
               
                  Eleanor Queene of Englād in an Epistle she wrote
to Pope Celestine, hath these wordes: Non Rex, non
Imperator à iugo vestrae Iurisdictionis eximitur. Neyther
King, nor Emperour is exempted from the yoke of
your Iurisdiction, or power. More of this matter in
another place.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            Faultes escaped in the Printing.
            Pag. 7. lin. vlt. in some copies dele is
17. lin. 7. shall read shalt
19. lin. 21. to write read to wit
36. lin. 4. in some copies Mattheaeo read Matthaeo
38. lin. 8. to lawfull read to be lawfull
40. lin. 7. in some copies you read yours
57. lin. 15. in some copies the read he
58. lin. 1
                  •
               . in some copies this read his
            
            LAVS DEO.
            
            
         
      
   