
      
         
            
            
            Here foloweth the Interpretacoin of the names
of goddes and goddeſſes as is reherced
in this trety•ſe folowynge as Poetes wryte
            
               
            
            
               
               ¶Phebus is as moche to ſaye as the Sonne.
               ¶Apollo is the ſame or elles God of ſyght.
               ¶Morpleus Shewer of dremis
               ¶Pluto God of hell.
               ¶Mynos Iuge of hell.
               ¶Cerberus Porter of hell.
               ¶Colus the wynde or God of the Eyre.
               ¶Dyana Goddeſſe of wode and chaſe.
               ¶Phebe the Mone or Goddeſſe of waters.
               Aurora Goddes of ye morowor ſprȳg of ye daye
               ¶Mars God of batayll
               ¶Iupiter God of wyſdom.
               ¶Iuno Goddeſſe of rycheſſe
               ¶Saturne God of colde.
               ¶Ceres Goddeſſe of corne.
               ¶Cupydo God of loue.
               ¶Othea Goddeſſe of wyſdome.
               ¶Fortune The varyant Goddeſſe
               ¶Pan God ſhepherdes.
               ¶Iſys Goddeſſe of frute.
               ¶Neptunus God of the ſe.
               ¶Mynerue Goddes of ye batail or of herueſt
               ¶Bachus God of wyne.
               ¶Mercuryus God of langage.
               ¶Venus Goddeſſe of loue.
               ¶Dyſcorde Goddes of debate & ſtryffe
               ¶Attropos Dethe
               ¶Here endeth ye interpretacyon of the names
of Goddes & Goddeſſes as is reherced in the / 
treatyſe folowynge as poetes wryte.
            
            
               
               
                  WHan Phebus the crabbe had
nere his cours ronne
               And toward ye Leon his Iourney
gan take
               To loke on Pyctagoras ſpere / 
I had begonne
               ¶Syttyng all ſolytary allone beſyde a lake.
               ¶Muſyng on a maner how y• I myght make.
               ¶Reaſon and ſenſualyte in one to accorde.
               ¶But I coude not bryng about ye manacorde.
            
            
               ¶For longe er I myght ſlepe me gan oppres
               ¶So ponderouſly I coud make none obſtacle
               ¶In myne hede was fall ſuche an heuineſſe.
               ¶I was fayne to drawe to myne habytacle.
               ¶To rowne wt a pylow me ſemyd beſt tryacle.
               ¶So leyde I me downe my dyſeaſe to releue.
               ¶Anone cam in Morpleus & toke me by ye ſleue
            
            
               ¶And as I ſoo lay halfe in a traunſe
               ¶Twene ſlepyng & wakyng he bad me aryſe.
               ¶For he ſayd I muſt yeue attendaunce.
               ¶To the grete Courte of Mynes the Iuſtyſe.
               ¶Me nought auayled ayene hym to ſylogyſe.
               ¶For hit is oft ſayd by hem that yet lyues.
               ¶He muſt nedes go that the deuell dryues.
            
            
               ¶Whan I ſee noo better but I muſt go.
               ¶I ſayd I was redy at his cōmaundement.
               ¶Wheder that he wolde me lede to or fro.
               
                  
¶Soo vp I aroſe and forth with hym went.
               ¶Tyll he had me brought to the parlament.
               ¶Where Pluto ſate and kepte is eſtate.
               ¶And with hym Mynos the Iuge deſperate.
            
            
               ¶But as we thyderwarde went by the way.
               ¶I hym beſought his name me to tell.
               ¶Morpleus he ſayde thou me call may.
               ¶A ſyr ſayde I than where do ye dwell.
               ¶In heuen or in erthe eyther elles in hell.
               ¶Nay he ſayde myn abydyng moſt comonly
               ¶Is in a lytyll corner called fantaſy.
            
            
               ¶And as ſone as he thyſe wordes had ſayd.
               ¶Cerberus the porter of hell wt his cheyne.
               ¶Brought theder Colus ī ragges euyll arayd
               ¶Agaȳ whom Neptunꝰ & Dyana dyd cōpeȳt
               ¶Saynge thus O Mynos yu Iuge ſouerayn.
               ¶Gyue thy cruel iugemēt ayē this traytour ſo
               ¶y• we may haue cauſe to preyſe thy lord Pluto
            
            
               ¶Then was there made a proclamacyon.
               ¶In Plutoos name cōmaunded ſcylence.
               ¶Vpon the payn of ſtrayt correccyon.
               ¶y• Dyana & Neptunꝰ might haue audience.
               ¶To declare her grefe of the grete offence.
               ¶To hem do by Colus wheron they cōpl
                     •
                  ined
               ¶And to begyn Dyana was conſtreyned.
            
            
               ¶Whyche thus begyn as ye ſhall here.
               
                  
¶Saynge in this wyſe. O thou lorde Pluto.
               ¶Wyth thy iuge Mynos ſyttyng wt the in fere
               ¶Execute your fury vpon Colus ſoo.
               ¶Accordyng to thofence that he to me hath do
               ¶That I haue no cauſe forther to appele.
               ¶Whyche yf I do ſhall not be for youre wele.
            
            
               ¶Remembre fyrſt how I a goddeſſe pure.
               ¶Ouer all deſertes / foreſtes and chaces.
               ¶Haue the guydynge and vnder my cure.
               ¶This traytour colus hath mani of nu places
               ¶Deſtroyd wt his blaſtes & daily me manaces
               ¶Where ony wood is he ſhall make it playne.
               ¶If he to his lyberte may reſorte ageyne
            
            
               ¶The greteſt trees that ony man may fynde
               ¶In foreſt to ſhade the dere for her comforte.
               ¶He breketh hē aſōder or rendith he rote & rīde
               ¶Out of the erthe this is his dyſporte.
               ¶So that the deere ſhall haue noo reſorte.
               ¶Wythin ſhorte tyme to noo maner ſhade
               ¶Where thorough the game is lykly to fade.
            
            
               ¶Which to my name a reproche ſynguler.
               ¶Sholde be for euer whyle the worlde laſte.
               ¶And to all the goddes an hygh dyſpleyſer.
               ¶To ſee the game ſoo deſtroyed by his blaſte.
               ¶Wherfore a remedy puruey in haſte.
               ¶And lete hym be punyſſhed after his offence.
               ¶Couſyder the cryme and yeue your ſentence.
            
            
               
               ¶And whan Dyana had made her compleȳt
               ¶To mynos the Iuge in Plutoos preſence.
               ¶Came forth Neptunꝰ wt vyſage pale & feynt
               ¶Deſyrynge of fauour to haue audyence.
               ¶Saynge thus Pluto to thy magnyfycence.
               ¶I ſhall reherce what this creature.
               ¶Colus hath done me out of meſure.
            
            
               ¶Thou knoweſt well that I haue the charge
               ¶Ouer all the ſe and therof god I am.
               ¶No ſhyp may ſayl Keruel / bote ne barge.
               ¶Grete karyk nor hulke wt ony lyuyng man.
               ¶But he haue my ſaueconduyte than.
               ¶who me offendith wythin my Iuryſdyccyon▪
               
               ¶O wyth to ſubmyt him to my correccyon.
            
            
               ¶But in aſmoche as it is now ſoo.
               ¶That ye hym here haue as your pryſonēre
               ¶I ſhall ſhew my compleynt ſoo.
               ¶wherfore I pray you that ye wyll here.
               ¶And let hȳ not eſcape out of your daungerē.
               ¶Tyl he haue made full ſethe & recompence
               ¶For hurt of my name thrugh his grete offēce
            
            
               ¶Fyrſt to begyn this Colus hath ofte.
               ¶Made me to retorne mi courſe agein nature.
               ¶wyth his grete blaſtes whan he hath be alofte
               ¶And charged me to labour fer out of meſure
               ¶yt it was gtete merueyl how I might endure
               ¶The com of my ſwete wyll teſtyfy.
               
                  
¶That on the ſe bankes lye beten full hye.
            
            
               ¶Secundly where my nature is.
               ¶Both to eb & flowe aud ſo thy courſe to kepe.
               ¶Ofte of myne entent hath he made me mys
               ¶where as I ſhulde haue fylled dykes depe.
               ¶At a full water I myght not theder crepe.
               ¶Before my ſeaſon came to returne ageyn.
               ¶And than went I faſter than i wold certayn
            
            
               ¶Thus he hathme dryuen ayen myn entente
               ¶And contrary to my courſe naturall.
               ¶where I ſhuld haue be he made me abſente
               ¶To my grete dyſhonour & in eſpecyall.
               ¶Oo thynge he vſed that worſt was of all.
               ¶For where I my ſauegard graunted
               ¶Ay in that coſte he comonly haunted
            
            
               ¶Of very pure malyce and ſylfwyll.
               ¶Theym to deſtroy in dyſpyte of me.
               ¶To whome I promiſed doth in gode & yll.
               ¶For to be her protectour in all aduerſyte.
               ¶That to theym ſhulde fall vpon theſe.
               ¶And euen ſodenly or they coud beware
               ¶wyth a ſodeyn pyry he lapped theym in care.
            
            
               ¶And full oft ſyth wyth hys boyſtous blaſte.
               ¶Or they myght bewar̄ he drof hē on ye ſond
               ¶And other whyle he brake top ſayl & maſte.
               ¶which cauſed theī to peryſſh or thei cā to lond
               
                  
¶Then curſed they the tyme yt euēr thei me fād
               ¶Thus amonge the people loſt is my name.
               ¶And ſo by his labour put I am to blame.
            
            
               ¶Conſyder this mater and ponder my caſe.
               ¶Tender my compleynt as rygure requyreth
               ¶Shew forth youre ſencence wt a breef clauſe
               ¶I may not longe tary the tyme faſt expyreth
               ¶The offence is grete wherfore it deſyreth.
               ¶The more greuous payn and haſty iugemēt
               ¶For offence don wylfully wyl non auyſement
            
            
               And whā ye god pluto a whyl had hī bethought
               ¶He rowned wt mynos what was to do.
               ¶Then he ſayde openly loke thou fayl nought
               ¶Thy ſentence to yeue wythoute fauoore ſoo.
               ¶Lyke as thou haſt herde the cauſes the too.
               ¶And ſo euenly dele twene thiſe partyey twein
               ¶That none of hē haue caſe on ye other cōpleint
            
            
               ¶Thenne ſayd mynos full indyfferently.
               ¶To Dyana & Neptunus is there ony more.
               ¶That ye wyll declare ageyn hym openly.
               ¶Nay in dede they ſayd we kepe none in ſtore / 
               ¶we haue ſayd Inough to punyſſhe hym fore
               ¶If ye in this mater be not parcyall.
               ¶Remembre your name was wont to be egall
            
            
               ¶Well than ſayd Mynos now let vs ſee.
               ¶What this boyſtous Colus for hȳſelf cay ſay
               
                  
¶For here / Prima facie to vs doth appere.
               ¶That he hath offended no man can ſay naye
               ¶wherfore thou Colꝰ wythoute more delaye
               ¶Shape vs an anſwere to thyne accuſemente
               ¶And elles I muſt procede vpon thy iugemēt
            
            
               ¶And euen as colus was onward to haue ſaid
               ¶For his excuſe / came in a meſſengere.
               ¶Fro god Appolo to Pluto and hym prayde.
               ¶On his behalfe that he wythoute daungere
               ¶wolde to hym come & brȳge wyth hym in fere
               ¶Dyana and Neptunus vnto his banket
               ¶And yf they dyſdeyned hȳſelf he wold hē fet.
            
            
               ¶Moreouer he ſayde to god Appolo
               ¶Deſyred to haue reſpyte of the iugemente
               ¶Of Colus bothe of Mynos and Pluto
               ¶So Dyana & Neptunꝰ were therwith cōtēt
               ¶And yf they were dyſpoſed to aſſente
               ¶That he myght come vnto his preſente
               ¶He it deſyred to knowe his offence
            
            
               ¶What ſay ye herto ſayd Pluto to hem tweyn
               ¶wyll ye both aſſente that it ſhal be thus
               ¶ye ſayd the goddeſſe for my parte certeyne
               ¶And I alſo ſayd this Neptunus
               ¶I am well pleſid quod this Colus
               ¶And whan they had a whyle thꝰ togy d ſpoke
               ¶Pluto commaunded the court to be broke
            
            
               
               ¶And than togeder went they in fere.
               ¶Pluto and Neptunus ledynge the goddeſſe
               ¶whome folowed Cerberus wt his pryſonere.
               ¶And alderlaſt wyth grete heuyneſſe.
               ¶Came I and Morpleus to the fortereſſe.
               ¶Of the god appolo vnto his banket.
               ¶where many goddes and goddeſſes met.
            
            
               ¶Whan Appolo ſe that they were come.
               ¶He was ryght glad & prayed theym to ſyt.
               ¶Nay ſayd Dyana this is all and ſome.
               ¶ye ſhall me pardone I ſhall not ſyt yet.
               ¶I ſhall fyrſte know why Colus abyde.
               ¶And what execucyon ſhall on hym be doo
               ¶For his offence / well ſayd Appollo.
            
            
               ¶Madame ye ſhall haue all your pleſere.
               ¶Syth that it wyll none other wyſe be.
               ¶But fyſte I pray you let me ye mater here
               ¶why he is brought in this perplexyte.
               ¶well ſayd Pluto that ſhall ye ſone ſe.
               ¶And gan to declare euen by and by.
               ¶Bothe theyr complayntes ordynatly.
            
            
               ¶And whan Appolo had herd the reporte
               ¶Of Pluto in a maner ſmylynge he ſayd.
               ¶I ſe well Colus thou haſt ſmall comforte.
               ¶Thy ſelfe to excuſe thoumayſt be dyſmayde.
               ¶For to here ſo grete cōpleyntes ayen the layd
               ¶And notwythſtondyng if thou can ſay ought
               
                  
¶For thyne own wele ſay and tary nought
            
            
               ¶Nota
               
                  ¶Forſoth ſayd Colus yf I had reſpyte.
                  ¶Hereto an anſwere cowd I counterfete.
                  ¶But to haue her grace more is my delyte.
                  ¶wherfore I pray you all for me entrete.
                  That I may by your req̄ſt her gode grace gete
                  ¶And what payn or greef ye for me prouyde
                  ¶wythout ony grutchyng I ſhall it abyde.
               
               
                  ¶Lo good dame ſayd god Appollo.
                  ¶what may he do more but ſew to your grace.
                  ¶Beholde how the teres from his eyen goo.
                  ¶It is ſatyſfaction half for his treſpace.
                  ¶Now gloryoꝰ goddes ſhew your petioꝰ face
                  ¶To this pore pryſoner at my requeſt.
                  ¶All we for youre honour thynke thus is beſt.
               
               
                  ¶And yf it lyke you to do in thys wyſe.
                  ¶And ſo to foryeue hym clerely his offence.
                  ¶One thynge ſurely I wyll you promyſe.
                  ¶If he ought rebell and make reſyſtence
                  ¶Or dyſobey vnto your ſencence.
                  ¶For euery tree that he maketh fall.
                  ¶Out of the erthe an / C / ryſe ſhall.
               
               
                  ¶Soo that youre game ſhall not dyſcreaſe
                  ¶For lacke of ſhade i dare vndertake
                  ¶well ſyr Appolo ſayd ſhe than wyll I ceaſe
                  ¶Off all my rancour and mercy wt you make
                  
                     
¶And than god Neptunus of his maner ſpak
                  ¶Sayng thꝰ appolo though dyana him releſe
                  ¶yet ſhall he ſue to me to haue his peaſe.
               
               
                  ¶A ſayd Appolo ye wende I had forgete.
                  ¶You for my lady Dyana the goddeſſe.
                  ¶Nay thynke not ſo for I wyll you entrete.
                  ¶As well as her wythoute longe proceſſe.
                  ¶wyll ye agre that Phebus your mayſtreſſe.
                  ¶May haue the guydyng of your varyaunce.
                  ¶I ſhall abyde quod he / her ordynaunce.
               
               
                  ¶Wel than quod appolo I pray you goddꝭ all
                  ¶And goddeſſes that ben here preſente.
                  ¶That ye companable wyll a borde falle.
                  ¶Nay than ſayd Othea it is not conuenyente.
                  ¶A dew ordre in euery place is expedyente.
                  ¶To be hadde wherfore ye may not lette.
                  ¶To be your own marſhal at your own bāket
               
               
                  ¶And whan appolo ſe it wolde none other be
                  ¶He called to hym Aurora the goddeſſe.
                  ¶And ſayd though ye wepe ye ſhall before me.
                  ¶Ay kepe your courſe and put yourſelf in p̄ſſe
                  ¶Soo he her ſet fyrſte at his owne meſſe.
                  ¶wyth her moyſt clothes wt teres all be ſpreȳt
                  ¶The medewes in may ſnew therof her cōpleīt
               
               
                  ¶Dext her ſat Mars myghty god and ſtrong
                  ¶wyth a flamme of fyre enuyroned all aboeut
                  
                     
¶A crown o yron on his hede a ſpere ī his hōd
                  ¶It ſemed by his chē as he wold haue fought.
                  ¶And next vnto hym as I perceyue mought.
                  ¶Sat ye goddeſſe Dyana in a mantell fyne.
                  ¶Of black ſylke purfyled wt poudred ermine
               
               
                  ¶Lyke as he had take ye mantell & the rynge
                  ¶And next vnto her arayed roally.
                  ¶Sat the god Iupyter in his demenynge.
                  ¶Full ſad and wyſe he ſemed ſykerly.
                  ¶A crowne of tynne ſtood on his hede.
                  ¶And that I recorde of all phyloſophers.
                  ¶y• lytyll ſtore of Coyne kepe in her cofres.
               
               
                  ¶Ioyned to hȳ in ſyttyng next there was
                  ¶The goddeſſe Iuno full rychely beſene.
                  ¶In a ſercote yt ſhone as bryght as glas
                  Of goldſmyth werk wt ſpāgles wrought beden̄
                  
                  ¶Of royall ryches wanted ſhe none I wene.
                  ¶And next to her ſat the god ſaturne.
                  ¶That oft ſyth cauſeth many one to morne.
               
               
                  ¶But he was clad me thought ſtraungely
                  ¶For of froſte & ſnowe was all his aray.
                  ¶In his honde he helde a fawchon all blody
                  ¶It ſemed by his chere as he wold make a frai
                  ¶A baudryck of Iſykles about his neckegaye
                  ¶He had. and aboue on hygh on his hede.
                  ¶Couchid wt hayl ſtōes he wered a croū of lede
               
               
                  
                  ¶And nexte in ordre was ſet by his ſyde.
                  ¶Ceres the goddeſſe in a garmente.
                  ¶Of ſacke cloth made wt ſleues large & wyde
                  ¶Embrowdered wyth ſheues and ſycles bent
                  ¶Of all maner greynes ſhe ſealed ye patente.
                  ¶In token y• ſhe was goddes of corne.
                  ¶Olde Poetes ſaye ſhe beryth the herueſt horn
               
               
                  ¶Then was there ſet the god cupydo.
                  ¶All freſſhe & galaunte and coſtly in aray.
                  ¶Wyth ouches and rynges he was beſet ſo.
                  ¶ye paleys therof ſhōn as though it had be day
                  ¶A kerchyff of pleſaūs ſtood ouer his helm ay
                  ¶The goddeſſe Ceres he loked in the face.
                  ¶And wyth one arme he her dyde enbrace.
               
               
                  ¶Next to Cupido in order by and by
                  ¶Of wordly wyſdum ſat the fortereſſe.
                  ¶Called Othea chyef grounde of polycy.
                  ¶Reuler of knyghthode of prudence ye goddes
                  ¶Clad all in purpure was ſhe more & leſſe.
                  ¶Saaf on her hede a crowne there ſtode.
                  ¶Couched wyth perles oryent fyne & good.
               
               
                  ¶And nexte to her was god Pluto ſet
                  ¶Wyth a derke myſte enuyrond al about.
                  ¶His clothy was made of a ſmoky net.
                  ¶His colour was bothe wythin & wythoute.
                  ¶Foule / derke & dȳme his eyen grete & ſtoute.
                  ¶Of fyre & ſulfure all his odoure waſe.
                  
                     
¶That wo was me whyle I beheld his face
               
               
                  ¶Fortune the goddeſſe wt her perty face.
                  ¶Was vnto Pluto next in order ſette.
                  ¶Varyant ſhe was ay in ſhorte ſpace.
                  ¶Her whele was redy to turne wythout let.
                  ¶Her gowne was of gawdy grene clamelet
                  ¶Chaungeable of ſondry dyuerſe colours.
                  ¶To ye condycyons accordȳg to her ſhoures
               
               
                  ¶And by her ſat thoughe he vnworthy were.
                  ¶The rewde god Pan of ſhepherdes y• gyde
                  ¶Clad in ruſſet freſe & breched lyke a bere.
                  ¶Wyth a grete terbox hangyng by his ſyde.
                  ¶A ſhepcrok in his hōd he ſpared for no pryde.
                  ¶And by his fete lay a prekered curre.
                  ¶He rateled in ye throte as he had ye murre.
               
               
                  ¶Iſys the goddes bare hym company.
                  ¶For at the table next ſhe ſat by his ſyde.
                  ¶In a cloſe kyr ell embrowdered curyouſly
                  ¶wt braunches and leues brood large & wyde.
                  ¶Grene as any graſſe in ye ſomer tyde.
                  ¶Of all maner frute ſhe had the gouernaunce
                  ¶Of fauours odyferous was her ſuſtynauns
               
               
                  ¶Next to her than was god Neptunus ſet.
                  ¶He ſauoured lyke a fyſſher 
                        〈…〉
                      before
                  ¶It ſemed by his clothes as they had be wet.
                  About hȳ ī his gyrde
                        •
                     ſted hīg fyſſhes mani a xx
                  
                     
¶Of his ſtraunge aray merueyled I ſore.
                  ¶A ſhyp wyth a top and ſayle was hys creſte.
                  ¶Me thought he was gayly dyſgyſed at ye feſt
               
               
                  ¶Than toke mynerue the goddes her ſete.
                  ¶Ioyntly to Neptunus all in curas cladde.
                  ¶Gaūtelettis on hōdes & ſabatoūs on her fete
                  ¶She loked about as though ſhe had be mad.
                  ¶An hamer and a ſythe on her hede ſhe hadde
                  ¶She wered two bokelers one by her ſyde.
                  ¶that other ye wote were this was al her prīd
               
               
                  ¶Thā cam ye god bachꝰ & by her ſet hȳ doun
                  ¶Holdynge in his honde a cuppe full of wyne.
                  ¶Of grene vyne leues he wered a Ioly croun
                  ¶He was clad in cluſtres of grapes gode & fine
                  ¶A garlonde of yuy he choſe for his ſygne.
                  ¶On his hede he had a thredbare kēdall hode.
                  ¶A gymlot and a fauſet therupon ſtode.
               
               
                  ¶Next hym ſat phebus wyth her colour pale.
                  ¶Fat ſhe was of face but oſ complexon feynte.
                  She ſayd ſherewled Neptunꝰp & made hȳ vayl
                  ¶And ones in ye monthe wt phebꝰ was ſhe meīt
                  ¶Alſo ne were ſhe Ceres were ateynte
                  ¶Thus ſhe ſat & tolde the myght of her nature
                  ¶& on her hede ſhe wered a croun of ſiluer pure
               
               
                  ¶Ioyntly to her Marcuryus toke his ſee.
                  ¶As came to his cours wytneſſe the zodyake.
                  
                     
¶He had a gylden tonge as fyll for his degree
                  ¶In eloquence of langage he paſſed al y• pake
                  ¶For in his talkyng noman coud fynde lake
                  ¶A box wyth quyckſyluer he had in his honde / 
                  ¶Multyplyers know it wel in euery londe
               
               
                  ¶By hym ſat dame Venꝰ wt colour cryſtalline
                  ¶Whos long here ſhone as wyre of gold bryȝt
                  ¶Cryſpe was her ſkyn her eyen columbyne
                  ¶Rauyſſhed myne herte her chere was ſo lyȝt
                  ¶Patrones of pleſaūce be named wel ſhe myȝt
                  ¶A ſmocke was her wede garnyſſhed curyuſli
                  ¶But all other ſhe had a wanton eye
               
               
                  ¶On her hede ſhe wered a red coper crowne
                  ¶A noſegay ſhe had made ful pleſauntly
                  ¶Bytwene her & aurora Apollo ſet hym doune
                  ¶Wyth his beames bryght he ſhone ſo feruētly
                  ¶That he therwyth gladyd al ye company
                  ¶A crown of pure gold was on his hede ſet
                  ¶In ſyne yt he was mayſter & lorde of y• banket
               
            
            
               ¶Nota
               
                  ¶Thus was the table ſet round aboute
                  ¶Wyth goddes & goddeſſes as i haue you told
                  ¶Awaytyng on the bord was a grete route
                  ¶Of ſage phyloſophers & poetes many fold
                  ¶There was ſad Sychero & Aryſtotle olde
                  ¶Tholome Dorothe wyth Dyogenes
                  ¶Plato Myſſehala and wyſe Socrates
               
               
                  
                  ¶Sortes & Saphdrꝰ wt hermes ſtode behynd
                  ¶Auycen & Aueroys wyth hem were in fere
                  ¶Galyen & ypocras that phyſyk haue in mynd
                  ¶wyth help of Eſculapyō toward hē drowner
                  ¶Vyrgyle Orace Ouyd and Omere
                  ¶Euclyde and albert yaue her attendaunce
                  ¶To do the goddꝭ & goddeſſes pleſaunce
               
               
                  ¶Horeberded Orpheus was there wt his harpe.
                  ¶And as a poyt muſycal made he melody
                  Other mīſtral had thei non ſaf Pan gā to carpe
                  ¶Of his leud bagpyp which cauſed ye compani
                  ¶To law yet many mo ther wē yf i ſhuld notly
                  ¶Som yong ſom old both better and werſe
                  ¶But mo of theyr names can I not reherce
               
               
                  ¶Of al maner deyntes there was habūdaūce
                  ¶Of metes & drynkes foyſon plenteuous
                  ¶In cam Dyſcord to haue varyaunce
                  ¶But there was no roum to ſet her ī that hous
                  ¶The goddis remembred the ſcyſme odious
                  ¶Among the thre goddeſſes yt he had wrought
                  ¶At the feſt of Peleus wherfore they thought
               
               
                  ¶They wold not wt her dele in a venture
                  ¶Leſt ſhe hem brought to ſom inconuenyente
                  ¶She ſeyng this was wroth out of me
                        •
                     ure
                  ¶And in that grete wrath out of ye paleyſe wēt
                  ¶Saȳg to herſelf that chere ſhuld thei repent
                  ¶And anone wt Attropes happed ſhe to mete.
                  
                     
¶As he had ben a goſt came in a wȳdȳg ſhete
               
               
                  ¶She toke hymby ye hond & rowned in his ere
                  ¶And told hy of the banket y• was ſo delycate.
                  How ſhe was receyued & what chere ſhe had yere
                  ¶And how euery god ſat in his aſtate
                  ¶Is it thus qd attropos what in ye deuyls date
                  ¶well he ſayd I ſe well how the game goth
                  ¶Ones yet for your ſake ſhal I make hē wroth
               
               
                  ¶And whan ſhe had hym al togyder told
                  ¶From her he departed & of her toke his leue / 
                  ¶Sayng yt for her ſake his way take he wolde
                  ¶In to the paleyſ his maters to meue
                  ¶And or he thens went he trowed hē to greue.
                  ¶wyth ſuch tydynges as he wold hem 
                        •
                     el
                  ¶So forth he went & ſpake wordes fell
               
               
                  ¶Whan he came in the p̄ſence of ye goddis alle
                  ¶As he had ben mad he loked hym a bout
                  ¶His ſhete from his body downe he let fall
                  ¶And on a reud maner he ſaluted al the route
                  ¶wyth a bold voys ſpekyng wordes ſtoute
                  ¶But he ſpake all holow as it had ben one
                  ¶Had ſpoke in a nother world y• had wo begon
               
               
                  ¶He ſtode forth boldly wt grym countenaūce
                  ¶Sayng on this wyſe as ye ſhal here
                  ¶All ye goddes yeue attendaunce
                  ¶Vnto my wordes wtout all daungere
               
               
                  
                  ¶Remembre how ye made me your offycere
                  ¶Al tho wyth my darte fynally to chaſtyſe
                  ¶That yu / dyſobeyed or wolde your law dyſpiſe
               
               
                  ¶And for the more ſurete ſeiled my patent
                  ¶Gyuyng me full power ſo to ocupy
                  ¶Wherto I haue enployed myn entent
                  ¶And that can dame Nature teſtefy
                  ¶If ſhe be examyned ſhe wyll not it denye
                  ¶For whan ſhe forſakyth ony creature
                  ¶I am al redy to take hȳ to my cure
               
               
                  ¶Thus haue I deuly wyth al mi dylygence.
                  ¶Executed the offyce of olde antyquyte
                  ¶To me by you graūted by your comyn ſētēce
                  ¶For I ſpared none hygh nor low degre
                  ¶So that on my parte no faute hath be
                  ¶For as ſone as ony to me commytted was
                  ¶I ſmote hȳ to ye hert he had none other grace
               
               
                  ¶Ector of Troy for al his cheualry
                  ¶Alexander thegre te & myghty conqueroure
                  ¶Iulyus Cezar wt al his companye
                  ¶Dauyd nor Ioſue nor worthy Artur
                  ¶Charlis the noble that was ſo gret of honour
                  ¶Nor Iudas Machabee for al his trew herte
                  ¶Nor Godfrey of Boleyn coud me not aſterte
               
               
                  ¶Nabugodonozor for al his grete pryde
                  ¶Nor the kyng of Egypt cruel Pharao
                  
                     
¶Iaſon ne Hercules wēnt they neuer ſo wyde.
                  ¶Coſdras Hanyball nor gentyll Sypyo.
                  ¶Cyrus Achylles nor many a nother mo
                  ¶for fayr nor foule gat of me no grace
                  ¶But al be at ye laſt I ſeaſed hem wt my mace.
               
               
                  ¶Thus haue I brought euery creature
                  ¶To an ende bothman fyſſhe foule and beſt
                  And euery other thyng in whomedame nature
                  ¶Hath ony Iuryſdyccion eyther moſt or leſt
                  ¶Except oonly one in whome your be heſt
                  ¶Is to me broke for ye me promyſed
                  That my myght of non̄ ſhold haue be dyſpyſed
               
               
                  ¶Wherof the aontrary daoe I well a uow
                  ¶Is trew for one there is that wyl not apply
                  ¶Vnto my correction nor in no wyſe bow
                  ¶To the dynt of my darte for dole nor deſteny.
                  ¶What comfort he hath nor the cauſe why
                  ¶That he ſo rebellyth I can yot thynk of ryȝt
                  But yf ye hȳ graūted your alders ſafcondyght.
               
               
                  ¶And yf he ſo haue than do ye not as goddis.
                  ¶For a goddys wrytyng may not reuerſed be.
                  ¶yf it ſhold I wold not gyue you ii peſecoddꝭ
                  ¶For grāut of your patent of offycenere of fee.
                  ¶wherfdre in this mater do me equyte
                  ¶Accerd&g to my patent for tyl this be do
                  ¶ye haue nomore my ſeruyſe nor my gode wy
               
               
                  
                  ¶And whan al the goddis had attropos hered
                  ¶As they had ben wode brayd vp attones
                  ¶& ſayd they wold not reſt tyll he were conq̄red
                  ¶Taken an dyſtroyed body blode and bones
                  ¶And that they ſwere grete othes for ye noms
                  ¶Her lad to dyſpyce that was ſo malapert
                  ¶They ſayd he ſhuld be taught for to be ſo pert
               
               
                  ¶Wel ſayd Appollo yf he on erth be
                  ¶wyth my brennyng chare I ſhall hȳ cōfound
                  ¶In feyth quod neptunus & he kepe theſe
                  ¶He may be well ſure he ſhall be drownd
                  ¶A ſy rſayd Mars this haue we wel found
                  ¶That ony dyſubeyed oure goodly precept
                  ¶We may well thynk we haue to long ſlept
               
               
                  ¶But neuertheles where I may hym fynd
                  ¶wyth thūd & lyghtning about I ſhall hȳ chaſe
                  ¶And I quod Saturnus before and behynd.
                  ¶wt my bytte cold ſhall ſhew hȳ harde grace
                  ¶well ſayd Mercuryus yf I may ſe his face.
                  ¶For euer of his ſpech I ſhall hym depryur
                  ¶So that hym were better dede than alyue
               
               
                  ¶Ye quod Othea yet may he well be
                  ¶In the eyr where he wyll & ax you no leue
                  ¶wherfore my counſeyl is that all we
                  ¶May entrete Neptunꝰ his rahcour foryeue.
                  ¶And than I dout not Colus wyl hȳ myſcheus
                  ¶So may ye be ſure he ſoal you not eſcape
                  
                     
¶& ellis. of you anger he wyll make but a iape.
               
               
                  ¶But for to tel you how Colus was brought.
                  ¶In daungere of Pluto yei had I forget
                  ¶wherfore on this mater forther wyl I nouȝt.
                  ¶Procede tyll I therof haue knowlege you let
                  ¶It beſell on a day the weder was wete
                  ¶And Colus thought he wold on his dyſport.
                  ¶Goo tn reioyſe his ſpyrytis and comforte
               
               
                  ¶He thought he wold ſe what was in ye groūd
                  ¶And in a krauers forth he gan hym dreſſe
                  ¶A drough had the erthe late before found.
                  ¶That cauſed it to chyne & krauy more & leſſe / 
                  ¶Sodenly by wete conſtreyned by dureſſe
                  ¶Was the ground to cloſe his ſuꝑfycyall face.
                  ¶So ſtreyt that to ſcape colꝰ had noo ſpace
               
               
                  ¶This ſeyng Colus be ſtyll wythin abode.
                  ¶Sekȳg where he myȝt haue gene fer or nere.
                  ¶Auone he was eſpyed and one to Pluto rode
                  ¶And told hȳ how Colus was in his daūgere
                  ¶Than ſayd he to Cerberꝰ fet me y• pryſonere / 
                  ¶Tyl I haue hȳ ſene let hȳ not go at large / 
                  ¶As ye wylt anſwere of hem I yeue the charge
               
               
                  ¶Thus was this Colus take pryſonere
                  ¶Than happed it ſo that thhſame day
                  ¶Pluto had prefyxed for a grete mater
                  ¶Mynos to ſyt in his robe of Ray
                  
                     
¶Wherfore Cerberꝰ toke the next way
                  ¶And led hȳ to the place where the court ſhalbe
                  ¶where I told you Morpleus brought me
               
               
                  ¶So thyder came Dyaua caryed in carre
                  ¶To make her compleynt as I told you all
                  ¶And ſo dyd Neptunus yt doth make and mar
                  ¶Walewyng wt his wawys & tōblyng as a ball
                  ¶Her matters they meued fal what may befall
                  ¶There was the fyrſt ſyght y• euer I them ſaw
                  ¶And yf I neuer do eft I care not a ſtraw
               
               
                  ¶But now to my matter retourne agayn
                  ¶And tu begyn new where I left.
                  ¶whan al the goddis had done her beſy payne.
                  ¶The way to contryue how it ſhuld be reft
                  ¶Of his lyf Attropos had no cauſe eft
                  ¶To cōpleyn than Phebus ſtert vpon her fete / 
                  ¶And ſayd I pray you let me ſpeke a word yet
               
               
                  ¶Othea menyth wel to ſay on this wyſe
                  ¶But al to entret Neptunꝰ thope ſhall notnede
                  ¶Me ſemyth I alone durſt take ye entespriſe.
                  ¶Er I am begyled or ellie I ſhal ſpede
                  ¶How ſay ye Neptunus ſhal I do this dede.
                  ¶Wyl ye your rancour ſeale at my requeſt
                  ¶Madame quod he reule me as ye lykyth beſt
               
               
                  ¶G ramercy ſayd ſhe of your good wyll
                  ¶That it pleyſyth you to ſhew methatfauorus
                  
                     
¶Wherfore the goddys hygh pleyſur to fulfyll
                  ¶Performe my deſyre & leue al olde rancoure
                  ¶For our elders wele & ſauyng of oure honour
                  ¶Agayn this colus that ye long haue had
                  ¶It is done quod he forſoth than am I gladd
               
               
                  ¶Sayd he now than Colus be yu to vs trewe
                        •
                     
                  
                  ¶Kepe well the eyr and oure grete rebell
                  ¶May we than ſone euer to vs ſubdew
                  ¶Yes and that quod Colus ſhall here tell
                  ¶No where in the eyr shall he reſt nor dwel
                  ¶If he do ther of put me in the faute
                  ¶Wyth my bytter blaſtes ſo ſhal I hȳ aſaut
               
               
                  ¶What ſayd the god Pluto what is his name.
                  ¶That thus preſumyth agayn vs to rebell
                  ¶Vertu quod attropes yt haue he mykyl ſhame
                  ¶He is neuer confoūded thus of hȳ here I tell
                  ¶A ſayd this pluto in dede I know hȳ wel
                  ¶Ho hath ben euer myn vtter ennemye
                  ¶Wherfore this mater agayn hȳ take wyll I
               
               
                  ¶For all the baytes yt we for hym haue layde
                  ¶Wythout my helpe be not worth a pere
                  ¶For though ye all the contrary had ſayd
                  ¶yet wold he brede right nigh your althris ere
                  ¶No maner of thynge can hym hurt or dere
                  ¶Saue only a ſone of my baſtard
                  ¶Whos name is vice he kepyth my vawarad.
               
               
                  
                  ¶Wherfore you Cerberꝰ now I the charge
                  ¶Of Colus & wyl that thou heder fet
                  ¶My dere ſone Vyce & ſay that I hȳ charge.
                  ¶That he to me come wythout ony let
                  ¶Armed at all poyntes for a day is ſet
                  ¶That he wt Vertu for al ye goddis ſake
                  ¶In our defence muſt on hym batayl take.
               
               
                  ¶Forth then went Cerberus we his fyry chein
                  ¶Brought thyd vyce as he cōmaūded was
                  ¶Agayn noble Vertu ye batayl to dereygne
                  ¶On a glydȳg ſerpent rydȳge a grete pace
                  ¶Formed lyke a dragon ſcaled hard as glas
                  ¶whoos mouth flammed fyre weout fayll
                  ¶wyngꝭ had it ſerpentyne & a long tayll
               
               
                  ¶Armed was vyce all in cure boyll
                  ¶Harde as horne blacker fer than ſute
                  ¶An vngoodly ſort folowed hym perde
                  ¶Of vnhappy capteyns of myſchyfe crop & rot
                  ¶Pryde was the fyrſt y• next hȳ rode god wote
                  ¶On a roryng Lyon next whom̄ came Enuye
                  ¶Syttyng on wolfe he had a ſcornful eye
               
               
                  ¶Wrath beſtrode a wyld bore & next hȳ gā ride.
                  ¶In his hond he bare a blody ſwerd
                  ¶Next whom cam couetiſe y•goth ſo fer & wide
                  ¶Rydȳg on a Olyfaūt as he had ben a ferd
                  ¶After whom rode Gloteny wyth his fat berd
                  ¶Syttyng on a bere wyth his grete bely
                  
                     
¶And next hȳ on a gote folowed Lechery
               
               
                  ¶Sloth was ſo ſlepy he came all behynd
                  ¶On a dull aſſe a full wery paſe
                  ¶Thyſe were ye capteins that vyce coud fynde
                  ¶Beſt to ſet his feld & folowon the chaſe
                  ¶As for pety capteyns many mo there was
                  ¶As ſacrylege ſymony & dyſſymulacyon
                  ¶Manſlaughter mordre theft & extorcyon
               
               
                  ¶Arrogaūce Preſūpcyon wyth contumact
                  ¶Contēpcyon Cōtempt & Inobedyence
                  ¶Malyle Frowardnes grete Ielaſy
                  ¶wodnes Hate Stryf and Impacyence
                  ¶Vnkyndnes Opp̄ſſyon wt wofull neglygēce.
                  ¶Murmur Myſchef Falſhod & detraccyon
                  ¶Vſury Periury Ly and adulacyon
               
               
                  ¶Wrong Rauyne Sturdy vyolence
                  ¶Fals Iugement wt Obſtynacyon
                  ¶Dyſceyt Dronknes & Improuydence.
                  ¶Boldnes in yll wt foule and Rybaudy.
                  ¶Fornycacyon Inceſt and Auoutry
                  ¶Vnſhamfaſtnes wt Prodygalyte
                  ¶Blaſfeme vaynglory & worldly vanyte
               
               
                  ¶Ignoraūce Dyffydence wt Ipocryſy
                  ¶Scyſme Rancour Debate and Offence
                  ¶Herely Errour wt Idolatry.
                  ¶New fangylnes and ſotyll falſe Pretence
                  
                     
¶Iordynat deſyre of worldly excellence
                  ¶Fayned pouerte wyth apoſtaſy
                  ¶Dyſclaunder ſcorn & vnkynd Ielouſy
               
               
                  ¶Hoordom baudry falſe mayntenaunce
                  ¶Treyſon abuſyon and pety brybry
                  ¶Vſurpacyon wt horryble vengaunce
                  ¶Came alder laſt of that company
                  ¶All thyſe pety capetayns folowed by and by.
                  ¶Shewyng theymſelf in the paleyſe wyde
                  ¶And ſay th
                        •
                     y were redy that batayl to abyde
               
               
                  ¶Idylnes ſet the comyns in a ray
                  ¶Without the palayſe on a fayr felde
                  ¶But there was an oſt for to make a fray
                  ¶I trow ſuche a nother neuer man beheld
                  ¶Many was the wepyn amonghē yt they weld
                  ¶What they were y• came to that dyſporte
                  ¶I ſhall you declare of many a ſondry ſort
               
               
                  ¶There were boſters crakers & brybours
                  ¶Praters ſaſers ſtrechers and wrythers
                  ¶Shamefull ſhakelers ſoleyn ſlauedours
                  ¶Oppreſſours of people and myghty crakers
                  ¶Mayntenours of quarels horryble lyers
                  ¶Theues traytours wt falſe heretykes
                  ¶Charmars ſorcerers & many ſcyſmatykes.
               
               
                  ¶Preuy ſymonyakes wyth falſe vſurers
                  ¶Multyplyers coyn waſſhers & clyppers
                  
                     
¶Wrong vſurpers wyth grete extorcyoners
                  ¶Bachyters Glofers and fayre flaterers.
                  ¶Malycyous murmurers with grete claterers
                  ¶Tregetours Tryfelers Feyners of tales.
                  ¶Laſtyuous lurdeyns and Pykers of malys.
               
               
                  ¶Rouners Vagabundes Forgers & leſingis.
                  ¶Robbers Reuers Rauenous Ryfelers.
                  ¶Choppers of Chyrches Fynders of tydynges
                  ¶Merrers of maters and mony makers.
                  ¶Stalkers by nyght wyth Euyſdroppers.
                  ¶Fyghters Brawlers Brekers of loue dayes
                  ¶Getters Chyders Cauſers of frayes.
               
               
                  ¶Tytyuyllis Tyraūtis wt Tourmentours.
                  ¶Corſyd apoſtatis Relygyous dyſſymulers:
                  ¶Cloſſhers Carders wyth comon haſardours.
                  ¶Tyburne colops and Purſkytters.
                  ¶Pylary knyghtys double tollyng Myllers.
                  ¶Gay Ioly tapters wt hoſtelers of the ſtewes.
                  ¶Hores and Bawdes that many bale brewes
               
               
                  ¶Bold blaſfemers wyth falſe Ipocrytes.
                  ¶Brothellers Brokers abhomynable ſwerers.
                  ¶Dryuylls Daſtardes dyſpyſers of ryghtis
                  ¶Homycydes Poyſeners & comon morderers
                  ¶Scoldis Caytyues Comberous clappers.
                  ¶I dolatres Enchauntors wt falſe regenates.
                  ¶Sotyl ambydextrys and ſekeers of debatis.
               
               
                  
                  ¶Pſeudo Prophetes falſe Sodemytes.
                  ¶Queſmers of chyldren wyth fornycatours.
                  ¶wetewoldes that ſuffre ſyn in their ſyghtis.
                  ¶Auoutrers and abhomynable auauntours.
                  ¶Of ſyn grete clappers & makers of clamours
                  ¶Vnthryftes & vnluſtes came al to that game
                  ¶wt luſkꝭ & loſelis y• might not thryue for ſham̄
                  
               
               
                  ¶Theſe were the comons ye came thider ye day.
                  ¶Redy bowne in batayl Vertu to abyde.
                  ¶Apollo theym beholdyng began to ſay.
                  ¶To the goddys & goddeſſes beyng there y• 
                     tid
                  
                  ¶Me ſemyth conuenyent an herowd to ryde
                  ¶To Vertu & byd hȳ to batayl make hȳ boune
                  ¶Hȳſelf to defend forſoth it ſhal be ſone.
               
               
                  ¶And let hym not be ſodeynly take.
                  ¶All dyſpurneyed or that he beware.
                  ¶For than ſhold our dyſhonour awake.
                  ¶If he were cowardly take in a ſnare.
                  ¶Ee quod Vyce for that haue I no care.
                  ¶I wyll auauntage take where I may.
                  ¶That heryng Morpleus p̄uely ſtale away.
               
               
                  ¶And went to warne Vertu of al this afray.
                  ¶And bad hȳ awake and make hymſelf ſtrong
                  ¶For he was lyke to endure that daye.
                  ¶A grete mortall ſhoure er. it were euenſonge.
                  ¶wt Vyce wherfore he bad hym not longe.
                  ¶Tary to ſend after more-ſocoure.
                  
                     
¶If he dyde it ſhold torne hym to dolour.
               
               
                  ¶And brefely the mater to he declared.
                  ¶Lyke as ye haue hard begynnyng and ende.
                  ¶Well quod Vertu he ſhall not be 
                        •
                     pared
                  ¶To the feld I wyl go how it wende.
                  ¶But gramercy Morpleꝰ myn own dere frēde
                  ¶Of your trew hert & faythfull entente.
                  ¶That ye in this mat to meward haue ment.
               
               
                  ¶This done Morpleus departed away.
                  ¶Fro Vertu to the palayſe retornȳg agayn.
                  ¶None hym aſpyed that I dare well ſay.
                  ¶In whych tyme Vertu dyde his beſy payn
                  ¶People to reyſe his quarell to maynteyn.
                  ¶Ymagynacyon was his meſſengere.
                  ¶He went to warne people both ter & nere.
               
               
                  ¶And bad hem come in all haſt they myght
                  ¶For to ſtrength Vertue for wyth out fayll.
                  ¶He ſayd he ſhold haue long or it were nyght.
                  ¶Wyth Vyce to do a myghty ſtrong batayl.
                  ¶Of vngracyoꝰ geſtes he bryngyth a gret tayll
                  ¶Wherfore it behouyth to help at this nede.
                  ¶And after this ſhal Vertue rewar yor mede
               
               
                  ¶Whan ymagynacyon had gone his cyrcuyte
                  ¶To Vertue & frendis thus all about.
                  ¶Wythin ſhort tyme many men of myght
                  ¶Gadered to Vertu in all that they myght.
                  
                     
¶They hym comforted & bad hȳ put no doute.
                  ¶His vtter enmy Vyce to ouerthrowe.
                  ¶Thoughe hwt hȳ brouȝt neuer ſo gret arow
               
               
                  ¶And whan Vertu ſe the ſuſtaūce of his ooſt
                  ¶He prayed all the comons to the feld hem hye
                  ¶Wyth her pety capteyns both leſt and moſte
                  ¶And wyth his capteyns ſhold folow redely.
                  ¶For he ſayd he knew well yt vyce was ful nye.
                  ¶And who myght fyrſt of ye feld recouer ye cētre
                  ¶Wold kepe out y• other he ſhuld not eſely ētre
               
               
                  ¶Then ſent he forth Baptym to ye feld before
                  ¶And prayed hym hartely it to ouerſe.
                  ¶That nomaner trayn nor cotlrop therin wor̄
                  
                  ¶To noy nor hurt hym nor his meyne.
                  ¶And whan he thyder came he began to ſe.
                  ¶How Vyce his purſeuannt cryme orygynall.
                  ¶Was entred before and had ſeaſed vp all.
               
               
                  ¶But as ſone as herof Baptym had a ſyght.
                  ¶He fled faſt away and left the feld alone.
                  ¶And anone Baptym entred wyth his myght.
                  ¶Serchyng al about where this crym̄ had gon̄
                  
                  ¶But the feld was clene defaut foūd he none.
                  ¶Then came Vertu after with his gret oſte.
                  ¶And his myghty capteyns both leſt and moſt▪
                  
               
               
                  ¶But to enfourme you how he thyder came.
                  ¶And what maner capteins he to ye feld brouȝt.
                  
                     
¶Hymſelfe ſekerly was the fyrſt man.
                  ¶Of all his grete hoſt ye thyderwarde ſought.
                  ¶Syttyng in a chare ye rychely was wrought.
                  ¶Wyth golde and peerles & gemmes precyous.
                  ¶Crowned with laurer as lord vyctoryous.
               
               
                  ¶Foure doubty knyghtes about ye chare went.
                  ¶At euery corner one hit for to gyde.
                  ¶And conuey accordyng to. Vertue his entent.
                  ¶At the fyrſt corner was Ryghtwyſneſſe ye tyde.
                  ¶Prudence at the ſeconde was ſet to abyde.
                  ¶At ye thryd ſtrength ye fourth kept temperaūce.
                  ¶Theſe ye chare gyded to. Vertue his pleaſaūce.
               
               
                  ¶Next to ye chare ſeuen capyteyns there roode.
                  ¶Echone aftre other in ordre by and by.
                  ¶Humylyte was ye fyrſt a lambe he beſtroode.
                  ¶With contenaūce demure he rood full ſoberly.
                  ¶Afawcon gentyll ſtood on his helme on hy.
                  ¶And next after hym came there. Charyte.
                  ¶Rydyng on a tygre as fyll to his degre.
               
               
                  ¶Boody as a rooſe ay he kept his chere.
                  ¶On his helme on hyghe a pellycan he bare.
                  ¶Next whom cam pacyēce y• no where hath no pere
                  ¶On a camell rydyng as voyde of all care.
                  ¶Afenix on his helm ſtood ſo forth gan he fare.
                  ¶Who next hym folowed but lyberalyte.
                  ¶Syteng on a dromedary y• was both good & fre.
               
               
                  
                  ¶On his helm for his creſt he bare on oſpray.
                  ¶And next after hym folowed abſtynence.
                  ¶Rydyng on an hete was trapure and gay.
                  ¶He ſemed a lorde of ryght grete excellence.
                  ¶A popyniay was his creſt he was of gret dyffēce.
                  ¶Next hym folowed chaſtyte on an vnicorne.
                  ¶Armed at all poyntes behynde & beforne.
               
               
                  ¶A tortyldoue he bare on hyghe for his creſt.
                  ¶Than came good beſyneſſe laſt of ye ſeuen.
                  ¶Rydyng on a panter a ſondry coloured beſt.
                  ¶Gloryouſly beſeen as he had come from heuen.
                  ¶A crane on his hede ſtood his creſt for 
                        •
                     o ſteuen.
                  ¶All theſe .vii. capteyned had ſtandardis of pryce.
                  ¶Eche of hem accordȳg after his d
                        •
                     uyſe.
               
               
                  ¶Many pety capteyns after theſe went.
                  ¶As trew feyth & hope mercy peaſe & pyte.
                  ¶Ryght trouth mekeneſſe wt rood entent.
                  ¶Goodnes concorde & parfyte vnyte.
                  ¶Hoe eſt trewe loue with ſymplycyte.
                  ¶Prayer faſtȳg preuy almyſdede.
                  ¶Ioyned with ye artycles of the crede.
               
               
                  ¶Confeſſyon contrycyon & ſatyffaccyon.
                  ¶With ſorow for ſynne & grete repentaunce.
                  ¶For
                        •
                     eueneſſe of treſpas wt good dyſpoſycyon.
                  ¶Reſyſtence of wrong performȳg of penance.
                  ¶Holy deuocyon wyth good contynaunce
                  ¶Preſth
                        •
                     de hem folowed with the ſacramētis
                  
                     
¶And ſadneſſe alſe wyth the commaūdementes
               
               
                  ¶Suffraunce in trouble wyth Innocenſy
                  ¶Clennes contynence and virgynyte
                  ¶Kyndnes reuerence wt curteyſy
                  ¶Content & pleaſed wyth pyteous pouerte
                  ¶Entendyng wel mynyſtryng equyte
                  ¶Twene ryght & wrong hole indyfferently
                  ¶And labouryng the ſeruyſe of god to multyply
               
               
                  ¶Refuſe of ryches & worldly vaynglory
                  ¶Perfeccyon wyth perfyght contemplacyon
                  ¶Relygyon profeſſyon wel kept in memory
                  ¶Verry drede of god wyth holy predycacyon
                  ¶Celeſtyall ſapyence wyth goſtly inſpyracyon
                  ¶Grace was the guyde of al this meyne
                  ¶Whome folowed konnyng wt his genealogy
               
               
                  ¶That is to ſay gramer and Sophyſtry
                  ¶Phyloſophy naturall logyke and Rythoryke
                  ¶Arſmetrycke geometry wyth aſtronomye
                  ¶Canon and Cyuyll melodyous muſyke
                  ¶Noble Theology and corporal phyſyke
                  ¶Moralyzayſon of holy ſcrypture
                  ¶Profound poetry and drawȳg of pycture
               
               
                  ¶Thyſe folowed connyng & thyd wyth h
                        •
                     n cān
                  ¶Wyth many one mo offryng her ſeruyie
                  ¶To Vertu at that nede but notwythſtōdȳg than
                  ¶Some he refuſed and ſayd in nowyſe
                  
                     
¶They ſhuld wyth hym go & as I coud auyſe
                  ¶Thyſewore her names fyrſt Nygrōmancy
                  ¶Geomanſy magyke and glotony
               
               
                  ¶Adryomanſy Ornomancy wt pyromancy
                  ¶Fyſenomy alſo and pawmeſtry
                  ¶And al her ſequeles yf I ſhal not lye
                  ¶Yet connyng prayed Vertu he wold not deny
                  ¶Theym for to know nor dyſdeyn his eye
                  ¶On hem to loke wherto Vertu graunted
                  ¶How be it in his werres ge wold not they haūted
               
               
                  ¶So had they connyng lyghly to depart
                  ¶From Vertu his feld and they ſeyng this
                  ¶By comyn aſſent hyred them a carte
                  ¶And made hem be caryed toward Vyce Iwys.
                  ¶Fro thens forth to ſerue hȳ this wold, not mys
                  ¶For loth they were to be mayſterles
                  ¶In ſtede of the better the worſe there they ches
               
               
                  ¶But forth to releſe al the rrmenaunt
                  ¶Of pety capteins that wyth Vertue were
                  ¶Moderate dyet and wyſdom auenant
                  ¶Euen weyght and meſure ware of contagyoꝰ gē
                  
                  ¶Loth to offend ann louyng ay to lere
                  ¶Worſhyp and profyte wt myrth in maner
                  ¶Thyſe pety capteyns wyth Vertu were in fere
               
               
                  ¶Comons hem folowed a grete multitude
                  ¶But in came pyſon to that other ſyde
                  
                     
¶I trow there was not brefely to conclude.
                  ¶The .x. man that batayl to abyde.
                  ¶Yet neuertheles I ſhal not from you hyde.
                  ¶what maner people they were & of what ſecte
                  ¶As nere as my wyt therto wyll me derect.
               
               
                  ¶There were noble and famous doctours.
                  ¶Example yeuers of lyuyng gracyous.
                  ¶Perpetuel preſtes and dyſcrete confeſſours.
                  ¶Of holy ſcrypture declarers fructuous.
                  ¶Rebukers of ſyn & myſcheues odyous.
                  ¶Fyſſhers of ſoules & louers of clennes.
                  ¶Dyſpyſers of veyn and worldly rycheſſe.
               
               
                  ¶Peaſyble prelatys Iuſtycyal gouernours.
                  ¶Founders of chyrches wyth mercyfull peres.
                  ¶Reformers of wrong of her progenytours
                  ¶On peynfull pore pyteous compaſſyoners
                  ¶well menyng marchaūtes wt trewartefecers
                  ¶Vyrgyns pure and alſo Innocentes
                  ¶Hooly matrones wt chaſt contynence
               
               
                  ¶Pylgrymes & palmers wt trew laborers
                  ¶Holy heremytes goddys ſolycytours
                  ¶Moneſteryal monkes & well dyſpoſed frereſ
                  ¶Chanons and nonnes feyth ꝓfeſſoures
                  ¶Of worldly people trew coniugatours.
                  ¶Louers of Cryſt Confounders of yll.
                  ¶And all that to godward yeue her good wyll
               
               
                  
                  ¶Mayntenours of ryghte verey penytentes.
                  ¶Dyſtroyers of errour cauſers of vnyte.
                  ¶Trew actyf lyuers that ſet her ententis
                  ¶The dedis to performe of mercy and pyte
                  ¶Contemplatyf people that deſyre to be.
                  ¶Salytary ſeruauntis vnto god alone.
                  ¶Rather thē to haboūd in rycheſſes echone.
               
               
                  ¶Thyſe wyth many mo than I reherce can
                  ¶were come thyder redy that batayl to abyde.
                  ¶And take ſuch part as fyl to Vertu than
                  ¶Vyce to uoercome they hoped for al his pride
                  ¶Al though he had more people on his ſyde
                  ¶For the men that Vertu had were ful ſure.
                  ¶To truſt on at nede & connyng in armure
               
               
                  ¶Macrocoſme was the name of the feld
                  ¶where this grete batayll was ſet for to be
                  ¶In the myddys therof ſtode cōſyence & beheld
                  ¶whyche of hem ſhold be brought to captyuyte
                  ¶Of that noble tryūph Iuge wold he be
                  ¶Syndereſys ſate hȳ wythin cloſed as a park
                  ¶wt his table in his honde her dedys to marke.
               
               
                  ¶To come in to the feld were hygh wayes .v.
                  ¶Fre to both partyes large brode and wyde
                  ¶Vertu wold not tari but highed hȳ 
                     thyd bliue
                  ¶Leſt he were by vyce deceyued at that tyde
                  ¶Long out of the feld loth was he to abyde
                  ¶In auenture that he out of it were kept.
                  
                     
¶For thā wold he haue thouȝt he had to long ſlept
               
               
                  ¶In this mene tyme whyle Vertu thꝰ ꝓceded
                  ¶For hȳ & his people the feld for to wynne.
                  ¶He charged euery man by grace to be guyded
                  ¶And al that euer myght ye feld to enter ynne.
                  ¶In all that ſeaſon went orygynal ſynne.
                  ¶To let Vyce know how Baptym wt his hoſte.
                  Had entred Macrocoſme & ſerched euery cooſte
               
               
                  ¶A ſayd Vyce I ſe well it is tyme.
                  ¶Baners to dyſplay & ſtandardes to auaunce.
                  ¶Al moſt to long haddeſt yu taryed cryme.
                  ¶To let vs haue knolege of this purueyaunce.
                  ¶Yet I trow I ſhal lerne hem a new daunce.
                  ¶Wherfore I commaund you al wtout delaye
                  ¶Toward the felde draw in all the haſt ye may
               
               
                  ¶Than ſayd ye god Pluto yt al men myȝt here
                  ¶Vyce I the charge as thou wylt eſchew.
                  ¶Our heuyous Indȳgnacyō yu draw not arere
                  ¶But put ye forth boldly to ouerthrowe Vertu.
                  ¶In fayth quod Attropos & I ſhal after ſew / 
                  ¶For yf he eſcape oure hondys this day.
                  ¶I tell you my ſeruyſe haue loſt for ay.
               
               
                  ¶Forth than rode Vyce wt al his hole ſtrength
                  ¶On his ſtede ſerpentyne as i told you byfore.
                  ¶The oſt that hȳ folowed was of a grete lēgth.
                  ¶Amōg whō were penoūs & g
                        •
                     yt̄s mani a ſcor̄
                  
                  
                     
¶Of hys pety capteynes he made many a kniȝt
                  ¶For they ſhuld not fle but manly wt him fight
               
               
                  ¶He doubed Falſhod wyth Dyſſymylacyon.
                  ¶Symony Vſury Wrong and Rybawdy.
                  ¶Malyce Deceyt Lye wythout Extorcyon.
                  ¶Periury Dyffydence and Apoſtaſy.
                  ¶Wyth boldnes in yl to bere hym company.
                  ¶Thyſe .xiiii. knyghtes made vyce that daye.
                  ¶To wyn her ſpores they ſayd they wold aſſay
               
               
                  ¶In lyke wyſe Vertu doubed on his ſyde:
                  ¶Of pety capteyns other fourtene.
                  ¶Whyche made her auou wyth hym to abyde:
                  ¶Hor ſpores wold they wȳ y• day ſhold it be 
                        •
                     en̄
                  
                  ¶Thyſe wore her names yf it be as I wene
                  ¶Feyth▪ Hope & Mercy Trouth & alſo Ryght.
                  ¶wt Reſyſtence of wronge a full hardy wyghte
               
               
                  ¶Confeſſyon Contrycyon wyth Satyſfaction
                  ¶Verrey drede of God Performȳg of penaūce
                  ¶Perfeccyon Connyng and Good dyſpociſion
                  ¶And all knyt to Vertu they were by alyauns
                  ¶Wherfore to hym they made aſſuraunce.
                  ¶That feld to kepe as long as they myght.
                  ¶And in his quarel agayn Vyce to fyght.
               
               
                  ¶The lord of Macrocoſme & rewler of ye fee
                  ¶Was called Frewyll chaunger of the chaūce:
                  ¶To whome Vertu ſent embaſſatours thre
                  
                     
¶Reſon dyſcreſyon & good remēbraūce.
                  ¶And prayed hȳ be fauorable his honoure to ēhās
                  ¶For but he had his fauour at ye poynt of nede
                  ¶He ſtood in gret doute he coude not lightly ſpede.
               
               
                  ¶In lyke wyſe. Vyce embaſſatours thre.
                  ¶For his party vnto Frewyll ſent.
                  ¶Temptacyon foly & ſenſualyte.
                  ¶Prayng hȳ of fauour that he wolde aſſent.
                  ¶To hȳ as he wolde at his cōmaundement.
                  ¶Haue hȳ eftſones whan he lyſt to call.
                  ¶On hȳ for ony thȳg y• afterward myght fall.
               
               
                  ¶Anſwere yaue he none to neyther party.
                  ¶Saue oonli he ſayd ye batayll wolde he ſe
                  ¶To wete whiche of hȳ ſhold haue ye vyctory.
                  ¶Hit hȳg in his balaūce ye ambyguyte.
                  ¶He ſayd he wolde not reſtrayne his lyberte.
                  ¶Whan he come where ſorow ſhold awake.
                  ¶Than it ſhold be know what part he wyl take
               
               
                  ¶Whan. Vertu & Vyce be her ambaſſatours.
                  ¶Knew of this anſwere they ſtood in gret doute.
                  ¶Neuertheles they ſeyd they wold ēdure tho ſhours
                  ¶And make an ende ſhortly of yt they wēt aboute.
                  ¶Soo forth came. Vyce wt all his grete route.
                  ¶Er he came at ye ſelde he ſent yet priuely.
                  ¶Senſualyte before in maner of a ſpy.
               
               
                  ¶Whiche ſewe ye felde wt his vnkynde ſeede.
                  
                     
¶That cauſed Vertu after mykyll woo to feele
                  ¶For therof grewe nought but all oonly weede.
                  ¶Whiche made the grounde as ſleper as an yele.
                  ¶He went ayene to vice & tolde hym euery dele.
                  ¶How he had done and bad hym come a way.
                  ¶For he had ſo purueyde ye vyce ſholde haue ye day▪
                  
               
               
                  ¶Soo as it happed at ye felde they mete.
                  ¶Frewyll vertu and vice as tripartite.
                  ¶Saaf vertu a litil before the felde had gete.
                  ¶And ellis his auātage forſoth had be fullyght
                  ¶Not for then encombred ſo was neuer wyght▪
                  
                  ¶As vertu & his men were with the ranke. wede
                  ¶That in ye felde grew of ſenſualitees fede
               
               
                  ¶But as ſoone as vyce of vertu had a ſyght.
                  ¶He gan ſwage gonnes as he had be woode
                  ¶That heryng vertu cōmaunded euery wyght
                  ¶To pauyce hym vnder the ſygne of ye rode.
                  ¶And bad hē not drede but kepe ſtyll where thy.
                  ¶It was but a ſhour ſhold ſoue cōfoūde
                  ¶wherfore he cōmaūded thē ſtād & kepe her groūd ſtode.
               
               
                  ¶And whan vyce cam nerer to the felde.
                  ¶He callyd ſore for bowes & bad hem ſhote faſte
                  ¶But vertu & hys meyny bare of with ye ſheld.
                  ¶Of the b
                        •
                     yſſyd Trynyte ay tyll ſhot was paſt.
                  ¶And whā ſhot was done vyce cam forth at laſt.
                  ¶Purpoſyng the felde wyth aſſaute to wyn.
                  ¶But v
                        
                           
                        
                        er
                     tu kept it long he myght not ent theryn.
               
               
                  
                  ¶All that tyme Frewyll ſtode & hym bethought.
                  ¶To which he myȝt leue & what ꝑe he wold take.
                  ¶At laſt ſenſualite had hȳ ſo fer brought.
                  ¶That he ſayd playnly he v
                        
                           
                        
                        er
                     tu wold forſake.
                  ¶And in vyce hys quarell all his power make.
                  Nota Iwis quod reaſon yt is not for the beſte.
                  ¶Noforſe ſayd frewyll I wyll do as my lyſt.
               
               
                  ¶Vertu was full heuy when he ſee frewyll
                  ¶Take part with vyce but yet neuertheleſſe.
                  ¶He dyde that he myght the felde to kepe ſtyll.
                  ¶Tyll vyce with frewyll ſo ſore gan hȳ oppreſſe.
                  ¶That he was conſtranyed clerely by dureſſe.
                  ¶A lytyll tyne abacke to make abew retret.
                  ¶All thyng conſydered hit was the beſt feet.
               
               
                  ¶Fyrſt to remembre how vyce parte was.
                  ¶Ten ayen one ſtrenger by lyklyneſſe.
                  ¶And than how frewyll was with hym alas.
                  ¶Whoo coude deme vertu but in heuyneſſe.
                  ¶Moreouer to thynke how that ſlyper graſſe.
                  ¶That of ſenſualyte hys on kynde ſeede grew.
                  ¶Vnder foot in ſtandyng encombred vertew
               
               
                  ¶Yet notwitſtondyng vertue his men all.
                  ¶Nobelly theym bare and faught myghtyly.
                  ¶How be it ye ſleper graſſe made many of hē fall.
                  ¶And from thenſe in maner departe ſodenly.
                  ¶That ſeyng vyce his hooſt began to ſhout & cry.
                  ¶And ſayd on in Pluto name on & all is oure.
                  
                     
¶For this day ſhal Vyce be made a conquerour.
               
               
                  ¶Thus Vertu was by myght of vyce & Frew
                  ¶Dryuen out of the feld it was the more pyte yll
                  ¶How by it yet Baptym kept his ground ſtyll.
                  ¶And wt hym abode feyth hope & vnyte.
                  ¶And konnynge alſo wt a grete meyne.
                  ¶Confeſſyon contrycyon were redy at her hond.
                  ¶And Satyſfaction Vyce to wythſtond.
               
               
                  ¶But al the tyme whyle Vertu was away.
                  ¶A myȝty conflycte kept they wt Vycys rout.
                  ¶And yet neuertheles for al that grete afray.
                  ¶Hope ſtod vpryght & feyth wold neuer lout
                  ¶And euermor̄ ſayd Baptym ſyres pu
                        •
                      no dout.
                  ¶Vertu ſhal return & haue his entent.
                  ¶This feld ſhal be ours or let me be ſhent.
               
               
                  ¶And whyl thyſe pety capteȳs ſuſtend thꝰ ye feld
                  ¶Wyth Vertu his reward come good ꝑſeuerauns
                  ¶An hugy myȝty hooſt & whan he beheld.
                  ¶How Vertu hym withdrew he toke dyſpleſaūs.
                  ¶And whā he to hȳ cam he ſayd ye ſhal your chās
                  ¶Take as it fallyth wherfore returne ye muſt.
                  ¶Yet ones for your ſake wt Vyce ſhal I Tuſt.
               
               
                  ¶Alas that euer ye ſhold leſe your honour.
                  ¶And therwyth alſo ye hygh ꝑpetuel crown.
                  ¶Which is for you kept in the celeſtyal tour.
                  ¶Wherfore be ye called chryſtys champyon.
                  
                     
¶How is it that ye haue noo compaſſyone.
                  ¶On baptyme feyth & hope konnyng & vnite.
                  ¶That ſtād ſo hard beſtad & fyght as ye may ſee.
               
               
                  ¶All the treſour erthely vnder ye fyrmamēt
                  ¶That euer was made of goddys creacyon.
                  ¶To reward theym euenly were not equyualent.
                  ¶For her noble labour in his affleccyon.
                  ¶Wherfore take vpon you your Iuriſdyccyon
                  ¶Reſcu yonder knyghtes & recontynu fyght.
                  ¶And els a dew your crown: or al your gret myȝt
               
               
                  ¶With theſe & ſuche wordys as I haue you tolde
                  ¶By good perſeueraunce vttred in this wyſe.
                  ¶Vertu hym remembred & gan to vexe bolde.
                  ¶And ſayd yeue trew knyghtis to reſcu Iauyſe
                  ¶Let vs no lengar tary from this entrepryſe.
                  ¶Agayn to yt felde ſoo Vertu retourned.
                  ¶That cauſed hē be mery yt lōg afore had morned
               
               
                  ¶Auaunt baner qd he in ye name of Ieſu
                  ¶And with yt his people ſet vp a gret ſhoute.
                  ¶And cryed with a loude voce a Vertu a Vertu.
                  ¶Then began Vyce his hooſt for to loke a boute.
                  ¶But I trow ꝑſeueraūce was not long withoute
                  ¶He bathed his ſwerd in his foos blood.
                  ¶The boldeſt of hem all not ones hȳ withſtoode.
               
               
                  ¶Conſtaūce hym folowed & brought hȳ his ſpere
                  ¶But when ꝑſeueraūce ſaw Vyce on his ſtede.
                  
                     
¶Noman coude hym let tyll he came there.
                  ¶For to byd hym ryde I trow it was no nede.
                  ¶All Vertu his ooſt prayed for his good ſpede.
                  ¶Agayn Vyce he rode with his grete ſhaft.
                  ¶And hym ouerthrew for all his ſo
                        •
                     yll craft.
               
               
                  ¶That ſeyng Frewill came to conſcyence.
                  ¶And gan hym to repente yt he with hym had be.
                  ¶Prayeng hym of coūſell for his grete offence.
                  ¶That he agayn Vertu had made his arme.
                  ¶What was beſt to doo to hymylyte:
                  ¶Qd conſcyence muſt yu go ſo he hym thyder ſent
                  ¶Dyſguyſed yt he were not knowen as he wente.
               
               
                  ¶And whan he thyder came humylyte hym toke.
                  ¶A token & bad hym go to conffeſſyon.
                  ¶And ſhew hym his mater with a peteous loke
                  ¶Whiche done he hym ſent to contrycyon.
                  ¶And fro thenſforthe to ſatyſfaccyon.
                  ¶Thus fro pooſt to pyler was he made to daūce.
                  ¶And at the laſt he went forthe to penaūce.
               
               
                  ¶But now for to tel you whē Vyce was outhrow
                  ¶A gret part of his ooſt about hym gan reſorte.
                  ¶But he was ſo febyll y• he coude noman know.
                  ¶And whan they ſe yt they knew no comforte.
                  ¶But caryed hym a way be a preuy porte.
                  ¶And as they caryed dyſpeyre with hȳ met.
                  ¶With Vyce his rewarde he cam theym for to fet
               
               
                  
                  ¶Then came there downe goodly ladyes tweyn.
                  ¶From the hyghe heuen aboue the fyrmamente.
                  ¶And ſayd the gret Alpha & Oo mooſt ſouereyn.
                  ¶For that nobell tryumphe had hem thyder ſent.
                  ¶One of hem to dryue Vyce to grete tormente.
                  ¶With a fyry ſtrong y• ſhe bare in her hande.
                  ¶And ſo he dede dyſpere & all his hole bande.
               
               
                  ¶The name of this lady was called Preſtyence.
                  ¶She neuer left Vyce ne none yt wolde hȳ folow.
                  ¶Tyll they were cōmytted by ye dyuyne ſentence.
                  ¶All to payne perpetuell & Infynyte ſorow.
                  ¶Right wyſnes went to ſe yt nomā ſhold hē borow.
                  ¶Thꝰ al entreted ſharpely were they tyll Cerberꝰ
                  ¶Had hem beſhut within his gates tenebrꝰ.
               
               
                  ¶And all ye whyle yt Preſtyēce wt her ſcorge ſmert
                  ¶To rewarde Vyce gan her thus occupy.
                  ¶With all his hole, bende after her deſert.
                  ¶That other gloryoꝰ lady y• came fro heuē on hy.
                  ¶Hauyng in her honde the palme of vyctory.
                  ¶Came downe to Vertu & toke hym to yt p̄ſent.
                  ¶Sayeng thus that Alpha & Oo hath hym ſent.
               
               
                  ¶And as ferre as I ryght coude vnderſtonde
                  ¶That ladyes name was Predeſtynacyon.
                  ¶Vertu & his ooſt ſhe bleſſyd with her honde.
                  ¶And in heuyn graunted hem habytacyon.
                  ¶Whereto eche of hem reſeruyd was a crowne.
                  ¶She ſayd in token that they enherytours.
                  
                     
¶Of the glory were & gracious conquerours.
               
               
                  ¶Wych done the ladyes 'ayen to gyder met
                  ¶And towarde heuen vp they gan to ſty
                  ¶Embraced in armes as they had ben knyt.
                  ¶Togyd wt a gyrdyl but ſo ſodenly.
                  ¶As yy wer̄ vanyſſhyd ſaw I neuthȳg wt ey.
                  ¶And anone Vertu wyth al his company.
                  ¶Kneled doūn & thāked god of yt vyctory.
               
               
                  ¶Yet had I forget whan Vyce was ouerthrow.
                  ¶To haue told you hou many of Vycys hooſt.
                  ¶Gan to ſeke peaſe & darked doūn ful low.
                  ¶And beſought mercy what ſo euer it coſte.
                  ¶To be her mene to Vertu els y•y wē but loſt.
                  ¶And ſome in lyke wyſe to feyth & hope ſought.
                  ¶What to do for peaſe they ſayd they ne rouȝte.
               
               
                  ¶Some alſo Baptym ſewed to be her mene.
                  ¶Som to one ſom to other as thei hē gete myȝte.
                  ¶But al to Confeſſyon wēt to make hē clene
                  ¶And as y•y came to cōſyēce he theȳ bad go lyȝte.
                  ¶Er thā old attropes of hē had a ſyȝt.
                  ¶For yf he ſo theym toke loſt they wē for euer
                  ¶He ſayd Vyce to forſake better late thȳ neuer.
               
               
                  ¶Som eke for ſocour drew to circūciſion.
                  ¶But by hȳ coud they gete but ſmal fauoure.
                  ¶For he in that company was had but in deryſyd
                  
                  ¶Neueryeleſſe to feyth he bad hē go laboure.
                  
                     
¶Prayng theȳ for oldē acqueyntāce theȳ ſocoure
                  ¶Wel qd feth for his ſake I ſhal do y• I may doo
                  ¶But fyrſte for the beſt way baptym go ye to.
               
               
                  ¶For by hym ſoneſt ſhal ye recouer grace.
                  ¶Which ſhal to Vertu bryng you by proceſſe.
                  ¶Wherfore in ony wyſe loke ye make good face.
                  ¶And let noman know of your heuynes.
                  ¶So they were by baptym brouȝt out of deſtres
                  ¶Turned al to Vertu & whan this was done.
                  ¶Vertu cūmaūded Frewyl before hym come.
               
               
                  ¶To whom thus he ſayd I haue grete merueyl
                  ¶Ye durſt be ſo bold Vyces party to take.
                  ¶Who bad you do ſo & yaue you that counſeyl.
                  ¶Iuſtly vnto that ye ſhal me preuy make.
                  ¶Then ſayd Frewyll & ſwemfully ſpake.
                  ¶Knelyng on his kne wyth a chere denyng.
                  ¶I pray you ſyr let pyte your eres to me enclyne.
               
               
                  ¶And I ſhall yow tel the verrey ſoth of all.
                  ¶How it was & who made me that way drawe.
                  ¶For ſoth ſenſualyte his ꝓpre name they call.
                  ¶A ſayd reaſon then I know wel that felowe.
                  ¶Wyld he is & wanton of me ſtant hȳ none awe.
                  ¶Is he ſo qd Vertu wel he ſhall be taught.
                  ¶As a player ſhuld to draw another draught.
               
               
                  ¶And wt 
                     thal came ſadneſſe wyt his ſober chere.
                  ¶Bryngyng Senſualite beyng ful of thought.
                  
                     
¶And ſayd that he had take hym pryſonere.
                  ¶A welcome ſayd Verſu now haue I ye I ſouȝt.
                  ¶Bleſſed be the good lord as ye wold it is nought
                  ¶Why arte yu ſo wanton he ſayd for ſhame.
                  ¶Or y• go at large yu ſhalt be more tame.
               
               
                  But ſtōd a part a whyle tyl I haue ſpoke a word
                  ¶Wyth Frewyl a lytyl & then ſhaite yu knowe.
                  ¶What ſhalbe thy fynaūce then he ſaydin bord
                  ¶Vnto Frewyl the bend of your bowe.
                  ¶Begynnyth to ſ
                        •
                     ake but ſuche as ye haue ſowe
                  ¶Muſt nedes repe there is none waye,
                  ¶Notwythſtondȳg that lette what ye can ſaye.
               
               
                  ¶What is your habilite me to recompenſe.
                  ¶For the grete harme that ye to me haue do.
                  ¶Forſoth ſayd Frewyll in open audyence.
                  ¶But oonly Macrocoſme more haue I not loo.
                  ¶Take yt yf it pleyſe you I wyl that it be ſoo.
                  ¶Yf I may vnderſtond ye be my good lorde.
                  ¶In dede ſayd Vertu to that wyll I accorde.
               
               
                  ¶Then made Vertu Reaſon his leyftenaunte.
                  ¶And yaue hī a grete charge macrocoſme to kepe
                  ¶That done Senſualite yeld hym recreaunte.
                  ¶And began for anger byſterly to wepe.
                  ¶For he demed ſurely hys ſorowe ſhold not ſlepe
                  ¶Then made Vertu Frewyll bayl vnd Reaſon.
                  ¶The feld for to ocupy to his behoue that ſeaſon.
               
               
                  
                  ¶And then ſayd Vertu to Senſualyte.
                  ¶Thou ſhalt be rewarded ſor thy beſyneſſe.
                  ¶Vnder this furme al fragylyte.
                  ¶Shalt yu forſake both more and leſſe.
                  ¶And vnd the guydȳg yu ſhalt be of ſadneſſe.
                  ¶All though it ſomwhat be agayn thy herte.
                  ¶Thy Iugement is gyuen yu ſhalt it not aſterte
               
               
                  ¶And euyn we that came in dame Nature.
                  ¶Sayeng thꝰ to Vertu ſyr ye do me wronge.
                  ¶By durcſſe & conſtreynt to put this creature.
                  ¶Gentyll Senſualyte yt hath me ꝓued longe.
                  ¶Clerely from his lyberte & ſet hym amonge.
                  ¶Theȳ that loue hȳ not to be her vndloute.
                  ¶As it were a caſt away or a ſho cloute.
               
               
                  ¶And perde ye know well a rewlehaue I muſt
                  ¶Wythin Macrocoſme forſoth I ſay not nay.
                  
                     Od Vertu butſēſualyte ſhal not ꝑform your luſt
                  ¶Lyke as he hath do befor this yf I may.
                  ¶Therfro hȳ reſtreyn ſadneſſe ſhal aſſay.
                  ¶How be it ye ſhal haue your hoſelyberte.
                  ¶Wythin Macrocoſme as ye haue had fre.
               
               
                  ¶And whan Vertu had to Nature ſayd thns
                  ¶A lytyll tyne his ey caſtyng hym beſyde.
                  ¶He ſe in a corner ſtondyng Morpleus.
                  ¶That hȳ before warned of ye verely tyde.
                  ¶A ſyrs ſayd Vertu yet we muſt abyde.
                  ¶Here is a frend of ours may not be forgete.
                  
                     
¶After his deſerte we ſhall hȳ entreate
               
               
                  ¶Morpleꝰ ſayd. Vertu I thāke you hertely.
                  ¶For your trew herte & your grete laboure.
                  ¶That ye lyſt to come to me ſoo redely.
                  ¶Whan ye vnderſtod ye comȳg of that ſhoure.
                  ¶I thanke god & you of ſauȳg of mȳ honour.
                  ¶Wherfore this preuylege now to you I grāt
                  ¶That wtin Macrocoſme ye ſhall haue your haūt
               
               
                  ¶And of fyue poſternes ye keys ſhall ye kepe.
                  ¶Lettyng in & out at hȳ whome ye lyſt.
                  ¶As long as in Macrocoſme your fad wyll crepe.
                  ¶Blere whos ey yewyll hardely wt your myſt
                  ¶And kepe your werkes cloſe there as in a chyſt
                  ¶Saaf I wold deſyre you ſpare Pollucyon.
                  For no thȳg may me pleſe ye ſoūeth to corrupcyon.
               
               
                  ¶And whā he had thꝰ ſayd ye keyes he hȳ toke.
                  ¶And toward his caſtell wt his people went
                  ¶Byddȳg reaſon take good hede & about loke.
                  ¶That ſēſualite by Nature were not ſhēt.
                  ¶Kepe hȳ ſhort he ſayd tyll his luſt be ſpēt
                  ¶For better were a chylde to by vnbore.
                  ¶Than let hȳ haue ye wyll & foreuer be lore.
               
               
                  ¶And whā olde Attropos had ſeen & herd all this
                  ¶How Vertu had opteyned aſtonyed as he ſtood,
                  ¶He ſayd to hȳſe lfe ſom what there is amys.
                  ¶I trow well my patent be not all good.
                  
                     
¶Sayeng to the goddys I ſee ye do but iape.
                  ¶After a worthy whew haue ye made me gape.
               
               
                  ¶How a deuyll way ſholde I Vertue ouerthrow.
                  ¶When he dredeth not all your hole route.
                  ¶How cā ye make good your patēt wold I know
                  ¶Hit is to Impoſſable to bryng that aboute.
                  ¶For ſtryke hym may I not yt is out of doute.
                  ¶A good Attropos ſayd god Apollo.
                  ¶An anſwere conuenyent ſhall thou haue hertō.
               
               
                  ¶The wordes of thy patent dare I well ſay
                  ¶Stretche to no forther but were dame Nature
                  ¶Hath Iuryſdyccyon thē to haue thy way Nota.
                  ¶And largeſſe to ſtryke as longet to thy cure.
                  ¶And as for Vertu he his no cryature.
                  ¶Vnder the predycament conteyned of quantyte
                  ¶Wherfore his dyſtruccyon longeth not to the.
               
               
                  ¶A ha ſayd Attropos then I ſee well.
                  ¶That all ye goodys be but couēterfete.
                  ¶For oo God there is that can euerydell.
                  ¶Tourne as hym leſt bothe drye & whete.
                  ¶In to whoos ſeruyce I ſhal aſſay to gete.
                  ¶And yf I may ones to his ſcruycece me.
                  ¶Your names ſhal be put to oblyuyone.
               
               
                  ¶Thus went Attropos fro the paleys wrooth.
                  ¶But in the mene tyme whyle ye he there was.
                  ¶Glydyng by the paleys reſydyuacyon gooth.
                  
                     
¶Towarde Macrocoſme with a pēynted faſe.
                  ¶Clad lyke a pylgryme walkyng a grete paſe.
                  ¶In the forme as he had ben a man of ynde.
                  ¶He wede haue made reſon & fadneſſe both blȳde
               
               
                  ¶With ſenſualyte was he ſoone aqueynted.
                  ¶To whome he decared his mater pryuely.
                  ¶Yet he was eſpyed for all his face peynted.
                  ¶Then reſon hy comauded pyke hȳ thēs lightly.
                  ¶For his eaſe qd ſadneſſe ſo coū eyll hym wyll I.
                  ¶Soo was ſenſualyte ay kepte vnder foote.
                  ¶That to reſydyuacyon myght he doo no boote.
               
               
                  ¶Then went he to Nature & aſked her auyſe.
                  ¶His entent to opteynde what was beſt to doo.
                  ¶She ſayd euer ſyth Vertu of vyce man ye pryſe.
                  ¶Reſon with ſadneſſe hath rewled the felde ſoo.
                  ¶That I & ſenſnalyte may iytyll for the doo.
                  ¶For I may noo more but oonly kepe my cours.
                  ¶And yet is ſeuſualyte ſtrenger kept & wours.
               
               
                  ¶Thꝰ herȳg reſydiuacōn fro thēs he went ageyn
                  ¶Full of thought & ſorow yt ehe myght not ſpede.
                  ¶Than reſon & ſadueſſe toke we dehokes tweyn.
                  ¶And all wylde wātoneſſe out ye felde gan wede.
                  ¶With all thr ſlyper graſſe ye grewe of the ſede.
                  ¶That ſenſualyte before therin ſew.
                  ¶And fro thens forth kept it clene for vertew
               
               
                  ¶Than began new graſe in the felde to ſpryng.
                  
                     
¶All vnlyke yt other of colour fayr & bryght.
                  ¶But then I aſpyed a meruelous thyng.
                  ¶For the groūde of ye felde gan wex hore & whyt.
                  ¶I coude not conceyue how ye be myght.
                  ¶Tyll I was enformed & taught it to know.
                  ¶But wher vertu occupyet muſt nedes wel grow
               
               
                  Yet in the mene tyme while the felde thus grow.
                  ¶And reſon with ſadneſſe therof had goueraūce.
                  ¶Many a preuy meſſenger thyder ſent Vertew.
                  ¶To know yf it were guyded to his pleſaūce.
                  ¶Now prayer eft faſtyng & often tyme penaūce.
                  ¶And whan he myght goo preuely almeſdede.
                  ¶And bad hȳ to his power helpe where heſe nede
               
               
                  While ye felde thus rewled reſon with ſadneſſe.
                  ¶Maugre dame Nature for all her carnall might
                  ¶Came thyder Attropos voyd of all gladneſſe.
                  ¶Wrapped in his ſhete & axed of ony wyght.
                  ¶Coude wyſſe hym the vay to the lorde of light.
                  ¶Or ellis where myght fynde ryghwyſneſſe.
                  ¶Forſothe ſayd reyſon I trowas I geſſe.
               
               
                  ¶At Vertu his caſtell ye may ſoone hym fynde
                  
                  ¶I 
                        •
                     ye lyſt the laboure thyder to take.
                  ¶And there ſhall ye know yf ye be not blynde.
                  ¶The next wey to the lorde of lyght I vndertake.
                  ¶So thyder went Attropos petycyon to make.
                  ¶To ryghtwyſneſſe preyeng that he myght.
                  ¶Be take in to the ſeruyſe of the lorde of lyght.
               
               
                  
                  ¶What ſad ryghwyſneſſe yu olde dotyng foole.
                  ¶Whome yaſt thou ſeruyd ſyth the worlde begā
                  
                  ¶But oonlh hym where haſt yu go to ſcole.
                  ¶Whethery art yu doubl cor elles the ſam man.
                  ¶That thou were fyrſt a ſyr ſayd he than.
                  ¶I praye you hertely holde me excuſed.
                  ¶I am olde & febell my wyttys are dyſuſed.
               
               
                  ¶Well ſayd ryghtwyſnes for as moche as thow.
                  ¶Knoweſt not thy mayſt̄ thy name ſhal I chaūge
                  ¶Dethe ſhalt yu be caled from hēs forward now
                  ¶Among all the peple that ſhal be had ſtraūge.
                  ¶But whan yu begynneſt to make thy chalaūge.
                  ¶Dredde ſhalt thou be where ſo thou become.
                  ¶And to noo creature ſhalt thou be welcome.
               
               
                  ¶And as for theym whome thou dedeſt ſerue.
                  ¶For as moche as they preſume on hem to take.
                  ¶That hygh name of god they ſhal as they deꝓue
                  ¶Therfore he rewarded I dare vnertake.
                  ¶Wyth payn ꝑpetual among fendes blake.
                  ¶And her names ſhall be put to oblyuyon.
                  ¶Among men but it be in dyryſyon.
               
               
                  ¶Aha fayd Attropos now begȳne I wexglad.
                  ¶That I ſhal thus auenged of hem be.
                  ¶Syth they ſo long tyme haue made me ſo mad.
                  ¶Yre qd ryght wyſneſſe here what I ſay to the.
                  ¶The lorde of lyght ſent the wordeby me.
                  
                     
¶That in Macrocoſme ſeſyne ſhalt thou take
                  ¶wherfore thy darte redy loke thou make
               
               
                  ¶And as ſoone as Vertue that vnderſtood
                  ¶He ſayd he was pleaſed that it ſholde ſoo be
                  ¶And euen forth with he cōmaunded preſthood
                  ¶To make hym redy the felde for to ſe
                  ¶So thyder went preſthode with benygnyte
                  ¶Conueyen
                        •
                     g thyder the bleſſyd ſacrament
                  ¶Of Eukaryſt but fyrſt were thyder ſent
               
               
                  ¶Confeſſyō contrycyon and ſatyſfaccyō nota
                  ¶Sorow for ſynne and grete repentaunce
                  ¶Holy deuocyon with good dyſpoſycyon
                  ¶All theſe thyder came and alſo penaunce
                  ¶As her dewte was to make purueaunce
                  ¶Agayn the comyng of that bleſſyd lorde
                  ¶Feyth hope & charyte therto were acorde
               
               
                  ¶Reaſon with ſadneſſe dyde his dylygence
                  ¶To clenſe the felde within and without
                  ¶And whan they ſe the bodely preſence
                  ¶Of that holy Eukaryſt lowly gan they lout
                  ¶So was that lorde receyued out of dout
                  ¶with all huble chere debonayre & benygne
                  ¶Lykly to pleaſure it was a grete ſygne
               
               
                  ¶Then came to the felde the mynyſter fynall
                  ¶Called holy vnccyon with a cryſmatory
                  ¶The fyue hye wayes in eſpecyall
                  
                     
¶Therof he anoȳted & made hit ſanctuary
                  ¶whome folowed deth which wolde not tary
                  ¶His feruent power there to put in vre
                  ¶As he was cōmaūded graūtyng dame Nature
               
            
            
               ¶Nota.
               
                  ¶He toke his darte called his mortall aunce
                  ¶And bent his ſtroke towarde the feldes herte
                  ¶That ſeyng preeſthode bad good remembraūce
                  ¶Towarde the felde tourne hym & aduerte
                  ¶For except hym all vertues thenſe muſt ſterte
                  ¶And euen with that dethe there ſeſyne toke
                  ¶And then all the company clercly hit forſoke
               
               
                  ¶And as ſoone as dethe thus had ſeſyne take
                  ¶The colour of the felde was chaūged ſodeynly
                  ¶The araſſe therin ſeere as though it had be bak
                  ¶And the fyue hygh wayes were mured vpon hy
                  ¶That fro thēſ forwarde none entre ſhold therbi
                  ¶The poſternes were alſo without lette
                  ¶Bothe in warde & outwarde fyne faſt ſhette
               
               
                  ¶Whiche done ſodeynly dethe vanyſſhed a way
                  ¶And Verty exalted was aboue the fyrmament
                  ¶where he toke crowne of glory 
                        •
                     
                     t is ay
                  ¶Preparate by Alpha & oo omnypotent
                  ¶The ſwete frute of macrocoſme thyd whȳ wēt
                  ¶And on all this mater as I ſtood muſyng thus
                  ¶Agayn fro the felde to me came Morpleus
               
               
                  ¶Sayēg thus what chere how lyketh ye this fyght
                  
                     
¶Haſte thou ſeen ynough or wyll thou ſee inore
                  ¶Nay ſyr I ſayd my trouthe I you plyght
                  ¶This is ſuffycente yf I knew wherfore
                  ¶This was to me ſhewed for therof he lore
                  ¶Coueyte I to haue yf I gete myght
                  ¶Folow me quod he and haue thy delyght
               
               
                  ¶Soo Thym folowed tyll he had me brougt
                  ¶To a foreſquare herber walled round aboute
                  ¶Loo qd Morpleꝰ here maiſt thou yt thouſought
                  ¶Fynde yf thou wyll I put the out of doute
                  ¶Alytyll whyle we ſtood ſtyll there withoute
                  ¶Tyll wytte chyef porter of that herber gate
                  ¶Requyred by ſtodye lete vs in there ate
               
               
                  ¶But whan I came in meruayled gretly
                  ¶Of that I behelde & herde reporte
                  ¶For fyrſt in a chayre apparaylled royally
                  ¶There ſate dam doctryne her childern to exorte
                  ¶And about her was many a ſondry ſorte
                  ¶Some wyllyng to lerne dyuerſe ſcyence
                  ¶And ſome for to haue perfyte intellygence
               
               
                  ¶Crowned ſhe was lyke an Empereſſe
                  ¶Wich iii. crownes ſtandyng on her hede on by
                  ¶All teyng about her an Infynyte proceſſe
                  ¶were to declare I tell you certaynly
                  ¶Neuertheleſſe ſome in mynde therof haue I
                  ¶whiche I ſhall to you as god wyll yeue me grace
                  ¶As I ſawe & herde tell in ſhort ſpace
               
               
                  
                  ¶Faſt by Doctryne on that one ſyde
                  ¶As I remembre ſate holy Texte
                  ¶That opened his mouthe to ye people wyde
                  ¶But not in comparyſon to Gloſe ye ſate nexte
                  ¶Moralyzacyon with a cloke contexte
                  ¶Sate & Scrypture was ſcrybe to theym all
                  ¶He ſate ay wrytyng of that that ſholde fall
               
               
                  ¶Theſe were tho that I there knewe
                  ¶By no maner waye of olde acqueyntaūce
                  ¶But as I before ſaw theym with Vertewe
                  ¶Company in felde & hauyng dalyaūce
                  ¶And as I thus ſtood halfe in a traunce
                  ¶whyle they were occupyed in her beſyneſſe
                  ¶Aboute the wallesmyn ey gan I dreſſe
               
               
                  ¶where I beheld the meruaylous ſtory
                  ¶That euer I yet ſawe in ony pycture
                  ¶For on tho walles was made memory
                  ¶Syngulerly of euery creature
                  ¶That there had byn bothe forme & ſtature
                  ¶whoos names reherſe I wyll as I can
                  ¶Bryng theym to mynde in ordre euery man
               
               
                  ¶Fyrſt to begynne there was in portrature
                  ¶Adam & Eue holdyng an apell rounde
                  ¶Noe in a ſhyp & Abraham hauyng ſure
                  ¶Aflyntſtone in his honde & I ſaaclay bounde
                  ¶On an hyghe moūte Jacob ſlepyng ſounde
                  ¶And a long ladder ſtood beſyde
                  ¶Joſeph in a Cyſterne was alſo there that tyde.
               
               
                  
                  ¶Next whom ſtode Moyſes with his tables two
                  ¶Aaron and Vrre his armes ſupportynge
                  ¶Ely in a brennyng chare was there alſo.
                  ¶And Elyze ſtode clad in hermytes cothynge.
                  ¶Dauyd wyth an harpe and a ſtone ſlynge.
                  ¶I ſaye Jeremy and Ezechyell.
                  ¶And cloſed wyth Lyons holy Danyell.
               
               
                  ¶A bacuc Mychee wyth Malachy.
                  ¶And Jonas out of a whales body comynge.
                  ¶Samuel in a Temple & holy zachary.
                  ¶Beſyde an aulter all blody ſtondynge.
                  ¶Dſee wyth Judyth ſtood there conſpyryng.
                  ¶The deth of Oloferne & Salamon.
                  ¶A chylde wyth hys ſwerde dyuydynge in two.
               
               
                  ¶Many mo prephetes certeynly there were.
                  ¶Whoos names now come not to my mynde.
                  ¶Melchyſedech alſo Jeſpyed there.
                  ¶Brede & wyne offryng as fell to his kynde.
                  ¶Ioachym & Anna▪ ſtode al behynde.
                  ¶Embraced in armes to the golden gate.
                  ¶And holy Iohan Baptyſt in deſert ſat.
               
               
                  ¶And now comyth to my remembrunce.
                  ¶I am auyſed I ſaw Sodechy:
                  ¶And Amos alſo with ſober countenaunce.
                  ¶Stondyng wyth her faces towarde Sophony.
                  ¶Neemy & Eldras bare hem companye.
                  ¶The holy man Iob as an Impotente.
                  
                     
¶Then folowed in pycture wyth Thoby pacyent
               
               
                  ¶Thyſe wyth many mo on that one ſyde.
                  ¶Of that grene herber portrayed were.
                  ¶A ſayd Morpleus a lytyll tyme abyde.
                  ¶Turn thy face where thy backe was ere.
                  ¶And beholde well what thou ſeeſte there.
                  ¶Than I me turned as he me badde.
                  ¶With herte ſtedfaſte & countenaunce ſadde.
               
               
                  ¶Where I ſawe Peter wyth his keyes ſtonde.
                  ¶Poule wyth a ſwerde and Iames alſo.
                  ¶Wyth a ſealop & Thomas holdyng in his honde
                  ¶Aſpere and Phylyp aproched hym to:
                  ¶Iames the leſſe nexte hem in pycture loo.
                  ¶Stode wyth Bartylme w whych was all flayn
                  ¶Symon & Thadee ſhewed how they were ſlayn
               
               
                  ¶Mathy and Barnabe drawȳg lottys ſtode
                  ¶Nexte whome was Marke a Lyon hym by.
                  ¶Hys boke holdyng & Mathew in his mode.
                  ¶Reſembled an aungell wyth wyngys glyouly.
                  ¶Luke had a calfe to holde his boke on hye.
                  ¶And Iohan wyth a cuppe & palme in his honde.
                  ¶An Egle bare his book thus ſaw I ſhem ſtonde
               
               
                  ¶G regory and Ierome Auſtyn and Ambroſe.
                  ¶Wyth pyllyōs on ther hedes ſtode lyke doctors
                  ¶Bernard wyth Amſelme and as I ſuppeſe.
                  ¶Thomas of alquyne and Domynyk cōfeſſours
                  
                     
¶Benet and Hew relygyous gouernours.
                  ¶Martyn & Iohan with byſſhops tweyne.
                  ¶Were there alſo and Cryſoſtom certayne.
               
               
                  ¶Behynd all thyſe was worſhypfull Bede.
                  ¶All behynde and next hym ſtood Orygene.
                  ¶Hydynge his face as he of his dede.
                  ¶Had hem a ſhamed ye wote what I mene.
                  ¶For of errour he was not al clene.
                  ¶And on that ſyde ſtode laſte of alle.
                  ¶The noble ꝓphetyſſa Sybell men her call.
               
               
                  ¶Let me remembre now I you pray
                  ¶My barayn is ſo thynne I deme in my herte
                  ¶Some of the felyſhyp that I there ſay.
                  ¶In all this whyle to haue ouerſterte.
                  ¶A benedicite none ere coude I aduerte.
                  ¶To thȳke on Andrew the apoſtle we his croſſe.
                  ¶Whome to forgete were a grete loſſe.
               
               
                  ¶Many one were peynted on that wall.
                  ¶Whoos names come not to my remembraūce
                  ¶But thyſe I marked in eſpecyall.
                  ¶And moo coude I tell in countenaunce.
                  ¶Of tyme but forth to ſhewe you the ſubſtaunce.
                  ¶Of this mater in the myndys of that arbere.
                  ¶Sat Doctryne coloured as ony cryſtall clere.
               
               
                  ¶Crowned as I tolde you late here before.
                  ¶Whoos apparayl wos worth treſour Infynyte
                  
                     
¶All erthyly rycheſſe count I no more.
                  ¶To that in cōparyſon valewȳg thē a myte.
                  ¶Ouer her hede houed a culuer fayr & whyte.
                  ¶Out of her byll ꝓceded a 
                        •
                     rete leme.
                  ¶Downward to Doctryne lyke a ſonne beme
               
               
                  ¶The wordes of Doctryne yaue grete redolēs
                  ¶In ſwetneſſe of ſauour to her dyſcyples al.
                  ¶It fer exceded myr & frankencenſe.
                  ¶Or ony other ire ſpyce or els galle.
                  ¶And whan ſhe me eſpyed anone ſhe gan me cal.
                  ¶Ad cōmaūded morpleꝰ y• he ſhold brȳ me nere
                  ¶For ſhe wold me hew theffect of my deſyre.
               
               
                  ¶She ſayd I know the cauſe of thy comyng.
                  ¶Is to vnderſtond be myn enforma
                        •
                     yon.
                  ¶Senſyble the mater of morp-leus his ſhe wynge
                  ¶As he hath the led about in veſyon.
                  ¶Wherfore now I apply thy natural reaſon.
                  ¶Vnto my wordes & or thou hens wend.
                  ¶Thou ſhalt it know begynnyng and ende.
               
               
                  ¶For whan Colus to pluto was broughte:
                  ¶By hys owne neclygence taken pryſonere.
                  ¶Wythin the erth for he ſo fer ſoughte.
                  ¶Sygnyfyed is nomore be that matere.
                  ¶But only to ſhew ſhe how it doth appere:
                  ¶That welth vnbrydeled at thyneye.
                  ¶Enbraſeth myſre wle and oft cauſyth foly.
               
               
                  
                  ¶For lyke as Colus beyng at his large
                  ¶Streyted hymſelfe thrugh his own lewdeneſſe
                  ¶For he wolde deele where he had no charge
                  ¶Ryght ſoo wantons by her wyldeneſſe
                  ¶Ofte ſythe bryng hymſelfe in dyſtreſſe
                  ¶Be cauſe they ſomtyme to largely deele
                  ¶what may wors be ſuffred thā ouermykell weel
                        •
                     
                  
               
               
                  ¶By Mynos the Iuge of hell deſperate
                  ¶May be vnderſtonde goddys ryghtwyſnes
                  ¶That to euery wyght his payne deputate
                  ¶Aſſygneth acordyng to his wyckednes
                  ¶Wherfore he is called Juge of cruelnes
                  ¶And as for Dyana & Neptunus compleynte
                  ¶Fygured may be fooles reaſon feynt.
               
               
                  ¶For lyke as they made her ſuggeſtyon
                  ¶To haue me Colus from cours of his kynde
                  ¶whiche was Impoſſyble to bryng to correceyon
                  ¶For euermore his lyberte haue wyll the wynde
                  ¶In lyke wyſe fooles other whyle be blynde
                  ¶wenyng to ſubdew with her one honde
                  ¶That is ouermykell for all an hole londe
               
               
                  ¶But what foloweth therof that ſhall thou here
                  ¶when they were come to the bankete
                  ¶The grete Apollo with his ſad chere
                  ¶Soo fayre & curtouſly gan theym entret
                  ¶That he made her beerdys on the new gete
                  ¶Loo what wyſdome doothto a foole
                  
                     
¶wherefore are children put to ſcoole
               
               
                  ¶Ofte is it ſeen with ſobre contenaunce
                  ¶That wyſe men fooles ouercome ay
                  ¶Tornyng as hem lyſt & all her varyaunce
                  ¶Chaunge from erneſt in to mery play
                  ¶what were they bothe amendeth that day
                  ¶when they were dreuen to her wyttes ende
                  ¶were they not fayne to graunt to be his frende
               
               
                  ¶Ryght ſoo fooles when they haue done
                  ¶All that they can than be they fayne
                  ¶Gyue vp hed mater to oblyuyone
                  ¶without rewarde they haue nomore brayne
                  ¶And yet ful ofte hath hit be ſayne
                  ¶when they it haue foryete & ſet at nought
                  ¶That they full dere haue afterwarde it bought
               
               
                  ¶And as for all tho that repreſent
                  ¶To be called goddys at that banket
                  ¶Reſemble falſe ydollys but to his entent
                  ¶was Morpleus cōmaunded thyder the to fet
                  ¶That thou ſholdeſt know the maner & the get
                  ¶Of the paynym law and of her byleue
                  ¶How falſe ydolatry ledeth hem by the ſleue
               
               
                  ¶For ſoone vppon the worldys creacyon
                  ¶when Adam and Eue had broke the precept
                  ¶whiche clerkes call the tyme of deuyacyon
                  ¶The worldly people in paynym law ſlept
                  
                     
¶Tyll moyſes vnd god the tables of ſtone kept
                  ¶In whiche tyme Poetes feyned many a fable
                  ¶To dyſcrete Reaſon ryght acceptable
               
               
                  ¶And to the entent that they ſholde ſounde
                  ¶To the ecres of hem the more pleaſantly
                  ¶That theȳ ſholde rede or here they yaue theȳ a groūd
                  ¶And addid names vnto theȳ naturally
                  ¶Of whom they ſpake & callid hē goddis hy
                  ¶Some for the ſtrength & myght of her nature
                  ¶And ſome for her ſotyll wytty coniecture
               
               
                  ¶By nature thus as the ſeuen planettes
                  ¶Haue her propre names by Aſtronomeres
                  ¶But goddys were they called by olde Poetes
                  ¶For her gret feruency of werkyng in her ſperes
                  ¶Experyence preueth this at all yeres
                  ¶And for as other that goddys called be
                  ¶For ſotyll wytte that ſhall I teche the
               
               
                  ¶How they by that hyghe name of god cam
                  ¶In this ſayd tyme the people was ſo rude
                  ¶That what maner creature man or woman
                  ¶Coude ony newelte contryue and conclude
                  ¶For the comon wele all the multytude
                  ¶Of the comon people a god ſholde hym call
                  ¶Or a goddeſſe after hit was fall
               
               
                  ¶Of the ſame thyng that was ſo newe founde
                  ¶As Ceres for ſhe the crafte of tylthe fonde
                  
                     
¶wherby more plentououſly corne dyd haboūde
                  ¶The people her called thrugh out euery londe
                  ¶Goddeſſe of corne wendyng in her honde
                  ¶Had layn all power of cornes habundaunce
                  ¶Thus were ye Paynems deceyued by ignoraūce
               
               
                  ¶In lyke maner Iſys was called the goddeſſe
                  ¶Of frute for ſhe fyrſt made it multuply
                  ¶By the name of graffyng & ſoo by proceſſe
                  ¶The name of Pan gan to deyfy
                  ¶For he fyrſt founde the mene ſhepe to guy
                  ¶Some toke it alſo by her condycyon
                  ¶As Pluto Fortune and ſuche other doon
               
               
                  ¶Thus all that Poetes put vnder couerture
                  ¶Of fable the rurall people hit toke
                  ¶Properly as acte refuſyng the fygure
                  ¶whiche errour ſome of hem neuer forſoke
                  ¶Ofte a falſe myrour deceyueth a mannes loke
                  ¶As thou mayſt dayly pryue at thyne ey
                  ¶Thus were the paynyms deceyued generally
               
               
                  ¶That ſeyng the dedely enemy of mankynde
                  ¶By his pouer premyſſyue entred the ymagys
                  ¶within the Temples to make the people blynde
                  ¶In her ydolatry ſtandyng on hyghe ſtagys
                  ¶In ſomoche whoo vſed daūgerous paſſagys
                  ¶Ony maner way by water or be londe
                  ¶when hyd his ſacryfyce his anſwere redy fonde
               
               
                  
                  ¶Thus duryng the tyme of deuyacion
                  ¶From Adam to Moyſes was ydolatry
                  ¶Through the worlde vſed in comon opynyon
                  ¶Theſe were the goddys that thou there ſy
                  ¶And as for the a wayters that ſtood hem by
                  ¶They polytyke Phyloſophers & Poetes were
                  ¶whiche feyned the fables y• I ſpeke of here
               
               
                  ¶Then ſeaſed the tyme of deuy acyon
                  ¶when Moyſes receyued that tables of ſtone
                  ¶Entryng the tyme of reuocacyon
                  ¶On the mounte of Synay ſtondyng allone
                  ¶God yaue hym myght ayene all his fone
                  ¶And then began the olde teſtament
                  ¶whiche to the people by Moyſes was ſent
               
               
                  ¶And that tyme dured the Incarnacyon
                  ¶Of Cryſte and then began it to ſeſe
                  ¶For then came the tyme of reconcylyacyon
                  ¶Of man to god I tell the doutleſe
                  ¶When the ſone of man put hym in preſe
                  ¶wylfully to ſuffre dethe for mankynde
                  ¶In holy ſcrypture this mayſt thou fynde
               
               
                  ¶This Reconcylyacyon was the tyme of grace
                  ¶when foūded was the chirche vpon ye fayre ſtōe
                  ¶And to holy Peter the keye delyuered was
                  ¶Of heuen hell dyſpoyled was anone
                  ¶Thys was mankynde delyuered from his fone
                  ¶wnd then began the newe teſtament
               
               
                  
                  ¶Whiche .iii. tymes a ſondry dyuyded
                  ¶Mayſt thou hereſee yf thou lyſt beholde
                  ¶The fyrſt behynde the in pycture in prouyded
                  ¶The ſeconde of the lyft honde ſhew prophet olde
                  ¶The .iii. on the ryght honde here it is to y• tolde
                  ¶Thus haſt thou in vyſyon the verey fygure
                  ¶Of theſe .iii. tymes here ſhewed in portrayture
               
               
                  ¶That is to ſay fyrſt of deuyacyon
                  ¶From Adam to Moyſes recordyng ſcripture
                  ¶Seconde fro Moyſes to the Incarnacyon
                  ¶Of Cryſt kepeth reuocacyon cure
                  ¶And as for the thyrd thou mayſt be verrey ſure
                  ¶wyll dure from thens to the worldes ende
                  ¶But now the .iiii. muſt thou haue in mynde
               
               
                  ¶whiche is callid ꝓperly ye tyme of pylgremage
                  ¶After ſome & ſome named it otherwyſe
                  ¶And call hit the tyme of daungerous paſſage
                  ¶And ſome of werre that fully hit dyſpyſe
                  ¶But what ſo it be named I wyll the auyſe
                  ¶Remembre it well and prynte it in thy mynde
                  ¶wherof the fygure mayſt thou me behynde
               
               
                  ¶And elles remembre thyſelfe in thyne herte
                  ¶How Vyce & Vertue dayly theym occupy
                  ¶In maner one of hem hym to peruerte
                  ¶Another to bryng hym to endeles glory
                  ¶Thus they contynue fyght for the vyctory
                  ¶Hit is no nede herof to tell the more
                  
                     
¶For in this ſhort vyſyon yu haſt ſeen it before
               
               
                  ¶And as for Attropos greuous compleynt
                  ¶Vnto the goddys betokeneth noo more
                  ¶But oonly to ſhew the how frendely conſtreȳt
                  ¶On a ſtedfaſt herte weyeth full ſore
                  ¶Good wyll requyreth good wyll ayene therfore
                  ¶Dyſcorde to deth hathe ay byn a frende
                  ¶For Dyſcorde bryngeth many to her ende
               
               
                  ¶Wherfore Dethe thought he wolde auenged be
                  ¶On his trendes quarell yf that he myghte
                  ¶For her gret vnkyndneſſe in ſomoche as ſhe
                  ¶was among hem all had ſo in deſpyte
                  ¶And at that banket made of ſoo lyte
                  ¶whiche cauſed hym among hē to caſt in a bone
                  ¶That foūde theȳ gnawyng ynough euerichone
               
               
                  ¶Thus ofte is ſeen on frende for a nother
                  ¶wyll ſay & doo and ſome tyme maters feyne
                  ¶And alſo kynnyſmen a coſyne or a brother
                  ¶wyll for his alyer he haue cauſe compleyne
                  ¶And where that he loueth doo his beſy peyne
                  ¶His frendes mater as his owne to take
                  ¶whiche oft ſythe cauſeth mychyll ſorow awake
               
               
                  ¶Be hit ryght or wrong he chargeth not a myte
                  Ap towarde that poynt he taketh lytyll hede
                  ¶So that he may haue his frowarde appetyte
                  Per ſormed he careth not how his ſoule ſpede not
                  
                  
                     
¶Of God or Deuyll haue ſuche lytyll drede
                  ¶How be it one there is that lord is of all
                  ¶whiche to euery wyght at laſt rewarde ſhall
               
               
                  ¶And as for ye batayl betwene Vertu holde
                  ¶Soo playnly appereth to the inwardly
                  ¶To make expoſycyon therof new or olde
                  ¶were but ſuperfluyte there fore refuſe hit I
                  ¶In man ſhall thou fynde yt were kept dayly
                  ¶Lyke as yu haſt ſeen it fowtyue before thy face
                  ¶The pycture me behynd the weth it ī lytyll ſpace
               
               
                  ¶And as for Macrocoſme it is nomore to ſay
                  ¶But the leſſe worlde to the comon entent
                  ¶whiche applyed is to man both nyght & day
                  ¶Soo is man the felde to whiche all were ſent
                  ¶On bothe partyes & they that thyder went
                  ¶Sygnyfye nomore but after the condycyon
                  ¶Of euery manes opynyon
               
               
                  ¶And as for the noble knygt Perſeueraunce
                  ¶whiche gate the felde when it was almoſt gone
                  ¶Betokeneth nomore but the contynuance
                  ¶Of vertuous lyuyng tyll dethe hath auergone
                  ¶who ſoo wyll doo rewarded is anone
                  ¶As Vertue was with the crowne on by
                  whiche is noo more but euerlaſtyng glory
               
               
                  ¶And as for Preſtynacyon
                  ¶That eche of hem rewarded after his deſerte
                  
                     
¶Is to vnderſtonde nomore but dampnacyon
                  ¶To vycyous people is the verey ſcourge ſmert
                  ¶Rewarde for they fro Vertue wolde peruert
                  ¶And endeleſſe Ioye is to hem that be electe
                  ¶Rewarded & to all that folow the ſame ſecte
               
               
                  ¶And as for the keyes of the poſternes fyue
                  whiche were to Morpleꝰ rewarded for his laboure
                  ¶Sygnyfye not elles but whyle man is on lyue
                  ¶His fyue inwarde wyttes ſhall be euery hour
                  ¶In his ſlepe occupyed in hele & in langour
                  ¶with fantaſyes tryfels Illuſyons & dremes
                  ¶whiche Poetes call Morpleus ſtremes
               
               
                  ¶And as for Reſidiuacyon is nomore to ſay
                  ¶But after Confeſſyon tornyng ayene to ſynne
                  ¶whiche to euery man retornyth ſauns delay
                  ¶To vycyous lyuyng agayn hym to wynne
                  ¶whyle ony man lyueth wyll it neuer blynne
                  ¶That curſed concluſyon for to bryng aboute
                  ¶But Reaſon with Sadnes kepe it ſtyll oute
               
               
                  ¶Here haſt thou properly the verrey ſentence
                  ¶Herde now declared of this vyſyon
                  ¶The pycture alſo yeueth clere intellygence
                  ¶Therof beholden with good dyſcreſyon
                  ¶Loke well aboute and take conſyderaſyon
                  ¶As I haue declared whether hit ſoo be
                  ¶A ſyr quoth Morpleus what tolde I the
               
               
                  
                  ¶Haſt thou properly the verey ſentence
                  ¶Loke on yon wall yonder before
                  ¶And all that tyme ſtood I in a wyre
                  ¶whiche way fyrſt myn hert wolde yeue more
                  ¶To loke in a ſtody ſtood I therfore
                  ¶Neuetheleſſe at laſt as Morpleus me badde
                  ¶I loked forwarde with contenaunce ſadde
               
               
                  ¶Where I behelde in portrayture
                  ¶The maner of the felde euen as it was
                  Shewed me before & euery creature
                  ¶On bothe ſydes beyng drawyng in ſmall ſpace
                  ¶Soo curyouſly in ſoo lytyll a compace
                  ¶In all this worlde was neuer thyng wrought
                  ¶Hit were Impoſſyble in erthe to be thought
               
               
                  ¶And when I had long beholde that pycture
                  ¶what qd Morpleus how longe ſhalte thou loke
                  ¶Daryn
                        •
                      as a daſtard on yon portrayture:
                  ¶Come of for ſhame thy wytte ſtante a croke
                  ¶I heryng that myn herte to me toke
                  ¶Towarde the fourthe wall tornyng my vyſage
                  ¶where I ſawe Poetes & Phyloſophers ſage
               
               
                  ¶Many one moo than at the banket
                  ¶Serued the goddes as I ſayde before
                  ¶Som were made ſtandyng & ſom in chayris ſet
                  ¶Som lokyng on bokys as they had ſtodyed ſore
                  ¶Som drawyng almenakis & in her hondis bore
                  ¶Aſtyrlabes takyng the altytude of the ſonne
                  
                     
¶Among whome Dyogenes ſate in a tonne
               
               
                  ¶And as I was lokyng on that fourthe wall
                  ¶Of Dyogenes beholdyng the ymage
                  ¶Sodeynly Doctryne began me to call
                  ¶And bad me tourne towarde hyr my vyſage
                  ¶And ſoo then I dyde with humble corage
                  ¶whan thynkeſt yu ſhe ſayd haſt yu not thentent
                  ¶Yet of theſe foure walles what they repreſent
               
               
                  ¶The pycture on the fyrſt yt ſtandeth at my bake
                  ¶Sheweth the ye preſent tyme of pylgremage
                  ¶Of whiche before I vnto the ſpake
                  ¶whiche is the tyme of daungerous paſſage
                  ¶The ſeconde dyſcrettly agayne my vyſage
                  ¶The tyme expreſſeth of Deuyacyon
                  ¶whyle paynyme lawe had the domynacyon
               
               
                  ¶The thryd wall ſtandyng on my lyfe honde
                  ¶The tyme repreſenteth of Reuocacyon
                  ¶And the fourthe ſtandyng on my ryght honde
                  ¶Determyneth the tyme of Reconſylyacyon
                  ¶This is the effecte of thy vyſyon
                  ¶wherfore the nedeth nomore theron to muſe
                  ¶Hit were but veyne thy wyttes to dyſuſe
               
               
                  ¶But duryng the tym of Reconſylyacyon
                  ¶Thy tyme of pylgremage loke well yu ſpende
                  ¶And then well gracyous Predeſtynacyon
                  ¶Bryng 
                        •
                     he to glory at thy law ende
                  
                     
¶And euen with that came to my mynde
                  ¶My fyrſt concluſyon that I was aboute
                  ¶To haue dreuen er ſlepe made me to lute
               
               
                  ¶That is to ſay how Senſualyte
                  ¶wt Reaſon to acorde myght be brought aboute
                  ¶whiche cauſed me to knele downe on my kne
                  ¶And beſeke Doctryne determyne that doute
                  ¶Oo lord god ſayd Doctrȳe canſt yu not withoute
                  ¶Me that concluſyon bryng to an ende
                  ¶Ferre is fro the wytte & ferther good mende
               
               
                  ¶And euen with that Dethe gan appere
                  ¶Shewyng hymſelfe as though that he wolde
                  ¶His darte haue occupyed within that herbere
                  ¶But there was none for hym yong nor olde
                  ¶Saue oonly I Doctrine hym tolde
                  ¶And when I herde hyr with hym comon thus
                  ¶I me withdrew behynde Morpleus.
               
               
                  ¶Dredyng full ſore leſt he with his dart.
                  ¶Through Doctrynes wordes ony entreſſe.
                  ¶In me wolde haue had or claymed ony part
                  ¶whiche ſholde haue cauſed me grete heuyneſſe
                  ¶within whiche tyme & ſhort proceſſe
                  ¶Came thynder Reaſon and Senſualyte.
                  ¶A quoth Doctryne ryght welcome be ye
               
               
                  ¶Hit is not long ſythe we of you ſpake
                  ¶Ye muſt er ye goo determyne a doute
                  
                     
¶And euen with that ſhe the mater brake
                  ¶To theym & tolde hit euery where aboute
                  ¶I wolde haue be thens yf I had moute
                  ¶For fere I loked as blake as a cole
                  ¶I wolde haue cropen in a mouſe hole
               
               
                  ¶what quoth Doctryne where is he now
                  ¶That meu
                        •
                     d this mater ſtraunge & dyffuſe
                  ¶He is a cowarde I make myn auow
                  ¶He hyded his hede his mocyon to refuſe
                  ¶Blame hym not qd Reaſon alway yt to vſe
                  ¶when he ſeeth Dethe ſoo nere at his honde
                  ¶Yet is his part hym to withſtonde
               
               
                  ¶Or at the leſte way elles fro tym flee
                  ¶As longe as he may who dooth other wyſe
                  ¶Is an ydeote quoth Senſualytee
                  ¶who dredeth not Dethe wyſe men hym dyſpyſe
                  ¶what ſaid Doctryne how long hathe this gyſe
                  ¶Be holden & vſed thus a twixe you tweyne
                  ¶ye were not wonte to acorde certeyne
               
               
                  ¶yes quoth Reaſon in this poynt alway
                  ¶To euery man haue we yeuen our counſayll
                  ¶Dethe for to flee as long as they may
                  ¶Al though wo otherwyſe haue done our trauayl
                  ¶Eche other to repreſſe yet withoute fayll
                  ¶In that poynt oonly dyſcordeth we neuer
                  ¶Thus condeſcended therin be we for euer
               
               
                  
                  ¶A ha ſayd Doctryne then is the concluſyon
                  ¶Clerely determined of the gret doute
                  ¶That here was meuyd & halfe in deryſyon
                  ¶She me then called & bade me loke oute
                  ¶Come forthe ſhe ſayd & feere not this route
                  ¶And euen with that Reaſon & Senſualyte
                  ¶And Dethe fro thens were vanyſſhed all thre
               
               
                  ¶Then loked I forthe as Doctryne me badde
                  ¶when Dethe was gone me thought I was bolde
                  ¶To ſhewe myſelfe but yet was I ſadde
                  ¶Me thought my doute was not as I wolde
                  ¶Clerely and openly declared & tolde
                  ¶Hit ſowned to me as a parable
                  ¶Derke as a myhe or a fayned fable
               
               
                  ¶And Doctryne my conceyte gan eſpy
                  ¶wherfore ſayd ſhe ſtandeſt thou ſoo ſtyll
                  ¶wherin is thy thought arte thou in ſtody
                  ¶Of thy queſtyon haſt thou not thy fyll
                  ¶To the declared tell me thy wyll
                  ¶Herdeſt thou not Reaſon & Senſualyte
                  ¶Declared thy doute here before the
               
               
                  ¶Forſothe quoth I. I herde what they ſayde
                  ¶But neuertheleſſe my wytte is ſo thynne
                  ¶And alſo of Dethe I was ſo afrayde
                  ¶That hit is out where hit vent ynne
                  ¶And ſo that mater can
                        •
                      I not wynne
                  ¶without your helpe & benyuolence
                  
                     
¶Therof to expreſſe the veray ſentence
               
               
                  ¶Well quod Doctryne then yeue attendaunce
                  ¶Vnto my wordes & thou ſhalt here
                  ¶Openly declared the concordaunce
                  ¶Atwene Senſualyte & Reaſon in fere
                  ¶If thou take hede hit clerely dooth apere
                  ¶How they were knette in one opynyon
                  ¶Bothe agayn Dethe helde contradyccon
               
               
                  ¶Whiche concordaunce nomore ſygnyfyeth
                  ¶To playne vnderſtandyng but in euery mane
                  ¶Bothe Senſualyte & Reaſon applyeth
                  ¶Rather Dethe to flee then with hit to be tane
                  ¶Loom that poynt accorde they holly thane
                  ¶And in all other they clerely dyſcorde
                  ¶Thus is trewly ſet thy doubtfull monacorde
               
               
                  ¶I heryng that kneled on my kne
                  ¶And thanked her lowly for her dyſcyplyne
                  ¶That ſhe woucheſafe of her benygnyte
                  ¶Of tho gret doubtes me to enlumyne
                  ¶well was ſhe worthy to be called Doctryne
                  ¶If it had be nomore but for the ſolucyon
                  ¶Of my demaunde & of this ſtraunge vyſyon
               
               
                  ¶And as I with myne hede began for to bow
                  ¶As me well ought to do her reuerence
                  ¶She thens departed I can not tell how
                  ¶But within a moment gone was ſhe thens
                  
                     
¶Then ſayd Morpleus let vs go hens
                  ¶what ſholde we here tarye lengere
                  ¶Haſt thou not herde a generall anſwere
               
               
                  ¶To all thy materes that thou lyſt to meue
                  ¶My tyme draweth nere that I muſt reſt
                  ¶And euen therwith he toke me by the ſleue
                  ¶And ſayd goo we hens for that ſholde I beſt
                  ¶As good is ynough as a grete feſt
                  ¶Thou haſt ſeen ynough holde the content
                  ¶And euen with yt forthe with hym I went
               
               
                  ¶Tyll he had me brought agene to my bedde
                  ¶where he me founde and then pruyely
                  ¶He ſtale awaye I coude not vnderſtande
                  ¶were he became but ſodeynly
                  ¶As he came he went I tell you veryly
                  ¶whiche done fro ſlepe I gan to awake
                  ¶My body all in ſwet began for to ſhake
               
               
                  ¶For drede of the ſyght that I had ſene
                  ¶wenyng to me all had be trew
                  ¶Actuelly done where I had bene
                  ¶That batyll holde twene Vyce & Vertew
                  ¶But when I ſee hit hit was but a whew
                  ¶A dreme a fantaſy & a thyng of nought
                  ¶To ſtudy theron I had nomore thought
               
               
                  ¶Tyll at the laſt I gan me bethynke
                  ¶For what cauſe ſhewed was this vyſyon
                  
                     
¶I knew not wherfore I toke pen & ynke
                  ¶And paper therof to make mencyon
                  ¶In wrytyng takyng conſyderacyon
                  ¶That noo defaute were found in me
                  ¶wheron accuſed I ought for to be
               
               
                  ¶For ſlouthe that I had left hit vntolde
                  ¶Neyther by mouthe nor in remembraūce
                  ¶Put it in wrytyng where thorugh manyfolde
                  ¶wayes of accuſaciō myght torne me to greuaūce
                  ¶All this I ſawe as I lay in a traunce
                  ¶But wheder it was with myne ey bodely
                  ¶Or not in certayn god knoweth & not I
               
               
                  ¶That to dyſcerne I purpoſe not to dele
                  ¶Soo large by my wyll it longeth not to me
                  ¶were hit dreme or vyſyon for your owne wele
                  ¶All that ſhall hit rede here rad or ſe
                  ¶Take therof the beſt & let the worſt be
                  ¶Try out the corne clene from the chaff
                  And then may ye ſay ye haue a ſure ſtaff
               
               
                  ¶To ſtande by at nede of ye Wyll it holde
                  ¶And walke by the way of Vertue
                  ¶But al wey beware be ye yong or olde
                  ¶That your Frewyll ay to Vertue more
                  ¶Apply than to Vyce the eaſyer may be bore
                  ¶The burden of the felde that ye dayly fyght
                  ¶Agayn your .iii. enemyes for all her gret myght
               
               
                  
                  ¶That is to ſay the Deuyll & the Fleſſhe
                  ¶And alſo the worlde with hith his gloſyng chere
                  ¶whiche on you loketh euer newe & freſſhe
                  ¶But he is not as he dooth apere
                  ¶Loke ye kepe you ay out of his daungere
                  ¶And ſoo the vyctory ſhall ye obteyne
                  ¶Vyce fro you exyled & Vertue in you reyne
               
               
                  ¶And then ſhall ye haue the trūphall guerdon
                  ¶That god reſerued to euery creature
                  ¶Aboue in his celeſtyall manſyon
                  ¶Ioye & blyſſe in fynyte eternally to endure
                  ¶wherof we ſay we wolde fayne be ſure
                  ¶But the way thyderwarde to holde be we lothe
                  ¶That oft ſythe cauſeth ye good lord to be wrothe
               
               
                  ¶And by our deſerte our habytacyon chaūgeth
                  ¶Fro Ioye to payne & woo perpetuelly
                  ¶From his gloryous ſyght thus he vs eſtraūgeth
                  ¶For our vycyous lyuyng thorugh our owne foly
                  ¶wherfore let vs praye to that lorde of glory
                  ¶whyle we in erthe be y• he wyll yeue vs grace
                  ¶So vs here to guyde that we may haue a place
               
               
                  ¶Accordyng to oure Regeneracyon
                  ¶which heuenly ſpyrytes his name to magnyfy.
                  ¶whiche downe deſcendeth for oure redempcyon
                  ¶Offryng hymſelfe on the croſſe to his fad on hy
                  ¶Now benygne Iheſu that boren was of Mary
                  ¶All that to this vyſyon haue gyue her audyence
                  
                     
¶Graunte eternall Ioye after thy laſt ſētence
               
               AMEN.
               ¶Here endeth a lytyll Treatyſe
named The aſſemble of goddes
            
         
         
            
               
               
               
            
            
         
      
   