
      
         
            
            
            
               
            
            
               
               
                  ¶ This is the Royall Cyte of Thebes.
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Here begynneth the prologue of the Storye of Thebes.
            
               
                  THan bryght phebus paſſedPhebus in Aryete was the Ram
               Myd of Aprell & in to the Bo le cam
               And Satourne olde. withSaturnus in Virgine his froſty face
               In Virgyne. taken had his place
               Melencolyke. and ſlouth of mocyo
                     •
                  
               
               And was alſo. in thoppoſycyon
               Of Lucyna the mone. moyſte and paleJupiter in capitecācri
               
               That many ſhoure. fro heuen made auale
               whan Aurora. was in the morow red
               And Jupyter. in the Crabbes hed
               Hath take his paleys. and his manſyon
               The luſty tyme. and Joly freſſhe ſeaſon
               whan that Flora. the noble myghty quene
               The ſoyll hath clad. in newe tender grene
               with her floures. craftely meynte
               Branche & bough. with red & whyte depeynte
               Fle
                     •
                  yng the baume. on hylles and on vales
               The tyme in ſoth. whan Canterbury tales
               Complet and tolde. at many ſondry ſtage
               Of eſtates. in the pylgrymage
               Eueryche man. lyke to his degree
               Some of deſporte. ſome of moralyte
               
                  Some of knyghthode. loue and gentylleſſe
               And ſome alſo. of parfyte holyneſſe
               And ſome alſo. in ſothe of Rybaudrye
               To make laughter. in the companye
               Eche admytted. for none wolde other greue
               Lyke as the Loke. the Myller and the ReueThe Loke Myller & ye Reue
               
               Aquyte hemſelfe. ſhortly to conclude
               Boyſtouſly in her termes rude
               whan they hadden. well dronken of the bolle
               And eke alſo. with his pylled nolle
               The Pardoner. beerdles all his chynPardoner
               
               Glaly eyes. and face of Lherubyn
               Tellyng a tale. to angre with the Frere
               As openly. the ſtory can you lere
               worde by worde. with euery circūſtaunce
               Echone I wryte. and put in remembraunce
               By hym that was. yf I ſhall not fayneLhaw
                        •
                     er
               
               Floure of Poe
                     •
                  es. thorugh out of all Bretayne
               whiche ſothly had. mooſt of excellence
               In Rethoryke. and in eloquence
               Rede his makyng. who lyst the trouthe fynde
               whiche neuer ſhall. appallen in my mynde
               But alwaye freſſhe. ben in myn memorye
               To whome be yeue. pryſe honour and glorye
               Of well ſayeng. fyrſte in oure langage
               Lhyfe regyſtrer. in this pylgrymage
               All that was 
                     •
                  olde. forgetyng nought at all
               Fayned tales. nor thyng hyſtoryall
               
                  with many prouerbes. dyuerſe and vncouthe
               By reherſayle. of his ſugred mouth
               Of eche thynge. kepynge in ſubſtaunce
               The ſentence hole. withoute varyaunce
               Voydynge the chaff. ſothly for to ſayn
               Enlumynynge. the trew pyked grayn
               By crafty wrytyng. of his ſawes ſwete
               Fro the tyme. that they dyde mete
               Fyrſte the pylgrymes. ſothly euerychon
               Atte the Tabard. aſſembled one by oon
               And fro Sothwerke. ſothly for to ſeyeAtte the 
                        •
                     a bard in ſou thwerke
               
               To Lanterbury. rydynge on her weye
               Tellyng a tale. as I reherſe can
               Lych as the hooſt. aſſygned euery man
               Noon ſoo hardy. his byddynge dyſobeyeThe Ooſt
               
               And this whyle. that the pylgrymes leye
               Atte Lanterbury. well logged one and alle
               I not in ſoth. what I may it calle
               Hap or fortune. in concluſyon
               That me befelle. to entre in to the toun
               The holy Saynt playnly to vyſyte
               After my ſykeneſſe. vowes to acquyte
               In a Lope of blake. and not of greneThe diſcri uynge of ye monke &c.
               
               On a palfray. Sclender. longe and lene
               with Ruſty brydell. made not for the Sale
               My man toforne. with a voyde male
               That of fortune. toke myne ynne anoon
               where the pylgrimes. were logged euerychon
               
                  The ſame tyme. her gouernour the Ooſt
               Scondynge in halle. full of wynde and booſt
               Lyche to a man. wounder ſterne and fers
               whiche ſpake to me. and ſayd anone dan persThe wordis of ye oſt to ye monke
               
               Dan domynyk. dan Godfray or Llement
               Ye be welcome. newly in to kent
               Though your brydell. haue nother boos ne bell
               Beſechynge you. that ye wyll tell
               Fyrſte of youre name. and what coūtre
               withoute more. ſhortly that ye be
               That loke ſo pale. all deuoyde of blode
               Vpon youre hede. a wonder thredbare hode
               well arrayed. for to ryde late
               I anſwerde my name. was LydgateLydgate monke of Burye
               
               Monke of Burye. nye fyfty yere of age
               Lome to this towne. to do my pylgrymage
               As I haue hyght. I haue there of noo ſhame
               Dan Johan qd he. well brouke ye your nameThe wordis of ye oſt
               
               Though ye be ſooll. byth right glad and lyght
               Prayeng you to ſuppe. with vs this nyght
               And ye ſhall haue made. at your deuys
               A grete poddynge. or a rounde hagys
               A fraunche moyſe. a tanſe or a Froyſe
               To ben a monke. ſclender is your coyſe
               ye haue ben ſyke. I dare myne hede aſſure
               Or lette fede. in a faynt paſture
               Lyfte vp your hede. be glad take noo ſorowe
               And ye ſhold home ryde. with vs to morowe
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Pars prima ¶ Here begynneth the Story of the deſtruccyon of the Lyte of Thebes
            
               SIrs quod I. ſyth of your curteſye
               I entred am. in to your cōpanye
               And admytted. a tale for to telle
               By hym that hath. power to compelle
               I mene oure Oſt. gouernour & guyde
               Of you echone rydynge. here beſyde
               Though that my wytt. bareyn be & dulle
               I wyll reherſe. a ſtory wounderfulle
               Towchynge the Syege of deſtruccyon
               Of worthy Thebes. the myghty royall toun
               Bylte and begonne. of olde antyquyte
               Vpon the tyme. of worthy Joſue
               By dylygence. of kynge Amphyon
               Lheef cauſe fyrſte. of his foundacyon
               For whiche his fame. whiche neuer ſhall awaye
               In honour floureth. yet vnto this daye
               And in ſtory remembred. is and preyſed
               But how the walles. were on heyght reyſed
               It is wonder. and meruayle for to here
               But yf ye lyſte. I ſhall you platly lere
               The maner hole platly in ſentence
               Vnder ſupporte. of your pacyence
               As wryte myn auctour. & Bochas bothe two
               Rede her bookes. and ye ſhall fynde it ſo
               
                  Eueryche conclude. lyche as his fantaſye
               And thus full ofte. gendred is enuye
               In folkes hertes. of ſoleynce and pryde
               For ſuche as lyſte not. ones to loke aſyde
               To rewarde hem. whan they lowe lou
                     •
                  e
               And agayne kynde. it is oute of doute
               That ony hede. by recorde of the wyſeHow ye poure peple ſupportē & be ren vp ye ſtate of a k
                        •
                     g
               
               Sholde the fote of dyſdayne deſpyſe
               whiche bereth hym vp. who ſoo can take hede
               And ſuſteyneth. in his mooſt nede
               As his pyler. and his ſuppoayle
               For fynally. ne were the porayle
               Her berer vp. and ſupportacyon
               Fare well lordſhyp. and denomynacyon
               Thorugh oute the londe. of euery hygh eſtate
               wherfore me ſemeth. more is fortunate
               Of Marcurye. the ſwete ſugred harpe
               Than Mars ſwerde. whettyd kene and ſharpe
               More accepted. with aſpectes good
               Than is this god. with his lokes woodNota What the goodlihede of a prynce auaileth to wyne ye her 
                        •
                     is of his peple
               
               For humble ſpeche. with glad contenaūce
               Maye a prynce. ſhortly auaūce
               Among his people. hertes for to wynne
               Of Inwarde loue. whiche wyll not twyne
               Than golde. rycheſſe. pryde or tyrannye
               Other dyſdayne. daungere or ſurquedye
               Or of lordes. clerkes can reporte
               But that loue. her crowne doo ſupporte
               
                  The fyne is not. in concluſyonEnſample of kyng ā
                     phyon
               
               I take recorde. of kyng Amphyon
               That bylte Thebes. by his eloquence
               More than of pryde. or of vyolence
               Noble and ryche. that lyke was nowhere none
               And thus the walles. made of lyme and ſtone
               were reyſed fyrſte. by ſyngynges of this kyng
               Lyke as poetes feynen. in her wrytyng
               But ſothly yet. ſome expoſytoursHow after thopynyon of ſom auc tours Cad mꝰ bylded fyrſt ye cyte of Thebes
               
               Groundyng hem. vpon olde auctours
               Sayen that Cadmus. the famous olde man
               Full longe afore. the Cytee fyrſte began
               And the grounde. of byldyng ſette
               And the bondes. by compas oute mette
               with thong oute kerue of a bolys ſyde
               whiche enuyron. ſtretche myght wyde
               To gette in londe. a full large ſpaceHow the cō tre of boece toke fyrſte his name of a bolyſkyn & aftir callid The bes How kyng cadmꝰ was exyled oute of Thebes by the ꝓweſſe of kyng Amphyon
               
               where vpon to bylde. a dwellyng place
               And called was. the ſoyle thus getten yn
               whylom Boece. of the bolys ſkyn
               The name after. in to Thebes tourned
               But Cadmus. hath not there longe ſoiourned
               Lyke in ſtory. as it is compyled
               For ſhortly. he fro thennes was exyled
               Neuer after. for to dwell in the town
               By the knyghthode. of this Amphyon
               whiche vp perfourmeth. ryche for the nones
               The Cytee Thebes. of myghty ſquare ſtones
               
                  As I you tolde. a lyte here to forne
               And Cadmus thus. his kyngdom hath lorne
               Sceptre and crowne. and his power royall
               Now haue I tolde. vnto you grounde of all
               That ye well knowe. by Informacyon
               Clerely the pyth. and thexpoſycyon
               Of this mater. as clerkes can you tell
               It were but vayne. lenger for to dwell
               To tarye you on this mater
               Syth my tale. whiche that ye ſhall here
               Vpon oure waye. wyll laſte a longe whyle
               The ſpace in ſothe. as I ſuppoſe of an myle
               And now ye knowe. fyrſte how Amphyon
               Bylte and began this Cyte and this town
               Regnyng there. longe after as I rede
               Of hym nomore. for I wyll procedeHow the ly 
                        •
                     e of aphy on by ducet was cō
                     
                        •
                     ey e
                        •
                      vnto k
                        •
                     
                     ge Layus
               
               To my purpos. that I fyrſte began
               Not tellyng here. how the lyne ran
               Fro kyng to kyng. by ſucceſſyon
               Conueyeng doun. by the ſtoke of Amphyon
               Ceryouſly by lyne. all the dyſcente
               But leue all this. playnly of entente
               To telle forth. in bokes as I rede
               How Layus. by proceſſe gan ſuccede
               To bere the crowne. in this myghty londe
               Holdyng the ſcepture. of Thebes in his hondekyng Layꝰ & 
                        •
                     ocaſta his wyfe
               
               Manly and wyſe. duryng all his lyfe
               And Jocaſta. called was his wyfe
               
                  Full womanly. the ſtory ſayth certeyn
               For a tyme. though ſhe were bareyn
               Tyll layus. in full humble wyſe
               To haue a childe. dyde ſacrefyce
               Fyrſte to Appollo. in his chare ſoo bryghte
               And Jubyter. that hath ſoo grete a myghte
               Beſechynge hem. with deuoute reuerence
               To graunte oonly. through her influence
               That his requeſt. executed maye be
               And ſpecyally. to goddeſſes thre
               He beſoughte. Pallas and Juno
               And Dyane. for to helpe alſo
               That he be not defrauded. of his boone
               And his prayer accepted. was full ſoone
               That fynally. thorugh his rytes olde
               Euen lyke. as his herte wolde
               The quene Jocaſta. hath anone conceyued
               whiche whan the kynge. fully hath perceyued
               He made in haſte. hym lyſte not to abyde
               Thorugh his kyngdome. meſſengers ryde
               Fro cooſt to cooſt. the ſtory can deuyſe
               For dyuyners. and philoſophers wyſe
               For ſuche as werne. famous phyſycyens
               And well experte. Aſtronomyens
               To come in haſte. vnto his preſence
               To fynde oute. ſhortly in ſentence
               By crafte oonly. of calculacyonHow the aſtronomyēs & the phyloſophers of thebes calked out the fayt of edippus
               
               The childes fate. and dyſpoſycyon
               
                  And therupon. to yeue a Jugemente
               The rote I take. atte aſcendente
               Trewly ſought oute. by mynute and degree
               The ſelfe houre. of his natyuytee
               Not for yet. the heuenly manſyons
               Clerely ſerched. by ſmale fraccyons
               Fyrſte by ſecondes. teers. and eke quartes
               On angrym ſtones. and on whyte cartes
               I preued oute. by dylygente laboure
               In tables correcte. deuoyde of all erroure
               Juſtly ſought. and founde oute of bothe two
               The yeres collecte. and expanſe alſo
               Conſydred eke. by good inſpeccyon
               Euery houre. and conſtellacyon
               And eche aſpecte. and loke eke dyuers
               whiche were good. and whiche alſo peruers
               where they were towarde. or at debate
               Happy welfull▪ or infortunate
               And fynally. in concluſyonNota the curſed cōſtella cōn & indiſ
                        •
                     oſi cōn of heuē in ye nat
                        ••
                     y te of edippꝰ Nota How ye face of edyppus dyſpoſed yt he ſhold ſle his owne fader
               
               They founde Saturne. in the Scorpyon
               Heuy chered. malencolyke and lothe
               And wood Mars furyous and wrothe
               Holdynge his ſepture. in the Caprycorne
               The ſame houre. whan this childe was borne
               Venus dyrecte. and contraryous
               And depreſſyd in Marcuryus hous
               That the dome. and Jugemente fynall
               Of thees clerkes. to ſpeke in ſpecyall
               
                  By fatall ſorte. that may not be withdrawe
               That with his ſwerde. his fader ſhall be ſlawe
               There maye no man. helpe it nor excuſe
               On whiche thynge. the kynge gan ſore muſe
               And caſte he wolde. on that other ſyde
               Agayne her dome. for hymſelfe prouyde
               Shape awaye. and remedye toforn
               Byddyng the quene. whan the childe were born
               withoute mercy. or moderly pyte
               That he be dede. it maye none other be
               And in all haſte. lyke as he hath ſente
               She obeyed. his commaundemente
               with wofull herte. and pyteous loke
               And face pale. her yonge ſone ſhe toke
               Tendre and grene. bothe of fleſſhe and bones
               To certayne men. ordeyned for the nones
               Fro poynte to poynte. in all maner thynge
               To execute. the byddynge of the kynge
               They durſte not. delaye it nor abyde
               But to a foreſte. that ſtode ferre beſyde
               They toke her waye. and faſt gan hem ſpede
               The kynges wyll. to perfourme in dede
               Hauynge therof. paſſynge heuyneſſe
               But whan that. they behelde the fayreneſſe
               Of the childe. and excellente beaute
               In her herte. they hadde grete pyte
               And playnly caſte. amonge hem was no ſtryfe
               That the childe. ſholde haue his lyfe
               
                  And anone. full hyghe vpon a tree
               In a place. that noo man myghte ſee
               They henge hym vp. the ſtory can reherſe
               But fyrſte his fete. thorugh they gan to perſe
               And on bowes tender. towgh and ſmale
               They knette hym vp this noo tale
               Hym to preſerue. fro beſtes wylde and rage
               And after that. taken her vyage
               Towarde Thebes. in all the haſte they maye
               But of fortune. thylken ſame daye
               with her houndes. ſerchynge vp and down
               The hunters wente. of kynge polybon
               Through the foreſte. game for to fynde
               Some aforne. and ſome come behynde
               And gan ſerche. and ſeke wounder ſore
               Amonge the hylles. and the holtes hore
               And as the reenge. the trenches by and byhow the hū
                     ters of kynge polybon fonde ye childe in ye foreſte & preſent hym vnto the kynge
               
               They harde a noyſe. and a pyteous cry
               Of this childe. hangynge on this tree
               And all atrones. drowe it for to ſee
               And lefte not. tyll they haue hym founde
               And toke hym downe. and his feet vnbounde
               And bare hym home. vnto polybon
               Lrynge of Archadye. the famous regyon
               And whan that he. fyrſte the chylde gan ſee
               Of his woundes. he hadde grete pytee
               To beholde. his tender fete blede
               And called hym. Edyppus as I rede
               
                  whiche is to ſeyn. platly this noo phage
               Bored the fete. as in that langage
               And fyrſte the kynge. in his royall halle
               Made his men. a nouryce for to calle
               This yonge childe. to fuſter and to kepe
               with her mylke. that he nought wepe
               And his leches. he charged eke alſo
               Tyll he were hoole. her deuoure for to do
               Fully in purpoſe. for the childe was fayre
               After his daye. to make hym his heyre
               For cauſe oonly. who ſoo taketh hede
               Sone hadde he none. by lyne to ſuccede
               And where that he hadde. a wyfe or none
               I fynde not. and therfore let it gone
               But by proceſſe. of dayes and of yeres
               This Edyppus. amonge his playeng feres
               was in his porte. paſſynge full of pryde
               That none. with hym myghte in peas abyde
               I herte he. was ſoo inly ſurquidous
               Malencolyke. and contraryous
               Full of deſpyte. and hygh dyſdayne
               That no wyght durſt. ſhortly hym with ſayne
               Tyll on a daye. he gan with one debate
               To whome he hadde. ſpecyally grete hate
               whiche of rancoure. and of haſty tene
               As he that myghte. his pryde not ſuſtene
               Gan vpon hym. truely abrayde
               And vnto hym. felly thus he ſayde
               
                  wherto quod he▪ arte thou ſoo proude of porte
               Lontrarye euer alſo in oure dyſporte
               Frowarde and felle. laſtynge euer mone
               As thou were lorde. of vs euerychone
               And preſumeſte. fully in worchynge
               Lyke as thou were ſone vnto the kynge
               And deſcended. of his royall blood
               But where ſoo be. thou be wrothe or wood
               Thou arte nothynge. and thou lyſte take hede
               Apperteynynge. vnto his kynrede
               But in a foreſte. founden and vnknowe
               whan thou were yonge. the▪ fore bere the lowe
               And vtterly. remembre yf the lyſte
               Thy byrthe and blood. are both twoo vnwyſte
               This is the fyne. ſhortly of my tale
               wherwith Edyppus. gan to waxe pale
               And chaunge alſo. chere and coūtenance
               And gan a poynte. in his remembrance
               worde by worde. and feyned righte noughte
               And felly to muſe. in his owne thoughte
               And caſte he wolde. withoute more taryenge
               The trouthe enquere. of Polybon the kynge
               And whan he ſawe. oportune ſpace
               And the kynge. in ſyker place
               He hym beſoughte. lowly on his knee
               To his requeſte. benygnely to ſee
               And that he wolde. playnly and not ſpare
               Of his byrthe. the trewe trouthe declare
               
                  And make hym ſure. of this thynge anone
               Yf he were his verray ſone or none
               And Polybon. oonly of gentylneſſe
               whan he behelde. the grete heuyneſſe
               Of Edyppus. and the wofull payne
               He gan dyſſymule. and in maner fayne
               Lyke as he hadde be. verrely his heyre
               But more and more. he falleth in dyſpeyre
               And downe on knees. efte ayen gan falle
               Hym coniurynge. by the goodes alle
               To telle trouthe. and noo thynge to hyde
               Affermynge eke he wolde not abyde
               Lenger with hym. but ryden and enquere
               Tyll tyme he maye. the verray ſothe here
               In ony parte. of happe or of fortune
               And for that he. was ſoo importune
               In his deſyre. the kynge withoute abode
               Leryouſly▪ tolde how it ſtode
               In a foreſte fyrſte. how he was founde
               Vpon a tree. by the feet I bounde
               And how he caſte. in concluſyon
               To make hym kynge. of that regyon
               After his daye. ſhortely for to telle
               But Edyppus. wyll noo lenger dwelle
               But to ke leue. and in haſte gan ryde
               To a temple. faſte there beſyde
               Of appollo. in ſtory as it is tolde
               whoos ſtatu. ſtode in a chare of golde
               
                  On wheles foure. burned bryghte and ſhene
               And within. a ſpyryte full vnclene
               By fraude oonly. and falſe colluſyon
               And anſwere gafe. to euery queſtyon
               Bryngynge the people. in full grete erroure
               Suche as to hym. dyden falſe honoure
               By ryghtes vſed. in the olde dawes
               After cuſtome. of paganymes lawes
               And Edyppus. with full humble chere
               To Appollo. made his prayere
               Beſechynge hym. on his knees bowe
               By ſome ſygne. that he myghte knowe
               Thorugh euydence. ſhortly comprehendeth
               Of what kynrede. he was deſcendeth
               And whan Edyppus. by grete deuocyon
               Fynyſſhed hathe. fully his oryſon
               He founde anone. wymmen Inuyſyble
               with a voyſe. dredfull and horryble
               Bade hym in haſte. taken his vyage
               Towarde Thebes. wherof his lynage
               He heren ſhall. and be certefyed
               And on his waye. anone he hathe hym hyed
               By haſty Journaye. & ſo his horſe conſtreyned
               Daye by daye. tyll he hathe atteyned
               Vnto a caſtell. Pylotes I called
               Ryche and ſtronge. and well aboute walled
               Adiacente. by ſyght of the countree
               And perteynente. to Thebes the cytee
               
                  Lrynge Layus. beynge there preſente
               For to holde. a manere tornemente
               with his knyghtes. yonge and curyous
               And other folke. that were deſyrous
               To preue hemſelfe. ſhortely for to telle
               who by force. other myghte excelle
               Or gette a name. thorugh his hye proweſſe
               Eche of hem. dyde his beſyneſſe
               On horſe backe. and alſo eke on fote
               All be that ſome founde all vnſote
               Rather applye. of werre than of pees
               where Edyppus. putte hymſelfe in prees
               As he that was ay redy to debate
               Enforſynge hym. to entren in atte gate
               Maugre all tho. that hym wolde lette
               And in the prees. of auenture how he metteHow edyppus ſlough his fad a
                        ••
                      a caſtell
               
               Lrynge Layus. and cruelly hym ſlowe
               Though the ſtory. wrytte not the maner howe
               Ne noo wyghte. can of all the companye
               By noo ſygne. verely eſpye
               By whos hande. that the kynge was ſlawe
               For Edyppus in haſte gan. hym withdrawe
               And kepte hym coye. of entencyon
               Grete was the noyſe. and the pyteous ſoun
               In the caſtell. for ſlaughter of the kynge
               Dooll and complaynte. ſorow and wepynge
               But for they ſee. heuyneſſe and thoughte
               Agaynſte dethe. vayleth lytell or noughte
               
                  They ordeyne. with Rytes full royall
               For the feſte. called funerall
               And lyke the cuſtome. of the dayes olde
               The cors they brente. in to aſſhes colde
               And in a veſſell. rounde made as a balle
               They cloſed hem. in golde and in metalle
               And after that dyde hyr beſy cure
               An Thebes. to make a ſepulture
               And rychely. hem lyſte noo lenger lette
               The aſſhen dyde they. encloſe and ſhette
               Of this mater. there is noo more to ſeyne
               But to Edyppus. I wyll tourne ayene
               whiche hym enhaſteth ay fro daye to daye
               Towerde Thebes. in all that euer he maye
               Brennynge in herte. hote as ony fyre
               The fyne to knowe. of his fatall deſyre
               But for that he fayled. of a guyde
               Oute of his waye. he wente fer beſyde
               Thorugh a wyloe. and a waſte countreeHow edyppꝰ went by ye hylle where ye mōſtre lay yt called was ſpynx
               
               By a montayne that ſtode vpon the ſee
               where that monſtres. of many dyuerſe kynde
               were conuerſante. in ſtory as I fynde
               Amonge whiche. ſothly there was one
               Soo Inly cruell. that noo man durſte gone
               For drede of dethe. forthe by that paſſage
               This monſtre. was ſoo mortall in his rageThe deſ
                        ••
                      cōn of yt fou le monſtre
               
               whiche hadde alſo. by deſcrypcyon
               Body and feet. of a fers lyon
               
                  And lyke a mayde. in ſothe was hede and face
               Fell of his his loke. and cruell to manace
               And odyous. of contenaunce and of ſyghte
               And as I rede. Spynx this monſtre hyghte
               worſe than Tygre. Dragon or Serpente
               And I ſuppoſe. by enchauntemente
               He was ordeyned. on the hylle to abyde
               To ſlewe all tho. that paſſeden beſyde
               And ſpecyally. all that dyde fayle
               To expowne. his myſty dyuynayle
               His probleme eke. in wordes playne and bare
               withoute a myſſe. openly declare
               Or with the lyfe. he myghte not eſcape
               This is berray ſothe. platly and noo Jape
               And yf that he. by declaracyon
               Gaaf there vpon. clere expoſycyon
               He ſholde in haſte. there was none other meane
               Slee this monſtre. for all his cruell teane
               There may of mercy. be none other graunte
               But for all this. Edyppus ignoraunte
               This dredfull hylle. ſtandynge on a Roche
               Or he was ware. full nye gan aproche
               More perlous platly. then he wende
               And ſodeynly the monſtre gan deſcende
               To ſtoppen his waye. and letten his paſſage
               Thus abraydynge. with a fell corage
               I haue in herte. Inly grete dyſporte
               That fortune hathe broughte the. to my ſorte
               
                  To make a preſte. yf thou mayſte endure
               The fatall ende of this auenture
               Sette atte a fyne. ſothely by dayes olde
               And by and by. all the caas hym tolde
               Chargynge hym. to be well ware and wyſe
               Gette the palme. and bere awaye the pryſe
               Thouchynge this thyng. ſet atwene vs twey
                     •
                  
               
               with lyfe or deth. whiche we ſhall dareyn
               And this monſtre. with a deſpytous chere
               His probleme. gan thus. as ye ſhall here
               There is a beeſt. merueylous to ſeeOf the probleme that ſpynx putt to edyppus
               
               The whiche in ſothe. atte his natyuytee
               Is of his myghte. ſoo tender and ſoo grene
               That he maye not. hymſelfe ſuſtene
               Vpon his fete. though he hadde it ſworne
               But yf that he be. of his moder borne
               And afterwarde. by proceſſe of age
               On foure feet. he maketh his paſſage
               After one. thre. yf I ſhall not fayne
               And alderlaſte. he gooth vpryghte ontwayne
               Dyuerſe of porte. and wonderfull of cheres
               Tyll by lengthe. of many ſondry yeres
               Naturelly. he gooth ayen on three
               And ſyth on foure. it may none other bee
               And fynally. this is the trouth playne
               He retorneth. kyndely agayne
               To the mater. whiche that he came fro
               Loo here is. all my probleme doo
               
                  Muſe here vpon. withouten werre or ſtry
                     •
                  e
               It to declare. or elles leſe thy lyfe
               And whan Edyppus. gan this thynge aduerte
               well aſſured. in his manly herte
               Gan in his wytte. ſerchen vp and downe
               And of prudence. caſte in his reaſone
               By grete auyſe. what this thynge maye be
               Seenge alſo. that he maye not fle
               And how there was. counſeyll none nor rede
               But telle trouth. or elles to be dede
               And by full goode delyberacyon
               Thus he anſwered. in concluſyon
               Thou Spynx quod he. fals and fraudulente
               Thou fowle monſtre. thou dragon yu ſerpente
               That in this hylle. lyche as I conceyue
               Lyeſte in a whayte. folkes to deceyue
               But truſte well. for all thy ſleyghty wytte
               Thy falſe fraude. ſhall anone by quyte
               Me lyſte not now. whyſper nether rowne
               But thy probleme. anone I ſhall expowne
               Soo openly. thou ſhalte not goo ther fro
               Loo thus it is. take good hede ther to
               Thylke beſte. thou ſpake of her beforneHow edyppus expow ned ye ꝓbleme yt ſpynx put to hym
               
               Is euery man. in this worlde borne
               whiche maye not gon. his lymmes be ſoo ſofte
               But as his moder. beryth hym a lofte
               In her armes. whan he dooth crye or wepe
               And after that. he gynneth for to crepe
               
                  On foure fete. in his tender youthe
               By experyence. as it is ofte couthe
               A forne I rekened. his handes bothe two
               And by proceſſe. thou mayſte conſyder alſo
               with his twoo fete. for all thy felle tene
               He hath a ſtaff. hymſelfe to ſuſtene
               And than he gooth. ſhortly vpon three
               And alderlaſte. as it muſte nedes be
               Voydynge his ſtaff. he walketh vpon tweyne
               Tyll it ſoo be. thorugh age he atteyne
               That luſte of youthe. waſted be and ſpente
               Than in his honde. he taketh a potente
               And on thre fete. thus he gooth agayne
               And I dare afferme. yu mayſt it not withſayne
               And ſoone after. thorugh his vnweldy myght
               By influence. of natures ryght
               By experyence. as euery man maye knowe
               Lyche a childe. on foure. he 
                     •
                  repeth alowe
               And for he maye. here noo whyle ſoiourne
               To erthe agayne. he muſte in haſte retourne
               whiche he come fro. he maye it not renue
               For in this worlde. noman maye eſchewe
               This verraye ſothe. ſhortly and noo doughte
               whan the whele of kynde. comyth aboughte
               And naturelly. hath his cours ronne
               By cyrcuyte. as dooth the ſhene ſonne
               That man and childe. of hye and lowe eſtate
               It gayneth not. to make more debate
               
                  His tyme ſette. that he muſte fyne
               whan Antropos. of malyce dooth vntwyne
               His lyues 
                     •
                  hred. by Cloto fyrſte compowned
               Loo here thy probleme. fully is expowned
               Atte oure metynge. as I toke on honde
               To the lawe. that thou muſte nedes ſtonde
               And in all haſte. of myne hondes deye
               But of reaſon. thou can it ought with ſeye
               And ſoo this ſpynx. a wapyd and amate
               Stode dyſamayed. and dyſconſolate
               with chere done caſte. muyte pale and dede
               And Edyppus. anone ſmote of the hede
               Of this fende. ſtynkynge and vnſw
                     •
                  te
               And the countree. ſette holy in quyete
               wherby he hathe. ſuche a pryſe I wonne
               That his fame. is euery coſte yronne
               Thorugh all the londe. yt he the monſtre hathe ſlawe
               And lyne righte. to Thebes he gan drawe
               well receyued. for his worthyneſſe
               For his manhode. and his righte proueſſe
               And for they ſee. he was a ſemely knyghte
               well fauoured. in euery mannys ſyghte
               And ſawe alſo. Thebes the myghty towne
               Not oonly they. but all the regyone
               werne deſtytute. of a gouernoure
               Avens her foon. hauynge noo ſocoure
               Hem to defende. but the quene allone
               Amonge hemſelfe. makynge full grete mone
               
                  For there was none. as bookes ſpecyfye
               The Septure or crowne. for to occupye
               For whiche the lordes. all by one aſſente▪
               
               within the towne. ſette a parlyamente
               Shortly concludynge. yf it myghte bene
               Prudently to treate. with the quene
               Namely they that. helde hemſelfe mooſt ſage
               To condyſcende by waye of maryage
               She to be Joyned. to this manly knyght
               Paſſynge prudente. and famous eke of myght
               Mooſt lykely man. as they can dyſcexne
               The worthy Cyte. to kepen and gouerne
               And thorugh counſeyll. of the lordes alle
               To her deſyre. playnly ſhe is falle
               And corded. withoute more taryeng
               That of Thebes. Edyppus ſhall be kyng
               By full aſſente. was none that ſayd naye
               And tyme ſette. agayne a certayne daye
               Amonge hemſelfe. and fynaly dyuyſed
               The weddynge was in Thebes ſolempnyſed
               Full ryally. with nedes mooſt vnthryne
               Oonly for he is. moder toke tho wyne
               Vn 
                     •
                  yst of bothe. he was of her blode
               And Ignoraunte. ſhortly how it ſtode
               That he tofore. hadde his fader ſlawe
               For whiche this weddyng. was agayn the lawe
               And to
                     •
                  ore god. is nother fayre ne good
               Nor acceptable. blood to touche blood
               
                  whiche cauſe hathe be. of grete confuſy
                     ••
                  
               
               In many londe. and many Regyon
               Grounde and rote. of vnhap and meſchaunce
               The fyne concludynge. alwaye in vengaunce
               As men haue ſeen. by clere experyence
               And holy wryte. recordeth in ſentence
               How herodes. falſly in his lyfe
               Vyolence. toke his brothers wyfe
               For ſhe was fayre. and pleaſaunte to his ſyght
               And kepte her ſtyll. by force thorugh his myght
               All be to her. tytle hadde he noon
               And for her ſake. the holy man ſaynt Johon
               For his trouthe. in pryſon loſte his hede
               Therfore I rede. euery man take hede
               where ſoo he be. prynce lorde or kynge
               That he be ware. to eſchewe ſuche weddynge
               Or that the ſwerde. of vengaunce of manace
               Leſte he leſe happe. fortune and grace
               Takynge enſample. in all maner thynge
               Of Edyppus. in Thebes crowned kynge
               All be that he wroughte of ignoraūce
               Full derke and blynde. of his wofull chaūce
               And yf vnwyſte. he of Innocence
               As ye haue herde. fylle in ſuche offence
               For whiche he was punyſſhed and brought low
               what ar they worthy that her errour know
               And fro the knotte. lyſte not to abſtene
               Of ſuche ſponſayle. to god and man vnclene
               
                  I can not ſeen. nomore therof deuyſe
               Demeth youre ſelfe. that prudente ben & wyſe
               And Edyppus. haue amonge in mynde
               Of whom the weddyng. lyke as ye may fynde
               Vnhappy was. and paſſynge odyous
               Infortuned. and vngracyous
               I am wery. and therof more to wryte
               The hatfull proceſſe. alſo to endyte
               I paſſe ouer. fully of entente
               For Imynens. was not there preſente
               Nor Lucyna. lyſte not therto ſhyne
               Ne there was none. of the muſys nyne
               Of oure accorde. for to make melodye
               For they ſonge not. by heuenly Armonye
               Nother Clyo. nor Calyope
               One of the ſuſtren. in nombre thryes thre
               And they dyde. whan Phylogye
               Aſcended vp hye. aboue the ſkye
               To be wedded. this lady vertuous
               Vnto her lorde. the god Marcuryus
               As Marcyan I named. de Capelle
               In his booke of weddynge. can you telle
               There concludynge. in this maryage
               The Poete. that whylom was ſoo ſage
               That this lady. called Sapyence
               I wedded was. vnto Eloquence
               As it ſat well. by heuenly purueaunce
               Hem to be Joyned. by knotte of alyaunce
               
                  But bothe twoo. ſothly of entente
               Atte weddynge. in Thebes were aſſente
               That cauſed after. grete aduerſyte
               For fynall ende. of that ſolempnyte
               was ſorowe. and woo and deſtruccyon
               Vter ruyne. of this royall toun
               There may noo man. helpe it ne ſocoure
               For a tyme in Joye. though they floure
               But atte weddynge. platly for to telleThe infortunat follr yt were atte edippꝰ weddyng. Cerberꝰ herebz Noye with her iii doughters drede fraude Trecherye treſon poū
                     te Indygence nede dethe & cruell Mars
               
               was Cerberus cheef porter of helle
               And herebus. fader to hatrede
               was there preſente. with his hole kynrede
               His wyfe alſo. with her browes blake
               And her doughter. ſorowe for to make
               Hydous chered. and vggely for to ſee
               Megera. and Theſyphonee
               Allecto eke. with laboure and enuye
               Drede and Fraude. and falſe Trecherye
               Treſon Pouerte. Indygence and Nede
               And cruell Dethe. in his rente wede
               wretchedneſſe. complaynte and eke rage
               Ferfull pale. derkenes croked age
               Cruell Mars. as ony tygre wood
               Brennynge yre. of vnkynde blood
               Fraternall hate. depe ſette the rote
               Saaf oonly dethe. that there nas noo bote
               Aſſured othes. atte fyne vntreweAll thiſe vnthryfty people were at ye weddyng of Edyppꝰ & Jocaſta
               
               Alle theſe folke. were atte this weddynge newe
               
                  To make the towne. deſolate and bare
               As the ſtory. after ſhall declare
               But ay in Thebes. with his walles ſtronge
               Edyppus regnyth. many daye and longe
               And as myne auctoure wryte. in wordes playne
               By Jocaſta. he hadde ſones twayne
               Ethyocles. and alſo Polymyte
               And in bookys. as ſoundry clerkes wryte
               Doughters twoo. full goodly on to ſee
               Of the whiche. one hyghte Antygonce
               And that other. called was I meyne
               Off hir beaute. inly ſouereyne
               Edyppus ay deuoyde. of werre and ſtryfe
               with Jocaſta. ladde a mery lyfe
               Tyll fortune. or his iniquyte
               Hadde enuye. of his proſperyte
               For whan he ſhone. mooſt riche in his renoune
               Fro her whele. ſhe plonged hym adoune
               Oute of his Joye. in to ſondayne woo
               As ſhe is wonte. frowardly to doo
               And namely hem. that ſetten her affyaunce
               On erthly truſte. in her varyaunce
               For whan this kynge. paſſyng of grete myghte
               Sate with the quene. vpon a certeyne nyghte
               Caſuelly whan his folke echone
               Oute of his chambre. ſodeynly were gone
               Or he was ware. Jocaſta gan beholde
               The carectes of his woundes olde
               
                  Vpon his feet. enprented woundes depe
               Tournynge her face. braſt oute for to wepe
               Soo ſecretly. he myghte it not aſpye
               And ſhe anone. felle in to a fantaſye
               Ay on this thynge. muſynge more and more
               And in her bedde. gan to ſygh ſore
               And whan the kynge. conceyued her dyſtreſſe
               He gan enquere. of her heuyneſſe
               Fully the cauſe. and occaſyon
               For he wolde wyte. in concluſyon
               what her eyleth. and why ſhe ferde ſoo
               My lord quod ſhe. withoute wordes moo
               Parcelle cauſe. of this ſodeyne rage
               Is for I in my tender age
               Hadde a lorde. I named Layus
               Lrynge of this towne. a man right vertuous
               By whome I hadde a ſone. wonder fayre
               Lykely to haue ben his. ſucceſſour and heyre
               But by cauſe. his dyuynours tolde
               Atte his byrthe. ſothly that he ſholde
               Yf he haue lyfe. by fatall deſtenye
               Slee his fader. it myghte none other be
               For whiche the kynge. his face to eſchue
               Badde me in haſte. as hym thoughte due
               To ſlee the childe. and haue therof noo routhe
               And I anone badde. withoute ſlouthe
               To certayne men. vpon payne of Jugemente
               To excecute. the commaundemente
               
                  Of the kynge. as I gaaf hem in charge
               And forthe they gone. to a foreſte large
               Adiacente to this countree
               Percen they his feet. and hangynge on a tree
               Not perfourmynge. the execucyon
               On hym they. hadde ſuche compaſſyon
               Lefte hym there. and home reſorte agayne
               Beynge in doubte. and in none certayne
               Atte her repayre. as they tolde alle
               Of this childe. what afterwarde is befalle
               Saaf they ſayde. hunters haue hym founde
               whiche lad hym forthe. and his feet vnbounde
               But to what coste. they coude not declare
               whiche percell is of. myne euell fare
               Grounde and cauſe. of myne heuy chere
               Consydered eke. the woundes that appere
               Vpon youre feet. and wote not what they mene
               And one thynge is. ay atte myne herte grene
               My lorde alas. but of newe date
               Lrynge Layus. ſlayne was but late
               Atte a castell. nye by this countree
               Vpon youre comynge. in to this Cytee
               Alle this I wayed. and rekened in to one
               Makynge myne herte. heuy as ony ſtone
               Soo that I can counſeyle. none ne rede
               And with yt worde. the kynge lyfte vp his hede
               And abarayed. with ſharpe ſyghes ſmerte
               And all this thynge. by ordre gan aduerte
               
                  Ceryouſly. by good aduyſemente
               And by ſygnes. clere and euydente
               Conceyueth well. and ſore gan repente
               It was hymſelfe. that Jocaſta mente
               And whan ye quene. in maner ſawe hym playne
               By her goddes. ſhe gan hym to conſtrayne
               To ſhewen oute. the cauſe of his affraye
               And it expowne. and make noo delaye
               Croppe and rote. ſhortly why that he
               Entred fyrſte. in to that countre
               Fro when he came. and fro what regyo
                     •
                  
               
               But he her putte in deluſyon
               As he hadde done it. for the nones
               Tyll atte laſte. he brake oute attones
               Vnto the quene. and gan a proceſſe make
               Fyrſte how he was. in the foreſte take
               wounded the feet. and ſoo forthe euery thynge
               Of his ſerchynge. how Polybon the kynge
               And hole the cauſe. why he hym forſoke
               And in what wyſe. he the waye toke
               Towarde Thebes. as Appollo badde
               And of fortune. how he was ladde
               where that Spynx. kepte the mountayne
               And how that he ſlowe▪ alſo in certayne
               Lrynge Layus atte caſtell gate
               Towardes nyghte. whan it was full late
               And to Thebes. than he gan hym ſpede
               To fynde oute. the ſtok of his kynrede
               
                  whiche vnto hym. gan wexe couthe
               For by proceſſe. of his grene youthe
               He founde oute well. by rekenynge of his lyfe
               That ſhe was bothe. his moder and his wyfe
               Soo that all nyght. and ſuyng on the morowe
               Atte twene hem twoo. gan a newe ſorowe
               whiche vnto me. were tedyous to telle
               For therupon. yf I ſholde dwelle
               A longe ſpace. it wolde occupyeTragedia ſenecede Edyppo rege thebax
               
               But ye maye reden. in a Tragedye
               Of morall Senek. and fully his endynge
               His dooll. his myſcheef and his compleynynge
               How with ſorowe. and vnweldy age
               This Edyppus. fylle in to dotage
               Loste his wytte. and his worldely delyte
               And how his ſones. hadde hym in dyſpyte
               And of dyſdayne. toke of hym noo kepe
               And bookes ſayen. his eyen oute he wepte
               And as myne auctour. lyketh to deuyſe
               As his ſones. rebuke hym and deſpyſe
               Vpon a daye. in a certayne place
               Oute of his hede. his eyen he gan oute race
               And caſte at hem. he gan none other bote
               And of malyce. they tradde hem vnder fote
               Fully deuoyde. bothe of loue and drede
               And whan Edyppꝰ. for myſcheef was thꝰ dede
               withinne a pytte. made in the erthe lowe
               Of cruelte. his ſones haue hym throwe
               
                  werre than ſerpente. or ony tygre wood
               Of curſed ſtok. cometh vnkynde blood
               As in ſtory. ye maye reden here to forne
               All by the Roſe. growe oute of a thorne
               Thus of Edyppus. whan he was blynd & olde
               The wretched ende. I haue yon playnly tolde
               For whiche ſhortly. to man and childe I rede
               To be well ware. and take hedeNota How euery man ought of dewte to do reuerēce to fad
                        
                           
                        
                        er
                      & moder. or ellis the wylfull vengaunce therof
               
               Of kyndly righte. and conſcyence
               To doo honoure. and due Reuerence
               To fader and moder. of what eſtate they be
               Or certaynly ellis. they ſholde neuer thee
               For whoo that is. not to hem debonayre
               In ſpeche in porte. for to treate hem fayre
               Hem to obeye. in honeſte and drede
               And to cheryſſhe. of what they hadde nede
               I dare afferme. exceptynge none eſtate
               That he ſhall fyrſte. be infortunate
               In all his werke. bothe in ſee and londe
               And of what thynge. he taketh on honde
               Fortune frowarde. and to hym contrayre
               waſte of his good. playnly and appayre
               Fynde plente. of contek warre and ſtryfe
               Vnhappy ende. and ſhortyenes of lyfe
               And graceles of. what he hathe to do
               Hatrede of god. and of man alſo
               Therfore noo man. be here of recheles
               But make youre myrroure. of Ethyocles
               
                  And his brother. called Polymyte
               whiche in ſuche thynge. gretely weve to wyte
               As ye ſhall here. of hem how it fylle
               And whan we be deſcended doune this hylle
               And I paſſed here. the lowe vale
               I ſhall begynne. the remenante of my tale
            
            ¶ Explicit prima pars iſtius Codicilli.
         
         
            ¶ Inmediate ſequitur ſecunda pars eiuſdem.
            
               PAſſyd ye thorpe. of boughton on the blee
               By my childern. I gan anone to ſee
               Thrugh ye ſonne. yt full clere gan ſhyne
               Of the clok. that it drowe to nyne
               And ſawe alſo. the ſyluer dropes ſhene
               Of the dewe. lyche perles on the grene
               Vapoured vp. in to the ayre a lofte
               whan zepherus. with his blowynge ſofte
               The weder made luſty. ſmothe and fayre
               And righte attempred. was the holſome ayre
               The ſame houre. all the hole route
               Of the pylgrymes. rydynge Rounde aboute
               In my tale. whan I gan procede
               Reherſynge forthe. as it was in dede
               
                  whan Edyppus. buryed was and graue
               How his ſones. the kyngdome for to haue
               Amonge hemſelfe. by full of mortall hate
               For the crowne. gonne to debate
               whiche of hem. Juſtely ſhall ſuccede
               And the ſepture. of the towne poſſede
               Aduertynge not. nother to righte ne wronge
               But eche of hem. to make her partye ſtronge
               And his quarell. proudly to ſuſtene
               From whoos hertes. was deuoyded clene
               Of bretherhode. the faythfull alyaunce
               Falſe couetyſe. ſoo made hem at dyſtaunce
               Fully worchynge. in to deſtruccyon
               And ruyne of this noble town
               Soo hote brente. the hatred enuye
               of bothe twoo. thorugh pompous ſurquedye
               That neyther wolde. playnly in a poynte
               Other forborne. they ſtode in ſuche deſioynte
               How as they hadde. of byrthe be foreyns
               Tyll of the towne. the noble Cytezeyns
               Lmyghtes barons. with many worthy lorde
               Shope awaye to make hem of accorde
               And to ſette hem. in quyete and in pes
               But for his parte. this Ethyocles
               Alledge gan. that he was fyrſte borne
               For whiche of reaſon. he oughte goo to forne
               In the cytee. to be crowned kyngeThe cōtrauercy of the twoo bretheren
               
               Sythe by lawe. there was noo lettynge
               
                  For vnto hym. longeth the heryſage
               By deſcende. and by tytle of age
               But Polymyte. of full hye dyſdayne
               All openly. gan replye agayne
               And for his parte. ſayde in ſpecyall
               Reaſon was none. that he ſholde haue all
               Regalye. and domynacyon
               And the lorſhyppe. hole of the toun
               And he righte noughte. oute of the Cyte
               Lyue in exyle. and in pouerte
               Full concludynge. withoute fere or drede
               Rather than it ſuffre. he wyll be dede
               And thus alas. thorugh her enuyous ſtryfe
               Atte ende eueryche loſte his lyfe
               Atte grete myſcheef. as ye ſhall after here
               But thylke tyme. the lordes all I fere
               Full beſely dyde. her dylygence
               By grete auyſe. of full hyghe prudence
               To ſetten hem in quyete and in reſte
               Coūſeylynge hem. playnly for the beſte
               To leue her ſtryfe. of wyſdome and reaſon
               A condeſcende. to ſome concluſyon
               whiche to bothe myghte. mooſt auayle
               That fynally thorugh. her gouernayle
               The lordes all. beynge tho preſente
               They haue hem broughte. to be of one aſſente
               Of one herte. as brother vnto brother
               Eueryche of hem. to regoen after otherThe cōuen cyon of the twoo bretheren
               
               
                  yere by yere as it come aboute
               Soo that the towne. ſhall abſente hym oute
               Fully that yere. and hymſelfe guye
               By his manhode. and his chyualrye
               Haunte hymſelfe. in dedes marcyall
               whyle his brother. in his ſee royall
               Holdeth his ſepture. the Cytee to gouerne
               And whan the yere. his cours hath ronne yerne
               And is come oute. he ſhall haue repeyre
               To regne in Thebes. lyke as lorde and heyre
               Therto receyue. fully his dygnyte
               whyle that the other. voydeth the Cyte
               Pacyently takynge. his aduenture
               Tyll he agayne. his honoure maye recure
               Thus entrechange. euery yere they ſhall
               That one aſcendeth. that other hath a fall
               They muſte obeye. of herte and take it wele
               Lyche as the tourne. reſorteth of the whele
               For this was. hole the compoſycyonThe wordes of the compoſicyon
               
               By twene the brethern. and conuencyon
               Full knytte vp. by grete auyſemente
               Therfore the goddes. by othe of ſacramente
               Neuer after to grutche. ne to varye
               But accomplyſſhen. ſhortly and not tarye
               Lyche as ye accorde. enrolled in the towne
               Fro poynte to poynte. made mencyone
               But alder fyrſte. by reaſon of his age
               Ethyocles. hadde thauantage
               
                  To regne aforne. to were a crowne
               Polymyte haſtynge hym oute of towne
               Durynge that yere. it maye none other bee
               Whyle his brother. ſate in his royall ſee
               Full rychely. vpon fortunes whele
               And rode hym forthe. armed bryghte in ſtele
               This Polymyte. ſothly as I rede
               Hymſelfe allone. on a Royall ſtede
               Withoute guyde. all the longe daye
               Beynge aferde. to kepe the hyghe waye
               In his herte. hauynge ſuſpecyon
               To his brother. of malyce and treſon
               Leſt he purſued. through his fals vnkynd blood
               To haue hym dede. for couetyſe of good
               That he allone. myghte haue poſſeſſyone
               Durynge his lyfe. fully of the towne
               For whiche in haſte. hauynge noo felawe
               Polymyte aſyde gan hym drawe
               By a foreſte. Joynynge to the ſee
               Linowyng right nought. ye ſyght of the coūtree
               Full of hylles. and of hye mountayns
               Craggy roches. and but few playns
               Wounder dredfull. and lothſome of paſſage
               And therwith all. full of beſtes rage
               Holdynge his waye. of herte noo thynge lyghte
               Mate and wery. tyll it drowe to nyghte
               And all the daye. beholdynge enuyrone
               He neyther ſawe. caſtell towre ne towne
               
                  The whiche thynge. greuyd hym full ſore
               And ſodeynly. the ſee began to rore
               Wynde and tempeſte. hydouſly to aryſe
               The reyne doune bete. in full gryſly wyſe
               That man and beſte. therof was adradde
               And nye for fere. gan to waxe madde
               As it ſemed. by the wofull ſowns
               And Tygres Beres. Bores and Lyons
               Whiche for refute. hemſelfe for to ſaue
               Eueryche in haſte. drowe vnto his caue
               But Polymyte. in this tempeſte huge
               Alas the whyle. he fyndeth noo refuge
               Nor hym to ſhronde. ſawe noo where no ſocour
               Tyll it was paſſed. almooſt mydnyghte hour
               The cloude voyde. in heuen dyde appere
               A large ſpace. that the ſterres clere
               Soo that this knyghte. oute of a foreſte largeHow Poly myte came in to ye londe of Arge
               
               Gan approchen. to the londe of Arge
               Seenge a paleys myghty of byldynge
               Of whiche Adraſtus. called was the kynge
               A manly man. riche and wounder ſage
               And ronne was. ſomdele in to age
               Borne of the yle. that called is Clyſon
               And whylom ſone. of the kynge Chalon
               And for his wytte. in ſtory as is couthe
               He choſen was. in his tender youthe
               Of all Arge. to be crowned kynge
               Chyfe of all grece. by recorde of wrytynge
               
                  Nor by dyſcente. ne ſucceſſyon
               But all oonly. of free eleccyon
               Beholde of Arge. the ſepture in his honde
               As mooſt worthy. of all Grekes londe
               Loued and drad. for wyſdome and Juſtyce
               And as the ſtory playnly can deuyſe
               This worthy kynge. hadde doughtres two
               Paſſynge fayre. and righte good alſo
               It were to longe. her beaute to dyſcryue
               And the eldeſte. called was ArgyueArgyue dei phyle & Adraſtus
               
               Deiphyle. I named the ſeconde
               And Adraſtus. lyche as it is fonde
               This worthy kynge. hadde ſone none
               To ſuccede. after he be gone
               For whiche he was durynge. all his lyfe
               Tryſte in herte. and paſſynge penſyfe
               But hole his truſte. and his hope ſtode
               By alyaunce. of ſome worthy blode
               Brought in by meane. of his doughters twayn
               That he ſhall be. releſſed of his payn
               Thorugh recomforte. of ſome hye maryage
               And ſothly yet. full hye in his corage
               He troubled was. by occaſyonThe dreme of adraſtus of a bore & of a lyon
               
               Of a ſweuen. and a vyſyon
               Shewed to hym. vpon a certeyne nyghte
               For as hym thoughte. in his inwarde ſyghte
               Whyle he ſlepte. by clere inſpeccyon
               A wylde bore. and a ferce lyon
               
                  Poſſede ſhall. the beſtes in her rage
               His doughters twoo. by bonde of maryage
               In ſhorte tyme. within a certayne daye
               whiche broughte his herte. in full grete affraye
               But thynge in ſouthe. that deſtyne hathe ſhaꝑe
               Here in this worlde. full harde it is teſcape
               Eke merueylous. a man teſchue his fate
               And Polymyte. of whome I ſpake late
               With the tempeſte. bete and all bereyned
               By grace oonly. the cytee hathe atteyned
               Where Adraſtus. full ſtatly of degree
               Thylke tyme. helde his Royall ſee
               The trouble nyghte. myrke and full obſcure
               Hathe broughte this knyght. oonly by auenture
               Through the cytee. encloſed with a wall
               Vnto the paleys. chyffe and pryncypall
               Where as the kynge. in his chambre alofte
               Laye in his bedde. and ſlepte wounder ſofte
               Eke all his folke. hadde her chambres cake
               Lyke as fortune. peraunter hadde ſhape
               The ſelfe tyme. by cauſe it was ſoo late
               And caſuelly. noo porter atte gate
               As it hadde be righte. for the nones
               And in a porche. bylte of ſquare ſtones
               Full myghtly. enarched enuyrowne
               Where the domes. and the plees of the towne
               Were execute. and lawes of the kynge
               And there this knyght. without more taryenge
               
                  wery and mate. fro his ſtede a lyght
               Hangynge the reyn. in all the haſte he myght
               Vpon his arme. ſurer hym to kepe
               And layde hym doune. and gan anone to ſlepe
               As hym ſemed. that tyme for the beſte
               And whyle he laye. thus for to reſte
               Of auenture. there come a knyghte rydynge
               The worthyeſt. in the worlde lyuynge
               Curteys lowly. and righte vertuous
               As ſayth my auctour. called Tydyus
               Eureus in armes. and manly in werkynge
               Of his byrthe. ſone vnto the kynge
               Of Calydonye. a londe of grete renowne
               And he alas. oute of that regyowne
               E
                     •
                  yled was. for he his brother ſlow
               As Scace of Thebes. wryte the maner how
               All be that he to hym. noo malyce mente
               For on a daye. as they on hoūtynge wente
               In a foreſte. for herte and for hynde
               Soo as he ſtode. vnder a grene lynde
               And caſuelly. lette his arowe ſlyppe
               He ſlow his brother. called menalyppe
               Thrugh mortall ſorte. his honde was begyled
               For whiche he was. banyſſhed and exyled
               As the lawe. narowe ſette his charge
               And for this caas. he came fyrſte to Arge
               In to the porche. where Polymyte ſlepe
               Of auenture. or he toke ony kepe
               
                  The ſame nyghte. hydouſly beſaen
               with the tempeſte. of thonder wynde and rayn
               And fylle alſo. anoye and grete domage
               Thrugh the foreſte. holdynge his paſſage
               As Polymyte. hadde done beforne
               In perell ofte lykely. to be lorne
               with beſtes rage. ſette on euery ſyde
               Tyll of grace. withoute ony guyde
               He rode thrugh Arge. the grete myghty towne
               Streyte to the paleys. and the chefe doūgone
               Lyche as I tolde. where Polymyte laye
               And atte his comynge. made a grete afraye
               For he was blynd. thorugh derkneſſe of ye nyght
               And hym to guyde. he founde noo lyght
               whan he came in. of pryket ne of torche
               Tyll he vnwarly. entred the porche
               And wolde haue taken there. his herbygage
               But Polymyte. ſterte vp in a rage
               Sodeynly awaked. as I rede
               with the nyghynge. of his proude ſtede
               And fyrſte of all. whan that he behelde
               A knyghte armyd. vpon his breſte a ſhelde
               And gan the maner. of his araye aduerte
               Of verraye yre. vpon his horſe he ſterte
               And cruelly. gan tydynge enquere
               whennes he came. or what he dyde there
               And badde in haſte. his anſwere to deuyſe
               And Tydeus. in full humble wyſe
               
                  Anſwered agayne. of verray gentylneſſe
               And ſayde in ſothe. that of hygh dyſtreſſe
               Of the tempeſte. and the derke nyghte
               He dryuen was. lyke an arrante knyghte
               Of nede oonly. and of neceſſyte
               And hye conſtreynte. of his aduerſyte
               Take lodgynge. where ſoo that he myghte
               And in that courte. therfore he a lyghte
               withoute more. thynkynge none outerage
               Nor to noo wyghte. menynge noo domage
               Than Polymyte. of malyce and hye pryde
               Tolde hym ſhortly. he ſholde not abyde
               Noo lenger there. though he hadde it ſworne
               For I quod he. toke it vp beforne
               And wyll it kepe. durynge all this nyghte
               I ſay the platly. maugre all thy myghte
               Quod Tydeus. that is noo curteſye
               Me to deuoyde. but rather vylonye
               Yf ye take hede. that ſeme a gentyll knyghte
               And I ſuppoſe. ye haue noo tytle of ryghte
               To this lodgynge. by waye of herytage
               More than haue I. for all youre felle rage
               And parde. yet ſhall it be noo dyſeſe
               Tyll to morow. that doo me eſe
               Of gentyleſſe. oonly by youre leue
               To ſuffre me. it ſhall lytyll greue
               But ay the more. Tydeus ſpake fayre
               Polymyte. was frowarde and contrayre
               
                  And ſhortly ſayd. it geyneth not to ſtryue
               That of force. he ſhall deuoyde blyue
               Or vtterly bytwene hem bothe twoo
               This thynge to trye. he muſt haue a doo
               And Tydeus ſeeng noo better mene
               Full lyke a knyght. in ſtele armed clene
               withoute abode. faſte gam hym ſpede
               wounder lyghtly. for to take his ſtede
               And thus. theſe knyghtes pompous and elate
               For lytyll cauſe. fellen atte debate
               And as they ranne togyder on horſe bakeHow Tydeus & Polymyte ſtro fe for her lodgyng
               
               Eueryche on other. fyrſte her ſpere brake
               And after that. full ſurquydous of pryde
               with ſharpe ſwerdes. they togyder ryde
               Full yrouſly. theſe myghty champyons
               In her furye. lyke Tygres or Lyons
               As they hurtle. that all the paleys ſhoke
               And kyng Adraſtus. oute of ſlepe woke
               And made in haſte. his chamberleyns call
               And thrugh the courte. his worthy knyghtis all
               Commaundyng hem. to deſcende and ſe
               And reporte what it myght be
               This wounder noyſe. in his courte be nyght
               And whā they ſawe. two ſtrange knyght fyght
               In plates bryght. and in thyk mayle
               withoute Juge. they hadde grete meruayle
               And dyſamayed. of this vncouthe thyng
               As they founde. tolde they to the kyng
               
                  And Adraſtus. for derkeneſſe of the nygh
                     •
                  
               
               Fro his chambre. with many torches lyght
               In to the courte. is deſcended downe
               All his mayne. ſtondynge enuyrowne
               Of theſe knyghtes. hauyng full grete wounder
               And of manhode. he putte hem fyrſt aſounder
               Hem commaundyng. lyke a gentyll kyng
               To leue her ſtryte. and ceſen of her fyghtyng
               And entred in. with a knyghtly loke
               And fyrſt from hem. her ſwerdes both he toke
               Affermyng eke. as to his fantaſye
               It was a rage. and a grete folye
               Soo wylfully. her lyues to in parte
               withoute Juge. her quarell to departe
               And ſpecyally. in the derke nyght
               whan neyther of other. myght haue a ſyght
               Chargyng hem. on payne of her lyfe
               To deſure and ſtynten of of her ſtryfe
               And Tydeus. in all the haſte he myght
               Full humbly. fro his ſtede a lyght
               And right mekely. with chere and contenaūce
               Putte hym hole in the gouernaūce
               Of Adraſtus. in all maner thyng
               And Polymyte. made eke noo taryeng
               To a lyght alſo. and wolde it not withſeye
               The kynges byddyng. lowly to obeye
               Soo as hym ought. with due reuerence
               And as they ſtode. both in his preſence
               
                  He gan enquere. fyrſte of her eſtate
               The cauſe alſo. why they where atte debate
               Of her countrees ſothly. and her age
               He aſked eke. touchyng her lynage
               By dyſcente of what. ſtok they were borne
               And Tydeus. his anſwere gaaf toforne
               Tolde playnly. made noo leſyng
               How that he was. ſone to the kyng
               Of Calydonye. and rightfull heyre therto
               And of thexyle. the ſoth he tolde alſo
               As ye haue herde. in the ſtory radde
               And Polymyte. with chere and face ſadde
               Vnto the kyng. touchyng his countree
               Sayde he was borne. in Thebes the Cytee
               And Jocaſta. the grete famons quene
               His moder was. withouten ony wene
               But of his fader. whylom kyng and lorde
               For verraye ſhame. he ſpake not a worde
               Oonly for he. yf I ſholde not fayne
               His fader was. and brother bothe twayne
               The whiche in ſouth. he was full lothe to telle
               And eke the kyng. wolde hym not compelle
               Of gentylleſſe. but badde withoute blame
               Of his byrthe. for to haue noo ſhame
               For hole the caas. and maner euery dele
               Touchyng his kyn. ye groūde he knew full well
               Lyche as it was. by full clere reporte
               Enforſyng hym. for to doo comforte
               
                  with all his myght. and his beſy payne
               This manly kyng. to theſe knyghtes twayne
               And to hem ſayd. aforne hym as they ſtode
               He wyſt well. that of worthy blode
               They were deſcended. touchyng her kynrede
               And made his offycers. in haſte to lede
               The ſtrange knyghtes beynge atte debate
               Thrugh his paleys. to chambres of eſtate
               Eche by hymſelfe. for to take his eaſe
               And euery thyng in ſouth yt myght hem pleaſe
               was offred hem. lyche to her eſtates
               And whan they weren. dyſeuered of her plates
               Cuſſhewes grenes. and her ſabatous
               Her harneys voyded. and her habargous
               Twayn mantels. vnto hem were brought
               Fret with perle. and ryche ſtones wrought
               Of clothe of golde. and veluett cremeſyne
               Full rychely furred. with armyne
               To wrappe hem in. agayn the colde morowe
               After the rage. of her nyghtes ſorowe
               To take her reſte. tyll the ſonne aryſe
               And than the kyng. in full prudente wyſe
               Fyrſte of all. was nothyng recheles
               The knyghtes hertes. to 
                     •
                  etten in pees
               That euer after. I dare aferme it well
               Eche was to other. as trewe as ony ſtele
               Durynge her lyfe. bothe in werke and dede
               Vnder a knotte. bounden of bretherhede
               
                  And Adraſtus. the worthy kyng famous
               A feſte made. riche and plenteuous
               To theſe knyghtis. & hymſelf there at preſente
               And after mete. full goodly he hath ſente
               This noble kyng. for his doughters dere
               Of gentylleſſe. for to make hem chere
               To the knyghtes. Icome fro ſoo fer
               And lyke in ſothe. as Lucyfer the ſter
               Gladdeth the morow. atte his vpryſyng
               Soo the ladyes. atte her incomyng
               with the ſtremes. of her eyen clere
               Goodly apporte. and womanly manere
               Contenaunce. and excellent fayreneſſe
               To all the courte. broughten in gladneſſe
               For the freſſheneſſe. of her heuenly cheres
               Soo agreable was. to the ſtrangers
               Atte her entre. that in ſpecyall
               Hem thought it lyke. a thynge celeſtyall
               Enhaſtyng hem. in full knyghtly wyſe
               Agaynſt hem. goodly to aryſe
               And as they mette. with humble contenaunce
               Full connyngly. dyde her obſeruaunce
               Hem conueyeng to her ſyttyng place
               But ſothly. I haue leyſer none ne ſpace
               To reherſe. and putte in remembraunce
               Hole the maner. of her dalyaunce
               I
                     •
                   were to longe. for you to abyde
               But well I wote. that the god Cupyde
               
                  By influence. of his myghty honde
               And the feruence. of his fyry bronde
               Her metyng fyrſte. fortuned hath ſoo well
               That his arowe. of golde and not of ſtele
               I perced haue the. knyghtes hertes twayne
               Thrugh the breeſte. with ſuche a luſty payne
               That there abode. ſharpe as ſpere or launce
               Depe I fyxed. the poynte of remembraunce
               whiche maye not lyghtly. raſed ben a waye
               And thus in Joye. they dryuen forth the waye
               In play and reuell. for the knyghtes ſake
               And towardes nyght. they her chambres toke
               Atte due tyme. as her fader badde
               And on her way. the knyghtes haue hem ladde
               Reuerently. vp by many a ſteyre
               Takyng leue. gan anone repayre
               To her lodgyng. in a full ſtatly toure
               Aſſygned to hem. by the herberyoure
               And after ſpyces. playnly and the wyne
               In cuppes grete. wrought of golde fyne
               withoute taryeng. to bedde ſtreyte they gone
               Touchyng her reſt. where they ſlepte or none
               Demeth ye louers. that in ſuche maner thyng
               By experyence. haue fully knowlechyng
               For it is not. declared in my boke
               But as I fynde. the kyng all nyght woke
               Thought full in herte. the ſtory ſpecyfyes
               Muſyng ſore. and full of fantaſyes
               
                  Fyrſte aduertyng. the grete worthyneſſe
               Of theſe knyghtes. and the ſemlyneſſe
               Her luſty youthe. her force and her manhode
               And how they weren comen. of Royall blode
               All this he gan to reuolue aboute
               Ay in his herte. hauyng a maner doubte
               Bytwene twoo. hangyng in a balaunce
               whether he ſholde maken alyaunce
               Bytwene his doughters. & the knyghtis twayn
               For one thyng. ay his herte gan conſtrayn
               The remembraunce of his auyſyon
               Of whiche. therfore I made menſyon
               Touchyng the lyon. and the wylde bore
               It nedeth not. to reherſe it more
               Castyng alwaye. in his fantaſye
               what it myght. clerely ſygnyfye
               This derke dreme. this was hydde and cloſe
               But on the morowe. Adraſtus vp aroſe
               And to the temple. the right waye he toke
               And gan praye deuoutly on his boke
               To the goddes. his dreme to ſpecyfye
               And they hym badde. homewarde for to hye
               And to beholde. in the knyghtes ſheldes
               The fell beſtes. peynted of the feldes
               whiche ſhall to hym. by clere inſpeccyon
               Full playnly. make declaracyon
               Of his dreme. that he had in the nyght
               And Adraſtus. enhaſted hym full ryght
               
                  In her ſheldes. hangynge vpon hokes
               The beſtes rage. with her mortall hokes
               And to purpoſe. lyke as wryte Bochas
               Polymyte. full ſtrayte enbraced was
               In the hyde of a fers lyon
               And Tydeus. abouen his haberyon
               Agypon hadde. 
                     ••
                  dous ſharpe and hore
               wrought of the bryſtles. of a wylde bore
               The whiche beſtes. as the ſtory leres
               were wrought and bete. vpon her baners
               Dyſplayed brode. whan they ſholde fyght
               wherof the kynge. whan he hadde a ſyght
               Atte his repayre. in herte was full gladde
               with a face full demure and ſadde
               with his lordes. that he aboute hym hadde
               To the temple. he theſe knyghtes ladde
               And whan they hadde. with all circumſtaūces
               Of rytes olde. done her obſeruaūces
               Home to the courte. they reſorte agayn
               And in a hall. riche and well beſayn
               This worthy kyng. of herte lyberall
               Made a feſte. ſolempne and Royall
               whiche in deyntes. ſuerly dyde excelle
               But it were veyn. euery cours to telle
               Her ſtrange ſewes. and her ſotyltees
               Ne how they. ſat lyke to her degrees
               Fer lak of tyme. I lette it ouerſlyde
               And after mete. Adraſtus toke aſyde▪
               
               
                  The knyghtes twoo. and lyke a prudente man
               In secrete wyſe. thus his tale he gan
               SIrs quod he. I doughte it noughtVerba Regis Adraſtus ad Polimitem et Tydeū
                  
               
               That it is freſſhe. & grene ay in your thought
               How that fyrſt. by goodis ordynaūce
               And after nexte. thrugh fates purueaūce
               And by workynge. of fortu
                     ••
                  s honde
               How yt ye werne. fyrſt brought in to this londe
               Bothe tweyne. but now this laſte nyghte
               Of wos comynge. I am full gladde & lyghte
               Fyrſte in my ſelfe. ſhortly to expreſſe
               whan I conſyder. and ſee the lyklyneſſe
               Of youre perſones. with the circumſtaunces
               And hole the maner. of your gouernaunces
               Seeynge full well. wherto ſholde I fayne
               ye lykely be. here after to attayne
               The grete eſtate. of habondaunce of good
               Thrugh youre byrthe. and your Royall blood
               ye maye not fayle. but ye haue wronge
               For ye are bothe manly. and ryghte ſtronge
               And for to ſette. youre hertes at more reſte
               My purpoſe is. I hope for the beſte
               Soo that in you. be noo varyaunce
               To make a knot. and by alyaunce
               A twixe you and my doughters two
               yf youre hertes. accorden wyll therto
               And for. I am fully in dyſpeyre
               To succede. for to haue an heyre
               
                  Therfore ye ſhall haue. poſſeſſyon
               Durynge my lyfe. of halfe this regyon
               Forth with in honde. and hole after my daye
               There is noman. that therto ſhall ſaye naye
               And ſothly after. whan I am graue
               Eche of you. ſhall his parte haue
               Of this kyngdome. as I haue prouyded
               This to ſeen. it ſhall be deuyded
               Bytwene you twoo. eueryche to be crowned
               youre purpartyes. by equyte compowned
               Soo egally. in euery mannys ſyghte
               That eche of you. reioyſe ſhall his ryghte
               And by youre wytte. ye ſhall the londe amende
               And of manhode. knyghtly it defende
               Agayne oure enemyes. and oure mortall foon
               And for the dayes. paſſed ben and goon
               Of my deſyres. and my luſty youthe
               I am full ſette. for to make couthe
               That ye ſholde haue. lyke myne opynyon
               The gouernaunce of this regyon
               To this entente. me ſemyth for the beſte
               ye to gouerne. and I to lyue in reſte
               Fully to fulfylle. the luſte of my pleyſurs
               Hunte and hawke. in woodes and ryuers
               whan ſoo euer. therto I ſhall haue pleaſance
               And for to haue. none other attendance
               Vnto nothynge. but vnto myne eaſe
               For whiche ſhortly. yf it agree and pleaſe
               
                  That I haue ſayde. to you that ben ſoo wyſe
               And ben accordynge. vnto youre auyſe
               Delayeth not. but in wordes playn
               what you ſemyth. yeue anſwere agayn
               ANd whan Adraſtus. had his tale fynedReſponſia a Polimite et tideo ad Regem Adraſtu
               
               Tydeus with hede. full lowe enclyned
               As he that was. a verry gentyll knyghte
               with all his power. and his full myghte
               Full humbly. thanked the kynge
               Touchynge his profre. of ſoo hygh a thynge
               And for his parte. ſayd he wolde aſſente
               Fully of herte. neuer to repente
               To all that euer. the kynge hath ſayde
               And Polymyte. was alſo well apayde
               In the ſtory. as it is comprehended
               And ſoo they be bothe. condeſcended
               The kynges wyll. to fulfylle in dede
               Fro poynte to poynte. and therupon procede
               where ſo euer. that they wynne or leſe
               And Tydeus made. his brother cheſe
               Of gentylleſſe. and of curteſye
               whiche was moost. to his fantaſye
               Of the ſuſtren. for to haue to wyue
               And he in ſouth. choſen hadde Argyue
               That eldeſt was. full womanly to ſe
               And T
                     •
                  deus. toke than Deyphyle
               Of her beaute. mooſt ſouerayn excellente
               And Adraſtus. thrugh out his londe hath ſente
               
                  For his lordes. and his baronage
               To be preſente. atte maryage
               Of the knyghtes. and make noo lettynge
               And they echone. come atte his byddynge
               In goodly wyſe. meke and full benygne
               Agayne the daye. that he dyde aſſygne
               And thyder come. full many luſty knyghte
               Full well beſeen. and many lady bryghte
               Fro euery coſte. and many freſſhe ſquyre
               The ſtory it ſayth. and many comynere
               To beholde. the grete Royalte
               And the maner. of this ſolempnyte
               But to telle. all the circumſtaunces
               Of Juſtes. reuell. and of dyuerſe daunces
               The feſtes riche. and the gyftes grete
               The pryue ſyghes. and the feruente hete
               Of loues folke. brennynge as the glede
               And deuyſes. of many ſondry wede
               The touches ſtole. and the amerous lokes
               By ſtoyll crafte. layde doune lyne and hokes
               The Jelous folke. to trayſſen and begyle
               In theyr a wayte. with many ſondry wyle
               All this in ſouthe. deſcryuen I ne can
               But well I wote. the newe fame ran
               This meane whyle. with full ſwyfte paſſage
               Vnto Thebes. of this maryage
               And by reporte trewe. and not I fayned
               The ſowne therof. the eres hathe attayned
               
                  Myne auctour wryte. of Ethyocles
               Touchyng the honoure. and the grete encres
               Of Polymyte. hyghly magnyfyed
               And how that he. newly was allyed
               with Adraſtus. in the londe of Arge
               The whiche thyng. gretly he gan to charge
               Dredyng inly. that this maryage
               Shall after tourne. in to his damage
               Sore muſyng. and caſtyng vp and downe
               The grete power. and the hye renowne
               Of Adraſtus. the whiche of Grekes londe
               Hadde all the power. ſudgett to his honde
               Leſte that he for Polymyte ſake
               wolde vpon hym. a newe werre make
               But yf that he. lyke to the conuencyon
               Atte the tyme ſette. delyuerd the toun
               To his brother. by bonde of bothe I ſworne
               By couenauntes. aſſured here byforne
               Yf ye remember. late as I you tolde
               whiche he was not. in purpos for to holde
               But from his heſt. caſted for to 
                     •
                  arye
               And therupon lyſte noo lenger to tarye
               Lyche his deſyre. to ſhape remedyes
               And fyrſte he ſente. for his next allyes
               In whome he hadde. mooſt affyaunce
               For his lordes. that hadde gouernaunce
               Of his kyngdome. to come to hym anone
               And whan they were preſente euerychone
               
                  He ſayd playnly. wenyng for the beſte
               That his herte. ſhall neuer lyen in reſte
               But in ſorowe. and in a maner drede
               Tyll his brother. vtterly be dede
               That he in Thebes. in his Royall ſete
               Myghte allone. regne in quyete
               He mente hymſelfe. ſhortly and none other
               Unperturbed. of Polymyte his brother
               And atte this counſeyll. dyucrſe of entente
               I fynde wrytte thre folkes were preſente
               Some in ſothe. that feythfull were and trewe
               And ſome alſo. that changen can of newe
               And other eke. that bytwene twayne
               Couertly coude vnder coloure fayne
               THe fyrſte ſayd. aboue all thyngThe commēdacyon of trouth
               
               Trouth ſholde longe to a kyng
               Of his worde. not be varyable
               But playne and hole. as a contre ſtable
               For trouth fyrſte. withoute ony wene
               Is chyfe pyler. that many a kyng ſuſtene
               In Joye and honour. for to lede his lyfeNota How trouthe is preferred 
                        •
                     v ye book of eſdre aforne kyngis wȳ mē & wyne
               
               For trouth whylom had a prerogatyfe
               As of Eſdre. the book can ſpecyfye
               Recorde I take. of prudente Neemye
               That worthy kyng. for all her grete pryde
               with all her power. and domynacyon
               Hauyng rewarde. in comparyſon
               The trouthes myght. trouthes worthyneſſe
               
                  For as Eſdre. playnly dooth expreſſe
               who taketh hede. in the ſame place
               The influence ſothly. and the grace
               Of trouth allone. this olde Neemye
               Gate hym lycence to redefye
               The walles newe. of JheruſalemSalamon Trouth & mercy p̄ſer uen a kyng fro all aduerſyte Chaūgene doublineſſe ſholde not be in a kynge
               
               whiche trouth is. treſoure. cheef of euery realme
               For Salamon wrytte. how that thynges tweyn
               Trouth and mercy. lynked in a cheyn
               Preſerue a kyng. lyke to his degree
               Fro all myſcheef. and aduerſytee
               Alas therfore. that ony doubleneſſe
               Varyaunce. or vnſykerneſſe
               Chaunge of worde. or mutabylytee
               Fraude or deceyte. other inſtabylyte
               Sholde in a kyng. haue domynacyon
               To cauſen after. his deſtruccyon
               Of kynges rede the ſtory done by rowe
               And ſeen how many. haue ben ouerthrowe
               Thrugh her falſhede. fro fortunes whele
               For vnto god. it pleſeth neuer a dele
               A kyng to be double of entente
               For it maye happe. that the worlde is blente
               Full ofte ſyth by ſleyth of her werkyng
               But this is the trouth. god ſeeth euery thyng
               Right as it is. for there maye be noo cloude
               Toforne his ſyght. trouth for to ſhroude
               It may be clypſed. and derked by dyſcente
               
                  By falſe engyne lyeng in a wayte
               As a ſerpente. for to vndermyne
               But atte laſte. it wyll clerely ſhyne
               who that ſayth nay. ſhe we his bryght beames
               For it is in ſothe. of kyngdomes & of reames
               Is berer vp. and conſeruatryce
               Fro all myſcheef. and ſouthfaſte medyatryce
               To god aboue. who ſoo lyſte to ſee
               To kepe a kyng. in proſperytee
               On euery ſyde. as I affermely dare
               For whiche kyngis. and lordes be well ware
               youre beheſtes. Juſtly for to holde
               And thynke how Thebes. with his wall olde
               Deſtroyed was. platly this noo less
               For the doubleneſſe. of Ethyocles
               whiche his people. after ſore abought
               Donly for he not by counſeyll wrought
               Of hem that were. bothe trewe and wyſe
               Hym lyſte not worche. after her deuyſe
               But lefte trouth. and ſette his fantaſye
               To be gouerned. by falſe flaterye
               That had hym thynke. how he was a knyght
               And to ſhelde of force. more than of ryght
               Duryng his lyfe. lordſhyp of the towne
               And not for to leſe. his poſſeſſyon
               For noo bonde. ne heſtes made aforne
               But late his brother. blowen in a horne
               where that hym lyſte. or pypen in a rede
               
                  This was the counſeyll. platly and the rede
               Of ſuche that lyſte not. to ſayen the ſouthe
               But falſly flater. with her wordes ſmothe
               And whan they had. hole her tale fayned
               Ethyocles. fully was enclyned
               who ſoo euer there atte. lawghe or wepe
               Lyke her counſeyll. peſſeſſyon to kepe
               who that ſaye nay. or grutche there agayne
               Hym to contrarye. he thought it was but vayne
               BVt in this whyle. hath the ſhene ſonneHow the ye re was comen oute yt Ethyocles regned in Thebes
               
               The. xii. ſygnes. rounde aboute ronne
               Syth Ethyocle. by Juſte rekenyng
               In Thebes was crowned lorde and kyng
               Holdyng the ſepture. and the dyademe
               That by reaſon. as wolde ſeme
               The tyme was full complete and the ſpace
               Of couenaunt. he ſholde voyde his place
               And Polymyte eke. his Journey make
               Towarde Thebes. poſſeſſyon to take
               Of due tytle. but yf he hadde wronge
               whiche thought in ſoth▪ ye yere was woūd longe
               Of his exyle. or it come aboute
               And for he hadde in herte. a maner doute
               Leſte in his brother. there were falſhede fonde
               To acquyte hymſelfe. lyke as he was bonde
               To Adraſtus. he gan declare his herte
               Beſechynge hym. this mater to aduerte
               And therupon. to yeue his counſeyll ſone
               
                  Touchyng his right. what was beſte to done
               where it was. beſte to gone or to abyde
               Or lyke a knyght. manfully to ryde
               Hymſelfe allone. and make noo meſſage
               For the chalange. of his rightfull herytage
               within Thebes. eyther by peas or ſtryfe
               And therupon. to yeoparde his lyfe
               Thus was he ſette. for all his fers brother
               But Adraſtus ſothly. thought a nother
               Better was to ſende. than hymſelfe to goon
               Leſte he were trapped. among his mortall foon
               Hauyng his brother. ſuſpecte in the caſe
               That by fraude. or by ſome falaſe
               He wolde werke. to his deſtruccyon
               Yf he were hardy. to entren in to the towne
               For whiche he badde hym. prudently take hede
               Full concludyng. how it was more ſpede
               That ſome other. be to Thebes ſente
               To apperceyue. fully the entente
               Of Ethyocle. outewarde by ſome ſygne
               And where that he his crowne wyll reſygne
               For tylke yere. lyke as he made his othe
               And whan he knew. how his purpos goth
               Therupon to werke and procede
               Thus Adraſtus. wyſely gan hym rede
               And whyle they treate. vpon this materTydeus toke vpon hȳ to do ye meſſage of his brother Polymyte
               
               Tydeus with a manly chere
               Sayd vtterly. for his brothers ſake
               
                  This meſſage. he wolde vndertake
               with hole tempryſe. of the embaſſyate
               were it wylfull. or infortunate
               He wyll not ſpare. what ſoo that bytyde
               But Adraſtus. on that other ſyde
               And Polymyte. in concluſyon
               weren contrarye. to that opynyon
               And ſayd ſothly. as hem thought ryght
               Syth that he was. ſoo well aproued knyght
               And deſcended. of ſoo worthy blood
               That they nolde. for none erthly good
               For all Thebes. with the rygalye
               Put his body. in ſuche yeopardye
               BUt all this thynge. auayled hē right nouzt
               For he wold forth. how dere yt it be bought
               Takyng leue. fyrſte of all the ſtates
               And armed hym. in mayle and ſure plates
               And ſhope hym forth. vpon his Journey
               who made ſorowe. but DeyphyleThe ſorowe of Deyphyle whā tydeꝰ went vnto Thebes
               
               with bytter teeres. dewed all her face
               Full ofte ſyth. ſwownyng in the place
               Tryſte and mornyng. in her blake wede
               whan ſhe ſawe. that he toke his ſtede
               Soo inwardly. gan encreace her mone
               Seeng her lorde. ſoo ryde forth allone
               Vpon his waye. this worthy Tydeus
               And in all haſte. the ſtory telleth vs
               He ſpede hym ſoo. makyng noo delayes
               
                  That in ſpace. of a fewe dayes
               The hye towres of Thebes he gan ſee
               And entred is in to the Lytee
               wyſely enqueryng. where the paleys ſtode
               And lyke a knyght. thyder ſtreyte he rode
               Marked full well. in many mannes ſyght
               Lyche Mars hymſelfe. in ſtele armed bryght
               Tyll he atteyned hath. the cheef dongyon
               where as the kyng. helde his manſyon
               And thrugh the paleys with a knyghtly loke
               In to the halle. the right waye he toke
               Fro his ſtede. whan he lyght down
               Not aferde. but hardy as a lyon
               where as the kyng. with lordes a grete route
               In the halle. ſyttyng rounde aboute
               He entred in mooſt manfull of corage
               To execute. the fyne of this meſſage
               And as hym thought. conuenyente and due
               Full connyngly. he gan the kyng ſalue
               Requyryng hym of kyngly excellence
               In goodly wyſe. to yeue hym audyence
               And not dyſdayne. neyther in porte ne chere
               Syth he was. come as a meſſagere
               From Polymyte. his owne brother dere
               Gynnyng his tale thus. as ye ſhall here
               QVod he vnto youre worthyneſſeHow wyſely & howe knyghtely tydeꝰ dyde his meſſage
               
               My purpos is. bryfly to expreſſe
               Theffecte oonly as in ſentemente
               
                  Of the meſſage. why that I am ſente
               It were in vayne. longe proceſſe for to make
               But of my mater. the verraye grounde to take
               In eſchuynge. of prolixyte
               And voyde awaye. all ſuperfluyte
               Syth yourſelfe. beſt ought to vnderſtonde
               The cauſe fully. that we haue on honde
               And eke conceyue. thentente of my menyng
               Of rightwyſneſſe. longyng to a kyng
               Fyrſte conſydred. yf that ye take hede
               whan Edyppus. the olde kyng was dede
               How yourſelfe. and youre brother blyue
               For the crowne. contagyouſly gan ſtryue
               As mortall foon. by full grete hatred
               whiche of you twoo. fyrſte ſholde ſuccede
               Tyll that ye weren. by meanes recouncyled
               The to regne. and he to be exyled
               Out of this towne. for a yeres ſpace
               And than agayne. reſorte to his place
               To regne as kyng. and ye to voyde oute
               Soo as your tourne. by proceſſe come aboute
               Eueryche of you. pacyently to endure
               The enterchaungyng. of his aduenture
               who were putte oute. or ſtode in his eſtate
               Therupon to make noo debate
               Lyche the conuenaunte. and conuencyon
               Enrolled vp. by lordes of this towne
               whiche of reaſon maye. not be denyed
               
                  And ſythe ye haue. a yere I occupyed
               Polymyte. requyreth you of ryghtThe requeſte yt tydeus made in ye name of polimyte vnd ye tytle of ye cōuencyon
               
               To acquyte you. lyche a trewe knyght
               In eſchewyng. of mortall werre and ſtryte
               Syth ye haue hadde. a prorogatyfe
               As eldeſt brother. for to regne a forne
               And thynheth eke. how that ye are ſworne
               youre othe to kepe. and make noo taryeng
               Hole aduertyng. lyke a prudente kyng
               That trouth is more in comparyſon
               Than all the treſoure. of youre regyon
               More acceptable. bothe to god and man
               Than all ryches. that ye reken can
               wherfore in haſte. and let there be noo ſlouthe
               Ouyteth youre ſelfe. Juſtly of your trouthe
               Vnto your brother. auoydyng this cyte
               And lette hym regne. in his royalte
               The crowne of Thebes. a yere to occupye
               Than wyll all Grece. preyſe and magnyfye
               youre hye renowne. and maye ſaye none other
               But ye haue you. Juſtly to your brother
               This is hole theffecte. of all that I wyll ſayen
               Anſwere expectante. what ye lyſte ſende ayen
               WHan Tydeus hadde tolde his tale
               Ethyocles. tryſte and wonder pale
               His conreyte fyrſte. in maner had refrayned
               Dyſſymelyng. vnder coloure fayned
               Shewyng a chere. in maner debonayre
               
                  To his entente. wounderly contrarye
               Inwarde in herte. wood and furyous
               Tournyng his face. towarde Tydeus
               But he gan abrayde. and atte laſte outbrake
               And euen thus. to hym he ſpakeI haue gret meruaylle qd tydeꝰ The āſwe re of ethyo cles
               
               I haue grete meruayle. quod he in my thought
               Of the meſſage. whiche thou haſt I brought
               That my brother. as thou haſte expowned
               Deſyreth ſoo in Thebes. to be crowned
               Hauyng rewarde. to the habondaunce
               The grete plente. and the ſuffyſaunce
               That he hath now. with the kyng of Arge
               That me ſemeth. that he ſholde lytell charge
               To haue lordſhyp. or domynacyon
               In the bondes. of this lytell towne
               Syth he regneth. ſoo freſſhely in his floures
               Surmountyng. all his predeceſſoures
               By newe encreaſe. thorugh fortunes myght
               wherof in herte. I am right glad and lyght
               Full truſtyng. yf I hadde nede
               To his helpe. that withoute drede
               Lyke a brother. than I ſholde hym fynde
               To mewarde. faythfully trewe and kynde
               Suppoſyng. playnly euermore
               Of this regne. he ſette but lytyll ſtore
               Nor caſte hym not. for ſoo ſhorte a whyle
               As for a yere. his brother to exyle
               To lyue in pouerte. and grete dyſtreſſe
               
                  He wyll not ſuffre it of his grete nobleſſe
               It were noo token of noo brotherhede
               But a ſygne rather of hatrede
               To interrupte. of my poſſeſſyon
               Of this lytyll poore regyon
               All that he ſpake. whoo that coude aduerte
               Of verray ſcorne. roted in his herte
               As it ſemeth. the ſtory can you teche
               By the ſurplus. ſothly of his ſpeche
               He myght not. hym noo lenger refrayne
               But platly ſayd. as tweyne vs twayne
               I mene thus Polymyte and me
               There is noo bonde. nother ſuerte
               Nor fayth I made. that maye hym auayle
               As he claymeth. to haue the gouernayle
               Of this Lytee. nother yere ne daye
               For I ſhall lette hym ſothly yf I maye
               That he ſhall not. by tytle of noo bonde
               Reioyſe in Thebes. halfe a fote of londe
               Lete hym kepe. all that he hath wonne
               For I purpoſe. as I haue begonne
               To regne in Thebes. henſforthe all my lyfe
               Maugre all hem that there agayne ſtryfe
               And in deſpyte. of his frendes all
               Or the counseyll. that hym lyſte call
               Lete hym be ſure. and know this right well
               His manaſſyng. I drede neuer a dele
               And ſykerly. as to myne auyſe
               
                  It ſheweth well. that thou were not wyſe
               But ſupprysyng. with a maner rage
               To take on the. this ſurquydous meſſage
               And preſume. to done ſoo hye offence
               Soo boldly to ſpeke in my preſence
               But all I fere. auayle ſhall ryght nought
               For the tydynges. that thou, haſte brought
               Shall vnto hym. be but dyſencrees
               He better were. to hauen in pees
               Than of folye. and preſumpcyon
               Agaynſt me. to ſeke occaſyon
               For whyle I leue. and therto here myne honde
               As I ſayd erſte. he wynneth here noo londe
               For fynally. I doo the to vnderſtonde
               whyle the walle. of this towne maye ſtonde
               That they ſhall fyrſte. be bete down full lowe
               And all the toures. to the erthe I throwe
               Or he in Thebes. haue ony thyng to doo
               Loo here is all. retourne and ſaye hym ſoo
               Whan Tydeus ſawe. the feruente yre
               Of the kyng. with anger ſette a fyre
               Full of dyſpyte. and malencolye
               Conceyuyng eke. the grete felonye
               In his apporte. lyke as he were wood
               This worthy knyght. a lytyll whyle ſtood
               Sadde and demure. or he wolde ought ſeyn
               But atte laſte. thus he ſpake ageyn
               Lerteys quod he. I conceyue of neweThe knyghtely anſwere of tydeus ayen to ye kyng
               
               
                  Aboute the. thy counſeyll is vntrewe
               I dare it ſayn. and vowen atte leſte
               Nor thou arte. faythfull of thy beheſte
               Stable of thy worde. that yu haſt ſayd toforne
               B
                     •
                  t dyſceyuable. and falſly eke forſworne
               And eke periure. of thyne aſſured othe
               But where ſoo be. that thou be leff or lothe
               I ſay the ſhortly. holde it for noo fage
               All ſhall tourne. vnto thy domage
               Truſte it well. and in full cruell wyſe
               All Grekes londe. ſhall vpon the ryſe
               To ben auenged. and manly to the redreſſe
               The grete vntrouth. and the hye falfneſſe
               whiche that yu haſte. agayn thy brother wrought
               It ſhall full dere. after this be bought
               And verrayly in dede. as thou ſhalte lere
               Lryng Adraſtus. wyll medell in this mater
               And all the lordes. aboute hym enuyron
               That bounde ben. to his ſubgeccyon
               Prynces Dukes. and many a noble knyght
               In ſuſteynyng. of thy brothers ryght
               Shall vpon a daye. with ſpere and ſhelde
               Agayns the be gadred. in a felde
               Lrnyghtly to proue. all by one aſſente
               That thou arte fals. and double of entente
               Of thy promyſe. atteynt and eke outrayed
               And leue me well. it ſhall not be delayed
               But in all the haſte. execute in dede
               
                  Lyke thy deſerte. thou ſhalte haue thy mede
               For god aboue. of his ryghtwyſneſſe
               Suche open wronge. ſhall in haſte redreſſe
               And of his myght. all ſuche concluſyon
               Refourme agayne. and all extorſyon
               For this the tyne. falſhede ſhall not auayle
               Agayne trouth. to holde batayle
               wronge is croked. bothe halte and lame
               And here anone. in my brothers name
               As I that am his next allye
               In his quarell. I ſhortly the defye
               Fully auyſed. with all my hole entente
               And the lordes. that ben there preſente
               I you requyre. of your worthyneſſe
               To ſaye trouth. and to bere wytneſſe
               whan tyme cometh. Juſtly to recorde
               How youre kyng. falſly can dyſcorde
               From his heſte. of falſe varyaunce
               And thynke how ye. of fayth and lygaunce
               Arne bonde echone. ye maye not goo therfro
               For to obeye. and ſeruen bothe twoo
               This next yere. now anone folowyng
               As to youre lorde. and youre trewe kyng
               Polymyte. though he be now abſente
               By Juſte accorde. made in perlemente
               At youre deuyſe. whiche ſytten here arowe
               Engroſed vp as it is right well knowe
               And enrolled. oonly for wytneſſe
               
                  In youre regeſtres. to voyden all falneſſe
               That none of you. varye maye of newe
               For that I ſaye. but yf he be vntrewe
               For whiche I rede. youre ſelfe to acquyte
               Lette noo 
                     •
                  yme lenger you reſpyte
               But attones. withoute more taryeng
               Of manly force. fetteth home youre kyng
               Manger his foon. lyke as ye are bounde
               And lette in you. noo ſlouth be founde
               To putte hym Juſtly in poſſeſſyon
               This my counſeyll. in concluſyon
               As Tydeus had his meſſage ſayde
               Lyke to the charge. yt was on hym layde
               As he that lyſte. noo lenger there ſoiourne
               Fro the kyng. he gan his face tourne
               Not aſtonyed. nor in his herte aferde
               But full proudly. leyd his honde on his ſwerde
               And in deſpyte. whoo that was leff or lothf
                        •
                     ow tydeꝰ manly departed frō the kyng
               
               A ſterne paas. thorugh the hall he goeth
               Thorught out ye courte. & manly toke his ſtede
               And oute of Thebes. faſte gan hym ſpede
               Enhaſtyng hym. tylle he was att large
               And ſpede hym forth. toward the lond of Arge
               Thus leue I hym. ryde forth a whyle
               whyle that I retourne agayne my ſtyle
               Vnto the kyng. that in the hall ſtode
               And amonge his lordes furyous and wode
               In his herte wrothe. and euyll apayed
               
                  Of the wordes. that Tydeus had ſayde
               Specyally hauyng. remembraunce
               On the proude. dyſpytous dyffyaunce
               whyles that he ſatte. in his royall ſee
               Vpon whiche. he wyll auenged bee
               Full cruelly. what euer that befalle
               And in his yre. he gan to hym calle
               Chyfe conſtable. of his chyualrye
               Chargyng hym faſte for to hye
               with all the worthy choſe. of his houſholde
               whiche as he knew. moſt manfull & moſt bolde
               In all haſte. Tydeus to ſue
               Toforn. or he oute of his londe renue
               Vpon payne of lyffe. and leſyng of her hede
               withoute mercy. anone that he be dede
               And of knyghtes. fyfty were in nombre
               Myne auctour ſayth. vnwarly hym tencombre
               Armed echone. in mayle and thyk ſtele
               And therwith all I horſed wounder wele
               Atte a poſterne. forth they gan to rydeHow falſely ethiocles layd a buſſhemete in ye valey to haue ſlayn Tydeus
               
               By agayne path. that laye oute aſyde
               Secretly. that noo man hem aſpye
               Oonly of treaſon. and felonye
               They haſte hem forth all the longe daye
               Of cruell malyce. for to ſtop his waye
               Thorugh a foreſte. all of one aſſente
               Full cowardly. to laye a buſſhemente
               Vnder an hylle. at a ſtrayte paſſage
               
                  To falle on hym. at more auantage
               The ſame waye. that Tydeus gan drawe
               Ate thylk mounte. where Spyx was ſlawe
               He nothyng ware in his opynyon
               Of this compaſſed. conſpyracyon
               But Innocente. and lyke a gentyll knyght
               Rode ay forth. tyll it drew to nyght
               Sole by hymſelfe. withoute companye
               Hauyng noo man to wyſe hym or to guye
               But atte laſte. lyftyng vp his hede
               Towarde eue and gan take hede
               In mynde of his waye. right as ony lyne
               Thought he ſawe ayen the mone ſhyne
               Sheldes freſſhe. and plates bourned bryght
               The whiche enuyron. caſten a grete lyght
               Ymagynyng. in his fantaſye
               There was treaſon. and conſpyracye
               Wrought by the kyng. his Journey for to lette
               And of all that. he nothyng ſette
               But well aſſured. in his manly herteHow tydeꝰ outerayed fyfty knyghtes yt lay in a wayte for to ſlee hym
               
               Lyſte not ones. aſyde to dyuerte
               But kepte his waye. his ſhelde vpon his breſte
               And caſte his ſpere. manly in his reſte
               And the fyrſte platly. that he mette
               Thorugh the body. proudly he hym ſmette
               That he fell dede. chyfe mayſter of hem all
               And than attones. they vpon hym falle
               On euery parte. by compas enuyrown
               
                  But Tydeus. thorugh his hye renown
               his blody ſwerde. let aboute hym glyde
               Sleeth and kylled. vpon euery ſyde
               In his yre. and in his mortall tene
               That meruayle was. he myght ſo ſuſteyne
               Ayen hem all. in euery halfe be ſette
               But his ſwerde. was ſoo ſharpe I whette
               That his foon. founde full vnſwette
               But he alas. was lyght on feete
               By force grounded. in full grete dyſtreſſe
               But of knyghthode. and of grete proweſſe
               Vp he roſe. maugre all his foon
               And as they come. he ſlewe hem one by one
               Lyke a lyon rampant in his rage
               And on this hylle. he fonde a narowe paſſage
               whiche that he toke. of full hye prudence
               And lyche a bore. ſtandyng at his defence
               As his foo men. proudly hym aſſayle
               Vpon the playne. he made her blood to rayle
               All enuyron. that the ſoyle waxe rede
               Now here now there. as they fyllen dede
               That laye here one. & there laye twoo or three
               Soo mercyles. in his fers crueltee
               Thylke daye he was. vpon hem founde
               And attones. his enmyes to confounde
               where as he ſtode. this myghty campyowne
               Beſyde he ſawe. with water tourned downe
               An huge ſtone. large longe and ſquare
               
                  And ſodaynly. or that they were ware
               As it had layen there for the nones
               Vpon his foon. he rolled it attones
               That ten of hem. wenten vnto wrake
               And the remenaunte. amaſed drowe a bake
               For one by one. they wente to myſchance
               And fynally he brought to outrance
               Hem euerychone. Tydeus as blyue
               That none but one. left of hem a lyue
               Hemſelfe I hurte. and I wounded kene
               Thorugh his harneys. bledyng on the grene
               The ſlayne knyghtis. in compas roūde aboute
               In the vale. ſlayne all the route
               whiche pyteouſly. agayne the mone gape
               For none of theym. ſhortly myght eſcape
               But dede echone. as they it haue deſerued
               Saaf one excepte. the whiche was reſerued
               By Tydeus. of this entencyon
               To the kyng to make relacyon
               How his knyghtes. haue on her Journey ſped
               Eueryche of hem. his lyfe lefte for awed
               And atte metyng. how they haue hem borne
               To tellen. all he ſured was and ſworne
               To Tydeus full. lowly on his knee
               By whiche enſample. openly ye may ſee
               Agayne trouthe. falſhede hath noo myghtHow trouthe with lytell multytude hathe euer in the fyne vyctorye of falſhede
               
               Fye on quarels. not grounded vpon ryght
               withoute whiche. maye be noo vyctorye
               
                  Therfore eche man. haue this in memorye
               That grete power. ſhortly to conclude
               Plente of good. nor moche multytude
               Sleyght or engeny. force or folonye
               Arn
                     •
                   to feble. to holde champartye
               Agayne trouth. who that lyſt take hede
               For atte ende. falſhede maye not ſpede
               To endure longe. the ſholde fynde it this
               Recorde I take. of worthy Tydeus
               whiche with his honde. thrugh tronyes excellence
               Fyfty knyghtes ſlewe. in his defence
               But one excepte. as I late tolde
               Sworne & aſſured. and his honde vpholde
               The kyng to enfourme. how they were attaynt
               And Tydeus of bledyng. wounder faynt
               Meat and wery. and in grete dyſtreſſe
               And ouerlayd. of verray feblyneſſe
               But as he myght. hymſelfe to ſuſtene
               He toke his horſe. ſtandyng on the grene
               worthed vp. and forth he gan to ryde
               An eaſy pace. with his woundes wyde
               And ſhortly yet. in his opynyon
               He was alwaye. aferde of treaſon
               But anguyſſhous. and full of beſy payne
               He rode hym forth. tyll he dyde attayne
               In to the bondes. of Lygurgus londeHow tydeꝰ all for woū
                     ded come in to Lygurgus londe
               
               A worthy kyng. and manly of his honde
               And he full pale. oonly for lacke of blode
               
                  Tydeus ſawe. where a caſtell ſtode
               Stronge and myghty. bylte vpon a roche
               Towarde whome. faſte he gan approche
               Conueyed thyder. by clereneſſe of the ſtone
               That by nyght. agayn the mone ſhone
               On the towres. with creſtes mar
                     •
                  yall
               And Joynyng. all mooſt to the wall
               Was a gardayne. lytyll oute beſyde
               In to whome. Tydeus gan to ryde
               Of auenture. by a gate ſmall
               And there he founde. for to reken all
               A luſty Erber. vnto his deuyſe
               Swete and freſſhe. lyche a paradyſe
               Verray heuenly. of inſpeccyon
               And fyrſte of all. he lyghted a doun
               The goodly place. whan that he behelde
               And from his nek. auoyded hath his ſhelde
               Drawe his brydell. fro his horſe hede
               Lete hym goon. and take noo maner hede
               Thrugh the gardayn. that encloſed was
               Hym to paſture. on the grene gras
               And Tydeus. more heuy than is lede
               Vpon the herbes. grene whyte and rede
               As hym thought. that tyme for the beſte
               He layde hym downe. for to take his reſte
               Of weryneſſe. deſyrous to slepe
               And none awayte. his body for to kepe
               And with dremes. grutched euer amonge
               
                  There he laye. tyll the larke ſonge
               with notes newe. hye vpon in the hayre
               The glad morowe. rody and ryght fayre
               Phebus alſo. caſtyng vp his bemes
               The hye hylles. gylte with his ſtremes
               The ſyluer dewe. vpon the herbes rounde
               There Tydeus laye. vpon the grounde
               Atte the vpryſte. of the ſhene ſonne
               And ſtoundmele. his grene woundes ronne
               Rounde aboute. that the ſoyll depeynte
               Of the grene. with rede meynte
               And euery morow. for holſumneſſe of the heyreHow lygurgꝰ dought fonde tideꝰ ſlepyng in the erber al forwoūded
               
               Lygurgus doughter. made her repayre
               Of cuſtome. ay among the floures newe
               In the gardayne. of many dyuerſe hewe
               Suche Joye had. for to take hede
               On her ſtalkes. for to ſee hem ſprede
               In the alayes walkyng to and fro
               And whan ſhe had. a lytyll whyle go
               Her ſelfe allone. caſtyng vp her ſyght
               She behelde. where an armed knyght
               Laye to reſte hym. on the herbes colde
               And hym beſyde. ſhe gan eke beholde
               His myghty ſtede. walkyug here and there
               And ſhe anone. fell in a maner fere
               Specyally. whan ſhe ſawe the blode
               Sprad all the grene. aboute there ſhe ſtode
               But at laſte. ſhe caught hardyneſſe
               
                  And womanly. gan her for to dreſſe
               Toward this knyght. hauyng a maner of drede
               And gan grete doute. leſt yt he were dede
               And of her wyll. ſoothly it was cheef
               That ſhe thought. for to make a preef
               How that it ſtode. of this man full ofte
               And forth ſhe gooth. & touched hym full ſofte
               There as he laye. with her hondes ſmale
               And with a face dedely. bleyke and pale
               Lyche as a man. dawed in a ſwone
               Vp he ſterte. and his ſwerde he drowe
               Not fully oute. but put it vp agayne▪
               
               Anone as he hath the lady ſayne
               Beſechyng her. oonly of her grace
               To haue pyte vpon his treſpace
               And rewe on hym. of her womanhede
               For of afraye. he was falle in drede
               Leſte he had. aſſayled be of newe
               Of the Thebans. preued full vntrewe
               For dred of whiche he was ſoo recheles
               Full humbly yeldyng hym to the pees
               Truſte in hymſelfe. he paſſed had his boundes
               And whan that ſhe ſawe his mortall woundes
               She had routhe. of verraye gentelleſſe
               Of his dyſeaſe. and of his dyſtreſſe
               And bad he ſholde. noo thyng be dyſmayedHowe womanly yt lady acquyteth her to tydeꝰ in his dyſeaſe
               
               Nor in herte ſorowfull. nor afrayed
               Dyſcomforte hym. in noo maner thyng
               
                  For I quod ſhe. am doughter to the kyng
               Called Lygurge. that gretly me delyte
               Euery morowe. this gardayne to vyſyte
               It is to me. ſoo paſſyngly dyſporte
               wherfore quod ſhe. byth of good comforte
               For noo wyght here. touchyng your vyage
               Shall hynder you. ne doo you noo domage
               And yf ye lyſte. of all youre aduenture
               The playne trouthe. to me dyſcure
               I wyll in ſouth. doo my beſyneſſe
               To refourme. your greuous heuyneſſe
               with all my myght. and myne hole dylygence
               That I hope. of youre grete offence
               ye ſhall haue helpe. in youre aduerſyte
               And as ferforthe. as it lyeth in me
               Truſteth right well. ye ſhall noo faute fynde
               And whan he ſawe. that he was kynge
               Soo womanly. ſoo goodly and ſoo benygne
               In all her porte. by many dyuerſe ſygne
               He vnto her. by order wolde not ſpare
               His aduentures. fully to declare
               In thebes fyrſte. touchyng his meſſage
               And all the hylle. of the wood rage
               Of his woundes. and hurtes ſore
               It were but vayn. to reherſe it more
               By and by. he tolde her euery dele
               The whiche in ſoth. ſhe lyked neuer a dele
               But had reuthe and compaſſyon
               
                  Of his myſchyfe. wrought by falſe treaſon
               Byddyng in haſte. that he ſholde her ſue
               And womanly. as her thought due
               To a chambre ſhe lad hym vp a lofteHow tydeꝰ was refeſſhed in the caſtell of ye lady
               
               Full well beſayn. there in a bed right ſofte
               Rychely abouten apparayled
               with clothe of golde. all the flore I rayed
               Of the ſame. bothe in length and brede
               And fyrſte this lady. of her womanhede
               Her wymmen bad. as goodly as ſhe can
               To be attendaunte. on this wounded man
               And whan he was vnarmed to his ſherte
               She made fyrſte. waſſhe his woundes ſmerte
               And ſerche hem well. with dyuerſe inſtrumentis
               And made fette. ſondry oynementis
               And leches eke. the beſte that ſhe coude fynde
               Full craftely. to ſtaunchen hem and to bynde
               And euery thyng that maye doo hem eaſe
               To ſwage his payne. or his woo to peaſe
               was in the courte. and in the caſtell ſought
               And by her byddyng. to the chambre brought
               And for his ſake. ſhe hath after ſente
               For ſuche deyntes. as were conuenyente
               Mooſt nutrytyfe. by phyſykes lore
               Hem that were ſyke. or wounded to reſtore
               Makyng her wymmen. eke to taken kepe
               And wayte on hym. a nyghtes whan he ſlepe
               And be well ware. that noo thyng a ſterte
               
                  That was or myght. be luſty to his herte
               And with all this. ſhe prayed hym to abyde
               Tyll he were ſtrong. and myghty for to ryde
               In the caſtell. to playe hym and dyſporte
               And at leyſer. home agayne reſorte
               whan he myght. bywelde hym at his large
               But all for nought. he wyll home to Arge
               Toke his leue. on the next daye
               withoute abode. to haſte hym on his waye
               Lowly thankyng. vnto her goodneſſe
               Of her fredome. & of her bounteous largeneſſe
               So wommanly. that her lyſt take hede
               Hym to refreſſhe. in his grete nede
               Behotyng her. with all his full myght
               He wolde be her ſeruaunte. and her knyght
               whyle he lyueth. of what ſhe wolde hem chargeHow tydeꝰ repayreth home to Arge alle forwoūded & ſore I hurte
               
               And forth he rode. tyll he come to Arge
               In full grete haſte. & wolde noo where dwelle
               But what ſholde I reherſen other telle
               Of his repayre. the coſtes or the playns
               The craggy roches. or the hye mountayns
               Or all the maner. of his home comyng
               Of the metyng, or of the welcomyng
               Nor the Joye that Adraſtus made
               Nor how his ſuſ
                     •
                  re. ne his wyfe were glad
               Nor how that they. where to ſholde I wryte
               Embraſed hym. in her armes wyte
               Nor the gaderyng. aboute hym ne the prece
               
                  Nor the ſorowe. that Polymyte
               Made in hymſelf. to ſee hym ſoo ſore wounded
               His greuous hurtes. his ſorowes eke vnſounded
               His dedely loke. and his face pale
               Of all this. to gynne a newe tale
               It were in ſouth a maner ydelneſſe
               Nor how hymſelfe. in ordre dyde expreſſe
               Fyrſte how that he. in Thebes hath hym borne
               Nor how the kyng. falſly was forſworne
               Nor of the awayte. nor treaſon that he ſette
               whan fyfty knyghtes. on the waye hym mette
               As he haue herde. all the maner howe
               withoute whiche. my tale is longe ynowe
               But Adraſtus. made men to ſeche
               In euery coſte. for many dyuerſe leche
               To come in haſte. and make noo taryeng
               Vpon a payne. by byddyng of the kyng
               To done her crafte. that he were recured
               And of his force. in euery parte aſſured
               And they echone. ſoo her connynges ſhewe
               That in ſpace. of dayes fewe
               He was all hole made. of his ſykeneſſe
               Tho was there Joye. th
                     •
                   was there gladneſſe
               Thorugh the courte. and thorugh all the town
               For euery man. hath ſuche opynyon
               In Tydeus. for his gentylleſſe
               For his manhode. and his lowlyneſſe
               That he was holde. the mooſt famous knyght
               
                  And beſte beloued. in euery mannes ſyght
               Thorugh oute Grece. in euery regyon
               But now muſte I make. a dygreſſyon
               To telle ſhortly. as in ſentemente
               Of thylke knyght. that Tydeus hath ſente
               In to Thebes. oonly to declare
               The grete myſchyfe. and the euyll fare
               Vnto the kyng. how it is befall
               The open trouthe. of his knyghtes all
               How Tydeus hath ſlayne hym euerychone
               Than ſaaf hymſelfe. there eſcaped none
               That were reſerued. fro ſhedyng of his blode
               The kyng to telle. playnly how it ſtode
               And whan he had. reherſed euery poynte
               Ethyocles ſtode. in ſuche dyſioynte
               Of hatfull yre. that he waxe nye wodeHow ethyocles was aſ toned whā he herde ye deth of his knyghtes
               
               And in his tene. and in his fell mode
               Of cruell malyce. to the knyght he ſpake
               And felly ſayde. that it was for lake
               Oonly of manhode. thorugh her cowardyſe
               That they were ſlayne. in ſoo mortall wyſe
               And hanged be he. hye by the nek
               That of your deth. or of your ſlaughter rek
               Or you complayne. other one or all
               Of the myſcheef. that is you befall
               I doo noo force. that none of you aſterte
               But fye vpon. youre falſe coward herte
               That one knyght. thrugh his hye renoune
               
                  Hāth brought you. all in confuſyon
               Full graceles. and full vnhappy to
               Naye quod this knyght. it is not ſo
               It is thyne vnhap. playnly and not oures
               That ſoo many. worthy werryoures
               whiche all her lyfe. neuer had ſhame
               Excepte this quarell. taken in thyne name
               That grounded was. and roted in falneſſe
               This was cauſe. in verray ſykerneſſe
               Of oure vnhappe. I wote well and none other
               And the vntrouthe. done vnto thy brother
               And that thou were. ſoo openly forſworne
               A percell cauſe. why that we were forlorne
               was falſe brekyng. of thyne aſſured othe
               And tho the kyng. all mooſt mad for wrothe
               In purpoſe was. for to ſlee this knyght
               Oonly for he ſayde vnto hym ryght
               The whiche myles alas. both at eue & morowe
               Suppryſed was. with a dedely ſorowe
               Renewed ay in his remembraunce
               with the pyteous. and vnhappy chaunce
               Of the myſcheef. and myſauenture
               Touchyng the deth. and the dyſcomfyture
               Of his fers. and of hymſelfe alſo
               That the ſhamfaſte. importable wo
               Soo fratte on hym. with ſuche a mortall ſtryfe
               That he was wery. of his owne lyfe
               Hence a ſwerde. and a ſyde ſterte
               
                  And roffe hymſelfe. euen to the herte
               The kyng hymſelfe. beyng tho preſente
               That the romoure. and the noyſe is wente
               Thrugh oute all Thebes. and the wood rage
               By ſuche as weren. Joyned by lynage
               To the knyghtes. ſlayne atte hyll
               That all attones. of one herte and wyll
               They wolde haue ryſen. thrugh out all the cyte
               Vpon the kyng. auenged for to be
               whiche of her dethe. was cheef occaſyon
               But the barons. and the lordes of the town
               Full beſy weren. this rumoue to dyſceaſe
               Of hye prudence. to ſtynten and appeaſe
               In quyete. euery thyng to ſette
               And after that the bodyes home they fette
               Of the knyghtes. lyke as ye haue herde
               A forne I ſlayne. with the blody ſwerde
               Of Tydeus. full ſharpe whette and grounde
               And in the felde. ſoo as they hem founde
               Oonly of loue. and of affeccyon
               Solempnely. they brought hem to the town
               And lyke the maner of her rightes olde
               They were fyrſte brente. in to aſſhes colde
               Eueryche I buryed. lyche to his degree
               Loo here kalendes of aduerſytee
               Sorowe vpon ſorowe. and deſtruccyon
               Fyrſte of the kyng. and all the regyon
               For lacke oonly. lyke as I you tolde
               
                  That beheſtes. truely were not holde
               Fyrſte grounde and rote. of this ruyne
               As the ſtory. clerely ſhall determyne
               And myne tale herafter. ſhall you lere
               If you lyſte. the remenaunte for to here
            
            ¶ Explicit pars Secunda.
         
         
            ¶ Sequitur pars Tercia.
            
               O Cruell Mars. full of malencolye
               And of thy kynde. hote combuſt & drye
               As the ſpercles. ſhewen fro ſoo fer
               By the ſtremes. of the rede ſter
               In thy ſpere. as it aboute gothe
               what was cauſe. that thou were ſoo wrothe
               with hem of Thebes. thrugh whos feruent yre
               The Cytee brente. and was ſette a fyre
               As bookes olde. well reherſe konne
               Of cruell hate. roted and begonne
               And engendred. the ſtory maketh mynde
               Oonly of blood. corrupte and vnkynde
               By infeccyon. called orygynall
               Cauſyng a ſtryfe. dredfull and mortall
               Of whiche the myſcheef. thrugh all Grece ran
               And kyng Adraſtus. alder fyrſte began
               That hath hym caſte. a conqueſte for to make
               Vpon Thebes. for Polymytes ſake
               
                  In knyghtly wyſe. there to preue his myght
               Of full entente. to recure his ryght
               And fyrſte of all. he ſette a parlyamente
               And hath his lettres. and meſſengers ſente
               Thrugh out Grece. to many ſoundry kynges
               Hem to enhaſte. and make noo lettynges
               And rounde aboute. as made is mencyon
               He ſente alſo. to many Regyon
               For prynces dukes. lordes and barons
               To taken vp. in cytees and in townes
               And cheſen out. the mooſt lyklyeſte
               And ſuche that waren preued for the beſte
               And of manhode. and ſende hem vp echone
               And in her honde. receyue her paye anone
               with Adraſtus. to Thebes for to rydeThe grete purueaūce of kyng Adraſtus towarde ye cyte of thebes
               
               And the lordes. that with hym abyde
               In houſholde ſtyll haue her leue take
               To ryden home. her retenu to make
               In theyr countrees. as they were of degree
               To ſtuffen hem. and to take vp mayne
               And make hem ſtrong. with knyght & ſquyres
               with ſperes bowes. and with arblaſtres
               In all the haſte poſſyble. that they maye
               And to retourne. in her beſte araye
               Atte terme ſette. full manly to be ſayen
               To forne Arge. mouſtren in a playn
               And as I rede. full worthy of degreThe kynges & prynces that come with adraſtus
               
               Thyder came fyrſte. Prothonolope
               
                  The whiche was. by recorde of wrytyng
               Of Archada. ſone to the kyng
               And full prudente. fonde in werre and peas
               There come alſo. the kyng Cylmythenes
               And as I fynde. full famous of renoun
               Thyder come eke. the kyng Epymedon
               And paſſyng all. of knyghthode and of name
               And excellyng. by worthyneſſe of fame
               The noble kyng. called Campaneus
               Come eke to Arge. the ſtory telleth vs
               Proued right well. and had ryden fer
               And thyder come. the kyng Melleager
               Lryng Genor eke. that helde his royall ſete
               Myne auctoure ſayth. in the londe of Crete
               Lryng Laerys. and the kyng of Pyrrus
               And eke the kyng. called Tortalanus
               And renomed in many regyon
               There come the kyng. I named Polemon
               Ofte aſſayed and I founde. a manly knyght
               That with hym brought. in ſtele armed bryght
               Full many worthy. oute of his countree
               And Tydeus. mooſt knyghtly for to ſee
               That manly man. that noble werryoure
               As he that was. of worthyneſſe floure
               Mayſter and myrrour. by proueſſe of his honde
               Hath ſente alſo. in to the myghty londe
               Of Calydonye. wherof he was heyre
               That is a kyngdome. bothe riche and feyre
               
                  Chargyng his counſeyll. and his offycers alſo
               In all the haſte. that it may be do
               To ſeken oute the beſte werryours
               Of famous knyghtes. and proued ſaudyours
               Thrugh all the lond. & leyd on hem this charge
               withoute abode. for to come to Arge
               And they obey ſhall. his byddyng
               Enhaſtyng hem. and made noo lettyng
               But ſped hem faſte. vpon her Journeye
               And from Thebes. the myghty ſtrong Cyte
               Come downe knygh
                     •
                  . with many a nother mā
               
               Mauger the kyng. to helpe what they can
               Conſydred fyrſte. his falſhede and treaſon
               I mened oonly. of trouth and of reaſon
               Polymytes. as they were ſworne of yore
               To his crowne. Juſtely to reſtore
               And whan they wern. at large out of the towne
               In to Arge they be deſcended downe
               And lyke her othe. and theyre aſſuraunce
               As they weren bounde. oonly of lygaunce
               To hym they came. in full lowly wyſe
               Redy to done. what hym lyſte to deuyſe
               And whan he had. her trouth full conceyued
               He hath to grace. goodly hem receyued
               Aſſygnyng hem. her place myd the ooſte
               Aſſembled there. fro many dyuerſe coſte
               That fynally. in this companye
               I gadred was. the floure of chyualrye
               
                  I choſen oute. of all Grekes londe
               The mooſt knyghtly. & manfull of her honde
               That I trowe. ſythe the worlde began
               There was not ſeen. ſoo many manly man
               Soo well horſed. with ſpere and with ſhelde
               Togyder aſſembled. ſooth in a felde
               There men myght ſee. many ſtrange gyſes
               Of armyng newe. and vncouthe deuyſe
               Euery man after his fantaſye
               That yf I ſholde. in order ſpecyfye
               Euery pees longyng to armure
               And therupon. doo my beſy cure
               It were in ſouth. almooſt a dayes werke
               And the termes. ben alſo to derke
               To reherſe hem clerely. and to ryme
               I paſſe ouer. oonly for lacke of tyme
               And telle I wolde. forth of her lodgyng
               How Adraſtus. the noble worthy kyng
               Hath euery lorde. lyke to his degree
               Receyueth well. within his cytee
               And there they had. lyke to her pleaſaunce
               Of what nedeth. fulſome habondaunce
               For man and horſe. plente of vytayle
               Commaundyng. that noo thyng ne fayle
               That all theſe noble werreours
               Bothe hye and lowe. and pooer ſaudyours
               I ſerued were. of that they had nede
               For Adraſtus. prudently toke hedewhat vayleth a kyng to pay his peple truly her ſoude
               
               
                  Full lyke a kyng. touchyng her terme daye
               That they to forne. were ſerued of her paye
               He was ſoo free. hym lyſte▪ nothyng reſtrayne
               And noo man. had cauſe to complayne
               Hunger. thurſte. nor Indygence
               And in a prynce. it is full grece offenceNota
               
               As clerkes ſayn. and a grece repre
                     •
                  e
               To ſuffre his people. lyuen at myſchefe
               It is full heuy. and greuous in her thought
               If he habonde. and they haue ryght nought
               He maye not both. poſſede good and herte
               He to be riche. and ſeen his people ſmerte
               He maye the body. of poore well conſtreyne
               But her herte. hath a full longe reyne
               Mauger his myght. to louen at large
               There maye noo kyng. on hertes ſette a charge
               Nor hem cohercen. from her lybertee
               Men ſeen full ofte. how that thought is free
               For whiche eche prynce. lorde and gouernoure
               And ſpecyally. euery conqueroure
               Lete hym beware. for all his nobleſſe
               That bounte fredome. plente and largeſſe
               By one accorde. that they his brydell lede
               Leſte of his people. whan he hath mooſt nede
               He be defrauded. whan he is but allone
               Than is to late. for to make his moneNota Howe loue auaylethe more a kynge thā gold or grete rycheſſe
               
               But in his courte. lete hym fyrſte deuyſe
               To exyle ſcarſhede and couetyſe
               
                  Than is he lykly. with fredome yf he gynne
               Loue of his people. euermore to wynne
               To regne longe. in honoure and contune
               Ay to encreaſe. by fauoure of fortune
               And his enmyes. manly to oppreſſe
               For loue is more. than golde or grete richeſſe
               Golde fayleth ofte. loue wyll abyde
               For lyſte or deth. by a lordes ſyde
               And the treſoure. ſhortly of a kyng
               Standeth in loue. aboue all thyng
               Fare well lordſhyp. bothe morowe and eue
               Specyally. whan loue taketh his leue
               And who ſo lyſte. a myrrour for to make
               Of kyndly fredome. lete hym enſample take
               Of Adraſtus. the manly kyng famous
               Soo lyberall. ſoo bounteous
               Unto his people. at all tyme founde
               Whiche made hym ſtrong. his fomen to confoū
                  de
               And loue oonly. his enmyes to werreye
               All grece. made his byddyng to obeye
               Of one accorde. knyghtly by his ſyde
               All attones. to Thebes for to ryde
               For tauenge. ſyth they were ſoo ſtrong
               The grete Iniurye. and the Importable wrong
               Done to his ſone. and to his next allye
               As ye to forne. haue harde me ſpecyfye
               But whyle Grekes. areſte a whyle in pes
               I wyll reſorte to EthyoclesNota
               
               
                  with Inne Thebes. warly hath aſpyed
               By his frendes. as he was certefyed
               Of the Grekes. hole the ordynaunce
               Her purpos eke. and her purueaunce
               And therof had in herte. a maner drede
               And fyrſte he toke. his counſeyll and his rede
               Of the lordes. and of the barons of the town
               And of the wyſeſt. of his regyon
               How he myght. maken reſyſtence
               Manly to ſtanden. at defence
               To be ſtrong. that there were noo doubteHow ethyo cles made him ſtrong ayen the comyng of ye Grekes
               
               And in tho contrees. adiacente aboute
               And eke▪ alſo. in foreyn regyons
               He hath withholde. all the champyons
               And therupon. he ſente oute his aſpyes
               And his frendes. and his next allyes
               And all the worthy. dwellyng enuyrowne
               Yonge freſſhe and luſty. he gadred in to towne
               Maſkowede his walles. and his hye toures
               And ſtuffed hem. with many ſadyoures
               Rounde aboute. he ſette many gonnes
               Grete and ſmale. and ſome large as tonnes
               And in his haſty. paſſyng feruente hete
               He ſpente his treſoure. and gaf yeftes grete
               Unto knyghtes. and worthy men of name
               And euermore. to encreaſe his fame
               He yafe to lordes. Jewels many folde
               Clothes of veluette. of damaſke and of golde
               
                  To gete hym hertes. ſothly as I rede
               To helpe hym now. in this grete nede
               And prudently purueyed hym to fome
               Of fleſſhe and fyſſhe. and of wyne and corne
               Sette his Capyteyns. erly and late
               with full ſtyfe ſtronge. at euery gate
               He made alſo. by werkmen that were trewe
               Barbycans. and bolwerkes newe
               Barres chaynes. and dyches wounder depe
               Makyng his vowe. the Cytee for to kepe
               whyle he lyueth. deſpyte of all his foon
               And by his goddes. of metall and of ſtoon
               Full ofte he ſwore. bothe of herte and thought
               That it ſhall fyrſte. full dere ben a bought
               And many a man. with pollax & ſwerd & knyfe
               To forne this towne. fyrſte ſhall leſe his lyfe
               And there ſhall eke. many ſydes blede
               Or his brother. peaſybly poſſede
               The towne in peas. lyke as Grekes wene
               But atte ende. the trouth ſhall be ſene
               Lete hym beware. and well to forne prouyde
               For Adraſtus. on that other ſyde
               For his parte. was not neclygente
               But on a daye. helde a parlyamente
               All his lordes. ſyttyng enuyron
               To dryue ſhortly. a playne concluſyon
               And vp thappoynte. the fyne of her entente
               But ſome thought. full expedyente.
               
                  Of they procede. to werke by thauyſe
               Of one that was. full prudente and right wyſe
               And circumſpecte. in his werkes all
               A worthy byſſhop. in to age fall
               And called was ſothly by his nameHow ye byſſhop āphio rax was ſēt for to come to ye grekes
               
               Amphyorax. of whome the grete fame
               Thrugh all the londe. both eſt and ſouth
               Among Grekes. paſſyngly was couth
               A man in ſothe. of olde antyquyte
               And mooſt excepted. of auctoryte
               Fyrſte by reaſon. of his hye eſtate
               And eke. for he was ſoo fortunate
               In his werkes. and was alſo ſecree
               with the goddes. knowyng her pryuetee
               By graunte. of whome as bokes ſpecyfye
               He had a ſpyryte. of trewe prophecye
               And coude a forne. full openly dyuyne
               Thynges begonne. how they ſholde fyne
               And eke by crafte. of calculacyon
               Gyue a dome. of euery queſtyon
               And had in Magyk. grete experyence
               And fynde coude. by heuenly Influence
               And by meanyng. of hye ſterres
               A fynall dome. of contek and of werres
               And wyſt well. as his goddes toldeAnd wyſte well ye trew ꝓphecye of biſſhop amphyorax
               
               That yf Grekes. forth her Journey holde
               It tourne ſholde. platly this noo phage
               To grete myſchyfe. and to grete domage
               
               Of hem echone. and in eſpecyall
               The mooſt parte. of the blode royall
               Thrugh all Grece. it maye not be withdrawe
               In this vyage. ſhortly ſhall be ſlawe
               And yf hymſelfe. with the Grekes wente
               who that euer wepte. hym or by mente
               This was the fyne. and maye not be ſocoured
               Of the erthe. he ſholde be deuoured
               Quyke as he was. he knew none other in ſerteyne
               And for he ſaw. there was non̄ other geyne
               To ſaue his lyfe. nor noo bet defence
               Than vtterly. to withdrawen his preſence
               Prayeng his wyfe. for hym to prouyde
               If he were ſought. that ſhe wolde hym hyde
               And womanly. for to kepe hym cloſe
               And of trouth. councelen his purpoſe
               For all his truſte. touchyng his greuaunce
               was fully ſette. in her preuyaunce
               I hope to god. that he nede not drede
               Of noo decerte. in her womanhede
               She was ſoo trewe. as wȳmen ben euerychone
               And alſo cloſe. and muet as a ſtone
               That ſhe ne wolde. as the mater ſtode
               Dyſcuren hym. for noo wordly gode
               But fynally. the Grekes of entente
               In all his drede. haue for the byſſhop ſente
               Though it was long. or they myght hym fynde
               For cauſe his wyfe. was to hym ſoo kynde
               
                  That full ſuerly. hath locked vp his cors
               But for ſhe had. a maner remors
               In her ſelfe. greuyng her conſcyenceHow yt wyt of amphyo rax of conſcience to ſa ue her othe diſcured hir huſbonde
               
               Dredyng to falle. in full grete offence
               Leſte her ſoule. were in perell lorne
               whan ſhe by othe. compelled was a ſworne
               There requyryng. yf ſhe coude telle
               where her lorde. the byſſhop ſholde dwelle
               whiche to dyſcure. her herte was full lothe
               Tyll tyme ſhe ganne. remembren on her othe
               And coude a trouthe of cuſtome not denye
               And had alſo grete conſcyence to lye
               wounder heuy. with a ſorowfull face
               Mauger her luſte. taught hem to the place
               where as he was. ſhytte vp in a toure
               All allone. hauyng noo ſocoure
               They fell on hym. or that he was ware
               And ſette hym vp. in a full riche chare
               A grete fole he was. to yeoparde his lyfe
               For to dyſcure. his counſeyll to his wyfe
               And yet ſhe was. full ſory for his ſake
               Specyally whan ſhe ſawe hym take
               But I hope. that her heuyneſſe
               Gan a ſwage. full ſone by proceſſe
               In ſhorte tyme. whan that he was gone
               There is no tempeſte. that may leſt euer in one
               But this byſſhop. by verray force and myght
               Unto Grekes. conueyed was full ryght
               
                  This hore graye. in his chare ſyttyng
               And they full glad. were of his comyng
               Hauyng a truſte. and full opynyon
               And thorugh cauſe. and occaſyon
               Of his wyſdome. and his ſapyence
               And by vertue. of his hye preſence
               They ſholde eſchewe. all aduerſytee
               Poſſyble to falle. as in her Journee
               And as the ſtorye. fully hath deuyſed
               Full circumſpecte. and right well aduyſed
               He hath pronounced. in the parlyamente
               To forne the lordes. and the preſydente
               His clere conceyte. in verray ſykerneſſe
               Not entryked with noo doubleneſſe
               Her dyſmole dayes. and her fatall houres
               Her aduentures. and her ſharpe ſhoures
               The frowarde ſorte. and the vnhappy ſtoūdes
               The complayntes. of her dedely woūdes
               The wofull wrath. and the contrauerſe
               Of fell Mars. and his cruelte
               And how by meane. of his gery mode
               There ſhalbe ſhed. all the worthy blode
               Of the Grekes. it maye not be eſchewed
               If her purpoſe. be execute and ſewed
               There is noo more. this ſhall be the fyne
               The hye nobleſſe. ſhall drawe to declyne
               Of Grekes blood. in myſchyfe ſorow and wo
               And with all this. I myſelfe alſo
               
                  As my fate. hath to forne dyſpoſed
               Depe in the grounde. I ſhall be encloſed
               And locked vp. in the derke vale
               Of cruell deth. loo this was the tale
               That the byſſhop to Adraſtus tolde
               Hym counſeylyng. his purpos to withholde
               In eſchewyng. of more myſcheef and ſorowe
               For all his goodes. he take vnto borowe
               Yf the Thebans. and the Grekes mete
               The fyne therof. ſhall be vnſwete
               That all Grece. after ſhall it rewe
               warnyng hym. yf they the myſcheef knewe
               That ſhall folowe. that noo man maye lette
               They wolde abſtene. a ſege for to 
                     •
                  ette
               Unto Thebes. and her purpos leue
               with whos wordes. the lordes gan hem greue
               And there in had. but full ſmale delyte
               And euery chone. of herely hye deſpyte
               They abrayde. and ſayd he was vntrewe
               A contryuer. of prophecyes newe
               And eke alſo. for his long berde
               And olde dottarde. a cowarde and a ferde
               And of rancoure. gan to defye
               Bothe his calkyng. and his aſtronomye
               And ſayd ſhortly. they toke therof none hede
               Ne wyll no thyng. gouerne hem after his rede
               This was the clamoure. & noyſe in euery coſte
               Of hye and lowe. thorugh oute all the hoſte
               
                  And ſpecyally of the ſaudyours
               And of lordes. regnyng in floures
               And of the ſtates. effectuelly I mene
               whiche of age. were but tender and grene
               That haue not had. by Martys Influence
               Of the werre. grete experyence
               Here yf ye lyſte. ye maye conſyder and ſee
               Of conceytes. full grete dyuerſytee
               How that youthe. noo peryll caſte a forne
               Tyll the myſchyfe. ſodeynly be borne
               Where as age prouydeth euery thyng
               Or he begynne. to caſten the endyng
               youthe is gouerned by a large reyneHow age & youthe ben of dyuerſe opynyons
               
               To renne forth. and can not hym refrayne
               But of hede. ſette on all attones
               As he that hurtlyth. agayn the harde ſtones
               Broſeth hymſelfe. vnwarly and parbraketh
               But age experte. noo thyng vndertaketh
               But to forne. of good dyſcrecyon
               Make a due examynacyon
               How it wyll tourne. other to bad or good
               But youthe as faſte. as ſtered is the blood
               Take empryſes. of haſty wylfulneſſe
               Joye at gynnyng. the ende is wretchedneſſe
               The olde prudente. in all his gouernaunce
               Full longe a forne. maketh purueaunce
               But youthe alas. by counſeyll wyll not werke
               For whiche full ofte. he ſtombleth in the derke
               
                  Thus ſelde is ſeen. the trouth to termyne
               That age and youthe. drawe by one lyne
               And where that folye hath denomynacyon
               wyſdome is putte in to ſubieccyon
               Lyke as this byſſhop. with all his hye prudence
               For cauſe. he myght haue none audyence
               All his wyſdome. and his prophecyeHow ye wyſdom without ſuppor tacōn auay leth lytyll or nought
               
               Of the Grekes. was holden but folye
               For though Plato. and wyſe Socrates
               Morall Senek. and Dyogenes
               Albumazar. and prudente Tholome
               And Tullyus. that had ſoueraynte
               whylom in Rome. as of eloquence
               Though all theſe. ſhorly in ſentence
               were a lyue. mooſt connyng and experte
               And noo man. lyſte her counſeyll to aduerte
               Nor of her ſawes. for to taken hede
               what myght auayle. and it come to nede
               For where prudence. can fynde noo ſocoure
               And prouydence. hath noo fauoure
               Fare well wyſdome. fare well dyſcrecyon
               For lacke oonly. of ſupportacyon
               For vnſupported. with his lockes hore
               Amphyorax. ſyghen gan full ſore
               with hede enclyned. and many euyll thought
               whan yt he ſawe. his counſeyll ſtonde for nought
               For vtterly. the Grekes as I tolde
               Haue fully caſte. her Journey for to holde
               
                  Made hem redy. and gonnen to hoſteye
               Towarde Thebes. the Cytee to werrey
               And forth with hem. Amphyorax they carye
               And in Grece. wyll noo lenger tarye
               Sytte in his chare. with a doolfull herte
               whan he wyſt. he myght not aſterte
               Of his fate. his dyſpoſycyon
               And hoſtyng. in to the regyon
               Of Lygurgus. Grekes gan approche
               A ſondy londe. with many a craggy roche
               But all the waye. ſothly that they gone
               For horſe nor man. water was there none
               Soo drye was the vales. and the playnes
               For all that yere. they hadden had noo reynes
               But full grete drought. as made is mencyonThe grete myſcheef yt grekes had of ye defaut of water
               
               And all the londe. ſerchyng enuyron
               They nother fonde. well ne ryuere
               Hem to refreſſhe. ne water that was clere
               But they alas. noo refute ne conne
               Soo importable. was the ſhene ſonne
               Soo hote on hem. in feldes where they lay
               That for myſcheef. man and horſe gan dey
               Gapyng full drye. vpward in to ſouth
               And ſome putten. her ſwerdes in her mouth
               And ſpere hedes. in ſtory as it is tolde
               Taſwage her thurſte. with the yron colde
               And of his lyfe. full many one dyſpayred
               In this myſcheef. and home agayne repayred
               
                  Tyll on a daye. worthy Tydeus
               And with hym eke. the kyng Campanous
               Of purpos rode. thorugh oute the countree
               If they myght. ony water ſee
               From coſte to coſte. bothe fer and nere
               Tyll of fortune. they entred an herbere
               with trees ſhadowed. for the ſonne ſhene
               Full of herbes. and of floures grene
               wonder holſome. both of ſyght and hayre
               There Inne a lady. that paſſyngly was fayre
               Syttyng as tho. vnder a laure tre
               And in her armes. a lytyll childe had ſhe
               Full gracyous. of loke and of vyſage
               And was alſo. wounder tender of age
               Sone of the kyng. borne to ſuccede
               Called Lygurgus. in ſtory as I rede
               whoos hertly Joye. and worldly eke dyſporte
               All his myrthe. pleaſance and comforte
               was in this childe. of excellente fayreneſſe
               And this lady. myrroure of ſemlyneſſe
               All ſodeynly. as ſhe caſte vp her ſyght
               And on his ſtede. ſawe an armed knyght
               Gretely abaſſhed. gan anone renue
               But Tydeus. after gan to ſue
               And ſayd. ſyſter byth nothyng dyſmayed
               In youre ſelfe. dyſpleaſed nor affrayed
               For we are come. oonly to this placeHow tydeꝰ cōplayneth to the lady in the erber for water
               
               you to beſeche. of mercy and of grace
               
                  Vs to ſocoure. in oure grete nede
               Declaryng you. how it stonde in dede
               Here faſte by. all mooſt at honde
               The worthyeſt. of all Grekes londe
               Lrynges prynces. ben lodgyng in the felde
               And many other. with pollax ſpere and ſhelde
               whiche in myſcheef. parell and grete drede
               For want of water. ben lykly to be dede
               For there was none. of hye ne lowe degree
               In all oure Doſt. now paſſed dayes three
               That dranke. alas excepte none eſtate
               Oure vyage. is soo Infortunate
               Prayeng you. of womanly pyte
               Benygnely. and gracyouſly for to ſee
               How of grece. all the chyualrye
               Of her lyues. ſtant in ieopardye
               That ye wolde of womanhede tell
               If ye knowe. ryuer ſpryng or well
               Specyally nowe. in all oure care
               Of gentyllesse. vnto vs declare
               Loo here is all. yf ye lyſte to here
               That ye wyll ſeyn. myn owne ſyſter dere
               And whan this lady Inly vertuousHow the lady taughte tydeus to ye well
               
               The complaynte herde. of worthy Tydeus
               Of verray pyte. changeth chere and hewe
               And in her herte. vpon her woo gan rewe
               And full goodely. ſeeng his dyſtreſſe
               Sayde vnto hym. in all his heuyneſſe
               
                  Certes quod ſhe. yf I were at large
               Touchyng this childe. of whom I haue charge
               I ſholde in haſte. of all that dooth you greue
               To my power. helpen to releue
               Oonly of reuthe. and compaſſyon
               And leue all other occupacyon
               Conueye you. and be youre trewe gyde
               To a ryuer. but lytyll here beſyde
               But I dare not. ſoo moche me aſſure
               This lytyll childe. to putte in auenture
               I am ſoo ferfull. from it to departe
               But for youre ſake. that I in parte
               My lyfe my dethe. of trewe affeccyon
               To prouyde. for youre ſauacyon
               Toke the childe. and leyde it in her lappe
               And richely in clothes. gan it wrappe
               And couched it among the herbes ſoote
               And leyde aboute. many holſom roote
               And floures eke. bothe blewe and rede
               And ſuppryſed. with a maner drede
               With Tydeus forth anone ſhe wente
               As ſhe in trouth. that noo treaſon mente
               And in her waye. wolde ſhe neuer dwell
               Tyll ſhe hym brought. to a right fayre well
               And to a ryuer. of water right habonde
               But who was glad. and who was tho Joconde
               But Tydeus ſeeng the ryuer
               whiche in all the haſte. ſente his meſſenger
               
                  To Adraſtns. and bade hym not abyde
               But downe deſcende. to the ryuer ſyde
               with all thooſt. recure for to haue
               Atte this ryuer. her lyues for to ſaue
               And this enhaſte. hem makyng none abode
               All attones. to the ryuer rode
               For to drynke. they had ſoo grete luſte
               Of appetyte. for to ſtanche her thruſte
               And ſome dronke. and foūde it dyde them good
               And ſome were ſoo feruente and ſoo wood
               Upon the water. that in ſykerneſſe
               Thrugh vndyſcrete. and haſty gredyneſſe
               Oute of meſure. the water ſoo they drynke
               That they fyll dede. euen vpon the brynke
               And ſome naked. in to the ryuer ronne
               Oonly for hete. of the ſomer ſonne
               To bathen hem. the water was ſoo colde
               And ſome alſo. as I haue you tolde
               I mene tho. that prudente weren and wyſe
               The water dranke. in meſurable wyſe
               That of the thurſte. they haue toforne endured
               They were refreſſhed. fully and recured
               And Grekes than. of hye and lowe degree
               For hye profyte. and grete commodytee
               Compas the ryuer. cryſtallyn of ſyght
               Of one accorde. there her tentes pyght
               To reſte hem. there in relees of her payne
               Oonly the ſpace. of a daye or twayne
               
                  And whyles Grekes. vpon the ryuer laye
               This Tydeus. vpon the ſame daye
               Full knyghtly. hath doo his dylygence
               This yonge lady. with grete reuerence
               To Adraſtus. goodly to preſente
               Atte whoos comyng. the kyng hymſelfe wente
               Agaynſt her. ſhe fallyng downe on her knees
               All the ſtates. preſente and degrees
               Of grekes londe. abſente was not one
               And in his armes. toke her vp anone
               Thankyng her. and of her beſyneſſe
               Of her laboure. and her kyndneſſe
               Behotyng her. lyke as he was holde
               If ony thyng. playnly that ſhe wolde
               That he maye done. ſhe ſholde it redy fynde
               And Grekes all. the ſtory maketh mynde
               Of the ſtates. beyng tho preſente
               Thanked her. with all her hole entente
               For the refreſſhyng. done to many a Greke
               And for her parte. they behyght her eke
               with her bodyes. and goodes bothe twoo
               what her lyſte. commaunde hem for to doo
               To be redy platly. and not fayle
               And here myne auctour. maketh reherſall
               That this lady. ſoo fayre vpon to ſee
               Of whome the name. was Iſyphyle
               To Adraſtus tolde. as ye maye rede
               Lynealy the ſtok of her kynrede
               
                  Whylom how ſhe a kynges doughter was
               Reherſyng hym. hole all the caas
               Fyrſte why that ſhe. oute of her countree wente
               Shortly. for ſhe nolde not aſſente
               To execute. a conſpyracyon
               Made by the wymmen. of that regyon
               A thyng contrarye. and ayenſte all ryght
               That eche of hem. vpon a certayn nyght
               By one accorde. ſhall warly take kepe
               Fader broder. and huſbondes in her ſlepe
               with knyues ſharpe. and raſours kene
               Lrytte her throtes. in that mortall tene
               Vnto this fyne. as Bochas tell can
               In all that londe. be not founde a man
               But ſlayn echone. to this concluſyon
               That wymmen myght haue domynacyon
               In that kyngdome. to regne at lyberte
               And on noo parte. interrupted be
               But for this lady. paſſyng debonayre
               To this morder. was froward and contrarye
               Lrepte her fader. that he was not ſlawe
               But fro the dethe. preſerued and wythdrawe
               For whiche alas. ſhe fled the countree
               And of a pyrat. taken in the ſee
               To kyng Lygurgus. broughten in all drede
               And for her trouthe. and her womanhede
               To her he toke his yong childe to kepe
               whiche in the herber. alone lefte to ſlepe
               
                  whan Tydeus. ſhe brought to welle
               And by Jaſon. ſome bokes telleJaſon
               
               That this lady. had ſones two
               whan that he. and Hercules alſoHercules
               
               Towarde Colchos. by her countree cam
               For tacomplyſſhe. the conqueſt of the Ram
               But who that lyſte. by and by for to ſee
               The ſtory hole. of this IſyphyleIſyphyle
               
               Her faders name. of whiche alſo I wente
               Though ſome ſeyn. he named was Toante
               And ſome bokes. Vermes eke hym call
               But to knowe. the auentures all
               Of this lady. Iſyphyle the fayre
               Soo faythfull ay. and Inly debonayre
               Loke on the boke. that Johan Bochas made
               whylom of wymmen. with Rothorykes glad
               And dyrecte. by full ſouerayne ſtyle
               To fayre Jane. the quene of Secyle
               Rede there the Rubryſſhe of Iſyphyle
               Of her trouth. and of her hye bountye
               Full craftely compyled. for her ſake
               And whan that ſhe. hath her leue take
               Of Adraſtus. homewarde in her waye
               Tydeus. gan her to conueye
               To the gardeyn. tyll ſhe is repayred
               But now alas. my mater dyſepeyred
               Of all Joye. and of all welfulneſſe
               And deſtytute. of myrthe and all gladneſſe
               
                  For now of woo. gynneth the ſharpe ſhoures
               For this lady founde. among the floures
               Her lytyll childe. tourned vp the faceHowe the childe was ſlayn with a ſerpent
               
               Slayne of a ſerpente. in the ſelfe place
               Her tayle burled. with ſcales ſyluer ſhene
               The venyin. was ſoo perſyng and ſoo kene
               Soo perylous. eke the mortall vyolence
               Cauſed alas. thorugh her long abſence
               She was to ſlowe. homewarde for to hye
               But now can ſhe. but wepe wayle and crye
               Now can ſhe not. but ſyghen and complayne
               And wofully. wryng her hondes twayne
               Dedely of loke. pale of face and chere
               And gan to rende. her gylte treſſes clere
               And ofte ſythe. gan ſhe ſaye alas
               I wofull wretche. vnhappy in this caas
               what ſhall I doo. or wheder ſhall I tourne
               For this the fyne. yf I there ſoiourne
               I wote right well. I maye not eſcape
               The pyteous fate. that is for me ſhape
               Socoure is none. nor there maye be noo rede
               Lyche my decerte. but that I mote be dede
               For thorugh my ſlouth. and my neclygence
               I haue alas. done ſoo grece offence
               That my gylte. I maye not excuſe
               Shall to the kyng. of treaſon me accuſe
               Thorugh my defaute. and ſlouth bothe two
               His ſone is dede. and his heyre alſo
               
                  whiche he loueth. more than all his gode
               For treſoure. none ſoo nye his herte ſtode
               Nor was ſoo depe. graue in his corage
               That he is lykly. to falle in a rage
               whan it is ſoo. myne odyous offence
               Reported be. vnto his audyence
               Soo Importable. ſhall be his heuyneſſe
               And well wote I. in verray ſothfaſtneſſe
               That whan the kyng. hath this eſpyed
               To myne excuſe. it maye not be denyed
               I doubte it not. there geyneth noo pyte
               with oute reſpyte. he wyll auenged be
               On me alas. I haue deſerued
               That fro the deth. I maye not be preſerued
               Nother by bylle. ne ſupplycacyon
               For the rage. of my tranſgreſſyon
               Requyreth deth. and none other mede
               And thus alas. quakyng in her drede
               None other helpe. ne remedye 
                     •
                  an
               But dreynte in ſorowe. to the Grekes ran
               Of hertly woo. face and chere deſteyned
               And her chekes. with wepyng all bereyned
               In her affraye. dyſtracte and furyous
               To forne all. ſhe come to Tydeus
               And fyll on knees. & gan her complaynt make
               Tolde playnly. that for Grekes ſake
               She mote be dede. and ſhortly in ſubſtance
               Reherſyng hym. the grete of her greuance
               
                  Fyrſte how by traynes. of falſe ſerpente
               The childe was ſlayne. whyle ſhe was abſente
               In what dyſioynte. and perell that ſhe ſtode
               And whan that he. her myſchyfe vnderſtode
               Vnto her. full knyghtly he behyght
               To helpe and further. all that euer he myght
               Her pyteous wo. to ſtynten and appeale
               And for to fynde. vnto her dyſeaſe
               Haſty comforte. he wente a full grete paſe
               To Adraſtus. and tolde hym all the caas
               Of this vnhappy. wofull aduenture
               Beſechyng hym. to done his beſy cure
               As he was bounde. of equyte and ryght
               And aduerten. and to haue a ſyght
               How ſhe quyte her. to Grekes here to forne
               whan they were lykly. for to haue be lorne
               The ſocour voyde. of her womanhede
               Of whiche he muſte. of knyghthode take hede
               To remedyen this vnhappy thyng
               And Adraſtus. lyke a worthy kyng
               Taquyte hymſelfe. the ſtory maketh mynde
               To this lady. wyll not to be founde vnkynde
               Nother for coſte. nor for noo trauayle
               But beſy was. in all that myght auayle
               To her ſocoure. conſydered all thynges
               And by thauyſe. of all the worthy kynges
               Of Grekes londe. they ben accorded thus
               Prynces dukes. and worthy Tydeus
               
                  To holde her waye. and all attones ryde
               To Lygurgus. dwellyng there beſyde
               Of one entente. yf they maye purchace
               In ony wyſe. for to gete grace
               For this lady. called Iſyphyle
               They wolde aſſaye. yf it myght be
               And to his paleys. full royall bylte of ſtone
               The worthy Grekes. cam rydyng euerychone
               Euery lorde. full freſſhely on his ſtede
               And Lygurgus. example of manlyhede
               Anone as he knewe. of her comyng
               Taquyte hymſelfe. lyche a gentyll kyng
               Agayn hem wente. to mete hem on the waye
               Full well beſeen. and in full good araye
               Receyuyng hym. with a full kyngly chere
               And to Adraſtus ſayde. as ye ſhall here
               Coſyn quod he. and gan hym to enbrace
               ye be welcome. to youre owne place
               Thankyng hertely. to your hye nobleſſe
               That ſoo goodly. of youre gentylleſſe
               Towardes me. ye lyſte you taquyte
               youre ſelfe daye. youre Coſyn to vyſyte
               In this caſtell. to make youre lodgyng
               That neuer yet. I was ſoo glad of thyng
               And all my lyfe. and there to here my trouthe
               And euermore. there ſhall be noo ſlouthe
               That the chambres. and the large toures
               Shall be delyuered. to your herberyours
               
                  That euery lorde. as is of degree
               Vnto his lodgyng. aſſygned ſhall be
               Youre offycers. lete hemſelfe deuyſe
               If the houſyng. maye largely ſuffyſe
               To you and youres. ſtretchen and attayne
               That none eſtate. haue cauſe to complayne
               And all youre hooſt. lodged here beſyde
               whiche in tentes. vpon you abyde
               Lete hem fette. by myne auctoryte
               Vytayle you here in my cyte
               And all that maye. hem ſocoure or ſaue
               And at a worde. all that euer I haue
               Is full and hole. at youre commaundemente
               Quod Adraſtus. that is not oure ententeHow adraſtꝰ & all the ſtat
                        •
                      of grekes prayed lygurgꝰ for the lyfe of Isyphyle
               
               Nor in noo partye. cauſe of oure comyng
               For we come. all for a nother thyng
               A certeyn gyfte. of you to requyre
               Benygnely. yf ye lyſte to here
               whiche maye Grekes. paſſyngly auayle
               Of youre requeſt. that ye not ne fayle
               whiche we dare not openly expreſſe
               withoute that ye wolde of gentylleſſe
               youre graunte a forne. conferme an ratyfye
               Than were we bolde. it to ſpecyfye
               Quod Lygurgus. what thyng euer it be
               Nought excepted. by oonly thynges thre
               The fyrſte thyng is it. toucheth not my lyfe
               My yong ſone playnly. ne my wyfe
               
                  Take all my good. or what ye lyſte prouyde
               Of my treſoure. and ſette theſe thre a ſyde
               All the ſurplus. I counte not at a myte
               Than Adraſtus. aſtoned was a lyte
               whan Lygurgus in concluſyon
               Of his ſone. dyde make excepcyon
               And whyles they thus entreaten I fere
               There come forth one. with a woofull chere
               Of face. of loke pale and noo thyng rede
               A lowde cryeth. the kynges ſone is dede
               Alas the whyle. that whylom was ſoo fayre
               After Lygurgus borne. for to ben hayre
               The whiche alas. hath yolden vp the brethe
               As a ſerpente. ſtongen vnto the dethe
               And with his wounde. newe freſſhe and grene
               In therber. lyeth that pyte is to ſene
               And hath ſoo layen. all mooſt all this daye
               That whan Lygurgus harde this affraye
               And wyſte his childe was dede. & had no moo
               Lytyll wounder. though that he were woo
               For ſodeynly. the Importable ſmerteThe ſorowe ye kyng ligurgꝰ made for ye dethe of his child & ye lamētacōn of the quene
               
               Ran anone. and hente hym by the herte
               That for conſtreyne. of his dedely peyne
               Thorugh oute he felte. koruen euery veyne
               The rage gan myne. in hym ſoo depe
               That he can not. but ſygh ſobbe and wepe
               And with the noyſe. and lamentacyon
               The quene deſtraught. is deſcended doun
               
                  And whan ſhe knew. groūde of all this ſorowe
               It nede her noo teres for to borowe
               But twenty tyme. by vpon a rowe
               A ſwoune ſhe fell. vnto the grounde lowe
               And ſtounde mele. for this hye myſchaūce
               Styll as ſtone. ſhe lyggeth in a traūce
               And whan it. in to the courte was brought
               Therfore Lygurgus alas. I wyte hym nought
               Vpon the cors. with a mortall face
               He fell attones. and gan it to embrace
               Sore to grype. and agayn vp ſterte
               That whan Adraſtus. gan this aduerte
               Of kyngly reuthe. and compaſſyon
               From his eyen. there teres fell doun
               Eke kynges dukes. that aboute ſtode
               O only of pyte. that is in gentyll blode
               Noo power had the water to reſtrayne
               That on her chekes. downe gan to reyne
               But all a daye. wolde not ſuffyſe
               All her ſorowes. in order to deuyſe
               Fyrſte of the kyng. and of the quene alſo
               To tellen all. I ſholde neuer haue do
               Nought in the ſpace. all mooſt of an houre
               But whan the ſtormes. and ſharpſhoures
               Of her wepyng. was ſomewhat ouer gone
               The lytyll cors. was grauen vnder ſtone
               And Adraſtus. in the ſame tyde
               Lygurgus toke. alyte oute aſyde
               
                  And full wyſely. with his prudente ſpeche
               The quene preſente. gan hym for to teche
               That ſoo to ſorowe. auayle maye right noughtAgayns de the may be no recure
               
               To morder hymſelfe. with his owne thought
               Syth los of deth. noman maye recure
               Though he in woo. perpetuelly endure
               All helpeth not. whan the ſoule is go
               And oure lyfe here. who taketh hede therto
               Is but an exyle. and a pylgrymage
               Full of tourmente. and of bytter rage
               Lyche a ſee. rennyng to and fro
               Suyng an ebbe. whan the flode is do
               Lytyll ſpace. abydyng at full
               Of whoos ſoiourne. the 
                     •
                  ope yeueth noo bull
               Nor kyng is. nor duke no Emperoure
               That may hym ſhroude. agayn yt fatall ſhoure
               Of cruell deth. whan hym lyſte manaſſe
               To marke a man. with his mortall mace
               That geyneth not. to his ſauacyon
               Nother franchyſe. ne proteccyon
               And lytyll or nought. maye helpe in this caas
               Saue conduyte. or ſuperſydeas
               For in this worlde. who loketh a ryght
               Is none ſoo grete. of power ne of myght
               None ſoo riche. ſhortly ne none ſoo holde
               That he muſte dye. other yong or olde
               And who in youthe paſſeth this paſſage
               He is eſcaped. all the wood rage
               
                  All ſorow and trouble. of this preſente lyfe
               Replenyſſhed. with contek warre and ſtryfe
               whiche ſelde or neuer. ſtonde in ſuerte
               wherfore beſte is. as ſemeth vnto me
               Noo man grutche. but of hye prudence
               The ſonde of god. take in pacyence
               And ye that be ſoo manly to
               youre lyfe to drowne. in tournement and in wo
               For loſſe of thyng. that ye lyſte to ſee
               whiche in noo wyſe. recured may be
               Is grete foly. and vndyſcrecyon
               And thus Adraſtus. hath conueyed doun
               The ſubſtance hole. of that he wolde ſaye
               Tyll that he fonde. a tyme for to praye
               Conuenyente. for Iſyphyle
               Beſechyng hym. for to haue pyte
               Of that ſhe hath. his hyghneſſe
               Not wylfully. but rekleſneſſe
               Fyrſte that he wolde. his domes to deuyde
               Mercy preferre. and ſette right aſyde
               Atte requeſte and prayer. of hem all
               Of this vnhap. and myſcheef that is befall
               By haſty rygoure. and not to vengaunce
               But thyng a forne. in his purueaunce
               who to wretches. dooth mercy in her drede
               Shall mercy fynde. whan he hath mooſt nede
               And ſyth he hath. power myght and ſpace
               Lete hym take this lady to his grace
               
                  For lacke of ruthe. that ſhe nought dye
               But tho the quene. gan ayen replye
               And platly ſayde. as in this mater
               Auayleth not. requeſt nor prayer
               Pyte mercy. noo remyſſyon
               But yf it be. by this condycyon
               But yf the ſerpente. cauſe of all this ſorowe
               Though his laboure. leye his hede to borowe
               This is fynall. and vtter recompenſe
               To fynde grace. for her grete offence
               Or ſhortly ſhede. blode for blode
               And whan the Grekes. her anſwer vnderſtode
               All of one accorde. in her beſte wyſe
               Toke on hem. this auentures empryſe
               For loue oonly of Iſyphyle
               And gan to ryde. enuyron the countre
               By hylles vales. roches and eke caues
               In dyches darke. and in olde graues
               By euery coſte. ſerchyng vp and downe
               Tyll
                     •
                  at laſte. full famous of renowne
               The worthy knyght. ParthonolopeHow parthonolope ſawe fyrſte this ſerpēt
               
               was the fyrſte. that happed to ſe
               This hydeous ſerpente. by a ryuer ſyde
               Grete and horryble. ſtern and full of pryde
               Vnder a roche. by a banke lowe
               And in all haſte. he hent a ſturdy bowe
               And there in ſette. an arowe fyled kene
               And thrugh the body. ſpotted blewe and grene
               
                  Full myghtely. he made it for to glyde
               And rente oute a ſwerde. hangyng by his ſyde
               Smote of his hede. and anone it hente
               And therwith all. gan the quene preſente
               Where thorugh. her ſorow parcell gan a ſwage
               And thus of proweſſe. and of hye corage
               This manly man. Parthonolope
               Hath reconſyled. fayre Iſyphyle
               Vnto grace. fully of the quene
               Her yre auoyed. and her olde tene
               And by Adraſtus. medyacyon
               Lryng Lygurgus. graunted a pardon
               To this lady. that from all daunger fre
               She was reſtored. to her lyberte
               In her paleys. all her lyfe to dwell
               Though Johan Bochas. the contrarye tell
               For this auctoure. affyrmed oute of drede
               That whā this childe. was by the ſerpent dede
               She durſte not. for her grete offence
               Neuer after come in preſence
               Of Lygurgus. but of intencyon
               Fled anone oute. of that regyon
               A
                     •
                  te herte ſhe toke. the childes dethe ſoo ſore
               what fell of her. I fynde can noo more
               Than ye haue herde. me a fore ſpecyfye
               And the kyngdome. but kookes lyeNota De Ligurgꝰ rege regni tracee
               
               Of Lygurgus. was I called trace
               And as I rede. in a nother place
               
                  He was the ſame myghty champyon
               To Athenes. that cam with palamon
               Agaynſt his brother. that called was Arcyte
               Lad in his chare. with .iiii. boles whyte
               Vpon his hede. a wreth of golde full fyne
               And I fynde eke. how Bachus god of wyneBachus deus vinū
                  
               
               with this kyng. was whylom at debate
               Oonly for he. pompous and elate
               Deſtruccyon dyde. to his vynes
               And for he fyrſte. allaye ſette on wynes
               Meynte water. where they were to ſtrong
               And this Bachus. for the grete wrong
               Brake his lymmes. and dreynte hym in the ſee
               Of Lygurgus. ye gete noo more of me
               But the trouth. yf ye lyſte verryfyeNotādū de xii arboriꝰ in libro bochacii de geneologya deo
                        
                           
                        
                        rum
                     
                  
               
               Rede of goddes. the geneologye
               Lyneally. her kynrede by degrees
               Ibraūched oute. vpon twelue trees
               Made by Bochas. Decertaldo called
               Amonge poetes. in Itayle ſtalled
               Next Frauncys. petrarke ſuyng in certayn
               Vnto Grekes. I wyll retourne agayn
               To telle forth. ſhortly yf I canne
               Of her Journey. that they haue begonne
               How Adraſtus. hath his leue take
               Of Lygurgus. with his browes blake
               And departyng. with ſaynt Johan to borowe
               Made his wardes. on the next morowe
               
                  Soo well beſeen. ſoo myghty and ſoo ſtronge
               wonder erly. whan the larke ſonge
               with a trompette. warned euery man
               To be redy. in all the haſte they can
               For to renne. and noo lenger lettyng make
               And ſoo they haue. the ryght waye take
               Towarde Thebes. the Grekes euerychone
               That ſuche a nombre. gadered in to one
               Of worthy knyghtes. neuer a forne was ſayne
               whan they in fere. mouſtren in a playne
               And they ne ſtynte. by none occaſyon
               Tyll they become. euen a forne the town
               And pyght her tentes. proudely as I rede
               Vnder the walles. in a grene mede
               And whan the Thebans. weren beſette aboute
               The manly knyghtes. wolde a yſſued oute
               And haue ſcarmeſſhed. in her luſty pryde
               with her fomen. on that other ſyde
               But by byddyng of Ethyocles
               All thylke nyght. they kepte hemſelfe in pees
               By cauſe oonly. that it was ſoo late
               with grete awayte. ſet at euery gate
               Men of armes. all the nyght wakyng
               On the walles. by byddyng of the kyng
               Leſte there were. treynes or treaſon
               And on the coures. and in the chyfe dongon
               He ſette vp men. to make mortall ſouns
               with braſen hornes. and lowde claryons
               
                  Of full entente. the watches for to kepe
               In his warde. that noo man ne ſlepe
               And Grekes proudly. all the long nyght
               Lryndly fyres. and made full grete lyght
               Set vp lodgyng. vpon euery ſyde
               Lyke as they ſolde. euer there abyde
               Compas the towne. there was noo voyde ſpace
               But all beſette. her fomen to manace
               And whyles they. a forne the Cytee layethe forraye yt the Grekes made in ye coūtre aboute the bes
               
               On euery coſte. they ſente oute the forraye
               Brente townes. thorpes and vyllages
               with grete Rauyne. makyng her pyllages
               Spoyle and robbe. and brought home vytayle
               And all maner ſortes of beſtayle
               Shepe and neet. and in her cruell rage
               with houndes ſlowe. all that was ſauage
               Herte and hynde. both buk and do
               The blak bore. and the wylde Roo
               The fatte ſwyne. and the tuſſhy bore
               Caryeng all home. for the Grekes ſtore
               whete and wyne. for her auauntage
               Hay and otes. foder and forage
               with this kalendes. as hem thynk due
               Grekes gan the Thebans to ſalue
               Mynyſtryng hem. occaſyons fell
               The ſege ſette. ſhortly for to tell
               Of full entente. in her hatfull pryde
               For lyfe or deth. there vpon to abyde
               
                  Who ſoo euer therwith be agreued
               Tyll they fully. her purpos haue acheued
               There maye therof. be maked noo reles
               And of this. full ware Ethyocles
               Gan in partye. gretely meruayle
               whan that he ſawe. the grete apparayle
               Of the Grekes. the Cytee rounde aboute
               And in hymſelfe. had a maner doubte
               None atte poynte. what was beſte to doo
               For thylke tyme. it ſtode with hym ſoo
               That to ſome. abydyng in the town
               He had in herte. grete ſuſpeccyon
               Leſte towarde hym. they were vnſtable
               And to his brother. in partye fauorable
               For in the Cytee. there was varyaunceThe varyance in the bes yt cytee among hē ſelfe
               
               whiche vnto hym. was a grete meſchaunce
               For in his nede. ſhortly he ne wyſte
               Vpon whome. that he myght tryſte
               For they were not all of one entente
               For whiche he hath. for his councell ſente
               All his lordes. and the olde quene
               whiche as he dempte. were pure and clene
               Hole of one herte. and not varyable
               Of olde experte. and alwaye founde ſtable
               Requyryng hym. by cauſe they were wyſe
               All openly. to tellen her auyſe
               where it where. bet playnly in her ſyght
               with his brother. to treaten or to fyght
               
                  And ſome gafe. a full blonte ſentence
               whiche had of werre. none experyence
               Sayde it was beſte. and not be aferde
               To trye his right. manly with his ſwerde
               And ſome alſo. that were more prudente
               Spake vnto hym. by good aduyſemente
               And lyſte not ſpare. but theyre conceyte tolde
               How it was beſte. his couenante for to holde
               And to perfourme. his heſte made to forne
               To his brother. lyche as he was ſworne
               Soo yt his ſworde. the wors to make hym ſpede
               Be not founde varyaunte. fro noo dede
               For none hatred. rancoure nother prydeNota The wordes of ye quene Jocaſta vnto ethyocles ye kyng
               
               And tho the quene. toke hym oute a ſyde
               Tolde hym playnly. it was vnſyttyng
               Suche doubleneſſe. to fynde in a kyng
               And ſayd hym eke. all though he were ſtrong
               To his brother. how he dyde wrong
               As all the towne. wyll recorde in dede
               And bere wytneſſe. yf it came to nede
               wherfore lete vs ſhape a nother mene
               In this mater. whyle that it is grene
               Or this quarell. gonne of volunte
               Tourne in the fyne. of more aduerſyte
               For yf it be. darreyned by batayle
               who truſteth mooſt. maye lykely fayle
               And it is foly. by ſho
                     •
                  te aduyſementeHow perylous it is to be goūned by Marces in ony quarell
               
               To put a ſtryfe. in Martis Jugemente
               
                  For harde it is. whan a Juge is wood
               To treate a forne hym. withoute loſſe of blood
               And yf we putte it hole in Marte
               That with the ſwerde. his lawes dooth coarte
               Than may it hap. where ye be glad or lothe
               Thou and thy brother. ſhall repente bothe
               And many a nother. that is here preſente
               Of youre treſpace. that ben Innocente
               And many thouſand. in caas ſhall complayne
               For the debate. oonly of you twayne
               And for youre ſtryfe. ſhalte fynde full vnſwote
               And for thou arte. gynnyng grounde and rote
               Of this Iniurye. and this grete vnryght
               To the goddes. that here of haue a ſyght
               Thou ſhalte a countes. and a rekenyng make
               For all tho. that peryſſhen for thy ſake
               And now the cauſe. dryuen is ſoo ferre
               Sodeyn peas. or haſty warre
               Muſte folowe anone. for the fatall chaunce
               Of lyfe and deth. dependeth in balaunce
               And noo man maye by noo crafte reſtrayne
               That vpon one. platly of theſe twayne
               The ſorte mote falle. lyke as it dooth torne
               whos that euer. laughe or morne
               And thou arte dryue. ſoo narowe to the ſtake
               That thou mayſte not. mo delayes make
               But fyghte or treate. this quarell for to fyne
               Be none engyne. thou canſte it not declyne
               
                  An haſty caſſe. as folke ſeyn that ben wyſe
               Redreſſe requyreth. by full ſhorte auyſe
               For to treate longe. now auayleth nought
               For to the poynte. ſothly thou arte brought
               Eyther to kepe. thy poſſeſſyon
               Or in all haſte. deuoyde oute of this town
               where thou therwith. be wroth or well apayde
               Now note well. all that I haue ſayde
               And by my councell. wyſly condeſcende
               wrong wrought. of olde newly to amende
               The tyme is come. it wyll be none other
               wherfore in haſte. treate well with thy brother
               And ageyn hym. make none reſyſtence
               But to thy lordes. fully yeue credence
               By whoos counceyll. ſyth they be ſoo ſage
               Lete Polymyte. reioyſe his herytage
               And that ſhall tourne. mooſt to thyne aueyll
               Loo here is hole. the fyne of oure counceyll
               And ſhortly tho. for verray yre wroth
               Though he therto. frowarde was or loth
               Accorded is. heryng all the pres
               If he algate. treate ſhall for pees
               It muſte be. by this condycyon
               That he wolde haue. the domynacyon
               Fyrſte in chyfe to hymſelfe reſerued
               As hym thought. he had it well deſerued
               And ſaue to hym. hole the ſoueraynte
               And vnder hym. in Thebes the Cyte
               
                  He to graunte. with a right good chere
               Polymyte. to regne for a yere
               Than auoyde. and not reſorte agayne
               For more to cleyme. was not but in vayne
               Thus wolde he done. oonly for her ſake
               And other wyſe. he wolde none ende make
               with the Grekes. what fortune euer falle
               And fynally. among his lordes all
               There was not one. of hye ne lowe eſtate
               That wolde gone on baſſate
               Oute of the towne. nother for bette ne worſe
               Tyll Jocaſta. made ſadell her horſe
               And caſte her ſelfe. to gone for this treate
               To make an ende. yf it wolde be
               And this was done. the morowe right by tyme
               Vpon the houre. whan it drowe to pryme
               And with her went. her yong doughters tweyne
               Antygone. and the fayre Imeyne
               Of her meyne. full many one aboute
               At gate ſhe was conueyed oute
               And of purpos. ſhe made fyrſte her wente
               On horſe bak. to the kyng Adraſtus tente
               He and his lordes. beyng all I fere
               And they reſceyue her. with right glad chere
               Suyng her. lyke to her degre
               On euery halfe. full grete humanyte
               Polymyte ryſyng. fro his place
               And humbely. his moder gan embrace
               
                  
                  
                     •
                  ryſſed her. and than Antygone
               And Imeyne. excellente of beaute
               And for that they were paſſyngly fayre
               Grete was the pres. concours and repayre
               Of the ladyes. for to haue a ſyght
               And Jocaſta. procedeth anone ryght
               To Adraſtus. her mater to purpoſe
               And gan to hym. openly dyſclose
               Thentente and wyll. of Ethyocles
               And by what mene. he deſyreth pees
               To hym reſerued. as ſhe can ſpecyfye
               The honour and hole. and the regalye
               with the ſepture. & crowne fro hym not deuyded
               But hole to hym. as he hath prouyded
               And Polymyte. vnder this condycyon
               Vnder hym to regnen. in the town
               As a ſubgette. by ſuffraūce of his brother
               But the Grekes. thoughten all a nother
               And ſpecyally. worthy TydeusThe āſwere of tydeꝰ to ye quene
               
               Playnly affermyng. it ſholde not be thus
               For he wyll haue noo condycyons
               But ſette a ſyde. all excepcyons
               Noo thyng reſerued. as in ſpecyall
               But hole the lordſhyp. regaly and all
               Polymyte. it fully to poſſede
               In Thebes crowned. verrayly in dede
               As ryghtfull kyng. put in poſſeſſyon
               Lyche the couenantes. and conuencyon
               
                  Imade of olde. aſſured and eſſealed
               whiche ſhall not now. of newe be repleted
               But ſtabyll and hole. in his ſtrengthe ſtonde
               And lete hym ſoo. platly vnderſtonde
               And fyrſte yt he. deuoyde hym out of the towne
               And delyuer. the ſepture and the crowne
               To his brother. and make there of noo more
               And ſhortly ellys. it ſhall be bought full ſore
               Or this mater. brought be to an ende
               For Grekes is there none. yt ſhall hens wende
               Or that oure right. whiche is vs denyed
               with lyfe or deth. dereyned be and tryed
               we ne wyll. erſt fro this towne rennewe
               And yf hym lyſte. all this to eſchewe
               And all myſchyfe. ſtynten and appeaſe
               To eyther parte. he maye doo grete eaſe
               Thus I mene. for his auauntage
               Delyuer vp hole. the trewe herytage
               To his brother. for a yere to endure
               And Grekes ſhall hym. fully aſſure
               By what bounde. that hym lyſte deuyſe
               The yere complete. in oure beſt wyſe
               To hym delyuer. ayen poſſeſſyon
               withoute ſtryfe. or contradyccyon
               And to his fyne. Juſtly holde vs to
               And yf it falle. that he wolde not ſo
               Lete hym not wayte. but oonly after warre
               The houre is come. we wyll it not deferre
               
                  
                  
                     •
                  oo here is all. and thus ye maye reporte
               To hym agayn. whan that ye reſorte
               Fro whiche a poynte. we caſte vs not to varye
               And yet to hym. Amphyorax contrarye
               Full playnly ſayde in concluſyon
               This fyne ſhall cauſe a deſtruccyon
               Of hem echone. yf it forth procede
               To be perfourmed. and executed in dede
               But thylke tyme. for all his eloquence
               He had in ſoth. but lytyll euydence
               For where ſoo euer. it mente good or yll
               Kyng Adraſtus. bad hym to be ſtyll
               And tho Jocaſta. as wyſdome dyd her teche
               Humble of her porte. with full ſofte ſpeche
               Gan ſeke meanes. in her fantaſye
               If ſhe myght. the yre modefye
               Of the Grekes. to make hem to enclyne
               In ony wyſe. her rancoure for to fyne
               She dyde her deuoyre. and her beſy cure
               But tho befell. a wounder aduenture
               Cauſe and grounde. of grete confuſyon
               Grekes perturbyng. and eke the town
               And it telle. maye not me aſterte
               For whiche a while. my ſtyle I mote dyuerte
               And ſhortly telle. by deſcrypcyon
               Of a Tyger. dwellyng in the town
               whiche from a kyngdome. beſyden adiacente
               Oute of Egypte. was to Thebes ſente
               
                  Whiche beſte. by recorde of ſcrypture
               Is mooſt ſwyfte. as of his nature
               And of his kynde. alſo mooſt ſauage
               And mooſt cruell. whan he is in his rage
               And as clerkes. maken menſyon
               He of body. reſembleth to a lyon
               And lyke a greyhoūde. the moſell and the hede
               And of eyen. as ony fyre rede
               Eke of his ſkynne. wryten as I fynde
               Lyche a panter. conuersaunte in ynde
               With all maner. hues and colours
               And is full ofte deſceyued with myrrours
               By fraude of hunters. and falſe apparence
               Shewed in glas. withoute exyſtence
               Whan his kyndles. arn by ſleyght Itake
               And he deſceyued. maye noo reſcuſe make
               And lyke a lambe. was this Tyger tame
               Ayen kynde. myne auctour wryte the ſame
               And this beſte. merueylous to ſe
               Was ſente. to Imeyne and antygone
               Whiche vnto hem. dyde grete comforte
               And coude playe. and make grete dyſporte
               Lyke a whelpe. that is but yonge of age
               And to wyght. dyde noo domage
               Noo more in ſouth. than dooth a lytyll hounde
               And it was worth. many a hoūdred pounde
               Vnto the kyng. for ay in his greuaūce
               There was no thyng. dyde hym more pleſaūce
               
                  That for no treſoure. it myght not be bought
               For whan that he was. in penſyfe or in thought
               It put hym oute. of his heuyneſſe
               And thylke tyme. the ſtory dyde expreſſe
               That Jocaſta. treated for a pes
               This tame Tyger. in partye rekles
               Oute of the gates. in ſyght of many a man
               In to the felde. wyldly oute ran
               And caſuelly. rennyng to and fro
               In and oute. as dooth a tame Ro
               Grekes wenyng. that were yong of age
               That this Tyger. had be ſauage
               And cruelly beſectyng all the place
               Rounde abounte. gan hym to enchaſe
               Tyll he was dede. and ſlayn in the felde
               The deth of whome. whan that they behelde
               The proude Thebans. whiche on ye walles ſtode
               They ronne downe. full furyous and wode
               Wenyng he had. ben ſlayn of deſpyte
               Takyng her hors. withoute more reſpyte
               Fully in purpos. with Grekes for to fyght
               The Tygers deth. tauenge yf they myght
               And oute they rode. withoute gouernayll
               And full proudely. Grekes gan aſſayll
               And of hatred. and hye dyſdayne
               Fyll vpon hem. that haue the Tyger ſlayne
               And cruelly quyten hem her mede
               That many Greke. in the grene mede
               
                  By the force. and the grete myght
               Of her fomen. laye ſlayne in the ſyght
               The Tygres dethe. ſoo dere they a bought
               Soo mortally. the Thebans on hem wrought
               That all the Ooſte. in the felde lyggyng
               Was aſtoned. of this ſodeyn thyng
               And in this whyle. of rancoure reckles
               Oute of Thebes. rode Ethyocles
               And with hym the worthy kyng Tremoure
               Of his honde a noble werryoure
               That made Grekes. to forſake her place
               And to her tentes. gan hem enchace
               And myd the felde. as they togyder mette
               On horſe bake. with ſperes ſharpe whette
               Of ve
                     •
                  ray hate. and enuyous pryde
               Full many one. was dede on euery ſyde
               The whiche thyng. whan Tydeus eſpyethThe grete māhode of worthy tydeus
               
               Wood as a lyon. to hors bak hyeth
               As he that was. neuer a dele aferde
               But ran on hym. and mette hem in the berde
               And maugre hem. in his crueltee
               He made hem fiee. home to her Lytee
               Hem purſuyng. of full dedely hate
               That many one. laye ſlayn at gate
               Gapyng vpryghtes. with her woundes wyde
               That vtterly. they durſte not abyde
               There for the ſwerde. of this Tydeus
               He was on hem. ſoo paſſyng furyous
               
                  Soo many Theban. he rofe to the herte
               That whan Jocaſta. the ſlaughter gan aduerte
               Polymyte. ſhe gan praye full fayre
               To make Grekes. home agayne repayre
               And that they wolde ſtenten to aſſayle
               For thylke daye. and ſeaſen her batayle
               Atte whoos requeſte. playnly and prayer
               And at reuerence. of his moder dere
               Polymyte. hyr herte to comforte
               Grekes made. home ageyn reſorte
               And Tydeus to ſtynten. of his chace
               And they of Thebes. haſtyng a grete pace
               Full tryſte and heuy. ben entred in to the town
               And for the Tygre. in concluſyon
               As ye haue herde. fyrſte began this ſtryfe
               That many Theban. that daye loſte his lyfe
               And reculees. haue yolden vp the breth
               In thauengyng. of the Tygre is deth
               And all this whyle. duely as ſhe ought
               The quene Jocaſta. humbly beſought
               Lryng Adraſtus. oonly of his grace
               Some mene waye. wyſly to purchace
               To make a peas. a twene the brethern tweyne
               And the treate. ſoo prudently ordeyne
               On eyther partye. that noo blood be ſhad
               And this Adraſtrus. wyſe and ryght ſad
               For Grekes partye. anſwere gaue anone
               That other ende. ſhortly gete ſhe none
               
                  Lyche as the lordes. fully ben aduyſed
               That Tydeus. hath to forne deuyſed
               And whan ſhe ſawe. it maye none other be
               She leue toke. and home to the Cyte
               She is repeyred. hauyng to her gyde
               Polymyte rydyng by her ſyde
               And Tydeus. lad Antygone
               And of Archadye. Prothonolope
               The worthy kyng. dyde his beſy peyne
               To be attendaunte. vpon fayre Imeyne
               Whos herte ſhe hath. to her ſeruyce lured
               And he agayne. hath p
                     •
                  rtrayed and fygured
               Myd of his breſte. that lyghtly maye not paſſe
               Hole the fetures. of her freſſhely face
               Hym thought ſhe was. ſoo fayre a creature
               And though that he. durſte not hym dyſcure
               Yet in his herte. as ferforth as he can
               He hath auowed. to be hyr trewe man
               U
                     •
                  wyſte to her. playnly and vnknowe
               How he was marked. with Cupydys bowe
               with his arowe. ſodeynly werreyed
               And to the yate. the ladyes conueyed
               Ben entred in. for it drewe to eue
               Grekes of hem. takyng tho her leue
               Though ſome of hem. were lothe to departe
               yet of wyſdom. they durſte not inparte
               Under a conduyte. to entren in to the town
               Leſte it tourned. to her confuſyon
               
                  Though ſome bokes. the contrarye ſayn
               But myn auctoure. is platly there agayn
               And fermeth. in his oppynyon
               That Tydeus. of hye dyſcrecyon
               Of wylfulneſſe. nor of folye
               Ne wolde as tho. putte in partye
               Nother hymſelfe. ne none of his feres
               And the ladyes. with heuenly there
               Angelyke. of loke and contenaunce
               Lyche as it is putte. in remembraunce
               Atte her entryng. fro Grekes in to the town
               Polymyte. of grete affeccyon
               The quene beſought. thylke nyght not fyne
               For to aſſaye. yf ſhe myght enclyne
               Ethyocles. of conſcyence and ryght
               To kepe couenaunte. as he hath behyght
               Full yere ago. with the ſuperluſage
               Leſte the contrarye. tourne to domage
               Fyrſte on hymſelfe. & ſyth on many other moo
               And thus from Thebes. the Grekes ben a goo
               To her tentes. and reſte hem all the nyght
               And Lucyna the mone. ſhone full bryght
               within Thebes. on the chyfe dongon
               whan Jocaſta. made relacyon
               Unto the kyng. and tolde hym all the gyſe
               How that the Grekes. vtterly deſpyſe
               His profer made. by falſe colluſyon
               Only excepte. the conuencyon
               
                  Of olde engroſed. by grete purueaunce
               That is enrolled. and put in remembraunce
               Upon whiche. fynally they wyll reſte
               Hym conſeylyng. her though for the beſte
               To conferme hym. to that he was bounde
               Leſte in the fyne. falſneſſe hym confounde
               But all her counſeyll. he ſette at noo pryce
               He dempte hymſelfe. ſoo prudente and ſoo wyſe
               For he was wylfull. and he was Indurate
               And in his herte. of malyce obſtynate
               And vtterly aduyſed. in his thought
               within Thebes. his brother gette right nought
               And in his erroure. thus I lete hym dwell
               And of Grekes. forth I wyll you tell
               whiche all that nyght. kepte hemſelfe cloſe
               And on the morowe. whan tytan vp a roſe
               They armed hem. and gan hem redy make
               And of aſſente. haue the felde Itake
               with the Thebans. that day oute of doughte
               For to fyghten. yf they yſſue oute
               And Adraſtus. in full tryſty wyſe
               In the felde. his wardes gan deuyſe
               As he that was. of all deceytes ware
               And rychely armed in his chare
               Amphyorax come. with his menye
               Full renomed. of antyquyte
               And well experte. by cauſe he was olde
               And whyle that Grekes. as I haue you tolde
               
                  were beſyeſte. her wardes to ordeyne
               Myd of the felde. befell a caas ſodeyne
               Full vnhappy. lothſome and odyble
               And lyche a thyng. that were Inuyſyble
               This olde byſſhop. with chare & horſe certeynHow byſſhop āphiorax ſodeynly fell downe in to hell
               
               Dyſapered. and noo more was ſeyn
               Oonly of fate. whiche noo man can expelle
               The erthe openeth. and he fyll downe to helle
               with all his folke. that vpon hym abode
               And ſodeynly. the grounde that he on ſtode
               Cloſed agayn. and togyder ſhytte
               That neuer after. Grekes with hym mette
               And thus the deuell. for his olde outrages
               Lyche is deſerte. payde hym his wages
               For he full lowe. is deſcended dewn
               In to the darke. and black rogyon
               where that Pluto. is crowned and Iſtalled
               with his quene. Proſerpyna called
               with whome this byſſhop. hath made his manſyon
               Perpetuelly. as for his guerdon
               Loo here the mede of ydolatrye
               Of ryghtes olde. and of falſe mammentrye
               Loo what auaylen Incantacyons
               Of exorſyſmes. and coniuryſons
               what ſtode hym ſtede. his nygramancye
               Calculacyon. or Aſtronomye
               what vayled hym. the heuenly manſyons
               Dyuerſe aſpectes. or conſtellacyons
               
                  The ende is not. but ſorowe and myſchaunce
               Of hem that ſetten. her vtter affyaunce
               In ſuche werkes. ſuperſtycyous
               Or truſte on hem. he is vngracyous
               Recorde I take. ſhortly for to telle
               Of this byſſhop. ſonken downe to helle
               whoos wofull ende. aboute in euery coſte
               Suche a rumor. hath made in the oſte
               That the noyſe. of this vncouth thyng
               Is I ronne. and I come to the kynge
               How this vengaūce. is vnwardly falle
               And he anone. made a trompette calle
               All his people. oute of the felde agayne
               And euerychone. aſſembled on a playne
               Tofore the kyng. and alſo rounde aboute
               Euery man of his lyfe in doubte
               Full pyteouſly. gan to froune and loure
               Leſte that the grounde. hem all wolde deuoure
               And ſwalue hem. in his darke kaue
               And they ne can. noo recure hem to ſaue
               For neyther force. ne manhode may hem auayle
               In ſuche myſchyfe. the value of a mayle
               For he that was wyſeſte. coude mooſt
               To ſerche and ſeke. thorugh oute all the ooſt
               Amphyorax. whan he leſte wende
               To helle is ſonken. and can not hym defende
               To hym the tyme. vnknowen and vnwyſte
               In whom whylom. was all the Grekes tryſte
               
                  Her hole comforte. and her affyaunce
               But all attones. for this ſodeyn chaunce
               And this myſchyfe. they gan hem all dyſpeyre
               Home to Grece. that they wyll repeyre
               This was the purpos. of hem euerychoon
               And on the walles. of Thebes lay her foon
               Reioyſyng hem. of this vnhappy eure
               wenyng therby. gretly to recure
               And on her towres. as they loken oute
               They on Grekes. enuyouſly gan ſhoute
               And of deſpyte. and grete enuyte
               Bad hem foles. gone ho
                     ••
                   to her contre
               Syth they haue loſt. her comforte & her ſocoure
               Her fals prophete. and her dyuynoure
               where thrugh. her parte gretly is appeyred
               And in this wyſe. Grekes dyſeſpeyred
               Dempte playnly. by tokens euydent
               This caſe falle. by ſo
                     ••
                   enchantement
               By wytchecrafte. or by falſe ſorcerye
               Agaynſte whiche. maye be noo remedye
               Tryſty defence. helpe nor ſocoure
               And whan Adraſtus. herde this clautoure
               He beſy was. agayns this perturbance
               To prouyde. ſome maner cheuyſance
               And to hym calleth. ſuche counſell as he wyſte
               For lyfe or deth. that he myght truſte
               Requyryng hem. but in wordes fewe
               In this myſchyfe. her mocyon to ſhewe
               
                  And declare by good auyſemente
               what to Grekes. were mooſt expedyente
               To remedyen. and make noo delaye
               The vncouthe noyſe. and the grete affraye
               That Grekes made. with clamour Importune
               And nowe and nowe euer. in one contune
               And they yt weren. mooſt manly & mooſt wyſe
               Shortly ſayd. it were a grete cowardyſe
               The empryſe. that they haue vndertake
               For drede of dethe. ſoo ſodeynly forſake
               It were to hem. a perpetuell ſhame
               And oure hyndryng. vnto Grekes name
               And better it were. to euery werryoure
               Manly to deye. with worſhyp and honoure
               Than lyke a cowarde. with the lyfe endure
               For ous ſhamed. harde is to recure
               His name ayen. of what eſtate he be
               And ſyth Grekes. of olde antyquyte
               As of knyghthode. who ſoo lyſte take hede
               Ben ſoo famous. and ſoo renomede
               If now of newe. the ſhynyng of her fame
               Eclypſed were. with ony ſpot of blame
               It were a thyng. vncouth for to here
               Of whoos renon. the bemes yet ben clere
               Thrugh all ye world. where as they haue paſſed
               And ben nor yet. dyrked ne defaced
               By noo reporte. neyther on ſee ne on londe
               Thyng to forſake. that they toke on honde
               
                  And by enſample. of oure progenytours
               That whylom weren. ſoo manly conquerours
               To forne that we. in to Grece wende
               Of thyng begon. lete vs make an ende
               And parte not. nor ſeuere fro this town
               Tyll it be brought. to deſtruccyon
               walles toures. creſted and embatayled
               And for werre. ſtrongly apparayled
               Be fyrſte downe. bete that noo thyng be ſeen
               But all togyder. to the erthe pleyn
               Be lowe layde. or that we reſorte
               That afterwarde. men maye of vs reporte
               That we began. knyghtly we haue achened
               Vpon oure foon. with worſhyp vnrepreued
               This was the counſell. ſhortly and thauyſe
               Of the Grekes. that manly were and wyſe
               That none aforn. were marked with no blame
               And ſpecyally. ſuche as drede ſhame
               And fully caſte. what fortune euery tyde
               On her purpos. to the ende abyde
               That on noo parte. her honour not appall
               And this counſell. Grekes one and all
               Ben condeſcended. for more happy ſpede
               In ſtede of hym. that was ſoo late dede
               Amphyorax. buryed depe in helle
               That coude whylom. to the Grekes telle
               Of thynges hyde. how it ſhall falle a forne
               In ſtede of whome. now they haue hym lorne
               
                  They caſten hym. wyſly to purchaſe
               Some prudente man. to occupye his place
               That in ſuche thyng. myght hem mooſt auayle
               Thorugh ſtorye. of his dyuynayle
               By crafte of ſorte. or of prophecye
               If ony ſuche. they conden oute eſpye
               And among all. her purpos to attayneHow Grekes choſen hem a new dyuynoure in ye ſtede of āphyorax ye byſſhop
               
               As I fynde. they haue choſen twayne
               Mooſt renomed. of hem euery chone
               And Menolyppus. called was that one
               And Tardynyus. eke that other hyght
               And for he had. mooſt fauoure in her ſyght
               This Tardynyus. was choſen and preferred
               And her choys. Grekes haue not arred
               For whylom. her lerned is empryſe
               Of his mayſter. Amphyorax the wyſe
               And was dyſcyplyne. vnder his doctryne
               And of entente. that he ſhall termyne
               Vnto Grekes. thynges that ſhall fall
               And as byſſhop. mytred in his ſtall
               Done for hym. in many vncouth wyſe
               In the Temple. to goddes ſacryfyſe
               And thus confermed. and ſtalled in his ſee
               And fell dayes. ſtode in his degree
               After his mayſter. with full grete honoure
               Of Grekes choſe. to be ſucceſſoure
               And all this tyme. in ſtory as it is tolde
               Full grete myſchyfe. of hunger thruſt and colde
               
                  And of Thebans. as they yſſuen oute
               Laye many one ſlayn in the route
               On eyther parte. of fortune as they mette
               Her mortall ſwerdes. were ſoo ſharpe whette
               And Tydeus. among hem of the town
               Fro daye to daye. playeth the lyon
               Soo cruelly. where ſoo that he rode
               That Thebans none. a forne his face abode
               He made hem. thrugh his hye renon
               Soo grete ſlaughter. and occaſyon
               That as the deth. fro his ſwerde they fled
               And who came next. leyde his hede to wed
               He quyte hymſelfe. ſoo lyke a manly knyght
               That where he wente. he put hem to the flyght
               And maugre hem. in his crueltee
               He drofe hem home. in to theyr Lytee
               Hem purſuyng. proudly to the gate
               That vnto hym. they bare ſoo dedely hate
               That they hem caſte. by ſlyght or ſome engyne
               To bryng hym. vnwarely to his fyne
               And leyde awayte. for hym daye and nyght
               But o alas. this noble manly knyght
               Vpon a daye. as he gan home enchaſe
               And mortaly made. hem to leſe her place
               And ſued hem. almooſt to the town
               That cauſe was. of his deſtruccyon
               For one alas. that on the walles ſtode
               Whiche all that daye. vpon hym abode
               
                  With a quarell. ſharp heded for his ſake
               Marked hym. with a bowe of brake
               Soo cruelly makyng. none areſteHow pyteouſly worthy tydeus was ſlayn wt a quarel
               
               Tyll it was paſſed. bothe back and breſte
               Where thorugh alas. there was none other rede
               Nor lechecrafte. that he mote be dede
               There maye therof. be made noo delayes
               And yet was he. holden in his dayes
               The beſte knyght. and the mooſt manly man
               As myne auctoure. well reherſe can
               But for all that. was there noo defence
               Agayn the ſtroke. of dethes vyolence
               And Bochas wryte. or he was fully dede
               He was by Grekes. preſented with the hede
               Of hym that gaue his laſte fatall wounde
               And he was called. lyke as it is founde
               Menolyppus. I can not other telleHow he yt ſlow tydeꝰ called was menolippꝰ
               
               But thylke daye. Thebans waxe ſoo felle
               Vpon Grekes. that vnder her Lyte
               The manly kyng. Parthonolope
               Iſlayn was. euen a forne the gates
               And there alſo. armed bryght in plates
               The famous kyng. called ypomedon
               The ſame daye. as made is mencyon
               On horſe back. manly as he faught
               Atte brygge. euen vpon the draught
               Beſette with pres. caſuelly was drowned
               And thus fortune. hath on Grekes frouned
               
                  On euery ſyde. thylke vnhappy daye
               But all the maner. tellen I ne maye
               Of her fyghtyng. nor her ſlaughter in ſothe
               More to declare. than myn auctour dothe
               But thylke daye. I fynde as ye maye ſeen
               Whan phebus. paſſed was merydyen
               And fro the ſouth. weſtwarde gan hem drawe
               His gylte treſſes. to bathen in the wawe
               The Theban kyng. fell Ethyocles
               Rote of vnreſte. and cauſer of vnhappes
               The ſlaughter of Grekes. whan yt he behelde
               Armed in ſtele. he come oute in to the felde
               Full deſyrous. in that ſodeyn hete
               Polymyte. atte good leyſer to mete
               Syngulerly. with hym to haue a doo
               For in this worlde. he hated noo man ſoo
               He ſatte ſoo nye. emprented in his herte
               Whoos comyng oute. his brother gan aduerte
               Vpon his ſtede. in the oppoſyte
               And had agaynwarde. alſo grete delyte
               To meten hym. yf fortune aſſente
               Thenuyous fyre. ſoo her hertes brente
               With hate cankred. of vnkynde blode
               And lyke twoo Tygres. in her rage wode
               With ſperes ſharpe. grounde for the nones
               Soo as they ran. and mette bothe attones
               Polymyte. thrugh plates mayle and ſhelde
               Rofe hym thrugh out. & ſmote hym in to ye felde
               
                  But whan he ſawe. the ſtremes of his blood
               Rayle aboute. in maner of a 
                     •
                  lood
               All ſodeynly. of compaſſyon
               Fro his courſer. he a lyght down
               And bretherly. with a pyteous face
               To ſaue his lyfe. gan hym to vnbrace
               And fro his wounde. of newe affeccyon
               Full beſy was. to pull oute the tronchon
               Of loue oonly. handlyng hym ryght ſofte
               But o alas. whyle he lay
                     •
                   a lofte
               Full yrouſly. Ethyocles the fell
               Of all this ſorowe. verray ſours and well
               with a dagger. in all his paynes ſmerteHow eueryche of ye theban brethern ſlow other to f
                        •
                     
                     ren the cyte
               
               His brother ſmote. vnwardly to the herte
               whiche all her lyfe. had be ſoo wrothe
               And thus the Thebans were ſlayne bathe
               Atte entre. euen a forne the towne
               But Grekes tho ben a
                     •
                  ayled downe
               Oute of the felde. the worthy knyghtes all
               And in Thebes londe. as ony ſhall
               The Cytee aroſe. whan her kyng was d
                     •
                  de
               And to the gates. armed fote and hede
               Out of the towne. come many proude Theban
               And ſome of hem. vpon the walles ran
               And gan to ſhoute. that pyte was to here
               And they withoute. of her lyfe in where
               withoute comforte. or conſolacyon
               Dyſeſpyred. ronne home to the town
               
                  And Grekes folowen after atte back
               That many one. that daye gooth to wrack
               And as her fomen. proudly hem aſſayle
               Full many grekes. thrugh plates & thrugh mayle
               was ſhet thrugh. oute preſſyng at walles
               And beten of. whiche with grete roūde balles
               That here laye one. and a nother yonder
               And the noyſe. more hydeous than thonder
               Of gonne ſhotte. and arblaſtes 
                     •
                  he
               So londroute rong. that many worthy Greke
               There loſte his lyfe. they were on hem ſoo fell
               And at the gates. ſhortly for to tell
               Atte Grekes pres. to entren the Cytee
               They of Thebes. in her crueltee
               with hem mette. full furyous and wo
                     •
                  e
               And mortally. as they agayn hem ſtode
               Men myght ſee. ſperes ſhyner a ſonder
               That to beholde it was a verray wonder
               How they feyne. with daggers & with ſwerdes
               Thorugh the vyſer. hauyng at berdes
               Perſyng alſo. thrugh the rounde mayles
               Rente oute peces. of her auantayles
               That nought auayleth. the myghty geſtran
               Thrugh breſte & neck. yt the myghty ſperes ran
               Her wepenes were. ſoo ſharpe grounde & whette
               In there armure. that there were noo lette
               For there laye one. troden vnder fote
               And yonder one. perſed to the herte rode
               
                  Here lyet one dede. and there a nother lame
               This was the playe. and the mortall game
               Attwene Thebans. and the Grekes proude
               That the ſwonnes. and the cryes loude
               Of hem that laye. and yolden vp the goſte
               was herde full fer. aboute in many coſte
               And atte gates. and ſaylyng of the wallHowe alle the gentyll blood of ye lond of gre
                     
                        •
                     es & of the bes ye Cyte deſtroyed was vpon a daye
               
               I ſlayne was. all the blood Royall
               Both of the towne. and of Grekes londe
               And all the worthy. knyhtes of her honde
               And of lordes. I ſhall not fayne
               On grekes ſyde. a lyue were but twayne
               Lryng Adraſtus. and Campaneus
               That daye to hem. was ſoo vngracyous
               And for tytan. weſtred was ſoo lowe
               That noman myght. vnnethes other knowe
               Tho of the towne ſhette her gates faſte
               with 
                     •
                  arres rounde made. for to laſte
               In whiche noo wyght. kerue maye ne hewe
               And Adraſtus. with a Grekes fewe
               Repeyred is home. vnto his tente
               And all that nyght. he haſted and ſpente
               For his vnhap. in ſorowe complaynyng
               And they in Thebes. the next daye ſuyng
               Her deuoyre dyde. and her beſy cure
               To ordeyne. and make a ſepulture
               For her kyng. Iſlayne in the felde
               And offred vp. his baner and his ſhelde
               
               
               
            
            
               It were a deth. to ony man a lyuewarde 
                        •
                     he
                        •
                      bes
               
               And yf I ſholde. by and by dyſcryue
               Theyre tender wepyng. and her wofull bale
               Her complayntes. with taces dede and pale
               Therof I myght. make a newe tale
               All mooſt. a daye you to occupye
               And as myn auctoure. clerely dooth certefye
               Through oute Grece. fro all the Regyons
               Oute of Cytees. and Royall towns
               Come all the ladyes. and wymmen of eſtate
               Full heuy chered. and dyſconſolate
               To this aſſemble. to forn as I you tolde
               I purpoſe fully. her Journey for to holde
               Towarde Thebes. theſe ſorowfull creatures
               There to bewayle. her wofull auentures
               Taquyte hemſelfe. of trouth in womanhede
               To her lordes. whiche in the felde laye dede
               And as the ſtory. lyketh to declare
               All this Journey. they wente on fote bare
               Lyke as they had gone. on pylgrymage
               In token of mornyng. barbed the vyſage
               wympled echone. and in burnette wedes
               Not in chares. drawen forth with ſtedes
               Nor on palfrays. blake neyther whyte
               The ſely wymmen. coude hem not delyte
               To holde her waye. but bare fote they wente
               Soo faythfully. euerychone they mente
               Thorugh heuyneſſe. defaced of her hewe
               
                  And as I fynde. they were all trewe
               Now was not that a wonder for to ſee
               Soo many trewe. oute of oo coūtree
               Attones gadred. in a companye
               And feythfull all. bokes can not lye
               Bothe in her porte. and Inwarde in menyng
               Vnto my dome. it was an vncouthe thyng
               Among a thouſande wymmen or twayne
               To fynden one. that coude in herte fayne
               It was a meruayle. not ofte ſeen a forne
               For ſelde in feldes. groweth ony corne
               But yf ſome wede. ſpryng vp there among
               Men allaye wynes. whan they be to ſtrong
               But her trouth. was meynt with none allayes
               They were ſoo trewe. fonde at all aſſayes
               And they ne ſtynte. vpon her Journee
               Tyll that they come. there as they wolde be
               where Adraſtus wryten. as I fynde
               Laye in his tente. all of coloure ynde
               Gretly meruayled. whan that he behelde
               The nombre of hem. ſprad thrugh all the felde
               Clad all in blacke. and bare fote euerychone
               Oute of his tente. he dreſſed hym anone
               Vpon his honde. the kyng Campaneus
               Full tryſte in herte. and face ryght pyteous
               Agayn the wymmen forth. they wente I fere
               And to beholde. the wofull chere
               The wofull cryes. alſo whan they mette
               
                  The ſorowfull ſyghes. in her breſtes ſhette
               The teres newe. dyſtyllyng on her faces
               And the ſwounyng. in many ſondry places
               Whan they her lordes. alyue not ne founde
               But in the felde. thrugh gyrte with many woū
                  de
               Laye ſtarke vpryght. playnly to endyte
               with dedely eyen. tourned vp the whyte
               who made ſorowe. or felte her herte ryue
               For her lorde. but the fayre Argyue
               who can now wepe. but Deyphyle
               Tydeus for ſhe. ne myght fele
               whoos conſtrayntes. were ſoo kene
               That Adraſtus. myght not ſuſtene
               To beholde the ladyes. ſoo complayne
               wyſſhyng her herte. parted were on twayne
               But yet alas. bothe eue and morowehow curſed Creon wyl not ſuffre ye bodyes neyther to be buryed ne to be brent▪
                  
               
               A thyng there was. that doubled all her ſorowe
               That olde Creon. fader of felonye
               Ne wolde ſuffre. thorugh his tyrannye
               The dede bodyes. be buryed neyther I brente
               But with beſtes. and houndes to be rente
               He made hem all. vpon an hepe be layde
               wherof the wymmen. tryſte and euyll apayde
               For verray dooll. it was no wonder
               Her hertes felte. all mooſt reyne a ſonder
               And as my mayſter. lyſte to endyte
               All clad in black. with her wymples whyte
               with grete honoure. and due reuerence
               
                  In the Temple. of the goddeſſe Clemence
               They abode the ſpace. of forty nyght
               Tyll Theſeus. the noble worthy knyght
               Duke of Athenys. with his chyualrye
               Repeyred home. out of Femynye
               And with hym ladde. full fayre vpon the ſene
               Thorugh his manhode. Ipolyta the quene
               And her ſuſter. called Emelye
               And whan theſe wymmen. gan fyrſte eſpye
               This worthy duke. as he came rydyng
               
                  
                     •
                  ryng Adraſtus. hem all conueyeng
               The wymmen brought. to his preſence
               whiche hym beſought. to yeue hem audyence
               And all attones. ſwounyng in the place
               Full humbly. prayed hym of grace
               To rewe on hem. her harmes to redreſſe
               But yf ye lyſte. to ſee the gentylneſſe
               Of Theſeus. how he hath hym borneHow the fynall deſtruccion of thebes is compendiouſly reherſed in the knyght tale
               
               yf ye remembre. ye haue herde it to for
                     •
                  e
               well reherſed. at Depforde in the vale
               In the begynnyng. of the knygtes tale
               Fyrſte how that he. whan he herde hem ſpeke
               For verray reuthe. felte his herte breke
               And her ſorowes. whan he gan aduerte
               Fro his courſer. downe anone he ſterte
               Hem comfortyng. in full good entente
               And in his armes. he hem all vp hente
               The knyghtes tale. reherſeth euery dele
               
                  Fro poynte to poynte. yf ye loke wele
               And how this duke. withoute more abode
               The ſame daye. towarde Thebes rode
               Full lyke in ſothe. a worthy conqueroure
               And in his Oſte. of chyualrye the floure
               And fynally. to ſpeken of this thyng
               with olde Creon. that was of Thebes kyng
               How yt he faught. & flow hym lyke a knyght
               And all his ooſt. put vnto flyght
               yet as ſome auctours make mencyon
               Or Theſeus entred. in to the town
               wymmen fyrſte. with pykeys and with malles
               with grete laboure. bete downe the walles
               And in her wrytyng. alſo as they ſayn
               Campaneus. was on the walles ſlayn
               with caſte of ſtone. he was ſoo ouerlade
               For whome Adraſtus. ſuche ſorow made
               That no man myght. hym relees of his payne
               And Jocaſta. with her doughters twayne
               Full wofully. opreſſed of her cheres
               To Athenes. were ſente as pryſoners
               what fell of hem. can I not ſeyn
               But Theſeus. myne auctoure wryte certeyn
               Oute of the felde. or he from Thebes wente
               He bette hit downe. and the houſes brente
               The people ſlowe. for all her cryeng loude
               Made the walles. and her towres proude
               Rounde aboute. euen vpon a rowe
               
                  with the ſoyle. to be layde full lowe
               That nought was lefte. but the ſoyle all bare
               And to the wymmen. in relees of her care
               The bones of her lordes. that were ſlayneThe bones of her lordes were de lyuered to the ladyes by duke the ſeus▪
                  
               
               This worthy duke. reſtored hath agayne
               And what ſholde I. than lenger dwell
               The olde rytes. by and by to tell
               Nor the obſequyes. in order to deuyſe
               Nor to declare. the maner and the gyſe
               How the bodyes. were to aſſhes brente
               Nor of the gomes. in the flamme ſpente
               To make the ayer ſwetter of reles
               As frankenſence. myrre and aloes
               Nor how the wymmen. rounde aboute ſtode
               Some with mylke. and ſome alſo with blode
               And ſome of hem. with vrnes made of golde
               whan the aſſhes. fully were made colde
               To encloſen hem. of grete affeccyon
               And bere hem home. in to her regyon
               And how that other. full dedely of her loke
               For loue oonly. of the bones toke
               Hem to kepe. for a remembrance
               That to reherſe euery obſeruance
               That was done. in the fyres bryght
               The wake playes. duryng all the nyght
               Nor of the wraſtlyng. to tell poynt by poynt
               Of hem that weren. naked and enoynt
               How eueryche other. lugge gan and ſhake
               
                  Nor how the wymmen. haue theyr leue take
               Of Theſeus. with full grete humbleſſe
               Thankyng hym. of his worthyneſſe
               That hym lyſte. on her woo to rewe
               And how that he. his fredome gan renewe
               with the wymmen. of his hye larges
               I parted hath eke. of his rycheſſe
               And how this duke. Thebes eke forſoke
               And to Athenes. the ryght waye toke
               with laurer crowned. in ſygne of vyctorye
               And the palme. of conqueſt and glorye
               Dyde his honoure. duely to Marte
               And how the wȳmen. wepte whan they departe
               with kyng Adraſtus. home ayen to ArgeHow ye kynge Adraſtꝰ with the ladyes repeyred ayen home to Arge
               
               To tell all. it were to grete a charge
               And eke alſo. as ye ſholde vnderſtonde
               Atte gynnyng. I toke noo more on honde
               By my promyſe. and in concluſyon
               But to reherſe. the deſtruccyon
               Of myghty Thebes. ſhortly and noo more
               And thus Adraſtus. with his lockes hore
               Styll abode. in Arge his Cyte
               Vnto his ende. ye gete noo more of me
               Saaf as myn auctoure. lyketh to compyle
               After that. he lyued but a whyle
               For he was olde. or the ſege began
               And thought and ſorowe. ſoo vpon hym ran
               The whiche in ſothe. ſhorted hath his dayes
               
                  And tyme ſette. deth maketh noo delayes
               And all his Joye. paſſed was and gone
               For of his lordes. a lyue was not one
               But ſlayn at Thebes. ye knowen all the cas
               And what this kyng. in Arge buryed was
               Full royally. with grete ſolempnytee
               It was accompted. in bokes ye maye ſee
               Foure hundred yere. as made is mencyonFoure hundred yere to forn the fū
                     dacōn of rome was thebes fynaly deſtroyed
               
               To forne the byldyng. and foundacyon
               Of grece Rome. ſoo Royally and ſoo large
               Whan the ladyes. departed fro Arge
               To her coūtrees. full tryſte and deſolate
               Loo here the fyne. of conteke and debate
               Loo here the myght. of Mars the myghty ſterre
               Loo what it is. to gynne a werre
               How it concludeth. enſample ye maye ſee
               Fyrſte of Grekes. and next of the Lytee
               For eyther parte. hath mater to complayne
               And in her ſtryfe. ye maye ſee thynges twayne
               The worthy blood. of all Grece ſpylte
               And Thebes eke. of Amphyon fyrſte bylte
               Withoute recure. brought in to ruyne
               And with the ſoyle. made playn as a lyne
               To wylderneſſe tourned. and deſerte
               And Gr
                     •
                  kes eke. falle in to pouerte
               Both of her men. and alſo of her good
               For fynally. all the gentyll blood
               Was ſhad oute there. her woūdes were ſoo wyde
               
                  To loſe fynall. vnto eyther ſyde
               For in the werre. is none excepcyon
               Of hye eſtate. nor lowe condycyon
               But as fortune. and fate bothe I fere
               Lyſte to dyſpoſe. with her double chere
               And Bellona. the goddeſſe in her chare
               A forne prouydeth. therfore eche man beware
               Vnauyſed. a werre to begynne
               For noo man wote. who ſhall leſe or wynne
               And harde it is. whan eyther parte leſeth
               And doubteles. neyther of hem cheſeth
               That they muſte. in all ſuche mortall rage
               Maugre her lyſte. folowe grete domage
               It maye not be. by mannes myght reſtrayned
               And werre in ſoth. was neuer fyrſte ordeyned
               But for ſynne. folkes to chaſtyſe
               And as the byble. truly can deuyſeNota How yt werre fyrſt began in heuen by pryde & ſurque dye of proude Lucyfer
               
               Hye in heuen. of pryde and ſurquedye
               Lucyfer. fader of enuye
               The olde ſerpente. he Leuyathan
               Was the fyrſte. that euer w
                     •
                  rre began
               Whan Mycaell. the heuenly champyon
               With his fers. vaynquyſſhed the dragon
               And to helle. caſte hem downe full lowe
               The whiche ſerpente. hath the bockell ſowe
               Through all e
                     •
                  th. of enuye and debate
               That vnnethes. is there none eſtate
               Withoute ſtryfe. can lyue in charyte
               
                  For euery man. of hye and lowe degre
               Enuyeth now. that other ſholde thryue
               And groūde and cauſe. why that men ſo ſcryue
               Is couetyſe. and falſe ambycyon
               That eueryche. wolde haue domynacyon
               Ouer other. and trede hym vnder fote
               Whiche of all ſorowe. gynnyng is and rote
               And cryſte recordeth. rede the boke & ye maye ſe
               For lack of loue. what myſchyfe there ſhall be
               For oo people. as he dooth deuyſeSurget gens contra gentē Luce xxi
               
               Agayn another. of hate ſhall aryſe
               And after tellyth. what dyuyſyons
               There ſhall be. at wene regyons
               Eueryche beſyde other to expreſſe
               And all ſuche ſtryfe. as he bereth wytneſſe
               Lralendes ben. I take his worde to borowe
               And a gynnyng. of myſchyfe and of ſorowe
               Men haue it founde. by experyence
               But the venym. and the vyolence
               Of ſtryfe of werre. of contek and debate
               That maketh londes. bare and deſolate
               Shall be proſcrypte. and voyded oute of place
               And Martys ſwerde. ſhall noo more manace
               Nor his ſpere. greuous to ſuſtene
               Shall now noo more. whetted be ſoo kene
               Nor he noo more. ſhall his hauberk ſhake
               But loue and peas. in hertes ſhall awake
               And charyte bothe. in lengthe and brede
               
                  Of newe ſhall. her bryght bemes ſprede
               Through grace oonly. in dyuers nacyons
               For to reforme. atwene Regyons
               Peas and quyete. concorde and vnyte
               And he that is both. one and two and thre
               Eke thre in one. and ſouerayn lorde of peaſe
               Whiche in this exyle. for oure ſake theſe
               For loue oonly. oure troubles to termyne
               For to be borne. of a pure virgyne
               And lete vs praye to hym that is mooſt good
               That for mankynde. ſhed his herte blood
               Thrugh beſechyng. of that heuenly quene
               Wyfe and moder. and a mayde clene
               To ſende vs peas. here in this lyfe preſente
               And of oure ſynnes. parfyte amend
                     •
                  mente
               And Joye eternall. whan we hens wende
               Of my tale. thus I make an ende
            
            AMEN
            ¶ Here now endeth as ye maye ſee The deſtruccyon of Thebes the Lytee
         
      
   