
      
         
            
            
            
               THE STRANGE FORTVNE OF Alerane: OR, My Ladies Toy.
By H. M. of the middle Temple in London.
            
               Tantieris alijs, quanti tibi fueris.
            
            Printed at London by V. S. for M. L. 1605.
         
         
            
            
            To the Reader.
            
               
                  GIve not raſh iudgement, on my rudest Toy,
               For tis my first: Say well although I ſwarve,
               Diſpraiſe is evill, but for to praiſe tis ioy:
               Helpe him with praiſe, that doth no praiſe deſerve:
               Vnworthineſſe deſerveth laude alwayes,
               For that which ſelles it ſelfe dooth neede no praiſe.
            
            
               I give no leave to men, to reade my Booke,
               My Toy is made to pleaſe the women kinde:
               I give it them, ſee that you doe not looke
               Vpon their Toy, which heere you written finde:
               Some things there are, of which things this is one,
               That none but women may them looke vpon.
            
            
               If they will let you, I will let you too:
               If they give leave, tis nothing vnto mee:
               If they deny it, I ſay alſo no:
               In all things I with Ladies doe agree:
               O would t'were worthy of that name of Ioy,
               For to be calld, Her pretty little Toy.
               
            
            
               Yours as you like to take him,
H. M.
            
         
         
            
            
            To his ſingular good Ladies, F. R. H. R. H. M. wiſheth all good increaſe.
            
               ADmired Ladies, as well for your excellent vertues; as your rare beauties; I humbly intreate your pardons before I crave your Patronage, deeme not I beſeech you, that this preſumption of mine, (namely) the reſemblance of a Poet, hath taken his originall from any defect of your Ladiſhips ingenies, or want of diſcretion to iudge betweene the piping of Pan, and the muſicke of Apollo; bettweene that which is rude, and that which is exquiſite, in whom, there is no defect or want of acute and diſcreete iudgement: But onely that it hath proceeded from the aboundance of your patiences and curteous promiſes, to all ſuch as are indued with any ſparke of good literature, or have a deſire to attaine to knowledge. For my part (ſweete Ladies) I alwayes affected Schollers, but every man cannot be learned, every Poet

cannot be Virgil. I preſent therefore vnto you this my Pamphlet (kinde favorites) not as the picture of Minerva, wrought by Fideas, was preſented; that is, as a thing worthy to be reſpected, but at your vacancie and fit oportunitie to be peruſed. As a trifle therefore to ſpend the time withall, I have entituled it (My Ladies Toy,) which I hope ſhall not be offenſive eyther in Title or Tittle, in compoſing whereof, I have more aymed at the fulfilling of your pleaſures, then any waies deſerved popular applauſes. Thus wiſhing to your Ladiſhips, the comfort of heaven, the contentment of heart, and the continuance of happineſſe; in hope whereof, and prayer for which, I reſt
            
               Your ſervant, H: M.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            My Ladies Toy.
            
               
                  
                     APollo that moſt wiſe and learned god,
               Did give this poeſie, Second thoughts are beſt,
               Which ſince t'is ſo, like Owle in Ivie tod
               I hid my Muſe, for tis the firſt I preſt,
               For had not I commanded beene to wright,
               My Toy had ſlept, and none had ſeene her ſight.
            
            
               For t'was my chance, oh happy chance of late,
               To meete my Miſtris at a royall feaſt,
               Where dainties were in moſt aboundant rate,
               Yet of them all (alas) I fed the leaſt:
               For I did ſurfet on a daintie diſh,
               Which was more daintie, then my hart could wiſh.
            
            
               And after dinner, when the feaſt was done,
               Againſt all Reaſon and the rules of Ryme,
               As I did gaze againſt this glorious Sunne,
               She vs'd me as a Toy to paſſe the time:
               Commanding me inſteede of Cardes and Dice,
               To tell ſome ſtory of ſome ſtately price.
            
            
               
               Even as the Schoole-boy which is ſet his taske,
               And ſhew'd the manner of his Maiſters will:
               The matter muſt be of ſome Monarks maske,
               In verſe (forſooth) to try my ſlender skill.
               God knowes (alas) before this time I ſcrafe
               In Engliſh tongue compos'd an idle verſe.
            
            
               Full glad I was to pleaſe my Miſtris care,
               And yet full loth for to diſpleaſe my ſelfe;
               For many curious womens wits were there,
               That much I fear'd to proove my Muſe an elfe:
               For on a ſuddaine womens wits are beſt;
               Mens wits are dull, except they give them reſt.
            
            
               I crav'd their pardon ere I did beginne,
               For ſure I was that I ſhould ſpeake amiſſe,
               As all men are, ſo apt am I to ſinne,
               Therefore (ſweet Ladies) pardon him that is
               Vow'd and devoted for to pleaſe your kinde,
               Were but his skill concording to his minde.
            
            
               
               They promis'd pardon when I ſpake not well,
               And with faire words they made it faire weathet:
               My Ladies ſmiles did me intreate to tell
               Some Ryme with Reaſon raſhly ioyn'd together:
               My trembling tong gave thanks for my good cheere,
               And on a fuddaine ſpake this ſequell heere.
            
            
               Faire Ladies, ſince your pleaſure is to paſſe
               Away the time with Stories grave and fit,
               I am not grave nor wiſe, my Silver's braſſe,
               My wit is willing, but my will wants wit:
               
                  Virgils verſe, and one of Tullies imps,
               Agreeth better with Dianaes Nimphs.
            
            
               To ſpeake divinely, t'is above my reach,
               To ſpeake of dutie, you know more then I,
               To ſpeake of dainties, heere you ſtay my ſpeach,
               To ſpeake of doting, I ne're knew it, I:
               But for to ſpeake of things now moſt in faſhion,
               Are lovely Ladies of moſt milde condition.
            
            
               
               
                  Pan counts her lovely which doth make men love;
               I ſay, She is lovely which doth love againe;
               For if no plaints nor prayers her can moove,
               She is not lovely, but a lowring Swaine:
               Needes muſt I thinke ſhe ſprings of ſavage kinde,
               Whom no deſires, love, or deſerts, can binde.
            
            
               We reade (Aviſa) as reports the Writer,
               We reade that Lucrece was purſude after;
               T'is read in proſe, but never yet in miter,
               The Saxons ſtorie of King Othoes daughter:
               Daine with patience, if you pleaſe to reede,
               T'is very ſtrange, but yet t'is true indeede.
            
            
               In antique time there was a Saxon King
               Of famous memory, named Charles the Great,
               Who was a Prince compleate in every thing,
               All ſorts of men he rightly did intreat:
               His power, plentie, and his peace and praiſe,
               This Prince to pride, no worldly pompe could raiſe.
            
            
               
               This noble King was matched fortie yeeres,
               To one Matild daughter of Duke de Maine,
               
               Forty yeeres paſt, her belly princely peares,
               And brings a child vnto olde Charlemaine:
               
               As ſoone as he had ſeene his ſweete facde boy,
               As Pirrhus did, he fell downe dead for ioy.
            
            
               This learnes vs (Ladies) that who wants an heire,
               Yea, be ſhe yong, or be ſhe in the wane,
               What e're ſhe be, ſhe ought not to diſpaire,
               A time may come to touch her maiſter veine:
               As heere Matilda bringeth forth a ſonne,
               When all men thoght her fineſt threed was ſpunne.
            
            
               Yea, tis a thing for to be mark't of all
               Thoſe latter children which are borne ſo late,
               How Iove infuſes in thoſe Infants ſmall,
               A kinde of height, or elſe a kinde of hate:
               That all the world ſhould highly them eſteeme,
               Or that the world of them ſhould hardly deeme.
            
            
               
               But that the Father for the Sonne ſhould die,
               The antient Father like the aged Tree,
               Which when he ſees yong braunches ſpringing by,
               He ſaith, Adue, and growe good trees for mee:
               My time is gone, and yours is to come,
               Rend vp my rootes, and plant yours in the rowme.
            
            
               Were I a Twigge to ſee my fathers harmes,
               His dying kindeneſſe would increaſe my rage:
               But out (alas) yoong trees, thinkes older armes
               Will top their twigs, and preſſe their tender age:
               Some youth like twigs wold fain their frinds forgo,
               Yet I, and Otho, never wiſhed ſo.
            
            
               Well to goe on, and tell my Story out,
               The Father's dead, the Sonne is growing vp,
               Who as in ſtature, ſo in State growes ſtowt,
               He ſcornes Synetes, but takes Xerxes Cup:
               So warrelike giv'n, that if hee ſtirr'd his eie,
               The Saxon ſouldiers would like Saxa lie.
            
            
               
               He was a man much fear'd and lov'd of All,
               He would ſpeake truely and vprightly both,
               That when he ſpake, then was it ſaide of all,
               If Otho ſpeakes it, then it needes no oath:
               His valour, venture, and his virtue ſhowne,
               Made him belov'd where he was never knowne.
            
            
               Thus when his proweſſe and perfections
               Divulg'd his long and everliving fame:
               All Europe, Aſia, and the worldes affections,
               Did bowe in honour of King Othoes name:
               Through all the world his praiſe ſo rare did ring,
               That Saba like they came to ſee this King.
            
            
               As did his Credite, ſo his Court increaſde,
               As did his Crowne, ſo did his Comfort than,
               He had no fault, his Fame for to decreaſe,
               Pray marke the matter, and conceive the man:
               There were three Othoes, but the third is he,
               Which makes my tongue, t'will not contained be.
            
            
               
               But ſee how Fortune turneth vp and downe,
               To make man famous in a world of fraude,
               Vpon his head ſhe ioynes a triple Crowne,
               Saying, Haile King, to thy eternall laude:
               If halfe a world ſet Othoes praiſe on wing,
               What may whole worlds then of our ſov'raigne K?
            
            
               
                  Otho was noble, but not like to our
               
                  Iames, more commended, and of more command;
               He ioyn'd three kingdomes, but our king ioyn'd foure,
               Which ſhall be ſpoke of while the world doth ſtand:
               
                  Henry ioyn'd Roſes, and king Otho Reames,
               But foure great kingdoms were conioyn'd by Iames
               
            
            
               Hee's preſent with vs, what ſhould I diſcuſſe?
               His gallant vertues ſhall for ever live,
               He gives vs honour, which ſufficeth vs;
               
                  Otho gave gifts, but did no glorie give:
               Though from my Tale I have awhile digreſt,
               Forgive me (Ladies) you ſhall heare the reſt.
            
            
               
               This noble Otho had not long beene match'd
               To one Ferrara, which was faire and rare,
               But had a daughter that did want no watch,
               Till ſhe diſcharg'd them of their painefull care:
               The Sunne at noone day did her light deny,
               Shaming to ſhew it, when this girle was by.
            
            
               Even as the ſun-ſhine in the ſummer bright,
               Caſts her reflection on the pale-fac'd wall;
               Or as a Diamond by the candle-light,
               Doth dimme the candle which gives light to all:
               So at her preſence all lights ſeem'd to dy,
               That all night long thou needſt no candle by.
            
            
               
                  (Adelaſia,) ſo they call her name,
               Oh too too happy that her name was ſo;
               She had ſuch fortune, and ſhe had ſuch fame,
               Thrice happy he, could Adelaſia woo:
               If Art together had agreed with Nature,
               They could not make one of more faire feature.
            
            
               
               What ſhould I ſtand for to define her parts,
               I ſhould defile them in defining them,
               Refined words ſo oft from me departs,
               That I want skill for to deſcribe this Stem:
               I thinke that Venus (if ſo ſay I may,)
               Did ſtrive with Fortune who ſhould have the day.
            
            
               Pray marke (faire Ladies) this ſame tale begunne,
               How cruell Fortune croſſt a guiltleſſe Lambe,
               Poore yong Alerane, Duke of Saxons ſonne,
               To Othoes Court, to be brought vp he came:
               Who had not long beene there, but ſoar'd above,
               And did conciliate every mans good love.
            
            
               For as it chanced that the King did hunt,
               On foote (alas) to try his bodies force,
               Out comes a Beare, from whence no beaſt was wont,
               Which on the King, would have had no remorce:
               Had not ſtowt Alerane then have kill'd the Beare,
               The Beare had kill'd his King and Maiſter there.
            
            
               
               You ſee how fortune hath alotted ſo,
               That ſome man ſhall have meane enough to riſe,
               Had not Alerane chanced then to go,
               The King had never lov'd him in ſuch wiſe:
               When he did this, the ſtory plaine appeares,
               He was of age, no more then ſeaventeene eares.
            
            
               As to (Alerane) his love did increaſe,
               So Aleranes love, to Adelaſia grew,
               And Adelaſia had the ſame diſeaſe,
               For his report did make her love renew:
               Whoſe vertue ſo enflam'd her tender hart,
               Yet durſt not this betweene themſelves impart.
            
            
               For well ſhe wot, if that her father did
               Perceive the leaſt apparance of their love,
               He ſhould be headed for his love that's hid,
               Or from his place ſhould have a wrong remove:
               For he might thinke it were againſt all right,
               Yet am not worthy of ſo brave a wight.
            
            
               
               But ſee how Cupid like a cruell (Caine,)
               
               Doth change faire daies, and makes it frowning weather:
               Theſe Princes ioyes, he over-caſt with paine,
               For t'was not likely they ſhould match together:
               By this we ſee, that Cupid ſeeth not,
               For he is blinde which gives ſo blinde a lot.
            
            
               Who hideth fire to extinguiſh it,
               It ſeekes (we ſee) to ſhew it ſelfe the more;
               Who hides his love within his boſoms pit,
               T'will breake the walls, or make him ope the dore:
               T'is like a ſurfet, which ift breake not out,
               It kills the Patient, be he ne're ſo ſtowt.
            
            
               What may it doe then to a tender Prince,
               Whom love made loyable to his luſtfull lawes?
               If one might iudge before, or ever ſince,
               It did conſume her like Calipſon ſtrawes:
               Which ſtraws did pine as holy Delphon pleas'd,
               So pin'd this Princeſſe, till her minde was eas'd.
            
            
               
               In haſte therefore ſhe opes her chamber dore,
               And calls Radeegon to come to her ſtrait,
               For I in ſtraits, and ne're ſo ſtraight before,
               Am caught (quoth ſhe) oh heare a thing of weight;
               But keepe it ſecret as thy heart within,
               Teach me to end, or learne me to begin.
            
            
               Then like a leafe, at blaſts of weſterne wind,
               Her tongue did tremble, and her body quak't,
               As though her ſoule, her inward place reſign'd,
               She could not ſpeake, but ſtill ſhe ſtood and ſhak't:
               Which then perceiving, ſhe beganne to weepe,
               Speake Prince (quoth ſhe) I will thy ſecrets keepe.
            
            
               
                  Radegon, I have alwaies found thee iuſt,
               Now be not falſe to her which meanes too true,
               My dolefull ſtate to thee declare I muſt,
               Be iuſt (ſweete maid) my heart too much doth rue:
               I was a Queene which yet did never crave,
               But now no Princeſſe, but am Cupids ſlave.
            
            
               
               His ſable ſute, and his arreſt I feele,
               Diſtracts my ſences, and diſturbes my ſoule;
               That Ixion like, in hell I turne the wheele,
               Or Siſiphs ſtone from ſteepie mountaine roule:
               Thou feltſt his force, let thy experience teach,
               To free me captive, caught by Cupids reach.
            
            
               Then (quoth Radegon) heare ſweete Ladie mine,
               When I was wounded with his golden Dart,
               No ſalve could ſave me from the Pſiches ſigne,
               Till he which hurt me helpt and heald my hart:
               So muſt your Grace receive ſome grace from him,
               Or elſe you perill both your life and limbe.
            
            
               Alas (quoth ſhee) it is yong Aleran,
               
               Who (as I thinke) doth love me not at all,
               And I too yong as yet to love a man:
               Oh, why did Cupid make me love ſo ſmall?
               Beſides all this, we women dare not ſpeake,
               Although for love our hearts are like to breake.
            
            
               
               I am ſorie Lady (quoth Radegon then)
               That from your ſelfe you ſeeme ſo much to ſwerve:
               Muſt you chooſe him above all other men,
               To have that place which none but Kings deſerve?
               Oh peace (quoth ſhe) for Cupids ſight is dimme,
               I'le have him (Lady) though I begge with him.
            
            
               Well (quoth Radegon) this too farre is ſpent,
               My poore perſwaſion commeth all too late;
               Yet this I knowe, your Fathers Scepters rent
               Will raiſe a beggar to a Kings eſtate:
               What pleaſeth you, doth alſo make me ſmile,
               He ſhall come to you, and conferre a while.
            
            
               And if you finde his ſpeach comes from his hart,
               And with ſalt teares doth manifeſt his love,
               Then vow you will not from his love depart,
               But from the Court in haſte your ſelves remove:
               For ift be knowne to Queene or King,
               The Court ſhall rue it, and the Country ring.
            
            
               
               In haſte Radegon went to ſeeke her boy,
               Whoſe fanſie alſo was with frenzie fed,
               Whom when ſhe found him, and did tell this ioy,
               His face put on an Elementall red:
               Let's goe (quoth he) for till I ſee my deere,
               Every houre I doe thinke a yeere.
            
            
               And when he came to the aſcending ſtaires,
               Which leades the way vnto his Paradiſe;
               He falleth proſtrate, and there makes his praiers,
               And the colde ſteppes he kiſſeth twiſe or thriſe:
               Beſeeching there thoſe ſeely ſenſleſſe powers,
               To pray for him, and for his happy howers.
            
            
               When hee approached to her preſence nie,
               He kneeleth downe, and did her favour crave:
               Kneele not to me: then quoth the Princeſſe by,
               My knees are made for thee, I am thy ſlave:
               Thou haſt my heart, none ſhall have me, but thee,
               Let's leave the Court before this noted be.
            
            
               
               They plight'd their troth, and to Radego ſwore,
               She ſhould be his, and he her owne would bee,
               And did addreſſe them like to Pilgrymes pore,
               To ſpend the time, till Otho pleas'd they ſee:
               I will (quoth ſhe) for thee all paines approve,
               I'le looſe my life, before I'le looſe thy love.
            
            
               Thus theſe two Princes in a moone-ſhine night,
               Did leave the King and all his royall Court,
               And wandred long vntill their purſe was light,
               Then were they left in very greevous ſort:
               Poore little Princes were conſtrain'd to crave,
               Thoſe things, before which they did ſcorne to have.
            
            
               Oh ſee how love doth dulcerate all griefe,
               Their dolefull travell in the drowſie night,
               They were contented with their loves reliefe:
               But in the morning when they miſſt this wight,
               The Court lamented and the King did frowne,
               Saying that Alerane had deſtroy'd his Crowne.
            
            
               
               
                  Otho proclaim'd in all his market townes,
               That what he was of them could tidings bring,
               He ſhould have giv'n him fifteene hundred crownes,
               But yet of them no newes was brought the King:
               For in the deſarts on Lyguria ſide,
               In darkeſome forreſts there themſelves did hide.
            
            
               Neceſſitie, the Miſtris of all Artes,
               Did learne them there to vſe a Colliars trade,
               And Nature alſo taught thoſe little harts,
               To dreſſe their pittes, and how the coales were made:
               Thus made he coales, and trudg'd about for pelfe,
               And yet was forced to content himſelfe.
            
            
               This Saxon Courtier carri'd ſackes of coales]
               Vpon his necke, about from towne to towne,
               And in their ground they dreſt vp certaine holes,
               And there they dwelt till Fortune ceaſde to frowne:
               As he to market on a time was gone,
               Shee was deliv'red of a goodly ſonne.
            
            
               
               Whom they nam'd William; as this childe did grow,
               They brought him vp to be a Colliar too,
               For ſeav'nteene yeeres he there ſuch ſeede did ſowe,
               That ev'ry yeere ſhe brought him one or two.
               Theſe faire Colliars had ſo fowle a trade,
               That their white skins were cleane contrary made.
            
            
               Thus to the ſonne, it chauncde the father ſpake,
               And ſent his ſonne to ſell ſome coales hard by,
               Who with his money ſtrait did buy a hawke,
               And brought it home: which when his father ſpie,
               He did rebuke him, and told him, ſuch things
               Became no Colliars, but were fit for Kings.
            
            
               And afterwards, when yeeres did witafford,
               Againe he ſent him for to ſell his ware,
               Who as before, ſo now he bought a ſword,
               And home he brings it to his father there:
               Which when he ſees, his eies like ſprings did runne,
               Saying, Hard fortune had much wrong'd his ſonne.
            
            
               
               Heere marke, I pray, Dame Natures deepe inſtinct,
               His birth could not conceale his noble blood,
               His parents poorenes, nor the place diſtinct,
               But ſhine it would, for no oblivious floud
               Could him obſcure, or make him leave to bee
               A Prince of Kingdomes more then two or three.
            
            
               Oh who would thinke, vnleſſe one ſee it ſo,
               That Nature workes thus in the heart of man,
               His blood did make him his blacke Art forgo,
               He ſcorn'd the Moore-bird, but did love the Swanne:
               He left his Dad, and had ſuch happy doles,
               Which made his heart he could not carry coales.
            
            
               About this time there was a true report,
               That th'Hungarians had beſieg'd a Towne,
               Thither comes Otho, from his royall Court,
               And brings great ayde, for he did owe the Towne:
               
                  William no ſooner heard their warlike drummes,
               But takes his ſword, and to the Towne he comes.
            
            
               
               There ſhewed hee valour of a worthy man,
               For when the king had overcome their fort,
               There was an Almaine challeng'd any man
               To fight with him, to ſhew the King ſome ſport:
               Then forth ſteps William with his ſword and ſhield,
               And there before them made him flie the field.
            
            
               Eternall credite was this Williams fee,
               The King did call him to come neere his ſight,
               Mee thinkes (quoth he) this ſouldier lookes like me,
               For in my youth I had his favour right:
               From whence come you that you ſuch fame have wonne?
               I am (quoth he) a ſory Colliars ſonne.
            
            
               Where dwells your Father, ſaith this noble King?
               Tell me his name, and where he vſeth moſt,
               I will preferre him to ſome better thing,
               And make thee captaine of ſome mightie hoſte:
               Goe bid thy parents vnto me reſort,
               Ev'n for thy ſake I'le place them neere the Court.
            
            
               
               I have heard (great King) my parents fled their parts,
               And ranne to dwell among thoſe lightleſſe trees,
               Where Fauni muſeth, and Sylvani martes,
               There do they worke like to the weary Bees:
               Which brings home hony to their hollow hive,
               And yet (poore ſoules) they cannot learne to thrive.
            
            
               But I (may't pleaſe your Grace to heare)
               Their wicked childe, and haughty harted ſonne,
               Did ſcorne their Spade, and did delight the Speare,
               I left them ſtrait, when I did heare the gunne:
               And came to you; in warres is my delight,
               My hart me thinkes would have my hands to fight.
            
            
               The King did view him, and did much ſuſpect
               He was the ſonne of his poore daughter gone:
               He calles lord Gunford vnto this effect,
               To goe with him, and bring his parents on:
               By his report, they are thoſe little elves,
               Which fled for feare, and there did hide themſelves.
            
            
               
               When Gunford and his ſonne came neere his Cell,
               They ſawe this Colliar Prince a loading wood,
               His ſonne lamenting, on his knees he fell,
               Craving his bleſſing, Oh pardon father good:
               Thy wicked ſonne forgetting God and thee,
               Forſooke his father in extreamitie.
            
            
               Welcome (quoth he) I pardon thy offence,
               And if thy comming be as good as glad:
               For Gunfordes ſight doth much diſturbe my ſence,
               I feare the King doth knowe of me my Lad.
               With that comes Gunford, and ſalutes this Moore,
               Saying, He ne're ſawe Prince crie coales before.
            
            
               I am glad (my Lord) I ſweare by heavens oth,
               To ſee you ſafe: where is my Princeſſe trimme?
               The King is pleaſed, and appeaſed both,
               And hath ſent me to bring you both to him:
               He bid me tell you, if I found you out,
               He means your good, he wold not have you doubt.
            
            
               
               They left their cottage, and their coales and caves,
               And like no Colliars, but like Princes brave,
               They tooke their iourney: As they went ſhe craves,
               That ſhe of Gunford there the trueth might have:
               Tis true (ſaith hee) for vnto you I vow,
               I will not faine, nor faile my Lord and you.
            
            
               No ſooner were they come, but even as ſoone,
               The King did meete them with exceeding ioy,
               Swearing by heavens, the ſtars, the ſunne, and moone,
               Welcome my ſonne, my daughter, and my boy:
               Who hath my Image, and for your ſonnes ſake,
               I will you both vnto my favour take.
            
            
               Then down they kneel'd, & out theſe words did weep,
               We thanke your Grace, that you ſuch mercy ſhew,
               For we deſerve not once to come, or creep,
               To have your bleſſing like the morning dew:
               But if our lives will get your love againe,
               Kinde King, commaund one for to kill vs twaine.
            
            
               
               No no, my children, if my life will ſerve,
               To die for you when you for me ſhould die,
               From you I will not, though from me you ſwarve,
               But keepe you as the apple of my eie:
               Nothing more greeves me, when on you I looke,
               Than your hard fortunes, which you kindely tooke.
            
            
               Ill lucke and chance needes muſt that man indure,
               Which ſtrives with Fortune, and would her reſtraine,
               Hee ſpurnes gainſt prickes, and can no good procure,
               Vnleſſe his patience make her practiſe vaine:
               To grudge thereat, it booteth not at all,
               To ſeeke to ſhunne her way ward whurling ball.
            
            
               How many Princes Fortune turnes to ſhame,
               
                  Hellena, Creta, yea great Iove above,
               
                  Medea alſo that ſame furious Dame,
               Did humble homage to the force of love:
               Theſe fled their Countries as you Princes did,
               
                  Iove fled from heav'n, and left his Iunoes bed.
            
            
               
               No marvell then if you, weake fleſh and blood,
               Did leave your countries for to live with love,
               When th'immortall gods which knowes what's good,
               Do yeeld to love, and leaves their thrones above:
               Muſe not (ſweete wench) if Cupids force be ſuch,
               Why men and women daily love ſo much.
            
            
               It is no marvell (ſweete daughter deere)
               If love did pierce your yong and tender hart,
               The ſmalleſt touch doth cracke the criſtall cleere,
               The ſweeteſt wine turnes taſte at length to tarte:
               Yet take no care, for thou ſhalt live in ſtate,
               Do not as Troyans, which repent too late.
            
            
               Thus did he ſummon all his chiefeſt Peeres,
               To celebrate his daughters nuptiall day:
               Their eldeſt ſonne he made him Duke of Cleeres,
               
               Their ſecond ſonne was Marqueſſe of Salay:
               
               The third of Boſco, which ſtil beares the name,
               Thoſe which have travelld can report the ſame.
            
            
               
               Well, when the King had ſet them both in ſtate,
               And all their children plac'd in their degree,
               Olde Otho dies, having liv'd out his date,
               And as next heire, and by the heav'ns decree,
               Thoſe mighty kingdomes and imperiall crownes,
               Poſſeſt theſe Princes to their high renownes.
            
            
               Thus have I (Ladies) finiſht your requeſt,
               Yet not ſo fully pleaſde your curious eares,
               Though moſt vnworthie, yet among the reſt,
               Receive this Pamphlet which lookes pale with feares:
               For your tuition will defend my Muſe,
               From Eſops Dogge, and from all Momus crewes.
            
            
               Tis hard to pleaſe the world, tis growne ſo coy,
               How many men, ſo many mindes there bee:
               Rebuke him Madam, who deludes your Toy,
               T'is made for Ladies, not for Lordes to ſee:
               For theſe ſame Zoyles are like Zeuxes Grapes,
               Which make faire ſhews, & are but painted ſhapes.
            
            Carpere, velnoli nostra, vel ede tua.
            Finis.
         
      
   