
      
         
            
            
            A Health to the Gentlemanly profession of Seruingmen: or, The Seruingmans Comfort:
With other thinges not impertinent to the Premisses, as well pleasant as profitable to the courteous Reader.
            Felix qui socij nauim perijsse procellis cum vidit, in tutum flectit sua carbasa portum.
            Imprinted at London by W. W. 1598.
         
         
            
            
            The Epistle to the gentle Reader, of what estate or calling soeuer.
            
               GEntle Reader, whether adorned with the royall Roabes of true Nobilitie, or apparrelled with the gorgious Garmentes of Gentilitie, pardon I pray, these my vnpolished lines: vnrip not, I beseech you, the mistaken stitches of this botcherit, neither sensure seuerely the vnsauerie taste of this Loafe, being Primogeniti, the first batch of my baking: But if you finde any thing herein conteyned displeasing your humours, say with the Doctor in Cambridge, What, was it I he meant? No, he named not mee, he spake it not by mee, he knoweth mee not; How should he then be priuate to any of my doinges? No no I am none of these miserable Maisters that so inhumanely burieth in obliuion vnrewarded the long, good, and duetifull seruice of my olde Seruant: But if you be such as either thus, or otherwyse abuseth those good creatures that God hath lent you, I meane these earthly commaunders, Golde and Siluer: Let these my cauiats

worke some remorse of conscience, and play not the gauled Horse that kicketh and winseth, his sore being once touched, to burst out into vngentlemanlike tearmes agaynst the Authour, being with his worke displeased. For assure your selues, and before God I protest, I speake not against one in particuler, neither against all in generall, vpon a malepart or presumptuous minde, as not caring who are offended with my doinges; but carefull least I should offende any, or incurre their displeasures, by my presumptuous enterprise, I humbly (as before) pray pardon. Thinke not Gentlemen, that whereas I speake any thing of Maisters hard vsage of their Seruantes, or of any auncient familiaritie betwixt them, that thereby I woulde giue any incouragement to the Seruant to be negligent in his duetie, or by malepart sawcinesse to abuse that reuerence that he oweth vnto his Maister: for God is my recorde, be it farre from mee, that I shoulde once dreame of so inhumane and sedicious a practise: For I protest for my owne part, yf I should serue the meanest Carman that whistleth after his Horse, and be bound by his wages to call him Maister, I would not skorne to do him any reuerence and duetie that by my place and calling were to be required at my handes. Therefore gentle Gentlemen, since curtesie is alwayes the companion of true Gentilitie, courteously I pray you consider of me and my doinges. And now Reader, if you by degree deserue the name of a Yeoman, submissiuely without hautines of hart I pray your patience in

perusing this my first practise, for I hold your calling no lesse commendable, and your profession no lesse pertinent to the supportyng of this humane societie, then them of higher dignitie and degree: For, What is the Prince without the Plough? or the Potentate without the Pasture? Doth not the one affoorde them Corne, the other Kine, with all other prouision for their bodyly sustenaunce? Since therefore gentle Reader, yf Yeoman you be one, that I shall happily haue somewhat to say to in this folowing Treatise, I pray (as before) your patience, that if you finde any thing therein amisse, either in vnmanerly tearmes, or otherwyse, that you would passe it ouer with silence, and impute it to ignoraunce, and not to be done of any malicious or set purpose; or els to say with your selues, In aliena republica ne sis curiosus, It is not good to scalde ones lyppes in other mens Pottage. Since he speaketh neither by me, of me, nor agaynst me, nor any thing that consernes me, why should I spurne agaynst his speches, or hate him for his harsh harmonie? Let them that are galled kicke, and them that are wounded seeke remedie: But yf you be such as your guyltie conscience perswades you, that what as is spoken, is meant by you, for it is an olde saying Concius ipse sibi, de se putat omnia dici, the guyltie conscience thinkes what as is sayd, is alwayes spoken himselfe to vpbrayde: Then worthely waigh and consider whether you be iustly accused, and complayned of or no; and yf you finde your selfe to haue offended in such and such thinges, and that

what hath been sayd of you, you haue worthely deserued; then be content to bite the lyp, wincke at small faultes, and mende that is amisse: for if you manifest your malice in any opprobrious speaches against the Authour of this worke, then you shall pronounce a definitiue sentence of condemnation against your selfe, as worthy to haue deserued all, and more, then herein is conteyned. For be it knowen vnto you, and all other of higher or inferiour degree, that I haue not touched any of the better sort, neither any that are men well meriting for their mindes and manners; but such as are mates of no merite, and as haue condingly deserued more then I can say against them: but if any of what estate or degree so euer, shall murmure against mee, I will say vnto him as Christ said to the men that brought the woman taken in adulterie before him to be stoned to death, Hee that hath not offended, let him throw the first stone: So, he that will acknowledge himselfe touched herewith, let him cast the first stone, let him the first seeke remedie and reuenge: but before he seeke reuenge, it were good he knew who had wronged him. And if he thinke I haue wronged him by speaking any thing against him, then let him come to me and know whether I ment it by him or no, and I will not onely resolue him of that doubt, but also pacifie his impatient humour. Therefore gentle Reader, I expect a pardon of course, if I haue offended by ignoraunce; which I vndoubtedly perswade my selfe to receaue at your handes, and so I leaue you to your labours: which

I pray God may yeelde you a plentifull increase. Now curtuous surueyour of these barren Landes, nay barren and mosse-begrowen lines, if thou beest my fellow in fraternitie a Seruingman, to thee I addresse my petition, if you be a Gentleman borne, and a Seruingman by profession, if in reading this my Booke, you shall happely stumble on any vnsauerie sentence that may mislike your taste, pocket I pray you this iniurie, as I may tearme it, since (God is my witnes) I meane you no harme, but rather pray for your preferment, and wysh your welfare, then by any meanes to seeke your indignitie, or disgrace. And if gentle Reader, thou be a Yeomans sonne, that hath with the complet Armour of foure Markes and a Lyuerie, entered the lystes to play the pryses of a Seruingman, shall in this my Booke finde a lumpe too much leauened, that a weake and queasie stomacke can hardly disgest, I pray thee perswade thy selfe, that it is better to haue a frowne of a friende, then a smyle of a flattering and deceitfull enemie: and whatsoeuer I haue spoken of thee, or concerning thee, is rather of goodwill, to forewarne thee of an imminent danger, then to beate thee with the dry blowes of intollerable ignominie. Wherefore gentle Reader, whatsoeuer thou be, I earnestly intreate thee, to reuerse that hard sentence of Hatred in lue of my laboure, and rather smother thy discontent with the ashes of silence (if any such thou finde in reading this Treatise) then to wreake thy malice with the hot coales of inquenchable furie; which will sooner

consume they selfe, then preuayle against thy mistaken enemie. Thus hauing (as I hope) satisfied my curious enemies, I am to craue the goodwill of my courteous friendes; desiring you (gentle Reader) to accept in good part these my labours: which if they shall like you, I shall accompt my gayne great; if not, yet must I needes count my losse but light, in that the doing of it kept me from idlenesse, a thing so dangerous to a young man, as it is conuenient he should seeke with as much industrie to auoyde the same, as the skilfull Mariners with vigilant eyes do labour to passe without perill the dangerous Rockes of Scilla and Caribdis: And so wishing to thee as to my selfe, I commit thee to God.
            I. M.
         
      
      
         
            
            A HEALTH TO THE GENTLEMANLY PROFESSION OF SERVINGMEN.
            
               IN this Bursse, or Exchange of humane affayres, which consisteth (as it were) altogeather in Marchandize, bargayning, buying & selling, it is very meete and necessary that there shoulde be men of all manners, conditions, and callinges: as the Princes or Potentats, Dukes, Earles, Barons, Knightes, Esquires, Gentlemen, Yeomen, Husbandmen, Taylor, Tanner, and Tinker, Cowper, Carter and Cobler, with men of all other estates, degrees, and professions, summoned vpon for fayture of .10. l. in Issues to appeare, with money or ware alwayes ready, to mayntaine this Mundane market. If then without euery of these professions, there can be no well gouerned Common wealth: (For if all men shoulde be Kinges, then cunning Coblers should loose their craft: yf, all Coblers, Princes soueraintie would quickly surceasse:) How then commeth it to passe that so many Heresies are crept into one Religion, so many diseases into one body, and so many aspyring mindes into this Commonwealth of England? For the Cobler would be a Shoomaker,

the Shoomaker a Tanner, the Tanner a Grasier: so that no man resteth contented with his vocation. But mee thinkes I heare one cry vnto mee, Hoe syr Iohn lacklattin, you are out of the text, your tongue trottes so vpon Tanners, Taylors, & Tinkers, that I feare me you will eyther loose your way amongst these cobling Carters, or els runne yourselfe out of breath: which if you do, your promyse to your profession wilbe slenderly performed, and our expectacions frustrate, so that we shalbe forced to say with the Fable in Esope, Perturiunt Montes paritur ridiculus Mus, His promise is golden Hilles, but his performance durtie Dales: Sutor ne vltra Crepitam: the pott is sull, therefore youth, drinke a health to the Gentlemanly profession of Seruingmen, and returne to your purpose. Seruingmen (sayes my gaffer Thomsons eldest sonne) as they are namelesse in this former Catalogue; so I holde them needeles in any well gouerned Common wealth. Russet coate I tell thee, if thou canst holde the Plough no better then thou canst holde this argument, I holde thy thorow thrift scarse able to prouide lyquor for thy throate: But as thou by profession, art not the meanest member in this vnited body, yf thou consider thy calling accordingly, without aspiring higher, or manifesting thy mallice by scalding thy lyppes in other mens Pottage: So I leaue thee to thy labor; wishing thee in thy profession no lesse prosperitie, then health and happines to my selfe. But since this whole text is too tedious for my trauell, vnwilling to vndertake the cutting out of a Garment, before I can heele a Hose; I will first implo
                  ••
                my endeuour to threede the needle, to intreate of one of 
                  ••
               ese members, and leaue the body for a 
                  ••
               tter workeman: in which member more matter consisteth, then qui mihi Du
                     ••
                  nis is able to comprehende: But Cum de
                     ••
                  unt vires 
                     ••
                  min est laudanda voluntas, As the poore must mixe Beanes and Pease with their Breadcor
                  ••
               e this

deare yeere, for Wheate and Rie is too highly rated, vnlesse it be knauerie, which seldome or neuer misseth a plentifull yeere in what ground soeuer it be sowen: So must I yeelde you a Loafe of course Cockle, hauing no acquaintance with Coyne to buy Corne, which though it may be hard of digestion, yet I hope it will not be much vnholsome.
            This Loafe is the profession of Seruingmen, not course for the calling, but in respect of the workeman, whose short time in his trade, hath gayned him so small experience, as he can hardly as yet fashyon a loafe of fine Cocket: but fine or course, such as it is, you must eyther eate or starue, for any bread of my baking. This Loafe (as I sayd before) this state and profession of Seruingmen, is the onely marke whereat I ayme: whose original, and to what ende it was ordained, I meane first to declare. Secondly, how florishing was the prime of this profession. And thirdly, the ruine and decay of this ancient buylding. In the first creation of Adam and Eue, there needed no Superioritie, nor members for this body, being altogeather planted and seated in all happines and perfectnes of Nature: but the offence committed, and the forfayture enrolde, that Man for his transgression Should eate the Labours of his handes by the Sweate of his browes, and that the commaunde, Increase and Multiplie, was strictly by the law of Nature obserued: Tract of time yeelded so plentifull an increase, as it grew very needefull that this body should be drawen into seuerall members, to auoyde a ca
                  ••
               es of confusion, and frame an artificiall buylding. For euen as a Logge of wood vnwrought, yeeldes neither profite nor pleasure, but being sawne, hewne, and squared, serues for many seuerall vses; for that which will not be a Bedde, wilbe a Boord, a Table, or Trusse, so that euery peece hauing his proportion, will execute his office: Euen so this consort of Companions,

not knowing seuerally the partes of their profession, restes very troublesome one to another: for all desiring to be Heades, then the body must needes fall for want of Eyes to direct him; and if all Eyes, then it must needes perish for want of a mouth to feede him: But being deuided into members, euery one vsing his office, and resting contented with his estate, the body remaynes in perfect health & happines. Now in the knitting of these ioyntes togeather, euery officer according to his aptnes was appoynted. First the King as head, for his magnanimitie: then others adorned with the tytles of Nobilitie and gentrie, their mindes no lesse meriting: And lastly, the Comminaltie at the commaund of these mercifull Maiestrates. These Princes and Potentates thus seated in the solace of their soueraintie, thought it very meete and necessarie, to chose and ordayne one sort of Seruantes for their profite and pleasure (ouer and besides their seruile sottes, as Dicke to droyle, Ralph to runne, Kit the Cater, with other Gouldsmythes of their occupation:) which sort of Seruantes were knowen from the rest by the names of Seruingmen. Now being come to their names, it is necessarie to know of what mettall these ministers were moulded, and what sort of people were thought fittest for this frame, considering the ende for which they were ordayned. First they were chosen men of witte, discretion, gouernment, and good bringing vp, considering their Soueraignes, Lordes, and Maisters serious busines, waightie affayres, and worldly wealth, was for the most part committed to their custodie and care: Whose vigilant eye, willing minde, and faythfull forecast diligently to discharge that duetie, was thought so necessarie, as choyce they were of them they admitted to this calling.
            Secondly, men of v
                  ••
               loure and courage, not fearing to fight in the mayntenance of their Maisters credite, in his iust quarrell, against his forraine foe, if occasion were offered:

and also, if any Countries causes called him abrode, to garde and defende him agaynst Newmarket Heathes commissioners, or any consories of their craft.
            Thirdly, men of strength, & actiuitie, to be excellent in shooting, running, leaping, dauncing, pitching the Barte, throwing the Hammer, or other feates of lyke facultie, wherewith Potentates in times past were highly pleased.
            Fourthly, men fine, neate, and nimble, in regarde of their nearenes about their Maister, his apparel and cates: for the Clowne, the Slouen, and Tom althummes, are as farre vnfit for this profession, as Tarletons toyes for Paule, Pulpit: betwixt which, though I make a comparison, yet to the place I reserue a reuerend regarde.
            Fiftly and lastly, men of qualitie to be seene in haulking, hunting, fyshing and fowling, with all such like Gentlemanly pastimes: All which being required in a Seruingman, and naturally belonging to a Gentleman: Amongst what sort of people should then this Seruingman be sought for? Euen the Dukes sonne preferred Page to the Prince, the Earles seconde sonne attendant vpon the Duke, the Knights seconde sonne the Earles Seruant, the Esquires sonne to weare the Knightes lyuerie, and the Gentlemans sonne the Esquiers Seruingman: Yea, I know at this day, Gentlemen younger brothers, that weares their elder brothers Blew coate and Badge, attending him with as reuerend regard and duetifull obedience, as if he were their Prince or Soueraigne. Where was then, in the prime of this profession, goodman Tomsons Iacke, or Robin Roushe my gaffer russetcoats seconde sonne? the one holding the Plough, the other whipping the Carthorse, labouring like honest men in their vocation: Tricke Tom the Taylor was then a Tiler for this trade, as strange to finde a Blew-coate on his backe with a badge on his sleeue, as to take Kentstreete without a Scoulde, or Newmarket-heath without

a Commissioner. But now being lapt in his Liuerie, he thinketh him selfe as good a man, with the Sheares at his backe, as the Poet Lawret with a penne in his eare: Notwithstanding for his profession I holde it profitable, and him selfe a good member, yf his Sheares do not canker, nor his Needle rust. And if there must be one amongst artificers, Coblers, and Carters, chosen felow of this facultie, I holde the Taylor not vnfittest: First, in regard his trade tyeth him to no vncleanlines: and secondly, that his Maisters apparell be kept in reparations: for nothing more vnseemely in a ciuile Gentleman, then his apparell out of repayre, torne, or broken. Agayne, yf he be a felow of an humble spirit, he may pleasure his friendes, and profite him selfe: his friendes, I meane his felow seruantes, without blot or stayne to his birth, or trade.
            Two thinges, it should seeme, were holden in high regard amongst the founders of this fraternitie of Seruingmen: the preseruation of ancient Houses, and, the mayntenance of the Commons in their calling. First, for the vpholding of Hospitalitie or auncient Houses, a Gentleman by antiquitie, or an Esquire by his calling, waighing and worthyly considering his wealth & worshyp, in this wauering worlde of wretchednes, hauing by Gods prouidence sent him .vi. or .viii. Sonnes, proper & personable men, wel meriting for their myndes and manners, callyng I say to mynde the credite he caryed in his Countrey, the men he mainteined, the poore prouided for by pence from his purse, the blacke Iack ietting from haul to butterie, from butterie to barrel, from barrel backe for the hauls health, where good felowes dyuing into the deapth of this ditch, leaues in the bottome this inscription: God saue the founders.
            
            Of all these, with many moe, the good Gentleman meditating in his minde, sayes with him selfe: If I shall leaue my Land and liuing, my Kine and Coyne, equally deuided amongst my children, imparcially proporcioning

to euery one his part, the youngest to the heire and eldest no way inferiour for worldly fortune: then shall the dignitie of my degree, the hope of my house, & the mayntenance of these before mentioned members, be quite (as Issue extinct) buried in the bottomles pit of obliuion. What, shall the light of my Lampe for want of Oyle be blemished, and my House for want of Lyuing sustayne the reprochfull name of a Mock-begger? Virtus post funera viuit. And shall I not leaue my name noted in the booke of ensuing ages? Yes, yes verely, Thou my eldest Sonne, that shall suruiue thy dying father, holde heere, wholly my Land I leaue thee, that my name may remayne registred in thy posteritie, thy byrthright by holy writ doth challenge it. Let therefore the example of Esaw be euer coated in the margent: Let couetousnes neuer corrupt thee, nor pleasures so much preuayle, as for Pottage to hazard thy Parentage: but let thy minde and manners be euer equally matched according to thy birth & calling, that thy fathers foregoing may teach thee to folow. Maynteine thy right, & loose no part of that which the law of libertie hath allotted thee. According to thy abilitie mainteyne Hospitalitie: for that is the harbourer of two hopes, prayse, & prayers: yet let Liberalitie be the Linke to light thee, least Couetousnes might corrupt, or Prodigalitie procure penurie, in medio concistet virtus, euery meane betwixt two extreames, is a vertue: so is liberalitie, betwixt auarice and prodigalitie, being placed: this meane in al musicke yeelds a most heauenly harmonie. Thus not doubting but in thee to liue after my Funerals be solemnized, committing the honour of my House to the care of thy credite, and thee with it to the tuition of thalmightie.
            And you my younger sonnes, to whom I allow no lesse loue then the law of nature doth allot, I giue euery one of you yeerely, to mainteyne you from miserie, an annual rent during your natural liues: with payment of which

rent your eldest brothers land shall remayne charged; so that the Legasie I leaue you, you may assuredly receaue: exceede not your exhibition, but liue within compasse, tyll your care and diligence, being sowne in seruice, it may yeelde you a more plentifull Haruest. For I tell you, my younger Children, Seruice I meane shalbe your inheritance: wherfore I will you, and euery of you, with modest mindes, and humble spirites, by diligence to augment your portions. And thus much for the preseruation of aucient Houses. Now it foloweth, with what care the maintenance of the commons in their calling, was in this election considered. For this Mundaine market was wholly maintayned by three Merchauntes, the supporters of this whole societie: fyrst the Prince or Soueraigne: secondly, the Nobilitie with gentrie: and the Commons the thirde calling. Now the Prince, being but one alone person, could lende no part to this profession: and for the Commons, there were many causes to keepe them in their accustomed consort. For if they should take Peter patch-pannell from the Cart to the Court, from the Plough to the Parlour, from the Sacke to the Saddle, and from course Karsie to handsome habite, this Shippe hauing one of her Cables thus crackt, might in a storme hazarde the whole, for want of such like necessaries to preuent the extremitie of winde and weather. Considering therefore that the Plough was the Potentates power, and Corne the kinges Commaunder, it was thought good not to lame it of any limbe, especially not of any such necessarie limbe as the houlder or the dryuer: for take but away a Yokesticke, the Yoke falles, the Plough standes, and the Haruest is hindered: Much more the mayming of eyther the before mentioned members. All artificers, Colliers, Coblers, and Carters, are consortes of this Craft, and maynteyners of this Misterie: And if any of them, nay any member of any of them be a missing, it doth blemysh

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
the body crosse the company, and hinder the hope of this happie Haruest.
            Since therefore, as I sayd before, the Plough is the Princes repast, the Maisters meate, the Seruantes sustenance, and the poores prouender; the Potentates as good Phisitians, had alwayes an eye that no hurt should happen to hinder the health of this blessed body, the blemish whereof might bryng bane and bayle into their owne bosome. You see the two causes so highly had in esteeme in the choyce of Seruingmen: the mayntenance of auncient Houses, and the Commons in their calling. And thus much for the originall and ende of Seruingmens fyrst ordeyning. Now foloweth how florishing was the prime of this profession.
            Euen as Adam our fyrst Parent, in the perfection of all pleasure placed in Paradice, God in his wysedome thought this seate too solitarie for him alone, so framed him a felow for his further content, helpe, and comfort: but what was the mettall that his mate was made of, considering that two of a contrary nature being matched togeather could neuer agree: and that these two must continually accompany togeather the one with thother, as in a consort without discorde; thought it meete and necessarie to match them as neare as might be, so casting Adam into a dead sleepe, tooke a Ribbe from his left side, whereof he framed the Woman: which being made of the same moulde, euen part of his owne body, he combined togeather in vndesoluable bondes of assured friendshyp: Euen so, Gentlemen and States considering their calling, thought it very meete and necessarie to haue a helpe, to further them in euery of their actions: which helpe, though not to them so seruiceable as Eue to Adam yet so needeful vnto them, & so necessarie about them, as it was thought meete, this helpe or Seruaunt should be made of their owne mettall, euen a Loafe of their owne dough:

which being done, as before I haue declared, the Gentleman receaued euen a Gentleman into his seruice, and therefore did limit him no other labour then belonged him selfe, as to helpe him readie in the morning, to brush his apparrel, Cloake, Hatte, Girdle, or other garment, trusse his poyntes, fetch him water to wash, with other such like necessaries. His Maister thus made ready, yf it pleased him to walke abrode, then to take his Liuerie and Weapon to attende him, being himselfe ready, handsome, and well appoynted: at his returne, yf it pleased him to eate, then with all diligence, decently and comely to bring his meate to the Table, and thereon in seemely sort being placed, with a reuerend regarde to attende him, placing and displacing dyshes at the first or seconde course, according as occasion shall serue, tyll time commaunde to take away: which done, grace sayd, and the Table taken vp, the Plate presently conueyed into the Pantrie, the Haul summons this consort of companions, (vpon payne to dyne with Duke Humfrie, or kisse the Hares foote) to appeare at the first call: where a song is to be song, the vndersong or holding whereof is, It is merrie in Haul, when Beardes wagges all: But beardlesse Brian, and long toothed Tom, whose teeth be longer then his beard, sayth the inditer of this dittie, was as farre ouerseene in misplacing a worde, as the founders of Broughton Church in Crauen in Yorkshyre was, in placing it without an Alehouse: or, he that giueth his friende a potte of Ale in a frostie mornyng without a Toast, for that is the appurtenance therunto belonging: (Beardes for Choppes) say they is the right of it, for it is merrie in Haull when Choppes wagges all: But Beardes or Choppes whether so euer, they both agree to bid a base to the chine of Beefe, which being sore battered with many fresh assaultes, retyres backe agayne to his houlde the Kitchen, if he be able to abyde a seconde

charge: yf not, then he dyes manfully in the feelde, vpon the poynt of his enemies weapon, who pursues him with such hatred, as they euen eate him for very anger, or hunger, choose you whether: and not so contented, they commit his very boones to the Dogges to gnaw, for his further persecution.
            And if any other enemies of lesse esteeme incounter them in this hot conflict, all goes to the potte, vnlesse some sparke of mercie mooue their mindes to repriue these prisoners tyll the next assises to be holden in the Haull aforesayd: which seruice performed, and they satisfied, the Maister calles to go on huntyng, haulkyng, fishyng, or fowlyng, in which he taketh most pleasure, or thinketh fit for the tyme. Then the Seruingman, or men, with all diligence prepare them selues to the feelde, euery one willing to shew his skil, to delight his Maister in which of these recreations he taketh most pleasure. Thus passing the day with these, or such lyke sportes, the nyght calleth them home, where the whole seruice of the Seruingman is styll imployde about his Maister. No seruile seruice was then sought for at the Seruingmans hand, though no Gentelman but standeth neede of some moylyng mate to droyle about his drudgerie. How florishyng then the state of Seruingmen was in these dayes, he that hath eares to heare, let him heare. What sport or pastime in feelde or at home, pleasing the eye, or delyghting the care, could the Maister any way haue, but the Seruant was thereof equall partaker? What was the difference then, wyll some say, betwixt the Maister and the Man, yf their pleasures were equall? for then it had been as good to haue been a Seruant, as a Soueraigne, a Man, as a Maister: euen this was one, and all that parted the Potentates power, and the Seruingmans profession, the one did commaunde, the other was to obey: the due obedience to which commaunde was had in so reuerent

regarde, and the Seruant so fearefull to offende his Maister, no seruile, but as it were a filiall feare, as the Maister was almost as carefull in his commaunde, as the Seruant diligent in his duetie. For in these dayes what greater loue could almost be found, then betwixt the Maister and the Seruant? it was in maner equall with the Husbandes to the Wyfe, and the Childes to the Parent: for testimonie whereof, there are infinite examples to be alleadged, as in the prescription of the triumuerie of Marcus Lepidus, Marcus Anthonius, and Octauius Cesar, in the Romane ciuile warres, where Naso, condemned by their prescription, was by one of his Seruants kept safe in an hill: the sayd Seruant going to the Sea side, to hyre his Maister a Boate for his more safe passage and speedy escape, and at his returne, perceauing his Maister by the strikers to be killed, he cryed aloude vnto him, (hauing yet a lytle life) Stay a whyle, O Maister (quoth he) and sodaynely stroke the Captayne and killed him, then comming agayne to his Maister, killed him selfe, saying: O Maister, you haue receaued comfort.
            An other in the same tyme of persecution and tryall of frindes, hauing a fayre shadowed Uineyarde, and in it a goodly Caue, deepe and large (for the which peraduenture he was condemned) by chaunce refreshing him selfe in the sayd Caue, one of his Seruantes perceauing the quellers yet a farre off, which came to finysh his Maisters tragidie, for the pure loue, and sinceere affection that he bore to his Maister, hid him safely, as he thought, in the secret place of the Denne, and furnished him selfe with his Maisters apparrell, feigning to be hee, euen offeryng him selfe to the death for his Maisters safetie. O rare examples, worthy of euerlastyng memorie: What greater goodwil? What purer loue, or more sinceere affection can be found amongst any consort of creatures then this? O happie Seruantes that had your beeing in those goulden dayes,

when Maisters would merite such maruels at your hands: and thrise happie Maisters, that past your pilgrimage in those blessed houres, when by your loue and liberalitie, you tyed your Seruantes with this vndessolueable bonde of assured friendshyp, euen to deserue and merite the full measure of your good will towardes them. Infinite are the examples (as I sayd before) that may be alledged in this matter, onely these two I holde sufficient to confirme this argument, since none but will confesse this loue and affection to be auncient, and of long continuance.
            Yea, but will some say, these examples are olde, and long is it since this loue and affection was thus in the highest degree made manifest, and the tryall of friendshyp thus exercised: shew me some examples of late yeeres, for the more credite of your cause, or els some reasons why these examples should not be as plentifull in these latter dayes, as in former tyme.
            To this Obiection, I answere thus: There be two especiall causes that hath vntwyned this knott, and euen cancelled this firme Obligaton, exchanging it for a single Bi
                  ••
               l. The first is, the compounding of this pure and refined mettall (whereof Seruingmen were first framed) with vntryed dregges and drosse of lesse esteeme. The seconde, is the death and decay of Liberalitie or Rewarde for well doing. But I wyll omit to vnrippe the bowelles of these reasons, tyll tyme and place of fitter oportunitie be offered, since I haue not as yet finished the seconde part of this tractate, which is onely to declare the florishyng dayes of the prime of this profession.
            I haue before declared how this seruice was in no sort seruile, nor the paynes belonging it any pennance, but they ioyed as much in their libertie, & florished as fresh in their profession as any other, of what sort, degree, or callyng soeuer: their fare was alwayes of the best, their apparrell fine, neate, handsome, and comly, their credite and

esteeme alwayes equall with their birth and callyng, in good regarde: their exercises, or dayly labours, nothyng but pleasure, their head so smally troubled with carpe and care of worldly Coyne, and them selues so farre from miserie, pennurie, scarcitie, or beggerie, harboured in the hauen of happinesse, swimming in the calme, neyther too deepe nor too shallow, supported by these good patrons their Maisters, neither soaryng to high, nor dyuing too deepe, neither Prince nor begger, floryshing in this their estate, being (as it were) euen the meane or midwarde of all degrees and callinges, as I verily thinke they were the happiest consort of Companions, and the least troubled tradesmen, in the prime of their profession, that belonged this Mundaine market.
            O what pleasure belonged Seruingmen in those dayes? when the great Chamber was serued? the Hauls cryer with a Hoe yes, summoned all good fellowes to appeare vpon an allarum? at which battayle, the boordes end was euer battered with the gunshot of Good-stomackes, where the chine of Beefe, the hagstocke to these Carpenters, was hewen and squared into diuers parcels, for seuerall purposes: And the blacke Iacke, merily trowlyng from one to another, well lyned with the lyquor of lyfe, moystened and molified the malecontent humors of these merrie mates, to their Maisters credice, and their owne comfort.
            But mee thinkes I heare the maligners of this mysterie or profession, lyke Momus mates murmure, saying to them selues, He telleth vs of their delicate diet, handsome habite, and pleasant passing the Sommer of their yeeres: But when this lustie 
                  〈◊〉
                begunne (with the Moone) to wane, and that crooked olde age had eclipsed the bright Sunshyne of their golden dayes, with duskie blacke Cloudes of darke morpheus; I meane, when that stealing Time, had consumed the oyle of their Lampes,

and euery ioynt begunne to grow starke, not able to supply his former place; what course then they tooke, to maynteine them selues from miserie, in this their greatest necessitie, he doth omit, as a thing altogeather impertinent to this discourse: but in my iudgement, a thing most necessarie amongst them to be considered, and the very marke whereat they ought chieflyest to ayme: for els, who is so simple but will confesse, that the Seruingmans profession (in regarde of their pleasure and ease) is to be preferred before diuers sortes of people, of more wealth, and greater abilitie, yf their ende were not miserie, pennurie, scarcitie, and almost beggerie: For, I holde it an infallible rule, An olde Seruingman, a young Begger. What Gentleman now a dayes, that giueth wages and lyueries, doth not looke his Seruant shoulde deserue them? and when the Seruant is olde and crooked, and altogeather vnable to helpe him selfe, how much more is he then vnable to deserue mayntenance at his Maisters handes? To this Obiection, thus much: What sotte is so simple to aske a question, not knowing the cause? or to make answere, being altogeather ignorant of the question? My Discourse tendeth onely to set foorth the florishyng and golden dayes of Seruingmens fyrst ordeyning: and the Obiection commeth foorth, With what Gentleman now a dayes. &c.
            
            But least he, or they shoulde thinke me striken mute with the first blow, not able to abyde a seconde charge, I wyll answere so much of the question as shall seeme any way appertayning to this place, and leaue the rest to a fitter opportunitie.
            Seeing therefore I haue handled the Ver, aestas, and Autumnus, of this Seruingmans estate, I wyl not leaue him tyll his fourth part be fully finished, since the Obiection hath allowed, that these three partes of his lyfe was spent in pleasure and delyght, accordyng to my former

saying: But you must note by the way, that I holde straight on the path wherein first I set foote, not medlyng with these latter or leaden dayes, tyll tyme minister occasion. Now for the fourth, which is the Hiems, and last part of mans yeeres, commonly called Crooked olde age; as Dauid sayth, are to euery man nothing but meere miserie, in regarde of weakening his strength, and decaying of nature: which hoarie heares, if they bryng to euery man miserie in generall, it must then needes touch this degree in particuler. But this miserie common to all, and by the law of nature so forcible, as the wealthy Cressus, the wittie Salomon nor the subtyle Simon, can any way eschew, yf Atropos do not befriende them in cutting the threed of their lyfe before these dayes of decay approch, cannot I say be onely attributed to Seruingmen, and them by that meanes accompted most miserable. But to leaue this naturall miserie, and come to the miserie that by pennurie, scarcitie, and want of worldly wealth, is incident. Thus much I say for this profession: When that Boreas boysterous blastes had blowen the buddes and blossoms from their trees, and that Hiems hoarie frostes had euen nipped and wythered the fruites of their florishyng Sommer, this kinde care had euery Lord of his attendant, and euery Maister of his Seruant that by these, and such lyke meanes, they prouided for their Attendantes and Seruantes, to maynteyne them from want of worldly necessaries, euen vntyll the fall of their leafe was fully finished, and their vitall dayes ended. Some woulde giue their Seruantes an Annuitie or yeerely portion of Money, duering their naturall lyues, ouer and aboue their Wages, to the ende, that when their seruice coulde not merite mayntenance, in respect of their yeeres and vnwealdines, consideryng they had reaped the fyrst fruites of their Benefice, euen the Sommer of their yeeres, this their beueuolence

should maynteyne these their Seruantes from worldly pennurie, to their last houre. Other some Maisters, in the same regarde, would procure for their Seruants such Martages, as they should thinke them selues sufficiently rewarded and satisfied for their whole seruice. Againe, some other would reward their Seruants with the Lease of a Farme, not as they are let now adayes, like a brydle for a brainesicke Iade, Durante bene placito, and rearing the rent, but Durante vita, and rent free: so that this angelicall Oyle, should so molifie his decaying members, and reuiue his dying spirit, as the thought of crooked olde Age should neither hinder his duetie in his seruice, nor with griefe shorten his dayes. By these, and such lyke meanes, were alwayes Seruingmen so prouided for in those dayes, that none, no not one (that reserued that reuerent regard and duetie towardes his Maister that he ought) but passed his youth and age, in as much pleasure, plentie, and worldly felicitie, to his hartes content, as any other, of what estate, degree, or calling soeuer. And thus much for the florishyng prime of this profession. Now foloweth the third, and last part of this tractate, wherein shalbe declared (God willing) the ruin, downe-fall, and decay, of this m
                  ••
               sterie or profession. Fyrst you haue heard the originall, and of what moulde or mettall this Seruingman was made. Secondly, in what pleasure, plentie, and delyght, in the fyrst age of their ordeyning, they past their tyme, euen A crepundus ad t
                     ••
                  minum vitae.
            
            Now gentle Reader, yf thou wilt with patience peruse these vnpolished lynes, and willingly lende me thy senses, to suruay a capite ad c
                     ••
                  lcem, this last part of this my fyrst practise: thou shalt therin playnely behold the manifold occasions that hath moued me to vndertake this heauie taske, which may be thought in me a malepart presumption, in regard of my insufficiencie. For euen as

the erector or buylder of an House, if he lay his platforme or foundation more large then the pence in his purse, or the coyne in his coffers is able to counteruayle or discharge, so that his abilitie is not sufficient to ende his beginnyng, what he is censured, the simple may easely surmise, Euen so I, hauing vndertaken this taske, and layde this platforme, fitter to cary Stones and Morter to this buylding, then to be thought the workeman, hauing I say layde this foundation, and farre vnfit to finysh it, what the gentle Reader may thinke of mee, I leaue it to his good consideration: For Cum desunt vires, tamen est laudanda voluntas, but the mutteryng or murmuryng of Momus mates I waigh not, for I holde them like barking Dogges, that ceasseth not to trouble, aswell the honest traueller, as the lurking loyterer. But least I should fall into a laborinth, not able to free my selfe from captiuitie, I meane, to goe so farre beside my text, as to forget where I left, I wyl returne agayne to my purpose. Since therfore I haue deuided this Tractate into three partes, namely the originall & ende of this ordinance, the flooryshyng prime of this profession, and lastly the ruine and decay thereof: two of the which, I haue alredy handled. Now the thirde and last, which is the downefall and decay of this buylding, I will also deuide and reduce into three seuerall poyntes, though infinite are the causes that may be alleadged in this matter.
            First, the death of Liberalitie. Secondly, the ambition and disdaine of the plaine Countreyman, and the gentlemanly Seruingman. Thirdly and lastly, the decay of Hospitalitie, or good Housekeeping.
            Now for the fyrst, which is the death of Liberalitie, at whose Funeralles or Obsequies the Seruingman may be holden chiefe mourner: Of the yeere, and day, of his originall and beginnyng, I am altogeather vncertayne, vnlesse he tooke his beginnyng primo die et anno salutis,
               
in the first day and yeere of our sauiour Christ Iesus: whose loue and liberalitie to mankind, so farre surpassed all others, as I am sure he had eyther thence his beginnig, or was then growen to his full perfection: but then, or whensoeuer he had his beginnyng (it is not greatly materiall) since he is now almost buried in the bottomlesse pit of obliuion, he is sure now eyther altogeather dead, or els so aged, as he lyeth bedrid in some obscure place: Where he is surely I know not; but yf I were of that power to pay his ransome, and free him from captiuitie, or of that knowledge in the Phisicall science, as by ministryng vnto him Potions I might mittigate his passions, I would endeuour with my whole power and skyll to procure his freedome and health, that I myght craue of him some acquaintance, for I much desire his friendshyp and familiaritie. But sure in my dayes he hath been such a stranger as I could neuer haue his acquaintance, no not know him from his ouerthwart neighbour Prodigalitie. I would fayne learne what is his countenance and habite, that yf I meete him, I may know him, and craue his acquaintance. Surely, I feare he walkes early in the mornyng, and then it is no maruell though I know him not, for my houre is eight a clocke, though it is an infallible Rule, Sanat, sanctificat, et ditat, surgere mane: But yf I thought early rysing would preuayle in this quest, I would change my houre, and begone at foure: but I am almost past hope of his recouerie, since his two vtter enemies, Prodigalitie and Couetousnesse, doth dayly pursue him with such deadly hatred. These are two extreames, and Liberalitie ameane betwixt them both, which is alwayes a vertue: but Hercules ne contra duos, though his part was the meane to make the musicke the sweeter, yet it is accompted harsh harmonie where Liberalitie beareth a part: And why? because his two opposite enemies hath banished him these (I may say) inhumane

coastes. Where he lyueth I know not; but sure I am, his exile, banyshment, death, or decay, hath brought this vtter ruine and ouerthrow to this profession, as further by the sequell hereof shall playnly appeare.
            I haue tolde you before, that Seruingmens onely mayntenance consisteth vpon Liberalitie, for their wages was neuer (in any age able to defray their necessarie charges and expences. But I would not haue you to m
                  ••
               sconster my meanyng in this Liberalitie, that it was bestowed vpon them in meere commisseration, pittie, and charitie, as them of abilitie doe vpon impotent Beggers: but the Seruant by his duetie and diligence, did merite and deserue it before he had it, though it was ouer and aboue his couenant and bargayne.
            And agayne, besides this good minde of the Maister to his owne Seruant, there was an other Liberalitie, as thus: If the Seruant were sent to his Maisters friende, or familiar, with a present or friendly remembrance, though he were not at that tyme prouided to requite his equall with the lyke gyft or present, yet he would shew his thankfulnesse towardes his Seruant, in liberally rewarding him for his paynes: And this kinde of Liberalitie is now very much decayed.
            There was also a Liberalitie allotted and belonging to the Seruingman, in this sort: If one Gentleman inuited an other to his house, or that of curtesie and kindnes he came to see him, the Seruingmans duetie and diligence, to do this his Maisters neighbour and friende seruice and honour, though that was their Maisters pleasure and commaunde, yet in regarde of their extraordinarie paynes, some pence redounded to their profite: For a Gentleman in those dayes, thought it (as it is in deede) the greatest disgrace that coulde happen vnto him, to omit thankfulnes for kindnes receaued: But Couetousnesse doth now so much corrupt, as they eyther thinke it is

idely spent, or euyll bestowed that is geuen in that manner, without care of their credit, or consideration why they should giue it, or els their memorie doth fayle them more then in former tyme it was wont: for sure I am, that they do either many times forget, or els are stacke in performance of this Gentlemanly gratitude & liberalitie. Est virtus vera nobintas, et liberalitas est virtus, ergo liberalitas est vera nobilitas: true it is, there are eyther few or none that are indued with wealth & worldly blessings, but they couet to be comely couered with the handsome habite of their highest tytles, Nobilitie, or Worshyp, or els whatsoeuer: but whether on them these titles be rightly bestowed, or no, that I leaue to the censure and iudgement of their owne consciences. And yf that Liberalitie be alwayes the companion of true Nobilitie, as it is in deede (for they are as neare ioyned togeather as Fayth and Good workes) Then, as S. Iames sayth, The good Tree will bring foorth good fruite: so the true Noble minde cannot be without his fruites, euen Liberalitie it selfe will bud and planely appeare in the branches of this body.
            Is Liberalitie then a Uertue, and so neare a kinsman to the true Noble minde, as it is the very scuttion, creast, and badge thereof, so that if this Coate and Cognisance walke the streetes, the Maister thereby may easely be knowne? surely it is: but yf a Nobleman or Gentleman now adayes, could no otherwyse be knowne but by his Liberalitie, I feare mee, yf I should tread the Strand, I should often (for want of knowledge) vnduetifully iustle some of them, and scarse lende my Cappe, to whom a low legge should belong. For trust mee, I met (not long since) a Gentleman in Fleetestreete, whose lyuing is better woorth then .2000. Markes yeerely, attended with onely one Man, whose apparrell was much better then his Maisters, though he was a Iustice of Peace is his

Countrey. But I speake not this, eyther to discommend the Gentlemans homely habite, or commende to Seruingman in his excesse: but the miserie of that minde, that regarded more Coyne then his credite.
            But me thinkes I heare one interrupt me, saying, If your sense of seeing be not besotted, you may easely discerne a difference betwixt the Potentate and the Peasant, the Gentleman & the meaner person: And yf your hart be not too hautie, you may render a reuerent regarde, & due curtesie to whom in duetie it doth belong. For yf there were no other note nor difference to know the one from the other, a Gentleman from his inferiour, the Potentats costly apparrel, handsome habite, & gorgious garmentes, doth alwayes easely bewray him; also his men and attendantes (when he walketh abrode) doth shew what he is: for men of meaner estates do not vse to goe so garded, or walke so worthely attended. Wherefore, as I sayd before, easie it is, yf you be thereunto willing to lende Cappe or knee, or other duetie, to whom it shall rightly belong or appertayne.
            To this Obiection I answere thus: First, for apparrell, surely I thinke him some farr borne Countreyman, that thus obiecteth, where in his Countrey a Satten Doblet, nay yf it be but a Ueluet Gyrdle or Waste, is of as much power and force, as Boreas boysterous blastes in a wyndie day, or a long Staffe with a good arme, the one blowyng a mans Cappe from his head perforce, and the other teaching a man to make curtesie, being well layde on. For I say, in some places of England, let but a payre of Ueluet breeches make their apparance, what personage so euer they retayne to, they shal haue moe Caps, and lowe Legges, then the Lord Maior of Applebie within his whole limit, precinct, or corporation. But yf he be such a cunning Lapidarie as can discerne cullours, and tell the nature and vertue of euery Stone by his outwarde

appearance, then I woulde gladly (yf I myght make so bolde with him) craue his companie to walke Paules in a Terme tyme: and yf his shooes be not too neare worne, foote it downe to Westminster haull by land: in which perambulation, yf he can rightly discipher the nature of euery golde Lace, and the vertue of euery silke Stocking at the first blush, nay, after long perusing the same, yf he can shew me by their royall Roabes, and gorgious Garmentes, the Noble man, and Gentleman, from the Uerser, Setter, Cros biter, and Cunnie-catcher, then I will yeelde to his saying, and learne some of his cunning, that I may euer hereafter know my duetie the better, and spare my Cappe & Legge from such mates of no merite, as many tymes I lende them vnto vnknowne. But surely I holde him in a great errour, that thinkes him selfe thus cunnyng, and no lesse able to performe this by his skill (I meane) to know euery estate by his habite, then the Alcumistes vnable by their Philosophers Stone, to make a metamorphosis of euery mettall, and turne all into Golde that they therewith touch.
            And whereas he alleadgeth, that the Seruingmen and attendantes do alwayes bewray the Nobleman and Gentleman what he is, that I deny: for, fallet hec regula quociescunque, I meete a Gentleman that may dispende yeerely by his reuenues .2000. poundes of good and lawfull Englysh money, with onely one Boy at his heeles, walking vp Ludgate hill, and by that tyme I come to Paules middle walke, I shall see Sir Dauie Debet, with .vi. or .viii. tall fellowes attending him, whetting their kniues redie to dine with Duke Humfrie: but though they be sharpe set, they may take leasure enough, for there all lirching is barde by and maine. But yf their hard Commons were the worst, that might be mended with after noones batling, for there is good Ale and Bread in Paules pettie Cannons: but there is a sore Giant, a Sargent I meane,

with whom they must wrastle, yf Pater noster Row be no better to them then Creede Lane: yf then sir Iohn Makeshift (whose last acre lyes morgaged to the mercie of sise sincke) hath many times .vi. or .viii. tall fellowes attending him, and an auncient Gentleman, that hath fayre landes, and great reuenues, whose onely studie is Arithmatique, and therein most practised in multiplication and the goulden number, manneth him selfe with onely one Boy, How should it be possible to discerne this difference, and know the one from the other, the Gentleman from the Swashbuckler, by his apparrel, attendants, and companie?
            But what is the reason, may some say, that a Gentleman of great worth and abilitie, doth walke nowadayes so slenderly attended? and a new vpstart Caueliro, whose Fathers chiefe Badge or Cognisance was the Weauers Shuttle, or the Taylors Sheares, will tread the streetes so stately attended, and so gallantly garded with a sort of seemely (yf so I may tearme them) and floryshing fayre Cloakes, as though he were the Prince of Peacockes, or Marques of some stately Moulhill? Mary euen this, The losse of Liberalitie in the one, and the power of Prodigalitie in the other: for yf the Gentleman of high regarde and esteeme, were not too studious in these two branches of the art of Arithmetique, Multiplication and the Goulden number: yf I say, Liberalitie, the badge and cognisaunce of true Nobilitie and worshyp, were not by his power & authoritie committed to common Gaole, then would he, preferring worth before wayght, walke more worthely attended, garded gallantly with a sort of seemely Seruantes, alwayes well appoynted, aswell to shew his power, as to grace his person. And syr Henrie Hadland, yf he would well waygh and consider how many dayes, nay weekes, monethes, and yeeres, his father spent in sore toyle and trauayle, euery houre and moment,

day and nyght, carping & caring, how of patches to make a weareable garment, and scrape some Crownes into his Coffers, whereby he, with his posteritie, might be more able to maynteine themselues in their trade and calling neighbourlike, would neuer so prodigally and carelesly spende, consume, and make hauocke in one Winter of that, which so many, yea and fruitefull Sommers before had yeelded. This prodigalitie procureth a double miserie, a miserable want in the ende to them that so carelesly consumes their patrimonie, and meere miserie to the couetous Cormorant: for, sayth he, Felix quem socij nanim periisse procellis cum vidit, in tutum flectit sua carbasa portim, it is good to be rich, a man may be yoore when he will: So by the example of this prodigall person, he that hath wherwith to maynteyne himselfe in very Gentlemanlike sort, with men about him for his credite, being descended of an auncient house and worthy parentage, burieth in obliuion his state and dignitie, and becomming a very seruile slaue, and thraull, to this donghyll drosse, his golde and money, leadeth his lyfe in most miserable maner. Where is then this Liberalitie become, that hath been in former tyme so highly esteemed? Looke in the .vii. Chapter of Ecclesiasticus, and there you shall finde a friendly perswasion, Be liberall vnto all men: much more then vnto your Seruantes & Attendantes, meriting and deseruing this your liberalitie. And in an other place of the same Chapter he sayth, You Maisters, restraine not your Seruants of their libertie, and be sure you leaue not your faythfull Seruant a poore man.
            
            O how many Gentlemen in these dayes doth respect this woorthy saying? or haue that care of their faythfull Seruants, that this place of Scripture doth commaund? sure they are few or none. The liberall Maister is a rare Phenix: so that the saying of Elias may well in these our dayes be verified, There is none, not one left in all

Israel, that feareth the Lord, and worketh righteousnes. Euen so it may be sayd, There is none, no not one, in this age, that beareth that loue in Liberalitie towardes his Seruantes, that he in goodwill ought, or they by duetie do dayly merite. But it may be sayd to mee, as the Lord sayd to Elias, I haue not onely seuen, but seuentie times seuen Seruantes in Israel, that hath not bowed their knees to Ball, though vnto Elias they were thought so small a number: Euen so, not onely seuen, but seuentie times seuen Gentlemen, in whom the ancient vertue, the badge and crest of true Nobilitie, euen Liberalitie it selfe, doth budde, blossome, and beare her accustomed fruite in due season, as in former ages.
            This number is since, by tract of tyme, much lessened and impayred: but howsoeuer, sure I am that Liberalitie, as I sayd before, is eyther quite dead, banyshed, or els playes least in sight, as Banckroutes, that walkes narrow lanes, or keepes them out of the Libertie, least they should sing the Counter tenor, or at Ludgate, For the Lords sake. But pittie it is, that Liberalitie that honest fellow should, dying, be buried without his rites and ceremonies, his funeralles and obsequies, to be duely solemnized. I feare me that none was so charitable as to ring his soule knell, or bestow on him a winding sheete. O that I had lyued when he dyed, or had been at the making of his Will, though I had been none of his Executors, nor had had any Legasie bestowed vpon mee, yet would I, at my owne charges, haue seene him honestly brought foorth to his long home (as the saying is:) but sure he died Intestate, and for heyres Apparent I think he had none, for since his death I neuer heard o
                  ••
                any his successours: Notwithstanding though he were before my tyme, yet haue I heard so much good of him, as loth I am that his fame should be buried in obliuion: wherefore I will (though I be no profest Poet) frame some Epitaph of his lyfe and death,

though the place and tyme of his death be vnto me altogeather vnknowne, and leaue it to ensuing ages.
            It is not for the Sheepheards O ten pipe, to presume to keepe his part in consort in Princes Pallaces, where heauenly harmony is dayly harboured; neyther I to take vpon me Poetrie, whose iudgement therein can scarcely discerne what feete a Uerse doth stande vpon: notwithstanding, since I haue promised an Epitaph, I will performe it, though it lie buryed with the shauinges of the Presse in the bottome of a Dryfat: wherefore, hoping the Fiddle may be accepted, for want of musicall Instrumentes, giue eare, and you shall heare his best tune.
            
               
                  Ceasse Sunne to lende thy glorious shine,
                  Moone darkned be, as cloudy night,
                  Starres stay your streaming lightes diuine,
                  That wonted were to shine so bright:
                  Weepe woofull wightes, and wayle with me,
                  For dead is Liberalitie.
               
               
                  You Fire, Water, Earth, and Ayre,
                  And what remaynes at your commaund:
                  Foules, Fysh, or els, be fyld with care,
                  And marke the summe of my demaund:
                  Weepe, weepe I say, and wayle with me,
                  For dead is Liberalitie.
               
               
                  You siluer Streames, that wont to flow,
                  Upon the bankes of Helicon:
                  You sacred Nimphes, whose stately show
                  Bedimd the bright of Phaeton,
                  
                  Weepe, weepe I say, and wayle with me,
                  For dead is Liberalitie.
               
               
                  
                  If Due-desart to Court resort,
                  Expecting largely for his payne,
                  The Prince he findes then alamore,
                  No lue, his labour is spent in vayne:
                  May he not then come wayle with me?
                  Yes, dead is Liberalitie.
               
               
                  The paringes from the Princes Fruite,
                  That silie Groomes were wont to feede,
                  Now Potentates for them make suite:
                  True Gascoine sayth, the Lord hath neede:
                  Weepe therefore weepe, and wayle with me,
                  For dead is Liberalitie.
               
               
                  The Courtly crew, of Noble mindes,
                  Would giue rewarde for euery Legge:
                  To crouch and kneele now duetie bindes,
                  Though Sutor nought but right doth begge:
                  Weepe therefore weepe, and wayle with me,
                  For dead is Liberalitie.
               
               
                  When Countreys causes did require,
                  Each Nobleman to keepe his house,
                  Then Blewcoates had what they desyre,
                  Good cheare, with many a full carouie:
                  But now not as it wont to be,
                  For dead is Liberalitie.
               
               
                  The Haull boordes-ende is taken vp,
                  No Dogges do differ for the bones,
                  Blacke-Iacke is left, now Glasse or Cup,
                  It makes mee sigh with many groones,
                  To thinke what was, now thus to be,
                  By death of Liberalitie.
               
               
                  
                  Where are the Farmes that wont to flye
                  Rent free by seruice well deserued?
                  Where is that kinde Annuitte,
                  That men in age from want preserued?
                  What, do you looke for wont to be?
                  No, dead is Liberalitie.
               
               
                  What Squire now but rackes his Rentes,
                  And what he 
                        ••
                     ath, who will g
                        ••
                     ue more?
                  T
                        ••
                     e giffe gaffe promise he repentes,
                  The Lord hath neede, surceasse therefore:
                  Weepe, weepe, for now you well may see,
                  That dead is Liberalitie.
               
               
                  The golden worlde is past and gone,
                  The Iron age hath runne his race,
                  The lumpe of Lead is left alone,
                  To presse the poore in euery place:
                  Nought els is left but miserie,
                  Since death of Liberalitie.
               
               
                  Weepe, weepe, for so the case requires,
                  The worlde hath lost her second Sunne:
                  This is the summe of my desires,
                  To ende where earst I haue begunne:
                  Euen still I say come wayle with me,
                  The death of Liberalitie.
               
            
            Thus you haue heard, the death of Liberalitie to be one of the especiall occasions that hath wrought the vtter ouerthrow, ruine, & subuertion of Seruingmens estate. Now for the ambition and disdayne of the Countreyman, and the Gentlemanly Seruingman.
            First for the Yeoman, or Husbandmans sonne, aspyring from the Plough to the Parlor, I holde these the

contempt of his vocation, Feare, to hazard his life in his Princes Marciall affayres, and, the ambitious desire of dignitie, to be the especiall occasions that hath mooued him to change his habite and cullour, from Ierkin to Coate, and from Russet to Blew. In the first he imitates Icarus, who presuming vpon his Waxen winges, soared so high, as the heate of fierie Phaeton melted the winges of this vnfethered Foule, and so cast him fully as lowe as he had his beginning: euen so, this Yeomans Sonne prying into this easie and pleasaunt lyfe of Seruingmen, and considering the droyling he hath about his drudgerie, without consideration that he is called to this Countryes labour, or how farre he is vnfitte to execute the others office, not acquainted therewithall, taketh vppon him this new trade of lyuing, in my iudgement as far vnable to execute the others office, as Icarus to soare in the highest heauens: but pittie it is that they are not as well punished for their aspyring mindes, as Icarus for his proude and presumptuous enterprise, Tempora mutantur et nos mutamur in illis, when crooked olde age commeth, and they shaken off, as by their vnwildinesse not able to merite foure Markes and a Lyuerie, then they are faigne with heauie cheare retro spectare; and wisheth that eye had been blynde wherewith they fyrst pried into the floryshing profession of Seruingmen: floryshing I say, in their first age, but now by these and such like occasions ruinated, and almost cleane withered.
            The seconde occasion that made Blew so deare, was this, These latter dayes are more dangerous and troublesome then former ages, so that many Kinges and Princes are euen occasioned to maynteine their right by force of Armes and Hostilitie. And now falling out so that an Armie must be leauied, to be imployed at home or abrode, for the defence of the Countrey, or offence to the enemie, Robin Russetcoate must of necessitie be one of the number,

as good reason that all sortes shoulde be assistant to such seruice. Now his Father, loth to part from his beloued Sonne, will giue Markes and Poundes to redeeme him, and keepe him at home from doing his Prince and Countrey seruice. And yf he can by any fauoure, coyne, or kindnesse, blow ouer these boysterous blastes, and keepe his Sonne from being made deafe by the gunshot of great Ordinance: then he will seeke by all meanes possible to preuent a seconde feare, and makes haste to a Gentleman, or Iustice of peace, to whom when he commeth, he lendes moe Cappes and Legges, then a good Arithmetitian can almost in a long tyme number: then comes, I beseeche your Worshyp, and at euery worde a low legge: the tenor of whose petition may easily be surmysed. The Gentleman being of Seruantes sufficiently furnished, and hauing all his Offices full, loth to displace any, well consideryng how farre vnfit such a fellow is to be lapt in a Lyuerie, or harboured in the Haull, who wonted dayly to attende in the Oxe-parlor, shapeth him an answere: Friende, I can not pleasure you, I haue no place voyde that your Sonne canne supply. The seelie olde man returneth home sad and sorowfull, not knowing how to preuent the next Alarum: but remembring the olde saying of the popysh Priestes, that wont to make money of their Mattens, No pennie, no Pater noster, putteth in practise, by the oyle of Angels, to mollifie the hard hart of this Maiestrate: then comes he againe, I haue brought your worshyp a coople of fat Capons, Pigge, Goose, or Lambe; now good your Worshyp stande my good Maister, and take my Sonne into your seruice, I will apparrell him at my owne charge, he shall aske nothing but meate, drinke, and a Lyuerie, with other necessaries I will maynteine him like a man. Now the Gentleman, calling to minde that hereby he might saue foure Markes and a Lyuerie, beside a preferment that his Man woulde

expect for his long and duetifull seruice, bethinketh himselfe one way or other, Nodum in serpo querere, and thereby to make benefite of this last motion: then he watcheth oportunitie, and euen for breaking a Bulrush, Facile cum inuenire baculum, ad cedendum Canem, Knaue packe out of my doores, I will keepe no such as thou art: with a thousande such lyke opprobrious liueries, neither befittyng a Gentleman to giue, nor a right Seruingman to receaue. But thus ridding his handes of one of his Seruantes that then most expected preferment, he giueth entertainement to syr Rowsand Russet-coates sonne, who restes no lesse glad of his place, then the Foule of a fayre day: But dulce bellum in expertis, If he considered what the want of fyre is in a Winter euening, he would rather with the Emmet laboure in Sommer, then with the Flye starue in Winter, though the Winter of Seruingmens yeeres was euer sufficiently prouided, as before I haue declared: but euery thing is worse for the wearing. Then th
                  ••
               s goodly Yeoman, thrusten into a Blew coate, holdeth himselfe a better Seruingman, then he that hath spent his whole tyme in that trade, though (simple swayne) he know not how to holde a Trencher.
            The thirde, and last occasion of this new enormitie, is the ambicious desire of dignitie: for in former ages (as before I haue sayd) when Seruingmen were had in good regarde, by dyuers occasions they were many tymes highly preferred, as by their wit and will many of them often merited great matters: Some of them would cary them selues so soberly, discreetely, and wisely, as they came to great wealth, worth, and preferment by Mariage: some agayne, amongst the Potentates were so much esteemed, as they were thought worthy, & in deede preferde to Offices & places of great credite: and many other meanes they had whereby they came to great promotion. Which wealth, worth, credite, and preferment, these vnciuill

sottes gape after, and surmise them selues worthyly to merite, though (God wot) many of them are as much vnworthy to keepe the Dogges out of the dyning Chamber, as I vnable to expresse their insufficiencie.
            Now for the disdayne of the Gentlemanly Seruingman: You haue heard before what mettall the right Seruingman was made off, of him selfe pure and right stuffe, not mixed with any dregges and drosse of lesse esteeme: But when this mixture of mingle-mangle begunne, and that he saw him selfe consorted with a crue of such clusterfystes, he beganne to waxe weerie of his profession, euen loathing to lyue in fellowshyp with such vnseruiceable people, and disdayning the degree of a seru
                  ••
               le drudge, resolueth eyther to cleare the suite of that Carde, or els to turne ouer a new leafe: but Herculei labores, it is as hard for him to thrust Pierce the Ploughman out of his Blew coate, as to tame the shrewysh tongue of a Kentysh-streete Scoulde; not in regard that the Gentlemen of this age are so delyghted with their clownish barbarisme, but that their mayntenance doth not so stretch the Purse-stringes of their Mai
                  ••
               ters, as the mayntenance of the right Seruingman: betwixt whose merites, there is much more difference, then in these our dayes betwixt their rewardes: for, foure Markes and a Lyuerie, is to them both as currant, as .vii. s. vi. d. for a flemysh Angell; nay, fourtie shillinges a yeere keepeth a great sturre in many Houses, though it was ordinarie .400. yeeres since: but for wages I will omit, tyll oportunitie be offered. Notwithstanding, to returne to my purpose, I would fayne know whether the Iorneyman or Apprentice, the Workeman or the Labourer, be more worthy or better deseruing? If the Labourers wages be but .vi. d. a day, and the Maister workman can & wil earne a shilling? So much, and more (in my iudgement) ought to be the difference betwixt a right Seruingman, & a new vpstart Tom all-thummes:

For the one, A crepundiis, hath been trayned vp to his science: the other at .xx. yeeres setteth vp for him selfe. But it is maruayle they are not brought into the Exchequer, vsing other mens occupations, neuer seruing Apprentishyp: Exchequer, nay, into the Towne-stockes, a fitter place: for the occupation is now a dayes so beggerly, as few, or none of them, is able to pay the fees to that Court belonging, neyther can Thenformer wring any powlyng pence out of any of their Purses. The olde saying is verified, There are so many of thoccupation, as one can not thriue for throng of his neighboures. Surely this doth proue, that in diebus illis, it was a good trade, otherwise so many would not haue left the Plough, to wayle in the Parlor. But euen as Ringtayles and Bussardes hoooueryng ouer the Partridge, spoyles the flyght of the Falcon, whose magnanimious minde daigneth not to stoope in the presence of these carion Scarcrowes, but choseth rather to leaue the pray, and soare abroade, then to wagge her winges, or seeme any way conuersant amongst such coapesmates: euen so the Gentlemanly Seruingman, whose lyfe and manners doth equall his birth and brynging vp, scorneth the societie of these sottes, or to place a Dysh, where they giue a Trencher.
            But amongst these vnfitting felowes for this fraternitie, I meane not to place all Yeomens sonnes, or others, that are not Gentlemen by birth, God forbid that I should do them all in generall so great wrong: for many there are that come to deserue the names of Gentlemen, and higher tytles, by Learning, and other their extraordinary good gyftes, whose Father could well content him selfe with the name of Goodman. &c. Wherefore, such as haue eyther been brought vp in Learning, and so made fit for this Forme, or them that a purili etate haue been practisers of this science, I will make bolde to place amongst these

Gentlemanly Seruingmen: for Cicero sayth, It is more honoure and credite to be the first Gentleman of the name, then so to ende, as his posteritie cannot challenge for their inheritance that worthy tytle: And for my owne part, I thinke the Scholler (howsoeuer borne) deserues alwayes the name of a Gentleman. Therefore filing these, as I sayd before, vpon the roule of right Seruingmen, I will returne agayne where I left. What inconuenience doth grow by this controuersie may easely be seene, knowne, and vnderstoode.
            First, for the aspyring minde of the Countreyman, that will needes be lapt in a Lyuerie, this mischiefe foloweth his madnesse, dearth, scarcitie, famine, and hunger: For I will prooue by good reason, that the Yeomans Sonne leauing his dayly labour (to which from his infancie he hath been trayned) and taking vpon him the degree of a Seruingman, breedeth as many inconueniences in the Commonwealth, as want of exercises begetteth diseases in a corpulent body: For the Yeomans sonne, as I sayd before, leauing gee, haygh, for Butlor some moe fayre Trenchers to the Table, bringeth these ensuing vleers amongst the members of this Common body. First, whereas he him selfe by the sweate of his browes and dayly hand labour, was able to digge yeerely from the wombe of the earth, so much belly timber, as was able to sustaine and satisfie the hungry mouthes of .vi.viii. or .x. of his Fathers familie, or neighbours neare dwelling, and so much backe prouision, as would hill, happe, or couer them in seemely sort, according to their Countreys callyng: This hand, that was so well imployed, Non sibi solum sed suis, now by change of his vocation, becomming idle, not any way gettyng meate for his owne mouth, the 
                  ••
               eelie soules that were by his industrie before fully fedde, must of necessitie now perysh with famine, and starue for want of clothing, for that the meanes of their mayntenance

is now thus metamorphosed: for the hand of any man scorning his office to feede his mouth, the whole body of necessitie must perysh: euen so this body, this hand thus disdayning his duetie.
            Agayne, this is an other enormitie that hereof proceedeth, This hand that maynteyned vi.viii. or .x. as I sayd before, ceasseth not only to do this good to his Countrey, but also in processe of tyme by changing his vocation, breedeth and begetteth a further mischiefe and inconuenience, to the hurt and hinderance of the Common wealth, as after by circumstances I shall declare. For hauing thus altered his vocation, he must alter his habite, countenance, conditions, qualities, cogitations: and what not? he must as well as he can make satisfaction for the Queenes currant English before by him clipped, he must now make it full wayght, good and currant lawfull English: His habite must now be fashionate in proportion and cullour: Northeren Carsies not now weareable in Breetches, for it will shrinke, and the fashion is now to haue Uenetians of the largest sise: yf they will not holde a bushell a breetch, they are not saleable in Birtchen lane. For Kentish russet, it is no cullour, it will make no shew in a Countrey Church: But the best Broad-cloth, and newest coloure, must couer this late Countrey Courtier. His pase it must not be tother Legge totherway, and tother Legge totherway, as he was wont to throw them, when he turned his Cattle from Plough to Pasture, making Indentures all along the ditches: But his gate and iesture of his body must be direct and vpright, treading as true as though he would tell what paces are in a Furlong. His curtesie with Cappe and Legge must be as his Apparrell of the newest fashion, with all other the rites and ceremonies belonging to this new taken vp trade: no small tyme he spendes before he be in this an artist, and meane while, his senses are so besotted, as he quite forgetteth how to

holde the Plough, or whip the Carthorse: and for the cunning in this craft, not one amongst an hundred of them, euer in all his life time, attayneth to the knowledge of his duetie, for Ethiopcum lauare, is an endlesse laboure: euen so, to make a Foxe tayle a blowing Horne, or of a Countrey Clowne, a sufficient Seruingman: For, Quo semel est imbuta rec
                     ••
                  ns seruabit odorem testa diu.
            
            
               He that till twentie is brought vp to Plow,
               What seruice in P
                     ••
                  rlor can he do thinke yow?
            
            Is it possible to bende or how a strong Oke as a young Sapline? or to teach the olde fyngers that are growen styffe and starke, to their full age, to play vpon any musicall Instrument, with such facilitie and leauinesse of ioyntes, as the young Fingers that are nimble, and to any thing tractable, in regarde they are but grystles and sinewes vngrowen? Euen such is the impossibilitie, to make the Countreyman that hath been brought vp in Husbandry, and other bodyly labour, whose handes, tongue, and all the rest of his members, haue been dayly and hourely imployed to one and the same kinde of exercise, now to aulter and change euery office of his sayd members, and them to imploy in seuerall and vnknowne exercises. But some may obiect and say, You make such a mysterie of your profession, and such cunning to belong it, as without a man haue all his members apt, neate, and nimble; as his Handes plyant to seuerall purposes, his Tongue eloquent to obiect, answere, or discourse pleasantly, his Person and iesture handsome and comely, his Wit, Discretion, and Courage, answerable to all the rest of his partes, as yf he want these, nay any one of these, he is Seruus nomine n
                     ••
                  n
                     ••
                  re, He is a Seruingman in name, but not in deede. I holde you are much mistaken, for yf a man can place a Dysh, fyll a Boule, and carrie his Maisters Rapier, what more is or can be required at his handes? And yf this be all in all to discharge that

duetie, what blunt fellow, how brutishly soeuer he hath been brought vp, but can and may learne quickly, to discharge so much as is here required:
            O foolysh obiection, and thrise sottysh surmise, no lesse simple, then meere simplicitie it selfe, not much vnlyke the Popysh Priestes of the olde Learnyng (as the say) which thought them selues worthy, nay, sufficient to discharge a place in the Ministerie, and take orders, yf they could say or sing by roate, or otherwyise, the olde Confitemini, or, Nunc dimittis seruum tuum domine, though they coulde better sing the whole Masse, then decline Dimittis: But as the olde verse is worthy notyng, and true in deede, that Qui bene can, bene con, bene le, presviter debet esse, and none els, no none ought to take vpon them that function, vnlesse they could reade well, sing well, and expounde well: So none ought (in my iudgement) to take vpon hym the degree of a Seruingman, vnlesse he be furnished with those qualities and partes that before I haue set downe belonging a Seruingman, and befitting his profession.
            And yf it be then requisite in a Seruingman, that he should be of wit, discretion, gouernment, and good bringing vp, fine, neate, nimble, and well qualited, to discharge those dueties, which before I haue set downe belonged him, and were required at his handes in the prime of his ordeyning, and for those qualities was so called to that place, as without them, nay, euery of them, he coulde not sufficiently discharge his duetie therein: how much would then the founders of this fraternitie haue frowned, to haue admitted one into this fellowshyp, that had wanted not onely one, but all these partes before mentioned, so requisite, and the full measure of them so much at his handes expected and required? would they, thinke you, haue been contented, to haue entertayned a man that could onely haue caried a Dysh, giuen a Trencher, or caried

a Rapier after them? No, they did not onely require this to be done in decent and comely maner, which none, no not one of them which is obiected, fitte enough for this profession, can do as is required, but much more he must ouer and besides the qualities before in him required, be able to giue entertaynement to a stranger in decent and comely maner, delyuer a Message discreetely and wisely to a Potentate, Maiestrate, or meaner person, to talke and discourse with his Maister vpon forraine or domesticall affayres, nay much more then I can expresse, for want of iudgement and experience herein: and if I were of knowledge sufficient, yet would my penne be weerie, before I should at large expresse the whole duetie to this profession belonging. But I will not take vpon me to teach others that, wherein I am my selfe but a learner, least it might be sayd vnto me (and not vndeseruedly) Turpe doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum, You take vpon you to teach others their duetie, and cannot your selfe performe it. Therefore I will surceasse to wade any further into this Foorde, least I should be drowned in the deapth, or loose my selfe in this Laborinth. If then all these dueties, & many moe be required in a Seruingman: How much then insufficient thinke you is the Yeomans sonne, that beginneth at .xx. to take vpon him this trade? Thus you haue heard what inconuenience doth grow by the aspyring minde of the Countreyman: Now what hurt doth happen to the Common-wealth, by the disdayne of the Gentlemanly Seruingman, a worde or two, and so an ende of this part.
            You haue heard before from whence this Seruingman was descended, of auncient and worthy Parentage, yet his mayntenance not altogeather correspondent: and the causes why he was no better by his Parentes prouided for, are before at large expressed: his mayntenance I say was but some annuall portion, and that after the deceasse

of his Parentes, which without some other helpe, was no way able to maynteine him Gentlemanlike, and therefore called to this profession, for the better supportyng of him according to his estate, without charging of his friendes further then his Fathers Legasie, his estate, birth, calling, & credite, no way thereby blotted, blemished, stayned, impayred, or impeached, but much bettered for wealth and worth: in worth, in regarde he was fellow to no inferiour: and in wealth, because he kept his owne, and often increased his tallent by his diligence and desart. But now being forced to consort him selfe with men of lesse merite, and that they shall equall him in esteeme, and better him in rewarde, I meane, they comming in the after noone at foure a clocke into the Uineyarde, shall haue their hire for the whole day, in as full or larger measure, then he that hath endeuoured himselfe Manibus pedibusque, with tooth and nayle, that is, euen to the vttermost of his power from .vi. in the mornyng, to the last houre, truely to earne his whole dayes wages, beginneth much to disdayne this drudgerie, and so leaueth the Uineyarde wholly to these vnskilfull workemen, and loytering labourers: And now being not as before set aworke, but missyng that part of his mayntenance before mentioned, which he got in seruice, How do you thinke he can carie himselfe in statu quo prius? no, it cannot be without some extraordinarie meanes: Eyther he must be more chargeable to his friendes then his Father willed him, or els procure his mayntenance by some worse meanes then will stande with his birth or credite. What neede I glose vpon the text, or seeme to daunce masked in a Nette? trueth it is, he must lyue, and he will lyue. How? lyke a Man? yea, and lyke a Gentleman. What, and want lyuing? that is no matter, he wil liue by his Wittes. What, by the art of Alcumistrie, to metamorphis other Mettall into Money? or by conueying the Indies into Englande,

or Englande into the Indies? No, no, Pewter, Brasse, nor Tinne, we can not spare, to turne into Golde or Siluer: and for the Indies to come into England, we haue no roome, vnlesse he can commaunde the Sea to giue it place, which doth on euery side so rounde immure vs, and I am sure it loues vs too well, to leaue vs vndefenced: What restes then? He can not, as Christ did, worke myracles, to turne Water into Wine; but he can do this myracle, by a writ of Remoue he can displace Money, or Golde, finding it vnseemely seated, and place it higher or lower, as he findes it worthy: and yf the sight of it be too garysh, and offende his eyes, he can do this myracle, he can turne it into Wine, which shalbe more pleasant to his taste, then was the sight to his eye: and after all, turne the Wine into Water, to shew his power and preheminence ouer it, and how smally he esteemes this worldly drosse and pelfe. But what Court this Writ of Remoue comes from, or whether it be ex officio or no, there is the question, but that doubt I leaue for men of more iudgement to discide: yet notwithstanding, thus much I wyll say, that yf the breaking, transgressing, and violating, of good Lawes and Statutes in a Common wealth, for the publique weale established, be offensiue, dangerous, and hurtfull to the state of the sayd weale publique, then surely this disdayne that I haue hitherto spoken off, must of necessitie ingender many diseases in this common body, to his great hurt and hinderance.
            Much more surely I could haue said in discribing particulerly the inconueniences herof proceeding, but loth I am to protract time with friuolous phrases, & seeme too tedious in a matter so apparant. Wherfore gentle Reader, you see how dangerous is this disdayne, & how hurtfull to the Common wealth, & beare with me I beseech you, in that I passe it ouer so slightly, for, Quod sub inteligiter non deest, that that is behinde I leaue to your good consideration.
            
               But me thinkes I heare you say, You haue made a long discourse of this ambition and disdayne, what mischiefe and inconuenience doth thereof proceede to the Common wealth, and to all in generall: but, what hurt or hinderance doth thereof grow in particuler, to the state and profession of Seruingmen in this age, that you leaue altogeather vntouched, which (as I take it) shoulde be the summe of your Treatise. I answere no, I haue in some sort handled it already: but yf I haue not therein satisfied your expectations to the full, I will briefely giue you a note or two moe, and so an ende of this part.
            For the Countreyman that will needes eleuate his voyce a note aboue Ela, that will with Icarus haue waxen Winges to flie aloft, because Fethers be to lyght in a boysterous winde: this felow I say, that imagines he can sing Pricksong at the first sight, before he can say his Gammoth, when he steppes in to play his pryses, imployeth all his partes, to see yf he haue any thing in him so to commende him, as thereby to gayne the good lyking of his new Maister. But finding in himselfe nothing worthy esteeme, and that his partes and gyftes cannot deserue nor gayne him that he expectes at his Maisters handes, he turneth ouer a new leafe, and seekes by sinister meanes to effect that, which otherwyse he could not by any good meanes bring to passe. Then he beginneth, like a Politician, to enter into consideration of his Maisters humor; and yf he be prodigall, he preacheth of Gentlemanlyke liberalitie: yf couetous and worldly, then he turneth his copie, and prattles of sparing, he telles him he keepes too many idle fellowes, his Butterie is too open, and his fare too costly, lesse would serue and as well satisfie: with a thousande such lyke tales he tyreth his Maisters eares: which needeth not, for they are subiect enough to heare now adayes such pratlyng Parasites, especially talking of profite or sparing. And yf his Maister

lende him hearing, and seeme to allow of his talke, then he ceasseth not to inuent and inuaigh against his fellowes, hoping thereby to creepe into sole credite with his Maister, and to lyft them out that are men of much more merite, and better desart: but all this his practise and pratling, is not with sinceere affection to preferre his Maisters profite, but thereby to grope for some gayne to himselfe. For Pettie in his ciuill conuersation, sayth: That marke when you will, yf any seeke to come vp or benefite them selues, they seeke by briberie, flatterie, and such other sinister meanes, yf they want the gyftes of Nature and nurture to the same to commende them. Now yf this new vpstart tradesman preuayle in his practise, it makes the Maister slenderly regarde his olde Seruantes, it makes him agayne smally, or not at all, rewarde them for their long seruice, and good desartes; it cutteth them short of their wonted allowance, as well for fare and dyet, as for their libertie: which mayning of their mayntenance, and laming their libertie, makes their lyues so myserable, their profession so contemptible, and their manners so mutable, as not being able (as before) to play the good fellowes, they fall into some desperate humor, or some malecontent melancholyke, cursing the houre of their creation, the day of their natiuitie, the place of their education, and the tyme wherein they tooke vpon them this their profession, wyshing they had been brought vp otherwyse, though it had been to the greatest and most seruile bodyly laboure: For, Who is so wobegon, as first a man, and then none? And thus much for the ambitious minde of the Countreyman.
            Now for the disdaine of the right Seruingman, finding himselfe thus agreeued, and his disease incurable, without change of ayre, leaueth his place and profession, and retyreth him selfe into some solitarie desart, where I will leaue him to the mercie of his malecontent humors.

Now he being thus banished as an exile, steppes into his place some mate of lesse merite, which hauing no partes to commende him, nor gyftes to deserue gaynes, becommeth very officious and diligent, willing to droyle and drudge in any seruile sort, so as he may get meate to his belly, and clothes to his backe, without respect of the credite of his place, his present gayne, or his future preferment: and when an other of better partes commeth to supply that place, hauing a care of his credite, and respect to his preferment, his Maister will regarde him no more then the other, neither in wages nor rewarde: so that this kinde of seruice by this meanes, becomes a very seruile seruitude. What might further hereof be discoursed I will omit, since I must touch it more at large in the sequell of this treatise, and therefore thus much shall suffice concernyng this ambition and disdayne.
            Now foloweth the last part of this Tractate, wherein I will shew (God willing) into what vtter ruine, downefall, decay, and meere miserie, this state of Seruingmen is fallen, by the decay of Hospitalitie and Good-housekeeping. It were a trauell too tedious to shew a capite, ad calc
                     ••
                  m, all the causes that brought this bane and bayle to the Butterie and Bordes ende, which both being fallen into a consumption, a curelesse disease, there restes no Phisicke helpes to recouer their decaying members. Wherefore I will omit the originall, from whence their maladie proceedes, and onely speake of the hurt and hinderaunce that thereof ensueth to the trafiquers in this trade, and ministers of this misterie.
            Now trueth it is, in diebus illis, in former ages, that Potentates and Gentlemen of worth, spent their whole Rentes and Reuenues in Hospitalitie and good Housekeeping (Skot and Lot onely excepted) making euen at the yeeres ende, neuer trubling them selues with the art of Arithmetique, to adde or substract: they wayed no

wealth, but helde Coyne in vtter contempt, not vouchsafing to touch, handle, or dispose of it, that care they committed to the consideration of their Seruantes, strictly obseruing the cōmaund of wise Cato, Dilige denarium sed perce dilige formam. It was rare to see any of them sell, or purchase, or finde more Coyne in their Coffers then would defray necessary charges. O how meryly they lyued, and what pleasure they tooke to see the gunshot of good stomackes come batter the great Chines of their staulled Beefe. To compare the pleasures of their golden dayes, when Golde was so smally regarded, with the miserie of this latter, nay last age, were able in my iudgement, to wring teares out of the eyes of Adamant. There was no violating of Fayth, nor breach of promyse, no hatred nor mallice, no cunning nor Cunnie-catching, no swearing nor forswearing, no feare of fraude, nor mistrust of friendshyp, no symonie, no briberie, no flatterie, no villany, no deceyte in bargaynyng, no false witnesse bearyng, no cruell murderyng, no craftie conspyring, nor any fraudulent dealing. And why? Because Golde, the authour of all this vngodlynes, was not regarded. Why is promyse not performed? Mallice so manifest? Cunning and Cunny-catching so common? Swearing and forswearing so vsuall? Symonie, Briberie, Flatterie, and all villanie, so dayly practised? What is the ende of deceyte in bargayning? Why doth the wicked beare false witnesse? the murderer kill cruelly? the craftie conspiratour imagine his mischiefe? and the fraudulent dealer deceyue his neighboure? euen Siluer and Golde, Money is the marke whereat they all shoote, the Maister whom they all obey, the Mine wherein they all digge, and the Man to whom they all do reuerence. It is Money they minde, Golde they grope after, and Gayne they groane for: Money I say, Money is the cause of al this mischiefe and miserie.
            
               But it may be obiected, How can Money be the cause of all this mischiefe and miserie? It neither commaundeth nor forbiddeth, procureth nor disswadeth, flattereth nor frowneth, compelleth nor denyeth, furdereth nor hindereth, any man to commit any offence, villanie, or knauerie; it is a dead mettall, and no lyuing creature, that with fayre wordes, amiable countenance, or faythfull promyses, it might intice, allure, or perswade any man to do any thing contrary to his owne intended meaning or purpose. Trueth it is, the Mettall of it selfe cannot be deemed either good or hurtfull: for let it lie, it will neither stop your passage, nor hinder your iourney, it will not braue vpon you, nor vrge you to any inconuenience, take it and vse it with discretion, it will not be your foe, but your friende: But come to abuse it, it wyll beare no coales, it wyll not take any wrong at your handes, it is pure and fined Mettall, and cannot indure to be mixted with dregges and drosse of lesse esteeme: I say, it cannot indure to be vsed otherwyse then as it is, and to that ende it was ordeyned. It is not the Mettall of it selfe, as I sayd before, that is eyther good or hurtfull, but the vse or abuse of it worketh in it either of the foresayd effectes. For marke from the beginning, whom you haue seene to abuse it, I meane, to desire or procure it, contrary to law, equitie, and conscience (for that is the abuse of it) and it hath not quit him or his their meede, as the saying is, euen rewarded him according to his desartes.
            Did not Iudas that false traytor, euen for the couetous desire of Coyne, betray his owne maister our sauiour Christ into the handes of the Iewes? but what was his guerden and rewarde? How long did he possesse this bootie, by this his inhumane practise obteyned? Did he not immediately goe foorth, and cursing the houre of his creation, the time of his birth, the wombe that bore him, and the pappes that gaue him sucke, and so in this desperate

humor hanged himselfe? Infinite are the number of them against whom this definite sentence of death, or other danger hath been adiudged, onely for abusing these pure and refined earthly commaunders, Golde and Siluer.
            You haue now proued, may some say, that the wrong vse of worldly treasure breedeth many diseases in this humane societie: But what particuler hurt hereof ensueth to Hospitalitie, which is the matter you haue now in hand, you omit. Not so my very good friendes, but haue patience a while, and I will pay you the vttermost farthing.
            I haue tolde you before, in what small esteeme men of worth in former ages helde this worldlinges God, nay, they were so afrayde to discontent or abuse it, that they would neither make nor meddle with it, but by substitutes and deputies, wich the helpe of it procured to them selues all worldly necessaries, which was the totall of their desire. But the Deuill (in my iudgement) the authour, roote, and originall of all mischiefe and miserie, hath infused into this mettall some peece of Adamant, and into mans desire and affection some lumpe of Iron: which Adamant, according to his nature, drawing the Iron vnto it, linketh them selues togeather in vndesolueable bondes of earthly perpetuitie during this worldly pilgrimage: not much vnlyke the Castle of Adamant, feigned in the historie of Hughon of Burdeaux, which Castle hauing drawne the sayd Hughon vnto it, all hope of departure thence was quite extinguished, onely except he coulde escape and be thence delyuered by an extraordinarie and imminent danger: which was, to be caried ouer the Sea in the clawes of a Griffine, whose desire was to deuoure him, and that was one danger: and in great hazard in regarde of his wayght to fall from the sayd Griffine into the Ocean and so be drowned, and that was an other danger: which dangers, as they were great and perilous, so

I holde their perils no lesse dangerous, and as hard for them to be seperated and deliuered from this pernitious Adamant Castle, that hath linked and chamed themselues vnto it by their extraordinarie couetouse desire of this worldly Mammon. Now this affectionate desire of this hase Bulloigne, hauing linked and chayned the hartes of great ones vnto it, such as in former ages were wont to maynteine Hospitalitie, and Good-house-keeping in the highest degree, in such a selfe blinded bond of assurance, as they fall into consideration and warie waighing of all the surplussage to that charge belonging: so lessening, pinching, deminishyng, deuiding, and substracting of it, as they may almost be ashamed of the remayne, it is drawen into so narrow a roome: nay, yf they holde on (as God wot they haue done too long) their substractes I feare mee wilbe, Take nothing out of nothing, and there remaynes nothing. I aduise you goe not fasting to such a house, for there you may as soone breake your necke as your fast. O miserable and strange language, and not so strange as true: Where are the great Chines of staulled Beefe? the great blacke Iackes of doble Beere? the long Haull tables fully furnished with good victuals? and the multitude of good fellowes assembling to the houses of Potentates and men of worth? In a worde, they are all banyshed with the spirit of the Butterie, they are as rare in this age, as common in former tymes, These Potentates and Gentlemen, as I sayd before, haue begun in this maner to lessen their charge: fyrst, for their three yeeres staulled Beefe, it was too fatte, and triple charge, one yeere, nay lesse will serue to fatte a Bullocke, the meate much sweeter, and the charge much lesse, and so for other victualles of that kinde. Now for Beefe, Mutton, Ueale, Pigge, Goose, and Capon, which was the substaunce of their prouision in those dayes, wherewith their Tables were dayly furnished, so that

there was good cheere with plentie for them that sate, good reuertions for them that wayted, and great reliefe for the poore amongst those full platters. Now these bountifull and substantiall dyshes are changed into cates of lesse cost, though dyshes of rarer deuice. Now there must be Goose-giblets, Pigs-petitoes, and so many other boyled meates, forced meates, and made dyshes, as wyll supply the roome of the substantiall accustomed full platters, to furnysh the Table, though they be but as siphers in Augrime, to supply the number. Allow notwithstanding, that this kinde of seruice doth satisfie and content them that are serued, yet what shall answere the hungrie appetites of the attendantes that hath long fasted in hope of this reuertion? Euen the remayne of these cold boyled meates, and made dyshes, must satisfie their hungrie appetites, which may wel be called colde Commons: but after this latter dinner is ended, small are the broken meates that remayne to relieue the poore. Nay further concerning their fare, they (like good Phisitians) consider that change of choyce dyshes and seuerall meates at one time may breede a surfet, and all superstuitie bringeth excesse, and therefore they will draw their multitude of dyshes into a lesse number, and content them selues onely with two or three dyshes at the most, with Fruite and Cheese after, to supply, yf neede require. Now, yf they haue but two or three dyshes, What should they neede so many Attendantes? So wanting seruice wherein to imploy them, there they cut off an other charge: this affoordes them a doble benefite, it cuts off the charge of Men, and many Dyshes. But yet there remaynes one seruice, wherein they must imploy moe Men then the tables attendance requireth, that is, yf their Mistres ryde abrode, she must haue .vi. or .viii. Seruingmen to attende her, she must haue one to carrie her Cloake and Hood, least it raine, an other her Fanne, if she vse it not her selfe,

an other her Boxe with Ruffes and other necessaries, an other behinde whom her Mayde or Gentlewoman must ryde, and some must be loose to open Gates, and supply other seruices that may be occasioned. Now to deminish and cut of this charge, aswell of Horse as Men, there is now a new inuention, and that is, she must haue a Coach, wherein she, with her Gentlewomen, Mayde, and Chyldren, and what necessaries as they or any of them are to vse, may be caryed and conueyed with smaller charge, lesse cost, and more credite, as it is accompted: for one or two Men at the most, besides the Coach-man, are sufficient for a Gentlewoman or Lady of worthy parentage. Now at Boord and abrode, yf so few Seruantes may satisfie, and supply all the seruice that herein can be required, all the rest sure are su
                     ••
                  er
                     ••
                  acuum, and omne nimium vertitur in vitium, therefore, least by the mayntenance of this superfluous charge, the superabundant number of Seruingmen might grow vitious, and so blame worthy, these remedies before rehearsed were put in vre and vse, so that hereby the number of this Companie is much lessened and impayred.
            Now it should seeme (in my iudgement) that the lessenyng and diminishyng of this consort of companions, should better their estate and callyng: for the fewer that a Gentleman hath attending him, the better he may prefer them, being as able in worldly possessions as his auncestors, which maynteyned many moe: But it falles out contrarie, for their seruice was neuer so smally regarded and rewarded as now; and yet the number of them neuer so small.
            The Gentleman (I know) will thus answere for him selfe, that he is neither able to do so much for his men, nor to maynteine his port & hospitalitie in so bountifull manner as h
                  ••
               s auncestors in former ages: for his Father, or Graundfather, payde but .xx. s. an Oxe .iii. s. a Mutton,

ii. s. a Calfe .vi. d. a Goose .iiii. d. a Capon .ii. d. a Henne, and .ii. d. a Pigge, and for all other householde prouision the like rate. Now there is not any thing that belonges to housekeeping, but it is a triple charge ouer it was: and whereas one hundred poundes a yeere was a competent lyuing to maynteine good hospitalitie, now three hundred pound a yeere will not defray the charge of such a house, rateably proportionyng all necessaries thereunto belonging, without exceeding his accustomed plentie. Now his lyuing is not greater then was his ancestors, nor any Acre by tract of tyme enlarged: yf the charge therefore grow thus doble burdenous, by reason of the deerenes of all kinde of prouision to that house keeping belonging, and his mayntenance not any way augmented, How is it possible for him to maynteine himselfe in statu quo prius? Now Farmours speake for your selues, for I holde you sufficient (though not learned) to answere this question, and discide this doubt.
            Mee thinkes I see them striue, who should speake first: free libertie is graunted, therefore speake in order, and you shall all be heard.
            Mary then sayes one, Let me haue the tenne Acres at the olde rent, and I will finde you Beefes for your house at .xx. s. a peece. Sayes another, Let me haue such a Farme as it went an hundred yeeres since, and I will serue you Muttons at .ii. s. vi. d. the case. Well sayth the thirde, Let me haue your Demaynes in such a place, for the rent your Graundfather let them, and I will finde you all other household prouision, for ordinarie victualles, at the rate he payde: therefore, yf your Housekeeping be more chargeable then it was, by the deerenes of your dyet, then your Landes yeeldes you more profite then it did, by rearing the rent.
            Thus is the Landlordes excuse answered with quid pro quo. But what may the poore Seruant heere obiect,

and say for him selfe.
            In tymes past, I could haue bought Cloth for .ii. s. the brode yarde, an Hatt for .xii. d. a Shirt for .x. d. a payre of Bootes for .ii. s. and whatsoeuer other necessaries belonged me, at like rate: now I must pay three tymes dearer for any part of the sayd Apparrell, and yet my Wages not more then my great Graundfathers, supplying the same place and office I doe. But it may be obiected on the behalfe of Maisters, that my auncestor or predecessor coulde be content with corse Karsie, or Countreys Russet, for his Holyday garment, and you, with your fraternitie, in these latter dayes, cannot be content to shape your Coate according to your Cloth, and your expences according to your mayntenance: but you, or the most of your consort, must in maner exceede your Maisters in brauerie, and costly fashionate Apparrell. Turpe doctori cum culparedarguit ipsum, It is a shame for the Lawgiuer to breake and violate his owne institutions.
            
            Trust me, I holde this excessiue costly Apparrell, a great cause why Gentlemen cannot maynteyne their wonted and accustomed bountie and liberalitie in Hospitalitie & House-keeping: for when as the Mercers booke shall come, Item for so many yardes of Cloth of Golde, of Siluer, Ueluet, Sattin, Taffata, or such lyke ware: the Goldsmithes Debet, for Chaynes, Ringes, Iewels, Pearles, and precious Stones: the Taylors Bill, so much for such a Sute of laced Satten, and such lyke superfluous charges, amounting in one yeere to more then the reuenues of his Landes, the charge of House-keeping, and other necessaries vndefrayde, How can he then chose but eyther make others Gentlemen by possessing his Inheritaunce, or els betake him to London, or some other Sanctuarie, where he may lyue priuate so many yeeres, as he is runne ouershooes, that debtes thereby may be payde, and defectes supplyed. Which tyme thus

spent in this priuate lyfe, is so euyll bestowed, as he can not make any accompt thereof to God, his Prince, or his Countrey, to whom he with his lands, liuing, possession, and worldly patrimonie, is bound in seuerall dueties: for there is none but knoweth, that at their handes that hath much, much shalbe required.
            If a Gentleman haue a competent lyuing, that wyll maynteine good Hospitalitie (which is, as I sayd before, the harbourer of two hopes, Prayse and Prayers) and him selfe like a Gentleman, yf he will not exceede his degree, al other superfluous charge layde a part, wyl bestow vpon his owne or his wiues backe in brauerie of apparrel halfe a yeere of his house-keepinges charge, the other halfe yeere must of necessitie be maymed, pinched, and impayred, to the great hurt and hinderaunce of that duetie which he is bound to performe by neighbourhood to his Countrey, and by charitie to his poore brother.
            Concerning this costly and fashionate Apparrel, I remember a notable example of a King of England (as it is sayd) that calling, vpon occasion, certayne of his Noblemen, and Peeres of his Realme to the Court, whyther when they came, one amongst the rest came very homely apparreled, in a Ierken of Frieze, and a payre of bretches of Countreys Russet, and al his other apparrel correspondent; his trayne and attendantes were a hundred or sixe score proper and personable men, all well Horsed, and gallantly furnished at all poyntes: this Noble-man thus attended, came to the Court, and doing his duetie to his Prince and Soueraigne, the King sayd vnto him: My Lord, I cannot but commende your troupe and trayne so well furnished, and your selfe so worthyly attended: but your owne person to be apparrelled in so base and vnseemely a suite, I cannot but highly discommende, for that it befitteth not a man of your estate, degree, and calling, but alwayes to be apparrelled in costly, comely, decent,

and handsome habite. Well my Leige and Soueraigne, answered the Noble-man, What as is amisse, shalbe amended (God willing.) So going from the Court to his lodging, he sene presently his man to buy hym a rich Gowne of blacke Ueluet, the sleeues thereof all beset with Aglets of Golde, a Ueluet Cappe, with a Fether and a golde Bande, very richly bordered about with Pearles and precious Stones of great value, a suite of Cloth-of-golde of the newest and richest fashion, his Gyrdle and Hangers richly imbrodred and beset with costly Pearle, with all other his apparrell no lesse stately and costly. Thus richly furnished, attended with onely one Man and a Page, he makes his repayre the next morning to the Court agayne, where when he had done his duetie to the King: Yea mary my Lord, sayd the King, you are now like your selfe, and as you should be: but where is your goodly trayne of Men and Horse, wherewith you were yesterday so gallantly garded? If it may like your Grace, answered the good Earle, throwing downe his Cappe, Heere is twentie Men and twentie Horse: and throwing off his Gowne, sayes, Heere lyes fourtie Men and fourtie Horse more, with other the rest of his sumptuous Rayment at the lyke rate, saying, that all his Men and Horses, were turned into gorgious Garments. Now sayth he, yf it like your Maiestie that I shoulde maynteine my selfe in these Royall Roabes to do your Grace seruice, onely garded with my Man and my Page, or that I should maynteine my troupe of Horse and Men, to do your Maistie seruice at home, or abrode against your Graces forraine foes, or domesticall Rebels (yf any such shalbe) in my homely habite: Whether of these, as it shall please your Grace to commaunde me, I am redie to obey: but my liuing is not able to perfourme them both. Now what answere he receyued from the King I know not, but if both could not be perfourmed, then I perswade

my selfe that none is so simple, but will preferre the Men and Horse, before the gorgious Garmentes, both for the honour of the King, the credite of the Maister, the sauegarde of the Countrey, the common good for the weale publique, and in all other respectes whatsoeuer: But Totnam is turned French, these Men and Horse are metamorphosed into Golden Garmentes, which makes Seruingmen, yea and Men, so litle set by, and so smally regarded: wherfore they may wel both say & sing,

                  
                     In vaine my eyes, in vaine you wast your trickling teares,
                     In vaine my sighes, my sighes, and sobbes of my despayres:
                     In vaine you search these troupes of gallent men and horse,
                     In vaine you search, for paynted plumes hath banishd al remorse.
                  
                  
                     The stately Towers decay, the Courts therof grow greene,
                     No passage into Pallace fayre, where great resort hath beene:
                     The Hauls are now too large, the Tables are too long,
                     The clouted shooes comes in so fast, they keepe too great a throng.
                  
                  
                     The Chargers now be changed, wherein men wont to eate,
                     An olde Fruite dish, is big enough to hold a ioynt of meate:
                     A Sallad, or a Sauce, to taste your eates withall,
                     Some strange deuice to feede mens eyes, mens stomackes now be small.
                  
                  
                     And where the Porters lodge, did yeelde beefe, bread and beere,
                     The Kitchen, Haul, & Parlor to, now wantes it twice a yeere:
                     Now Seruingmen may sing, adue you golden dayes,
                     Meere miserie hath taken place, where plentie purchast prayse.
                  
               
            
            Thus you haue heard, that the number of this profession, by this decay of Hospitalitie, is greatly lessened and diminished, and so consequently the state of the remaine impayred: for what trade or occupation is best, there are commonly of the same most professors. But I will speake

a worde or two of the perticuler inconueniences that hath happened to this, at the first happie, but by tract of time, thrise vnfortunate fraternitie: hereby I meane by the decay of good House-keeping.
            First, whereas their pleasures were equall with their Maisters, and their Maisters tooke pleasure commonly in honest sportes: now these their Maisters sportes and pastimes, are either turned into couetousnesse, groping after worldly graith, or els into riotous spending their Patrimonie in gay Cloathes, lasciuious lewdnes, extraordinarie gaming, or such like; the godly meane, which is the heauenly harmonie, is now banished these (I may say) inhumane coastes, and cannot be harboured in any of our Hauens. Now the Seruingmans pleasure, is turned into seruile toyle, and droyling drudgerie, for since he hath no fellowes but that are dayly and hourely imployed: and how? not in pleasure, as before, in haulking, hunting, fyshing, and fowling, but in other businesse, he himselfe alwayes riding and running about worldly busines, or otherwise, as it shall please his Maister to appoynt: but I cannot, nor will not maynteine argument against this, for, Otium est radix omnium malorum, Idlenesse is the roote of all mischiefe. And if Seruingmen should do no other seruice but as they were wont, and tie them selues to their ancient custome, then they should be altogeather idle, because former imployment is taken away. But it may be obiected, You tolde vs what maruels Seruingmen merited at their Maisters handes in former ages: and why are not their desartes so well gratified in these latter dayes, as before? Marie for many respectes, yet principally for two. First, they are for the most part, though not all, of a baser mettall then they were wont to be, and therefore the kinde vsage, and friendly familiaritie that in former ages did linke the Maister and the Seruant togeather, is now on the Maisters behalfe had

in vtter contempt and disdaine, in regard of their homely, rusticke, and vngentlemanlike bringing vp: which they regarde as it is, and rewarde onely with bare wages. Couenauntes they keepe and perfourme, as Artificers do with their Apprentises, & Workemen with their Labourers; but preferment ouer and aboue they get none: And why? Because their singularitie in any of their seruices, is no such as can merite or deserue any thing aboue promise. Neither doth Maisters now adayes take any such pleasure in the qualities of their Men, as he can affoorde them a Farme for their feates, or a yeerely Annuitie for their skill in any of the seuen liberall Sciences. Beleeue me, I speake as I thinke, If the wisedome of Salomon, the strength of Sampson, the beawtie of Absolon, the prowes of Hercules, the eloquence of Cicero, the profound learning of wise Plato, and all the excellentest partes that can be named, were all comprehended in one man, and the same man would shroude him selfe in the habite of a Seruingman, and professe the same by taking foure Markes a yeere wages and a Liuerie, I verily beleeue his preferment should be rather a Remuneration, then a Guerdon, if he get any in this Leaden and last age. But what is the difference betwixt the Remuneration and the Guerdon, may some say, we would faine know? otherwise we can not tell how you meane this well qualited Seruingmans desartes should be rewarded. Your question is reasonable, and therefore I will distinguish them as their difference was tolde me, not long since by a friende of mine.
            There was, sayth he, a man (but of what estate, degree, or calling, I will not name, least thereby I might incurre displeasure of any) that comming to his friendes house, who was a Gentleman of good reckoning, and being there kindly entertayned, and well vsed, as well of his friende the Gentleman, as of his Seruantes: one of the sayd Seruantes doing him some extraordinarie pleasure during

his abode there; at his departure he comes vnto the sayd Seruant, and saith vnto him, Holde thee, heere is a remuneration for thy paynes, which the Seruant receyuing, gaue him vtterly for it (besides his paynes) thankes, for it was but a Three-farthinges peere: and I holde thankes for the same a small price, howsoeuer the market goes. Now an other comming to the sayd Gentlemans house, it was the foresayd Seruants good hap to be neare him at his going away, who calling the Seruant vnto him, sayd, Holde thee, heere is a Guerdon for thy defartes: Now the Seruant payde no d
                  ••
               ere
                  ••
                for the Guerdon then he did for the Remuneration, though the Guerdon was xi. d. farthing better, for it was a Shilling, and the other but a Three-farthinges. Therefore, I say as I sayd before, the man of best qualitie in these dayes, if he be a Seruingman by profession, shalbe as slenderly rewarded for his seruice, as the mome of no merite, that hath no partes at all in him worthy commendation.
            Now for the other reason, why Seruingmens desartes are not rewarded in these dayes, as they were wont in former ages: It is, because Gentlemen nowadayes haue more vse of their Land & Liuing, their Kine and Coyne, their Rentes and Reuenues, their Siluer and Golde, and all other their worldly Treasure, then they were wont to haue: for in times before they had so much (many of them) as they bestowed Landes, Liuinges, Rentes, and Reuenues, vaynely and ceremoniously vpon Friers, Monkes, Abbots, Cannons, and pelting popysh Priestes: And to what ende? Euen that they, and their 
                  ••
               rue, might pray that their soules might passe Purgatorie with lesse pennance then they would willingly endure. But now they finde other vse for it, then either to bestow it vpon such momysh Massmongers, or any of it vpon them that better deserue it, their owne Men.
            What say they, yf a Seruingman for long and duetifull

seruice, request the Lease of a Farme at the olde rent, or some other preferment? Was my Liuing left me to bestow vpon my Men? or, to deuide amongst my Children? Why do I giue you wages, but in regarde of your seruice? If you like not me nor my wages, you may prouide for your selfe when you will, I will not be your hinderaunce; not waighing and considering, that that his wages is not able to finde his Man necessaries from the middle downe: but I dare not speake what I thinke, neither what might be spoken, concerning wages in these dayes. But why is the Gentleman so peremptorie and resolute at his Mans reasonable request? Mary, because he knoweth where to haue a Man fitter for his purpose, that will stande him in lesse charge; and therefore Seruingmen are not rewarded as they were wont, because Gentlemen nowadayes cannot spare any preferment to bestow vpon them. But what is this fellow that is fitter for his purpose? and will stande him in lesse charge, expecting no preferment at all at his handes, no not so much commonly as Wages? It is (as I sayd before) his neighbours Sonne, who will not onely maynteine him selfe with all necessaries, but also his father will gratifie his Maisters kindnes at Christmas with a New-yeeres gyft, and at other Festiuall times with Pigge, Goose, Capon, or other such like householde prouision. And why will the good olde Yeoman be at all this charge, since his sonne woulde otherwise earne him much more profite, and do him much more pleasure? Why? Marie, because his Sonne shalbe sure to keepe the Catte from the Tonges at home, when other his neighbours children shall trudge into Fraunce, Flaunders, and other Nations, to do their Prince and Countrey seruice. But if it woulde please God of his goodnesse, to sende vs peace and quietnesse, that our gracious Soueraigne (whom God preserue long amongst vs, to his blessed will and pleasure) should haue no vse of warlike

prouision at home nor abrode, and consequently the Yeoman no vse of this the Gentlemans goodwill and pleasure, you should see these new vpstart Seruingmen flocke to their olde haunt, as the Emmets in the beginning of Sommer do congregate them selues togeather, to labour while Sommer lastes, for feare of Winters penury.
            Now if this Man, I say (as I sayd before) my neighbours sonne, can at one and twentie, or two and twentie yeeres supply the place of a Seruingman, and discharge that duetie as well as he that hath been trayned vp in seruice from his childhood, and will take vpon him that trade, without expecting either present gayne, or future preferment for his seruice at his Maisters handes: what neede then the Gentleman giue wages and preferment to a Seruingman, yf he may haue these of so free cost? But I say it is pittie that God hath lent that man his fiue Senses, and all other his bodyly members that belonges to the sufficient furnishyng of a whole man, that bestowes his talent so euil, & so slouthfully labours in his vocation, as he cannot with all his indeuours get meate to his belly, nor clothes to his backe, as these do that bestowes euen the best time of all their yeeres in the seruice of Gentlemen. But this decay of Hospitalitie, hath bred a far greater mischiefe amongst Seruingmen then this: For now euery Gentleman almost, hath gotten such a rabble of Retayners, as makes poore House-holde seruantes so smally set by as they are. For what cares a Gentleman now adayes, to knaue & rascall his Man at euery worde? And yf his Man (as flesh and blood many tymes cannot indure to be 
                  〈◊〉
                inhumanely intreated) shal scorne these vngentlemanlike tearmes, and thinke much for so small a cause, as many times they are, to be so hardly vsed: then off goes the Lyuerie-Coate, or Cloake, and packe out of my doores you arrant knaue, I wyll haue your betters to beare more then this at my handes. Thus is the poore

Seruingman turned out of his Lyuerie, & out of doores, hauing but a bare quarters warning, but not that quarter that is allowed them by the Statute made for Seruants, in Quinto of her Maisties reigne, which is a quarter of a yeere, but scarce a quarter of an houre, to packe vp such apparrell as he hath.
            But what is the cause that the Gentleman cares so lytle for his Man, though he be neuer so paynefull, honest, diligent, and duetifull a Seruant? What? marie this, because he can haue, yf he sende for such a Retayner, to ryde with him, or runne for him, or do any seruice he hath to commaunde him, till such time as he shalbe prouided of another. But poore Seruingman, what shall he doe? yf he be farre from his friendes, and haue small acquaintance there where he dwelt? Poore soule, I holde him to be in much worse case then the impotent Begger, that procureth the Towne-seale, with certayne of his neighbours handes, where he hath been three yeeres last resident, to begge within the limits of such hundredes, by vertue of the Statute made in Vicessimo secundo of our late dread Soueraigne, that worthy Prince of famous memorie, King Henrie the eight, for the reliefe of the poore: for the one hath free libertie to passe from Towne to Towne, without let, molestation, or hinderance, vsing himselfe honestly: and the other shalbe accompted as a Roge, and sent to Gaole, being Maisterlesse, for wandring abroade without a Lycence.
            Now the miserable needinesse of House-keeping was the first founder, begetter, and rayser of this Retayner. For yf a Gentleman nowadayes, coulde be content to giue Meate, Drinke, Wages, and Lyuerie, as his forefather did, to so many men as he had any imployment for, What neede he then haue any Retayners? And yf the Gentleman will pleade inhabilitie, that he is not able by his Lyuing to maynteine so many in householde as his

father did, though his degree and calling require no lesse countenance: then let him be content to cary so much a lower sayle, and grinde as his winde will giue him leaue, cary that port, credite, and countenance in his Countrey, as his lyuing will afforde him maynteinance. I will not say what I could say concerning these Retayners, since the worthy Lawes and Statutes of this Realme hath prepared, constituted, and ordeyned, pecuniarie punishmentes for the offenders herein, yf they might be duely put in execution: But, Quod supra nos, nihil ad nos, What hath Ioan to do with my Lady, or I with execution of Lawes or Statutes, that is neither Constable nor Borshoulder of Towne nor Hundred? But I wysh well to all, and would not willingly incurre displeasure of any, and craue pardon yf in any thing I haue past my boundes, or been too bolde. But to returne agayne to my poore maisterlesse, and Lyuerylesse, nay Lyuerlesse and Hartlesse brother in Christ, What shall he do being thus Maisterlesse, moneylesse, & friendlesse, hauing lost his Maister and maynteynance both at one instance? What, shall he beg? no, he wantes his Testimoniall. Liberalitie is dead, as I tolde you before, and no body will giue him any thing, because he is able to worke. What then, shall he worke? Alas, he can not earne salt to his pottage, for he hath not been trayned to any bodyly laboure: and yf he would or coulde, yet no body will set him a worke, because they know him not: and yf they knew him, yet they will not, for they haue Townesmen labourers enough, to do what worke they haue. What shall he then do? Shall he make his appearance at Gaddes hill, Shooters hiil, Salisburie playne, or Newmarket heath, to sit in Commission, and examine passengers? Not so, for then, yf he mistake but a worde, Stande, for Goodmorow, he shall straight, whereas he did attende, be attended with moe men then his Maister kept, and preferred to a better house then euer

his father buylded for him, though not so holsome. What restes then, shall he starue? No, no, Ferrum frangit necessitas, Hunger breakes stone walles, necessitie hath no Law: and yet necessitie vrgeth him to do some of these, to worke or steale: to worke if he coulde haue it, I holde well withall: but to steale, or starue, are two hard choyses. And woe, woe, and thrise woe be to him that is dryuen to eyther of them, as God wot many of these poore Seruingmen be in this Leaden and last age.
            O who would be a Seruingman, to hazarde to fall into this detestable daunger, and be dryuen into these extremities? euen into all the penurie, beggarie, scarcitie, and meere miserie, that may befall any humane creature: nay when they are in their greatest prosperitie, and had in highest esteeme, yet they are euen then the most contemned and despised companie that lyues in this humane societie. For what doth a Gentleman now adayes care more for his Man, then to serue his present turne? No, no more for him then he doth for his Dogge or his Horse, who while they can do him seruice, he is content to allow them meate, and other necessaries: But when the Horse falles blynde or lame, knocke him in the head: when the Dogge growes so olde as he can do nothing but lie by the fyre, cut his throate, what is he good for, but to spende victualles: and the Seruingman, when the Sommer of his yeeres are spent, and that crooked olde age hath summoned him to make her many low curtesies, with bended knees, so as he is not able now by his seruice to earne Otemeale for his Pottage, then off goes his shooes, and he is turned to the Common, inpasture is too good for him, for who would keepe one to do nothing, and bread so deare? Thus much doth his Maister regarde him when he is able to do him no more seruice.
            Agayne, yf this honest minded Seruingman doth enter into consideration of his estate, and woulde willingly

by some honest meanes prouide that he myght liue in time to come like a man, and so 
                  ••
               endes a louing looke to some Yeoman or Countreymans daughter, whose Father he thinkes will bestow vpon her some reasonable portion, that with good husbandry may maynteine them both neighbour-like: then vpon some good lyking of both the parties, he comes to the Father & Mother of the Mayde, to craue their good willes in the matter. What then? sayes the Father, shall I bestow my Daughter vpon a Gentleman, forsooth, that wantes lyuing, and cannot worke? On a Seruingman, on a begger? Noe, I am not yet so weerie of my Daughter, as I would see her stande neede of an almes: no no, I pray you prouide for your selfe otherwyse, for my Daughter is not, nor shall not be a pray for your pawes. Then it comes to the eares of my neighbours kinsmen & friendes, that my neighbour Ienkingsons daughter shall haue M. what call you-hims man: then they beginne to gabble amongst them selues. What, shall Ioan haue a Seruingman? is her father so madd as he wyll marrie her to a Seruingman? What to a Seruingman sayes one? To a Seruingman sayes another? he neyther hath any thyng, nor can earne any thyng. How wyll they lyue, sayes one? How wyll they lyue sayes another? Marie merily, tyll his wyues portion be spent, and then wyll he be gone, and play least in sight. Mee thinkes he myght remember the olde saying: A Bakers wyfe may byte of a Bunne, a Brewers wyfe may drinke of a Tunne, and a Fyshmongers wyfe may feede of a Cunger, but a Seruingmans wyfe may starue for hunger.
            Thus vncharitably do they all iudge of the poore Seruingman. What estate, degree, or callyng, can then be more miserable, then the profession of a Seruingman? Heere to day, and gone to morow. In good credite with his Maister at noone, and Iacke out of office before night.

It was not for nothyng that a good fellow, and friende of myne, a Seruingman, tolde mee he neuer made his Bedde before he went to it; for, sayth he, I know not in the mornyng, whether I shall lie in it at nyght or no, and therefore I wyll be sure my Maister shall not owe mee a bedde making.
            And thus you see, gentle Reader, the estate, degree, callyng, and profession, of euery poore Seruingman, in these latter dayes, to be more waueryng and vnconstant, then Winters weather, Womens thoughtes, or Fortunes wheele, that neuer restes rowlyng and turnyng about, in all thynges mutable, but mutabilitie.
            Thus courtuous Reader, I haue set downe, accordyng to my small iudgement herein, to what ende this fraternitie of Seruingmen was at the fyrst ordeyned, and of what mettall they were made. I haue also declared how floryshyng was the prime of their profession, and what estate, credite, and countenaunce, they lyued in, in former ages, euen tyll Vltima linea vitae. And thirdly and lastly, into what penurie, scarcitie, beggery, meere myserie, and vtter ruine, subuertion, and contempt, this auncient buyldyng is fallen into, in this leaden, latter, and last age. Whose fall, I earnestly lament and bewayle, wyllyng (yf any way I coulde) to procure a salue for this incurable disease: But, since I cannot, I wyll pray euen Ab intimo corde, from the bottom of my hart, that this companie of Seruingmen, may eyther be better rewarded for their seruice, and better esteemed of amongst their superiours, equals, and inferiours; or els, that none of my friendes, or welwillers, doe take vpon them this trade and profession: (though for my owne part I cannot speake any thyng of this, by my owne experience, as hauyng tasted my

selfe the gaule of this bitter-sweete: for euer since I was a Seruingman, I haue receyued the full measure of my desartes at my Maisters handes) least they should fall into the before rehearsed inconueniences, which are very incident generally to the professors of this callyng.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   