
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A brefe confutacion of this moſt deteſtable, & Anabaptiſtical opinion, that Chriſt dyd not take hys fleſh of the bleſſed Vyrgyn Mary nor any corporal ſubſtaunce of her body. For the main tenaunce whereof Ihone Bucher otherwiſe called Ihone of Kēt moſt obſtinately ſuffered and was burned in Smythfyelde, the .ii. day of May.
            ☞ Anno domini▪ M. D. L.
            ☞ Cum privilegio ad Imprimendum ſolum.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  SO ſubtile is ſathan, our Enemy Immortal,
               When hé is tranſformed into an angell of light
               He captiuates oure ſences, ſo fond and phantaſtical
               That we doubt not to deme the day to be nighte.Hiſtori. Eccleſi. Lib. iiii. ca. xiiii
               
               By Suche lieng ſpirites ſeduced is the ſight.
               And with pernicious opinions amaſed in a miſte
               Ace al they that beleue not, the incarnation of Chriſt.
            
            
               ¶ In the primatiue churche, within fortie yeres,
               After Chriſtes aſencion, this darnell begonne,
               To ſpringe vp by Marcion, his complices and feers
               Whom Policarpus called, the deuyls eldeſt ſonne.
               The Anabaptiſtes hold herein, an erronius opinion
               So did the wayward Virago, that wold not repent
               The deuils Eldeſt doughter, which lately was brent.
            
            
               ¶ Beware of ſuch errours, and reuerentlye reade
               Gods worde with humilitie, and modeſtie▪ of mynd,
               Geue faith to the ſame, and ſticke to thy Crede
               For the deuyll nowe beſtirs him, and doth but hys kind
               To hinder the Goſpell, many meanes doth he finde.
               He rages and raunges, the wyld worlde ouer
               He makes many loſe with ſhorte, and ſome with ouer.
            
            
               ¶ This the ſcripture is wreſted, and all to be Rackte
               Of Such as with ſpirites of errour are ledde
               Thaſſiſtance of God, and his meke ſpirite is lacte
               To teach them the true ſence, whan his word is redde
               It ſerues not to mayntayne fonde toyes in their heade.iii. 
                        〈…〉
                      xix.
               
               And wher the proude ſpirite is halt, and voyde of goddes feare.
               
                  Non ibidem dominus. The Lorde is not There.
            
            
               ☞ God promiſed to Eue, that the ſead of a womanneGen. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
               
               
                  Shulde treade downe the head of the ſubtill ſerpente,
               This Promiſe was fully accomplyſhed than
               When Chriſt became man and made the attonemente.
               This ſeade was of his mother▪ and not from heauen ſente
                     
                        •
                     at
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     .
               
               How can it be called the ſede of a woman truly
               Which taketh no ſubſtaunce, nor parte of her bodye?
            
            
               To Abraham and Iacob, the ſame ſead was promyſed
               The boke of Geneſys, is playne and manifeſt:
               In thy ſede, ſhall all the people of the worlde be bleſſed
               Not brought from aboue, but borne to performe the beheſt
               Was Chriſt of his mother, and not from heauen ſent
               To this ſence and meanyng thy wittes thou enclyne,
               And marke well what is meant by thys pronoune thyne
               
            
            
               How could it be their ſead, whiche take not their ſubſtaunce
               But came downe from heauen, and was not of their kind?
               The ſcripture. Conteineth no ſuch repugnaunce
               Who ſhalbe able by the ſame, to proue or to finde
               To warrant Chriſtes humanyty, or beleue it in his mynd?
               If ye make it vncertayne, of whom he did take it
               It appereth by thys opinion the deuyll is awaked.
            
            
               ☞ God promiſed to rayſe vp the ſame ſede to Dauyd
               Of the frute of his belly to ſit on his ſeat.
               In the ſecond of Samuell and the ſeuenth ye may haue it
               God is full Iuſt and did not forgette
               To conquere the dyuel and his deuiſe to difeate,
               To vanquiſh his iudgement and putt awaye ſynne,
               Chriſt was this ſede borne of his mother the virgyn.
            
            
               Eſaye the prophete confirmed the ſame
               
                  A virgyn ſhall conceiue and brynge forth a chylde,
               With this the Goſpell of Mathewe doth frame
               The fruite did growe in the wombe vndefilde
               And the mother waxt greate, nature was begild
               This came not by fortune or caſuall chaunce
               That Chriſte toke of his mother his corporall ſubſtance.
            
            
               ☞ From the rote of Ieſſe procede ſhall a bud,
               And a flower of this rote, for ſo the prophet ſaies.
               This bud was Marye, of whoſe fleſhe and bloud,
               Came Chriſte the flowre, my fayth ſhalbe alwayes
               The fruite of her wombe whyche neuer decayes,
               And not as water which runnes to a Condit,
               And paſſes thorowe a pipe, as the Diuell nowe hath found it.
            
            
               ¶ To conceyue and beare a chylde what other thinge is mente,
               Than the mother to her child to geue and participate,
               As the tree to the fruit? for euen ſo dyd this parent,
               Of her body with thys chylde communicate.
               Nouriſhed him in her wombe where he was incorporate.
               And not as tayne comes from heauen as Martian ſpoke.
               Whyche is as true as an oringe ſpringes of an oke.
            
            
               Mathewe diſcribing the Lineall deſſente
               In his genealogye, thus he writtes of Marye
               Of whome is borne Chriſt, learne what he meant
               By this terme of, for he doth not ſaye by
               Whom, or through whom: the holy ghoſt cannot lye.
               Beleue than gods worde though the deuel be neuerſo loth
               And let thy wyl and thy wyt gaue place to the troth
            
            
               ☞ As touchyng the fleſh Chriſt was borne of Dauids ſede,
               And whan the tyme was perfourmed, God than did ſend
               
                  His ſonne borne of a woman, let this be the Crede,
               And forget not the Aue, with what wordes it doth ende
               Bleſſed is the fruyte of thy wombe, pray to god he may defende
               The, from this errour, and ſo from al other,
               That thou may beleue, Chriſte toke fleſhe of hys mother.
            
            
               ☞ But if froward fondnes, haue ſo wedded the to thy wyl,
               Both piuyſhe and peruerſe, that theſe will not perſwade
               The fourth of the Galathians I wyl write in my bille
               The place is pithy, to tourne the from that trade.
               But when the ful tyme was come, God ſent his ſonne made
               Of a woman, the greke hath it made, written by Poulle,
               And not bourne: beleue this ſcripture, and dampne not thy ſoule.
            
            
               ☞ Tyme wil not ſerue to vtter the ſtore
               Of ſundry textes, which ſcripture contaynes
               Agaynſt this opinion, and moſt dyueliſh erroure,
               Lately maintayned by a ſort of Idle braines.
               And all to ſeme ſinguler but marke well their gaynes
               They are ſo ſturdy and ſtoute, they wyll be take for no ſtarters
               Thei had rather goo to the Dyuel, like ſtinking marters.
            
            
               ☞ Scripture diſdaynes not, to cal Chriſt the ſonne
                     
                        ••
                     he. i 
                        〈…〉
                     . ii.
               
               Of Marye his mother, in Luke and in Mathewe,
               But their hartes are ſo hardened they will not be wonne
               They make a tuſh at a text, be it neuer ſo true.
               They wyl beleue Paule no more, than a turcke or a Iewe,
               To aledge them ſcriptures, it greately ſkylleth not
               Ther is none ſo blind as they that can ſe, and will not.
            
            
               ☞ Thys doubte were diſcuſſed if they vnderſtode
               And wold rede and beleue, the ſecond to the Ebrues,
               Foraſmuch as the chyldren were pertakers of fleſh and bloude,
               
                  He alſo him ſelfe likewiſe did not Refuſe
               But toke part with them, wherby he ſubduſe
               Through death the deuyll, our mortall aduerſary
               Where had Chriſte his fleſhe, but of his mother Mary?
            
            
               ☞ Chriſt toke the ſede of Abrahā, he toke it not of Aungelles
               So that be became like to his brethren in al thinges
               Synne only excepte, thus playnly Paule telles,
               Where came he by thys fleſh, which amongſt vs he brings?
               Had he fethers as well as fleſh, and came downe with winges?
               Chriſt came to be a mediatoure, it was requiſite that he
               Shuld be partaker of the godhede, and of our humanitye.
            
            
               Chriſte preached the worde, and ſowed forth good ſedes,
               The Apoſtles trauayled, and toke greate paynes,
               But Belſebub beſturred him, and vp came the wedes
               Whiche ſhortly ſprong vp in fantaſticall braynes.
               Suche Deuiliſhe deceyuers the Deuyll intertaynes.
               Many entred in Iohns tyme whyche woulde not confeſſe:
               That oure Sauioure Ieſus Chriſte was come in the fleſhe.
            
            
               ☞ It ſemed moſt mete to gods hyghe prouidence
               And alſo moſt neceſſarye for our redemcion,
               That wher the fyrſt mā in our nature cōmitted diſobedience.
               The ſecond Man Chriſte ſhoulde make ſatiſfaccion.
               Repayre and recompence in the ſame nature and parſon
               And paye the payne of ſynne this was not omitted
               In the fleſhe of man wherein it was committed.
            
            
               ☞ Howe ſtandeth to the Corinthyans Paules dyſputacion
               If Chriſt had not his nature common wyth vs?
               In whom now ryſen Paule proueth an vniuerſal reſurreccion
               It were eaſy to reply agaynſt the ſame thus:
               
                  If it myght: be alledged (as it cannot) that Ieſus
               Broughte downe from heauen an heauenly body
               In to the wombe of the Vyrgyn Mary.
            
            
               ☞ What maruell is it, if an heauenly ſubſtaunce,
               Be vtterly voyde and exempte from corrupcion
               It cannot well folowe ther muſt be variaunce,
               That our bodies ſubiecte to putrefaccion,
               Shoulde ryſe vp agayne wythout corrpucion
               That we doute not hereof let vs beleue ſure
               That Chriſte toke parte wyth vs in our nature.
            
            
               ☞ Eſay the Prophet ſayd he was made Emanuell,
               The worde ſoundes and ſignifieth God is wyth vs,
               Howe it ſhould be other wyſe, I cannot tell.
               But I am aſſured that Dauyd in the parſon of Ieſus
                     
                        ••
                     alme
               
               Reade the .xxii. Pſal. where he this doute doeth dyſcus
               Thou toke me from my mothers wombe to performe the beheſtes
               Thou waſt my hope when I hnaged vpon my mothers breaſtes.
            
            
               ☞ Let vs praye vnto god longe to mayntayne and defende
               The ſtate of this realme and goddes true religion,
               Let vs alſo geue thankes to god whiche hath ſende
               Vs a kynge to al princes a preſident and patron,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
               
               A counſell moſt catholike for a chriſtian congregacion.
               To ſurceaſſe al ſedicion to punyſhe falſe teachers
               And to ſtabliſhe true doctrine god ſende vs good preachers.
            
            ☞By me Edmon Becke.
         
      
      
         
            (?) Imprinted at London by Iohn day dwellynge ouer Alderſgate, and Wylliam Setes dwellynge in Peter Colledge.
            
         
      
   