
      
         
            
            
               
AN ANSWER TO THE VNTRVTHES, PVBLISHED AND PRINTED IN SPAINE, IN GLORIE OF THEIR SVPPOSED VICTORIE atchieued againſt our Engliſh NAVIE, and the Right Honorable CHARLES Lord HOWARD, Lord high Admiral of England, &c. Sir FRANCIS DRAKE, and the reſt of the Nobles and Gentlemen, Captaines, and Soldiers of our ſaid Navie. First written and publiſhed in Spaniſh By a Spaniſh
            
            Gentleman; who came hither out of the Lowe Countries from the ſervice of the prince of PARMA, with his wife and familie, ſince the overthrowe of the Spaniſh Armada, forſaking both his countrie and Romiſh religion; as by this Treatiſe (againſt the barbarous impietie of the Spaniards; and dedicated to the Queenes most excellent Majestie) may appeere.
            
            Faithfully tranſlated by I. L.
            
            LONDON, Printed by Iohn Iackſon, for Thomas Cadman. 1589.
         
         
            
            England to hir Queene, S. D.
            
            
               Eternall yeeres, thee proſper and vphold,
               (My ſoueraigne Queene) the MIGHTIE HAND,
               
               And grant thee morne and euening to behold,
               Health, content, joy, on thee, and me thy land.
               Treaſure heaped up, of ſiluer and of gold,
               Both day and night, within thy preſence ſtand.
               And for reward befall upon thy foe,
               puniſhment and paine, with euer during wo.
            
         
         
            England to hir Admirall.
            
               The Lion white, his lookes against the skie,
               His viſage grim, his dredfull frowning browe,
               Doth well bewraie, my Howard, to the eie.
               Triumphing ſtands, who rules my Navie now:
               And long maist thou it rule: far of, thy day to die:
               That frighted foes, may never dare againe
               To ſaile my ſeas, nor once approch my Maine.
               
                  I. LEA.
               
            
         
         
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, CHARLES, LORD HOWARD, BARON OF Effingham, Knight of the moſt Noble order of the Garter, Lord high Admirall of England, and one of hir Majeſties moſt Honorable privie counſell, I. L. wiſheth long life in perfect health, with great increaſe of honor.
            
               WHen Caeſar ſwaid the dictatorſhip of Rome, thoſe (right Honorable) that wrote the Romain conqueſts, offred their papers under his patronage as coveting a martiall Mecoenas, for works treating of high performed chivalrie: Entring into the ſight of the Romain methode, chauncing upon a Spaniſh Pamphlet, dedicated to the Queenes moſt excellent Majeſtie, containing an anſwer againſt certaine untruths publiſhed and printed in Spaine: when I noted that vertue coulde not but be praiſed, even by a late enimie, (though now reconciled) a ſtranger, naie a Spaniard, forceced by truth it ſelfe, to defend the woorthines of our Engliſh Nobilitie, againſt his owne countriemen: I could not (right Honorable) but (for the benefite and farther incouragement of my country) publiſh his works in Engliſh, and preſume to preſent it to your good Lordſhip; who, being (moſt woorthilie) high Admirall of England, and cheefe agent, in ſo honorable a ſervice, did blazon to the Spaniards the matchleſſe reſolution, of your knightly proweſſe. And although Sir Francis Drake be moſt touched in their invectives, as an enimie cheefely noted for his private prejudice, offered them in Spaine, and in the Indies (and as they thought) the cheefe governor alſo in this honorable action; Yet now feeling and knowing the valor of your honors woorthines; time ſhal make your name as fearefull to the Spaniards, as was that of high minded Scipio againſt the Numidians. And ſomewhat (by compariſon) to note (right

Honorable) the ſlacknes of Engliſhmen, in yeelding high deſervers, (in ſo honorable and profitable a ſervice) their due: I ſaie, that if the Duke of Medina, (being in the ſame place for Spaine, as your Honor for England) had gotten (as God forbid) the like glorious conqueſt againſt our Engliſh Navie, as your Honor woone againſt the Spaniſh Armada; the chronicles of Spaine had bin ſtuffed with his praiſes, the cleargie had ſoong him in, with Te Deum, thorow the ſtreets of Toledo, made him triumphs in his towne of S. Lucar, and in fine Deified him, and regiſtred him amidſt their catologue of Saints. If then (right Honorable) the Spaniards ſetting out ſuch hyperbolicall trophees of their cōqueſts, ſeeke by ſuch praiſes to incourage their nobilitie: It behooveth us, not to be ſtained with ingratitude, but to publiſh the proweſſe of ſuch woorthy men as ſtill with their bloud do paint out, the woorthines of their reſolutions. Amongſt whom your Honor having the cheefeſt place, as high Admirall of ſo victorious a fleete, and performing in your owne perſon ſuch honorable ſervice therein: I humbly preſent this my ſimple tranſlation to your Honors patronage, as the Romaines did their martial diſcourſes, to the Dictator, hoping your Honor will beare with the harſhnes of my ſtile, in that verbally it anſwers the authors minde, and to accept of my well intended meaning, with that honorable curteſie, that your noble minde hath alwaies extended towards others: In which hope reſting, I wiſh to your lordſhip, ſuch health and happines, with ſuch moſt honorable ſucceſſe to all your attempts, as your Honor can deſire, and I imagine.
            
               Your Honors most humble in all obedience
IAMES LEA.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE QVEENES MOST EXCELLENT MAIESTY ELIZABETH BY THE GRACE OF GOD, QVEENE OF ENGLAND, FRAVNCE, AND IRELAND, DEFENDER of the faith, &c. all bleſſednes, good hap, victorie, with encreaſe of triumphant raigne, and life everlaſting.
            
               SAint Iohn Chryſoſtom (most renowmed Queene) ſaith in one of his Homilies of the praiſe of S. Paul, that ſuch is the condition of falſehood, that of it ſelfe it commeth to naught; and on the contrarie, that truth is knit togither with ſuch ſtrength, that wel it may be aſſaulted, but never cō
               quered: and that deceit yeeldeth unto hir, as having no power to reſiſt hirs. I remember to haue read in the 3. booke of Eſdras; being questioned before Darius king Eſdras 4. of Perſia, what might be the thing of greateſt ſtrength, it was agreed and concluded, that it was truth; which not onely overcommeth thoſe things that time goeth on conſuming, but triumpheth alſo over time it ſelfe: falſe opinion, for a while, may beare authoritie, but at length truth prevaileth: whoſe nature is woonderfull, for where moſt force is oppoſed againſt hir, there becommeth ſhe moſt ſtrongeſt, and the more they ſtrive to throwe hir downe to the bottome, and to bury hir in the bottomleſſe pit of oblivion, the more ſhe aſcendeth aloft, and ſhewes hirſelfe in the higheſt: even as the oyle, though it be put under the water, yet ſtraight commeth above it, ſo is truth, for in caſe men would put it under falſhood, yet it ſhal ariſe to the higheſt place, for it abideth not to lie long in covert. For even as a comet appeereth for a ſeaſon, in which it ſheweth ſome brightnes, but yet endureth not long, bicauſe though it ſeeme a ſtar, yet is none: even ſo is deceit, though it may be beleeved for a time, by a falſe apparance of light, yet

at length it ſhall vaniſh and conſume away, when as truth ſhal endure to the end. Truth is a thing ſo pretious and belooved of God, that al they who ſeeke to excell in vertue, do preferre hir before treaſure, chooſing to be behinde in wealth, to go forward with truth: And finallie they eſteeme the hazarding of their life (which ſoone paſſeth awaie) for wel imploied, for the love of truth which abideth for ever. David, preferring truth before al worldly matters, ſaith: Take not ô Lord thy truth out of my mouth. In ancient hiſtories we read Pſal. 119. that Simandrus prince of Egypt, commanded his picture to be engraved on his tombe, and a jewell on his breast, with his eies fixed thereon, which jewell was the image of truth, as recordeth Diodor. Sicul. Elianus ſaith, that Pithagoras called truth a thing divine. And of the ſame Pitha. it is written, that he ſaid, that for a man to make himſelfe a God, he ought to ſpeake the truth. Truth is a centre where vertues repoſe, the north ſtar of the vertuous, the balme of the wounded, and finally it is the butte whereat many ſhoote, and the white that fewe do hitte. All theſe I bring (renowmed Queene) that they who ſhall reade my anſwere may knowe (that in the defenſe I make of the truth, which hapned in both Navies) that my intent is to deale in truth and not to flatter your Majeſty, you being an enimy to adulation: and I knowing it to be as far from the princely nature of your Majeſtie to heare it, as from mine, to write it. And that you have in memorie the ſaieng of S. Hierome; that he that would be accounted woorthy of true praiſe, ſhould not ſeek it of men. That which heer I meane to ſpeake of are certaine truths, ſo cleere and manifeſt, that they publiſh themſelves. For who ſeeth not the great regard in your Majeſtie of divine woorſhip, the great devocion to the ſacred ſcripture, the fulnes of Religion that ſhineth in your Majeſtie, the alwaies opened large hand to the poore: And who ſeeth not more clearely with his eies, then I can utter with my words, the ſinguler prudencie of your Majeſtie, your ſound juſtice, your excellent fortitude, your marvellous temperancie, your firme truth, your clemencie, your benignitie, your good government, your royall condition, and the ſhining of your works, enterlaced with divine love. Your Majestie may be ſaid to be a coffer wherein nature hath laide up hir treaſure, and hir gathering togither of thoſe perfections, which were repartederſt, amongſt manie, Such finites anſwer well to the trunck, from whence your Majeſtie deſcends, even from that invincible

king, and moſt chriſtian prince, Henrie the 8. whoſe woorthie deeds live in the remembrance of this preſent age, and ſhall never die in the times to come. Theſe and many ſuch perfect vertues of your Majestie, have wrought in me ſuch love, that I have bin verie deſirous to do you ſome ſervice, & determining to effectuat theſe my deſires, which long I have bread in my breast, I purpoſed to offer to your Majeſty this my anſwer, but I chanced to meet with a new fear, which made me doubt. For perceiving it not, to deſerve to appeer before ſo excellent a Queene: I ſtood in ſuſpence what to do, being driven into many and ſundrie thoughts, as having experience that boldnes without deliberation, most commonly cauſeth repentance; At length the one and the other conſiderations felt & waied togither, I found love, to overcharge and waie downe reſpect. Thorow which I determined to dedicate it to your Majeſtie, thereby as well to ſhewe the deſire I have to ſerve you, as alſo that this ſhort anſwer and poore woorke, belonging to your Majeſtie, may receive that auctoritie, which it cannot have in being mine, and the darke miſt which it hath on my part, may be baniſhed by the reſplendent ſhining, that it ſhall receive from your Majestie, whoſe Royall perſon the Lord Almightie preſerve and proſper in his bleſſed ſervice,
            Amen.
            
               Your Majeſties humble and loyall ſervant which kiſſeth your Royall feete and hands,
D F. R. de M.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The Anſwer.
            
               I Marvell good Sir, to ſee a man of ſo noble a linage, and no leſſe indued with the gifts of nature than others, ſhould have your eares ſo opened to heare the rumors and lies, which the ſcoffing & gibing flatterers do write you: and I woonder not ſo much in that you credit them, as at the ſpeede wherewith your Honor doth write them. Truly I am ſorie for it. Looke into your ſelfe, and you ſhall ſee, that they who write you ſuch novelties, do but fill your ſides with ſharp darts. Your Honor writeth to Spaine, that it is a matter moſt true, that the Lord high Admirall of England, was come, running away with 25. or 26. ſhips unto London, and that he had loſt his ſhip that was Admirall, and that this was written for a matter moſt certaine, by perſons of credit from London. I knowe not what men of credit they ſhould be, that wrote a matter of ſo great diſcredit. But at leaſtwiſe this I know, that if your Honor were in London, we might ſing unto you the ſong of Don Pedro: More enimies than friends have compaſſed his perſon. For in truth I know not ſo much as one in that citie, that is your friend. You ſaie farther in your letter, that the Admirall was loſt; hardly may a ſhip be loſt that had for hir governor ſo noble a captain, as is, that noble gentleman my L. Charles Howard; who, when fortune ſhould haue bin ſo wholy his enimie would rather have choſen to dy than flie. But both the Admiral and his ſhip that was Admirall, entred both togither (as togither they erſt went forth) into the river of London, triūphing in the victorie, that the Lord vouchſafed to give them, unto whom they yeeld all praiſe and thanks. Your Honor ſaith farther, that Drake is priſoner: I demand by whom? Know you not that from the The word, Drago which ſignifieth a Dragō, made the Author thus to run upon Draque, whom the Spaniards doo not let to call alſo Drago.
                Dragon the Lion flies, the Beare feares, the Oliphant hides himſelfe, the Lybard trembles, the Tygre retires, the Ounce diſmaieth,

and the reſt of the beaſts tremble? If then this be ſo, who ſhould he be, that ſhould take Drake, that the venome and poiſon of his ſword, bereft him not of his life? It was then an unbridled boldnes in him that wrote your Honor this matter. Concerning which, read a ſhort letter, which I make in anſwer of that of Diego Perez poſtmaſter of Logronio, and therin (although I deale ſoftly with him) you may ſee, who Drake is, and what he hath done in the Indies and in Spaine, and chawing it in the cud, you ſhall know ſome part of his valor. Your honor ſaith, that if he be not priſoner he is ſlaine, in theſe words. Drake is either taken or dead. The Ginets in Spaine deliver themſelves flieng and hurt the more, ſo that they do more harme flieng then aſſaulting, but on the ſea it is contrary. For if his enimie fled from him, who tooke him or ſlue him? If your Honor in ſaieng Drake is priſoner or dead, had added, he is priſoner to hir Majeſtie; then would I be ſilent, for that he is ſo loyall a ſubiect unto hir, that, though free, yet alwaies in hir priſon, and ſacrificed day and night to do hir ſervice, and for and in all to accompliſh hir will. And in ſaieng dead, had your Honor named the diſeaſe whereof he died, we would ſaie that the howre were come, wherein the Lord almighty had called him unto himſelfe: but finally he is both free and alive, and as loyall a vaſſall to hir Majeſtie as ever. Farther your Honor ſaith, that, the Queene commanded that there ſhould be no talke of hir Navie: giving thereby to underſtand, that it was in regard of the great dammage hir ſaid Navie had received. She commanded no ſuch matter; but had ſhe ſo commanded, it had bin a thing both holie and iuſt, for as ſhe is an enimie to all vaine-glorie, even ſo the ſpoiles of hir victorie and triumph, ſhe offered it all to God, from whom it came. And if, for not receiving theſe letters ſo plentie as at other times, you gathered, that it was ordained by hir Majeſtie, that they ſhould not write, you gathered amiſſe, for the cauſe was no other, but that for the generall repairing of all people to give thanks to God (at the Churches) from whom all their good proceeded, they became unmindful of all worldly affaires. Great ods between

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
this celebration of victorie and that which was uſed in Spaine, where in ſteed of ſinging Pſalmes and praiſes unto God, they made fire and ſports, and blinde men in open places, pirkt up, upon fiſhmongers ſtals, ſoong ſongs, making the people beleeve that they were victors: the contrarie where of is true. Your letter relates farther, that hir Majeſtie had 30000. men betweene Dover and Margate, rawe ſoldiers, heer to I anſwere; that this ballance runneth too faſt: for that hir Majeſties campe was hard by Tylberrie, in the province of Eſſex, a far different place from Dover & Margate. And that hir Majeſtie was with them, it was ſo; and marke your Honor what I ſaie, that the ſight of Iulius Caeſar in his hoaſt, wrought not ſo great effect, as did the ſight of hir Majeſtie amongſt hirs; for ſhe being a valiant Mars, and ſhewing hir ſelfe a moſt expert warrior, clad hir ſoldiers with the webs and fels of Hercules, where there was not any that eſteemed himſelfe in leſſe than a Hanniball or a Cevola: whereunto they were invited, by the ſight of a tender woman, being the firſt that put hirſelfe to ſuch a travell, for Chriſtendome, the peace of hir countrie, and for the quietnes of hir ſubiects. And who ſo had ſeene hir Majeſtie, I ſay not, that he ſhould have ſeene an angrie Mars, a Iulius Caeſar, or Charlemaine, for all this is winde in compariſon of hir: But he ſhould have ſeene a Debora, a Heſter, a Ruth, and a Iudith, and finally he ſhould have ſeene a Valour ſecond to none. You ſaid farther in your letter, that hir Majestie went to and from the Campe, bicauſe the Catholikes had made a mutinie. Your Honor knowes that it is an old Proverbe, that when you ſee your neighbours beard a ſhaving, prepare yours to the waſhing baſen. And in this countrie they remember what the Goſpell ſaith, Everie kingdome divided against it ſelfe, ſhall be 
               Luke 11. 
               deſolate. And the experience heereof, they finde in their neighbors the french men, that for not having peace amongſt themſelves, their poore kingdome is deſtroyed. Concerning this matter I have heard it queſtioned in this countrie, by ſome perſons of no baſe calling, who ſay plainly that while your Honor was heer, they never had any perfect quietnes amongſt them, and ſince your departure they

have had no broyles nor Save ſuch as he left kindled before his going. ſtrife: and it may be, that the going of matters in ſuch ſort in the kingdome of Fraunce, ſo troubled and kindled as they are, that it is by reaſon your Honor is there, and that your abſence might quench ſo great a fire. You ſaie farther in your letter, that there was none other ſhip brought hither but that of Don Pedro de Valdes. Heerin is the publiſhing of victorie gainſaid, and loſſe, evident; the which ſhip, had your Armada bin victors, they had not permitted to be brought hither, neither was Don Pedro de Valdes, ſo ill a ſoldier, nor for ſo little, as to ſuffer himſelfe to be taken by a people alreadie overcome, and running awaie; neither the ſoldiers which he had with him (which were fower hundreth at leaſt) of leſſe valor then the reſt of thoſe of the Armada, they were rather everie man to conquere a kingdome, and to give a thouſand victories. But the thriſe noble Lord, high Admirall, not flieng, but aſſaulting, and he the captive or ſlaine Drake, his fetters broken, and riſen from death; fettered the conquerers, and bereaved their life, who lived a little before. In concluſion there were no more ſhips brought into England but that of Don Pedro, as for the reſt (for a better demonſtration of the truth) they were contented that their friends and neighbors ſhould participate with them; and ſo they left a Galleaſſe at Callis, wherein amongſt others, was ſlaine Don Hugo de Moncada, and Don Georje Manrique, (being Veedor Generall) eſcaped to carrie the true relation thereof unto Spaine. And the Saint Matthew, and S. Philip, being two moſt ſtrong Gallions, were carried to Fluſhing, out of one of the which eſcaped Don Franciſco de Toledo, with ſixe and thirtie ſoldiers, which were the remainder of fower or five hundreth, which he had with him: and in the other was taken Don Diego Pimentel, with all his men ſave thoſe that were ſlaine, and many other ſhips (by divine providence) by force of wind and ſea, were deſtroied upon the coaſt of Ireland. If I have bin large in anſwering your Honor, the occaſion excuſeth me; and the matter which is wider then the ſea, makes me thinke to be woorthy reprehenſion for being ſo ſhort. Yet notwithſtanding, time, which gave an end to theſe my weariſome

reaſonings, ſeemed to call upon me to paſſe on farther. And having caſt about, I fell into conſideration with my ſelfe, what occaſion I might have to enlarge farther, ſith (though briefely) I had anſwered to the letter: and I perceived that the lawe of love, and Chriſtianitie in the Lord, did binde me to admoniſh you like a true neighbor. The lawe of love in Chriſt ſaith, Love your enimies. And this Matth. 5. ſaid Chriſt after that he had ſaid, Yee have heard, that it hath bin ſaid, thou ſhalt love thy friend and hate thy enimie; and he paſſeth on ſaieng, and do good to them that hate you. There is another lawe which ſaith: Yee ſhall not render ill for ill, but good for evill. Theſe and ſuch other, ſacred words do binde me to love your Honor: but not your condition & proceedings, for if I ſhould have reſpect thereunto, I ſhould followe the lawe of old, Thou ſhalt love thy friend, and hate thy enimie; and I ſhould be more bound to hate then love you. But for that the Goſpel commandeth me, To do good to thoſe that hurt me, and to render good for evill, and to love my enimies: I will do both the one and the other, ſo that I will both love, and do you good. I meane not to do you good, by beſtowing treaſures upon you, bicauſe I have them not, but I wil give you of that, which bookes have given me, which are certaine counſailes, by meane whereof, it may be, you ſhall live leſſe troubleſome, and not ſo much abhord: wherſoever I come I heare, that your Honor is an enimie to peace, & unquiet. To the firſt I anſwere, that Et ex conſequenti, you are an enimie to God. When Chriſt our Redeemer departed from his diſciples, amongſt other gifts which he gave them, and free mercies beſtowed upon them, he gave them his peace, and it was neither the peace of the world, nor that of Iudas, for theſe are peaces of death and damnation, unwoorthily called peace, but ſuch a peace as was a pledge of bleſſednes. Bleſſed are the peace-makers, ſaith the Goſpell. I might alleage manie places to ſhew, how gratefull that peace is Matth. 5. unto God, and they that love it, and how he abhorreth the contemners thereof, and ſo I admoniſh your Honor to cloath your ſelfe with peace, and let it be that of Chriſt which ſaveth, and not that of Iudas which betraieth, nor

that of the world which killeth. To the ſecond, that I am informed you are troubleſome, I anſwere, that if for the firſt you are an enimie to God, that by this you are the like unto Heaven; and for confirmation of this truth, you muſt underſtand, that of divers ſences, divers are the objects. So that (according to Ariſtotle) one ſence cannot judge directly Aristotle. of the object of an other ſence, for the taſte judgeth not of the colour, nor the ſight of the taſte, rather beholding Sugar, we judge it to be white, and taſting it, we judge it to be ſweete. So they that have the earth for object cannot judge well of Heaven, and they who live according to the fleſh, comprehend not the ſweetnes of the ſpirit, & they that go intangled in the affaires of the world and ſeated in their wiles, attaine not the delectation of ſpirituall repoſe. Such is your Honor, who being entred into the laberinth of the reſtleſſe labors of life, you cannot make an end to knowe the ſweetnes of the tranquillitie of life it ſelfe. Open your eies, and behold that much ſelfe truſt groweth not but of ſmall knowledge, and you ſhall ſee, that the firſt degree for a man to know little, is, to ſuppoſe that he knoweth much. I hold that for a moſt certaintie, which Saint Hierom ſaith, Hierom. that the acknowledging of imperfection, is, a certaine kind of perfection in a man: regard that it is not a ſmall matter for a man to know, that he knoweth nothing. And if your Honor knew this of your ſelfe, you would become peaceable, and live a quiet life, and ſo be accounted quiet. Where the river goeth ſtilleſt, there hath it moſt water, and is deepeſt; and where it maketh moſt noiſe, there hath it leaſt water: ſo the quiet and ſtill man is of great depth, and is to be holden and accounted of greatly; and he that prates much is he that doth leaſt, for the ignorant have great ſound, and ſmall depth. The wiſe are free from paſſions, far from moleſtations, and full of tranquillitie. So then, to have a ſhare in heaven, a good life on earth, and to be accounted wiſe, it is to be quiet, and a peace-maker. And now let the former turmoiles ſuffice, and the hurt that you have already done unto Spaine by your unquietnes, giving hir ſo ill counſell, making hir to leeſe Armada, treaſure, munition, credit and

reputation; and that which is more to be lamented, ſo many thouſands of ſoules: for verily Spaine ſhould have been full both of men and monie, were it not for ſo long and coſtly wars, and altogither unprofitable. Whereby it had been better for thee, ô Spaine, to have contented thee with thy towe, than to have deſired the hollands of Flanders, where there is ſcant a ſpan of earth, that hath not been watered with the blood of thy Spaniards. And to have contented thee with thy pots of clay, rather than to have luſted for the ſilver diſhes of Engliſh men, which are ſo hardly gotten. I thought alſo heere to advertiſe you more at large, than I did in my anſwer to your letter, concerning the few friends which heer you have, rather I put you out of doubt, that you are to make no account of them, no, not to thinke that you have a friend in London: to proove this to be true, I wil availe my ſelfe with that ſaieng of Saint Paul, who ſaith, that Charitie wel ordred, muſt begin in himſelfe. If then this be ſo, who would you have to be ſuch a friend to your Honor, that he ſhould ceaſe to bee a friend to himſelfe, his wife, children, and ſubſtance. May you bee perſuaded that your friendes heere, ſhoulde open their doores to their enimies, to the end to rob them of their goodes? for in very truth, not one in this kingdome (though he had a ſafe conduct from your Honor) ſhould have eſcaped from being robbed, ſlaine, or diſhonored. If this then be true, how can you hope for any friends heer? Rather, in truth, if you would conſider and open your eies, you ſhall ſee that all are your mortall enimies. If it be the dutie of a friend to deale trulie, and he that writes you moſt newes, doth notſo, then have you heere no friend. As alſo, he is no friend, that requireth of his friend, what is unjuſt and unlawfull, and this the verie Gentiles underſtood, for ſo Marcus Tullius teacheth, even as I ſpeake it, in his booke of Mar. Tu. Pericles. Friendſhip, and before him Pericles taught the ſame, when a certaine friend requeſted him to affirme a lie for him and that with an oth, he anſwered him ſaieng: It is lawful to be a friend, yet no farther than the altar. And ſo recordeth Plutarch. Aul. Gel. Bruſon. 
               Plutarch, Aulus Gellius, and Bruſon: Pericles ment, that

friendſhip was good, and woorthie to be conſerved, with gifts given and received, but that it ſhould be in ſuch ſort that it ſhould not be againſt the good liking of God. For friends ought not to impugne religion, nor paſſe the limits of conſcience: friends are bound to do one for another, ſo that their good works paſſe not the bounds of reaſon, nor the limits of vertue. Publius Rutilius denied a certaine friend a matter, bicauſe it was unjuſt, which made his friend to Publius Rutilius. ſay; Why ſhould I account of thy friendſhip, if thou wilt not do as I requeſt thee? And Rutilius replied: But why ſhould I make account of thine, ſith thou requeſteſt me that which I ought not to do? Authors heerof are Valerius Maximus in his ſixt booke, and Bruſonius in his firſt. Sith therefore your Honor demandeth unjuſt things of Engliſh men, as are, to admit entrance to their enimies, and to ſuffer themſelves to be robbed, diſhonored, maſſacred, and to be traitors to their Soveraigne: how can you challenge them for your friends? True friends ought to be juſt, and to love the ſoules of their friends better than their bodies; to be more affectionate to their ſoules than to their ſubſtance, and more to their conſciences than to their lives. To do any good deede to a friend, is alſo the office of a friend; even as at the play of tenniſe, it is not ynough to reach the ball in the aire, but alſo to ſtrike him, and ſend it from whence it came: in like ſort in friendſhip, it is not for one friend alwaies to expect good turns of the other, but alſo to indevor to requite it: there ſhould never be a (take) without a (regive:) and good deeds muſt reſult from both parts full of love. And ſith your Honor will take and not give (except it be death and diſhonor) we will not accept you for a friend. You have men that are altogither ſand without lime, all words and no deeds; and in England they account your Honor for one of the number: from which England and your pretended friends therin, remoove your bloodie hand, ſo ſhall you live more in quiet and reſt, and then ſhall you have friends indeede: and one that ſo meaneth to be your friend, ſince the victorie that this kingdom atchived againſt the Spaniſh Armada (or better to ſay, that

God gave them) made this Sonet in praiſe of the noblenes of this kingdome, wherein are many Caeſars and Pompeies, unto which valor and magnanimitie, they are ſtirred up by the love of hir Majeſtie their Queene: a matter well knowen to your Honor, inſomuch that by none of your practiſes you have prevailed to pervert them.
            
               A Sonet to England.
               PRoud Rome hir enſignes, bravely diſplaies
               In cruell ſort, thy famous name to blot
               If that ſhe could, but all to weake, God wot,
               Envieng ſtill thy Crowne, as ſhe hath done alwaies.
               The Spaniſh arme, hir instrument to do the feate
               Did furrow up the ſea, but all his labor lost,
               Yet marvell not ther at, though they were beat and toſt:
               For ſo had Perſia been, and Macedon the great.
               Aſſault thou maist, where that thou pleaſe and when,
               Though doubtfull, ſharpe, and ſtrong it ſeeme to men,
               And never dread the conquest at the length,
               For from thy feates heroicall, is ſpred both far and neere,
               Of famous and renowmed deeds, a river great and cleere.
               Which fils the earth full of thy praiſe and ſtrength.
            
            
               The copie of a letter ſent unto Spaine by Iuan de Gamarra, a Spaniſh merchant, dated the 31. of September 1588.
               
                  THat the Engliſh have loſt 40. ſhips at Ho, ho, maſter lier, not too faſt I pray you, for 40. is much at one clap for them to take which ſtil ran away. one incounter, where they could not flie, the which was in Luxaten, a port of Scotland, unto which place the Engliſh had followed the Spaniſh Armada from before Callis; and they thinking that our Armada had gone to take this port, got before ours to defend it: but ours ſeeing themſelves ſo neere the Engliſh, (and that they could notretire, as they had often done before,

running for ſuccor to the Engliſh ports) had them now as they would; and ſet upon them ſo ſtrongly, that they ſoonke 20. ſhips, and tooke 26. ſafe and ſound. And the reſt perceiving their deſtruction, fled without men, all rent and torne; and then (it is reported) that our Armada tooke the ſaid port, where they are in very good harborow, as all affirme. Thus is the newes, God grant them ſuch ſucceſſe as is needfull; and this is underſtood by a Poſt that is come from Callis: and that it is commanded in England, upon paine of loſſe of life and goods, that none write newes to any place, which is a confirmation of the aforeſaid.
            
            
               The Anſwer.
               
                  THree or fower times I laid aſide my pen, at ſuch time (Sen̄or Gamarra) as I purpoſed to anſwer your blurs: for I thought it a matter very improper to anſwer to a thing ſo devoid of reaſon and truth, and that, that was ſufficient, which time it ſelfe hath long ſince anſwered. But ſeeing your eſtate deſerves no leſſe, I could not excuſe my ſelfe: but firſt receive from me this counſell for another time; and is, that you ſhew not your ſelfe ſo very a marchant; for if it be lawfull for a marchant to lie in his priſes, yet is it not, to lie in his writings; and you would be ſo wholy a marchant, that you have plaied bankrout with truth. It ſeemeth unto me, that you being a marchant of cloth, will become a marchant of wines; and proclaiming wine, you ſell vineger, giving very cheape, that which hath coſt you ſo deere: and you ſell victorie, being no victor; and you promiſé palme, yours being the nettle. You ſay in your letter, that the Spaniſh Armada woon 46. ſhips, 20. ſoonke, and 26. taken, and that this was in Luxaten a port in Scotland. You take an ill courſe for a Chronicler; for the Engliſh Navie was not at alſo far as Scotland, neither did my Lord high Admiral break the order which he had of hir Majeſtie, which was, not to

leave hir owne ports ungarded: and in this you may know the humilitie of the Queenes Majeſtie, in that ſhe would not put hir ſelfe ſo much to offend, as to defend hir owne; and therefore that befel hir, which Saint Iames mentioneth in his fourth chapter; God reſisteth the proud, and giveth his 
                  Iam. 4. 
                  grace to the humble: and ſo as God ſaw the humilitie of his ſervant Elizabeth, he raiſed hir up, and gave hir the victorie over hir enimies. The pride of a Pharao in Egypt, God confounded Exod. 14. by the waters of the red ſea, as in Exodus. And the pride of your hautie Armada hath he cōfounded in the Ocean ſea. God is he that taketh in hand the cauſe of his ſervants. This then being true, you have ſmall reaſon to ſay, that you ſoonke and tooke ſo many ſhips. Though when the Egyptians were drowned, there eſcaped none to carrie newes therof unto Egypt; there are ſome gone from hence, which have carried the newes of the reſt unto Spaine, wherby yours will be thought of ſmall moment. I purpoſe not heere to give you a particular account of the ſhips, which the Engliſh Armada tooke and ſoonke, nor of thoſe which have periſhed in Ireland, neither the number of priſoners and ſlaine; bicauſe it is the doings of the Lord & his works, and from him commeth all goodnes, on whoſe divine Majeſtie this whole kingdome hath put and laid his truſt, and to him alone do they give the glorie of this victorie, ſinging to him Pſalmes and Hymnes, as they did in the citie of Bethulia, after the beheading of Holofernes. So, to conclude, Judith 16. neither went the Engliſh Armada into Scotland, neither brake they the order of their roial Soveraigne the Queenes Majeſtie, rather they viſited their owne ports, gathering (as it were) under their wings their ſcattering chickens. This (friend Iohn Gamarra) is true, and ſith you knew it not at the beginning, when firſt you became an Hiſtoriographer, meddle not hence forward any more in that office (for it is for you a matter too high) that it befall you not, as unto Icarus, and Phaeton, and occupie your ſelfe in waight and meaſures, Burſe affaires, and Caſh bookes; and if you be wearie of this, then were it beſt for you to become a crier of figs about the ſtreets; or a cobler, or matmaker, for this

ſhall be eaſier for you, than to becom a Chronicler. A Chronicler ought to conſider what he ſaith, and of whom, to write the certaintie, and to follow the trueſt authors, and of moſt credit: You (Sen̄or Gamarra) obſerve none of all theſe. If thou didſt conſider the valor of the Queenes Majeſtie, hir courage and greatnes; thou wouldeſt not dare to publiſh ſuch falſhoods. And knowe that it is ſuch and ſo much, that, for not being able to utter it, I thinke it better to keepe it ſilent, than to come ſhort therein: for that I ſhould need for ſuch a purpoſe, not one Angelicall toong, but a thouſand. To compare hir with Hester for humilitie; in compaſſion to an Abigail; in prudencie and valor to a Debora; and in courage to a Iudith. Notwithſtanding, of that little light, which I have gotten of hir valor, I will make you partaker, and ſo accept of theſe poore verſes, made with a greater love and good will, than with knowledge or art. Praieng you (that ſith you are reſident in Andwerpe in the affaires of the Malvendas) that you write no more ſuch fained letters, uſing for excuſe, to date them from Roan.
               
                  SONET.
                  GReat Elizabeth, whoſe fame at this day
                  From thone, to thother poale, is ſpred ſo and knowne,
                  By having incountred fierce Mars in his way,
                  That now not a God, his Godhead is flowen.
                  The glorious deeds, which the world had raiſed
                  To the highest roome; when viewing thy acts
                  Start backe, and gave place, as things all amazed,
                  Vndoing the done, and hiding their facts.
                  To ſay that thou doest, ſurpaſſe and excell
                  All the whole world; thy battels and deeds
                  Do ſay now the ſame, thy ſtanderds it tell,
                  To ſearch for antiquities, which proove now but weeds,
                  Is for to go warme us, by ſmoke of wet ſtrawe:
                  Thou winnest more glorie, than yet any ſawe.
               
            
            
               
               The copie of a letter which Pedro de Alva (a Spaniſh marchant) wrote from Roan unto Spaine, the firſt of September 1588.
               
                  I Write no newes of the Spaniſh Armada, for that they be varieng, and I deſirous to write nothing but truth. Nowe by newes which run from many places, from Callis, Deepe, Holland, & by ſome preſuppoſings, from England and other places, it is held for a matter moſt certaine, that they have fought with the Engliſh, ſpoiled & ſuncke many of them, and taken others, and that the reſt, (reported to be 27. ſhips) are retourned ſpoiled, to the river of London being al that could eſcape. With this poſt there goeth one from George Seguin of Callis, who ſaith that Maſters and mariners of Zeland, have affirmed to the governor of Callis, Monſeur de Gordan: that the Armada is in a port or river of Scotland called Triffla, where they ſaie, there may ride two thouſand ſhips; this is No lie. the common report.
            
            
               The Anſwer.
               
                  WE would have highly eſteemed you (Sen̄or Pedro de Alva) and I would ſay the dog had not bitten you, had you contented your ſelfe with the firſt words of your letter, (where you ſaid, I write no newes of the Spaniſh Armada, for that they be varieng, and I deſirous to write nothing but truth) without paſſing any farther, that it might not have bin ſeen, how ful of blots you have your underſtanding, you ſay that you are a friend to ſoundnes and truth, and an enimie to varietie, and immediately you ſhew proofes to the contrary, written with your hand and firmed with your name. Such a thing is called in good Spaniſh a preſſed follie; pardon me heerein bicauſe the love I beare you and the reſpect due to your graie haires, urgeth me to ſpeake ſo plainelie. And

though my wordes ſcald you, yet I paſſe not, for if you remember the ſaieng of Salomon, Better are the wounds of 
                  Prov. 27. 
                  him that loveth thee, then the falſe kiſſes of him that abhorreth thee: You would not take in ill part my maner of ſpeech. But for that I know you to be ſound and a friend of truth, I will briefely informe you of the certaintie, and ſuch as is devoid of doubt. For though time hath ſufficiently ſhewed thee the contrarie, of that whereunto thou firmedſt, according as you are maſſie, ſound, and waightie, it ſhall be well to recount it you, yea and with hammer and naile to beate it into your head. The truth then is, that aſſoone as it was knowne in this kingdome of the comming of the Spaniſh Armada, the noble Lord Charles Howard, (Lord high Admirall,) went foorth with his navie, who reparted the ſaide into ſundry ſquadrons (according as time and place afforded) at times making two ſquadrons, and then three, and more or leſſe, as was fitteſt for the purpoſe, to fight and defend themſelves, without cumbring one another: In this order they went defending their ports, wherein they not onely obſerved hir Majeſties order, but there was alſo ſeen the valor in fight, of the L. high Admirall, who is a man not onely ſufficient to rule and governe ſuch a Navie as this of England is, but if all the Chriſtian princes of the worlde ſhould joine, & make by a loving union, an Armada againſt the Infidels, they might well truſt and commit the ſame to his Honors government, and I doubt that there ſhall be any found more woorthy. For though it be true that there are ſome to be found in Chriſtendome moſt fit for ſuch a charge, yet none ſo much nor repleat with ſo many vertues; for what is reparted amongſt others, is wholie in him. You have in the world ſoldiers ripe in giving counſell, others to fight and others to governe, &c. But manie of theſe are gameſtars, backbiters, blaſphemers, & ill Chriſtians. But in the Lord Admirall, is the feare of God, Chriſtianitie, ſcience, government, knowledge, practiſe, policie, juſtice, forecaſt, agilitie, aſſaulting, perſeverance, courage, chollor, patience and ſuffering, with many other graces. Theſe are things not found in all men. So that then, the

Engliſh Armada to be governed as is ſaid, was by the order of hir Majeſtie, and the performance and induſtrie of this Lord. Obſerving this order, the Duke of Medina durſt not aſſault thē, dreading the hurt which might enſue: notwithſtāding his Armada was more puiſſant, greater ſhips, ſtronger, and more in number & men, though (I beleeve) not in Artillery. The Spaniſh Armada thē entred the mouth of the chanel, and the Engliſh followed by little & little, and tarrieng the oportunity to worke the effect: and what befell afterwards, I wil not detaine my ſelfe in recounting it, aske it of Don Pedro de Valdes (when you ſee him there) who loſt his ſhip with 400. men, yeelding to Sir Francis Drake, having ſo fewe men that for the honor of the Spaniſh nation, I name not the nūber. You may alſo informe your ſelf of Don Diego Piementel, which was loſt with 500. men: and of Don Franciſoode Toledo, which was loſt with ſo many more within the ſight of Newport, though it be true that he ſaved himſelfe with thirtie ſoldiers, in the skiffe, the ſhip and the reſt periſhing, where none would ſuccour thē: if this ſuffice not, thē enquire of Don Ieorge Manrique veedor general, who fled out of the Galliaſſe, which was loſt before Callis, a place not far from Roane. I ſhew you not particularly the matters of Ireland, for it would be long, and greevous to your hearing. The loſſe of the ſhip called La Rata, and the Venician, and the ſhip Santa Maria, and many other, and ſo likewiſe it will be yerkſome for you to heare of ſo many noblemen which there are periſhed: Don Antonio Manrique, Don Beltran de Salto, Don Garcia Davila, Don Gaſpar his Brother, Don Alonſo Luſon, Don Rodrigo Laſo de la Vega, of the habite of Saint Iames, and innumerable other, gentlemen and ſouldiers, ſome ſlaine by the Iriſh, others drowned in the ſea. This ſtorie being ſo lamentable, I proceede no farther therein, but I pray you that this may be a warning for another time, and let that which is ſaid ſerve you for a rod. And verily if thou kneweſt who the Admirall is, (under whoſe governmēt the Engliſh Navie reſteth) I beleeve; that though he had beene taken or loſt, that thou wouldſt skant credite it, and conſequently, not write as thou didſt.

And know that he is the Lord Howard, Knight of the order of the Garter, and to the end it ſlip not out of thy memorie, I ſend thee heere this Sonet, lay it up in thy breaſt, not for that which the Sonet containeth, nor for the arts ſake, but for that with a ſound intent I preſent thee therin, ſome part (though the leaſt) of the valor of this excellent Gentleman, the Lord high Admirall.
               
                  THE SONET.
                  THe Lion fierce, his eies against the ſunne
                  Like Eagle bold, for pray prepard to flight,
                  And round about the noble garter donne
                  With ſword and crowne to ſhew the more his might.
                  From end to end he throweth downe, and levels all,
                  Famous is his enſigne bright on earth and brackiſh wave,
                  And Mars the jarring God, reſignes his right and all,
                  Both honor, arms, and resteth as his ſlave.
                  Neptune, now afraid, and skared in his flood,
                  By view of noble Charles, and his famous fleet,
                  Reſignes his name of God, his rule, and all his good,
                  To Howard he, that of the ſame was meet,
                  With everlasting name and ſcepter he remaines,
                  For ſerving ſo his Queene, in hazard great and paines.
               
            
            
               The copie of a letter which Diego Perez, Poſtmaſter of Logron̄o wrote in confirmation of the victorie against England in the Ocean ſea, dated the 2. Septemb. 1588.
               
                  THis day is the Engliſh newes confirmed, by a letter from the governor of Roan, who writeth that he hath in his power the chiefe Pilot of captaine Drake, and that he knoweth that all the Engliſh Navy was utterly diſcomfited, 25. ſhips ſunke, and about 40. taken, and Francis Drake priſoner, having

chaſed them as far as Abſpurg, and put manie to the Heerin they ſhew their pretence, if they had had their will. ſword: ſaieng, that there was found in Drakes ſhip a peece of 25. ſpans, of one kintall of munition, made of purpoſe, with one onely ſhot to ſinke the Admirall of Spaine, but it pleaſed God (though ſhe was hurt therwith, yet ſhe was repaired againe) and overcame the Engliſh fleete.
            
            
               The Anſwer.
               
                  I Would never have thought (Sen̄or Diego Perez) that ſo wittingly, a man of your account, and Poſtmaſter of Logron̄o, ſhoulde ſettle himſelfe ſo lightly to write matters ſo voide of reaſon. But I marvell not; for that your poſt horſes are ſuch yerkers, whoſe plungings have ſet you quite beſides the ſaddell. In the examining of Notaries, intreating of the manner how to examine them, it is recorded, that one being demanded by the examinars, how he would make a falſe writing, that yet ſhould be available, he anſwered; By bringing for witnes the dead, and thoſe of ſtrange countries and unknowen: of ſuch an occaſion, me thinks you would advantage your ſelfe: but let us ſee maſter Poſt, how you ſhamed not to bring for witnes of ſuch a falſhood, the Governor of Roan, which is not a man of ſuch lightnes, as you paint him to be, ſith you lade him with ſuch a lie; for he is rather a man of a verie ripe underſtanding, a ſharpe wit, conſiderat, and very warie; and finally, accompanied with many perfections; and ſo you have overſeene your ſelfe, in bringing ſuch a witnes for the making your falſe writing good; for though he be of a ſtrange countrie, yet he is well knowen, and his vertues, every where. I can tell thee one thing, that when the Engliſh Armada ſhould have been loſt, and the Governor of Roan certainly adviſed thereof, yet would he doubt, and never have written it; for that it would be hard for him either to write or beleeve it, not ſo much, in regard that the Engliſh

Navie ſhould ſimply be invincible, or more ſtrong than the Spaniſh, but for that it belongs to a Catholike Queene, and ſo juſtly imploied; as, in the defence of Chriſtian religion, their houſes, people and ſubjects, and in defence of the goods of the poore, the lives of the afflicted pilgrims and diſinherited ſtrangers. If in many places of the ſacred ſcripture, God commandeth a regard to be had of the widowe, the poore, the pupill, of the orphan and ſtranger: and if this Engliſh Armada, was in defence of all theſe, and for the propagation of the Chriſtian religion, matters, wherof the Governor of Roan was not ignorant, how then would you have him to write you a thing, which in his opinion is contrarie to the will of God. You alledge a notable reaſon to confirme the loſſe of the Engliſh Armada, as to ſay that Francis Drake is priſoner: I grieve not a little, to ſee now, how apparantly Spaine is given to lie. For, what Iulius Caeſar, what Scipio, or what Alexander, aſſaulted the Admirall (under whom Drake was) to take him, but a Duke, that knew no better than to flie him, thereby to bereave him of a woonderfull victorie, yea one of the greateſt that had ever beene atchieved in the world, and if thou knoweſt it not, it is good that thou know, that now Iulius Caeſar liveth not, Pompeie is dead, Scipio forgotten, Alexander baniſhed, Iudas Machabeus ſleepeth, Hector is ſlaine, Achilles is no more. Nor none of thoſe whoſe theaters fame ſo adorned, live now in remembrance of this preſent age: and the reaſon is; for as the ſtars ſhine not by reaſon of the force of the ſunne; ſo all thoſe aforenamed, in reſpect of the valor of the Lord high Admirall, and Sir Francis Drake, are of no account. For more than Achilles, Charles; more than Hector, Drake; more than Machabee, Charles; more than Alexander, Drake; more than Scipio, Charles; more than Pompey, Drake; more than Caeſar, Charles; and finally, more than al the reſt: and for that thou maiſt comprehend part of the greatnes and valor of Drake, Read this Sonet, ſeeing you may have read that of the excellent Lord high Admirall.
               
                  
                  SONET.
                  SO was the name of Salomon, diſperst and ſpred at large,
                  By winged fame, in voice and ſtately ſong,
                  So that no wight alive, but gladly was at charge
                  And tooke the paine, to ſee him ſtill among.
                  From countries far the Saba Queene did paſſe
                  Of purpoſe for to ſee, that prudent youth and ſage,
                  Whoſe ſacred breast, a perfect cloſet was
                  Where wiſedome ſat, in yoong and tender age.
                  A temple huge both faire and gilded well:
                  A Iustice great that in the child did dwell,
                  Did blaze him thus with everlasting name:
                  To Francis Drake, his government likewiſe,
                  With greater praiſe and triumph hath lift him to the skies,
                  And by the raging ſea augmented is his fame.
               
               
                  AND if this ſuffice not to make thee knowe the valour of Sir Francis, fixe then your eies on that he did at Cales, where the feare of him remaineth yet to this daie: and in Sancto Domingo, where, onely with 1200. men which he lāded, did put to flight two ſquadrons of light horſe, & two of footemen, and no other horſe, nor foote men, but Spaniards, & ſackte the citie, & the ſame he did in Saint Auguſtine, and in Santiago and in Carthagena: And I intreat no farther of this hiſtorie, bicauſe there be others that have written and intreated thereof at large. And if to this you anſwer me, that it was not he onely that did it, but alſo the valiant gentleman M. Christofer Carelile, campmaſter, and Powell the ſargent maior, and ſundrie other captaines, and that Drake went not a ſhore. To this I anſwer, that a generall doth more in governing and conſerving then in fighting, and I do not onely thus anſwer you, but I tell thee, that Drake both governeth, conſerveth and fighteth, and

knoweth how to prevent. You ſay farther in your letter, that the Spaniſh Armada gave chaſe to the Engliſh, unto Abſpurge. To this I anſwer you nothing, bicauſe the ambaſſador in France doth, and ſets downe the contrarie, calling the place Trapena Euxaten: and Iuan de Gamarra, gaine-ſaith the ambaſſador, calling it Luxaten: and Pedro de Alva, gainſaith him, being his neighbor of Roane, no great diſtance from Andwarp, and ſaith that the port is called Triffla: attone me theſe meaſures. It is a great deſperatenes of Spaine, to conſent a matter to be imprinted ſo apparant fabulous. But Spaine will anſwer me and ſaie, that none of theſe authors diſagree in calling the port by ſuch ſundrie names (as are Abſpurge, Trapena, Euxaten, Luxaten, Triffla) and that though there be a difference in the names, yet that there is none in the place, and ſignification, and that the writers are of ſundrie nations and ſo ſpeake with ſundrie toongs, & everie one rather uſeth his mother toong, then a ſtrange language, for ſome are Arabians, others Hebrewes, others Galileans, others Parthians, and Caldees, and everie one named the port in his owne language. You (Sen̄or poſtmaſter) whoſe ſpeech is Arabian, call it Abſpurge; the ambaſſador, who is a Galilean, Parthian, and Meede, ſaith Trapena Euxaten: Gamarra, is a Caldean (though he be indeed a Burgales) and ſaith Luxaten; Pedro de Alva who is a Iewe, ſaith Triffla. To this looſe anſwere of Spaine, I will anſwer, and rid them of doubt, giving them to underſtand, that as well in the place, as the ſignification and name, there is in all, difference and error. For why Abſpurge, which Diego Perez writeth ſhould be called Ausburgo, which is in Almanie, and not in Scotland; Luxaten, which Gamarra nameth, is called Newcaſtell, and is no port of Scotland, but of England: Triffla, which Pedro de Alva nameth, is called Tasfill, and is hard by the Brill: Trapena, or Euxaten, which the ambaſſador rehearſeth, Trapena is called Traport, a little port of France hard by Deepe, (if he will not have it to be Trapena in Levante) And Euxaten is the ſaid Newcaſtel a port in England. Let us ſee then whether the ſhips were Angelicall ſpirits, to be at one inſtant in ſundrie and divers

places, there being diſtance off many leagues one from another; ſo heereby I proove it manifeſt, that the errour is both in the name and place: If it ſo be not, then the purpoſe of the Chroniclers, is, under thoſe unknowne and diſconſorted names, to give to underſtand the ſucceſſe of their Armada, interpreting them thus, Abſpurge, an Armada, diſperſt; Luxaten, an Armada of weeping: Triffla, an Armada that trembles; Trapena, an Armada which bringeth ſorrow: and Euxaten, an Armada of ſighes: and ſo the conſort is good, for God ſhewing his arme of power and wrath againſt them, he ſcattered them, he gave them weepings, tremblings, ſorow and ſighes, ſuch as Spaine never had. You ſaie farther (Sen̄or poſtmaſter) that there was found a peece of 25. ſpans in the ſhip of Drake, of a kintall of munition: In the ſhip of Sir Francis Drake, there were no other peeces but thoſe, which ſhe had in time before, and this peece that you ſpeake of, ſhould be of your Armada, which peradventure you threwe overboord, to make you more light to flie away, as ſome did. And concerning that you ſaie, that your Admirall was ſhot with this peece, but that God preſerved hir: In good ſooth ſhe preſerved hir ſelfe by flight, not daring abide the musket and caliver ſhot, and indeed they wiſhed for the wings of a bird to flie the faſter, and I thinke all the whole companie fell a blowing in the ſailes to give the ſhip more waie. But now, ſeeing you have prooved ſo ill, leave the office of a Chronicler, and be that of Marfodius or Paſquin, if you be weary of being a poſt, but if you be not, follow your function, and another time laie not the fault on him that hath it not, neither write that which is unlawfull, ſeeing you ſhal get nothing elſe therby, thē hethat ſpits againſt Heaven, which ſpittle fals againe back on his eies.
            
            
               By a letter from the poſtmaſter of Burdeaux written to the Ambaſſador in Fraunce, the 2. of December 1588.
               SInce the writing herof, heer is arrived a Scottiſhmā, who ſaith, that all the Spaniſh Armada, are harbored in Scotland, and that the Scots have taken arms againſt England.
            
            
               
               The Anſwer.
               
                  THe toong of the ſlanderer is the penſill of the divell, and as the Pſalmiſt ſaith, their throte is an open ſepulcher, 
                  Pſal. 5. 
                  they flatter with their toongs.
               
               Theſe be they of whom Saint Paul ſpeaketh, that evill ſpeakers ſhall not inherit 
                  1. Cor. 6. 
                  the kingdome of God. The toong of a wicked perſon hath power to unburie the dead, and to burie the living: Death and life are in the hands of the toong, ſaith Wiſdome: an ill toong hath power to altar cities and townes, to bring hoaſts into mutinie, to moove the people, to trouble kings and diſquiet ſoules. Such was your pretence (Sir poſtmaſter of Burdeaux) with your ill toong to have ingendred hatred and ſowed diſſention betweene us and our brethren the Scottiſhmen, to baniſh us out of the world (whereunto I will anſwer farther heereafter.) Now I will produce certaine humaine hiſtories for confirmation heerof. Hermodorus being virtuous, and that beyond all thoſe of Epheſus (whereof he was naturall) he was ſo perſecuted of ill toongs, and ſo much, that they baniſhed him the citie, their venom exceeding his virtue. The like did the Atheniens to Ariſtides, to Cimon and Themistocles; and the Siracuſans to Hermocrates and Dion: and the Romanes to Camillus and Rutilus, and to Metellus. And Cato Vticenſis, being nothing covetous, nor Hercules at any time a coward, Plutarch mentioneth, that they noted Cato for covetous, and Hercules for a coward: Finally, all men of great and heroicall virtues, are envied and wounded by the evill toong: for even as the ſhadow accompanieth the bodie, ſo doth envie purſue vertue, and from hence it groweth that the vertuous are ſo murmured at and perſecuted by the wicked. O England, England, and how art thou bound to give immortal thanks to God, in ſeeing thy ſelfe perſecuted and murmured at by ſo many, an evident ſigne and probable token,

that thou art the citie of the moſt higheſt. To thoſe whome God loveth he ſendeth troubles, prooving them as Gold in the fornace: And to his beloved people in Egypt he ſent many and ſundry ſcourges, and this bicauſe he loved them. The troubles of the 
                  Pſal. 34. 
                  just (ſaith David) are great, and addeth foorthwith, but the Lord delivereth him out of them all. Even ſo thee (O England) hath the Lord delivered frō all thy troubles: from ſo mightie an Armada, from ſo much death, from ſo many and ſundrie kinds of torments, as having bin overcome, thou muſt of neceſſitie have taſted: from theſe tribulations hath he delivered thee by his ſtrong hand, giving thee ſuch valiant captaines: If he gave to the people of Iſraell, for they bringing out of Egypt, a Moyſes, an Aaron, and a Marie; To thee he hath given, a moſt Chriſtian and puiſſant Queene, adorned with ſundrie vertues, a Charles Howard, a Francis Drake, and manie others, whom the Lord had ordained & kept long before, for the defence of his univerſal church & this particular kingdome, which all he yet ſtil preſerveth for greater matters: and what theſe thy woorthies (ô England) made not an end of, in performing thy totall deliverance, the reſt did the wind, the ſea, the rocks, the ſand, the heavens, the fowle, and the fiſh: and now laſtly he delivereth thee, of the untruthes wherein thine enimies boaſted and ſlandered thee; putting time for the unfolding of deceit, fame for the proclaimer, and truth, for the certaine proofe; and ſo their ſlanders and falſe publications remaine al untwiſted. But returning to my purpoſe, Saint Anastaſius ſaith, that even as he who taketh up a viper in his hands to throw to another (to bite him) is firſt bitten of the viper himſelfe; ſo the malicious and murmurer that would perſecute and infame the juſt, doth firſt perſecute himſelfe, and remaines infamed, and deſirous to bite the fame of another, ſlaieth his owne ſoule: for there is no byting of Viper or Aſpe ſo poiſonſome, as the malice of the perverſe; But this cannot ſinke into their underſtanding, which murmur at vertue, & charge hir with vice, and with falſhood, make that which is good ſeeme ill, and of ſtocks make ſtones, like to the fountaine in Almaine whereof Albertus Magnus maketh

mention. Of the number of theſe, me ſeemeth, that the Poſtmaſter is, ſeeing, of the peace and affinitie, which is betweene the Engliſh and the Scots, he wil make wars, ſaieng, that the Scottiſhmen had taken weapon against the Engliſh: a moſt inconvenient thing, and utterly unwoorthie to be beleeved; for it were the very inſtrument for the Scots to ſtrike off their owne heads withall, to favor their enimies in arms and religion, whereby to make them Lords of their houſes and poſſeſſions. And without all doubt, had the Spaniards taken ſure footing in this land, they would never have ſtaid till they had beene Lords alſo of Scotland; and who can doubt it, for the onely blazon, now adaies amongſt Spaniards, is nothing els but NON SVFFICIT ORBIS, as if they ſhould ſay, All the world is too little, and they cannot ſee, that their grave ſufficeth them. But ſuch was the malice of him that wrote this letter, that therwith he meant to ſtir up the minds of Engliſh men, that there might be wars betweene two kingdoms, borne of one bellie, brethren in religion, confederate in perfect peace, and of one language (in a maner:) and the health of the one, depending in not damaging the other. And this the Scottiſhmen knowing well, when the Spaniſh ſhips paſſed by their coaſts, the King commanded to take weapon againſt them, forbidding to permit any Spaniard to land: this is the truth; go not then about to make of ſtocks, ſtones; neither to give us to underſtand things ſo contrarie to reaſon. In this prevention, the King of Scots ſhewed plainly, that he knew the kindled and loftie minds of the Spaniards, who, if they had landed, (imitating the Goads, of whom they deſcend) though it had been under the title of peace, they would ſoone have reacht the crowne, not ſo much to depoſe the King, as to become Lords of the whole world, and to ſhew their greatnes and courage. Now in fine, he that will ſee cleerly, who theſe gloſers are, let him behold what they ſay, and be attentive to their ſpeeches, and he ſhall ſee their putrified harts laid open. Saint Ambroſe ſaith, that moſt commonly the looking-glaſſe of the ſoule ſhineth in the words. Saint Hierom ſaith, that the words which iſſue foorth, are the

ſignes of that which remaineth within: this is alſo aſentence of Aristotle. Saint Bernard ſaith, that the mouth is a gate and ſervant of the hart. Socrates ſaith, that ſuch as the man is, ſuch is his talke. Themistocles compareth men that be ſilent, unto pictures rold up and incloſed; and thoſe who talke and uſe ſpeech, to pictures ſpred abroad and laid open. If thou wilt know what pictures there are in a linnen cloth painted in Flaunders, ſpread it abroad: would you know whereof the hart of a man is painted, be converſant with him. What need we more? Chriſt our Saviour ſaith, that Of the abundance of the hart the mouth ſpeaketh, and that by our words we ſhall be justified or condemned. Well knowen and Matth. 12. manifeſtly do the writers of theſe letters ſhew heere, their want of charitie, and as to the ſonnes of leazings it may be ſaid unto them; You have the Divell for your father. This ſeemeth unto me, like that which we reading the ſacred Scripture, where the incontinent miſtreſſe of chaſte Ioſeph condemned him of incontinencie: and the proud Hebrewes Gen. 39. condemned divine Moſes of pride: and the unruly Abſolon 
                  Num. 16. 2. King. 15. reprehended David of ill government: and the miſchievous Rabſhaketh living by deceit, accuſed the innocent king Hezechiah, 
                  4. King. 18. of deceit: Even ſo the writers of theſe fabulous letters, they being the vanquiſhed, publiſh themſelves victors, and the Engliſhmen by the divine favor being conquerors, they accuſe them for vanquiſhed; and they being thoſe that diſquiet this kingdome, and make war againſt it, lay the fault upon the Scottiſh men, publiſhing them for our enimies, and that they tooke armes againſt Engliſh men, and they being the ſwift inventors of theſe novelties ſo falſe, they accuſe the Governor of Roan of an inventor and lightnes, and the like they lay upon George Seguin of Callis. To all this I ſay, that it is better to be ſlandered by the wicked, for being vertuous, than by being evill, to be hated of the good. I will put an end to the anſwering of theſe five Letters; for that I have ſufficiently done it (and for that I may have ſome time to anſwer the blinde man, the toong and publiſher of them) onely putting Spaine in mind of a marvellous policie obſerved by the Lacedemonians, who,

the better to conſerve themſelves, eſtabliſhed a lawe, that none ſhould be ſo bold to invent any noveltie in the Common weale. And as this law was upon a time broken, by a famous muſicion (called Tependarus) whoſe tranſgreſſion was, that his inſtrument whereon he uſed to play, being of five orders, he added a ſtring, and made it of ſixe: a noveltie offending none, neither did it good or harme to the Commonweale, neither altered it the minds of the citizens, for all this, him they baniſhed the Common-weale, and brake the inſtrument in pieces. With how much more reaſon then (deere Spaine) maiſt thou bereave the lives of theſe inventors of falſe novelties, written ſo much in thy prejudice, and the pen, inkhorne and paper, which ſerved to that uſe, to burne them in the market place. Receive this, ô Spaine, from him that bewailes thy weepings, widowes, moorning attire, and thy ſcattered ſmall orphans remaining without their fathers aide; and conſider how far better it had been for thee, to have imploied ſuch a puiſſant Armada againſt infidels, than againſt Chriſtians, baptized in the name of the Father, the Sonne, and the holie Ghoſt, & redeemed by the blood of Chriſt, from whom commeth all our weale, and to whom we yeeld infinite thanks and praiſe for ever and ever,
               Amen.
            
            
               An end to the anſwer of the Letters, with a briefe, true, and Christian relation of that which was done in England after the departure of the Armada.
               
                  THis victorie thus obtained, the whole kingdom of England (by the commandement of hir Majeſtie) was imploied in ſpirituall plaies, wherein was nothing els repreſented than thanks-giving to God, ſinging of Pſalms, and preaching the Goſpell, and to this ſpirituall exerciſe repaired all, both ſmall and great, poore and rich, and this endured for certaine daies, and at the length the Queenes ſacred Majeſtie, accompanied with the Nobles, as Earles, Lords, Barons,

Knights, and Gentlemen of the land, came unto the church of Saint Paule, where ſhe was received of the Biſhops and other Miniſters; in whoſe preſence, with great reverence, ſolemnitie, and devotion, there was giving of thanks to God, preaching the divine word, & ſinging ſundry Pſalms, of which I will onely name this himne.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           The Himne. Te Deum laudamus, and ſo foorth.
                           WE praiſe thee O God: we knowledge thee to be the Lord.
                           All the earth doth worſhip thee: the father everlaſting.
                           To thee all Angels crie aloud: the heaven and all the powers therein.
                           To thee Cherubin and Seraphin: continually doe crie.
                           Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabaoth.
                           Heaven and earth are full of the majeſtie: of thy glorie.
                           The glorious companie of the Apostles: praiſe thee.
                           The goodly fellowſhip of the Prophets: praiſe thee.
                           The noble armie of Martyrs: praiſe thee.
                           The holy Church throughout all the world: doth knowledge thee.
                           The father of an infinite majestie.
                           Thy honorable, true, and onely ſonne.
                           Alſo the holy Ghost: the comforter.
                           Thou art the King of glorie: O Christ.
                           Thou art the everlasting ſon of the father.
                           When thou tookest upon thee to deliver man: thou diddest not abhor the virgins wombe.
                           When thou hadst overcome the ſharpnes of death: thou didst open the kingdome of heaven to all beleevers.
                           Thou ſitteſt on the right hand of God: in the glorie of the father.
                           We beleeve that thou ſhalt come to be our judge.
                           We therefore pray thee helpe thy ſervants: whom thou haſt redeemed with thy precious blood,
                           Make them to be numbred with thy ſaints in glorie everlaſting.
                           O Lord ſave thy people: and bleſſe thine heritage.
                           Governe them: and lift them up for ever.
                           
                              
Day by day we magnifie thee.
                           And we worſhip thy name: ever world without end.
                           Vouchſafe, O Lord, to keepe us this day without ſinne.
                           O Lord have mercie upon us: have mercie upon us.
                           O Lord let thy mercie lighten upon us: as our trust is in thee.
                           O Lord in thee have I trusted: let me never be confounded.
                        
                     
                  
               
               THere were alſo ſaid ſundrie praiers, ſome of thankeſgiving for ſo great benefits received from the Lord; others for the life and proſperitie of the Queenes Majeſtie, and for peace, others for the increaſing of our zeale, and the holding of his holie hand over us, and for his church univerſall. To him be all praiſe, honor and glorie for ever and ever, Amen.
               
                  FAr otherwiſe, ô, Spaine, they celebrate heer ſuch victories, then they do in thy kindomes and provinces; for there they paſſe all in worldly ſports, as maskings, dauncings with bels, hurling of canes, launcing of buls, Iuſts and torneies, and with theſe feaſtes, ô, Spaine, thou giveſt the glorie of thy victories to the world, as though the world had given them unto thee; but from hence foorth take my counſell and give them to God, and turne to him. But if thou wilt be obſtinate and ſtill give them to the world, heere I preſent thee a Himne, which thou maiſt ſing to the head of this world.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           The Himne.
                           TE Papam damnamus.
                           Te confuſum confitemur.
                           Te confuſionis Patrem, omnis terra arbitratur.
                           Tibi Eccleſiastici & ſeculares inceſſabili voce proclamant. Mundanorum mundo gratiarum actio.
                           
                           Confuſus, Confuſus, Confuſus dominus Babaloth.
                           Vacui ſunt coeli & terra: operibus gloriae tuae.
                           
                              
Te glorioſus, Theologorum chorus.
                           Te Medicorum laudabilis numerus.
                           Te Philoſophorum candidatus, vituperat exercitus.
                           Te per orbem terrarum omnis confitetur ſchola.
                           Patrem Mentis aegestatis.
                           Reprobandum tuum falſum & innorme Collegium.
                           Malum quoque tuum ſpiritum
                           Tu rex gloriae vanae.
                           Tu ſuperbiae ſempiternus es filius.
                           Tu ad regendam ſuſcepturus Eccleſiam, confudiſti mundum.
                           Tu injuncto mortis juramento, clauſisti tibi credentibus Regna coelorum.
                           Tu ad dexteram Diaboli ſedes: in pena Luciferi.
                           Iudicatus crederis eſſe venturus.
                           Te ergo quae ſumus tuis Scholis ſubueni, quas ligitioſo furore perdidiſti.
                           Aeterno fac cum ſociis tuis igne numerari.
                           Damna Papatum hunc Domine, & maledic haereditati ſuae.
                           Et doma eum & humillia illum uſque in aeternum.
                           Per ſingulos dies Papam maledicimus tibi.
                           Et vituperamus nomen tuum in ſeculum, & in ſeculum ſeculi.
                           Dignare Domine die illo, Peccatorem hunc damnare.
                           Nèmiſerearis ejus Domine, nè miſerearis ejus.
                           Fiat maledictio tua Domine ſuper eum, quemadmodum ſperavimus in te.
                           Tibi Domine peccavit, confundatur in aeternum, Amen.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  The ſame in Engliſh.
                  WE condemn thee ô pope. A thankſgiving of worldlings to the world.
                  
                  We knowledge thee to be confounded.
                  Al the earth judgeth thee to be the father of confuſion.
                  To thee the cleargie and laitie continually docrie
                  Confounded, confounded, confounded: Lord of Babaloth.
                  Heaven and earth are void: of the workes of thy glorie.
                  The glorious companie of divines: diſpraiſe thee.
                  The goodly ſocietie of Phiſitions: diſpraiſe thee.
                  The noble armie of Philo ſophers: diſpraiſe thee.
                  Everie ſchoole throughout the

world doth knowledge thee:
                  The father of the povertie of minde to be.
                  Thy counterfeit and enormous colledge to be reprobate.
                  Alſo thine evill ſpirit.
                  Thou art the king of vaine glorie.
                  Thou art the everlaſting ſon of pride.
                  When thou tookest upon thee to governe the church, thou diſorderedſt the world.
                  Thou by an injoined oth of death, haſt ſhut the kingdome of heaven to all that beleeve thee.
                  Thou ſitteſt at the right had of the divel: in the pain of Lucifer.
                  Thou art beleeved that thou ſhalt come: to be judged.
                  Wee therefore praie thee, helpe thy colledges: which thou haſt caſt away by cōtentious fury.
                  Make them to be numbred with thy fellowes: in fire everlaſting.
                  O Lord, condemn this papacy:
                  And curſe his inheritage.
                  Subdue him: and cast him downe for ever.
                  Day by day ô pope we curſe thee.
                  We diſpraiſe thy name: ever world without end.
                  
                     Ʋouchſafe, ô Lord, that daie, this ſinner to condemne.
                  O Lord have no mercy upon him, have no mercy upon him.
                  O Lord let thy curſe lighten upon him: as we have trusted in thee.
                  O Lord, againſt thee hath he ſinned: let him for ever be confounded.
               
            
            
               An anſwer to the ſongs of Chriſtovall Bravo, of Cordova, blinde of bodie and ſoule, in praiſe of the victorie, which the Spaniſh Armada had againſt the Engliſh the yeere of our Lord God, 1588
               
                  The firſt ſong.
                  
                     O Emperour moſt high, Ieſus Chriſt conſecrate,
                     Sonne of the virgine pure, without The virgin in hir ſong calling God hir Savior, confeſſeth to be a ſinner. ſin begat:
                     Which wouldeſt for our ſin, ſuffer and die
                     vpon the croſſe, whipt, crowned, and hung on hie,
                     
                        
Give me thy grace, thou crowned king of kings
                     to ſing and recount, theſe memorable things,
                     Which in England There paſſed no ſuch thing in England, it was at ſea. past, as told Falſe witnes, is no proofe. I have beene,
                     and thou bleſſed virgine, divine-garden and Queene
                     Of Chriſt An error to call on anie ſaving Chriſt, of whom Saint Paul ſaith we have an advocate with the father Chriſt Ieſus. get me favor, ſith he is thy ſon,
                     that my toong may well end, what I have begon:
                     Since our Armada went foorth, as is prooved at last
                     from the citie of Liſhborne in May that is past:
                     Sailing with diligence, care, and all ſpeede
                     paſſing by the Groine, a good harborough at need.
                     Heere begin the plagues
                     of Egypt.
                     And after fewe daies, great Bicauſe they came not in the ſervice of God but to diſtroy his Church. ſtormes there aroſe
                     that unto the Groine the fleete againe goſe.
                     
                        Pharao his hart is hardned.
                     
                     And the three and twentie of Iulie, this yeere yet in hand,
                     they purpoſe to proſecute, their voiage began.
                     
                        Now begin the lies.
                     
                     The ſecond of August, the Armada of The Armie was not vnder the government of Sir Francis Drake, but under the Lord high Admirall. 
                        Drake
                     
                     that peſtilent man, towards ours did make.
                     
                        A lie.
                     
                     On whom ours ſet, with courage not thought,
                     and ſtraight ſeven & twenty, to the bottom were brought:
                     And fower more, without yards there were ſtaid
                     when all the reſt fled, they were ſo afraid,
                     Towards Dover in haste, as written I found,
                     to enter the Thames, (their fortune ſo fround)
                     to live in their harbrough, more ſafe and more ſound.
                  
               
               
                  The Anſwer to the firſt Song.
                  
                     BLinde foole, lier, unbaptized and ſcald
                     why thus devoid of feare, on Christ hast thou cald,
                     To give and repart, of his bountifull glorie,
                     to thee the treaſure, of his grace (thou unhollie)
                     Saieng, thou wilt ſing, a matter ſtrange and true,
                     which was a loud lie, as everie man knew:
                     Proclaiming (dog) truths, yet ſellest thou lies,
                     
                        
giving victorie to the vanquiſht, and the victors deſpies,
                     Abaſing the victor, and exalting the ſlaine,
                     And the glorie of England thou givest to Spaine.
                     Monſter of nature, borne in ſome lake,
                     mongst flags, the ſonne of a toade or a ſnake,
                     
                        Lucifer thy father, and Sathan thy brother,
                     a vaſſall of hell, Leaſings thy mother,
                     Thou wanteſt thy three powers, and in ſteed thou hast got
                     lieng and blindnes, and of aſſes braines a pot,
                     I call thee Lope, the Vylde, blinde aſſe, and dolt,
                     Ram, ape, parret, munckie and colt:
                     Oyſtridge, and ape, clad in a coate,
                     of greene and ſundry colours, thy lightnes to note.
                     Mutinous, perverſe, ſhameleſſe in all things,
                     enemie to ſee peace, amongſt Chriſtian kings:
                     Saie, how durſt thou ſing, the king of Spaine had deſtroide
                     the Engliſh Navie, (and yet he the annoid.)
                     Thou infameſt thy woorthy king, and diſpiſeſt his decree,
                     thou overthrowest his crowne, ſcepter and degree:
                     And tell me bold bayard, more fowle then horſe gall,
                     why ſuch words thou uſeſt, gainſt a ſoldier ſo tall,
                     As is Sir Francis Drake, of Gods temple a prop,
                     a defender of faith, and to Britaine a hoape:
                     Of whom, the univerſall, trembles at his name,
                     the Indies for witnes, can ſpeake of his fame:
                     Galicia, Cales, San. Domingo, Cartagena, fear him at this day,
                     San. Auguſtine, Santiago, and the fierce Ocean ſea:
                     The duke of Medina, feard, and durſt not abide him,
                     
                        Valdes that fled not, may ſaie how he tride him:
                     He lost his ſtrong ſhip, and his ſoldiers ſtout,
                     but he loſt not his honor, by fighting it out:
                     They (blind) who blindfold fled, are of thy ſide,
                     whoſe ſhips are loſt, diſplanckt, and opened wide.
                     Who came out of the Groine, in month of Iulie laſt,
                     of munition full, of men, powder ſhot, and good repaſt:
                     Theſe are the loſt, the Engliſh have the best,
                     for God was on their ſide, who now doth give them rest.
                  
                  The end of the anſwer to the firſt ſong.
               
               
                  
                  The blinde mans ſecond ſong, wherein he proſecuteth his untruthes and injuries.
                  
                     AFter the great battell, was ended (as before)
                     the ſecond of August, a fight moſt fierce and ſore,
                     Our Armada retired, to place moſt apt and meet,
                     to know if any hurt, had chanced to our fleet:
                     One ſhip alone was miſt, which burned was at ſea,
                     by ſlight regard, hard miſhap, and luckleſſe daie:
                     But all the men were ſaved, and not a man was loſt,
                     and other harme was none, for that was all and moſt.
                     And on the ſixt daie, of month I named last
                     our Armada going on, thorow narrow chanell paſt:
                     And ſo did the contrarie, proceed the ſelfe ſame way:
                     as neere unto England, as either of them may,
                     And the Engliſh thought, the wind of us to get,
                     but God would it not ſo, their purpoſe he did let:
                     And when the darkeſome night, was come upon the skie,
                     the adverſe part prepard, at anker where they lie,
                     Eight ſhips all burning bright, which ſeemed to the view,
                     ech ſhip of them a hell, all what I ſing is true:
                     Of powder full and ſtones, with timber huge and great,
                     with engens many more, which I can not repeat,
                     That they on our Armada, at unawares might drive
                     to burne our ſhips and men, not leaving one alive:
                     But he the king of Heaven, which rules the world wide,
                     permitted not theffect, their treazons put a ſide.
                     For he inſpirde our Duke, of that his foe had wrought,
                     and then the prudent Duke, to prevent the treaſon ſought,
                     Or elſe they burnt must be, wherefore the Duke doth ſend,
                     and wils each man his cable cut, and all away to wend
                     Vnto the ſea, where larger ſcoape they had.
                     his grace did ſo command, which made them alſo glad,
                     Every one did goe, the way that he thought best,
                     and then the flaming ſhips came burning from the rest,
                     They came with loftie pride, with fire which they brought,
                     
                        
but our Armada gone, behind they leaving nought.
                     And their pretended ill, on us tooke no effect,
                     for all their hidden harme, in vaine flew up direct.
                     Now all this past and donne, and that the night was ſpent,
                     and the reſplendent Pheb, his beames abroad had ſent:
                     There blew a pleaſant gale, great joie unto all,
                     but chiefely our To flie. Armada, did need it moſt of all.
                     So Aſſaulting the Spaniſh. came the adverſe ſhips, that were not far behind,
                     and at this very time, as fortune had aſſignd,
                     Both Armadas went, with power and courage braue,
                     by a chanell ſtraight, made by the brackiſh wave:
                     And in the ſight of Dunkerck, appeerd another fleet,
                     and the gallion S. Martine, for the duke a ſhip ſo meet,
                     Knew that they were of England, the fleet which all deſcrie,
                     and all the rest do know them to, by flag that ſtands on hie:
                     And in this ſort, they ſailed on their waie,
                     untill the twelfth of August, after which ſaid daie
                     Befell, as heerafter, my pen ſhall you declare,
                     that day into Callis, a ſhip arrived there,
                     Which ſaid, they ſawe togither, the two Armadas fierce,
                     and after hir another ſhip, which did the ſame rehearſe,
                     And that he ſawe much ſtuffe, and riches cast in ſea,
                     and that in boates They of the Galliaſſe threw themſelves into the ſea, without boats to eſcape aſhoare. to ſhore, the Engliſh ran away
                     To ſave themſelves from harme, which came on them ſo fast.
                     and then the thirteenth day, more newes there came in haſte
                     From the kingdome of England, moſt certaine and moſt ſure,
                     by our ſpies and toongs, which there for us endure,
                     That fifteene of their ſhips, were ſent unto the ground,
                     and that the Gallion, wherein our duke was found,
                     Called the Sant Martine, which is hir proper name,
                     had grappled with the ſhip, wherein the great theefe came,
                     Cald Francis Drake, who brought in his conſort,
                     of all the men of England, thoſe of the higheſt ſort,
                     Marqueſes, There are no Dukes in England. Dukes, Counts, and men of honor great:
                     and our great duke him tooke, and did him ill intreat.
                     And then towards Scotland, bicauſe he thought it well,
                     he went, with winde in poupe, as I do heare tell:
                     Theſe (lordings) are the newes, which hitherto we know,
                     
                        
of the eſtate of war, that this our church doth follow,
                     Beſeeche we Ieſus, & bleſſed Marie divine,
                     to give us victorie, for ſhe can do it fine,
                     And preſerve our great mornarch, Don Phillip of Spaine,
                     and give us his grace and glorie, for that must be our gaine.
                  
                  The end of the ſecond ſong.
               
               
                  The Anſwer.
                  
                     BY ſayeng the furious ſea, and Phebus ſhining bright,
                     by calling policie treaſon, (which is not ſo in fight.)
                     A blind dolt and foole, a foole in highest degree,
                     doth now become a Poet, his verſe that we may ſee:
                     A perfect Iewe, by due deſcent, borne in Cordova,
                     
                     which is a Citie in the kingdome of Andaluzia.
                     
                     And to give us to understand, that verſe he could deviſe,
                     he writs in ragged rime, approoved filthy lies:
                     And ſingeth them in ſtreets, with muſicke, in his laies,
                     the people clapping hands, then in his ſong he ſaies.
                     After the great battle, was ended (as before,)
                     the ſecond of August, a fight most fierce and ſore.
                     How much better mightest thou ſay, (unprofitable blind,)
                     (ſith that there was no battaile, but flying with the wind.)
                     After that our Armada, the Engliſh had deſcride,
                     they began themſelves to lighten, and faſt away they hied,
                     Cables cut, and ſailes they hoiſe, to ſcape awaie with vita,
                     
                     their backs they turne to death, the ſoldiers of Medina,
                     While Charles and his many, to death do turne their breaſt,
                     like valiant & ſtout champions, brought up in Mars his neſt.
                     And there like men couragious, esteeming life in little
                     preferring first their honor, before a thing ſo brittle,
                     The duke flies, Drake followes, by order that he had
                     of Charles the great Admirall, whoſe ſight the Drake did glad,
                     With whoſe onely preſence, Drakes valor did increaſe,
                     doing immortall deeds, which I cannot rehearſe,
                     And ſo the woorthy Drake, like eagle high that laie,
                     cloſing his two wings, fals downe upon his praie,
                     
                        
In this ſame maner and ſort, on Spainyard he laieth load,
                     he cloſeth up his wings, his tallons are abroad:
                     The tallons that he opens, are courage and attempt,
                     his cloſed wings are feare, from which he is exempt.
                     His wings he doth reſigne, his tallons ſerve him beſt,
                     wherewith he takes or kils, all them that do reſiſt.
                     Let Valdes heerof be witnes, and thoſe with him that were,
                     alſo Don George Manrique, which fled away for feare,
                     The Sant Phillip, and S. Mathew, ſhips of great account,
                     and all thoſe who ruled them, whoſe fame in Spain did mount:
                     If ſuch be Drakes valor, why then, (thou toong of ſnake)
                     doſt thou defame for theefe, and of no account him make:
                     But he that is baſe, can never defame the valorous man,
                     nor yet the coward, the bold, nor king, the rustick ſwaine.
                     If thou this hadst knowne, thou wouldst not be ſo bold,
                     ſo openly to ſpeake, and ſuch foule lies have told.
                     The good tree, good fruite doth yeeld, with bloſſoms faire & gaie,
                     the ill yeelds none but leaves, wormes, and webs alwaie:
                     Thou art an evill tree, thy roote all rotten lies,
                     the fruits that come from thee, are falſe and ſhameles lies.
                     The Engliſh Navie to be overcome, I ſaie it is a lie,
                     thou lieſt in ſaieng in boats, the Engliſh then did flie,
                     Thou lieſt in calling theefe, him that deſerves ſo much,
                     and him that by his courage, hath gotten honor ſuch:
                     Thou lieſt in ſaieng you tooke priſoners that ſame day,
                     fourteene Engliſh ſhips, and all they brought to ſea.
                     Thou lieſt both loud and lowe, at firſt and in the midſt,
                     thou lieſt all in all, thou lieſt in all thou didſt:
                     Dogs eate thy toong, the ants eate thine eares,
                     hungrie ravens eate thy guts, as helliſh griffen teares.
                     Thy head uppon a gibbet, in heat, and whorie frost,
                     let ſtand in deſert place, like one forlorne and lost.
                     Thy hands chopt off aliue, thy feete and yeke thy knees,
                     thy ſhoulders all bewhipt, thy belly burnt, and thies.
                     The rest of thy members, conſumde to dust and Aſhe,
                     the eies which thou dost want, let them remaine as traſh.
                  
               
               The end of the Anſwer to the ſecond ſong.
            
            
               
               The Author yelds the reaſons that mooved him, to anſwere matters ſo fabulous and baſe.
               
               
                  LEaſt anie man ſhould blame me for imploieng my pen in anſwering matters ſo baſe (as are theſe five letters, and eſpecially the blind mans ſongs) and ſhould ſaie that it had bin better imploied in matters of greater moment. Not gainſaieng him that ſhall thus correct me, I give him to underſtand, that the good tennis plaier, labors as much, and uſeth as great diligence, to reach that ball which commeth aloft in the aire, as for that which commeth cloſe by the grounde: So that neither for the height, it paſſeth from his ſight, neither for the lownes it eſcapeth him: the conſideration of this compariſon, hath lifted up my minde, not to diſmaie in great matters, nor to be aſhamed of the leſſer, ſo I diſdaine not to anſwer this (though ſhort) for that the minde wherewith I do it doth greaten the ſame. And that Spaine (which not being faulty in this miſcheefe) ſuffer not unpuniſhed the blindman and his auctors, the diſturbers of the common wealth, nor to conſent to be deceived hencefoorth with ſuch light vanities, chiefely their deſcent being from Tubal the ſonne of Noah, and of the Goads and Vandals, nations ſo woorthy that at this day the memorie of their noble deeds endures, and ſhall endure for ever, and being endued with ſo good and marvellous wits, & having ſo good a king as they have, of whoſe friendſhip all Chriſtian kings are glad, chieflie in reſpect of his great power and treaſure, alſo for his worthie and politicall government, experience, learning, and due adminiſtring of Iuſtice. I have alſo taken this labor to ſhewe unto Spaine, that il counſellers & flatterers, deſtroy hir: and ſo that it is convenient to avoide them, or better, to puniſh them, that the puniſhing of theſe may be a ſcaring to thoſe

that ſhall come heerafter. I have alſo charged my ſelfe with this burthen, to ſhew in ſhort reaſons, how contrarie things have hapned, to that as was there publiſhed and given to underſtand. It was divulgated in Spaine, that they were victors, they being then vanquiſhed, as well is ſeene. They alſo thought in Spaine not to have left an Engliſh man alive. O blinde imagination, and, ô, ſorrowfull Spaine, howe farre better were it for thee to emploie this imagination (that it might take effect) againſt Infidels, (ſetting all thy reſt, and calling all Chriſtian kings to thy aide, and it ſhould not be a ſmall ſuccor which thou mighteſt have out of this kingdome of England) rather then againſt Chriſtians, which do nothing daie nor night, but ſerve God and give him thanks. There, there, ô Spaine, ſhouldſt thou ſhew thy power to the enlarging of Chriſtendome, and not heere in diminiſhing thereof. Thou perſecuteſt Engliſh men, as thine enimies, to maintaine the opinion of men, & thou perſecuteſt not the Turke, to maintaine and defend that of God. Thou perſecuteſt Engliſhmen, poore in goods & rich in faith, & thou perſecuteſt not the Turke rich in ſubſtance, and altogither without faith. Thou troubleſt the minds both of us and thy owne common weale, and thou cauſeſt tranquilitie amongſt the Turks, enimies to us all: thou makeſt wars againſt Chriſtianiſme, and giveſt peace unto Paganiſme. Finally that which reſults heerof is, that Chriſtianitie weepeth, and Gentilitie laugheth; Chriſtianitie troubled, and Gentilitie at quiet; Chriſtianitie in wars and the Gentils in peace: Chriſtians in torments, Gentils in contentments: Chriſtians in mourning weeds, Gentils in feaſts; and Chriſtians in burials, and the Gentils in ſports. Behold heer, Spaine, whereto thou haſt made this great and coſtly Armada, to diſcontent thy friends, and pleaſure thy enimies: and the better to pleaſure them, thou wouldeſt not content thee with leſſe than the bereaving of the life of thoſe of this kingdome. And put caſe it had fallen out according to thy thoughts, doſt thou not conſider how deere it would haue coſt thee, and that thou ſhouldeſt have remained onely with the lordſhip of earth and ſtones,

mountaines and brambles, and not of men? And if it ſeem unto thee an eaſie matter, to people it a newe: thou haſt not people to do it, unleſſe thou wilt leave thy ſelfe deſert. For if thou looke well into it, thou ſhalt ſee how loſt, thou art alreadie, which loſſe conſiſteth not in ſacks of wool and other merchandiſe, and money, but of thy men: Now for Naples, nowe Cicilia, for Lumbardie, Flanders (which is thy Sepulchre) for the Indies, Portingall, and the Terceras, for thy owne coaſts, for Barbarie, for the Ilandes of Mayork and Menorcke, for Sardenia, & the gallies, & finally for the frontiers of thy owne kingdome. And if thou couldeſt decerne the people that everie hower goeth out of thee, thou ſhouldeſt ſee how-ſoon thou art like to lie waſte, for though thou haſt much ground, yet is it not all peopled, and that which is inhabited, hath want both of men and women, but ſpecially of men, and ſo if thou ſhouldeſt compaſſe to conquer this kingdome, thou muſt leave thy owne to the Moores; who if the knew the few men that thou haſt, they would not ſleepe ſo long, neither leave thee at ſuch reſt; though peradventure their reſt, is for our unreſt; as one ſhould ſaie, let now Chriſtians breake one anothers heads, let one kill another, and after we will enter to keepe the peace, and ſo remaine lords of all. Who doubteth but that the Turke rejoiceth at the troubles in Fraunce. And no leſſe would he rejoice, that thou, ô, Spaine ſtoodeſt in the like eſtate; yea, that there were no Chriſtianitie in the world. You ſee then heereby, that the deſire which you had, to bereave Engliſhmen of their life, was to conſent with that of the Turks. Againſt this thy wicked deſire, did the mighty arme of God oppoſe it ſelfe, that thou mighteſt not paſſe on therewith, hindring thy ſo ill a thought, and puniſhing thy (ſo great a) follie: puniſhing thee, as thou wouldeſt have puniſhed us. Content thy ſelfe Spaine with that thou haſt, & deſire not to embrace more within thy armes, then thou art well able to compaſſe, for he that ſo doth cannot hold it faſt: and he that murmures at many is hated of many, and he that diſquieteth many, is perſecuted of many. O deere Spaine, and if thou didſt but knowe and

conſider, how dangerous a thing it is, to procure kingdomes and Signiories, by unlawfull meanes, and by prejudicing thy neighbors and brethren; how ſhouldeſt thou then withdraw thy hands from ſo many wars, excuſe thee of ſo many hard labors, and perſecutions, and loſſe of men and money: how much more, I know thou art not ignorant of that old proverbe which ſaith; That which is well gotten is loſt: but that which is ill, both it, and the getter. It is a rule of right, That of goods ill gotten, the third heire ſhall never enjoie. Open thy eies, ô, Spaine, and ſee what beſt complieth thee. Example heerof we have in the ſacred Scripture. That Herode Aſcolonita, which tyrannically and againſt reaſon and Luc. 3. juſtice, had uſurped the kingdome of Iudea, had his eies ſcant cloſed up, when his kingdom was divided into fower parts, and in the principall parte thereof, which was Iudea, ſucceeded a Gentile for preſident, called Pilate.
               
               The tribes which Ieroboam tyrannically uſurped is a matter 3. King. 12. well knowne, that all his ſonnes enjoied them not. And king Achab (which unlawfully poſſeſſed anothers heritage) his houſe was deſtroied by Iehu. Neither ſhould it better 4. King. 10. befall thee, ô, Spaine, then it did unto Achab, Ieroboam, and Herode; for hadſt thou gotten thy pretence, yet ſhouldeſt thou not have enjoied it, for being il gotten. But me thinks I heare thee, ô, Spaine to ſaie, that if the heires of theſe enjoied not the goods and poſſeſſions which they got, it was bicauſe they got it againſt reaſon, juſtice, and the will of God. But that thou cameſt with thy mightie Armada, by the ordinance of God and government of the holie Ghoſt, and therefore thou cameſt to deſtroy and kill, and that thou ſhouldſt have enjoied that which thou hadſt gotten. If, of ſo vaine a preſumption, thou couldſt alleage anie place of the ſacred Scripture in thy defence; then neither would I call thy preſumption vaine, nor gainſaie thee. But I gainſay thee, bicauſe thou haſt no reaſon, & I cal it vain, bicauſe they are ſmokes of thy vainglories, like thoſe of them (of whom Moyſes ſpeaketh) that woulde builde a tower, Gen. 11. whoſe top ſhould reach unto heaven, who, (in rewarde of their pride) were puniſhed and deſtroied. When the Lords

people went foorth of Egypt, remaining in the wildernes, amongſt other things that the Lord ſpak unto Moyſes their guide and captaine generall, this was one (as appeereth:) Exod. 23. 
                  That they ſhould not encline to the Gods of the Gentils, but that they ſhould deſtroy and breake their altars. And afterwards the Lord ſaith unto Moyſes: Take heede to thy ſelfe that thou make no 
                  Exod. 34. 
                  compact with the inhabitants of the land, whether thou goest, least they be the cauſe of ruine amongst you. But you ſhall overthrowe their altars, and breake their images in peeces, and cut downe their groaves. God commanded Ioſhua to deſtroy the citie of Iericho, Ioſhua 6. even to the overthrowing of the wals. All the inhabitants of Ai were deſtroied and the citie laid waſte. God Ioſhua 8. commanded Gideon to deſtroy the altar of Baal, and he did it. So then theſe, (and others which I might alleage:) If they conquered kingdomes, ſlew the people, and raced cities unto the grounde, it was by the commandement of God. For ſuch kingdomes, people, and provinces lived, prejudiciall to the honor of God. But who commanded thee, ô, Spaine, to come to make war upon Engliſhmen? If it were by the commandement of God, and for their idolatrie; give us teſtimonie and ſhew us the place where God ſpake, and ſhew us thy Moyſes, thy Ioſhua, or thy Gideon: and if it were by ill counſellers, puniſh them, and repent thee of that which is done, and amend from hence foorth. I would gladly know which of theſe two cauſes ſtirred up this war, whether the commandement of God, or ill counſell. To the firſt I ſaie (if thou ſaieſt it was by the cōmandement of God) that thou erreſt in ſo ſaieng, ſith heaven & earth ſhall faile, but the word of God ſhall never faile: and ſo, had his divine Majeſtie commanded thee to come, he had given thee victorie: he gave it thee not; then he was not pleaſed with thy comming. He promiſed the land of promiſe to the children of Iſrael, and though the countrie was ſtrong, and the defenders ſtrong and many, and they weake and weary; yet he gave it them: and to thee would he have given this Iland, had he promiſed it thee. Beſides this, thy comming could not be acceptable to God, neither was it with his conſent: For God now, is not a blouddy God, but a God of

love; he puniſheth not nowe in a ſtrong arme, (as he was woont under that hard lawe) but with a hand of compaſſion: and thy comming was, throwing lightnings, thunders, and thunder bolts, and ſaieng; let them die, let them die, let not a man remaine alive; a matter moſt abhominable to God, ergo, without his conſent. That God commanded the captaines of his people, to deſtroy the gods, altars, wals, and groves of their enimies, and to put them to the ſword, the cauſe was (as I ſaide a little before) bicauſe God was offended and diſhonored by them. But we according to the povertie of our ſtrength, bleſſe, & give God thanks, and the honor that is his, we give it not to creatures: Then it is likely he would not command us to be deſtroied by thy wrathfull hand. When his people of Iſraell committed idolatrie, he put them into his enimies hands, and when they acknowledged their ſin, he delivered them: But God delivered not his people of England into the hands of the Spanyards: then God cōmanded them not to com againſt England, neither is this kingdome an enimie to God. The Gentiles had many gods, but Engliſhmen, onely one God, Father, Sonne, and holie Ghoſe, three perſons, and one onlie true God, omnipotent, and creator of the univerſall. And in ſuch ſort we beleeve in this God, that we confound not the perſons: for one perſon is of the Father, another of the Sonne; another of the holie Ghoſt; and ſo we beleeve three perſons, that yet we make not three Gods, but one God, as the ſcripture doth teach us, where he ſaith; Heare, ô, Iſrael, the Lord our God, is Lord onely. He nameth God Deut. 6. three times, bicauſe he conſiſteth of three perſons: and bicauſe theſe three perſons are one God, and not three gods; he ſaith, is Lord onely: and for that of this bleſſed Trinitie, the ſecond perſon was incarnate, and clothed himſelfe with our humanitie (for our ſalvation) therefore he ſaith in the ſecond place, our God. If then we have one God, whoſe purſons we confound not, and whoſe ſubſtance we ſeparate not; and ſay that this God, cloathed himſelfe with our miſeries for our ſalvation, and reconciled us with the everlaſting father, whom (according to our ſmall power) we

worſhip, and ſerve and obeie him according to his lawes, and not after the lawes of men: Then we have not manie gods, with the Gentiles, neither are we idolators, why God ſhould ſend you to make war upon us: and hence I conclude, that ſeeing God ſent you not, that it is the ſecond cauſe that mooved you: Which is ill counſellers; who mooved by ſome ſecret hatred, deceiving their king, and deſtroie his kingdome: The deſtroiers of kings and kingdomes are ill counſellers. Three hundred yeeres the Romanes made wars upon thee, yet never werſt thou overcome of them, but alwaies victor, till ſuch time as ill counſellers deceived thee, ſowing in thee hatred and diviſion. The ill counſels of the falſe prophets, deſtroied Iezabel, Achab, and others. And ſo thee, ô, Spaine, have thy il counſellers, and falſe prophets, waſhed and deſtroied. One of the chiefeſt cauſes why, thou haſt obtained ſo many victories againſt Turkes, Moores, the French, and other nations, hath bin bicauſe of thy good counſellers: the conſervation of the prince and people depends upon good counſell. And ſo, many honorable perſonages, have exalted manie for their good counſell, and utterly rejected il counſellers and flatterers. Octavius Augustus gave the dignity of Conſulſhip, to the philoſopher Frontonius, with ſundry other dignities, for giving good counſel. Marcus Antonius cauſed a Statua to be erected, which might remaine for a memorie for the celebration of his name, for the excellencie of his learning, and good counſels, as recordeth Iulius Capitolinus. The Emperor Domitian made Scillus oftentimes Conſul for his good counſell, as may be gathered, by certaine verſes of Martial. Trajan caried with him in his chariot triumphall Dion Pruſio, as affirmeth Suidas, for his good counſels, which he obeied. The Emperor Constantine made Ablabius of his Royall counſell, for his good counſel; ſo ſaith Eutropius, and Volatteran. Petrus Crinit. ſaith, that Theodoſius the Emperor gave the prefectſhip & charge of war, to the excellent Poet Aurelius Prudentius, for the good counſels which he gave him. And Artaxerxes king of Perſia, bought good counſell with the waight of money, (for in good counſell conſiſteth

the peace and conſervation, of the king & kingdome) & ſo did manie other moſt honorable men: the which for not to be tedious, I repeate not, contenting my ſelf with thoſe rehearſed. If then Spain and his king have good counſellers, let them take viewe of the ſucceſſe of their counſels received. Good counſels pacifie and increaſe, and ill counſels trouble and diminiſh. And ſo it appeereth plaine that poor Spaine and his king for having ill counſell, is ſo troubled, and diminiſhed of people and honor. Being nowe poore of people, and rich in enemies: poore of money and rich in expence: emptie of peace and full of warre, and heavilie laden with offendors, and well lighted of defenders. O poore Spain, and what a perfect picture is everie one of thy counſellers, of a king Herode, who, to kill Chriſt and triumph over him, ſlew both his owne and the children of his ſubjects, diminiſhing the fruite of his kingdome: even ſo hath it befallen thee, who to deſtroie the Engliſh and triumph over them, haſt loſt both thy ſubſtance and ſubjects: And as Chriſt remained free from the bloudie handes of Herode, ſo have the Engliſh eſcaped (by the divine favour) from thine. Baniſh (ſacred king) thy ill counſellers, and behold how they are deceivers and flatterers which deſtroie thee and with their fained words deceive thee. Ioab came 2. Kings 20. ſmoothly to his friend Amaſa, and ſtabbed him thorowe. Thy ill counſellers come ſmoothly to thee (ſacred king) flattering thee with their adulations, and deſtroy thee. Sawſin by truſting to the ſweete words of Dalila, was put into his enemies hands. Thou haſt truſted (ſacred king) in Iud. 16. the flatteries of thoſe who are about thee, whereby thou haſt delivered thy treaſures to the cuſtodie of thy enimies: O, lamentable caſe, that ſo milde a king ſhould be in vironed with ſo many flatterers. Note (king) that our anceſtors were voont to call the toongs of flatterers, a ſworde annointed with honie, which proverbe, S. Hierome vſeth in an Epiſtle. God commanded the children of Iſraell, that they ſhould not touch the tabernacles of the ungodly, nor anie thing of theirs, that they might not be defiled. And alſo, that at their entring the land of Canaan, that they ſhould Num. 33.
                  
deſtroy and baniſh all the inhabitants of that province, to the end that they might not be infected with their ill maners and cuſtomes. For even as the hands (though never ſo white) by handling of coales, become blacke and polluted; even ſo, be a man never ſo good, if he be converſant with ill counſellers, ſhall alſo become ill. Salomon ſaith, that he that toucheth pitch, ſhall be defiled therewith. Depart then, ô, king, and moſt woorthy prince, from ſuch ill counſellers which waſte and conſume thee, and trouble and deſtroie thy kingdome. They fell themſelves unto thee for true friends, being deceitfull enimies. Take heede (mightie king) for if theſe flatterers follow thee; it is not for thy royall perſons ſake, nor for thy vertues, but onely for thy great riches. For in like ſort as the woode breedeth the woorme which eateth & cōſumeth it; even ſo rich men bring up flatterers which by litle & litle deſtroie them. This underſtood Pſal. 141. wel the Pſalmiſt when he ſaid. Let the righteous rather ſmite me friendly, & reproove me. But let not their precious balms break mine head. There he calleth the flatterie of the wicked, precious balmes: My people, (ſaith Iſaiah) they that call thee bleſſed, even they deceave thee. More hurt (ſaith S. Hierome) doth the toong of the flatterer, then the ſword of the enimie. By admitting (moſt woorthie king) the balme of thy ill counſellers, thou haſt deceived thy ſelfe: They call thee moſt mightie, and the onely deſerver of all the kingdomes of the world. They warrant thee, that thou maiſt raiſe a thouſand tributes in thy countrie, wherewith to conquere others kingdomes: and they have done thee more harme then the ſwords of thine enimies. Flatterers are ſo prejudiciall, that Antiſtenes ſaith, it is better to fal into the power of Ravens, then of flatterers, for the Ravens eate the eies of the dead, but the flatterers corrupt the minds of the living: ſo record Laertius and Bruſonius, though others attribute this ſaieng to Diogenes. And the ſame Laertius ſaith, that Bias, the philoſopher being asked, what beaſt was moſt poiſonſome, he anſwered, of wilde beaſts the tyrant, and of tame beaſts the flatterer. AEneus Silvius reporteth, that the Emperor Sigiſmund, was ſuch an enimie to flatterers, that on a time not

being able to ſuffer the flatterings of one that praiſed him overmuch, he gave him a blowe, who ſaieng, why doſt thou ſtrike me Emperor? He anſwered; flatterer, why doeſt thou bite me? And with this (moſt valorous king) I conclude and make an ende of this particular matter: That men of high ſpirits, give not their eares to flatterers, neither accept ill counſellers. Behold it heer prooved, that the arming of Spaine, was not by the commandement of God, but through ill counſell, and therefore it periſhed. Beſides this, the Spanyards gave out (the more to pricke their people forward in fury) that if the Engliſh ſhould take any of them, that they would kill him, and not leave anie alive that ſhould fall into their hands. Truely, though the Engliſh had bin of that mind, yet had they offred no injurie to the Spaniards: for if they came proclaiming death; had it bin much that Engliſh men ſhould proclaime death? The Eccho anſwereth ſtill unto the voice without changing the words. If you ſaie evill; it anſwers evill; if good, good; if pain, paine; if glorie, glorie; the Spanyards come then, ſaieng, fire, the Eccho anſwers in Engliſhmen, fire; Spanyards ſay bloud, Engliſhmen ſaie bloud; Spanyards ſaie death, Engliſhmen ſaie death; Spanyards ſaie war, Engliſhmen ſaie war; and when they ſhall ſaie peace, then Engliſhmen will anſwer peace: But now if Engliſhmen ſhould kill all their priſoners, they ſhould do them no injurie, nor breake jus Gentium, neither that which is de jure belli, for this war deſerves not the name of a good war, bicauſe it was mooved by covetouſnes and tyrannie, and not for valour and increaſe of honor. There were wars betweene the Emperor Charles the fift & Francis king of Fraunce; but the originall was neither of tyrannie, nor covetouſnes: and this was ſeene apparantly; for Francis being priſoner by the Emperor, neer unto Pavia, in the yeere 1525. and from thence carried into Spaine: the Emperor never willed him to reſigne his crowne, neither was his thought ſuch, or ever went he about it; but rather ſet both him and his free, for in fine, they were rather wars of braverie then tyrannie. But in this war of Spaine againſt England, Spaine comming with armed hand, to deprive hir

Majeſtie of Sceprer and crowne, what injuſtice ſhould ſhe do, in cauſing all to be ſlaine, that ſhall come to hand? for tyrants deſerve no leſſe then death: And ſith Spanyards in this war ſhew themſelves tyrants, (My author is a Spanyard and therfore whatſoever you thinke or know to the contrary, yet you muſt beare with his parentheſis in this point. though naturally they be not ſo) they ſhould have no wrong done them, had they all bin ſlaine. But in fine, ſuch as the fountaine is, ſuch are the ſtreames, if the fountaine be ſweete, the ſtreames are ſweete, and if the fountaine be brackiſh, the rivers are brackiſh. The fountaine of England, which is the ſacred Majeſtie of Queene Elizabeth (whom the Lord long preſerve) is a ſweete fountaine, full of love, compaſſion, clemencie, and benignitie, and ſo are hir ſubjects; for ſuch as the Lord is, ſuch is the vaſſall. This is verefied in the ſacred Scripture. Herademas troubled and all Ieruſalem with him. And Achab and Mat. 2. 4. King. 
                  Ieſabell being wicked, ſo were the people: ſo that a good king hath good ſubjects; and ſo as hir Majeſtie is merciful, ſo are hir ſubjects; and hence it groweth, that the Engliſhmen not reſpecting the tyrannie of this war, nor the blouddie hands of the ſoldiers; but uſing clemencie with the priſoners, they have not taken their lives, but rather as though the wars had bin ſuch, as was betweene Charles and Francis, ſo have they bin well intreated and ſuccoured with meate, with apparell, hoſe and ſhooes, ſhirts, firing and other neceſſaries, Engliſhmen ſeeming to be ſorie, and to bewaile the poore Spanyards, which periſhed in Ireland, by the hands of the ſavage Iriſhmen; and to ſerve for meate, ſome in the ſea for the fiſh, and others on the land, for the carrion Crowes; ſo that they ſorrowe the loſſe of the dead, and ſuccour the neceſſitie of the priſoners. And all this, for being hir Majeſtie full of love and not of rigor, and ſo aboundant in clemencie, and not in revenge, a greater friend to pardon, then to puniſh: and uſing more of mercie then juſtice, ſhe ſhewes hir ſelfe moſt Chriſtian, and fearing God: Vnto whom, his divine Majeſtie graunt, long yeeres of life, augment and proſper hir eſtate, as is needfull for the holie church ſake, (ſhe being a true defender thereof) and as hir humble and loiall ſubjects deſire, Amen.
            
            
               
               The tranſlator.
               I Am to requeſt thee, (courteous Reader) to beare with the tranſlations of the blinde mans ſongs and their anſwers, for I know the verſe will ſeeme ſomewhat harſhe unto thee, wherin I was overſhot, in tieng my ſelfe ſo much to the Spaniſh, (at the authors requeſt) as you may ſee, the Engliſh to anſwer verſe for verſe with the Spaniſh: to avoide which inconvenience, receive theſe verſes following (I humblie beſeech thee) in good parte, (with the reſt of the tranſlation) which verſes follow (almoſt) verballie, though not in meeter: in ſtead whereof, I pray thee alſo, accept with good will, certaine verſes of my owne to the ſame effect, wherein thou ſhalt both pleaſure and incourage me, fare well.
               
                  Thine in good will I. L.
               
            
            
               A ſong in the praiſe of the Engliſh Nobilitie.
               
                  ARraied, in ſundrie colours, white, red, and incarnation,
                  blew, green, yellow, and murrie colour fine:
                  Plumes of feathers brave, diſplaieng foorth their minds,
                  ſtreamers fringd with gold, and ſilver round about,
                  Armor ſhining, white helmets, fine and graven,
                  ſwords broad and ſharpe, daggers ſtrong and large,
                  Launces great and long, and ſharpned ſteele at end,
                  targets faire of ſteele, iacks of proofe, of male,
                  Enſignes brave advaunſt, with red croſſe in field white,
                  and a roſe for deviſe, ſet out in colour read,
                  With letters which do ſaie, I thinke he meaneth the poſie of the gatter. 
                     Let him be puniſht and correct,
                  
                  
                     which evill thinks, & doth not do, all what, that he is boūd
                  
                  For to defend, & enlarge his cuntry & faith unto the deth.
                  From great Brytaine, iſſueout, gentlemen of fame,
                  
                     
Youths, deſirous of honor, and vſde the ſame to win,
                  do take their leave of friends, with many a brace & kiſſe,
                  From Father, from mother, from brothers, and from ſiſters,
                  from kindred, & from neighbors, & frō their houſhold chere:
                  They go towards the ſea, their enimies to ſeeke,
                  to die, or overcome, regarding life in little,
                  They go thinking upon war, and upon deeds of old
                  of their fathers, grandfathers, and others of their bloud,
                  They print in their memorie, the facts of their forefathers,
                  to ſhew themſelves no cowards, but bold, fierce, and ſtout,
                  And they, who thus do go are Gentles paſſing brave,
                  the Earles of Oxford, Northumberland, & Cumberlād,
                  
                  Of valor, force, and courage, they beare the pricke and priſe,
                  three famous woorthy Earles, wel known and tried at armes,
                  Lord Dudley, Henry Brook, Arthur Gorge and Gerard,
                  
                  which to aſſault & win, are fower woorthy ſoldiers,
                  The valorous Cicill, which Thomas hath to name,
                  who in affaires of wars, did never feare his foe,
                  
                     Charles Blunt, William Hatton, two ſoldiers noted well,
                  
                     Walter Rawleigh, not the leaſt, nor uſed leſſe in armes,
                  
                     Robert Cicill, and William, that is his brothers ſon,
                  whoſe valor goes beyond, that of the wrathfull Mars,
                  
                  Two famous Roberts eeke, Carie and Harvie cald,
                  of whome Fame proclaimes, affaires ſtrange and great:
                  Of Darcy the valiant, whoſe name is called Edward,
                  
                  Heaven beareth witnes, and all the Britiſh Ile:
                  And Horatio Palavezino, a gentleman well uſed,
                  in letters, counſell, and armes, a gallant knight of ſtrength.
                  Theſe and many other, with Charles the Lord Admirall,
                  accompanied with Drake, in armes are all as brethren,
                  One bodie, one reſolute minde, the one hath care of thother,
                  and one doth courage each, in ſuch ſo brave a caſe,
                  Now my harts, go to, they ſaie, remember we are bound
                  rather to die then flie, for flight belongs to baſe:
                  Better to die with honor, then live long diſhonored,
                  tis life to a gentleman, to die in ſuch a quarrell:
                  To ſerve God and his prince, the loyall ſubject fights,
                  and for his deere countrie, the citizen yeelds his life,
                  
                     
To this then and more, we preſent all are bound,
                  ſith that we be gentlemen, and ſerve ſo brave a Queene,
                  In ſuch converſation, the ſaile, and paſſe the time
                  when ſodainely with ſailes, they ſee the ſea beſpread,
                  They know it to be the Armada, of the mightie Spaniard
                  whoſe ſhips are like ſtrong caſtels, full of artillerie,
                  Provided well with men, and loaded with munition
                  in deſpite of raging ſea, they part in two the waves,
                  Reparted into ſquadrons, and marching in good order,
                  and with their pleaſant muſicke rejoicing skie and ſea,
                  They put feare and dread, on all that them behold,
                  ſuch a number of ſhips, as furrow up the ſea,
                  Fraunce feares, and Almany, the force of Spaniſh king,
                  ſo doth the Turcke and all the world, ſave England faire:
                  If Fraunce feare, it is for civill wars,
                  and Almany hath not hir Signiories unite:
                  And the Turcke bicauſe great Canne, doth make him wars,
                  and if the world be afraid, the world is a coward:
                  But famous England which, in peace hath all estates
                  and full of martiall men, hir cities and hir townes,
                  Which live one with another, as faithfull loving brothers,
                  they feare at all no force, nor Spaniſh mightie arme,
                  But with boldnes, valor and force that is ſeldome ſeene,
                  regarding them in nought, to foe they ſet their breaſt,
                  And with fewer men and ſhips to ſea themſelves commit,
                  determind all to die before they flie a foote:
                  And like to Tygres fierce, and Lions fraught with ire
                  they preſſe unto the fight, armed with armor brave:
                  And this determination, perceived by the foe,
                  they flie like little conie, before the cruel graiehound,
                  And better for to flie, they hoiſe ſailes and cut cables,
                  and of their treaſure rich, yeeld part unto the ſea:
                  They flie without all order, like ſoldiers yoong and rawe,
                  ſome heere, ſome there, as best may ſerve their turne,
                  And the nobles of England, do follow at their heeles,
                  chaſing and charging, glorie and honor they gaine,
                  Winning from them their ſhips, and captiving their men,
                  returning with great victorie, unto their Engliſh Ile,
                  
                     
Whereas they land with joie, their banners brave advanst
                  and with heavenly muſicke, their trumpets ſound aloud,
                  Crieng with voice moſt ſhrill, long live our royall Queene,
                  live, live, and God preſerve, hir from all forraine foes,
                  That all hir ſubjects true, may long hir grace enjoie,
                  and that almightie God, augment hir lands and ſtate.
                  Then all the ſpoile which in the war, they gained have,
                  they offer it unto the Lord, their triumph and their joie,
                  And in the church they yeeld him thanks, as is their due,
                  for ſo great grace on them beſtowed ſo free.
                  Sundrie ſongs they ſing to him, and Davids Pſalmes in verſe,
                  which lives for ever and ever, and raignes without all end.
               
               FINIS.
            
            
               The tranſlator to the ſame effect.
               
                  VVHen from the Heſperian bounds, with warlike bands,
                  the vowed fo-men of this happie Ile,
                  with martiall men, drawne foorth from many lands:
                  gan ſet their ſaile, on whom the winds did ſmile:
                  the rumors ran of conquest, war, and ſpoile,
                  and hapleſſe ſacke of this renowmed ſoile.
               
               
                  From foorth his chanels glide: the Ocean gaſd,
                  To ſee the furrowing keeles, beate on his breaſt:
                  And The Ladie of the ſea. 
                     Thetis wept, hir tides as one amaſde,
                  To ſee hir watrie boſome overprest.
                  The ſpreading pendents, and the flags from far,
                  With braieng trumps, ſo threaten balefull war.
               
               
                  
                     The goddeſſe of war. 
                     Dictimne, wakened by their bitter threats:
                  Armd with hir tooles, and weapons of defence:
                  
                     
Shaking hir launce, for inward paſſion, ſweates,
                  Driving the thought of woonted peace from hence.
                  And gliding through the circute of the aire,
                  
                     Ʋnto Vnder the name of Eliſa is ment, our gratious Queene Elizabeth. 
                     Eliſas pallace did repaire.
               
               
                  As when the flames amidſt the fields of corne,
                  With hidious noiſe, awakes the ſleepie ſwaine:
                  So do hir threatnings, ſeldome heard beforne,
                  Reviue the warlike courtiers harts againe:
                  So foorth they preſſe, ſince Pallas was their guide.
                  And boldly ſaile upon the Ocean glide.
               
               
                  The Admirall with Lion on his creaſt, L. Admirall.
                  
                  Like to Alcides on the ſtrond of Troy:
                  Armd at aſſaie, to battell is addreast:
                  The ſea that ſawe his frownes, waxt calme and coy,
                  As when that Neptune with three forkedmaſe,
                  For Trojans ſake, did keepe the winds in chaſe.
               
               
                  
                     De-Vere whoſe fame, and loyaltie hath pearſt, Earle of Oxford.
                  
                  The Tuſcan clime, and through the Belgike lands,
                  By winged Fame, for valor is rehearſt:
                  Like warlike Mars upon the hatches ſtands,
                  His tusked Bore gan fome for inwarde ire,
                  While Pallas fild his breast, with warlike fire.
               
               
                  
                     Percy whoſe fame the northren Albane kings, Earle of Northumberland.
                  
                  With bleeding creaſt report and publiſh foorth:
                  Preſt then in place, him Pallas armor brings,
                  And bids him boldly to avowe his woorth:
                  Laieng hir lip upon his Ivorie browe,
                  Enjoining Fate, his fortunes to allow.
               
               
                  A-downe his ſhoulders hang his ambar locks,
                  Like Phoebus golden treſſes feately ſpread:
                  Manly he ſtands to bide the Spaniards ſhocks,
                  Awarlike helmet fixt upon his head,
                  May God of Phyſicke. 
                     Aeſculapius with his cunning charmes,
                  Preſerve the toward Lord, from future harmes.
               
               
                  
                  Next him the matchleſſe Clifford ſhakes his ſword, Earle of Cumberlād.
                  
                  (Like to Hercules the ſonne of Iupiter and Alcmena. 
                     Alcides, faire Alcmenas ſonne)
                  His lookes are ſterne, his locks do feare affoord,
                  Within his breaſt doth manly courage woone,
                  Vpon his creſt the dragon liſt to frowne,
                  Empald and compast with a golden crowne.
               
               
                  On ſodaine gan haught Howard preſſe in place:
                  His argent lion couched at his feete: L. Thomas.
                  
                  Oft lookt he backe, and from his honored face,
                  The trickling teares dropt downe, ſo ambar, ſweete,
                  That faire Eliſa viewing of his will,
                  Avowd, my Howard will be faithfull ſtill.
               
               
                  
                     Seymor the chiefetaine next ſupplied his roume,
                  A wreath of Baie his temples did adorne, L. Honrie.
                  
                  His arme to war Minerva firſt did dombe,
                  His pen by proofe brought forraine ſtiles in ſcorne,
                  
                     Phoebus ſo ſhine upon his courage now,
                  As each his skill and poems do allow.
               
               
                  What neede I write of Brooke, or Gorges praiſe, M. Henrie Brooke. M. Gorge. Sir William Hatton. L. Dudley. M. Gerard. Sir Thomas Cicill. M. William Cicill. M. Darcie. M. R. Harvie. Sir Walter Rawleigh. M. Robart Carie.
                  
                  Of Hattons will, of Dudleys skill in armes,
                  Of Gerards hope, of Cicils haught aſſaies,
                  Of Darcies power, of Harvies hot alarmes,
                  Of Rawleighs art, of Caries skill in lance:
                  Of haught Horatios ſtately checke of chance.
               
               
                  From foorth the Oxford. Sir Charles Blunt. 
                     Oxens tract, to courtly ſtate,
                  I ſee the treaſure of all Science come:
                  Whoſe pen of yore, the Muſes ſtile did mate,
                  Whoſe ſword is now unſheathd to follow drumbe,
                  
                     Parnaſſus knowes my Poet by his looke,
                  
                     Charles Blunt, the pride of war, and friend of booke.
               
               
                  Moorne not thou matchleſſe parragon of war, Sir Francis Drake.
                  
                  In theſe deſcriptions, to be placed laſt:
                  Thy glories take their eſſence from a far,
                  
                     
Haught Drake himſelfe the brunt of war hath paſt,
                  Ynough to arme theſe nobles to the deed,
                  Whilst matchleſſe thou command, adviſe, and lead.
               
               
                  Helpe Muſes now, with fruitefull lines to note
                  This warlike worke: the fleets are both in ſight:
                  The canons rore, makes ring the trembling flote:
                  The armies ioine, and grapple to the fight:
                  As he that ſees the windes with bitter blast:
                  The ſtately towers in winter time to taſte.
               
               
                  Nought ſounds or ecchoeth in the woondring aire,
                  But noiſe of death and dreadfull drirement:
                  As when the ſons of Cham ſought heavens repaire,
                  Ech neighboring regions heares of languiſhment,
                  Thus opened Goddeſſe of diſcorde. 
                     Pandoras boxe of ſcath,
                  That fild the ſeas with bloud, with ſpoiles and wrath.
               
               
                  At last the heavens gan cleare, the foes gan flie,
                  
                     Iehovahs hand aſſisted Englands right:
                  Our thankefull peeres lift up their hands on hie,
                  Avowing ſtill in countries cauſe to fight:
                  Bleſſing our God that on his people ſpreads
                  His grace, and heapes his ire on envious heads.
               
               
                  And home returnd (the dastard Spaniards gon)
                  They humbly bend at faire Eliſas feete,
                  Whoſe praiers meane while, had pierſd the heavenly throne,
                  Ech one with dutie do their Princes meete,
                  Whiles midſt their joie true peace gan ſoone returne,
                  Intending with Zabetha to ſojorne.
               
               
                  Long maist thou rest ſweete Peace. Nymph within hir bowre,
                  Whileſt forraine countries woonder at hir wit,
                  That ſwaies hir Scepter with a matchleſſe power,
                  Sweete muſe now ceaſe, though ſcarſely wakened yet,
                  That when hir fame by vertues conqueſt ſhines,
                  Thou maist eternize hir, within thy lines.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   