
      
         
            
            ¶A Newe Ballade.
            
               O Dere Lady Elyſabeth, which art our right and vertous Quene
               God hath endued the wt mercy & fayth, as by thy workes it may be ſene
               Wherefore good Quene I counſayle thee, Lady Lady.
               For to beware of the ſpiritualtie moſt dere Lady.
            
            
               Haue you not rede of your progenitours, which was before you many a yere
               How they endured many ſharpe ſhowers, as by the cronicles it doth appere
               And many of them came to euell hap, lady lady,
               And all was through the forked cap moſt dere Lady.
            
            
               ¶Haue you nat rede of Wyllyam Rufus the ſecond kyng hereof that name
               How he was ſlayne moſte maruelous, all through the curſſed ſeede of caine.
               Tyrell kyllede hym with an arrowe, Lady lady
               Yet ſom men ſayed he ſhot at a ſparow moſte dere Lady.
            
            
               ¶Haue you not rede of good Kyng Iohn, how by them he was vndone
               The Biſhop of Canterbury ye wicked mā, accuſed him to the court of Rome
               They enterdyted his lande as the cronicle ſayeth, Lady Lady.
               A monke poyſoned him to his death, moſte dere Lady.
            
            
               ¶Haue you not rede of the ſecond Richard, who was the black princes ſōne
               How they handled him full hard, and famiſhed him til lyfe was donne
               In Powles they made him a funerall Lady Lady,
               To blinde the peoples eyes withall, mooſte dere Lady.
            
            
               ¶Haue you not rede of the ſixt Henry which was a good and a ſimple man
               The Cardinall of Wyncheſter truly, made him loſe, that hys father wanne
               The good Protector his vncle dere, Lady Lady,
               The prieſtes kept war with him a longe yere moſte dere Lady.
            
            
               ¶Then came your father, King Henry ye .viii. which was a prince of victory
               And he depoſed them all ſtraight, when he had ſpyed their Idolatry
               If this be trewe as trewe it was, Lady, Lady,
               God graunt your grace may do no leſſe moſt dere Lady.
            
            
               ¶Thē came your brother king Edward, which was a good & vertuoꝰ child
               And to gods word he had regarde, but the wicked prieſtes hath hym begilde
               And rayſed vp trentalles in euery place, Lady Lady,
               And ſome of them preached agaynſt his grace moſt dere Lady,
            
            
               ¶Then came your ſyſter quene Mary, & for fiue yeres that ſhe did rayne,
               All that was done Edward and Hary, her wicked prieſtes made it but vaine
               They brought in agayne the Romyſhe lore, Lady Lady,
               Whiche was baniſhed longe before, moſte dere Lady.
            
            
               ¶Then God ſent vs your noble grace, as in dede it was highe tyme
               Whiche dothe all popery cleane deface, and ſet vs forth Gods trewe deuine
               For whome we are all bound to praye Lady Lady,
               Longe life to raigne bothe night and day, moſte dere Ladye.
            
            FINIS.
            
               quod. R.M.
            
         
      
   