
      
         
            
            
            Micro-cynicon. SIXE SNARling Satyres. 
                  Inſatiat Cron.
                  
                  Prodigall Zodon.
                  
                  Inſolent Superbia.
                  
                  Cheating Droone.
                  
                  Ingling Pyander.
                  
                  Wiſe Innocent.
                  
               
            
            
               Adſis pulcher homo canis hic tibi pulcher emendo.
            
            
            Imprinted at London by Thomas Creede, for Thomas Buſhell, and are to be ſold at his ſhop at the North doore of Paules Church. 1599.
         
         
            
            
            His defiance to Enuy.
            
               
                  ENuy, which makſt thy ſelfe in commō guiſe,
               To haunt deſeruers, and to hunt deſarts,
               Hard-ſoft, cold-hot, well-euill, fooliſh-wiſe,
               Miſſe contrarities agreeing parts.
            
            
               Auant I ſay, ile anger thee inough,
               And fold thy firy-eyes in thy ſmazkie ſnufe,
            
            
               
               Defiance, reſolution and neglects,
               True trine of barres againſt thy falſe aſſault,
               Defies, reſolues defiance and reiects
               Thy intereſt to claime the ſmalleſt fault.
            
            
               Thou lawleſſe landlady, poore Prodigall,
               Sowre ſolace, Credits Crack,
               Feares Feſtiuall.
            
            
               
               More angry Satyr-dayes ile muſter vp,
               Then thou canſt challenge letters in thy name:
               My Negrum true borne inck no more ſhall ſup,
               Thy ſtayned blemiſh, charracterd in blame.
            
            
               My pens two nebs ſhall turne vnto a forke,
               Chaſing old Enuy from ſo young a worke:
               I but the Authors mouth bid thee auaunt,
               He more defies thy Hate, thy hūt, thy haunt.
            
            
               T. M. Gent.
            
         
         
            
            The Authors Prologue. 1. Booke.
            
            
               DIſmounted from the hie aſpiring hils,
               Which the all emptie airie Kingdome fils,
               Leauing the ſcorched moūtains threatning heuē
               
               Frō whence fel fierie rage my ſoule hath driuē:
               Paſſing the downe ſteepe vallies all in haſt,
               Haue tript it through the woods: & now at laſt
            
            
               
               Am vaild with a ſtonie ſanctuarie,
               To ſaue my Ire ſtuft ſoule leaſt it miſcarie:
               From threating ſtormes ore'turning veritie,
               That ſhames to ſee truthes refined puritie:
               Thoſe open plains, thoſe hie skie kiſſing moūts,
               Wher huffing winds caſt vp their airy accounts
               Were too too open, ſhelter yeelding none,
               So that the blaſts did tyrannize vpon
            
            
               
               The naked Carkaſſe of my heauie ſoule,
               And with their furie all my all controule,
               But now enuiron'd with a brazen Tower,
               I little dread their ſtormie raging power:
               Witneſſe this blacke defying Embaſſie,
               That wanders them beforne in maieſtie:
               Vndaunted of their bugbare threatning words,
               Whoſe proud aſpiring vaunts, time paſt records.
            
            
               
               Now windie Paraſites or the the ſlaues of wine,
               That wind from al things ſaue the truth diuine,
               Winde turne and toſſe into the depth of ſpight,
               Your diuelliſh venome cannot me affright:
               It is a Cordiall of a Candie taſte,
               Ile drinke it vp, and then let't run at waſte.
            
            
               
               Whoſe drugie Lees mixt with the liquid flood,
               Of muddy fell defiance as it ſtood,
               Ile belch into your throates all open wide,
               Whoſe gaping ſwallow nothing runs beſide:
               And if it venome, take it as you liſt:
               He ſpights himſelfe, that ſpights a Satyriſt.
            
         
      
      
         
            THE FIRST BOOKE. Inſatiat Cron.
         
         
            
               Satyre 1. Cur eget indignus quiſquam, te diuite.
            TIme was, when down declining toothleſſe age,
            Was of a holy and diuine preſage:
            Diuining prudent and foretelling truth,
            In ſacred points, inſtructing wandring youth.
            But oh detraction of our latter daies,
            How much from veritie this age eſtraies?
            
               Raunging the bryerie deſarts of blacke ſin,
            Seeking a diſmall caue to reuell in.
            This latter age or member of that time,
            Of whom my ſnarling muſe now thūdreth rime
            Wandred the brackes vntill a hidden Cell,
            He found at length, and ſtill therin doth dwell:
            The houſe of gaine inſatiat it is,
            Which this hore aged peſant deemes his blis:
            Oh that deſire might hunt amongſt that fur,
            It ſhould go hard but he would looſe a cur:
            To rowſe the fox, hid in a bramble buſh,
            Who frighteth conſcience with a wrimouth'd puſh:
            But what need I to wiſh or would it thus,
            When I may find him ſtarting at the burs:
            Where he infecteth other pregnant wits,
            Making them Coheires to his damned fits.
            There may you ſee this writhen faced maſſe,
            Of rotten mouldring clay, that prating aſſe:
            That riddles wonders meere compact of lies,
            Of heauen, of hell, of earth and of the skies:
            
               Of heauen thus he reaſons: heauen theres none,
            Vnles it be within his mantion.
            Oh there is heauen: why? becauſe theres gold,
            That from the late to this laſt age controld,
            The maſſie ſcepter of Earthes hauenly round,
            Exiling forth her ſiluer paued bound,
            The Leaders, brethren, brazen counterfets,
            That in this golden age contempt begets:
            Vaunt then I mortall I, I onely King,
            And golden God of this eternall being.
            Of Hell Cymerian thus Auarus reaſons:
            Though hell be hot, yet it obſerueth ſeaſons:
            Hauing within his Kingdome reſidence,
            Ore which his godhead hath preheminence:
            An obſcure angell of his Heauen it is,
            Wherein's containd that Hell deuouring blis:
            Into this Hell ſometimes an Angell fals,
            Whoſe white aſpect black forlorn ſoules appals
            And that is when a Saint beleeuing gold,
            Old in that heauen, yong in being old.
            
               Falls headlong downe into that pit of woe,
            Fit for ſuch damned creatures ouerthrow.
            To make this publike that obſcured lies,
            And more apparant vulgar ſecrecies:
            To make this plaine, harſh vnto common wits,
            Simplicitie in common iudgement ſits.
            This down-caſt angell, or declining ſaint,
            Is greedy Croone, when Cron makes his compt:
            For his poore creditors falne to decay,
            Being bankerouts, take heeles and run away.
            Then franticke Cron, gald to the very hart,
            In ſome by corner playes a diuels part:
            Repining at the loſſe of ſo much pelfe,
            And in a humor goes and hangs himſelfe.
            So of a ſaint, a diuell Cron is made,
            The diuel lou'd Cron, and Cron the diuels trade.
            Thus may you ſee ſuch angels often fall,
            Making a working day a feſtiuall.
            Now to the third point of his deitie,
            And that's th'earth, thus reaſons credulitie:
            
               Credulous Cron, Cron credulous in all,
            Sweares that his kingdome is in generall.
            As he is Regent of this Heauen and Hell,
            So of the Earth, all others hee'le expell:
            The Skies at his diſpoſe, the Earth his owne,
            And if Cron pleaſe, all muſt be ouerthrowne.
            
               Cron, Crō, aduiſe thee Crō
                with the copper noſe,
            And be not rulde ſo much by falſe ſuppoſe:
            Leaſt Crons profeſſing holineſſe turne euil,
            And of a falſe god, proue a perfect diuil.
            I prithee Cron find out ſome other talke,
            Make not the Burſe a place for ſpirits to walke:
            For doubtleſſe if thy damned lies take place,
            Deſtruction followes, farwell ſacred grace.
            Th'Exchāge for goodly Merchāts is appointed
            Why not for me ſayes Cron, & mine annointed?
            Can Marchants thriue and not the Vſe'r nie?
            Can Marchants liue without my companie?
            No Cron helps all, and Cron hath help frō none,
            What others haue is Crons, & Crons his owne.
            
               And Cron will hold his owne, or't ſhal go hard,
            The diuel will helpe him for a ſmall reward:
            The diuels helpe, oh tis a mightie thing,
            If he but ſay the word, Cron is a King.
            Oh then the diuel is greater yet then hee,
            I thought as much, the diuel would maſter bee.
            And reaſon too (ſaith Cron) for what care I,
            So I may liue as God, and neuer die.
            Yea golden Cron, death will make thee away,
            And each dog Cron, muſt haue a dying day.
            And with this reſolution I bequeath thee,
            To God or to the diuel, and ſo I leaue thee.
         
         
            
            
               Satyre 2. Prodigall Zodon
            
            WHo knowes not Zodon; Zodon, what is he?
            The true borne child of inſatietie.
            If true borne, when? if borne at all, ſay where?
            Where conſcience beg'd in worſt time of the yeare,
            His name yong Prodigall, ſon to greedy gaine:
            Let bloud by folly, in a contrary vaine.
            For ſcraping Cron, ſeeing he needs muſt die,
            Bequeathed all to prodigallitie.
            The will once prou'd, and he poſſeſt of all,
            Who then ſo gallant as yong Prodigall?
            Mounted aloft on flattering Fortunes wings,
            Where like an Nightingale ſecure he ſings:
            Floating on Seas of ſcarce proſperitie,
            In girt with pleaſures ſweete tranquillitie.
            Sute vpon ſute, ſatten too too baſe,
            Veluet laid on with gold or ſiluer lace:
            A meane man doth become, but yee muſt ride
            In cloth of fyned gold, and by his ſide
            
               Two footmen at the leaſt, with choiſe of ſteeds,
            Attired when ſhe rides in gorgeous weeds.
            
               Zodon muſt haue his Charrot gilded ore,
            And when he triumphes, fowre bare before,
            In pure white Satten to vſher out his way,
            To make him glorious on his progreſſe day,
            Vaile bonnet he that doth not paſſing by,
            Admiring on that Sunne inriching skie,
            Two dayes incag'd at leaſt in ſtrongeſt hold,
            Storme he that liſt, he ſcornes to be controld.
            What is it lawfull that a mounted begger,
            May vncōtrolled thus beare ſway and ſwagger?
            A baſe borne iſſue of a baſer ſyer:
            Bred in a cottage, wandring in the myer,
            With nailed ſhooes, and whipſtaffe in his hand,
            Who with a hey and ree the beaſts command:
            And being ſeuen years practizde in that trade,
            At ſeuen yeares end by Tom a iournyes made,
            Vnto the Citie of faire Troynouant,
            
            Where through extremitie of need and want,
            
               Hees forc't to trot with fardle at his backe.
            From houſe to houſe, demaunding if they lacke
            A poore yong man that's willing to take paine,
            And mickle labour, though for little gaine.
            Well, ſome kind Troyan thinking he hath grace,
            Keepes him himſelfe, or gets ſome other place.
            The world now god be thanked's wel amended
            Want that erewhile did want, is now befrended.
            And ſcraping Cron hath got a world of welth,
            Now what of that, Cron's dead, wher's al his pelf?
            Bequeathed to yong prodigall: That's well,
            His God hath left him, and he's fled to hell:
            See goulden ſoules, the end of ill got gaine,
            Reade and marke well, to do the like refraine.
            This youthful gallant like the prince of pleaſure,
            Floting on golden ſeas of earthly treaſure:
            Treaſure ill got by miniſtring of wrong.
            Made a faire ſhow, but endured not long.
            Ill got, worſe ſpent, gotten by deceit:
            Spent on laſciuions wantons which await,
            
               And hourely expect ſuch prodigallitie,
            Luſt breathing leachers giuen to venerie.
            No day expired but Zodon hath his trull,
            He hath his tyt, and ſhe likewiſe her gull.
            Gull he, Trull ſhe, oh tis a gallant age,
            Men may haue hacknyes of good carriage:
            Prouided that their rayne a golden ſhower,
            Then come whoſe will, at th'appointed hower.
            Hower me no howers, howers breake no ſquare,
            Where gold doth rai
                  ••
               ,  
                  〈◊〉
                to find thē there.
            Well: Zodon hath his pleaſure, he hath gold,
            Young in his golden age, in ſin too old:
            Now he wants gold, all his treaſures done,
            Hees baniſhed the Stewes, pittie findes none.
            Rich yeſterday in wealth, this day as poore,
            To morrow like to beg from doore to doore.
            See youthfull ſpendthrifts all your brauery,
            Euen in a moment turnd to miſery.
         
         
            
            
               Satyre 3. Inſolent Superbia.
            
            LIſt ye profane faire painted images,
            Predeſtinated by the deſtenies,
            At your firſt being to fall eternallie
            Into Cymerian black obſcuritie.
            Ilfauoured Idols, Pride anatomie,
            Foule coloured puppets, balls of infamie:
            Whome zealous ſoules do racket too and fro,
            Sometimes aloft ye flye, otherwhiles below:
            Banded into the ayres looſe continent:
            Where hard vpbearing winds hold parlament.
            For ſuch is the force of downe declining ſin,
            Where our ſhort feathered peacocks wallow in.
            That when ſweete motions vrge them to aſpire,
            They are ſo bathed ore by ſweete deſire
            In the odiferous fountaine of ſweete pleaſure,
            Wherein delight hath all embalmd her treaſure.
            I meane where Sin the miſtris of diſgrace,
            Hath reſidence, and her abiding place.
            
               And ſin though it be foule, yet faire in this,
            In being painted with a ſhow of blis.
            For what more happie creature to the eie,
            Then is Superbia in her brauerie?
            Yet who more foule diſrobed of attire?
            Perld with the botch as children burnt with fire,
            That for their outward cloake vpon the skin,
            Worſer enormities abound within.
            Looke they to that, truth tels them there amis,
            And in this glaſſe, all telling truth it is.
            Whē welcome Spring had clad the hils in green,
            And pretty whiſtling birds were heard and ſeen,
            
               Superbia abrode gan take her walke:
            With other peacocks for to finde her talke.
            
               Kyron that in a buſh lay cloſely couched,
            Heard all their chat, and how it was auouched:
            Siſter ſayes one, and ſoftly packt away,
            In what faire company did you dine to day?
            Mongſt gallāt dames, & then ſhe wipes her lips,
            Placing both hands vpon her whalebone hips,
            
               Puft vp with a round circling farthingale,
            That done: ſhe gins go forward with her tale:
            Sitting at table caru'd of walnut tree,
            All couered with damaskt naperie,
            Garniſht with ſaults of pure beaten gould,
            Whoſe ſiluer plated edge of rareſt mould,
            Mou'd admiration in my ſearching eie,
            To ſee the goldſmiths ritch artificie.
            The Butlers placing of his manchets white,
            The plated cupbord for our more delight.
            Whoſe goulden bewty glauncing from on hie,
            Illuminated other chambers nie.
            The ſlowly pacing of the ſeruing men,
            Which were appointed to attend vs then,
            Holding in either hand a ſiluer diſh,
            Of coſtly cates of farfetcht daintie fiſh,
            Vntill they do approch the table nye,
            Where the appointed caruer carefully
            Diſchargeth them of their full freighted hands,
            Which inſtantly vpon the table ſtands.
            
               The muſick ſweet which al that while did ſound,
            Rauiſh the hearers, and their ſence confound.
            This done, the maſter of that ſumptuous feaſt,
            In order gins to place his welcome geſt.
            
               Bewtie firſt ſeated in a throne of ſtate,
            Vnmatchable diſdaining other mate
            Shone like the ſun, wheron mine eies ſtil gazed,
            Feeding on her perfections that amazed:
            But oh, her ſiluer framed Coronet
            With low downe dangling ſpangles all beſet,
            Her ſumptuous perewig, her curious curles,
            Her hie prizde necklace of entrailed perles:
            Her pretious Iewels wondrous to behold,
            Her baſeſt I em framde of the pureſt gold.
            Oh I could kill my ſelfe for very ſpight,
            That my dim ſtars giue not ſo cleere a light.
            Hartburning ire new kindled, bids diſpaire,
            Since Bewtie liues in her, and I want faire.
            Oh had I dyde in youth, or not bin borne,
            Rather then liue in hate, and dye forlorne.
            
               And dye I will, therewith ſhe drew a knife
            To kill her ſelfe, but Kyron ſau'd her life.
            See heere proud puppets hie aſpiring euils,
            Scarſe any good, moſt of you worſe then diuels.
            Excellent in ill, ill in aduiſing well,
            Wel in thats worſt, worſe then the worſt in hell.
            Hell is ſtarke blind, ſo blind moſt women bee:
            Blinde & yet not blind whē they ſhould not ſee.
            Fine Madam Tiptoes in her veluet gowne,
            That quotes her paces in Characters downe:
            Valuing each ſtep that ſhe had made that day,
            Worth twenty ſhillings in her beſt aray.
            And why forſooth ſome little durty ſpot
            Hath fell vpon her gowne or petticote.
            Perhaps that nothing much, or ſomething little,
            Nothing in manies view, in hers a mickle:
            Doth thereon ſurfet, and ſome day or two
            Shees paſſing ſick, and knowes not what to do.
            The poore handmaid ſeeing her miſtres wed▪
            
            To frantick ſicknes, wiſhes ſhe were dead:
            
               Or that her diuelliſh tyranizing fits
            May mend, and ſhe enioy her former wits.
            For whilſt that Helth thus counterfets not well,
            Poore here at hand, liues in the depth of hell.
            Wher is this baggadge, wher's this girle, what ho
            (Quoth ſhe) was euer woman troubled ſo?
            What huſwife Nan, and then ſhe gins to brall,
            Then in comes Nan, ſooth miſtris did you call?
            Out on thee queane, now by the liuing God,
            And then ſhe ſtrikes & on the wench layes load.
            Poore ſilly maide with finger in the eye,
            Sighing and ſobbing takes all patiently.
            Nimble Affection ſtung to the very hart,
            To ſee her fellow mate ſuſteine ſuch ſmart,
            Flies to the Burſe gate for a match or two,
            And ſalues th'amis, there is no more to do.
            Quickfooted kindnes, quick as it ſelfe thought
            With that wel pleaſing newes but lately bought
            By loues aſſiduat care and induſtry,
            Into the Chamber runs immediatly.
            
               Where ſhe vnlades the fraight of ſweet content,
            The hagler pleaſd doth riſe incontinent.
            Then thought of ſicknes is not thought vpon,
            Care hath no being in her mantion.
            But former peacock pride, grand inſolence,
            Euen in the higheſt thought hath reſidence.
            But it on tiptoe ſtands, well: what of that?
            It is more prompt to fall and ruinate:
            And fall it will whē deaths ſhrill clamorous bell
            Shall ſummon you vnto the depth of hell:
            Repent proude Princocks, ceaſe for to aſpire,
            Or dye to liue, with Pride in burning fire.
         
         
            
            
               Satyre 4. Cheating Droone.
            
            THere is a Cheater by profeſſion,
            That takes more ſhapes then the Camelion.
            
            Sometimes he iets it in a black furd gowne,
            And that is, when he harbours in the towne.
            Sometimes a cloake to mantle hoary age,
            Ilfauoured like an ape in ſpightfull rage:
            And then he walks in Paules a turne or two,
            To ſee by Cheating what his wit can do.
            Perhaps heele tell a Gentleman a tale,
            Will coſt him twenty angels in the ſale:
            But if he know his purſe well linde within,
            And by that meanes he cannot finger him,
            He'le proffer him ſuch far ſet curteſie,
            That ſhortly in a Tauerne neighbring by,
            He hath encag'd the ſilly Gentleman,
            To whom he proffers ſeruice all he can.
            Sir, I perceiue you are of gentle bloud,
            Therefore I will, our Cates be new and good:
            
               For well I wot, the Country yeeldeth plenty,
            And as they diuers be, ſo are they dainty.
            May it pleaſe you then a while to reſt you merry.
            Some Cates I will make choiſe of and not tarry.
            The ſilly Cunny blith and merrily,
            Doth for his kindnes thanke him hartily.
            Then hies the Cheater very haſtily,
            And with ſome Peſant where he is in fee
            Iugles, that dinner being almoſt ended,
            He in a matter of weight may then be frended.
            The Peſant for an angell then in hand,
            Will do what ere his worſhip ſhall command:
            And yeelds, that when a reckoning they call in,
            To make reply ther's one to ſpeake with him.
            The plot is laid, now comes the Cheater back,
            And calls in haſt for ſuch things as they lack.
            The table fraighted with all dainty cates,
            Hauing well fed, they fall to pleaſant chates:
            Diſcourſing of the mickle difference,
            Twixt perfit truth and painted eloquence.
            
               Plaine troth that harbours in the country ſwain
            The Cunny ſtands defendant, the Cheaters vain
            Is to vphold an eloquent ſmooth toong
            To be truths Orator righting euery wrong:
            Before the cauſe concluded tooke effect,
            In comes a crew of fidling knaues abiect,
            The very refuſe of that rabble rout,
            Halfe ſhooes vpon their feet torne round about,
            Saue little Dicke the dapper ſinging knaue,
            He had a threadbare coate to make him braue:
            God knowes ſcarce worth a teſter, if it were
            Vallewed at moſt, of ſeuen it was too deere.
            Well take it as they liſt, ſhakerag came in,
            Making no doubt but they would like of him:
            And twere but for his perſon a pretty lad
            Well quallified, hauing a ſinging trade.
            Well ſo it was the Cheater muſt be merry,
            And he a ſong muſt haue, cald hey down derry.
            So Dick begins to ſing, the fidler play,
            The melancholly Cunny replies, nay, nay:
            
               No more of this: the tother bids play on,
            Tis good our ſpirits ſhuld ſomething work vpō.
            Tut gentle ſir, be pleaſant man (quoth he)
            Yours be the pleaſure, mine the charge ſhall be.
            This do I for the loue of gentlemen,
            Hereafter happily if we meete agen,
            I ſhall of you expect like curteſie,
            Finding fit time and opportunitie:
            Or elſe I were vngratefull quoth the cunny,
            It ſhall go hard, but we wil find ſome mony.
            For ſome we haue, that ſome wel vſd gets more,
            And ſo in time we ſhall increaſe our ſtore.
            Meane time ſaid he, imploy it to good vſe,
            For time ill ſpent, doth purchaſe times abuſe.
            With that more wine he calls for and intends
            That either of them carouſe to all their frends.
            The cunny nods the head, yet ſayes not nay,
            Becauſe the other would the charge defray:
            The end tryes all, and here begins the ieſt,
            My gentleman betooke him to his reſt.
            
               Wine tooke poſſeſſiō of his drowſie head,
            And Cheating Droone hath brought the foole to bed.
            The fidlers were diſchargd, and al things whiſt,
            Then pilfring Droone gan vſe him as he liſt.
            Ten pound he finds, the reckoning he doth pay:
            And with the reſidue paſſeth ſheere away.
            Anon the Conny wakes, his coyne being gon,
            He exclaymes againſt diſſimulation.
            But twas too late, the Cheater had his pray,
            Be wiſe young heads, care for an afterday.
         
         
            
            
               Satyre 5. Ingling Pyander.
            
            AGe hath his infant youth, old trees their ſprigs,
            Oreſpreading brāches their inferior twigs:
            Old beldam hath a daughter or a ſonne
            True borne, or illegitimate alls one:
            Iſſue ſhe hath: the father? aske you mee?
            The houſe wide open ſtands, her lodgings free.
            Admit my ſelfe for recreation
            Sometimes did enter her poſſeſſion,
            It argues not that I haue bin the man,
            That firſt kept reuels in that mantian,
            No no, the hagling common place is old,
            The Tenement hath oft bin bought and ſold:
            Tis rotten now, earth to earth, duſt to duſt,
            
               Sodoms on fire, and conſume it muſt:
            And wanting ſecond reparations,
            Pluto hath ceaſd the poore reuertions.
            But that hereafter worlds may truly know,
            What hemlocks & what rue there erſt did grow:
            
               As it is Sathans vſuall pollicie,
            He left an iſſue of like quallitie:
            The ſtill memoriall if I aime aright,
            Is a pale Chequered black Hermophrodite.
            
            Sometimes he 
                  •
               ets it like a Gentleman,
            Otherwhiles much like a wanton Curteſan:
            But truth to tell a man or woman whether,
            I cannot ſay ſhees excellent in ether.
            But if Report may certifie a truth,
            Shees nether of ether, but a Cheating youth.
            Yet Troynouant that all admired towne,
            Where thouſands ſtill do trauell vp and downe,
            Of Bewties counterfets affoords not one,
            So like a louely ſmiling parragon,
            As is Pyander in a Nymphes attire,
            Whoſe rowling eye ſets gazers harts on fire:
            Whoſe cherry lip, black brow & ſmiles procure
            Luſt burning buzzards to the tempting lure.
            What ſhall I cloake ſin with a coward feare,
            And ſuffer not Pyanders ſin appeare?
            
               I will I will: your reaſon? why, Ile tell,
            Becauſe time was, I loued Pyander well:
            True loue in deed, wil hate loues black defame,
            So loathes my ſoule to ſeeke Pyanders ſhame.
            Oh but I feele the worme of conſcience ſting,
            And ſummons me vpon my ſoule to bring
            Sinfull Pyander into open viewe,
            There to receiue the ſhame that will enſue.
            Oh this ſad paſſion of my heauie ſoule,
            Torments my heart, and ſences do controule:
            Shame thou Pyander, for I can but ſhame,
            The meanes of my amiſſe, by thy means came:
            And ſhall I then procure eternall blame,
            By ſecret cloaking of Pyanders ſhame,
            And he not bluſh?
            By heauen I will not, Ile not burne in hell,
            For falſe Pyander though I lou'd him well:
            No no, the world ſhall know thy villany,
            Leaſt they be cheated with like rogery:
            Walking the Cittie as my wonted vſe,
            
               There was I ſubiect to this foule abuſe,
            Troubled with many thoughts pacing along,
            It was my chance to ſhoulder in a throng,
            Thruſt to the Channel I was, but crowding her,
            I ſpide Piander in a Nymphes attire:
            No Nymph more faire, then did Pyander ſeeme,
            Had not Pyander, then Pyander beene:
            No Lady with a fairer face more graced,
            But that Pyanders ſelfe, himſelfe defaced
            Neuer was boy ſo pleaſing to the hart,
            As was Pyander for a womans part:
            Neuer did woman foſter ſuch an other,
            As was Pyander, but Pyanders mother:
            Foole that I was in my affection,
            More happie I, had it bene a viſion.
            So far intangled was my ſoule by loue,
            That force perforce, I muſt Pyander proue:
            The iſſue of which proofe did teſtifie,
            Ingling Pyanders damned villanie:
            I loued indeed, and to my mickle coſt,
            
               I loued Pyander, ſo my labour loſt.
            Faire words I had for ſtore of coyne I gaue,
            But not enioyde the fruite I thought to haue.
            Oh ſo I was beſotted with her words,
            His words that no part of a ſhe affords:
            For had he bene a ſhe iniurious boy,
            I had not bene ſo ſubiect to annoy.
            A plague vpon ſuch filthy gullery,
            The world was nere ſo drunke with mockery:
            Raſh headed Caualeires learne to be wiſe,
            And if you needs will do, do with aduiſe,
            Tye not affection to each wanton ſmile,
            Leaſt doting Fancie trueſt loue beguile:
            Truſt not a painted puppet as I haue done,
            Who far more doted then Pigmalion:
            The ſtreetes are full of iugling paraſites,
            With the true ſhape of Virgins counterfets:
            But if of force you muſt a hackney hire,
            Be curious in your choiſe, the beſt will tire:
            The beſt is bad, therefore hire none at all,
            Better to go on foot, then ride and fall.
         
         
            
            
               Satyre 6. Wiſe Innocent.
            
            Why for an Innocent ho: what a pure foole?
            Not ſo (pure aſſe) aſſe, wher wēt you to ſchoole?
            With Innocents, that makes the foole to prate:
            Foole will you any? yes the foole ſhall hate.
            Wiſedome what ſhal he haue? the foole at leaſt:
            Prouinder for the Aſſe ho: ſtalk vp the beaſt,
            What ſhall we haue a railing Innocent?
            No gentle gull, a wiſe mans preſident.
            Then forward wiſedome, not without I liſt,
            Twentie to one, this foole's ſome Satiriſt,
            Stil doth the foole haunt me, fond foole be gon,
            No I will ſtay, the foole to gaze vpon.
            Well foole ſtay ſtill, ſtil ſhall the foole ſtay? no:
            Then pack ſimplicitie, good Innocent, why ſo?
            Nor go nor ſtay, what will the foole do then?
            Vexe him that ſeemes to vexe all other men.
            It is impoſſible, ſtreames yt
                are bard their courſe,
            Swel with more rage, & far more greater force:
            
               Vntill there full ſtuft gorge a paſſage makes
            Into the wide mawes of more ſcopious lakes:
            Spight me: not ſpight it ſelfe can diſcontent,
            My ſteeled thoughts, or breed diſparagement:
            Had palefac't coward feare bene reſident
            Within the boſome of me Innocent:
            I would haue houſde me from the eyes of ire,
            Whoſe bitter ſpleen vomits forth flames of fire
            A reſolute Aſſe, oh for a ſpurring Rider,
            A brace of Angels: what is the foole a briber?
            Is not the Aſſe yet wearie of his load?
            What with once bearing of the foole abroad?
            Mount againe Foole: then the Aſſe will tire
            And leaue the Foole to wallow in the mire.
            Doſt thou think otherwiſe? good Aſſe thē be gō
            
            I ſtay but till the Innocent get on.
            What wilt thou needs of the foole bereaue mee▪
            
            Then pack good fooliſh Aſſe, & ſo I leaue thee.
         
         FINIS.
      
      
         
            
            
               Epilouge to the laſt Satyre of the firſt booke.
            THus may we ſee by folly of the wiſe,
            Stumble and fall into fooles paradiſe:
            For iocand wit of force muſt iangling bee,
            Wit muſt haue his will and ſo had hee.
            Wit muſt haue his will, yet parting of the fray,
            Wit was enioynd to carrie the foole away.
            
               Qui Color albus erat, nunc eſt contrarius albo.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   