
      
         
            
            
            ¶The forme and ſhape of a Monſtrous Child / borne
at Maydſtone in Kent, the .xxiiij. of October. 1568.
            
               
                  1568
                  ventral and dorsal view of deformed infant
                  
                     As ye this ſhape abhorre
                     In body for to haue:
                     So flee ſuch Vices farre
                     As might the ſoule depraue
                     
                        In Gods power
                        
                        all fleſhſtands,
                     
                     
                        As the clay to the
                        
                        Potters hands.
                     
                     
                        To faſhion euen
                        
                        as he wyll
                     
                     
                        Jn good ſhape
                        
                        or in yll.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               AT Maydſtone in Kent there was one Marget Mere, Daughter to Richard Mere of the ſayd
Towne of Maydſtone, who being vnmaryed, played the naughty packe, and was gotten with
childe, being deliuered of the ſame childe the .xxiiij. daye of October laſt paſt, in the yeare of our
Lord. 1568. at .vij. of the clocke in the after noone of the ſame day being Sonday. Which child
being a man child, had firſt the mouth ſlitted on the right ſide like a Libardes mouth, terrible to beholde,
the left arme lying vpon the breſt, faſt therto ioyned, hauing as it were ſtumps on the handes, the left leg
growing vpward toward the head, and the ryght leg bending toward the left leg, the foote therof growing
into the buttocke of the ſayd left leg. In the middeſt of the backe there was a broade lump of fleſh in
faſhion lyke a Roſe, in the myddeſt whereof was a hole, which voyded like an Iſſue. Thys ſayd Childe
was borne alyue, and lyued .xxiiij. houres, and then departed this lyfe. Which may be a terrour aſwell to
all ſuch workers of filthynes & iniquity, as to thoſe vngodly liuers. Who (if in them any feare of God be)
may mooue them to repentance and amendement of lyfe, which God for Chriſtes ſake graunt both to
them and vs. Amen. Witneſſes hereof were theſe, William Plomer, Iohn Squier Glaſier, Iohn
Sadler Goldſmith, beſides diuers other credible perſons both men and women.
            
               
                  ❧A warnyng to England.
               
                  THis monſtrous ſhape to thee England
                  Playn ſhewes thy monſtrous vice.
                  If thou ech part wylt vnderſtand,
                  And take thereby aduice.
               
               
                  For waying firſt the gaſpyng mouth,
                  It doth full well declare:
                  What rauine and oppreſſion both
                  Is vſed wyth greedy care.
               
               
                  For, for the backe, and gorging paunch,
                  To lyue in wealth and eaſe:
                  Such toyl men take that none may ſtaunch
                  Their greedy minde, nor pleaſe.
               
               
                  For in ſuch ſort, their mouthes they infect,
                  With lying othes, and ſlaightes:
                  Blaſpheming God, and Prince reiect,
                  As they were brutiſh beaſtes.
               
               
                  Their filthy talke, and poyſoned ſpeech,
                  Diſfigures ſo the mouth:
                  That ſom wold think ther ſtood ye breech
                  Such filth it breatheth forth.
               
               
                  The hands which haue no fingers right
                  But ſtumps fit for no vſe:
                  Doth well ſet forth the idle plight,
                  Which we in theſe daies chuſe.
               
               
                  For rich and poore, for age and youth,
                  Eche one would labour flye:
                  Few ſeekes to do the deedes of truth,
                  To helpe others thereby.
               
               
                  The leg ſo clyming to the head,
                  What meaneth it but this?
                  That ſome do ſeeke not to be lead,
                  But for to leade amis.
               
               
                  And as this makes it moſt monſtrous,
                  For Foote to clyme to head:
                  So thoſe Subiects be moſt vicious,
                  That refuſe to be lead.
               
               
                  The hinder part doth ſhew vs playne,
                  Our cloſe and hidden vice,
                  Which doth behind vs run amayne,
                  In vyle and ſhameful wyſe.
               
               
                  Wherefore to ech in England now,
                  Let this Monſter them teach:
                  To mend the monſtrous life they ſhow,
                  Leaſt endles death them reach.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶Imprinted at London by
Iohn Awdeley, dwellyng in little
Britain ſtreete without Alderſgate.
The .xxiij. of December.
         
      
   