
      
         
            
            
            
            
            GERILEON
OF ENGLAND.
The second Part
Of his most excellent, delectable,
morall, and sweet contriued Historie:
continuing his meruailous deeds
of Armes, haughtie prowesse, and honourable
loue: with sundrie other
verie memorable Aduentures.
            Written in French by Estienne de Maisonneufue,
Bordelois: and translated into English,
by A. M. one of the Messengers
of her Maiesties Chamber.
Patere: aut abstine.
            
            Imprinted at London for Cuthbert Burbie, and are to be
sold at the middle Shop in the Poultrie. 1592.
         
         
            
            
            To the right Worshipfull, Maister
Ralphe Marshall, of Carleton, in
the Countie of Nottingham, Esquier: &
to the vertuous and most affable Gentlewoman,
Mistres Fraunces Marshall
his wife: A. M. commendeth
the kinde acceptance of
his translated
Gerileon.
            
               IT is not vnknowen
to your Worship, (gentle
Maister Marshall, howe
since my first entring on
this Historie, to translate
it: I haue been diuers and
sundrie times countermanded
by her Maiesties appointment, in the
place where I serue, to post from place to place
on such affaires as were enioyned mee, so that
not hauing fully finished one sheete, and the
Printer beginning almost so soone as my selfe;
I haue been greatly his hinderaunce, and compelled

to catch hold on such little leasures, as in
the morning ere I went to horse-backe, or in
the euening comming into mine Inne, I could
compasse from companie. That I fable not
herein, you are my witnesse; in that at your
owne house I wrote a sheete or two, and elsewhere
in your companie, as occasion serued:
and sithence in a long lingring iourney, I haue
knit vp the rest, sending leafe by leafe vnperused
to the Printer, which must needes yeelde
doubt of a perfect Translation. In this hard
case, I hope your Worship will the more fauor
mee, being perswaded it should haue been
better, if more respite had been graunted me.
Yet this dare I saye beside, that except it bee a
word here and there by mee left out, or by the
Printer mistaken, I am assured verie little lacketh,
I am certaine not so much as a line of the
Historie: for in verie trueth, I followed the
French (welneere) word for word. But howsoeuer
imperfect or vnpollished it bee, your
kinde Acceptation will make it passe for currant:
whereof, as I make no doubt, so am I the
better encouraged in the successe of my fortune.

You are a Scholler your selfe, and know
both how to gratifie Schollers labors, as also in
affabilitie of spirite to shew them good countenaunce.
I am not vnmindfull of the good
Gentlewoman your Wife, and although thys
worke were once else-where determined: yet
now, both my promise to you and her (at our
last beeing together) is perfourmed: wishing
that Gerileon may prooue as delightfull to you
both in the reading, as it hath been painfull &
laborious to me in the Translating.
            Your Worships to vse.
A. Mundy.
            
         
         
            
            To his good friend Ma: A. M.
            
               ABsence, among approoued frends
disseuers not affect, neither can
the change of aire chaunge resolued
minds. In absence your kindnes
toward me hath been approued,
which I haue studied to requite,
but can no way equall: neuertheles
abilitie shall not hinder
endeuour; but I will doo what I
may, whereby shall bee manifest
what I would. But least I seeme to call my credite in question
with you by too long circumstance (of which I assure
my selfe you make no doubt) I will leaue protestations, & go
forward with my purpose. Sir, so it is, that in your late employment
about her Maiesties affaires, hauing left the Translation
of Gerileon vnfinished, I chaunst to heare of a newe
part fully ended, by an excellent Scholler (I assure ye) as euer
attained to the vnderstanding of As in praesenti. His ripe
wit, rare learning, and excellent Science, hath plentifully appeared,
in sundrie inuented bookes of newes; wherein how
euer he hath audaciously abused sundrie well deseruing personages,
by attributing to them victories, when they at that
time came not neere the enemie; yet hath hee been liberally
rewarded (after six pence a sheete) of the Book-binder hys
Arch-workmaister. For this sea-swolne Sycophant, can no
sooner heare the thunder cracke, but he interpretes it to bee
the roaring of Cannons, the confusion of enemies, a conquest
to the English. Then ouer his Kan of Canarie wine:
nay, soft and faire, his labour gets no such allowance; for truly,
truly, and in good sooth, ye see this world is hard, & better
drink than Barley yeelds, cannot be spar'd. Yea, say ye so;
well, sith we are all English-men, let it bee so: and ouer hys
Ale-pot let him ruminate. Now, in such a month at Lisbone,
               
fire consumed so manie Hambrough ships of Corne; witnessed
by them that in three yere b
                  •
               fore, neuer left the Realme
of England: them a valiant Suffolke Gentleman, (as indeede
he is) at such a sight tooke such a prize; at another, one so
rich, as it is almost incredible to report: when God knowes
the worthy Gentleman came home, and hardly had saued his
owne. Sundrie of these could I set downe, beside that paltry
rude ryme, wherein an honourable personage of this Realme
was so palpably abusde. But what cares hee? not a Barley
corne: for he calls himselfe a Canonier, and in the discharge
of pot-shot, cares not at whom he leuell, so he fasten on the
white, that by diminutiue degrees is drawen from the strings
of his Stationers purse. But I remember ye tolde mee once,
his newes-buyer is no Stationer, yet I am sure he is a Balladseller,
and hath a whole Armie of runnagates at his reuersion
that swarme euerie where in England, and with theyr ribauld
songs infect the Youth of this flourishing Commonweale.
I maruell who the di
                  •
               ell is his Printer: and but that
I am assured, it cannot bee done but by some mans helpe of
that profession, I should hardly be perswaded, that anie professor
of so excellent a Science would bee so impudent, to
print such odious and lasciuious ribauldrie, as Watkins Ale,
The Carmans Whistle, and sundrie such other. But it may be,
there is some wainscot fac'd fellowe, that is abel to print no
good thing, found out to be his instrument: if it be so, it were
not greatly amisse, might my censure serue for a determinate
sentence, that he might dance at a Cartes tayle the Car-mans
whistle, till his backe were as well seasoned as his face. But
this belongs to higher powers: returne wee to our first man.
Who, how euer his credite may bee impayred by the publishing
of vntrue newes, it hath not been a little recouered by
the exquisite Translation of Fortunes Defier Andrugio. For
this is to be prooued, he so followed his Author, that not the
best Scholler in the worlde can reprooue him of digression.
Indeed (as I take it) it was first written in broken English, &

so I am sure it is printed: for if he had not in some measure
the English tongue, he woul
                  •
                be vtterly mute. But here may
a question be mooued, if this that I affirme bee true; where
shall we haue Gerileon by him Englished, sith he vnderstands
not French? Why easely. Is it not a Fiction first deuised
in French? Yes So shall it be in English. Why tell mee, art
thou so impudent to abuse the worke of so noble a Gentleman,
as the French Author was; wherein such excelent pollicie,
such morrall prudence, such singular conceipted passions
are included? Go too, let me not take thee publishing a
counterfet part thereof in print: if I doo, I will hang Saint
Peters Church Corner with such Scutchions of thy shame,
that Mannering musing what it should meane, shall neuer
cease bestirring him with his tip-staffe, till at Landen Hall all
the Ballad-
                  •
               ingers be gathered into one Assembly; and there
in rime doggrell (like thy Winter bitten Epitaph) carroll thy
rude conceipts. But whether runne I? Let this bee 
                  〈◊〉
               
for a warning, and so wil I leaue him to the mercie of his mother
wit. Beseeching you to proceede, as you haue begun in
that delectable Hystorie, which as it is much desired for the
delightfulnes therof; so shal you be no lesse commended for
your diligence therein.
            Your friend. T. N.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE
SECOND
BOOKE OF THE PLEAsant
Historie, of Gerileon
of England.
            
               Cap. 1.
               
                  How the Infant Porphiria, daughter to the Emperour of Constantinople,
being very sick for the loue of the Fairie youth
that was sent by Ozyris: is brought (by the meanes of Sagibell
her Phisition, in the companie of Marcella and Harderin
                        •
                     
her 
                        •
                     ousin,) to a Castell neere Constantinople, for
change of ayre. Where the wise Sagibell promised to let her
see by art Magique, in what estate her friend was the Knight
of the Fayries, with his originall and aduentures.
               
               
                  THe Princesse Porphiria hauing taken no
rest, since the day and houre when falslie
the maide Dynamia, sister to Pharisor, and
Amidrea who déerely loued him, notwithstanding
shee receiuing no loue againe,
came to informe her, how the Fayrie
youth on whom she had fastened such earnest
affection, as it was not possible for any King or Prince
like him selfe, to be belooued of any Princesse, as he was of
the Infant Porphiria: was slaine, with Pharisor, who had
wun like conquest of the Uirgin Amidrea, and that the murderer
was go
                     •
                  e to make his vaunt in the Emperour her fathers
Court, of such a monstrous and vnhappie déed, clad in
his Armour, and mounted on the good Knights horse that
had vanquished the Giants, as is declared in the xvi. Chapter

of the first Booke of this nistorie. After she had by insupportable
gréefe, swounded many times, she fell into an extreame
burning feauer: as what with the violence therof,
and her balefull passions of loue together, she had at this instant
dyed, but that she was continually comforted by the
Ladyes Harderina and Marcella, after that the Giant Ergoferant,
who followed in quest of the vnknowne Knight, and
hauing found him, brought him to the Emperours Court,
where in eight dayes his wounds were healed. By meanes
whereof, these Ladyes (who knew well the cause of the In
                  
                     •
                  ants
disease) perswaded her so much as they could: with
this hope grounded in them, that the death of the Knight
and Fayrie youth, was no more certaine or to be credited,
then the report of Pharisor: And that the vnknowne Knight
who rumourd foorth these tidings, had doone it but for the
aduantage of his glorie, or to couer the dishonour he receiued
in the Ioust: which made her somewhat to recomfort
her selfe, so that (but for her feauer) she might easily haue
recouered her former state of health.
               But if she suffered such anguish for her friend, the Fairie
youth endured no whit lesse for her, in that his loue tooke
life at that instant, when she did him the honour to girde on
his sword with her dellicate hands: but he fearing that their
loues were not reciprocall, languished in selfe same fits as
the Infant did, esteeming him selfe so vnfortunate and
flenderlie fauoured by loue: that he thought their wounds
to procéed from shafts of contrarie nature, whereby the cure
of either would prooue as different. Thus did the fire search
through the bone to the marrowe, and he was so distracted
in himselfe (as hath béene toucht in the former Booke) as
wandering from the care hee had to séeke the vnknowne
Knight, to reue
                     •
                  ge the death of his good friend Pharicor: he
now hath lost himselfe, in thinking and contemplating on
that heauenly beautie, which lay neerest his hart, and aboue
all things else he most prefered. So that in steed of taking

the right way, for embarking himself so some strange countrey:
hee returned with his Squire Geliaste towards the
Cittie of Constantinople, imagining (neuerthelesse) that he
rode farre enough from it. On the other side, the Princesse
Porphiria was euen at deaths doore, for the loue of her
knighth, and so farre extended each extremitie, as notwithstanding
all soueraigne remedies appplyed, from one houre
to another, a daungerous end was still expected.
               The Emperour and Empresse were wonderfull gréeued
at their daughters sicknes, not knowing whence the occasion
thereof procéeded: and therefore wholy committed her to
the care of Sagibell her Phisition, a man most expert and
skilfull in the art of medicine. This Phisition was likewise
greatly experimented in the art Magique, and the Princesse
of long time discerned in him very speciall affection and
fidelitie towards her: wherefore among diuers contrarie
opinions, which day and night combatted in her labouring
thoughts, she imagined how to finde some ease for her afflictions,
and sent for him by the Lady Marcella, who knewe
much better then the phisition where the disease pained her,
she beeing then to Harderina participating these secrets.
Right prompt and readie was shee to obey the Princesse
will, and suddenly went to finde this wise man, who was
altogether confounded with greefe and pensiuenes, because
he could not attaine the meane, whereby the faire Princes
might recouer footing againe: for to her serui
                     ••
                   he was intirelie
affected, considering that all his happines depended
on her safetie and health, and shee recured it would enrich
him for euer: for the Emperour had promised him, that if
by his skill he could restore his daughter, he would returne
him such a recompence, as should both exalt and content
him for euer. But without any such promise Sagibell was
carefull enough of the Infants health, and failed not in his
very vttermost endeuours: and Porphiria (for her part) was
willing to bestowe on this skilfull man, what euer she might

enioy by the Emperour and Empres, prouided, that her amorous
sicknes might finde desired recouerie. Wherevpon,
Marcella hauing tould him the Princes would speake with
him, and that with speed he should repaire to her chamber:
without further questioning with the Lady, he went thither
immediatly, not a little ioyfull of this message, which he hoped
might presage some good to ensue, because hauing so
lately left her, he was now so suddenly sent for. When Sagibell
was come to her, he demanded how she felt her selfe:
When the Princesse (breathing foorth a déepe fetcht sighe
from the bottome of her hart) thus spake vnto him. Ah Sagibell,
impossible is it I should be well, considering the estate
wherein I am, all your medicines and drugges hauing
no abilitie to giue me my former strength, health and
quietnes; yet notwithstanding, your knowledge might doe
me great good seruice, if you were so pleased. Sagibell was
not a little abashed at the woordes of the Princesse, and
knew not what to coniecture of them, because they implyed
such a contradiction: for she said all his medicines and drugs
could not helpe her, and yet she might be highly benefited by
his knowledge, which made him to returne this answere.
Why Madame, doe you thinke I haue made spare of my
knowledge, and that I haue not endeuoured my vttermost
(according to Art) to set ye on your feet againe? Thereof I
am perswaded my good friend Sagibell, quoth she, but your
art of medicine is not auailable for me in this case: for were
your God Appollo, Aesculapius, Hipocrates and Galen heere
present to giue me remedie, yet could they vnderstand no
more of my disease then you doo. But will yee promise to
be faithfull and secret to me, as I did neuer yet finde yee otherwise:
and I shall acquaint yee with the cause and originall
of my greefe, which when ye haue vnderstood, easily
by your knowledge may the effect be taken away. The Phisition
who was quick conceited, began to waxe iealous of
the cause, gathering by hir wordes, that loue had made a

great breach into her tender hart: yet making shewe as
though he suspected no such matter, he sayd to the Princesse.
Beléeue (good Madame) that I will be secret to yée, and continue
such fidelitie towards yée, as the Emperour your father
and your selfe haue alwayes found in me. The Princesse
being in bed, caused her pillowes to be raysed, to the
end shee might deliuer her minde with the more ease: and
hauing heard the answer of her Phisition, with voice faint
and weake, entermedled with a thousand sighes, shee thus
began.
               My sicknes is caused by the loue I beare to the fairie
youth, if he liue not, then thinke a speedie end will deliuer
me from this anguish: except you take pittie on mee, and
succour me in other sort then as yet you haue done, I know
you are skilfull in the Magique science, and that by Art you
can let me sée him aliue or dead: he is the man, whose onely
remembrance giues life and content to my amorous passions.
Then let me sée in what estate he is, for nothing else
can ease my afflictions, and all remedies else are vtterlie in
vaine, as by the applying and proofe you haue hitherto beheld.
I had not knowne aboue fourtéene or fiftéene yeeres,
when first his loue made seyzure on my hart, euen amongst
the Ladyes of the Empresse my mother, where I was constrained
to swoune in the publique assemblie: he then that
hath occasioned this hurt to me, can take it away and giue
me helpe, but it consists in you to giue me some ease by your
knowledge, in shewing me my friend aliue, wherein I desire
to be resolued, because I stand in doubt he is dead. If I
be assured of his end, then mine hath no long date of continuance,
so shall I bee freed from these extreame passions,
which not alone wounds my hart, but deuides in sunder my
very soule: leauing me so disconsolate, as but I was comforted
by one of my Ladyes, long since had I pass out of this
miserable life into a better.
               
                  Sagibell hauing attentiuely heard the Princesse, thus

answered. Madame you haue well séene my faithfull seruic
                     •
                  
towards yee till this present, and be ye assured, that though
it valued the price of my life, yet will I hazard all for the
safetie of yours: for so must I confesse my selfe bound to do
in dutie, in regard yee haue discouered to me such a secret,
as neuer could be gathered by the rules of phisick, beside, the
many honors doone me, in being toward the Emperour and
you, commaunds me to do my vttermost for your good. Most
gladly then doo I yeeld to satisfie you request, but perhaps
it cannot be so soone as you would, because heere I may not
make proofe of any such practise by arte, for feare of being
discouered: it behooues vs then to finde out, a place more
proper and conuenient, and it were not much amisse, the
better to couller our enterprise, that the Emperour were
giuen to vnderstand, that it is needefull for your health to
change this ayre, otherwise your life will be in great hazard.
As for the place, both faire, delightfull, and agreeing
with your intent, choose the Castell of pleasure which the
Emperour hath hard at hand: and there may yee commodiously
without any suspition, haue knowledge of him you
loue so deerely, and vnderstand likewise of whence he is.
               The Princesse intreated him very earnestly that it
might be so, and foorthwith to mooue the matter to the Emperour:
which he hauing effected, she would requite it with
such liberalitie, as hee should haue cause to extoll his good
fortune. The phi
                     •
                  ition hauing in this sort comforted her,
and giuen her hope of knowing what most she desired: tooke
his leaue, promising very quickly to returne againe, to tell
her how he sped with the Emperour. Before whom when
he was come, both he and the Empresse demanded of the
phisition, the estate of Porphiria their daughter: when Sagibell
answered, that he thought it méete she should change
the ayre, to sée if that in any sort would amend her, for hee
was of opinion, that the alteration of the ayre would do hir
great good, and bring her to her former health and strength,

next to the grace of God. And whither were it best (quoth
the Emperour) she should be remooued? To some fayre and
pleasant place, replied Sagibell, that her body finding ease by
change of ayre, her eye might likewise bee delighted with
pleasing obiects. It were good then (said the Emperour) to
conuay her to my Castell néere at hand, which is seatedmeruailous
fitly for such a purpose. There cannot be (quoth Sagibell)
a place more conuenable, but it were not expedient
that any traine should accompanie her, for disquieting her
head with goers and commers to speake with her: and I
doubt not, but (by Gods helpe) you shall shortly see her as
well and merrie as euer she was, albeit now she is more
likely to die then liue. God prosper your attempt then (said
the Emperour) and turning toward the Empresse, thus he
proceeded. Do you (Madame) cause all her equipage to be
prouided, and appoint such Ladyes for her companie as you
shall thinke méete. In this time of their conference, Sagibell
departed, and aduertised the princesse how he had sped, shewing
likewise what resolution was set downe, to transport
her to the place himselfe before had named. Whereof the
princesse not a littlle ioyfull, though weake, yet hoping to
receiue some comfort: intreated the phisition to hasten this
iourney.
               
                  Sagibell was scant departed the princesse chamber, but
the Empresse entred, hauing her eyes full of teares, and her
hart cloyde with greefe, accompanyed with hir Ladyes and
Gentlewomen, saying to hir daughter: that for recouerie of
her health, it was thought expedient shee should change the
ayre, and (it she were so pleased) she should be conducted to
the Emperours Castell of pleasure, which was not farre
without the Cittie of Constantinople. She answered with
a spent and wearyed voyce, that she submitted her selfe to
their good pleasures, and desired she might haue to kéepe hir
companie, her Coosin Harderina and the Lady Marcella. You
shall haue them (quoth the Empresse) with all things else

shall stand with your liking: in meane while then bee of
good cheere, that wee may 
                     •
                  ee yée well againe, so soone as
possible may be, if ye regard the ioy of the Emperour and
mee.
               Hauing spoken these words, the teares fell from her eyes
in such aboundance, gréeuing to sée the faire princesse of the
world in this weake estate: as being ouercome with sorrow,
she was constrained to depart the chamber, not saying
any thing, but that shee should rest her selfe awhile, and shee
would go giue order for her departure. Which accordingly
she did, and after all things were in a readinesse, the day being
still, calme and cléere, Sagibell aduised the Emperour
and Empresse, that now the time serued most f
                     •
                  tly, for conuaying
the princesse to the place appointed: without making
any longer stay, least any contrarie accident should happen,
as 
                     •
                  ight crosse theyr determination so sound and profitable.
Wherefore the Empresse, with consent of the princesse
Porphiria, (who was pale, wan, and consumed with greefe,
as nothing was expected more then her 
                     •
                  uriall, so woonderfully
was she weakened and changed, hauing lost hir vermillion
blush, the life and essence of her diuine beautie,
which made her loued and honoured of the most fayre and
valiant Knight of the world, to wit, the man so farre renewmed
by Ozyris:) caused a Litter to be brought, couered
with greene veluet, and lined all through within with the
same, the nayles and frindges of bea
                     •
                  en gold, and the arches
ouer head richly embolished: wherein was layd the languishing
and amourous princesse, who séemed therein as a
bright shining Sunne, such as chased Diana amongst the
troope of hir fayre Nimphes, and therein was placed with
hir Harderina, to entertaine the time of iourney with comfortable
spéeches. Each one may imagine (without any setting
downe in writing) the wofull sighes and teares of the
father and mother, and the generall lamentations on euery
side at this departure, for they had neither heard or séene

any cause of reioysing in long time before.
               In this sort, and very well accompanied, especially with
her phisition, she was conducted to a very faire and pleasant
Castell, which the Emperour had caused to bee built
fiue or sixe miles from the Cittie of Constantinople, wherin
(because it was seated and builded so meruailous stronglie)
the Emperours treasure, riches, and most precious iewels
were kept. This Castell was erected very stately to beholde,
for the walles wherewith it was enui
                     •
                  oned, was of
sto
                     •
                  e, so white as 
                     •
                  ine Iuorie: the inclosures and base
courts were on the one side guarded with the maine Sea,
and on the other with ditches so large and deepe, as the
space contained thrée quarters of a mile, rather more then
lesse, so saith the Historian, that saw the measure thereof taken
by a Geomatrician of that time when it was made. It
was bodyed with many beautifull lodgings, in goodly faire
Towers and Turrets, euery chamber being in most swéete
and wholsome ayre, and backt with sundrie galleries of all
sorts and fashions, the couerings whereof were of lead,
wrought and cut into many curidus deuises of workmanship,
hauing standing aloft thereon, fayre vaynes and weather
cocks of golde and siluer. The Gardens and Arbours
were he
                     •
                  d in with swift runnings riuers and cleere fountaines,
and to say all in breefe, there wanted not any thing
that could be imagined, both to strengthen the place, as also
beseeming such a dain
                     •
                  ie compassed Castell. Heereinto was
brought (by the councell of her phisition) the most faire
princesse of the world, for more assured commoditie of
knowing and seeing what she most desired, according to the
promise of the wise Magitian: in whom she reposed very
great hope and trust, and there happened to her what yee
shall read heereafter, for now we must borrow a little leaue
to speake of other matters.
            
            
               
               Chap. 2.
               
                  Of the Sophie of Persiaes loue to the beautifull Porphiria, and
how he forsooke and left his kingdome, to goe see if her exquisite
perfections answered the report of her renowme.
And how on the way he met two Pilgrimes of diuers sorte,
the one whereof recounted to him the prowesse, beautie,
and high chiualrie of the Fairie youth, during which time
they heard a great noise in a Forrest, which caused them goe
thither. Wherein one may note, how amorous passions do
so maister the hearts of the greatest personages, as leading
them from the pathes of reason: they forsake what is their
dutie, and all important affaires whatsoeuer, cannot withdraw
them from seruing their affections. And by the Pilgrimes
discourse, wee may see how commendable true and
sincere freendship is, and that a good turne ought to bee
greatlie esteemed, and bindes him in no small bond that
hath receiued it, especially the heart addicted to noblenesse
and vertue.
               
               
                  I Haue héereto fore declared, as yee may
read in the fourtéenth and sixtéenth chapters
of the former Booke, that the great
and puissant king of Persia, was wonderfully
surprised with the loue of this
faire princesse, whom because we so latelie
left, yee cannot easilie forget: and
that by all meanes possible he could deuise, he sought how
he might attaine her to be his wife. So that imagining the
contrarietie of his religion, might yéeld some reason of hinderance,
he caused himselfe to be baptized, to the end all his
people might become Christians, he sent for diuers diuines
into Christendome, that they should come preach, and do all
the other seruices of good and faithfull Christians in his

kingdome. Notwithstanding this which he did was but
counterfeit and dissimulation, that so (vnder this pretext) he
might the more easilie induce the good Emperour of Constantinople
father to the maide, without difficultie to grant
his mariage. And to this end sent he messengers and ambassadours
expresselie to him, to vnderstand his pleasure, attending
which time, transported with impatience of so
long delay: one day he determined secretlie to depart himselfe,
that he might behold this so famous beautie, by whose
picture (drawne to the life by some excellent painter of that
time,) he had drunke this sweete sirrop of conceiued loue.
And as he had suddenlie thus determined, as suddenlie did
he put it in execution, not hauing any companie with him
but a Squire of his owne, whose fidelitie he neuer called in
question: to him he gaue his Helmet and Launce to beare,
is Helmet (I say) which was beyond all other in temper
and goodnes, hauing on the Creast thereof a bright shining
Carbuncle, made in resemblance of the Sunne, which an
hundred paces euery way about him, gaue in the night time
such an exceeding cleerenes and light, as dooth the Moone
when she is in hir fullest perfection. He sometimes wun it
from a great and puissant king of Assiria, whome he had
conquered in combate, that for the prize of victorie, had set
his kingdome against a part of Persia: but after the conquest,
he released him, and in recompence of such wonderfull
courtesie, the Ass
                     ••
                  ian gaue him this Helmet, which he estéemed
more then all his good. Héere vpon the Sophie did vsuallie
weare it, when he went in any notable or signall expedition,
and especiallie when he had any occasion to trauaile
by night about any affaires of importance, as this which
now he had vndertaken: leauing his kingdome in weake
and poore estate, through diuersitie of religions which there
he suffered. And this oftentimes is cause of the intire ruine
and desolation, of the very greatest Monarchies and common-wealths,
yet left he the rule to one of his bretheren, a

young man, voyd of exper
                     ••
                  nce in such high affayres. And
albeit hee was apt to armes, and a good knight in triall of
his person: yet had hee not sence and vnderstanding, to gouerne
the helme of so huge a vessell, as was the monarchie
of Persia. Thus was the Sophie not assured of his suffiencie,
and but that his head was troubled with amorous conceits,
he would not haue reposed any such trust in him: but
let it be, he did it by indis
                     •
                  retion, or else for more assurance
of his secret departure, not thinking his voyage would be so
long as afterward it prooued, suffice it he did not wisely, as
you shall perceiue by the discourse following in the historie.
               Hauing committed this poore kinde of order to his very
greatest affaires, he departed in equipage as ye haue heard,
riding many dayes and nights together, vnder cléerenes of
his meruailous shining helmet, without finding any aduenture
worthy the writing, and passed thorow diuers Citties
of his owne kingdom, vnknowne of any one, and made such
quick expedition, as he came to the vtmost merge of Persia:
where finding a Barque readie to depart, in few dayes hee
landed in the desert of Arabia, and from thence by great
trauayle, not without enduring sundrie hazards and perrils
on the way, he reached the countrey of Palestine, still
carryed on with the inward remembrance of his loue, as he
little regarded whether he rode right or wrong. Being thus
arriued in this countrey, he entred into a Forrest thick beset
with trées, which contained many mi
                     •
                  es both in length
and breadth, wherein he had not ridden any long while, but
he met two pilgrimes conferring together: the one of them
being young of age, and endued with very singuler beautie,
for his haire was yellow like wyers of gold, and the prettie
downe on his chéekes and chin was of the same couler, in
his face like wise stood the liuely couler of the Rose: his stature
was neither great nor smal, but indifferent euery way:
his broad ha
                     •
                   was garnished with Scallop shels round about,
and Medialles of gold and siluer, intermingled with

little pilgrime stones of Iuorie very artificially framed: his
Cassock and hose was of fine linnen cloth, and at his girdle
hung a little bottle, wherein hee had both wine and water,
according as he had occasion to vse them, and in his hand a
staffe piked at both the ends. The other pilgrime was an
old man, the haire of whose head and heard was of reddish
couller, griz
                     •
                  led among with many white haires, his visage
drie and withered, and tand with blacknesse almost like a
Moore, flat nosed, the tooth standing in his head very vgly to
behold, of very euill fauour was he and disposition: his stature
was grosse and short, big bulkt before downe to the
girdle, and on his back arising mountaine: his garments
were of old besmered lether, all ragged and torne, and his
hat (in stéed of shels) was garnished with skales of some
young Tortoise: his Medailles were of saffronned lead,
where among stood little staues of the bones of dead beasts.
The Sophie drawing néere them, saluted them very courteouslie,
and addressing his spéech to the younger man, demanded
of whence he was, whether he went, and wherfore
he was disguised in that sort, considering that his countenance
deliuered him to be a man of other qualitie then his
garments made shew of: and if I be not deceiued (sayd the
Sophie) you are discended of some noble linage, and are a
man likewise of no meane valour. Sir, answered the pilgrime,
if ye will somewhat slack the pace of your horsse, and
(withholding his bridle) make him goe according as we do,
if likewise ye will vouchsafe such patience, as to heare my
discorsiue answere to all your questions: I shall satisfie ye
concerning the matters enquired, and beside acquaint yee
with other things, whereat yee will not a little meruaile.
Beléeue me, said the Persian king. I am very well contented,
and I thinke my horsse would gladly ease his pace awhile:
then the pilgrime thus began. My Lord, because
I perceiue both by your wordes and behauiour, that you
are a man more accustomed to commaund then obey,

I would intreat yee not to be offended, if talking familiarlie
with yee, perhaps I haue indiscréetly said, that to listen
what I conceiue worthie of meruaile, you should enforce
your Stéed to a more gentle pace, that happily would run
so fast as he could, according to the weightie affaires of importance
you goe about: which hardlie will permit yee to
stay my discourse, being (in regard of your selfe) not so worthie
hearing as I estéemed, but rather may yéeld yée more
discontent then pleasure. If then I haue offended héerein, or
shall do by ouer tedious circumstance: I beséech yee imagine
I was not well aduised, which in respect of my submission,
may the more easily be pardoned. Well, well, quoth the
king, vse no more words concerning me, but answere what
I haue demanded: for were I not so desirous to knowe, I
would not shew my selfe so inquisitiue, and if your discourse
be worthie the hearing, as you haue sayd, it cannot be too
long for me to listen, or displeasing any way, but verie acceptable.
               First then (quoth the Pilgrim) you must vnderstand, that
albeit in this estate you behold me, yet am I discended of
noble linage, for my father beares the title and crowne of a
king, and my mother was sister to the puissant Emperour
of Constantinople, a man that (for his manifold vertues) deserueth
to be highly estéemed and accounted of. In whose
Court, both in my youngest age, and since the time of mine
infancie, I was carefully nourished and brought vp: vntill
the houre I receiued knighthood, which is no long time
since. Notwithstanding, after I began to enterprise my first
exploites of good or bad fortune, trusting more to the
strength and dexteritie of my body, then reason would I
should, for a proofe or triall what I could do: I was so hardie
one day, to goe in person alone, to aduenture on the Den
or Caue of Rock Alpine, and there assayled the horrible Giants
Ferclaste, Androfort and Ergoferant, by whome I was
vanquished, and long time kept as prisoner there very mimiserable.

For after I had a great while endured the fight
against Androfort, without suffering him to gaine the verie
least aduantage ouer me: the cruell Ferclaste came trecherously
behinde me, and gaue me such a weightie blowe on
my helmet, as layde mee well néere dead at his foote: and
strange it was that he tooke not my life from me, as my ouer
much boldnesse had deserued. But as the Glead snatcheth
vp a Chicken in her talents, so almost dead, and with
like facilitie, did he graspe me vp, carrieng me into a streict
and darksome prison: where I endured such miserie and dolor,
as hardly could a humaine creature suffer the like, by
reason of the woundes I had receiued in the fight, which
with the hard enterteinment they gaue mee beside, (being
bloodie enemies by nature, and men in whome no naturall
compassion harboured) was insupportable. An hundred
times they would haue put mee to death, if I had had an
hundred liues for them to tirannise on, but that the remembrance
of the grace of God, and his sonne crucified for the
redemption of man, on whom incessantly I euermore called,
was still my succour and comfort: and their brother Ergoferant,
a man of more milde and gentle nature then the
other were, did all that possibly hee might, to preserue mee
from death. Neuerthelesse, the crueltie and rigor of the prison
wherein I was so strictly detained, was such, as I knew
not whether I liued or no: but the Almightie, in whome
continually I trusted, taking compassion vpon my miserie,
casting downe his eye of pittie, sent to deliuer mee out of
this captiuitie, by an vnexpected helpe, as I shall declare
vnto yée.
               First giue me leaue to tell yee, that one (without the
knowledge of any man) arriued in the great Emperours
court of Constantinople, a young knight, so beautifull as an
angell in all perfections: yet no one there knew him, neyther
did himselfe know who were his parents, but sayd hee
was sent thither by a Fairie named Ozyris, who from his

infancie had nourished and brought him vp, likewise of her
he receiued horsse, armour, and all things else beséeming a
young gallant that sought the order of knighthood, without
which it was not lawfull for any one to meddle with the
search of aduentures, or to attempt exploits of armes and
chiualrie, whereby renowme and honor was atchieued, and
religiously obserued among the professors thereof. I will
not trifle time with particuler discourse, how well shaped,
lustie, and faire his horsse was, caparasonned so rich and costly,
as all the beholders much admired thereat: it shall suffice
in one word to tell yee, that neuer was séene in the time
of our memorie, a young man, who in countenance, aspect,
and assured behauiour, could promise more louely déedes of
armes, and galliardise of person, then he did: nor was there
any one, whose eyes could be glutted, or hart satisfied with
looking on him, imagining that hee was sent from heauen
by the grace of God, to do some act of memorie for the benefit
of the Empire, as it was not long before it came so to
passe. For he who by the aduise of the Fairie was thus sent
to the court, to require of the Emperor his order of knighthood,
after he had humbly intreated it at his hand: with
great honor was it giuen him, and all the worthie obseruations
thereto belonging, the most diuine and faire princesse
Porphiria, daughter to the Emperour, girding on his sword:
in the dooing whereof (a thing worthie noting) the sweete
Roseate rednesse in her chéekes, suddenlie changed to such a
liuely vermillion hew, that they which before imagined no
addition could bee made to make her more beautifull, because
she contained such an absolute perfection, by this effect
were drawne to a quite contrary opinion. For she séemed
such as the Knight himselfe did, vpon whose front sat an assured
boldnesse, with a countenance immooueable, blandished
with such a swéete grauitie, as if some alteration had
suddenly entred his thoughts, and that present affection had
surprised him, which (as I learned of such, who take héedfull

regard in like occasion, and therefore marked this the more
na
                     •
                  rowly) proued so in deede. The morrow after this young
youth was made knight, for proofe of the exteriour valour
that seemed to be in him, the Emperour feasting and enterteining
him accordinglie: gaue him to vnderstand of the
manstrous and inhumaine giants Ferclaste and Androfort,
who too much iniured and oppressed the whole countrey.
This hardie new knight, presently determined so go combat
                     •
                  
with them, desiring to atchieue by the price of his blood
and perrill of his life such immortall praise: withall, to expresse
his thankfulnesse to the Emperour, for the great honor
he had doone him, whereto he was bound by all meanes
possible he could deuise: not being ignorant I warrant ye,
that the power of a mightie enemie was not so much to be
feared, as the fauour of so great a personage was to be cherished
and maintayned.
               Being then secretly departed from the Courte, to put in
execution this faire enterprise, such was his happie fortune,
after a long, doubtfull and dangerous fight, wherein
he endured more paine then I am able to rehearse: that he
got the victorie of the Giants, killing two of them, and the
third he tooke to mercie. This déed which I haue discoursed
to ye, was of greatest honor that euer was heard of in
our time: and the Emperour hearing thereof, was driuen
to no little admiration, especially when hee vnderstood the
certaine trueth in deed. It is reported, that these newes being
blazed abroad in sundry countries, as indéed they were
in mo
                     ••
                   knowne places of the world: that the great Sea it
selfe was sore troubled, and the greatest part of the forrest
of Ardene was distraunched, and the rest of the Trees stood
halfe rent in sunder, without any honour of their former
verdure. The great flood of Egipt ouerflowed the banckes,
and left the common course where it was wunt to glide,
being so furious and outragious: as the people of Egipt
were more then halfe part drowned, and the whole land so

couered with water, as many were forced to endure famishment,
others (with conceit of greefe) dyed presently. For my
selfe, I can hardly be drawne to credit these reports, because
such insensible things cannot be mooued by any so great a
meruaile: I rather coniecture, that this came from some
Poets of those times, who (as Painters doo take an audatious
licence, to iustifie by their writing and painting what
neuer was) to make the more ample discourse of this déed so
full of admiration, did set downe the historie in this manner.
               But howsoeuer it was, to come againe to my purpose, I
know it well, and that for a certaintie, that the knight hauing
vanquished the Giants, and annihillated all their forces,
that he came to deliuer me out of that accursed prison,
wherein I had beene so long time enthralled. And when hee
vnderstood that I was named Pharisor, a knight of some
fame, and Nephew to the Emperour: most kindely hee
came and embraced me, suffering mee to doo the like to him,
by whom I had receiued so great a benefit. Then began I to
remember (according as I had often times heard talked of
before, and that by no meane personages in times past,) that
we should account the day of our desiuerance from any miserable
bondage, much more happie then the daye when
first we were borne into this world: because from the day
of our birth, we g
                     •
                   on still forward into diuersitie of misfortunes,
but on the day of our deliuerie, wee were restored
from such a feare, as we neuer need to stand in doubt of any
more: thus are we no lesse bound to the cause of our deliuerance,
then to our parents from whom wee receiue life.
And beere vpon wee contracted together such an intire
l
                     •
                  agne of amitie, as death should not seperate or extinct
our affections: nor was the loue of the valorous Achilles to
Patroclus, Nysus to Eurialus, or Pylades to Or
                        •
                     stes, worthy to
be compared with my affection to him. For albeit by vngentle
fortune wee are sundered the one from the other, the

greefe and sadnesse I endure for his absence, hath constrained
me to disguise my selfe in these habillements as yee sée,
thus barefooted as I am, to goe and visit the holy Sepulthre,
wherein was buryed the precious body of the redeemer
of the world: to which place I am bound, by a solemne
vowe long since made, to giue him hartie thankes for my
deliuerance, and with great deuotion and humilitie to intreat,
that it would please him I might soone recouer and
sée againe my true Achilles: to whom I owe not onely this
office of freendship, but an hundred liues if possiblie I could
haue so many, and this I doubt not but hee will permit
me.
               As thus the young Pilgrime continued his discourse on
the way, they came to a place in the Forrest which was very
spatious and plaine, in the midst whereof stood a great
thicket of meruailous high trees: and there they heard such
a clanching of swordes vppon armour, as all the whole
forrest ecchoed therewith, which caused the Sophie and the
young pilgrime direct their course thither ward, to see what
it was: but as for the olde pilgrime, so soone as hee heard
the noyse, he set foote forward more speedie then the winde,
to seeke some corner where he might hide him. And there
will wee leaue him, and proceed with the Sophie and the
young pilgrime: what happened to them shall bee declared
in the other chapter, for in this hath beene sufficient said alreadie.
            
            
               
               Cap. 3.
               
                  How the Sophie found in the forrest two strong and puissant
Knightes, that fought together (at all extremities) for a faire
horsse, and other things of great value, exposed as guerdon
to the conquerour. And how the Sophie would haue taken
and carryed away perforce, the horsse for which the knights
combatted, which made them run violently vpon him, and
of the dissention that ensued betweene them three, how it
tooke end, and what happened afterward. Where out may
be gathered, how hurtfull a thing arrogancie is, to such as
inconsideratly will enterprise more, then they are assured of
power to effect: and how in all affayres whatsoeuer, it is necessarie
to place aduise and knowledge in the forefront, ere
we vndertake to performe any matter of importance.
               
               
                  THe great King of Persia being come first
to the plaine, where the noyse caused him
forsake his way, to know the occasion of
that hurly burly: beheld two Knights, of
more then common stature, being armed
capape, who fought very violently together,
to sley each other. The one of them
was more mightie of body then the other, because hee was
of monstrous and Giantlike composition: but in dexteritie
of armes and valour of courage, he went not so farre beyond
his enemie, but that the greater part of the day was spent,
yet little aduantage was gained on eyther side. For if the
Giants shield were battered in pieces, his body wounded,
and his strength much diminished: the knight with whom
he dealt had likewise his armour sore mangled, and his bodie
iniured in many places, from whence the bloud issued in
great aboundance, and at the time of the Persians arriuall
there, they were vpon the point to pause a breathing while,

being vnable to withstand each other any longer, so were
they ouertrauailed with a sharpe and dangerous conflict,
which as it had▪ so was it still to continue betweene them.
The Sophie, without enquiring the cause of their debate,
or speaking any word to the knights (for he was meruaylous
proud and arrogant) allighted from his horsse in great
hast, and went to vntie a goodlie faire horsse, which he saw
bound to a tree with great chaines of 
                     •
                  ron: but as he was
about to do it, being somewhat to néere the horsse, he smote
him such a violent stroke with his héele vpon the shéeld, as
made him tumble along so amazedly, that hee lay a good
while ere he could recouer himselfe againe: and had not his
sheeld beene of some temper indéed, he had not liued to complaine
of his hurt. But the goodnes of the mettall saued his
life for this once, when being risen againe from his astonishment,
he would not desist from his former en
                     •
                  erprise,
which was to take and beare the horsse, that so highly liked
him: as well for the beautie and likelihood of goodnes to
be in him, as also for the necessitie he was in of one at that
time, his owne horsse being ouer much wearyed with trauaile.
When the two Combattants perceiued what he intended,
they cryed to him, that he could not carry thence
the horsse so easily, without buying him more dearly with
the price of the combate: and that if he did not forbeare and
let the horsse alone, he should by them be well beaten, as his
boldnes did deserue no lesse.
               The King of Persia hearing these hardie menaces, was
enraged with such choller, that hauing fastened his Helmet
on his head, and gotten his sword in his hand
                     •
                   he made
presently toward them, with resolution to deale with them
both, striking first at the Giants legge with such force, as if
he had not quickly clapt his shéeld before, he had cut it quite
off at that blowe: But the Giant who was readie at armes,
as any man of his qualitie in those times, to defend this
stroake thrust forward his shéeld, the greater part whereof

was pared away with the blowe, and laide on the ground,
which the other knight perceiuing to whome the Persian
addressed him selfe, aiming at a part of his body, which he
sawe was bare by losse of some of his armour: but he escaping
the thrust, gaue the Sophie such a mightie stroke on
the Creast, as had it beene any other Helmet, beside this
meruailous one and not to bee equalled, as before I haue
told ye: he had cleft his head downe to the shoulders, but of
such soundnesse was the helmet, as certaine sparkes of fire
issued thereout, not receiuing anye other harme by the
stroke, whereat the Giant not a little enraged, sayd, that
to him alone appertained the chastising of the Persian
king, and not to any other: because he had receiued the first
stroke at his hands, and besides, himselfe was the more able
man for the combate. Likewise, quoth the Giant, to mee belongeth
the defence of the horsse, and not to thee, as thou
knowest well enough, and better can I maintaine the fight
then thou, as the dealing betweene vs twaine hath well
giuen thée to vnderstand, and would I haue vsed my vttermost
forces against thée, I néeded not haue wasted so much
time in vaine, for long ere this our strife had beene ended.
Now because I perceiue there is some more valour in th
                     ••
                  
then in him, I am willing to spare thee so much as possible I
may: wherein (notwithstanding) I would not haue thee
ouerweene thy selfe, in presuming to impeach me, when I
shall chasten this rusticall fellow, who thus ventured to
trouble vs, when I was vpon the point of giuing end to our
strife, and thylife together: whereto the knight Combatant
thus replyed.
               I know well Giant, that commonly the people of thy
sorte are mightie and strong, by reason of theyr greatnesse
beyond other men: but withall, they haue much
lesse courage, valour and vertue, then presumption and arrogancie,
as at this present I may gather by thy wordes
which I finde to be more hautie and proud, then either thy

strength or dexteritie to armes is, albeit (without shew of
fainting) thou hast doone thy best to vanquish me, and neuer
dealt I with any one, that held me harder tack then thou hast
doone, since the beginning of our combate, at the end wherof
I am certainlie perswaded, that I shall remaine the conquerour:
as long ere this I had beene, if this knight had
not béene our hinderance. And therefore the correcting of
him appertaineth to me, and not thée, as hauing more
right to the horsse, the shéeld, and the Cup, the prizes of our
combate, then thou hast: thou oughtest therefore to withdraw
thy selfe, and leaue the fight alone to me, otherwise I
shall be enforced to set my selfe against thée with him, thereby
to offend thée the more. Much rather had I a thousand
times (answered the Giant) to fight against ten such as thou
art, then to giue thée such an aduantage: such is the small
estéeme I make of thée. These words were no sooner ended,
but the Sophie and the knight ran both vpon the Giant:
the one to hinder him from dealing alone with the Sophie,
and the other to beare away the horse, and alay the pride of
the Giant.
               Soone after, the Sophie and the Giant (for the same
intent) put them selues against the knight, and immediatly
(without kéeping any order among them) the Giant
and the knight fought against the Sophie: by meanes
whereof, the combate was of as long continuance as disorder
betwéene them, which was very pernicious and dangerous
for them, had it not béene that the young pilgrime,
who but newly arriued there vpon this confused bickering,
and séeing such an vnruly manner of fight, as in all his lyfe
time hee had not séene the like, sharpe, rigorous, and cruell,
on each side, and one or other must in the end beare away
the woorst: he aduentured to seperate them with his staffe,
but the blowes fell so thick, that it was quickly cut in thrée
péeces, which when hee sawe, and doubting greater harme
might happen to him: hee was enforced to keepe aloo
                     •
                  e,

and stand as a beholder of this cruell combate. Long continued
this reasonlesse fight, h
                     •
                  e not being able to iudge who
had the better: sauing that the Sophie séemed more fresh
and lesse we aryed then the other, but at length, with the
consent of the Sophie, who had as then least need of all, they
sundred themselues to breath a while, when the young Pilgrime
thus bespake them.
               My Lords, it were a great losse, if thrée such knights of so
great valour, and endued with hautie resolution, as I perceiue
you all are, that it may be iudged your equals liue not
in the world: should perish so miserablie, as I know you
cannot but finish your dayes in this combate begun, onely
through want of due order to be obserued among ye, following
such reasonable connsell and aduise, as might be giuen
yée. Already haue you spent most part of the day, yet no one
of yée can certainly make vaunt of any aduantage ouer his
enemie: neither (for ought I perceiue) dooth any one of yée
know which is his aduersarie, nor against whom he ought
especially to direct himselfe: for sometimes two beares
themselues against one, and then that one ioynes with one
of the two against the third: in continuance of which most
kinde of fight, it cannot be but all thrée at the last will miserablie
end their liues: so that no man shall be able so say
which is the conquerour, or who beares away the honor of
the combate, whereby your intent was to merit commendation:
but now on the contrary yee shall get no praise at
all▪ but rather bee esteemed as insensible and misgouerned,
whereas well yee wot, that reputation and accompt is the
principall guerdon of noble and valiant knights, that make
profession of armes. Thus shall your parents if ye haue any
be gréeued, your freends will be waile your mishaps, and
your country, that challengeth your vttermost endeuours,
will lament your wilfull losse, beside the sorrow of such as in
distresse receiue succour by vertuous knights. Rather should
each of yée take one of those launces that leanes against

yonder Tree, and trie the fortune of the Ioust one after another,
till it may bee séene which shall bee dismounted, and
then to pursue the combate afterward, when the third may
aduenture as he sees occasion. Thus shall the victor be discerned,
and who is woorthie the honor of the field, when hee
that paused while the other fought, may enter the Lists against
the conquerour: but if yee continue in this order ye
haue begun, the greater will be your daunger, and all three
will foyle themselues thorow choller and ouer-weening.
               Thus spake the Pilgrime, and the Combattants (after
they had rested a while) creditting his councell, and liking
well of his aduise: tooke each of them a Launce, and mounted
on their horsses to begin the Ioust, whereto the readiest
were the Giant and the knight, against whom he fought before
the comming of the Sophie, who could not so soone recouer
his horsse, because he had strayed aside, and was grasing
alone by himselfe in the Forrest. In meane while these
two ran fiercely against each other with their Launces, and
met together with such 
                     •
                  urie, as when two billowes of the
sea méet violently, when the winde carryeth them contrary
to their course, and then breakes them aloft in the ayre with
a most terrible murmour. The Launces being shiuered in a
thousand pieces, flew like a fire thorow the ayre, and theyr
horses being shrewdly hurt with méeting their shoulders together,
brake their girts, cruppers, and their other caparisons,
and tombled along on the ground with their maisters,
each hauing the saddle betwéene his legs: making such a
terrible noyse with the fall, as the ground trembled and
shooke more then a mile about the place: and they, hauing
theyr Shéeldes battered, and theyr sides mortally wounded,
lay in a traunce vpon the earth, without moouing either
hand or foote, but as though the life and soule were parted
in sunder. Whereat the Sophie abashed, began not a little
to meruayle, 
                     •
                  hauing stoode a good while wayting
when the one or other would ryse and vrge the combate:

and séeing neither of them stirre, he ran to the place where
the horsse was tyed, which they combatted for. But séeing
he was not there, and could not tell what was become of
his Squire likewise, he followed a path that led further into
the Forrest, which when he had trackt a long time, not méeting
any one, it happened to him as you shall heare in the
Chapter following.
            
            
               Chap. 4.
               
                  What fortuned to the Sophie, after the hard encounter betweene
the two strong and puissant knights, that fought the
Combate in the Forrest. And how he tooke away perforce
the great Lycocephall from a Damosell, that made a greeuous
complaint holding him by the bridle, and howe afterward
he departed with her. How the young Pilgrime mounted
one of the wounded knights vpon his horsse, the succour
which he gaue him, by conducting him to a place, where remedie
might be giuen to his wounds. What the old mishapen
Pilgrime was, and the speech he had with the mightie
Giant Squamell: how hee found the Tree whereof the Pilgrime
told him, and what happened to him. Wherein may
be seene, what chastisement foolish and ouerbold women
are woorthie of, that misprise and disdaine the seruice done
for them, and with what punishment their ingratitude is often
times recompenced. Then by the young and euill fauoured
Pilgrime, and the succor they gaue to each of the wounded
knights: is signified both vice and vertue, the one euermore
accompaning the good, and the other the wicked.
They that are guided by vertue, some matter of woorth continually
ensues them: and they on the contrarie that follow
vice, fall from euill to wursse, and to vtter perdition in
the end.
               
               NOw began it to were darke, and the heauens being
couered with obscure clowdes, declared to humaine

creatures, that the houre of their rest drew neere: when
the great king of Persia, hauing long sought the proud and
goodly horse Lycocephall, and perceiuing that he could not
finde him, determined to passe that night vnder a Trée in the
Forrest, for hee was so tyred and wearyed with going on
foote, that he could hold out no longer.
               Beeing thus armed as he was, and couched on the gréene
grasse, he had not line there any long while, but hee heard a
feeble voyce, which he gathered to be the voyce of a woman,
lamenting very gréeuouslie, vsing these or the like kinde of
speeches. Alas most miserable that I am, in what place or
part of this darke vast Forrest may I méet with him, whose
absence brings to my desires more obscure gréefes and anguishes:
then this black comfortlesse night, or this place so
hideoue presents to mine eyes. Alas thou hardie and valiant
knight, the most faire and agréeable to my heart that
the earth beares: in what nooke art thou hidden that I
should not sée thée? I haue the eyes of my remembrance so
open, as all the obscuritie of this night cannot hinder me,
but that I could and can behold thy image and resemblance
before me: but to touch and hold thee according as I wish,
my misfortune and thy crueltie dooth forbid me. Aye me, if
heeretofore when thou soughtest for me, I was any thing
offensiue to thée: pardon me I intreat thée. Pardon me (O
Loue) thou mightie God of heauen, if in thus dooing I haue
offended thy maiestie, that now I should bee woorthie of so
seuere punishment. Tell mee faire horsse, tell mee I pray
thée, where hast thou left thy noble maister? I am deceiued
if thou be not the beast he so highly estéemeth, and on whom
he was mounted the last time I sawe him. How happens
it that thou art thus strayed from him? and what is the
cause thou hast forsaken him? But foolish that I am, speake
I not to a beast, which hath no more habilitie to answer me
then hee who is not present whome I so dearely looue? O
vnkinde, peruerse, and detestable fortune. O vnhappie

                  Lucinda, what deitie hath coniured against thee, to make
thée so miserable: as hee that looued thée when thou didst
disdaine him, should now hate when thou féelest & estéemest
more of him then thine owne selfe, thine eyes, or thy heart?
Ah Lucinda, mischaunce follow thée Lucinda, a Princesse
most vnluckie and vnfortunate, thy mishap may well befall
thy freend, because he flyes from thée now when thou séekest
him. These lamentations in such sort pronounced, as if they
had beene vttered out of the hollow of a Rock: or the strokes
vpon an Anuile: that euen as the fire softneth waxe, so
must it haue beene some Hircanian Tigar, or some vnnaturall
deuouring Lionnesse, but would therewith be mooued
to pittie. But the Sophie, who was so proud and arrogant
as possible might be, was not any thing mooued at all:
but hauing by the cleere light of his Helmet discouered a
young beautifull damosell, that held the goodly horsse by
the bridle, went presently to her, and giuing her a rude
thrust, tooke awaye the horsse from her: whereon being
quickly monnted, he rode to séeke his Squire, and the waye
which guided him the day before. And riding part of the
night by his lightsome Helmet, by this rough encounter
and vnmanly iniurie, the damosell remained greatly astonished:
yet recouering courage and spirit, she followed him,
and a hundred times she called him théefe, robber, and discourteous
knight, vnwoorthie to ride on such a horsse, or euer
thencefoorth to weare armour on his body. And hauing
breathed foorth a thousand such like hatefull spéeches against
him. Canst thou (quoth she) inhumaine as thou art,
thus vndeseruedly wrong me? thou maist liue to sée the day,
that thy Lady shall despise thy teares and intreats, as now
thou disdaynest and makest small account of mine: and let
a more cruell shaft, then euer Cupid bare in his Quiuer,
wound thée thorowly, to bring thée into the middest of most
violent flames, and then vtterly to consume thée to cinders.
But of all these spéeches the Sophie made no reckoning,

but held on his way, as I told 
                     •
                  ee before, where we will
leaue him, and the disconsolate Lady in the Forrest: whose
mishap may well serue as an example to young damosels,
that beeing sometime beloued with true and sincere affection,
hold such kindnes in contempt, and oftentimes make
scorne of men of great valour, who merit better fauours
then hatred and disdaine: which in the end they knowe so
well how to reuenge, as they shall repent and bemoue their
estates more miserablie, then did this Princesse, of whom
we haue made mention in the former Booke, and whom ye
now behold consounded with folly, discheneled running about
the fields, hauing forsaken the king of high Misia her
father, to meet the strong and puissant Giant Squamell: who
thus badly recompenced the seruices she did him, by manifold
hazards wherein shee aduentured her life, onely for his
looue. Let Ladyes then bee carefull, least they fall into any
such inconuenience, and so making like proofe, there ensue
like punishment: for they are better taught, that learne to
be wise by others harmes, then they that fetch wisedome out
of their owne follies. So comming againe to our historie,
we will speake of the two knights, whome wee left halfe
wounded to death in the Forrest.
               The Historie speaking of them, saith, that they both reuiued
from their traunce, the one so soone as the other, and that
the Giant was he who first espyed the Sophie to be gon, hauing
caried away the horsse with him: wherefore all wounded
as he was, he ran presently (as he had béene mad) into
the Forrest, wherein when hee was but a little entred, hee
met the old pilgrime wee spake of before, who ran thither to
hide himselfe, when hee heard the noyse of the combate betwéene
the Giant and the Knight. This was an old Necromancer,
that could foretell to passengers their good and
euill fortune to come, and knew by the lineature of theyr
handes, till what age they should liue, and what day, what
houre, by what aduenture, and howe they should dye.

He knew by heart all the bookes of the Sibelles, of Circes, of
Medea, of all the old liuing Magitians, and the Magitians
of former times. And because he knew that the Fairie Ozyris
was his aduersaire, and the greatest enemie in the
world to his charmes and enchantments, likewise that she
had greater skill and knowledge then he, and specially that
for his ruine, and such as he loued, she had nourished the onlie
knight the cause of our historie: he had opposed by an anticharme
this strong Giant Squamell and his brother, who
by theyr owne nature were endued with most high prowesse:
yet notwithstanding by deuillish subtiltie hee preserued
them still from death, and to them oft times he gaue admirable
and supernaturall strength. So that knowing him
to be in quest of his horse, his shéeld, and other aduentures,
and chéefely, that he earnestly desired to haue the enchaunted
Cup, whereof he sometime had heard great report: hee
had put them all into the custodie of this strong Giant, hauing
withall incited and perswaded him in a dreame, that
he should combate against the most puissant knight on the
earth, and so set downe (as prizes for the conquerour) the
sheeld, the horse, and the Cup, whereof wee haue spoken.
Heereupon hee should holde open Ioust to all commers and
goers in the Forrest, causing the Forrest to bee commonly
called The Forrest of great Aduentures: and alreadie had he
performed many fayre exploits, by meanes whereof he was
much renowmed thorow the world, and very 
                     •
                  arre were
his deedes talked of: wherevpon the knight (so hardly handled)
came to combate with him, of whom heereafter we will
speake more liberallie, as also by what aduenture, and for
what reason he was thither conducted.
               But now let vs a little while speake of the Giant, who
séeing the olde man, of whome hee had no more knowledge
then if hee had neuer seene him: because hee could disguise
himselfe in diuers sortes, as now he did in the habit of a pilgrime,
to deceiue such great numbers as passed that waye,

and as he had deceiued Pharisor, if the meeting of the Sophie
had not preuented it. The Giant at the first sight of him
began to be somewhat afrayd, seeing him looke so vgly and
hidious: but the old Enchanter that very well knew him,
began to reason after this manner.
               Most generous and puissant knight, as this day liueth
not thy like vnder heauen, who now being mortally wounded
doost trauerse this darke forrest of high aduentures:
stay thy selfe, and forbeare (if thou be wise) to run thus as
thou doost, to finde and recouer what the destinies will not
permit thée as yet. And if thou art not enemie to thy selfe,
but hast regard of thine owne life, heare and credit my councell,
and doo as I shall presently direct thée: concerning
what I say vnto thée, who I am, and for what cause I am
so carefull of thée, the effect shall acquaint thee withall.
Know then that I am the old and auncient Necromancian
Charonifer, father to great Minofoll, of whom (it may bee)
thou hast sometime heard some spéech: such as thou nowe
seestmee, haue I liued and reigned more than a thousand
yeeres. It is in my power to make the black night a fayre
and bright day, and the fairest day againe to make the most
darkesome night. I can make the Moone and all the starres
to discend from heauen downe to the earth, by my charmes
and enchauntments: but a woman of great wisedome oftentimes
hinders me from dooing what I would. Iknew
thy graundfathers, who were great kings and Monarches
on the earth. I haue seene to my ioy, the mightie Horfella
thy mother, who (in her life time) was very deere to me, and
whome I looued as mine owne life: for of thy forefathers
and great vnckles did I receiue my first nourriture, and
was brought vp from my very youngest yeeres: in recompence
whereof, I haue euermore cherished and looued such
as were discended of them, especially thee and thy brother
Nabot, whom I esteeme as much as thee, you twaine beeing
the most hardie and valiant of all your linage and race.

So that for your aduancement, I haue dayly preserued yee
from infinite perrils and 
                     ••
                  ortall dangers, whereinto (according
to your destinies) you were readie to fall: but by
mine arte I haue preuented all inconueniences, which I
perceiued were threatned against yée. And namely, let me
remember thée of the deuillish spirits that were in the Castell
of the Enchanteresse Melanda, which could not be chased
thence but by one of the best knights in the world: likewise
the Combate thou hadst with them, by commaundement
of the Lady whom thou seruest: then maist thou likewise
bee mindfull, of the great sorrowe and vexation thou
wert to endure, before thou couldst vanquish them, and from
which (for 
                     •
                  ertaine) thou couldst not haue escaped without
death, but onely by mine arte and by my meanes, which
succoured and defended thee: for there did I so handle the
matter, that in the end thou didst obtaine the victorie, as thy
selfe doost very well knowe: and nowe againe thou art in
farre greater daunger of death, if thou doost not as I shall
say vnto thee.
               Goe then and follow the path which now thou treadest,
thorow the forrest, vntill that hauing many times turned
by my circle, made in manner and forme of a Laborynth,
thou perceiuest thy selfe to be in the middest thereof, where
thou shalt see a great Trée, straite as any Ceder, which neuer
had braunches, leaues, nor fruite, since first it sprang
from out the earth. In that tree thou shalt behold a doore
open, which notwithstanding is now so fast shut, as no one
can discerne that euer it hath beene opened, neither shall
such as come néere it, sée it, except it please me: those onely
whome I will, shall perceiue it, but others that by chaunce
light vppon it, shall imagine it to bee a huge great Rock,
wherein is a strong Caue, full of Lyons, Tigars, Beares,
and other sauage and cruell beasts. But see that boldly thou
enter thereinto, and discend lowe vnder the earth by certaine
stayres, which thou shalt finde made expressely for this

cause: and when thou art discended an indifferent waye,
thou shalt finde a floud, the water whereof runneth so violently,
as the flood is very fearefull to behold. Uppon this
water thou shalt sée a black Barque, furnished with oares
and sayles, necessarie for conueyance to the place where I
make my continuall abiding. Enter boldly into the vessell,
enter as thou art, without dread of any thing, and coutching
thy selfe therein, keeping thy selfe alwayes beneath,
and thy mouth fast closed, remooue not at all: for from
thence vppon the flood (which continually runneth downewards)
shalt thou bee brought to a place, where thou shalt
receiue helpe for thy mortall woundes, for in very déed thou
art somewhat daungerouslie wounded. Afterward thou
shalt be aduertised what is expedient for thée to doo, to merit
glorie and reputation among the Gods, that make their
aboad in the inferiour part of the world: and if thou doost
other wise then as I haue tolde thee, thou canst not any way
escape the death.
               If the Giant were amazed at the first beholding of this
olde man, no doubt hee was much more now, hearing his
wordes, and yet was it more meruaylous then all the rest,
that when he had concluded his spéech, there appeared in his
place a flame of fire, which béeing conuerted into smoake,
was carryed héere and there thorow the ayre, without appearance
left of any other thing, which caused the Giant to
stand along while pensiue, without aduenturing on any resolution
an indifferent space: but after hee had considered
with himselfe the wordes of the old Magitian, he gaue credit
to them, and determined to do as he had willed him, by reason
that the losse of his bloud from foorth his wounds, made
him feele his strength to diminish very much, and a very
great weaknesse conquer all his body. In this determination
he put himselfe vppon the way, to finde the Tree whereof
the olde man had tolde him: in which searche wee will
leaue him, to speake of the other knight so cruelly wounded.

He (as writes the Historian) being come to himselfe againe
so soone as the Giant, could not yet arise so readily, for hee
was of a more weake and soft complexion. Which Pharisor
(who had béeneah eye witnesse of their encountring) beholding,
went to him, and hauing vnlaced his Helmet, saw
that his visage, which naturally was faire: was now so
spent and discoulloured, as one could perceiue nothing of
his wunted perfection. Héereat he began to greeue, for hee
was of good nature, very pittifull and succourable to the afflicted,
and séeing the knight complained verye much of his
woundes, which made him now feele a dangerous and mortall
anguish: he began to comfort him so well as possiblie he
could. And séeing that still his bloud wasted in great aboundanc
                     •
                  ,
he despoyled himselfe of his shirt, which was so whit
                     •
                  
as hart could wish: and hauing torne it in p
                     •
                  eces, ther with
he bound vp his wounds very handsomly. When the knight
féeling more ease then he did before, and that his vigour in
better sort encreased: he intreated to be mounted vppon his
horsse, which he did by the helpe of Pharisor, who leading the
horsse by the bridle, guided him by sundry pathes thorow the
Forrest, séeking where he might finde any village or house,
or any one that knew howe to cure the knights woundes:
with kinde comfortings and other fréendly spéeches, he thus
conducted him along the forrest, when the night being spent
at their entrance thereout, they came to a very great champion
plaine: when the auaunt courrer or messenger of the
day, began to s
                     •
                  ew his Christalline beautie
                     •
                   thorow his siluer
locks, whence soone after followed the bright splendour
of the goulden Sun. Then can they discerne a farre of in
this desert, a smoake that séemed to come from the Chimney
of some house: which made the fayre pilgrime to guide the
horsse that way. But hee had not gon much ground, till hee
sawe the Knight giue a signe of falling from his horse, for
he was suddenly surprised with the trembling fit of an extreame
ag
                     ••
                  , caused thorow the deadly pain of his wounds:

which beeing vnbound for ease, let the bloud againe issue
foorth, as thor
                     •
                  w pipes or gutte
                     •
                  s. This was no little gréefe
to the pilgrime, who tooke him from his horse in his armes,
when setting him to the grounde, the knight began to
swoune againe: wherewith Pharisor was so troubled, as
fearing he was néere his death, hee layde him along on the
the grasse, and bound againe his wide gaping woundes.
Then taking him in his armes, hee got vp on the Knights
horse, and so caryed him before him ouerthwart the saddle:
and hauing long ridden that way as he beheld the smoake,
there ensued as you shall heare in the following chapter.
            
            
               Chap. 5.
               
                  How the wounded Knight, which the faire Pilgrime conducted,
was brought into the lodging of a good and holy Hermit,
where his wounds were healed, by the praiers which the
good Hermit made to God. The great miracle that happened,
likewise howe the Knight was baptized and made a
Christian. Whereby is signified vnto vs, how God disperseth
the effects of his almightie power to such as serue him: who
are oftentimes found rather in poore and simple Cottages,
and in desert places, then in the golden Pallaces or wealthie
Citties. Likewise is in this Chapter remembred: that the
ayde and succour of the meanest, may serue and profit the
greatest personages.
               
               
                  
                     PHarisor the fayre Pilgrime, so long, and by
so many sundry pathes in the desert, conducted
(in sort as yee haue read in the former
Chapter) the halfe dead body of the
hardie and vertuous knight: that about
the houre of mid-day hee discouered the
place, whence he saw the smoke to ascend

                     •
                  oorth. Thither hasted hee with all the speed hee could vse,

hoping in that place to méete with some one that could giue
remedie to the knights wounds: for very great care he had
of him, because of the bountie and valour he had discerned
in him. But drawing néerer to this long expected place, hee
thought his hope would be deceiued, by reason he sawe it to
be but a little lodging, couered with Reedes and Rushes,
in which he could not be perswaded to finde what he would.
This made him halfe minded to change his way to some other
part, yet something still houered about his heart, that
hee should venture to continue on his waye, and sée what
might be doone in this little 
                     •
                  lender habitation, builded in a
desert so barren, for some vnlooked for body might (perhaps)
abide there. Resoluing thus, he discended from the horse, and
brought the knights body before the doore of the house, which
hauing thrust open, he saw an olde man, with his head and
beard as white as snowe, sitting before a little pan of fire,
chafing his bloodlesse and withered vaynes, and reading in
a booke which he held vppon his knee. The good olde man
was somewhat astonished when he sawe the pilgrime, but
much more when he beheld the Knights halfe dead body before
his doore. In like case was Pharisor, séeing the old mans
head and beard so vener able, with an aspect of holinesse
much to be admired: so that albeit he was an assured hardie
knight, yet was he surprised in such sort, as he durst not open
his mouth to speake vnto him, but with more great honor
and reuerence, yea, with more regard, then if he had spoken
to the greatest Monarch on the earth. Beside, the historian
(speaking heereof) saith, that he set his knée on the threshold
of the olde mans doore, and spake vnto him in this
manner.
               Father, for that thy white head and beard, with the venerable
aspect of thy countenance, makes me conceiue that
thou hast experience in many affayres, and that in thée abideth
more good then in other men, by reason of the holinesse
of life which thou leadest in this desert, farre from all euill

company or conuersation of the wicked, who oftentimes (by
their frequenting) induce the good to doo ill, whereby they
incurre the wrath of God and his indignation: where contrarywise,
hee regardeth with a chéerefull eye such as doe
well, and (as thou) hauing repented their sinnes, despise the
manner of dissolute life, full of voluptuous and carnall concupiscence:
lead a life austere and full of solitude, to temper
and appease (by these meanes) the violence of inordinate
appetites and euill desires, whereby they are naturally incited,
and prouoked to doo badly, enclining rather to vice
then to vertue. If thou haue any humanitie, and art not altogether
naked of swéete amitie, whereby humaine societie
is preserued: I desire thée in the name of God, to haue pittie
and compassion on the miserable estate of one of the most
valiant and braue Knights, that the Sunne euer vouchsafed
to looke vpon, whome thou beholdest cruelly wounded,
and readie to die heere before thy doore. Father, do thy best
endeuour to cure his wounds, wherewith thou séest hee is
vnnaturally iniured: and if the heauens haue not so fauoured
thée, that by humaine cunning thou canst giue remedie:
or if thou perceiuest them to be incurable, and that he must
néedes presently dye: yet to the end the soule may not perish
together with the body, let him receiue by thy hands
the holy Sacrament of Baptisme, by the meane whereof,
and the grace of God assisting, men are washed and made
cleane from originall sinne. For he hath told me, that by nation
he is a Pagane, contrary to the beléefe that Christians
doo professe: doo thou then thy dutie, and God shall yeeld
thée thy recompence in heauen. If my wordes may not incite
thee to this christian worke: yet let the hardnes of the
pittious estate wherein thou beholdest him, at the least
mooue thée to humaine compassion. Thus spake the sayre
pilgrime, whereto the good olde man thus answered.
               Hee to whome all that liue and die doo seruice and obeysance,
the great Father of the world, he that created it, and

all things that inhabite therein, commandeth me (pilgrime)
to doo what thou requirest: for it is his will that wee doo
good one to another, and likewise that we should render good
for euill, as well to our enemies as to our freends. And although
the contrarietie of his religion from ours, might
somewhat withhold me from accomplishing thy desire: yet
will I vse my very vttermost endeuoure for thy sake, whom
I know to be a Christian, because I am commaunded from
aboue to do so. Not that I haue any skill in the art of medicine
or Chirurgerie, for I vnderstand nothing tending therto,
much lesse knowledge haue I in the nature or vertue of
hearbes: but I helpe and giue remedie to the body by such
meanes as thou shalt perceiue: bring him then into my
lodging, and bow thy knées in prayer to God, as thou beholdest
me to make my orisons. Pharisor obeyed the Hermits
commandement, brought in the body of the Knight, which
could not mooue or stirre more then a dead man: the old man
knéeling downe by him, opening his eyes and lifting vp his
hands, hauing thrée times made the signe of the Crosse vpon
the body, and softly vttered certaine priuate suff
                     •
                  ages
and Orisons, the pilgime being likewise on his knées: with
an high voyce, and a hart full of deuotion, he sayd a prayer of
this substance or effect.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           The Hermits prayer.
                           O Mightie Sonne of God, Sauiour and redeemer of
the world, whome God thy Father vouchsafed to
leaue the essence of thy diuinitie, and to forsake thy
supreme throne, to come heere on earth, taking the habit of
our humanitie, and following the same, tookest humaine
flesh and birth, in the wombe of a virgin of long time chosen
and elected by thée, pure, white, and immaculate, of the
race and linage of Iesse: to abide and endure with vs the
self-same troubles and aduersities, which our miserable life
is subiect vnto: thou God almighty, all good, and which euermore

hast thy 
                                 •
                              eat full of mercie and looue, wide open to rereiue
the praiers and requests, which we make to thée in our
necessities, and art alwayes readie to doo vs good, receiue
vs euermore in thy mercie. O God of peace and concord,
who being diuine, immortall and most mightie, hast power
to quench the thirst of the thir
                                 ••
                              ie, the hunger of the famished,
to clothe the naked, heale all maladies, and comfort the
afflicted. Thou (I say) who hast not only taken humaine
flesh for life, subiect to endure many euils and afflictions amongst
men: but also didst beare vppon thy diuine forhead,
the cruell sweat of death, and endure the seuere passion therof,
to saue vs from eternall death, whereto for our sinnes
we were condemned. Thou (O God) who only hast power
with one woord, or with one winke of thine eye, to arrest
the strong horrible tempests of the winds, that canst trouble
the earth, that roullest and calmest the waters in the
Seas, and ridest on the heauens when thou pleasest, or slackest
as thou likest the celestiall fierie lights. Thou that long
since hauing taken humanitie amongst vs, being in Samaria,
hadst power to giue health to ten poore lepers, they beleeuing
in thee, prayed and were healed. Then a poore man
troubled with the pal
                                 ••
                              e, and one that was sick of the dropsie
by thee were likewise cured, they being one day of the Sabaoth
presented before thee: by the selfe-same power and
goodnes, a poore crooked woman, that could not help her selfe,
and shee that for the space of twelue yeares was sick with a
flux of bloud: were by thee recouered to their former estate
and health. The centurions seruant, that altogether grounded
his hope in thee. An other Leaper, and one that had his
hand dried vp, with the poore widdow lamenting for the approching
death of hir Son. And Iayrus, whose daughter was
euen ready to die: they all hauing recourse to thee, & calling
for thy aid with a chéerful hart, & firm beléefe of thy omnipotent
power: were all by thy goodnes made sound & comforted:
séeing then that thy power is alwaies one, & asgreat at this

present as it then was, and so shalbe for euer, that thou art
full of the selfe same mercie and goodnesse: I beséech thée, if
euer I haue sayd any thing that hath pleased thée, if euer I
haue doone any thing agréeable to thy liking, if euer I requested
any thing, if euer thou tookest pleasure in this austere
kinde of life, which héere I lead in this desert, by the intire
affection I haue toward thée, and the burning desire in
me to serue and honor thee: I beseech thée O good God, that
thou wouldst deigne in pitty to regard this miserable corps.
And if thou séest, (as for certaine thou seest and knowest all
things) that thou canst draw any seruice to thee from out of
it, by suffering it to liue longer time in this world, thy mightie
hand being nowe vpon the man, and the healing of his
mortall wounds so neere deaths doore: giue him thy grace,
that he may see and acknowledge for truth, that it is by thy
grace, and from thy hand, that hee receiueth all things hee
hath in this world. If not (Lord,) but that thou wilt call him
to thée, and that his houre is come: receiue and conduct his
soule I beseech thee, into thy celestiall paradise, where (for
the rest) giue him what thou better knowest then I, is necessary
for him.
                        
                     
                  
               
               Thus prayed the good Hermit, and at the same instant
baptized him, in the name of the Father, the Sonne, and the
Holy ghost: saying and dooing all that is requisite in the holy
Sacrament of Baptisme, in the presence of Pharisor, who
serued as his Deacon. Then suddenly discended from heauen
vppon the Hermits lodge, such a cleere brightnesse,
more golden then the Sun: that the Hermit and the Pilgrime
had theyr eies so dazeled therewith, as they were constrained
to lye flat with theyr faces on the earth, as if they
would haue kissed it. And more astonned were they, then if
it had mightily thundered, because they heard a voyce from
heauen, vttering these words: Be whole braue knight, to the
ende thou mayst dye for maintenance of the Christian faith,
whereinto already thou art receiued.
               
               
                  
Then suddenly the bright s
                     •
                  lendour vanished away,
when the Hermit and Phariso
                        •
                     
                   arose, and the Knight so
soone as they, as sound, lustie and pleasant, as if his body neuer
had béene wounded. Notwithstanding, he greatly merueiled
to sée himselfe in such a place, betwéene two men
whom he knew not: hee béeing of the opinion, that hee had
béene but in a sléepe, and all the paine hee had felt of his
woundes, was no more then a dreame. Yet he remembred
all that was past before, since, and at that instant, especially
Pharisors request to the Hermit, and the prayer the Hermit
made to God for him, also the bright cléerenes that appeared,
the baptisme he had receiued, with the voyce from heauen,
which he well vnderstood: whereat being not a little abashed,
he was strongly confirmed in the christian religion,
for which euer after hee determined to imploy all his forces
till death, contrary to the promise he made, when he departed
from the kingdome of Phez. Then being well remembred
and certaine of all these things, which he had séene and
vnderstood, he humbly thanked the holy man: who tolde
him, that to God onely he should returne thankes, for his
health came from him, and no other. As for him, he but praied,
and afterward made a breefe S
                     •
                  rmon, wherein he examplified
& declared the points of christian religion, wherin
the king of Phez tooke singuler pleasure. This doone, the
good man and Pharisor desiring him to tell them, of whence
and what he was, and wherefore he fought so manfully against
him that had so cruelly wounded him: hee began to
recount vnto them all his aduentures, in manner as you
shall read héereafter.
            
            
               
               Chap. 6.
               
                  The high deedes of armes and chiualrie, doone by the Knight
Gerileon, how hauing taken landing in a desert place, hee
trauailed long time on foote, before he could any where rest
himselfe. The pleasant talke and deuise his Squire Geliaste
had with him in walking, to giue him pleasure and passe away
the time. In which may bee discerned, how much such
ought to suffer as trauaile to gaine honor. And by the speeches
of the squire Geliaste, how ridiculous the reasonings
of the Sophists are, who by outward appearance resemble
sound men, and such as by their faces are supposed of good
health: yet inwardlye are attainted with mortall diseases.
Because (at first sight) their arguments seeme to bee matter
of trueth: but beeing sounded to the bottome, they are
found to bee nothing else but follyes, mockeries and meere
dreames.
               
               
                  IT is now high time, that wee should remember
the fortunes and aduentures, of
the famous and vertuous knight Gerileon,
because of him our historie beares title,
and for his sake we haue composed in
this second Booke, following the former
order you read before: the aduentures of
the loyall louer, of the Sophie of Persia, and the puissant
Squa
                        •
                     ell▪
                   By discontinuing a little in spéech of them, with
repetition of them héereafter in time and place conuenient:
we shall giue yee to vnderstand, that this whole discourse is
builded to no other end, then for him, and to his euerlasting
commendation. To this end, that the diuersitie of these
things, which are most agreeable to the greater part of readers,
may bring ye the more pleasure and recreation. To
come then againe where wee left: yee must conceiue, that

after he had long time sailed on the sea, with the fauour and
fortune of the windes that then gouerned, when he had conquered
the shippes of the Giant Squamell, with them that
were his Pirates and théeues, that spoiled Merchants of
their goods and treasure, where he heard tidings of his horse
& armes, which he had stollen: he was in the end (by violence
of a sudden tempest) cast vppon Armenia, in a place farre of
from the Forrest of great aduentures, and which was as
barren and desolate, as that which before we deciphered vnto
yee, where by the prayer of the holy Hermit, the king of
Phez recouered his wounds. Being arri
                     •
                  ed in a porte of

                     •
                  lender assurance for the safetie of ships, he minded to go on
land a while: till the tempest (which raged so extreamely,
and made the Seas vnfit for passengers) were ceased, not for
any longer abyding there.
               Heerevppon, he commaunded the maister of the Ship to
launche out a Squiffe, whereinto hee entred with his armour
and his Squire: desiring the Knight, whome hee had
saued from shipwrack on the Sea, as yee haue heard, which
was he for whose méeting he enterprised this voyage, to tarie
in the Ship for the safetie thereof, and to hinder that
the Pirate which brought them against the aduentures
and forces of Nabot and Squamell, should doo them no more
iniurie, or flie away with the Shippe which hee had gotten

                     •
                  rom him, and so thereby driue his iourney to a further delay
or lingering. The knight, who had learned all his disseignes,
the occasion of his searche, and other aduentures,
promised to fulfill his request: so vnder this promise going
on shoare, he was somewhat abashed, to sée a place so great
and spacious, to be so desert, barren, and comfortlesse, for he
could not discerne one Tree, where vnder he might take a
little repose: which he not a little desired, because hee was
crazie and ouer much wearied, with his long continuance
in the Shippe on the Seas, whereto hee was not accu
                     ••
                  omed,
and in soothe it cannot but bee yrkesome and

tedious, to such as are not acquainted with that kinde of
trauaile. So finding a little path on the port where he landed,
he kept on his way, to see if wandering further from
the Sea, which was inhabitable by the sterilitie of the place:
he could finde anye bush or shadowed plot, where hee might
rest awhile and take the fresh ayre. For the countrey of it
selfe was naturally enflamed with extreame heate, and the
shade of the ship which he had so lately left, was likewise
hot and troublesome to him. But when he had gon about the
space of a mile, hee found himselfe so ouercharged with his
armour, which till then hee alwayes had worne vppon his
body: as he was constrained thorow the extreame weight
be felt thereof, to disarme himselfe, hauing desire to walke
longer time, and more at his ease, vntill he could sée some
place conuenient for him to rest in. And as Geliaste his
Squire was beginning to take off his armour, perceiuing
that hee must beare this heauie burden on foote, hee thus
spake to his maister.
               In sooth my Lord, this Armour dooth so well become ye,
as no heat (me thinkes) should cause yee to disarme your
selfe: for in mine eye, séeing you armed by me, I see Saint
Michaell the faire Acchangell, leading me with such securitie
into paradise: as all the deuils in hell cannot get me into
their hands: you are so proper and of so goodly appearance,
when you are armed, as ye cannot méet any Lady vpon
the way, but presently she will become enamoured of ye.
And it is no small thing, to gaine the loue of faire Ladyes
that may be met withall: for such a one she may be, as is
not to be refused. To others likewise you séeme so redoubted,
as there is not a beast in all the world, but beholding
you approching, will 
                     〈◊〉
                   farre enough from yee. Whereas
if ye vnarme your selfe: I am afraide I shall bee driuen to
trie the goodnes of my legges, which were my great sorrow
if any thing should so happen. It seemeth when you are armed,
that you were brought into this world, and fourmed

an excellent m
                     •
                  uld for an armo
                     •
                  r, or that you were borne
armed, and made expressely to beare this ornament. If God
had béene so gratious to me, as to haue made me of such perfection
and propertie, as that I had béene borne to weare armour:
I would neuer make my selfe naked thereof for any
other clothing, notwithstanding the greatest heate that
might be, but he hath not made me apt to beare such honor,
or any way to defend it. If I carry it in mine armes, and
any one méete me therewith, hee will say: that I am some
Iugler, so decked to make the world laughter and pastime.
And therefore (my Lord) I beséech yee credit my councell, to
suffer your Armour still on your body as it is: for what
know ye may suddenly happen, and what but your armour
can do ye seruice. As for me, these armes will not serue me
to doo any thing therewith: because I know, as I haue bin
a little instructed, that from my birth I should be but faint
hearted and a coward. Whereto the knight, who knew wel
his squire spake these wordes but to make him merrie and
pleasant: smyling to himselfe, thus answered.
               My freend, I pray thée carry no such dismay in thy minde,
as to vaunt whether I am armed or vnarmed: for I rather
doubt this will make thée become ouer courragious, whereby
I may be held suspected, that I haue not 
                     •
                  nstructed thee
as I ought to doo, but rather haue kept thee fasting wursse
then in the time of Lent. Therefore onely do as I command
thee, carrie mine armour: and thou shalt sée, we shalbe as
merrie afterward, as now, and that no furious beast dare
venture to make thee trie thy legges.
               My Lord (quoth Geliaste) I am most constant in obeying
your commaund, yet doo I esteeme it a much better aduice,
that I should weare your armour on my body, for the more
easie cariage: and that you should come after mee, and call
me my Lord, and I to call you my sq
                     •
                  ire Geliaste, yea, it is
necessarie you should doo whatsoeuer I command yee. For
when you are armed, and I not, I come after yee, I call yee

my Lord, and you call mee Geliaste, and which is more, I obey
and doo all that euer ye bid me. And questionlesse, reason
requireth this which I saye, because there is no other
difference betweene vs: for wee are both men, and as you
haue beene armed, so am I nowe at this present, doone by
your helpe and assistance: it followeth then, that you do me
the selfe same honor, and much more then I can doo to you,
when you are as I am n
                     •
                  w. For it is but armes and gaye
garments that honors the person, and you will not deny,
but that you are honoured by your armes. See I pray ye if
the strong Nabot, if his brother Squamell, if the Sonnes of
the old Grandowin, if the puissant king of Phez and his bretheren,
if the great king of Persia, if the braue king Floridamant,
of whome is made such rumour and renowne thorowe
the world. If the monstrous king of Scithia, or any of
so many other woorthy personages, that gayned praise and
reputation by armes: had euer w
                     •
                  n such honour and account,
if they had not béene alwayes armed: your selfe, had
you euer vanquished the strong Giants, which I feared
would haue eaten mee, Ferclast and his bretheren: if these
weapons had not beene in your hands, and this armour on
your body? Truely, without these armes you had beene but
in bad case: and thereof ought honor be doone to armes, and
to such likewise as beare them. Certainly (quoth the knight)
Geliaste my good freend, there is too much sophistrie and
déepe sence in thyne argument, to perswade that which
thou proposest. How? sophi
                     ••
                  rie my Lord? sayd the Squire:
nay rather reason enough, when I receiue no sufficient
contrary answer. For there is no other difference betwéene
vs, b
                     •
                  t that you are oftentimes armed when I am not, and
then I honour yee, when yee make no account of me, but
in dooing yee seruice. It then ensueth by like reason, that
when I am armed and you not: you should doo such dutie
to me as I haue sayd: In other things wee are equall and
alike, as by reason I will prooue vnto yee, which (as yee

know) should alwayes be held of greatest trueth. For when
you laugh, I laugh likewise: when you weepe, I weepe also:
when you goe, I goe: when you are on horsseback, I
am not on foote, and when you are on foote, I am not on
horsseback. If you be agreeued, so am I: if you be amorous,
I am so as well as yee, when yee eate, I eate: when you
drinke, I am thirst
                     •
                  e: when you sléepe, I snort. What will
yee that I shall say for further proofe? in breefe, there is no
other difference betweene vs, then as I haue sayd. By my
faith (sayd the knight (who tooke great pleasure in hearing
him thus prate like a Parret,) Thou saist true Geliaste:
but tell me I pray thée, howe canst thou saue thy selfe from
this answere, and not confesse thy selfe to bee v
                     ••
                  quished?
               Thy father, thy mother, and mine: are they one selfe same
persons? are we
                     •
                   two as great, the one as the other? thou
well perceiuest we are not, for I am far greater then thou
art: we are not likewise of one teiucture, nor of haire alike.
When we dine, when we eate or drinke, we 
                     ••
                  t not both at
one table, thou dinest and suppest at my dispence, or by my
meanes, I neuer dine or sup at thine, nor by thy helpe.
When I combate, thou doost not: I looke the enemie in the
face, and stand to him, thou turnest thy back and flyest: when
I am assured, thou art fearefull: and sometime when I
smite, thou bearest away the blowes, or takest thee to thy
heeles, and so escapest.
               Continuing these speeches, with diuers other to passe away
the time, as the Knight was highlye contented with
this pleasant kinde of arguing: they followed still the path
that had conducted them from the Sea, and were come now
the space of two good myles, when a far off the Knight discouered
a little thicket, which was round beset with fayre
Bushes: this gaue him some hope, that there hee should
find so
                     •
                  e Spring or Fountaine, where bee might quench
his thirst, which pained him greatly, and shaddow sufficient

to take the frew ayre, and rest himselfe as he had some néed.
Here vpon he continued his way thither ward, and beeing
there arriued, was glad hee had found the thing he desired.
For this place was round enuironed with great goodlye
Trees, where vnder was a most pleasing shade, and in one
part thereof was a most fayre cléere fountaine, the sourse
whereof was engirt with a daintie sweet spring, the greatnes
whereof contained three acres of ground. The grasse
was there so greene and cheerefull as possible might be, and
cheefely there, more then in any other part adioining: wherat
the Knight greatly meruailed, and without care of seeking
after any other particuler occasion, but contenting
himselfe with the naturall fertilitie of the place, proceeding
from the riuer the onely cause thereof: hee went about to
beholde, and mounting on a higher part of the ground, to
rest himselfe vnder a coole shaddowe, he fell a sleepe, and so
did Geliaste likewise, where (for necessitie sake) we wil giue
them leaue to rest a while.
            
            
               Chap. 7.
               
                  How Gerileon being at rest, and sleeping in the wood neere the
fountaine, which he had so fortunately found: was awaked
by his squire, to heare the pleasing lamentable voyce of a
Lady, that did sing there hard by, which hauing vnderstood,
he intreated the Lady to sing the same Song againe. The
talkes which the Lady had with him, during which time,
there came vppon them an horrible cruell monster, called
the sauage Polippe, wherewith Gerileon began a fierce and
daungerous fight. From whence may bee gathered, that
there where man dooth purpose to be safe and at quiet, sleeping
long time in delight and voluptuousnes: there sinne
(which is a sauage monster, and which changeth and enchaunteth
it selfe into diuers fourme, yet all most dangerous)
commeth and assayleth him so fi
                        •
                     rcely, as hee hath worke
enough to defend him selfe. But if hee can ouercome him,
then is he greatly to be commended, and merits wonderfull
renowme and reputation.
               
               
                  
THe good and vertuous knight Gerileon remained a
sléepe, according as you heard in the end of the former
chapter, about the space of two houres: but Geliaste
could not sleepe so long, because in his slumber he dreamed
that he heard a swéet hermonie, wherein his thoughts tooke
very great pleasure. So that when he awaked, he plainlye
heard what he dreamed on, no imagination, but a very perfect
voyce singing a song. He heard a femenine voyce, very
swéete and mellodious, which sang with pleasure to the
eare, yet pittifully in regard of her cause, a song in the Spanish
language, the substance whereof héereafter followeth.
Nor was there any humaine heart that heard it: but as it
would haue beene highly pleased, so could it not choose but
compassion would haue mooued it. The Song was thus.
               
                  The Ladyes Song while Gerileon slept.
                  BLinde, cruell bowe-man looue,
                  that with enuenomde dart:
                  Outragiously enflamest my brest,
                  and murdrest my poore hart.
                  Alas, what wouldst thou more?
                  thou makest me lingring stay:
                  And wilt not send Phinander home,
                  whom all my thoughts obay.
                  The promisde day is come,
                  when fayre Ozyris sayd:
                  My long distresse should haue an end
                  and all my greefes allayd.
                  Yet am I still detaynde,
                  within this cruell prison:
                  
                     
Of fierce inhumaine Polyppe,
                  who keepes 
                        •
                     e gainst all reason.
               
               Alreadie six times together had the voice sung this song,
ere the Squire would arise to awake his maister, who as
yet had heard nothing: but the seauenth time, as the song
was halfe finished, or at this place where we haue paused,
he well vnderstanding both the words and sence: arose, and
awaked the knight that slept, saying. My Lord, I pray yee
take your armour, for I imagine you shall finde some aduenture
heere, that will incite yee to the combate. As for
me, I shall not, because I haue bound your armour so long,
as I am wearyed therewith. I pray yee this once stand in
my defence, and fight for mee and in my place: because I
finde my selfe so spent with choller, by reason of the greefe I
conceiue at the Ladyes song which ye heare, that if I should
lay hand to my weapon in this rage and agonie: I am afraid
I should kill my selfe, which I should be very sorry to
doo, not so much for the looue of my selfe, but because if such
inconuenience should happen: you should be left all alone,
and so haue no body to carrye your armour. Well Geliaste
(quoth Gerileon) thou hast reason to be so carefull of me, and
I take it in very good part: but what Song is that thou
tellest me of? and wherefore hast thou awaked me? Listen
a little my Lord, quoth the Squire, and you shall heare
what it is. Then the Knight heard the same voyce which
his Squire had doone, continuing the Song in this manner.
               
                  But causelesse blame I thee,
                  fayre looue that stayest my blisse:
                  Because Phynander feeles like fire,
                  as in my bosome is.
                  But cruell, vnkinde fate,
                  that holdes me seruile so:
                  
                     
Infortunat
                        •
                      Orphyza, when
                  will time abridge thy woe?
                  Seauen yeares aduentures spent,
                  as bird and beast from me:
                  Is it not time then now at length,
                  my braue knight I should see?
                  The hardie Champion for my sake,
                  in dreame I did discerne:
                  Fighting in fire with Polyppe,
                  my libertie to yearne.
               
               The knight hearing in a place so farre from the company
of men, and withall 
                     〈◊〉
                   desert and barren, a humaine voyce
singing with such sweetnes and mellodie, as the best singing
birdes might 
                     •
                  ease their notes to listen, and the harpe of
Orpheus had beene but rude to the eares of such, as first had
heard the heauenly hermonie of this song, was no lesse drouen
into admiration, then ouercome with pleasure in the
hearing. But when the squire tolde him, that in the beginning
of the song mention was made of the nymph Oziris, he
was sodainly prouoked with an extreame desire, to knowe
on what occasion the Ladie song, and who conducted her into
that place. So putting on his armour, except his helmet,
which he lefte as yet in the hand of the squire, 
                     •
                  rauersing among
the highest trées, he went straight to the place, where
he heard the voyce, and there hee found a great déepe dungeon,
which was round about enuironed with trées, wherevnder
he had before seated himselfe, there he beh
                     •
                  ld a huge hole
into the earth, the mouth whereof des
                     •
                  ended downe into the
dungeon, where he sawe a Ladie that sometime had bene of
exquisite beautie, as yet the feature of her countenance discouered:
but the long languishing solitude, which as it séemed,
shee had no little while endured, had so extenuated and
chafed awaie her perfection, as she séemed nothing in beautie
to her former estate, Besides, her garmentes, that whilome

gaue her some fourme, being now olde, rent, & 
                     ••
                  rne,
made her séeme lesse beautifull than indéede shee was, notwithstanding
men of iudgement may easily conceiue, that
were she reduced to her wonted plight, shee would appeare
more excellent than euer she did. The knight beholding her,
began to reason and talke with her, as thus. Faire Ladie,
(quoth he) I wish that once more for my sake you would sing
the song, which not long since ye did, for you haue a voice so
swéete and agréeable, that in hearing yee, I conceined excéeding
great pleasure. Or if you thinke me not of such desert,
yet at the least doe me the fauour to sing it againe, for the
loue of Phynander, him whom you haue so great desire to sée.
The Ladie was somewhat abashed when shee hearde the
knight speake, especially when shee behelde his wonderfull
beautie: then came to her memorie, that this was he she had
so many times séene in her sléep, combatting against the cruell
sauage Polyppe, and of whom she had heard the faire Ozyris
speake: wherevpon she chaunged sodainly into a vermillion
colour, like a fragrant gilleflour, when with a trembling
voice she thus aunswered the knight.
               If thou art not he that must bee the cause of my deliuerance.
I praie thée friendly knight, for the youth and beautie
which I beholde in thée, and whereof I haue verie great
compassion, staie not héere to listen my singing. For it may
so fal out, that if once more thou giuest eare to my song, thou
wilt receiue more displeasure, than therein thou tookest delight
and contentment. But without further expence of
time in questioning wherefore, I pray thée (whilest it is yet
permitted thée) to be gone spéedily, and with the greatest diligence
thou canst possibly vse, out of this place, assuring thy
selfe, that I would not refuse to graunt thy request, as well

                     〈◊〉
                   the vertue as the beautie which I conceiue to be in thée,

                     〈◊〉
                   also for the loue of him in whose name thou doest require
the same. For thou must knowe for certaine, that if while I
sing, the sauage Polyppe ariue héere, he will kill thée though

thou hadst an hundred liues. Therefore I counsell thée as
thou louest thy life, to get thée gone from hence as soone as
thou canst.
               I neuer feared (quoth the knight) the thing I neuer saw,
nor whereof I euer heard anie spéech, therefore you labour
in vaine in perswading me to flight, I rather imagine that
you vse these wordes, to excuse your selfe in the request I
made vnto you.
               The Ladie would haue spoken something more to him,
but sodainely came a swift foule whistling with her wings,
and flying hard by where the knight stood, pearched her selfe
in one of the highest trées about the dungeon. At the hearing
whereof the Ladie was so ouercome with passion and
feare, that her tongue stood as fast bounde in her mouth, in
such sorte, that shée (not hauing the power to speak anie one
worde) was constrained to withdrawe her selfe farther into
the denne, tourning her backe towardes the knight. Uppon
this accident Gerileon hearde a greate and fearefull voyce,
which without customable order, made a meruailous noise,
lyke vnto the bellowing of a Bull, when he is strayed from
the troupe of kine that he conducteth. Then presently among
the bushes entered the cruell and fierce sauage, carrying
a dead béefe vppon his shoulder, and in one hand he helde
two other deade béefes, intending with this prouision to
make his supper. The aspect and forme of him, at the first
sight, made the knight somewhat dismayed, for hee was couered
all the bodie and face with long shagge haire, as black
as a coale, and no manner of white appeared about him but
his téeth. The eyes in his head were lyke fire, hee was of a
Gyants stature, and right before his nauell he had the head
of a dragon, verie hideous and vgly, with a greate mouth,
whereout appeared two mightie long hooked téeth, sharply
pointed, and verie dangerous. On his necke he bare a great
staffe, made in the fourme of a mase, wherewith hee was
wont to take and kill both men and beasts of all sortes. So

soone as he espied the knight, he presently layde downe his
load, and taking his 
                     〈◊〉
                   staffe from his shoulder, beganne
to laie at the knight: who seeing the vnaccustomed furie of
the monster, quickly caught his helmet from his squire Geliaste,
which when his maister had, hee ranne to hide himselfe
in the hole where he had seene the Ladie. The Sauage
leaping to the dungeon, which was as large as it was high,
first smote at the knightes head with the staffe, from which
to shield himselfe, he turued with such dexteritie and lightnesse,
as he was not auie 
                     ••
                  te hurt thereby. Which the monster
perceining, redoubled another blowe on the other side so
violently, as the knightes shielde was thereby verie much
brused, and his arm
                     •
                   stonnied greatly with the stroke. Notwithstanding,
he stood firmely against him, and entered into
such coler against the monster, that his face and bodie became
all red, and his eyes 
                     •
                  parkled as fire, so that the sauage
who neuer before feared anie man, and imagined that this
was but a signe of feare in him, sodainly thought that he beheld
the knightes ladie enuironed in a flame of fire, that séemed
(as it were) to issue out of him.
               This happened not to him of himselfe, but by the succor
and aide of his nurse Oziris, who made him appeare in this
fearefull resemblance, thereby to weaken the vntonquetable
strength of the sauage, against whome the knight so abuanced
himselfe, with his broade brandishing swoord in his
hand, and reached in furie such a stroake at him, that had it
met with the head of the monster, as it 
                     〈◊〉
                   with his staffe,
which was as great as the most of a shippe, he had 
                     〈◊〉
                   it in
two partes.
               But the vn
                     ••
                  nted sauage, hauing quickly adua
                     •
                  ced his
staffe before, was not hurt by the stroke, only his staffe was
néere cut in sunder, although it was very hard wood, and beset
round about with knagges and knottes, which lifting vp
againe, he 
                     〈◊〉
                   so rigorously vpon the knightes helmet, as
it was broken through the middest, Gerileon likewise beeing

so a
                     •••
                  nied, as hee knewe not whether it was daie or
night, and staggering therewith, he was readie to fall to the
earth, yet he fell not, but recouering fresh courage, smote
with his swoord to cut off the monsters head, who espying
the blowe comming, ranne fiercely vpon him, and grasping
him about the bodie, stroue to ouerthrowe him, or by his fast
holde to strangle him. Then forcing him to the Dragons
head, which naturally was fixed right against his nauell,
most cruelly he bit him by the vpper parte of his thighes, his
armour for that part not auailing him, but the two crooked
téeth entered quite thorowe. The knight fel
                     •
                  e verie greate
paine hereby, and entered into such excéeding fury, when by
strong wrastling he had gotten forth of the monsters armes
and withdrawing himselfe thrée or foure paces backe, hee
smote fiue or sixe terrible blowes at his bodie, all thicke together,
not one 
                     •
                  arrying for another. With one of them hee
cut off his arme, albeit it was couered with rough and harde
haire, which was of great defence for his bodie, but that the
knights strength was meruailous and incomparable. By
the other blowes the sauage receiued fiue great wounds, as
well on his head, as on other partes of his bodie, which iniured
him more then the losse of his arme, because in stead
thereof immediatly sprang forth of the same place a Lyons
clawe of meruailous greatnes, so that he felt no defect of the
other losse: but the paine of his other woundes made him

                     •
                  rie and roare so horribly, that the knight saued from shipwracke,
and the marriners in the shippe at the sea side, not
knowing what it was trembled with feare, some of them
swouning and falling into trances, especially when by this

                     •
                  oise they beheld the sea moued with so great a tempest, as
the cables that held the anchors were almost broken in the
middest, and Gerilcon himselfe beeing amazed, yet not that
he minded to giue ouer the fight, though immediatly he felt
himselfe caught by the shoulders with the Lions clawe, so

                     •
                  ately risen vppon the Polyppe, as therewith hee was verie

grieuously wounded, euen to the losse of verie much bloud.
But being (by meruailo
                     ••
                   force and vinacitie) gotten once
more out of the monsters hold, he doubled many strokes vppon
him, slicing the haire and skinne awaie by greate gobbets,
notwithstanding the extreame hardnes thereof. And
the sauage defended himselfe couragiously, wounding and
offending with his clawe and téeth the vertuous nurse child
of the faire Ozyris: who in this manner combatted all the
rest of the daie, vntill such time as the night being come, the
sauage hauing lost great store of his bloud, and with the
losse thereof féeling great weakning of his forces, chaunged
himselfe from his first forme, into the shape of a huge meruailous
roaring lyon, which so soone as hee had giuen the
knight to beholde, he fled into the obscure caue, where the
Ladie and Geliaste were hidden, whereby Gerileon remayned
verie greatly perplexed.
            
            
               CHAP. 8.
               
                  How Gerileon being in great trouble, & feeli
                        •
                     g mortall
paine of the wounds which he had in combat against
the Sauage Polyppe, was succoured by the
Nymph Olympia: of the talke likewise they had
together. And howe afterwarde hee fought againe
with the same monster, hee beeing in the shape of a
Lyon, and beeing vanguished by him the second
time, was constrained to hide himselfe againe.
Whereout may bee gathered, that a vertuous man
feeling himselfe iniured and wounded by sinne, being
in great griefe and displeasure with himselfe, is
euermore succoured by the good Angell that comforts
him, so that by such good and speedie remedies,
which giueth him courage to resist it manfully▪
he proceede vntill hee haue altogether vanquished
and chased it awaie. By the diuerse mutation of the
monster into the forme of cruell beastes, is signified
nothing else but sinne, what sundrie shapes so euer
it receiueth, yet it is alwaies cruell, onely to trie the
consciences of such good men as itassaileth.
               
               
                  
                  WHen Gerileon sawe that
the sauage had changed
his shape, and was departed
from the combat,
he knewe that hee shoulde
haue somewhat to doe to
vanquish him: and withal
hee considered, that if hee
could escape this vnexpected
danger, he shoulde deserue
praise and reputation
for euer, which was the
greatest guerdon and 
                     ••
                  compence, that all his aduenturous

                     〈◊〉
                   aimed at, for which he not at all dreaded the hazard
of his life. There vpon hee determined to abide in that
place, yet not in the caue or dungeon, but aboue vnder the
trées, where he had rested himselfe the daie before, attending
when the Polyppe should come forth againe in his new receiued
forme, to finish the combat he had begun: yet hee not
knowing the originall or behauiour of the monster, nor for
what cause he abode in that place: but in this determination
hee went from the caue and layde him downe to rest for
that night, vntill the cleere light of a new day should shew it
selfe to the world. But it was not possible for him to take anie
rest hauing (as one sayth) thrée tinglinges in his eare
that hinde
                     •
                  ed him. The principall whereof was, the continuall
thoughts, whereby he was rauished in contemplation

of his Mistresse. The second was his feare of his squire,
least he was slaine or outraged by the monster: for he loued
him so deerely, as he could not sleepe, vnlesse he were assured
that his Squire was as well as himselfe, such was the
care he had of him. The third, which was no lesse hurtfull
to his body, then these other twaine were to his minde: was
the great paine he felt in his thighes and shoulders, by the
téeth and clawes of the monster, by meanes whereof all his
body became enflamed, by reason of the venim wherewith
the nailes and téeth of the Sauage was infected. Heereby
he became meruailouslie spent and ouercharged, and euen
readie to fall into a mortall feauer: when suddenly he being
in this paine, heard the water (which as I tolde yee before
enuironed the dungeon) to mooue with a great murmure,
as if some one had bathed himselfe therein. Héerevpon
he presently lifted vp himselfe, as it were to knowe the
cause thereof, when hee beheld come foorth of the riuer the
fayre Nimphe Olympia, chamber maide to the Fayrie Ozyris.
She hauing oftentimes seene him, was fresh in memorie,
and knowne immediatly: when suddenly running to
him, embrasing him louiugly, she entred into these spéeches.
               My sweete friend, within these two houres am I come
hither, guided by the channels of vnder-ground, from
whence these waters ascend to this place: euen from the
Pallace of the Nymphe Ozyris thy Nursse, whome I serue
and reuerence, shee louing thee extreamly, as well thou
knowest. Hither am I come from her to preserue thee, and
to tell thee withall, that if thou suffer me not to embalme
the wounds on thy body with this precious vnguent, which
she expressely commaunded me to bring in this golden bottel
thou beholdest in my hand: thou art in very great danger
of thy life, so that thou canst hardly escape the death, if thou
continue in this estate but till to morow morning. Therfore
disdaine not to discouer where thy wounds are, that I may
put in execution the command of my lady, wherto I dare in

no wise be disobedient. I may not (quoth he) faire Olympia, &
my friend, refuse the succour of my most deare Oziris, nor of
thyselfe likewise, for albeit the necessitie wherin I now am
did not incite me to take it, yet the obeisance which I owe
both to the one and the other of ye, marie more great to the
mistres than to the seruant, commands me to obey all that
you can command in a knight. So saying, he discouered his
woundes to the Nimphe, who applyed to them the precious
ointments in the golden bottell: which was no sooner
spread vpon them, but presently he felt no paine at all, and
became immediatly as whole and sound, as if he neuer had
béene wounded. Hereof was he not a little ioyfull, when imbrasing,
colling and kissing the Nimphe more then a thousand
times, who was in part the cause of so great good to
him: he often enquired of the health of her Lady, and the rest
of the companie, and chéefely if she had receiued any charge
frō her, to tell him what issue the combate should haue which
he had begun, whether he should be the conquerer, or himself
he brought vnder and vanquished. Enquire not at all gentle
knight (answered the nimphe) what shall happen to thée, either
in this combat, or any other enterprises, wherein thou
art to hazard thy life: for it is not lawful that mortall creatures
should know things to come. Only be thou of good courage,
and take no gréefe of the multitude of trauailes, which
thou must procéed in. Let it suffice that I say to thée in generall,
howbeit I néed not specifie so much before hand to thée:
that thou art destined to vndertake & finish before thou diest
many hautie enterprises. And of all them to behold the end,
it behooueth thee to endure much to expose thy self to a thousand
thousand dangers and perilous hazards: especially before
thou canst know who is thy father, or maist behold the
place of thy birth, or what thy cheefest desire is to see: as oft
times I haue heard the great princesse of the Fayries, the
high & mightie Ozyris my mistres say, to whom it is necessarie
that I quickly returne, because shee so commanded me.

Therefore I say God be with thee, to whom I recommend
thée, desiring him to guarde and preserue thée from all mortall
daungers. Hauing so sayd, she kiss the Knight, and then
vanished suddenly before him, he not séeing her, till she came
néere the Fountaine, where he beheld her plange her golden
tresses into the siluer waters, whereinto likewise she diued
her whole body, being for this time séene no more, notwithstanding
the manifolde intreaties for returne that the
knight made: whereby he continued all the night so displeased,
that he could entertaine no thought of rest, but when
the vermillion blush of day breake began to showe his red
locks, and disperse his splendour ouer the earth: hee put on
his Armour againe, and wen
                     •
                   before the Caue, to attend the
Polyppes comming to the combate, whereout if hee would
showe himselfe this day: yet hee intended to speake with
the Lady he saw the day before, to enquire of her the cause
of this aduenture, as also for his Squire, for whose losse
(which he imagined vnrecouerable) hee remained full of
gréefe and sorrow. Long had he not stayed there, before the
Polyppe came foorth, in the shape he had taken the night before,
which was like a mightie huge Lion, fierce, rauenous,
and very fearfull to behold, farre differing from the naturall
beasts of the same kinde, which ordinarily are not so
great, hideous, and monstrous in view: which had terrified
the Knight with feare, but that hee remembred the last
woordes of the Nymphe Olympia, and as they began to
quicken his memorie, so they made him become more hardie,
fierce and terrible, then the Lion himselfe, who comming

                     •
                  ha
                     •
                  ing foorth of his den to run vpon him, seeing him
stand with such resolued hardinesse: minded once to returne
againe into his Caue. But the fire of his rage was so violent,
for loosing the combate the day before, as his heate
could contey
                     •
                  e no gouernement, but that in all furie hee
would flie vppon him: and snatching at him, stroue to teare
away his shield that hung about his neck, and with such vigour

did he catch hold thereon, as he brake the arme braces
of strong brasse, and the buckles of steele wherewith it was
fastened, in dooing whereof, he well néere had ouerthrowne
him in the place: had not the worthie knight (more braue
then the Lion himselfe) reached such a blow at his head, as
but it was quicklie defended, hee had beene cleft therewith
to the shoulders. But the sturdie beast, who the day before
had made proofe of such like weightie strokes: let goe his
hold, to make a step backward from the blowe. Euen as a
mallicious enraged dogge, seeing a waff
                     •
                  ing man with an
yron piked staffe, passing before a doore in a village where
he lay sleeping, without any noyse or barking, runneth suddenly
vpon him, tearing with his téeth the flesh from one of
his legges, wherewith the man being agréeued, turneth the
yron poynt of his staffe to strike and kill him, which the dog
fearing, giueth back and turning againe vpon the man, enforceth
himselfe to runne againe vpon him, to get a greater
morsell from him: and he still standing vppon his guarde,
threatnes the yron pointe more dangerouslie to the téeth of
the Mastie, who perseuering still in his rage, constraines
foorth himselfe still to giue him more woundes, yet being
constrayned to flie, no lesse chafed then he was at the first,
returneth vanquished into his kennell: and the man ouertrauailed
in this strife, féeling and séeing himselfe wounded
and bléeding, to rest himselfe, is likewise enforced to go lay
him downe in an other place. In like sort, this fy
                     •
                  rce and
inhumaine monster, hauing left his fyrst holde, fearing to be
smitten with the brandished swoord the knight helde in his
hand, with the point whereof he menaced fatall death: keeping
himselfe of the whole length of the swoord, turned againe,
watching where he might fasten his renting pawes
and enuenomed téeth, without enda
                     •
                  gering himselfe: but
the weapon being so neere him, eyther to loppe off a legge,
or else to slice his head from his shoulders, as he perceiued
how well the knight could handle his sworde: yet raising

himselfe into rage and choller more then before, presseth on
himselfe néerer and néerer, to throwe a violent blowe on
the braue warriour, which (notwithstanding all his subtiltie)
could not hurt him. For hee beheld the weapon aloft,
wherewith the knight verily thought to spoyle the Sauage:
but the blow missing the aymed intent, falling to the earth,
entred more then halfe the length of the sworde thereinto,
which he being vnable presently to recouer, was left destitute
againe. On which aduantage, the cruell beast got opportunitie
to close againe with him, and getting hold about
the midst of his bodie, he held him so stronglie with his dangerous
clawes, as with woonderfull force they pierced
through the mayle of his haubergeon and his armour, euen
to the tearing of his flesh: whereby hee felt such exceeding
anguish, as he was ready to sinck downe, for the black bloud
came forth in foure or fiue places, where the clawes were
entred euen to the entrailes: which the knight too well féeling
and perceiuing, considered, that if he applyed not his verie
vttermost deuoir
                     •
                  , quicklie to recouer himselfe out of
this holde, and lost any iot of courage in this extreame néed,
the losse of life likewise would immediatly follow.
               Heerevpon, he smote fiue or six strokes with the pommell
of his sword on the Lyons head, for otherwise hee could not
reach at him: and with such woonderfull puissance were
these blowes deliuered, as he brake the scull of his head, and
made his two most hurtfull teeth fall out of his mouth, the
bloud likewise gushing foorth in great aboundance. When
the Lyon felt himselfe so grieuously wounded, fearing least
woorsse should befall him: endeuoured all he could to auoide
taking and getting farre off from the knight, forbare to
turne againe as he did ere be came to those assaults: whereby
Gerileon felt himselfe much eased, for the beast pressed
him in such fort, as hee was well néere sweltred and out of
breath. Thus continuing still the combate in extremetie of
furie, the rest of the day was spent, when the Lyon at one

stroake thinking to finish the combate: let driue a very dangerous
blowe at the knight, who foreséeing his mallicious
rage, carefully regarded least, hee should abide any more
gripes, and therewithall deliuered him such a stroke on the
crest: as he was compelled to stagger backward, yet not to
giue ouer the fight, when lifting vp one of his pawes, hee
thought therewith to rent away the knights helmet: which
Gerileon perceiuing, preuented him with such a sound salutation,
as made him fall to the ground very weightily: then
redoubling an other couragious stroke vpon his head, cleft
it in the middest, the one halfe whereof (with the right
chéeke and braines) fell to the earth. At this instant the Lion
changed his shape againe into the likenesse of a Beare, that
halfe breathlesse and ouerspent with trauayle, fled into the
Caue againe, and there hid himselfe.
               The knight well contented to pause a while, went from
the Den, and returned to the place where he might rest all
night, and there fynding the Golden bottell, wherein the
Nimphe Olympia brought the pretious vnguents, and healed
such woundes as he receiued the day before: hee tooke
and opened it, and applying the same againe to his hurts:
in lesse then halfe an houre they were soundly healed. So
féeling no anguish or paine at all, saue onely that his bodie
was wearied very much: being ouercharged with sleepe, he
layde him downe and closed his eyes, where two whole
houres he tooke quiet rest, and there will we leaue him, to
finish this Chapter.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 9.
               
                  How the cruell Polyppe came againe the third time
to assaile the Knight, who was greatly agrieued that
the Polyppe waked before him in the morning,
Howe afterwarde hee entered combat with him againe,
hauing vowed not to rest or sleepe, till he had
vtterly vanquished & put him to death. What was
the end of their combat, and what perplexitie (after
the fight finished) the noble Gerileon remained in.
From which things may be gathered, what labour
a good and vertuous man endureth to conquere
sinne, when hee beholdeth the frailtie of his owne
nature, that would make him sleepe in faire resolutions
and deliberations, thereby to cause him loose
the victorie which was before promised him. Then
what trouble and busye care hee hath to ouercome
such a horrible monster, that is prouided with sundrie
sortes of force & defence, to violence the most
couragious and hardiest that shall withstand him.
Afterward is shewen what strength and efficacie is
in the oath of well minded man, and that it ought
not to be broken for any accident whatsoeuer that
may happen.
               
               
                  I Tolde ye before, when the Polyppe first
came to the caue, and when first hee me
                     •
                  
with our inuincible knight, that a foul
                     •
                  
fluttered thether somewhat before, or euen
in the same instant was there pearched
vpon a trée, from whence as yet 
                     〈◊〉
                  
not remoued, but both while the comba
                     •
                  
                  
endured and afterward, still she sate vppon one braunche of
the tree, to behold all that should passe betwéen the two combattants,
desirous in her selfe that the fight should soone be
ended, and that the knight should be the conquerer, for causes
wherewith yee shall be better acquainted hereafter.
               Now about two houres after the Knight had begunne to
sléepe, the Polyppe (more furious in his new shape of a beare
then before) came foorth of his darke den, where he reposed
himselfe awhile, now to finish the combate so long since begun:
determining to die himselfe, or else vtterly to exterminate
the knights daies, for whom he fought very seriously,
both within the Caue and euery where without. The Bird
beholding all this, and fearing least the monster should méet
with the knight, he would kill him in his sléepe, as hee certeinly
intended: flew right downe where Gerileon slept,
and with her bēake and winges so smote at him, that hee awaked,
and rising vp tooke his Helmet, looking euery where
about him, to see who had so rudely waked him from sleepe.
But no where could he perceiue the dooer of this deed, only
he heard the Polyppe turmoiling and rauing on each side, séeking
where he was, yet could not finde him, braying with a
very hideous and fearefull noyse: whereby he coniectured,
that hee was waked by some other then humaine prouidence,
to end the combate begun, & now perceiuing he had
slept ouer long, he began to chide himselfe in this manner.
Unhappie that I am, to sleepe so long in this place, where I
rather ought continually to haue had mine eyes waking,
considering the enterprise I haue taken in hand, whereof
now (it may be) I shall neuer sée the end. Am I not most indiscreet
and badly aduised, to haue so little care of my selfe,
as he
                     •
                  re to sleepe soundly, without dreading the danger and
hazard of death, where I haue opposed both my life and honor,
for safetie of which I ought to watch continually? Certeinly
I con
                     •
                  esse, & very well I know it, that I little deserue
to make profession of armes, to 
                     •
                  nd such doubtful and perillous

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
attempts, as dayly I endeuour my selfe to meet withall:
séeing hauing now found them, I make so slender account
of them: as I aduentured to sleepe, when honorable
deuoire bids me wake and do my dutie. High time then is it
for me, by meruailous diligence, and chiualrie, such as beséemeth
a man of vertue and account, to amend this fault:
whereon I sweare, that I will neuer sleepe or take any rest,
till I haue slaine this mutable and inconstant monster, that
disguiseth and changeth himselfe into so many shapes, to deceiue
and depriue me of life by an ouer long lingering combate.
Hauing thus spoken to himselfe, he lightly stept aloft
to the large den, wherein was the lothsome kennell of the
sauage, whom he found in such manner and forme as alreadie
I haue told ye: to wit, in the likenesse of a Beare, excéeding
meruailous in greatnesse to behold, yea, more then I
dare report vnto yee. For in his head, in steed of two eyes,
you would haue 
                     •
                  ayd were two burning torches, and you
would haue imagined when he opened his mouth, that there
ye beheld fire & flaming brands, when his teeth shewed like
glowing red fire hookes, and were of such greatnesse withall,
as he could not containe them within his mouth, but
were seene out on each side the length of more then halfe a
foote. All his body was couered ouer with very long hayre,
vnlike such as other beares haue, his clawes were great and
sharpe, & his skin was of such proofe, as it could not be pierced
thorow to the flesh, as the knight well perceiued at the
very first stroke, which hee deliuered at him so soone as he
came to the Caue, & with such force did it fall vpon his shoulder,
as the sworde hauing sliced away a great quantitie of
the hard harsh haire: hee might see it fall on the ground, but
no hurt at all was doone to the flesh. For the weapon grated
vpon the skin, as the noise of a file vpon hard mettall, when
it breaketh through the place where it enters: notwithstanding,
the monster felt some paine hereby, for he was no sooner
smitten, but he braied aloud so horribly, as he was heard

more then ten miles from the place. This could not withhold
him from running on the knight, against whom he so bestirred
himselfe, as he fastened his two feete about his necke so
rudely: as the knight had no meane to hurt him, or defend
himselfe. Then with his teeth he would haue bitten him by
the throat, in which place if he had wounded him, he had bin
dead though he had an hundred liues. But the knight foreséeing
the danger well enough, got the shéeld from his shoulder
right before him, where against the monster could not
any iot preuaile, because he could fasten no hold thereon, so
the knight stood wholy couered therewith. Now striue they
to throw one another down, whē 
                  Gerileons strength against
the Polyppe was to small purpose, such was his wonderfull
and vnmeasurable power: on the contrary, the monster so
roughly shooke the knight, as if he had not had more agilitie
and skill, then force, at the very first offer he had bin cast: but
he vsed such nimblenes and sleights, in succouring that part
where he was most in danger, and containing himselfe still
firmely on his féete: as the beast thus contended with him
more then an houre, and yet could get no other aduantage.
In the end hauing incessantly tormented himself in this maner
so long time, he (for al this) made him measure his length
on the earth, euen as the mightie huge Pine trée, long laboured
with the forcible strokes and cuts of the Carpenters axe
is in the end compelled to fall, and with his fall, leaues the
marke of his goodly branches imprinted on the groūd where
he lies, by the noi
                     •
                  e wherof all the beasts in the forrest wher
it is hewen down, stand quaking and trembling with feare.
Euen so the valourous knight, making a fearfull thundring
with his armour, fell so weightily on the earth, as the
marke of his armes, his helmet, braces, & print of his shoulders,
remained engrauen on the ground, he being also sore
astonied with the fal. The beast that wonderfully laboured
for this aduantage, vnable to containe himselfe on his legs,
fel also vpon him very fiercely: yet the knight was not so lost

in his sences, but that he tooke speciall guarde, how thus lying
on his back, he might bestowe some hurtfull wound vpon
the monster, and thrusting fiercely at the armes and legs
of the beast, hee made him glad to leape from him hastily, in
which leap taking vnaduised heed, he fell with such weight
vppon his owne head, as he became in a traunce with the
fall. This gaue the knight libertie to recouer footing againe
when aduauncing himselfe to this sauage disguised Beare,
he gaue him so many strokes with the sharpe keene edge of
his sword: that a great part of his body séemed to be shorne in
like sort, as when a cittizen is barbed or polled by a yong apprentise
Barber, vnskilfull in his occupation, his head appeared
circled, notcht, and very euill fauouredly handled: but
when he saw no little gutter of blood was drawn from him
he grew into exceeding choller, when presently he beheld the
beast come vpon him with wide open mouth, to get hold of
him by some mortall morsell: for since the rec
                     •
                  iuing of this
new shape, he had not yet receiued any great harme, which
made him run likewise at the monster with the sword point
and seeking to pierce it in at his mouth, by entring further
into his body or head, deuised how to take away his life frō
him: but herein he was deceiued, for the monster féeling the
sharp weapon in his mouth, held it with his teeth more hard
then the stéele it selfe, in such sort, that if the knight who (fearing
what might ensue) had not quickly xecouered it thence,
he had broken it in many peeces. But he rather intended to
suffer the monster to take hold on him againe, then to lose his
weapon and be a naked man, wherof if once he were depriued,
hee then knew that he could not escape with life. The
beast hauing thus fast seazed on him, wounded him with his
teeth so cruelly on the right arme, as he well pierced quite
thorow: wherby the knight felt such pain, as if his arme had
bin pierced with hot yrons, such was the venim of the monsters
téeth: this anguish prouoking Gerileon to anger, made
him thrust violently with his sword at the belly of y• beare,

but it was as hard as the rest on his bodie, notwithstanding
he still laboured that place with thrust vpon thrust, till hée
had the skinne there so soft and tender, as at last the swoord
passed in a great waie. Now began the sauage to be so mad
and fierce, as snatching at the sword which was in his belly
with his téeth, brake it in the midst and then getting foorth
of the knights power, tooke his former shape of the sauage againe,
and ranne to hide himselfe in his denne, as before hée
was wont to doo, when he thought himselfe to be depriued
of life, leauing nothing in the knights hande with the péece
of his sworde, the breaking whereof did not a little grieue
him. Neuertheles being so couragious and magnanimious
as possible a man could be, he chéered by his spirites, hoping
that night (which alreadie was come vpon him) to imagine
some meane whereby he might victoriously escape the danger,
for otherwise hee had no care of sauing his life, vnlesse
he might haue thence with him th
                     •
                   honor of conquering the
monster, And such confidence had hee in his volour to performe
this, as all fearefull doubts were now vtterly abandoned,
and so he went from the caue, to the place where hee
was accustomed to take his rest the nightes before: where
being set downe, he opened himself to view such wounds as
he had receiued in this last conflict, and applied to them the
precious ointments that were brought him by the Nymph
Olympia, whereof there was nowe remained verie little in
the golden bottell, which made him th
                     •
                  s resolue, no more to
hazard the combat without death or victory, because he wel
perceiued, that to returne wounded from the fight, was but
to bring the dart of death with him, beeing without hope of
helpe, in that he receiued no wound on his bodie but it was
mortall, and which (without the vnguents sent him by Oziris)
had presently bene his death. Being in this determination
ready to lie downe on the gréene grasse, which was
embrodered with many beautifull flowers, he remembred
that before hee entered the last battell with the monster, hée

had sworne not to sléepe or take anie rest vntill hee had put
the sauage to death, or else himselfe to die in the triall, and
so farre herein he considered with himselfe, as thus hee began
to parle with himselfe. Thou hast vowed not to sléep or
receiue anie iot of rest, vntil thou hast slain this monstrous
Polyppe, or thine owne life to perishe in aduenturing the
combat. But vnhappie man thou canst not doe it, and thy
vowe so careleslie made in choler, ought not so constrain thée
but that (necessitie so requiring) thou repose thy selfe, in regard
of such danger as hereafter may ensu
                     •
                  : which being other
then thou art able to coniecture of, thou maist lawfullie
excuse thy selfe, and by good reason take thy rest, without
standing on thine oath, thou abide in anie offence of conscience.
For it is sayd, that a thing spoken in choler and vnaduisedly,
remaineth without effect: because till the humour
be past, he hath no perseuerance to knowe what he sayd. In
like sort if I binde my selfe by oath to doe a thing impossible
for humane power, mine oath yeelds it selfe as vaine and
vnprofitable, because of the vncertaintie of future euents
and successiue affaires: in which case to be quit of mine oth,
it ought not suffice that I haue done my endeuour, and all
possible I coulde to doe what I haue vowed, albeit for the
greate difficultie of the thing sworne, I farre differed from
compassing it in such sort as I tooke mine oath. But howe
now? quoth he sodainely, why séeke I reasons to excuse a
matter sworne, where there is none to be admitted? I haue
vowed to God, then can it not bee that mine oath is vaine:
for breaking of such an oath, is a thing that verie weightyly
chargeth the conscience, and God is the onelie punisher
of so great and greeuous an offence. For before I swore,
I might verie heedfullie and aduisedly regard what I doe,
and the fault committed by folliie is as punishable as that
done by aduise, in that all faultes are committed willinglie
and by knowledge: in that God hath giuen reaso
                     •
                   to man,
to take heed that he in no wise offend, so that a man not v
                  
                     ••
                  ng

reason in the beginning of his actions, wroght his own
knowledge. Moreouer. I haue sworne voluntarily, without
the compulsion of anie one to cause mee sweare, séeing then
I began thus willinglie, it followes of necessitie that I kéep
mine oath inuiolable, without any breach whatsoeuer hereafter.
Nor ought I seeke anie cauils whereby to excuse my
selfe, for none at all is to be allowed, in that a man of vertue
making profession of honour and armes, ought to keepe his
vowed faith, with all other matters belonging to his oath,
euen so dearely as his proper life: lesse then which wee
ought not to esteeme our conscience and our honour, both
which in me I should account greatlie iniured, if I shoulde
not die rather (a thing not impossible) or vanquish and put
to death this monster before I sleepe, accordings as I haue
vowed: it behooues me then not to sleepe tyll I haue done
the déede.
               Reasoning thus a long time within himselfe, hee began
to thinke howe in the mean while he should weare the time
awaie, and thinking 
                     〈◊〉
                   goe to the first place of rest, to seeke
the swoord of his squier and companion, he changed quickly
that minde, in that the sauage might begin i
                     •
                   the meane
space: beside, he was vncertayne whether the Ships stai
                  
                     •
                  ed
all this whyle at the place where he lefte them, and if
they were gone, what then might ensue to frustrate theyr
hope. Nor was 
                     •
                  ee certaine lykewyse, in so darke a nyght
to finde the waie that brought him thether, so straying hee
knew not whether, it would be long ere he returned again▪
and so shuld loose the commoditie of gaining so great fame,
as was the victorie to come of this monstrous sauage, and
whi
                     •
                  h most of all grieued him, hee had no reason to forsake
Geliaste his faithful squier. Then comparing these reasons
with others, he thought it ouer-much boldnes to staie there,

                     •
                  hinking with hands and nails so soft and tender, to combat

                     •
                  ith a beast so cruel, & wéeing to do that without his sword

                     •
                  hich when it was whole and sharp he could not compasse.

Then came another opinion into his head, to laie a greate
deale of wood on the mouth of the caue, and putting fire ther
to, so smoother the sauage therein. But séeing hee wanted
fire, and yet if hee had it, by this meanes the Ladie shoulde
likewise die that he heard sing so swéetly: hee forsooke that
conceit, imagining a new deuise, that the den of the Sa
                     •
                  age
had many nookes and corners in it, where happily Gel
                        •
                     ste
and the ladie were, in some place not knowen to the Polyppe.
For heretofore hee had séene the caues of vnder-ground
belonging to the Gyants Ferclaste and his brethren, & therefore
he entended to cut with his swoord great braunches of
trees neere adioyning, and therewith to stopp the mouth of
the caue, that the monster shoulde receiue no breathing in,
but so should die stifeled. So thinking this last determination
to be the best, he sodainly arose to performe his intent.
What happe
                     •
                  ed to him you may reade in this discourse following.
            
            
               CHAP. 8.
               
                  Howe Gerileon resolued to trie againe the combat against
the Sauage Polyppe, for the vanquishing of
whome (after hee had deuoutly praied vnto God)
he determined to get a great staffe, and to fashion it
in forme agreeable for the combat: wherwith (after
a harde and daungerous conflict) hee killed the
monster, for which he rendered thankes to God.
And howe afterwarde the Ladie Orphyza and the
young Gentleman Phynandermet and ioyed together,
thanking Gerileon for their deliuerance, &
of the conference they had together. Whence may
be gathered, that a man louing and fearing God,
putting all his confidenc
                        •
                      in him: is in the end so
inspired, that beeing assisted with his grace, he vanquisheth
sinne, wherewith he hath long time been
assaulted and tormented. From which such as receiue
any fruite, taking it well in worth, and thanking
him with humilitie: they attaine more contentment
thereby, then if they had gained all the treasure
and riches in the world.
               
               
                  
                  
                     GErileon being thus determined, to giue an
end to his last resolution, remembred
that when bee parted from the statelye
Fayrie Ozyris, aboue all things she recommended
to him the loue and feare of
God, saying to him: that if hee had recourse
to him in his aduersities, and
with a good and cheerefull courage, did implore his assistance:
he would neuer faile him, but euermore (according to
his accustomed kindnesse) would shewe himselfe readie to
helpe, not permitting him to 
                     •
                  arrie long time oppressed.
And sundry times before this vertuous Lady had taught
him this faire lesson, which nowe in extremitie the knight
well remembred: whereof lifting his eyes on high, bowing
his knees with great humilitie, and holding his two hands
knit together vp toward Heauen, where, with great admiration
hee contemplated the disorder well ordered of the
Moone, the Starres, the woorking powers, and generallie
of the celestiall bodies, according as his eyes were capable
of this sight: hee began to bee rauished in contemplation,
and made his prayer to Almightie God in this
manner.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The Praier of Gerileon before his last combat
with the Polyppe.
                           
                              ALmightie God, whose power is infinite
and incomprehensible, séeing thou hast
created and appointed man on the earth
to honour thy diuinitie, and extoll thy
might, which so much the more procéedeth
from thée, as thou makest men admirable
in greatnesse, in knowledge, in
wisdome, in fortitude, and all other effectuall vertues, which
thou rainest downe on them with thy right hand in greate
abundance: making some more wise than strong, others
strong and lesse prouided of wit and knowledge, others (as
a principall worke wrought by thy powerfull hand) wise &
va
                                 ••
                              ant, prudent and strong together. And according to the
gettings of a couetous merchant, that counteth his debtes
with booties, vseth places for each accordingly, so beeing of
of great value, and others of little, euen so hast thou ordayned,
some more high, others in a place of more lowe and
inferiour degrée, yet all neuerthelesse contented with theyr
roomes, exalt thy Godhead, and render thankes for the good
they haue receiued from thy bountifull hand. In like manner
(by thy goodnes) eache thing is maintained according to
his place, with such prouidence, as no one ought receue discontentment,
or hath occasion to be agreued, but to la
                                 •
                              d and
glorifie thy high name. Ought not I then that am but a litle
colde earth, yeld thée thankes, for that thou hast appointed
me in this world, to bee in some degrée among humane
creatures, yea among such as thou hast ordained to fight against
monsters, which the enemy of nature nourisheth and
maintaineth to afflict poore creatures, and heereby to bee among
the number of those, whom thy almighty power hath

yéelded most admirable, a thing which I knowe in my self to
proceede from thy only might & bountie. I yeld thée thankes
then O my God with all my heart, for the good I haue receued
from thy largesse, and intreate thée in all affection, that
continuing in me the giftes of thy liberalitie, it will please
to regard me in this mine enterprise with thy eie of pitti
                                 •
                              ,
and suffer me not to fall therin with shame and dishonour,
but displaying thy grace in me, thou wilt inspire mee with
thy goodnes, and make mine eies to beholde the beames of
thy holy spirite, cleerly to know and discerne the meane and
waie, whereby I ought to do such things as are pleasing to
thee: among which, if the combate that I haue begun may
be numbred, vouchsafe that I may by some meanes return
and escape with victory, being assured that without thy help
all my strength is vaine and vnprofitable. Heare then Lord
with gracious eares, and listen to the praier of thy afflicted
seruant, that craues it in humilitie of heart, and giue beside
what thou knowest more expedient for him than himselfe
doth, and which the weake cogitations of man are not worthie
to know.
                        
                     
                  
               
               With these words he made an end of his praier, & beeing
risen vp, he went with the piece of the swoord that remained
in his hand and lopped diuerse branches from the trées,
and especiallie he cut an oake, containing in compasse the
bignes of a mans thigh, euen of the best membred man that
might be found. This oake was straight and full of knots
round about, which taking in one of his hands, he cut away
the little branches or shrigs, that grew on each side: and
when he had shaped it according to his mind
                     •
                  , it came into
his head, that with this staffe he should attempt to vanquish
the Polyppe by mightie downe right strokes, being perswaded
to accomplish and performe with this staffe, what hée
could not doe with his weapon. In this determination hee
continued fashioning it in ample fourme for the purpose,
sharpening the knottes on euerie side, that as occasion

serued, hee might the better preuaile with his blowes: the

                     •
                  oint likewise thereof made hee so piercing, as easilie the

                     ••
                  onster should not scape both strokes and thrusts. After he

                     •
                  ad thus busied hims
                     •
                  lfe an indifferent while, hee beheld
faire Aurora come dauncing with the mornings garland in
her hand, which made him not a little ioyfull, in that he had
assured hope to bring his purpose to passe: such was his confidence
in God, from whose fauour onely he expected an answere
of this hope. Whereupon immediatlie he armed himself,
and taking his staffe, went to looke if the Polyppe were
come againe to the place, where the dayes past they had continued
their fight. Now came foorth the monster more terrible
and furious to behold, than at any time before, being
armed with a huge strong buckler of yron, which he held in
one hand, and a sharpe 
                     ••
                  icing Cimetarie in the other, by the
kéene edge and pointe whereof, this day hee was promised
victorie certainelie.
               The knight also this day shewed him selfe, and appeared
more meruaylous and fearefull to the Sauage monster,
then euer he did before: for looking on him, ye would haue
thought, that as the Sunne when hee goeth to rest in the
longest Summer dayes, is inuironed with Uermillion
beames round about: euen so braue and beautifull séemed
our Champion, and presenting himselfe readie to the combate,

                     •
                  e thus spake to the Sauage.
               Thou hast (enemie to nature) long made resistance against
my force and strength, and by thy most strange disguisings
hast alreadie thrée times escaped the daunger of
of thy life: but nowe (such is my trust in Almightie God,
by whose inspiration and power I haue chosen a newe
weapon to ouercome and destroye thee withall) thou shalt
escape me no more, but shalt now end thy dayes with vtter
confusion.
               The Sauage monster as he was about to answer, shewed
him the Buckler and the Swoorde, which he lifted on

high, and in so dooing, he brayed and cryed, so that it séemed
by his cryes, that he made the earth to tremble vnder his
féete, that hee menaced the knight so to murder him with
his Cimetarie, and with the assistance of his buckler to performe
what he had sayd. Hauing thus spoken in his language,
he deliuered a meruaylous stroke at the knight with
his cimetarie, who by his dexteritie escaped both the stroke
and death likewise, whereof he had beene certainly assured,
if the blowe had falne vpon him, but being started aside, he
would now make proofe if hee could do any thing with his
staffe against the Sauage, and thereupon smote at him so
lustily, as if he had not quickly animated his buckler before
(which he held with one hand, though it was so weightie, as
two men of this time could hardly stir it from the ground)
doubtl
                     •
                  ss
                     •
                   the stroke had bin his death: but he couered himselfe
so well from the blowe, as hee had no harme, but his
hand stonnied a little, whereat he being excéedingly angrie,
rodoubled with his Cimetarie such a stroke on the knights
sheeld, as cutting of a great part thereof, it fell to the ground,
very hardly escaping the arme that held it, but no more
harme or offence happened as yet. On the other side, the
knight lifting vp his staffe with both his hands, hauing
throwne backe his broken shield vpon his shoulder, intending
eyther to end his life or the combate: and albeit the Polyppe
stood vnder guarde of his buckler, yet he receiued such
a violent stroke: as made him fall downe astonished, not
knowing where he was, and as hee sought to rise againe,
the couragious knight bestowed such an other greeting on
on him, as he could not recouer footing, so heauily fell the
staffe vppon his stomach. Gerileon séeing him lie thus along,
and wéening the latest extremitie was come, ranne vppon
him to wrest the Cimetarie out of his hand, therewith to
cut his thr
                     •
                  at, or otherwise kill him: but the Sauage who
was not yet so vnprouided of strength, caught him so roughlie
by the arme, as made him like wise fall to the ground:

when eche recouering himself, a great many violent blows
were dealt betweene them, as it would haue required a verie
sound iudgement, to know whether side should haue the
victorie. But in the end Gerileon, being highly offended the
combate endured so long, within him called vppon God verie
deuoutlie, desiring him to strengthen his present stroke:
and then lifting his staffe with meruaylous hardinesse, the
blow fell so peisantly on the monsters buckler, as made him
amazedly turne three or foure times about, during which
time he redoubled such an other stroke vpon him, as broke
the back bone of him in sunder, with all the ioynts of his
neck, the bloud streaming from foorth his mouth in great
aboundance, likewise out of his eyes, eares and nose, so that
with the losse of this bloud, hee lost life and all together,
though he might discerne as he lay vomitting, how with inraged
anger he bit the ground, and the effusion of his bloud
made a great lake in that place. Nor can I compare his fall
but to the like noyse of a huge pine tree, that beeing ouerthrowne
by the vnmercifull blasts of winde, cast downe
from the top of an high mountaine, falleth to the bottome
with meruaylous noyse, breaking and renting his small
braunches on each side, as all the inhabitants neere adioyning,
remaine astonished and affrighted verie fearefully.
               Thus dyed the infernall monster, by the vertue and patience
of this braue knight onely, who did more in this exploit,
then the puissant king of Siria euer did in former
time, with the assemblie of all forces and conquering armies,
which hee only brought thether for the taking or destruction
of this monster.
               Being ioyfull of this gratious victorie, he felt no payne
or labour of this combate, albeit he was bathed all in sweat,
through vexation of long delay in the fight: like a woman
after the hard trauaile of child-bearing, forgetteth the anguish
of that bitter brunt, seeing her infant well brought
into the world: for then such is her ioy, as she remembers

no more the pa
                     ••
                  ed stormes. So with great 
                     •
                  umilitie and
deuotion Gerileon gaue thankes to God, from whome hee
knew proceeded this woorthie woorke of victorie, acknowledging
that hee was but the minister or instrument, by
whome GOD shewed the effects of his almightie prouidence.
               Soone after he had thus giuen thankes, the Ladye that
sung the Song which yee heard before, came foorth of the
Den where the Polyppe was wunt to hide himselfe: she being
pale, wanne, and trembling with feare, came and fel on
both her knees at the knights feet, and embrasing his legs
fast in her folded armes, she thus spake.
               Most noble and vertuous knight, as euer was borne in
this world, extracted and issued of high, princely, and generous
linage: happy 
                     •
                  e the houre of thy arriuall in this countrey,
blessed were the pappes that gaue so fayre a creature
nourishment, and the mother that bare thee in her wombe,
likewise the ship wherein thou saylest to this coast, neuer
may it perish, but with safetie passe into euery place, free
from vexation of stormes or tempests. Longer mayst tho
                     •
                  
liue then the father of Amphilocus and Thrasimede, the
strength and vigour of thine armes neuer féeling any weakning,
but by the glory and honor of this blessed dayes victorie,
to all posteritie may they make thee more famous, and
after dea
                     •
                  h reuiue perpetually the renowme of thy valour.
May each season by thy meanes taste the flourishing verdure
and sweetnesse of an euerlasting spring time, seeing by
thy her
                     •
                  yeall vertues I am this day deliuered from moste
miserable bondage and seruitude, wherein poore desolate
Princesse that I am, I haue beene too long a time detained.
Thinke and consider vertuous knight I intreat thee, wherin
my wretched selfe may doo thee any seruice. My father
hath great store of riches and treasure, beside more store of
welthie and honorable friends: to whom if it may please
yee to beare me company, I am assured for this my deliueraunce,

he will returne suc
                     •
                   recompence, as ye shall haue no
cause to be discontented.
               Ladie (answered Gerileon) riches and treasure are no
such recompence as my trauailes do expect, neither did desire
of any such matter incite me to knightly deeds, following
the execution of dangerous exploits of Armes: but an
earnest affection to do good, and bringing to passe such things
as are pleasing in the sight of God: as is shortning the liues
of the wicked, that ordinarily commit a thousand cruelties,
displeasing to his maiestie. Nor am I ignorant, that among
men of honor and vertue, I shall beare away more account
and fame by the effects of this affection, then should I bee
possessed of massie heapes of riches, the greedie desire wherof
(oftentimes) prouoketh men rather to do euill then good.
And this is my assurance, that thus I shall obtaine more easilie
the fauour of the better sort, and no other guerdon doe
I require, eyther of you or your father: if the pleasure I
haue doone ye, in deliuering ye from this monsters captiuitie,
may merit any recompence at all on my behalfe. But I
repute the déed to bee of so slender valew, in regard of your
deserts, as for all my labour bestowed, I require no other
thing of yee: but that ye would tell me the first effects of this
aduenture, and especially of whence ye are, how and wherfore
ye haue beene thus deteyned by this monster, also why
ye sung the Song before the beginning of our combates:
perswading your selfe, that with this onely courtesie I shall
holde my selfe sufficiently requited.
               If I should (most vertuous knight, answered the Ladie)
recount from the beginning to the end, the whole Historie
and progresse of all my misfortunes: three times would
the sunne and moone make their course about the world, before
my discourse were ended, and so yee might thereby receiue
more discontent then pleasure. But for your sake, I
am content to reueale what you desire to know, and when
my tale shall growe yrkesome and offensiue to ye, then will

I end if so ye please to commaund mee. As the Lady procéeded
in this kinde of language, the knight (who held her
by the right hand) espyed her chéekes suddenly died with a
Uermillion blush surpassing the Rose, whereby her beautie
which was nothing lesse inferiour there
                     •
                  o, receiued more
splendour then before it did, when the monster with feare
still dismaied her heart, and this inward dismay, greatly altered
and changed her beautifull complexion, making her
looke pale, wanne, and coullerlesse. Now began Gerileon
greatly to meruaile heereat, and withall stood as amazed,
when be beheld the vnlooked for companie of a young Gentleman
so néere him, fayre and of good grace, who had procured
this loouely change in the Lady: nor did he take it anie
iote displeasantly, though with a smiling and debonnarie
countenance, the young Gentleman approached néere
to touche her, saluting her with a swéet kisse, humble reuerence,
and kinde embrace, expressing his inward affection
and goodwill, which immediatlie was pursued with amiable
and gentle spéech to Gerileon, full of gratulations and
thankfull courtesies, as well for his deliuerance, as the Ladyes
there present, where to when the knight had kindly replyed,
as he was not to learne his court-ship, the Gentleman
ran and embraced the Lady in such sorte, as they are
wunt to doo, that haue béen long time without the sight and
company of such as they extreamely loue and affect: and she
like wise, as finding no small ease heereby to her amourous
flames so strictly bound the Gentleman in the circle of her
armes, ouercome with loue and intire affection, as if he had
not had more discretion then the Lady, fearing least Gerileon
would be offended at these ceremoniall actions of loue:
I thinke they would neuer haue sundered till the worlds
end: but he shewing a bashfull countenance for these amourous
behauiours, (which neuerthelesse were performed modestly
and comely) winding himselfe (though loth) from the
anchorholde of his ioye, brake foorth in these spéeches to the

Ladie. Swéet Mistresse, I heard that you made a promise
to this knight, to whome both you and I remaine so highlie
beholding, as you ought not delay any longer time, but to
reueale what ye haue promised: aboue all things be so good
as your woord, and obey whatsoeuer he shall please to commaund
yee: being assured that hee will command no other
thing, then what shall be agreeing with honor and honestie.
               My good Lord and fréend, answered the Lady, I doubt not
but this woorthie knight will pardon me, if I be a little forgetfull
of my dutie towarde him: considering the sight of
you rauished my hart with such ioy, that if euer he knew to
loue, and what his conquering passions are: he will rather
referre the fault to his power, then to any disgrace or discourtesie
on my behalfe committed.
               At these words Gerileon sighed and changed couller, féeing
to kindle againe within him by this new touch or remembrance,
the liuely amourous flames which not long
since tooke beginning in his youthfull brest: and so much
the more they encreased in him, as hee stroue to couer and
dissemble the same, which the Ladie and young Gentleman
well enough perceiued, albeit they made no shewe thereof,
tearing to displease him to whom they were so greatly indebted.
               In this time Geliaste came foorth of the Caue, quaking
and trembling, which made the knight so glad (fearing hee
was dead) as he forgot some part of his late remembrance:
for next to his Ladie, hee intirely looued his Squire, and
would not lose him for any thing in the world. His comming
causing pleasure and content to them all, they went further
from the Caue, and laye downe in the shade vnder a great
goodly Trée: where sitting very kindly together, the Lady
began her discourse, in forme and manner as ye shall read
in the Chapter following.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 11.
               
                  Orphisa recounteth the whole progresse of her aduenture to the
Knight Gerileon, how the King Di
                        •
                     gonde of Lusitania (after
long triall of his fortune) hauing espoused the Princesse of
Spaine, named Pollyda, and hauing no issue by her: she beguiled
him with one of her fayrest Damosels, called Olympia,
of whom he begat the fayre Orphisa, who was carryed
away by the Sauage Polyppe, and afterward deliuered as yee
haue heard. Whereby we may note, how variable fortune
is in this world, and how after she hath (by her inconstancie)
ouertrauayled such as are vnder the guarde of their good
Angell: in the end they escape with pleasure and contentment,
more easily after they are brought to the porte of so
many euils, then if they had neuer beene tossed in those pittilesse
and dangerous stormes.
               
               
                  THe skilfull Ladie Orphisa, began then to
recounte her aduenture to the Fayrie
Knight, in this manner. You must vnderstand
sir Knight, that I am daughter
to the wise and vertuous king of Lusitania,
a man, by reason of his prudence and
valour, sufficiently knowne to all the
world, as hauing doone many things worthie of memorie,
the 
                     •
                  ame whereof is bruted euery where. He being named
Diegonde, was in his younger yeares a most accomplished
knight, euen in the time of king Dorino, father to the king
of Spaine at this instant reigning, who had a daughter in
yeares mariageable, called Pollyda. This Ladie, beside her
excellencie of beautie, could cunningly twist, spin & sowe, as
is most proper to women, likewise she was well instructed
in good letters and the liberall Artes: in such sort, as she was
able to disgrace the most wise and studious Philosophers

of those times, so subtillie could shee dispute of matters depending
in Morrall and Naturall Philosophie concerning
her selfe.
               By reason héere of shee became so proud and audacious,
as shee imagined no man then liuing in the world, was
worthie to ioyne with her in mariage, and therefore despised
all: so that there was no one (how woorthie so euer) that
durst enterprise to demaund the question, no, not the great
King of England, who in those dayes was the most fayre
and accomplished knight in the world, and highly loued of
King Dorino, because of his valour. But the King my Father,
who was become amorous of her, would put it in aduenture,
either to gaine her in marriage, or be altogether
refused. And in this resolution hee wente to the king of
Spaines Court, where within short time after his arriuall,
the Daughter hauing heard the cause of his comming thither,
gaue him to vnderstand by one of her Pages: that he
could win nothing but losse of time, by séeking to ioyne in
marriage with her, and therefore he should do much better,
to imploy his purpose about other occasions. Héereat although
the king my father was extreamly offended, yet left
he not for all that to pursue the cause, and made his request
to the king of Spaine (who would not marrie her against
her will) with such importunitie: as in the end the Father
and the daughter were constrained to graunt the pretended
marriage, yet vnder this condition. That eight dayes before
the nuptials, my Father should be bound to hold open
Ioust a whole day together, against all knights that should
present themselues at this generall tourney, which expresselie
was there appointed for honour of that day: and if hee
were vnhorsed by any knight, hee should desist from his importunate
sute and request of mariage. But if fortune smiled
so fauourablie on him, as that he went away conqueror
in this enterprise: then eight dayes afterward, the desired
mariage should be accomplished.
               
                  
My father, who was caryed away with ouer hot and 
                     •
                  urious
heat of marrying this fa
                     •
                  re and skilfull Pollyda, accounting
no danger to be in the enterprise, willingly yéelded
to the mariage, vnder the condition proposed: although
he knew right well, that those times affoorded great number
of most hardie and braue knights, that knew how to behaue
themselues in the Ioust, and could dismount such as
carryed better estéeme then themselues. But amongst all,
and beyond all the rest, was reckoned as most strong and
valiant in each point of chiual
                     •
                  ie, the young knight Floridamant,
sonne to the great king Brandismell of England, and
him onely my Father doubted, as sundry times before hee
acquainted me withall. Weighing then aduisedly the valour
of this young knight, he began somwhat to dispayre of
the issue of his attempt, and as in this thought he stood pensiue
and troubled, he concluded to put in practise, what heretofore
was sayd by the great Lacedemonian Admirall Lysander,
to wit: that where the Lyons skinn
                     •
                   fell out to short
to peece it out with the Foxes case: minding to vse industrie
and cunning in these affayres, where hee thought
strength and manhood might happen to fayle, hauing to
deale with such mightie and puissant aduersaries.
               In this determination, vnderstanding that the great
king Belligande of Gaule had a Launce, the yron poynte
whereof was so inchanted, as all such as were touched therwith
should bee dismounted: eyther by sleight or force hee
resolued to be possessed thereof, imagining which of these
meanes were lykest to speed, and to aduenture both rather
then fayle of his intent.
               To bring about this stratageme, he went with all speed
into the realme of Gaule, where beeing, hee heard that in a
Forrest appertayning to that kingdome, dwelt a certaine
man, which termed himselfe a knight, but commonly hee
was called the cunning Théefe: and so subtill was hee in
robbing, as nothing could escape his fingering, and all his

attempts were so artificially compassed, as such as had lost
any thing, or were otherwise robbed, presently the blame of
their losse was imputed to him: he likewise séeing each one
estéeme him such a famous thée
                     •
                  e, and so admire his sleights
and pollicies, tooke great pleasure therein, and oftentimes
would sit solemnly smiling thereat.
               To this man the king my father foorthwith trauailed,
and promised him very large summes of money, if he could
rob the king of this enchaunted Launce, which he so safelie
kept in his Cabinet, as it was thought impossible to get it
thence. The cause why hee held it with such vigilant care,
was for the loue of a fayrie named Oziris, who thereof had
made a present to him: hoping withall hereafter to leaue
it to a sonne of his, which as yet was but a very yong infant.
Notwithstanding the great difficultie consisting in
this busines: yet in respect of the large summe of money, the
théefe promised to deliuer this Launce into my fathers
hand, as he did the day after my father had this conference
with him, but first he thus bespake him. Knight, quoth he to
the king my father (in that hee had no other knowledge of
him) it is necessarie, if yee would haue this Launce, that to
morrow you goe with me to the great Cittie of Poictiers,
where the king of Gaule at this present maketh his abode,
and where hee is determined to holde a generall tourney,
because as to morrow is the day, when he wan the victorie
against the Giant Perceuall, who had long time before
greatly trauayled and molested him with warre. I will stay
for ye néere the place where the Torney is to bee kept, and
you shall go to the king, telling him that I am the Knight
Lorgolio, Cosen to the Giant Perceuall, whom hee slew by
treason: wherefore I am come to defie him in combate man
to man, to reuenge the death of the Giant my Cosen: with
which reuenge I should thinke my selfe satisfied, might I
but breake a couple of Launces with himselfe, no other in
his defence to offer me iniurie: beside, hee shall not strengthen

himselfe with his enchaunted Launce, whereby my
Cosen receiued his death, and for better assurance heereof,
he shall deliuer that Launce into your hand to keepe wh
                     •
                  le
we Ioust, which I am assured he will not refuse to do: thus
may you depart, and beare away the Launce with yee: but
if this deuise should faile vs, assure your selfe that quickly
we will finde another: for I will receiu
                     •
                   no money of yee,
before yée haue this Launce so much desired, in your possession.
               My father liked well of this councell, and (to make short)
it came to passe euen as the theefe had before deuised: for
the king of Gaule hearing the defiance, and weening that all
my father tolde was true, made no doubte of giuing the
Launce into his hand, and my father being possessed thereof
while the king of Gaule went to put on better Armour:
both he and the cunning theefe departed, so that none could
tell what was become of them. The king and all his Court
(at the first tidings hereof) was greatly abashed, but vnderstanding
soone after the cause of this theft, and who was
the inuenter of this pollicie: it was made but a merrie iest
of. In the end (notwithstanding) this pleasure did not so concontinue,
but this fine theefe, fearing to be taken, was glad
to flye from the kingdome of Gaule, and passed thence into
England, where afterwarde hee liued and remained a
long time.
               As for the king my father, he returned againe by Sea to
Lisbone, and from thence to Saragossa, where the king Dori
                     
                        •
                     o
then held Courte, where beeing arriued, he behaued himselfe
so well with this slie gotten Launce, as all the knights
that Iousted against him, yea, euen the braue knight Floridament,
were foyled and dismounted to the ground: where
                  
                     ••
                  t
the Princesse Pollyda (who bare no loue at all to the
king my father) beeing greatly displeased, would haue re
                  
                     •
                  used
the mariage before agreed vppon by the king Dori
                     
                        •
                     o:
saying that for her parte, shee had giuen no consent,

and without the Brides consent, hardly can any mariage
be accorded, especially with such a one to whome shee could
not vse any affection.
               Héereat the king my father being highly offended, in furie
flunge foorth of the Spanish kings court, giuing him
many hard tauntes and iniurious speeches, for the di
                     ••
                  oyaltie
that he sayd remained in him. On the other side, the
king was full of rage and anger against the infant his
daughter, whom he ceased not dayly to perswade, that shee
should like well of marrying with king Diegonde of Lusitauia,
least his credit and reputation should be condemned,
in vsing trecherie and per
                     •
                  idie to so great a Prince. So
what thorow loue and pleasing spéeches, as also force and
frowning countenances, in the end she yeelded to his wyll.
But this was after the Lady had had conference with a noble
and excellent Fayrie, named Ozyris, who had beene
greatly helping in her birth, endowing her with manifolde
vertues and riches of spirit, for which she was not a little
commended: and after the decease of her mother, Sister to
king Barachen of Scotland, she had sometime nourished her
in her rich inuinsible palace, which was in the realme of
great Brittaine, and euer afterward shee perswaded her,
that she should not marie with any liuing man, which was
the cause shee helde so aloofe from this aforesaid marriage.
               After she had well schooled her concerning this matter,
the noble and vertuous Fayrie sayd, that in respect children
by the diuine lawe) ought obedience to theyr parents, and
it was her fathers will she should match with the king Diegonde,
who alreadie had doone so much for her looue, and
was euen readie to despaire if he fayled thereof: shee councelled
her not to withstand her fathers appointment. And
although in former time she had diswaded her from mariage,
it was because she discerned by her skill, that such issue
as discended from her in mariage (if shee fortuned to haue

any) should haue hard hap, and prooue very vnfortunate,
which would be such gréefe both to her husband, as the greater
part of theyr youth would bee spent in greefe and pensiuenesse.
Notwithstanding, if this marriage must néedes
be accomplished, she promised to vse the matter in such sort,
as by this coniunction she should neuer haue child. And so
found she meanes to comfort them sufficiently, as heerafter
yee shall vnderstand the manner how, without iniurie to
the beautifull Pollydon: but my father (by himselfe and his)
should féele the euill and misfortune, whereto yet she promised
a day of finall conclusion.
               The Princely maide giuing credit to hir propheticall
speeches, was greatly comforted and satisfied, and so resolued
to marie with the king my father: after which determination
once knowne, soone was hee sent for by the King
Dorino, when with great pleasure and content to euery
one, he espoused Pollyda, with her he liued more then twentie
yeares, yet could he haue no issue by her, which so greeued
him, confounding his thoughts with sadnes and melancholly,
as the most part of the time he eat his bread in mone
and teares: for I imagine it a meruaylous hart breake to
a man that desires to liue after his death, and perpetuate
his memorie by his children: to sée his mariage consumed
without any generation, that might make mention of him
when he is dead. And such (heerefore) was his intire conceit
of gréefe, as oftentimes he meant to repudiate his Queene
Pollyda: but such againe was the woondrous loue he bare
her, fearing to offend God, and displease king Dorino her
father: as hee was still diswaded when such thoughts entred
his fantasie. All this likewise the Queene very well
noted, and notwithstanding her former despisings, yet after
her marriage she loued him exceedingly, pittying his gréefe,
but shaddowing her owne so much as possibly she could, séeking
by all meanes to remedie both, as in the end she did, by
the aduise and counsell of the wise Ozyris, who euery daye

and in all places assisted her, perswading her to doe as followeth.
One of her wayting Damosels, whome my father
vsed good countenance towards, because she was of perfect
beautie, being named Olympia, daughter to he Duchesse of
Terciede, a chaste and prudent dame: with her the Fayrie
aduised the Queene, that my father should haue dalliance.
She following this councell, one night when the king my
father sent woord to haue her company in bed: so cunninglie
handled the matter, that this damosell lay there insteed
of her, for the maide was likewise secretly amourous of the
king, which was the cause, that (being where she would be)
she disliked not this swéet and pleasant deceit, but without
any shew of displeasure, shee gladly endured the kings pastime
with her, séeing the Quéene was so well content to affoord
her her place and priuiledge. To such effect grew my
fathers labours, who little thought he was thus beguiled:
as the Maide was conceiued with childe: when afterward
the Queene comming to sleepe with the King, sayd that she
felt her selfe conceiued, answerable to his so long desire, for
which good fortune hee should applaude the heauens, from
whence procéeded so great good to her. Héereof was the king
my father glad, thinking the Quéene had tolde the trueth
indéed, as within short while after, he minded to goe on pilgrimage,
to pray at the holy Sepulcher of Iesus Christ, and
returning thence, to visit Saint Iames in Galicia, at each
place to thanke God for this fortunate euent.
               Beeing thus resolued, one day hee secretly departed in
disguised garments (feigning some other excuse) to accomplish
his intended voyage, in which time (beeing the space
almost of a whole yeare) it chaunced that the fayre Olympia
was deliuered of me, to the great content and pleasure
of Quéene Pollyda, who nine moneths together feigned her
selfe with childe, though but meere dissimulation: and vsing
the Damosels deliuerance as her owne, gaue generally to
be knowne by some of her, fauourites and moste familiar

Ladies, that this long expect
                     •
                  d fruite had issued from her
owne bodie. And to the end this mysterie might not be discouered,
the wise Ozyris tooke to her inuisible Fairie house
or Pallace, the faire Olympia my mother, where euer after
she continued of selfe same nature as her other nimphes and
faires, among whom at this present she is most beloued, as
I certainly knowe by such reuelations that her selfe hath
showne me. Now the king my father being ignorant of all
these things, was so glad when he returned from his voyage
to sée me growne to a prittie porte or stature, and that the
Quéene was not sicklie or felt such paynes as other do after
their deliuerie: as all his care now was for my education
and instruction, not onely in curious weauing and sowing,
but also of good letters, especiallie poesie and musique, perceiuing
my voyce apt and proper for singing.
               Héerein likewise did the Quéenes care agrée with his,
and so dearely did shee looue me, as if I had beene indéed a
braunche of her owne bodie: for neuer wente shee to any
place, but still I must accompany her, through which continuall
association, it happened one day among the rest,
that she would needes ride on hunting, a pastime wherein
she tooke excéeding pleasure. I being with her, the hounds
egerly pursuing the graue, and she chasing that things fadged
not according to her minde, roade so fast that wee had
soone lost one another.
               The space of a whole day almost, remained I thus alone
in this meruaylous great forrest, wearyed and spent with
séeking to finde my company againe, till at length by good
happe I came to a fayre and cléere fountaine, from whence
streamed foorth a swift gliding riuer, that made his course
quite thorow the forrest: where alighting from my horsse,
to rest and refresh my selfe on the soft tender hearbes that
grewe about the banckes of the fountaine, I had not long
sitten there in this sorte, but the fayre Olympia my mother
appeared in sight vnto mee in the habit of a Nimphe,

at whose sudden sight I was greatly amazed. But with her
swéet and gratious language, she deliuered my heart from
feare and dismaying, recounting to me (as in a dainty compiled
historie) the whole discourse of my birth, in manner
and forme as you haue heard, albeit somewhat more at
large.
               Moreouer she told me, how the mightie and skilfull Fayrie
Ozyris her Mistr
                     •
                  sse, had disclosed to her, that by the craft
and meanes of an old abhominable Necromancian, named
Charonyfer, should bee nourished a cruell and hideous monster
called the Polyppe, whose crueltie and puissance should
be doubted and feared ouer the whole earth. This beast, to
iniurie both her and me, should one day steale me from my
parents and friends, to keepe me in extreame miserie and
thraldome, vntill the best knight in the world, nourished
and brought vp by this Fayrie as her owne childe, albeit
extracted originallie from the best, puissant and most vertuous
king aliue: should trauaile to the place of my imprisonment,
and there by his prowesse and valiancie (killing the
monster) deliuer me out of captituitie.
               Beside this, shee tolde mee, that during the last seauen
yeares of my detayning and miserie, a young noble man,
brother to Quéene Pollyda, to hinder the monster from killing
me, should follow me to the place where I was imprisonned,
and there each day for six yeares space, changing into
as many sundrie formes as the monster, should combate
with him for my libertie: yet all his endeuours would
prooue in vaine, because the monster was onely to be slaine
by the knight of the Fayrie Ozyris. And to let me know
when the last yeere of my miserie should ensue, she said, that
from the beginning thereof, the noble man (who loued mee
with perfect loue) should be changed into a Foule or Bird of
straunge sort, in which shape dayly would hee come to visit
and sée me, euen vntill the Polyppe were slaine, when hee
should receiue his manly shape againe, and the day of the

                  Polyppes death, should bee the finall extermination of my
miserie.
               After she had imparted to me all these things, she threw
foorth such a perfume of Poppie vppon me, as (from the end
of her discourse) I slept so soundly by the Fountaines side,
that I neyther sawe or heard when shee departed: and as
some while I continued in this sléepe, Queene Pollyda not
a little displeased for my losse, hauing with her traine
sought thorow the forrest, came at last and found me where
I slept, when gently awaking me, wee thence departed againe
into the Cittie.
               Within a while after, it chanced, that by the aduise of
the king my father, and his Queene Pollyda, I was sent to
king Dorino my imagined Grand-father, who desired to
haue me néere him, because he verely thought me to be his
daughters childe, by reason whereof he wunderouslie loued
me. Hauing continued certaine yeares in his Court, this
young Prince heere present, named Phinander, youngest
sonne to king Dorino, and brother to king Dorian, that at
this day gouernes ouer the Spaniards, beeing equall in
yeares with me, taking me for so néere in kindered to him:
spent the time of his infancie with me, and I in like sorte
with him.
               Among these pastimes and sportes of children, it happened
that we became amourous of ech other, and that in such
manner, as we could not endure long without each others
sight: which loue each one imagined to growe by naturall
affection, that so neere kinne doe customablie beare one to
another, and the young Prince verily perswaded himselfe,
that the iouissance of our loue might not bee compassed, because
of the prohibition of Christian laws, concerning mariage
betweene so neere kindred as we séemed to be. Héerevpon,
séeing him one day very sad and pensiue, being alone
in the Garden, I faithfully discouered to him the manner
of my birth, according as my swéete mother Olympia before

had tolde me: which highly, comforted him, causing both in
him and me farre greater affecton to each other, if more
might be then was commenced before. Our passions were
still worne out with honest sollace and pleasure, expecting
that the long delay of time should minister more intire delight
of our loues, according to the honest desire abiding in
eyther of vs: but both our hope and desire were suddenly
squandered, by a new and strange accident that immediatly
followed.
               Knowe then gentle Sir, that the daye when the Prince
Dorian, eldest sonne to the king of Spaine, br
                     •
                  ught to his
fathers court the fayr
                     •
                   princesse Amarylla, daughter to the
King of Gaule, whome hee had newly espoused, there was
speech of nothing else but ioye and sollace: in middest of
which pleasure, this wicked monster which you haue slaine,
entered the great hall of the Pallace with a most horrible
noyse and crie, which made the Ladyes in such affright, as
each one 
                     •
                  led for safetie of themselues, yea, though there
were present many braue and hardie knights, yet beeing
vnarmed, and thereby not fit to vse resistance, some ranne
with spéed to get on theyr armour, and others to saue themselues
from death. By this meanes the Polyppe had leisure
to make choyse of mee, among all the other Ladyes of the
courte, and after he had caught me fast in his armes, without
any stay, he ran ouer the land and sea, what of his owne
nature, and by the enchauntments of that curssed Magitian,
who gaue wings to his course: that in short time (astonnied
and néere hand dead with feare) he brought me to this place,
where euer since I haue remained in greefe and torments,
liuing the most part of this dolefull season, with raw flesh,
and other viands, sometime good, sometime bad, such as the
monster did eat himselfe: but to speake truth, since his first

                     •
                  aking me, he neuer made semblance of any wrong to mee:
but from day to day I s
                     •
                  w how his rigour encreased, and
if he had fayled of his pray, or could not get it so conueniently

as he would, I iudged that my selfe at last should haue
serued to slake his hunger. But at the beginning, my deere
mother Olympia so assisted me, and from time to time gaue
me so good councell: as (by many slight subtilties and inuentions)
I appeased his anger toward me, euen vntill this
prince arriued heere: for yee must note withall, that from
the first day of my surprising, as I haue beene assured by my
mother, and since by him, that hee ceased not to followe the
monster, and to enquire the place of his adode, when (after
long and painfull trauaile) he found it: and one day when
the monster was abroad, hee aduentured to come sée and
speake with me, when I aduised him, as I did you, to beegon,
least hee should chance to be taken or slaine by the Polyppe.
He giuing credit to my words, went to the king of
this country, who is the king of Assiria, a meruailons mightie,
courteous, and debonnarie knight, to whome making
himselfe knowne, and my misfortune: the good king (that
diuers times had layd ambushes for this monster, because
hee had ruined and wasted all this countrey, yet by no
meanes could be slaine or taken) caused an assembly of most
part of the best knights of his Courte, intending to assayle
this deuill, and deliuer me from my miserie: but such slender
successe tooke this attempt, as in one day (by force and
illusion of his manifold shapes) he slew more then thrée hundred
of them: and if the king had longer continued his p
                     •
                  rsuite,
himselfe had likewise perished. Wherefore with this
l
                     •
                  sse hee left off, and would no more enterprise my deliuerance,
whereat this prince conceiued such vnkindnes, as in
teares and greefe he went to a forrest, which is six or seauen
leagues distant from this place, where weeping and lamenting
day and night, continually he called for death to end his
affliction. Then appeared to him, the powerful and wise O
                     
                        •
                     yris,
who comforted him with future hope of my release, al
                  
                     ••
                  it
it would be long before, euen seauen whole yeres: du
                  
                     ••
                  ng
which time, y• he might liue safe (els had he no hope of

continuance) she changed him into the forme of a wylde and
sauage beast, giuing him power likewise to alter himselfe
into so many shapes as the Polyppe changed: sauing at his
last fight he should receiue the nature of a Byrd, and could
no more attaine the forme of a foure footed beast, but might
varie into sundrie shapes of Birdes.
               The Prince being thus transformed, came euery day six
yeeres together to combate with the Polyppe, without vanquishing
or beeing vanquished, though all the day they
would not rest from theyr trauaile, but fought most furiouslie,
euen to the beginning of the seauenth yeere, when he
changed into the likenesse of Foule as you beheld him: for
this is the Bird that flutterd on the Trée at your arriuall,
who since the Polyppe was slaine by your vertue, hath now
recouered his former humaine shape: and for him sung I
the song you heard at your first comming, which in that maner
I composed in mine owne language. Thus haue you
heard sir knight the whole estate of my aduenture, what yet
remaineth, yee may be satisfied in by mee: so tooke the Ladyes
tale an end, and therewith will I likewise ende this
Chapter.
            
            
               CHAP. 12.
               
                  How the Ladie Orphisa hauing ended the discourse
of her aduenture, there came into the place before
Gerileon and the Prince Phinander, a knight cruelly
wounded, trayled on the ground by his horse:
who intreated Gerileon to assist him, in reuenge of
the wrong the puissant Adylas had doone him.
And now after hee had heard of the ciuill warre in
Persia, since the departure of the great Sophie, hee
tooke leaue to depart from the Prince Phinander,
and the faire Orphisa, and howe Gerileon healed
the knights wounds.
               
               
                  
                  THe Historie saith, that after the Lady had
thus ended her discourse: the fayrie
Knight, who made no little maruayle of
the aduenture, thus answered. Ladie,
right glad am I that I haue slaine the
monster, which offred ye so much wrong
and iniurie, for some other occasion, that
made me so earnest in desire to combate with him, to wit,
desire of acquiring honor and renowme, for which knights
valiant doe often put theyr liues in ieopardie: beside, because
in performance heere of, I haue doone something pleasing
to the noble dame Ozyris, towards whom I am, and by
whom onely I hold my life: if then for the loue of her, and
fayre Olympia your mother, well knowne to me, and who
in these combates hath greatly succoured mee, likewise for
the looue of this prince heere present, and vertue abiding in
your selfe: if I can do any other seruice profitable and pleasing
to yee, I would make spare of no trauaile whatsoeuer,
so I might accomplish any thing to your contentment. And
were I not bound by a solemne vow neuer to take rest, till
I haue found a knight whom I séeke, which constraines me
God knowes how farre in his search, to reuenge the death
of my friend slaine by him: I assure yee, that gladly would
I accompany yee to the Courte of your father, the king of
Lusitania, where neuerthelesse one day (by Gods helpe) I
hope to sée ye, with more ease and ioy then I haue at this instant,
but thither shall this worthie Lord kéepe ye good and
loyall companie.
               As Gerileon spake these words, and further would haue
proceeded, his purpose was preuented by the sudden course
of a goodly horsse, that trayled along a Knight well néere

                  
                     •
                  ead, hanging by one foote in the stirrop, and holding a
Launce in his hand: but the Fayrie knight catching the
horsse by the bridle, tooke of the knights Helmet, where he
found a very dangerous wound in his head, then getting
his foote foorth of the stirrop, perceiuing some life yet remained
in him, and that hee was not but in an amazed

                     •
                  raunce: with the helpe of the prince Phynander and the Ladie
Orphisa he was recouered againe. Beeing come to himselfe,
he knew well the place where hee was, which made
him thus speake to Gerileon. For Gods sake sir knight help
vs, and let vs quickly get vs hence, for héere 
                     •
                  wels the most
cruell and inhumaine monster of the world, who as yet (I
hope) hath not séene vs, therefore I aduise ye presently to be
gon: as for my selfe, I had rather bee dead then tarry in a
place so daungerous as this is. Feare not the monster you
speake of (quoth the Fayrie knight) for if hee that hath thus
shrewdly dealt with you, had had no more power then the
monster at this instant 
                     •
                  at, you should be more healthfull
and in better disposition then ye are.
               I sée well (sayd th
                     •
                   wounded knight) that you haue not
heard the inexpugnall force of the Sauage Polyppe, for if ye
had once experimented it: yee would sorbeare to talke of
him, and tary in this place lesse while then yee doe. I know
more of him then you doe, quoth the fayrie knight, for you
know nothing but by heare say: and that which I knowe
is by experience, the mistresse of vertue, and true discouerer
of all things. And to let yee sée that I speake not by hart, I
will giue ye some instance. Then taking the knight by the
hand, he shewed him the Sauage monster dead, which when
he beheld, hee trembled as full of feare and astonnishment,
as if he knew not whether this 
                     〈◊〉
                   a dreame or a certain
                  
                     •
                  ie:
and beholding well Gerillions countenance, sayd. Sir
knight, haue you then beene one that 
                     〈◊〉
                   this monster to
his death? surely I beleeue, that since you had the stomack
to come so neere, in vsing courage against him while hee

                  
                     •
                  ed, and are one of the braue 
                     •
                  rmie that hath discomfited
him: you dare as boldly doo something for the Christians,
and I iudge if yee be a Christian, and such a one as I imagine
ye to be, you will not refuse to reuenge the shame and
outrage that hath beene offered me. Beleeue me Sir, quoth
the Fayrie knight, I am a true Christian, and to any, bee
they Persians, Arabians, Syrians or Assirians, I would
giue succour according to my power and their necessitie:
wherefore I pray ye tell me, in what affaires haue the christians
need to vse my helps, and who hath thus vnmanlie
outraged yee: to the end I may assuredly giue them assistance,
and also do my endeuour to auenge your wrong, tell
me the trueth, without any further feare of the monster,
concerning both the one and other, Sir answered the knight
héerein will I gladly satisfie yee, but because I haue verie
much to discouer, if I should recount each necessarie pointe
therto belonging, that ye may the more bréefely vnderstand
these high affaires: I wil shorten the discourse conueniently
as I may, reueling nothing but the very principal matters.
               Know then sir that I am a knight, my natiue countrey
is the kingdome of Persia, neere to the great cittie of Tauris,
and not long since was I sent in company of twelue other
knights, with the strong & puissant Ariodant, a knight
of great reputation, neere coosen to the mightie Mutiuell
king of Persia, who was elected and chosen by the greater
part of the inhabitants of that countrey (to goe to the great
Emperour of Constantinople, to intreate his succour for a
multitude of good knights and christian souldiours, whom
the young prince Mauspasian, brother to the great Sophie of
Persia, very straitlye besieged in the citties of Susa and Tauris,
beside diuers other places of the Persians kingdome. And
to the end ye may know wherefore we went, ye must note,
that (some while since) the great Sophie, a man worthie of
great dignity, for the high prowes where with he is indued,
hauing séene a portrait curiously drawn▪ of the faire princes

of Constantinople, daughter to the Emperour: became so
carryed away with the loue of this most beautifull Ladie,
as he immediatly resolued to make her his wife, what hazard
or aduenture so euer stood thereon. And to compasse the
same, he sent ambassadours to the Emperours, to demaund
her in marriage, but the Emperour at that time made refusall,
because hee was contrary to him in religion, and it
was not lawfull for a Christian to marrie with a Pagan,
neither for a Christian to ioyne in any conuersation with
a heathen. Which was the cause (to take away this difficultie,
which onely séemed to hinder the mariage) that the
great Sophie of Persia with all his people would become
Christians, and should be baptized. And because the popular
sort should frame their actions, and fashion their manners
answerable to their king: himselfe was the first that
receiued holy baptisme, and commanded in all the countries
of his kingdome, that the Christian law should be anounced
and preached. Which being doone according to his will and
commaund, many willingly receiued the faith and religion:
others finding the alteration very strange, withdrew
themselues in displeasure: some other that would not at all
receiue it, but were constrained thereto, thought better to
forsake their houses, lands and possessions, to liue in another
kingdome with libertie of conscience, and so continue
the rest of their liues in the Pagan law. After these things
were thus ordered, it chaunced that the king absented himselfe,
so that no one could tell what was become of him: some
sayd, that as in former times hee had beene accustomed, so
now (like a knight 
                     •
                  rrant) he was gon in search of strange
and perillous aduentures, with especiall intent to make
proofe and combate body to body, with the puissant Nabot
and Squamell, who were counted the most hardie knights in
the world. Others sayd, that being transported with this
amourous passion, hee was gon to the Emperour of Constantinople,
to demaund of him the Princesse his daughter:

for if he found her to be of such 
                     •
                  erfect beautie, as the Painter
by his art had discouered, surely by force or fayre means
he intended to haue her. But which way so euer hee tooke,
very true it is, that soone after his departure, the Prince
Mauspasian his brother, whom hee had left to gouerne the
Realme in his absence, would by force of armes compell
such as had abiured the pagan lawe, and were become christians:
to take againe their former religion, saying, that
what the king his brother had doone and intended to doo,
was but onely to induce the Christian Emperour, with
more ease to graunt the marriage of the princesse his
daughter. And because there was no likelyhood by that
meane to obtaine her, by force he minded (after his returne)
to haue the Lady, and this Mauspasian said that the Sophie
had disclosed to him. But all would not giue credit to his
spéeches, for many resisted to doo as he commanded, thus
vrging the contrary: that séeing they found the Christian
religion good and profitable to their consciences, as also the
saluation of their soules, séeing likewise their king had caused
them to vndertake that religion and beléefe, and since had
giuen them no commaund to the contrary: the present Gouernour
(being but a deputie) ought not constraine them to
forgoe the religion, but the same king might do it when he
should be present. Beside, what once he had so fréely granted
and established, could not so suddenly displease him, to the
preiudice of his people, for as they did owe loyaltie and fidelitie
to their prince, by submission which they voluntarilie
made to his power: so are all princes bound againe toward
their people, to guarde, defend and kéepe them by his
power, and to entertaine them vnder the obedience and assurance
of conuentions, made betweene them and the laws
of the land.
               Upon this debate rose many perticuler quarrels and partialities,
betwéene such as had auouched Christianitie, and
them that continued idolaters to their false Gods, who hauing

chosen the Prince M
                        •
                     uspasian for theyr head and gouernour:
withdrew themselues to their houses, and forciblie
would depriue them (of the other part) of theyr houses
and possessions, whereby is nowe growne in Persia a ciuill
warre, the most straunge and cruell that euer was. For betweene
the inhabitants of on selfe same kingdome, hath alreadie
beene séene sundry bloodie battels, where on each side
are, slaine many Christians and Pagans, especially two
most signall and markable persons: one on the coast of Tyrisir,
where the Christians by the prowesse and valiancie of
the braue knight Ariodant, wun the day, and draue the Infidels
in disorder: the other neere the cittie of Tauris, where
the Pagans had ioyned with their forces the ayde of the
Medes, Syrians, A
                     ••
                  irians, and Arabes, compelled the christians
to flye the field, with great losse of their men, to make
themselues strong in the citties of Tauris, Susa, and diuers other
townes beside, where they are at this instant begirt
with very sharpe siedge. So despairing of theyr former
trust in God, the valiant prince Ariodant, determined secretlie
to leaue the cittie of Tauris, where hee was Generall of
the Christians, accompanyed onely with twelue chosen
knights (among whom I was one) to go require ayde of the
Emperour of Constantinople against the Pagans, with promise
to subiect to the Christian Empire, all the whole Monarchie
of Persia. As we were on the way to effect our voyage,
by ill hay we met (about a league hence) a troupe of Pagans,
consisting of about three hundred men, all well appointed,
and knights of marke, who hauing pitched theyr
pauillions in a medowe that butted harde vppon our way:
we quickly were descryed vnto them, and knowing by our
En
                     •
                  ignes, as also the badge of the crosse (which all of vs bare
open in our armes) that we were Christians: they cryed aloud,
that we should passe no further, without speaking to
theyr prince and conducter, who was the puis
                     •
                  ant king of
Thuris, named Adylas, and was there in a very 
                     •
                  ayre large

lion, minding to vnderstand what we were, that hee might
make further enquiry of the Per
                        ••
                     an warre. Now albeit this
rude summons was greeuous to vs, yet we durst not refuse
to go speake with the king Adylas, perswading our selues,
that although he was a Pagan, yet would 
                     〈◊〉
                   be no enemie to
vs, as wee were aduertised a daye before, beeing in quest of
his coosen germaine the king of Phez, one of the hardyest
knights in the world. He questioned with vs concerning
the affayres of Persia, wherein the prince Ariodant truly answered
him, as also both what hee and wee were, with the
present occasion of our iourney: wherevpon hee would arrest
and detayne vs as prisoners, a thing very yrkes
                     •
                  me to
vs, and which we were not able to endure, but more gladly
would loose our liues, then see our selues captiue in our enemies
hands, and subiected to their wils. Heerevpon wee
fell to our best endeuour, that our foes might get no aduantage
of vs, and in such sorte did wee defend our selues, that
twentie of them were layd dead on the ground, before any
of vs sustayned any iote of harme. Which when the king
Adylas perceiued, immediatly hee put himselfe in armes,
and hauing assembled all his people, assayled vs so fiercely,
that six or seauen of my companions were slaine outright,
the other taken prisoners, and my selfe escaped in such
plight as you now beholde mee, but the prince Ariodant I
hope is fled like wise.
               Thus heare yee (sir Knight) the estate of my misfortune,
for releefe wherein, and to reuendge my iniurie receiued,
I desire that wee might haue one bought more with
them, assuring yee for certaintie, that whatsoeuer my
harme alreadie is, yet could I imploye and bestirre my
selfe a fresh: but I see wee shall be so feeble, that all our courage
will bee but friuolous and vayne, and accounted as
cowardise.
               The wounded Knight hauing thus spoken, presently
fell into a swoune, which greatly greeued Gerileon, who did

his best to helpe him: and hauing ransacked his golden
bottle, wherein the Nimphe Olympia brought him the precious
vngents, that healed his woundes receiued from the
Polyppe: he got out a little, which he applied to the knights
wound, when soone after hee felt himselfe of more able disposition,
and this beeing doone, how they resolued, yee shall
read heereafter.
            
            
               CHAP. 13.
               
                  Of the aduentures that happened to the knights Gerileon
and Taffinor, and how after they had slaine
Argontes, and ten or twelue of the best Knights in
the hoste of Adylas: Gerileon went and tooke the
king himsel
                        •
                     e, and of the conference they had together.
               
               
                  THe daye after the Persian knight
had recounted all his aduenture
to Gerileon, according as ye haue
read in the former Chapter: they
departed from the Polyppes Den,
to goe combate with Adylas and
his people, and albeit imminent
death stood before theyr eyes, yet
could nothing withdrawe them
from such a daungerous enterprise, as not the intreats of
Phynander and the fayre Orphisa, who by many meanes laboured
to diswade them to the contrary. For the Fayrie
knight euermore resolued, not for dread of death to let slip
any opportunitie, when he might combate or performe any
generous act, whence might growe fame and reputation,
the onely wadges for a man of valour and vertue. And as
for the Persian knight, it was such despight to him to bee

vanquished: that as a man h
                     •
                  lfe desperate, an hundred
times he wished the fatall death, so he might in any sort reuenge
the shame and iniurie doone him, then feare of death
was no matter for him to stand vppon. In this enflamed
desire, ta
                     •
                  ing their leaue of Phynander and Orphisa, (who
were verye pensiue for Gerileons departure, both mounted
on the horsse of Taffinor, for so was the Persian knights
name, hauing betweene them but one Launce, which Gerileon
bare that sate in the saddle: in this sort they rode away,
and not farre had they trauayled, but they met an other
horse (readie sadled, the bridle lying vppon his neck)
softly pacing in the field they rode thorow. Taffinor immediatly
knew the horsse, and that one of his companions had
beene mounted thereon, who beeing slaine by Adylas his
Souldiours, ran now ranging from place to place. Taffinor
lightly leaping from behinde Gerileon, made such shift that
he tooke the horsse, and getting quicklye vp into the seate,
they both spurred away with all possible speede. In shorte
time they came to the place where Ariodant and his companions
had beene discomfited, and Adylas this day intended
to dislodge with his pauillions, that hee might meet Mauspasian
at Tauris, there to deliuer such prisoners to him as
he had gotten from Ariodant.
               
               Beeing come into this place, they were soone espyed by
one of the knights of the king of Thunis, this knight was
named Argontes, one of the most faithfull friends to the
king, and as valiant as any in all the troope, hee beeing by
chaunce first mounted in this preparation of departure, sitting
with a huge strong Launce auaunced vpon his thigh.
This was the first man, that néedes would knowe what
these two knights were, who durst with such boldnes come
so néere their hoste. For this purpose, and without speaking
woord to any one, he galloped with a swift carrire towards
them, and when he was so neere, that hee might easily discerne
them to be straungers: he slacked his pace, when the

first hee must needes speak
                     •
                   to, was the Fayri
                     •
                   knight, to
whom arrogantly he thus began. Be stirre ye fellows, and
come after me to king Adylas my Lord, to tell him of whence
ye are, and what ye seeke in this place: for I take yee to be
spyes, sent hither (to worke some treason) by these Christians,
that are mustered vp in the Cittie of Tauris: otherwise
I would presently slice yee in such small gobbets, as a Rauen
might easily beare in his beake the biggest piece of
your bodyes. Freend, quoth Gerileon, I thinke yee meane
not so ill as yee speake, for no such matter appeares in your
countenance. But setting a parte these tearmes of brauerie,
I pray ye goe tell king Adylas your maister, that heere
is a knight errant, accompanyed with one of those Christian
knights, whom lately (both causelesse and verye shamefully)
he monstrously abused. Say I bid him, (if he be a man
of woorth or any valour) that immediatly he come foorth in
equipage conuenable for the combate, and accompanyed
with such an other: to make this knight amends, and to
repayre the wrong doone to Ariodant, in charging his troope
with too much aduantage, and thereby entermedled with
affayres neither touching or concerning him. If he will not
doo it, I say he is a villaine and a traytour: for were he not
so, he would not offer offence to any one, without habiliti
                     •
                  
of meanes to make requitall. By my faith, answered Argontes,
thou art a very foole, in comming hether to be kild
with credit, and to let thee know, how much better it had
beene for thée to haue kept thée quiet, then trauaile to this
place with such mallepart kinde of language: I will not
suffer that the king my Lorde, nor any of his people but my
selfe onely, shall teach thée against another time better wisdome,
as also to speake more aduisedly, and therefore stand
vppon thy guarde. In vsing these words, he drew back, that
his horsse might haue his course, and hee vayle his Launce
against Gerileon: who made so little account therof, that he
reserued his labour to better effect then the Pagan did, and

therefore shrunke aside to scape the attaint. Héereat Taffinor
was gretly abashed, thinking he did it by cowardise, or feare
to meddle with the Pagan, which made him imagine euill of
him, and nothing at all to regard him, as Argontes did likewise:
who finishing his race to no purpose, prepared toward
Taffinor, calling him to the Ioust, which hee refused
because hee had no Launce. But laying hand to his sword
for the combate, hee brauely made against the Pagan, who
likewise let go his Launce, and drew out his swoord to entertaine
him: which Gerileon perceiuing, and doubting the
length of theyr fight would growe too tedious, whil
                     •
                   the
Pagans beeing so neere them, might charge them in greater
number, then they should bee able to deale withall, or withstand,
séeing himselfe likewise vnprouided of a swoord, for ye
haue heard how his was broken in combate with the Sauage
Polyppe: he foorthwith determined to kill the Pagan,
because he would be possessed of his weapon, which he imagined
no hard matter to compasse, as in verye déed it was
not: for running against him with meruaylous violence, he
gaue him such a peazant knocke with the butte end of his
launce, as ouerthrew both his horsse and him to the ground,
and strugling vnder the horsse, that trampled very heauily
vpon him, there both his pride, arrogancie and life ended all
together. This done, Gerileon alighted and tooke his sword,
saying to Taffinor, that therewith he would send more of his
companions after him: which Taffinor beeing not a little
ioyfull to heare, returned this answere. Now haue I good
hope Sir, that (by your meanes) I shall bee auenged of the
outragious wrongs doone me by the Pagans, and were our

                     •
                  appe so fortunate, that Ariodant would returne to succour
vs, (as thereof I am assured if hee bee not dead, for hee is a
prince impacient of iniurie:) wee might easilye ouercome
and vanquish the hoste of Adylas. For amongst them all
himselfe is most redoubted, being so good and able a knight
of person, as there are few in Persia that can equall him in

soundnes of chiualrie: nor could wee haue beene conquered
by his souldiours, had not he put to his helping hand.
               In middest of this talke, whilst Gerileon armed himselfe
with the swoord of dead Argontes, and Taffinor with his
Launce, Adylas caused the Trumpets to be sounded, declaring
his departure from the place, where he had beene encamped
and soiourned so many dayes together: at which instant
he called for Argontes his faithfull freend, but he could
not be found in all the hoste, then commaunding to vnderstand
what was become of him, ten or twelue knights of
the troupe tooke the same waye, they saw him gallop before.
At last they beheld the two Christian knights, riding with
vnconquerable countenance towards the Tents of Adylas
and a little further off they sawe Argontes dead, his horsse
likewise lying beating with his hooues vppon him, not able
to rise: whereat they were enflamed with such rage,
(for Argontes was well and deerely beloued of all Adylas
hoste) as they could no longer containe their furie, but forciblie
made against the Christian knights. Against Gerileon
foure of them brake their Launces, without any further
iniurie vnto him: but hee had better successe, for the first he
met, felt so soundly the sharpnes of his launce, as piercing
quite thorow his bodie, layd him dead on the earth. Two
other that ma
                     •
                  e out after these foure, began very fiercely
to assaile Taffinor: but for all that they vnhorssed him not,
yet one of them receiued a deadly wound on his shoulder at
his hand, and so was forced to fall to the ground. They that
came after, hauing their swordes naked in their handes,
couragiously aduentured on the Christian knights, who being
ready prepared, receiued the valiant strokes of the Pagans
on their sheelds, without any hurt vnto their bodyes:
marie each of them stood so stiffely to the Pagans, as Gerileon
sent one of their heads roundlie from his shoulders, and
Taffinor slicing off an others arme from his bodye, made
both Gerileons stroke and his owne agree in an hermonie:

for the first Pagan dyed immediatly, and the other caught
such a sudden sicknes, as his bloud ab
                     •
                  undantly streaming
foorth, called his life soone after. The rest of their companions
were not a little amazed heereat, especially at the
puissant strokes of Gerileon, with the exceeding vertue, valiancie
and addresse that they discerned in him, so that sixe
of theyr fellowes lying dead before theyr faces, the other
fearefully fled to the troupe of Adylas, that they might to
him declare theyr misfortune: but they were followed euen
thither by Gerileon and Taffinor, at whose hardinesse
Adylas stood greatly abashed, and the rather, because (in
his presence) Gerileon ouertaking two of the tardyest fugitiues,
from one he lopt the eare, cheeke, and shoulder, together,
and tooke off the others head so neatly, as if the kéenest
Rasor in the world had beene the instrument.
               All the troupe standing affrighted heereat, durst not
boudge one foote, but taryed to heare the pleasure of theyr
king, who was surprised with no common kinde of pensiuenes,
imagining that Gerileon was one of the Gods
whom he adored, to wit, Mars the God of battailes, and (as
they supposed) that hee was highly displeased with them.
When hee beheld what hauock the Fayrie knight made of
his people, hee came foorth from the middest of his troupe,
to know for certaintie what he was, and if he were one of
theyr gods, with praiers, oblations and sacrifices he would
appease his anger: but Gerileon that made no regarde of
such folly, prepared to endure the braue against all the rest.
And for this cause, hee entred further in among them with
Taffinor, where sundring themselues, no one durst stirre to
approach néere them, for in Gerileons countenance they noted
such high resolution, as they reputed him alone able to
foyle a farre greater hoste of men.
               Euen as a lustie Mower in the haruest time, in the middest
of a well growne field, with a sharpe Scithe in his
hand, cuts downe the grasse and hearbes about him in very

great quantitie: euen like 
                     •
                  eare had the Pagans of this noble
warriour, verily thinking him to be some celestiall deitie:
and many times had they béene brought into such errour,
for when they beheld any one, who by his haughtie
déedes séemed to surpasse the common valour of men, and
had some thing in him to out goe other in hardinesse: they
easily were induced to beléeue, that this was one of their
imaginarie Gods. This false perswasion serued very well
for these two Christians, because if all the troupe had risen
against them, you quickly may conceiue their daunger: but
the good Angell that conducted them, by the helpe of God
assisted them in such sort, as Adylas alone offered spéech to
Gerileon, and that in this manner. I pray thée if thou bee
one of the Gods, whose habitations is in heauen, tell or
shew me by some signe if I haue offended the
                     •
                  , and wherein
I haue giuen cause, that thou shouldst thus destroy me and
my people: assuring thée, that if by prayers, oblations and
sacrifices, thine anger is not to bee appeased, and thy furie
qualified, thou shalt no sooner bee returned to thy celestiall
mansion, but presently thou shalt in aboundance feele, the
pleasant perfume and exquisite Sabeene odour, with large
gifts in thy Temple, and offerings on thine Altar, by me
bestowed to thine honor and glory. Or if thou be some mortall
creature, that hast reason thus to come and assayle me,
killing Argontes my faithfull Achates, beside so many of my
souldiours: then onely tell to me the cause heereof, and assure
thy selfe, that I will repaire whatsoeuer iniurie, which
thou pretendest to haue receiued by me, neither shall any of
my men once mooue to offend thée, for the great valour and
vertue I estéeme to be in thée. But if without any reasonable
occasion, thou hast dared thus boldly to abuse me: thou
mayst be well assured, that thou shalt be chastised according
to thy deserts. Knight (answered Gerileon) I imagine thée
to be the most apparant man of al thy troope, and (as I haue
heard) thou art called Adylas king of Thunis, a knight verye

famous and of great reputation as I gather, because I see
thée affable and courteous. Wherfore I fréely tell thée, that
I am none of the supposed Gods thou talkest of, but credit
me, I am a knight errant, ignorant of the place wher I was
borne, and the parents that gaue me life: but trauayle thorow
the worlde, whether fortune and my de
                     ••••
                  e conducts
me, in search of such aduentures as merrit fame. Not long
since, and not far hence, I slew a cruell monster, called the
sauage Polyppe, where I met this knight, who told mee
what causeles shame both thou and thy company (being ods
of too great aduantage) offered a Christian prince called Ariodant,
one of whose traine he was: thou hauing discomfited
him and his men, detainest some of them as prisoners, which
iniurie he intreated me to reuenge, and I haue vndertaken
it both vpon thée & thine: for well thou knowest, that by the
lawe of chiualrie, inuiolably obserued among such as are
woorthie to beare the title of knighthood, all errant knights
séeking aduentures, are bound to reuenge the opprobrious
wrongs, that the ouerstrong offer to the ouer weake, hauing
no iust cause or reason therefore, and to defend them against
all forcible violence, indirectly throwne vppon miserable
and afflicted persons, maintaining euermore the quarrell of
the wronged that haue no helpe. Beside, the quarrell (for
which thou hast so hardly dealt with Ariodant and his people)
is publique, touching all good Christians, of which number
I am one, and for euer will be: so by consequence it appertaineth
to mee, inciting mee to wreake reuenge, for the
iniurie doone to my confederates, that are of selfe same religion
as I am, against all that are of the contrarye and aduersarie
faith. Because then thou hast nothing else now to
do, prouide thée, presently to the combate with me, if thou be
so desirous as thou hast expressed: for thou séest I haue reason
to assaile thée, and for whatsoeuer else I haue doone beside.
Hauing thus spoken, it happened as ye shall read hereafter,
for now we are to speake of other matters.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 14.
               
                  Of the warre betweene the Christians and the Pagans
that had layde siege before the famous Cittie of
London. And howe king Angrafolt, prisoner to
king Floridamant, became enamoured of the princesse
Polydamie. And how many sundry sortes of
nations, came by heapes to the Pagans Campe for
theyr succour.
               
               
                  IN this place, the Authour of this Historie
discontinueth a while, from speaking
of the heroycall gestes and déeds of the
knight Gerileon, to take the discourse againe
heeretofore begun, touching the
cruell and bloodie warre betwéene the
Christians and Pagans, that held siedge
before the proud and famous Cittie of London: ensuing vpon
that you haue read in the former part of this Booke,
where alreadie hath beene told yee, how the hote and fierce
assault against the Cittie, vnder the conduct of furious Angrafolt
was ended.
               Now remaineth to acquaint ye, with what happened after
the Pagans were chased thence, sustaining so great losse
and slaughter of their men, beside their cheefe heads and
conducters Angrafolt and Mycophon beeing taken prisoners,
then thus we procéed. The night after this meruaylous
assault against the good and vertuous king Floridamant,
dooing a déed becomming a king that feared God and
looued his people, as euery prince that is called to so high
dignitie ought doo, séeing and knowing, how without helpe
of the celestiall bountie, he was in most great danger of totall
ruine, (which had béene no small hurt to all Christendome)

also that as yet he had some aduantage of his enemies,
hauing subiected one of the principall heads to his
will, and an other of the best knights in all their troope:
he would not now shew himselfe slothfull, but perfourme
the act of a good Christian, by yéelding thanks and prayses
to God, with intreatance to continue towards him and his
people, these fauourable effects of his almightie goodnes,
cheefely in a quarrell so iust and equitable, as was the cause
of this seuere and outragious warre.
               To this end, the same night that eche was retired from
the fight, hee commanded the belles in all the Churches of
the Cittie to be 
                     •
                  noled, to assemble and call together all his
people, from the highest to the lowest that had knowledge of
God: willing them to render dutifull thanks to God, praying
that in mercie he would assist them, against his vnbeléeuing
enemies who would not acknowledge him: which euery
one did very deuoutly, and there was no holye place
thorowout the Cittie, where lampes, torches, and tapers,
were lighted, but the people flocked thither in exceeding
number. And for this purpose, the aforenamed places were
persumed with incense and Aromaticall odours, beside the
musicall and mellodious voyces of Priests, Moonkes, singing
children, and other seruants of God, who with hearts
full of heauenly deuotion, sung Canticles of prayse, with
prayers agréeable and pleasing to God. Continuing thus
well néere all the night, such as were more apte for warre,
sayled not to be on the walles in their glittering Armour,
to impeach the enemie, that hee should presume so prowdlye
as the daye before hee had doone: in which time, they that
were in guarde and kept the night watche, went to thanke
God, and afterwards to their rest.
               
                  Angrafolt, whome king Floridament had taken prisoner,
séeing all these things, admired the meruaylous foresight
of the king, the industrie, care and vigilance he vsed, for preparation
of the Citties defence and people: when well hee

perceiued, that many of the Pagans should loose theyr liues,
before they could vanquish the people beloued of God: but
beyond all other things, he was astonned at the sight of the
faire Infant Polydamie, who by commaundement of the
king her father, entertayned him beningly, and shewed him
good countenance: because the king had determined to intreat
and vse him with such contentment, as the force of his
kindnes and benignitie, might mollifie the hard crueltie of
his enemies. And so making them (against their nature) soft
and gentle, they might bee induced to vse humanitie & courtesie,
to foure worthie Christian knights, Accial of Surrie,
Ramelin of Uuich, Melchior or Ireland, and Frangard Countie
of Durford, whom the Giant Brisard and Rongemont
had taken prisoners in combatting. For this cause he perswaded
Angrafolt, to write vnto king Grandowin his father,
to vse those foure hardy knights so kindly as might be:
which he did, fearing if they misdealt with the Christians,
by ouer sharpe or inhumaine seueritie, like rigour would
be vsed towards him, and he should be as cruelly tormented.
Heere vpon the Pagans did not put them to death, as otherwise
they would haue doone, for the liues of these foure valiant
knights was desired of king Floridamant, more then
the death of fiue hundred of his enemies, considering the
present necessitie he was in.
               And although Angrafolt (before his taking) was abooue
all other a fierce and cruell aduersarie against him, yet now
hee was so ouercome by the courtesie and kindnesse of the
king vsed toward him: as more gladly would he continue
in this prisonment, then returne againe to his companions,
for in such sorte was hee arrested by the fayre Infants
beautie, which in his eye excelled all other hee had séene before,
as made him more desirous to abide in this fayre prison:
so that when libertie was offered him, hee had no will
to forgoe this swéet seruitude. For yee must vnderstand,
that beyond her naturall perfection, which was no lesse absolute

then I haue tolde yee: shee was adorned with such
sumptuous garments, iewels and other trickes of embellishment,
as like stately princesses are accustomed to weare,
that the barbarous king feeling himselfe altogether surprised
with her loue, desired nothing more, then dayly to liue in
contemplation of her good graces: and albeit thereby he receiued
some pleasure and contentment, yet was it a gréefe
and martirdome to him to enioy nothing else, his amourous
conceit being vnable to compasse any other effect, then this
vaine imagination and fantasticall contemplation, so lying
figured in his hart. And if by chaunce he dreamed on some
little shew of hope, that perswaded him he should enioy the
pleasant skirmishes of loue: yet presently againe was hee
kild and discomforted: not vnlike the angrie and arrogant
boot-haling Pirate, that was w
                     •
                  nte to tyrannize and triumphe
ouer poorer théeues then himselfe, seeing he is (for
some offence by him committed) bound fast by the leg with
a chaine, blames the houre of his birth, exclaming on God
and his iustice, without any feare or regarde of his supreme
greatnesse.
               Euen so was this proud Pagan tormented, and in his
torment oftentimes to himselfe, hee imagined some subtill
and detestable meane, whereby he might rauish the young
and tender princesse, or forcibly carrie her awaye: When
shee (good Ladye) without any thought of euill or mallice,
vsed him most gratiouslie and courteous, euermore shewing
him freendly and smilying countenances, and (according
as the king her father had giuen in charge) would manie
and sundrie tymes, entertayne him with honest talke
and familiare conference: which more and more serued to
prouoke forward his loue, and from milde amourous conceit
to make him more violent, inducing this cruell enemie
to an euill and pernicious intent, such as heereafter ye
shall knowe more of. For in this Chapter I must tell yee
what chaunced (meane while) in the enemyes Campe.

whether safely were retyred (as yee haue read in the first
booke) the king Guittard of Baccaleos and the Carybes, who
had beene in the thickest of the hurlie burlie: and not a little
offended were they, to be thus shamefully driuen and repulsed
from their enterprise.
               It is necessarie then that wee consider, howe almightie
God dooth sometime send afflictions on the good, to make
tryall of theyr perseuerance in well doing, supporting with
pacience the aduersities wherewith they are exercised: so it
séemed now, that he would permit the Pagans of all countreys
farre and neere, to assemble together with their inexpugnable
forces, to peruert and ruinate altogether the
estate of Christendome, whereof the kingdome of England
was the great and strongest colour. For the day after this
meruaylous assault, there arriued in the enemies campe for
theyr helpe and succour, a great multitude of theyr allyes
and confederates, such as had vowed with them the euersion
and totall ruine of Christendome. Among others there
came a Captaine sent by the king of the Turkes, named
Grimoaldo, a man hardie and valiant of person: who conducted
vnder his Ensignes fiftie thousand braue fighting
men, and in goode quipage. Hee with his troope was welcommed
and receiued by the heads of the Pagan armie, especially
of the old king Grandowin, who feasted and entertained
him in the best manner he could deuise, for hee kn
                     •
                  w
well, that this Grimoaldo was a man of marke, as skilfull
in feates of armes as any in all the host. He caused him to
he lodged in the reregard of his Campe, whereof he was the
head and gouernour, and this fresh supply made the Heathen
so glad and ioyfull, as nothing was heard among
them but sounding of Tabourines, Trumpets, and other
warlike instruments, expressing no little ioy and pleasure
amongst them, with menaces against them of the Cittie, of
quick discomfiture and extermination.
               This ioy endured a great many dayes together, and as

theyr succour encreased, so did theyr iouissance, for beside
this Turkish Captaine, there came a puissant and meruaylous
Pagan, of monstrous forme and Gi
                     •
                  ntine stature, a
proud monster, mutinous, and a mightie drinker. He had
thrée heads or faces vppon on neck that supported them all,
and when he entred the Campe, he wore a massie Crowne
of golde, triple fourmed according to his heads: the crownes
were made high like the Turrets of a strong Tower, and
vnderneath was written this verse.
               I am Triphon, the great and puissant king of Scythia,
               The most valiant and strongest, in combate I conquer.
               This arrogant and proud subscription was no leasing, for
he was so strong and puissant, as himselfe was able to foile
a whole Armie: and therefore to this assembly he brought
with him but ten thousand combattants, with whome hee
thought himselfe sufficient to subiugate all Christendome.
And the cause why he 
                     •
                  are these thrée crownes, was not in
respect of his thrée faces so combine together: but because he
was king of thrée kingdomes, and held thrée cruell kinde of
people vnder his obe
                     •
                  sance, to wit the Ge
                        •
                     es, the Seythians,
and the Sarmates or Sauromates. He shewed in the middest
of his troope, as a great high Pine trée in the midst of a little
wood, where the braunches beeing but young and tender,
do begin to spread: for beside his vnmeasurable 
                     ••
                  ature,
he was mounted on a furious bull of excéeding height, more
prompt and apt to beare a saddle, run and carrire, then any
horsse that was to be found in the world, as fit was he likewise
eyther for the ioust or combate: because if the Pagan
seated on his backe ouerthrew his aduersarie, the bull immediatly
with his hornes would beate downe the horsse,
whereon the knight that fought against him was mounted.
In this manner, enuir
                     •
                  ned with his men, e
                     ••
                  red hee the
Pagans campe, many of them being surprized with meruailous

feare, to sée him of such a terrible aspect and furious

                     •
                  orme.
               The other that were of better spirite and courage, knew
well, that his arriuall would bee greatly succourable to
them, because his force and valiancie was vnspeakable and
inuincible, farre beyond any other humaine strength. And
he that ioyed most to sée him, was the arrogant and fierce
Brandissant, who sent for him, and at his request he came: for
they two had long before beene companyons together, in
many robberies and cruelties by them doone ioyntly, and
by their association, forcibly, violently and thorow tiranny,
they had gotten kingdomes, many rich booties and heritages,
which they deuided betwéene them as brethren, that
parte the common herritage of their Father when hee is
deceased.
               So by reason of the wunted familiaritie and acquaintance
that the one of them had with the other, they vsed
many sundrie ceremoniall embracings to each other, being
glad they had so fortunately met in this place, where they
assured themselues of the pillage and spoyle, of the famous
and wealthie Cittie of London, beside the rich treasure of
king Floridamant, after they had vsed towards him and his
people, the like or more bloodier crueltie, then euer the
Grecians in times past did shew to Pryam and his warlike
Troyans.
               And surely this good Christian king was verye sad and
sorowfull in his heart, seeing himselfe so weake against
such a puissant armie, wherein were so many hardie and
strong knightes, as but fewe like them could bee founde
through the whole world, and aboue all the rest this monster
of Scythia was most redoubted, in that he was most to
be feared for his force and crueltie: yet notwithstanding,
putting his trust in God, the walles of his cittie beeing
strong and well appointed, hee was pacient in this perill,
expressing meruaylous hardinesse in his countenance, encouraging

his people with fayre speeches and exhortations,
that by their generous actes and behauiour, they should be
vigilant and carefull for the defence of the cittie, giuing
them to vnderstand by woorthie examples, how religiously
euery subiect stood bound to their king and countrie in that
behalfe.
               The enemyes on the contrarie side (for the reasons alreadie
declared) were so merrie and io
                     ••
                  nd, as through
their campe was nothing but songs of ioye and pleasure,
dronken pastimes, beastly gourmandisings, and such like
insolencies: for beside the succour before rehearsed, came
to the Pagan hoste two strong and puissant kings from the
coast of Barbarie, the one named Phoas king of Alger, and
the other Orontes king of Marocco, both co
                     •
                  sens germaine,
and kinne in the same degree to Adylas king of Thunis, and
to the king of Phez whom we spake of before, beeing of no
lesse force and valour then those two. Withall they brought
in theyr companie a great multitude of armed men, good
archers bearing Persian Bowes and arrowes, with poysonned
heads, the number of theyr men was fortie thousand.
               By these meanes it seemed, that God being angrie and
displeased with his people, would now thorowly scourge
them, suffering in so short time, such a mightie power of enemies
to be assembled: whereof heere I purpose to speake
no more, but in the following Chapter you shall heare
what happened.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 15.
               
                  How the Pagans reioysing for the succour, that thus
came daylye to them from all partes: the prisoner
Angrafolt had minde of nothing, but the looue of
the fayre Princesse Polydamie. In meane while, the
olde Grandowin assembled his councell of sixteene
puissant kings, who concluded on an vniust
resolution: whereof king Floridamant made no
account, but minded to defend himselfe, and withstand
the furious assaultes of his enemies. And
howe hee heard tidings of helpe from Spaine and
Fraunce.
               
               
                  ALl the Pagan Arm
                     •
                  e being in this ioy and
metriment, for the newe supplyes that
came to them, as before yee haue heard,
some hoping to loade themselues with
rich bootles and pillage, others in the destruction
of the Englishe Citties and
townes, which gréedie desire made them
to vndertake this warre, and this they would obtaine, or
die in pursuite thereof, (as at this day too many are found
of like disposition) others incited and enflamed with desire
of honor, but they were very fewe in number to the former
sorte, wishing for spéedie fight with king Floridamants hardie
and valiant knights, the conquest of whom would bring
them immortall reputation, and this desire especially made
them be seene in this warre, because many of their friends
and kindred were slaine in the assault before the Cittie, and
for their deaths they had reason to séeke reuenge: but aboue
the rest, the olde king Grandowin, chéefe of this Armie, the

most ancient and malicious enemie in the troope, appeasing
his conceiued greefe, for the imprisonment and captiuitie
of Angrafolt his eldest sonne: quicklye sent him woord of
these good newes, and how daye by day there came to him
from many places fresh supplyes, whereof if I should héere
make report, it would require a very large discourse: neuerthelesse,
in running thorow the progresse of these affayres
and state of this warre, he may gather some, breefe perticularitie
heereafter. And to admit comparison, not Alexander,
Darius, Xerxes, no not the Romaines, nor the Greekes
before Troye, assembled so many fighting men together at
one instant, as now was before the Cittie of London: so that
according to generall oppinion, especially of the besteged, it
was held for certainty, that all the kingdom of great Brittaine
was ruined and lost.
               Of all these things was Angrafolt aduertised, and exhorted
to worke some mean
                     •
                   of secret commotion within the
Cittie, if he could deuise any way whereby to compasse it:
but this two-folde taken prisoner, made full reckoning of
all these newes and aduertisements, his thoughts onely at
some secret cogitation, howe or which way hee might most
commodiouslie steale away the young princesse Polydamie,
or otherwise gaine some amourous iouissance, the onely
medicine for his languishing passions, which continually
maistred his wunted humours: making sometime a courteous
and affable knight contrary to his nature, and sometime
againe so drowned in melancholly, as the sight of any
one but his fayre mistresse offended him. A thing questionlesse
very strange, that he who was such a sauage and cruell
enemie to all humanitie, not to bee conquered by anye
kinde meanes, whose former desires aymed at nothing, but
to sée himselfe in the middest of a battayle, holding his bloodie
Launce or Courtla
                     •
                  e in his hand, burning with enflamed
affection of fighting without measure: should now bee
so subiected to the lookes of a soft and delicate maiden, carying

him dayly (as it were) bound after her, without thinking
eyther on battayle, armour, swoord, shield, horse or

                     〈◊〉
                   his minde was howe to conferre familiarly with
Polydamie, or counting it a cheefe felicitie to bee in sight
of her, for all things else were death to his amourous
desires.
               
                  Grandowin in meane while (being ignorant of this vnexspected
accident) one day called an assembly of his kings and
such as were the chéefe of his armie, to the Pauillion where
councell was accustomed to be holden: to the end they might
deligently deliberate on their present affaires, and by what
meanes they were likeliest to gaine home againe their prisoned
friends. At this councell there met about fiftéene or
sixteene puissant kings, all wearing Crownes, and were
placed according to their auncient honor and degrées. The
first was king Brandissant, next, the puissant Tryphon king
of Scythia, king Tauladas, king Guittard of Baccaleos, king
Marton of Cantabres, king Phoas of Alger, Orontes king of
Marocco, king Grimoaldo, king Pagotroff, king Salazard,
king Kambarell, the strong king Zorlet, Borant king of Carybe,
Maurus king of Bohemia, with the proud and arrogant
king Phorban of Moeotides, a braue Pagan, and a worthie
knight. All these being assembled, to set downe some resolution
touching their busines, after they had long debated on
diuersitie of opinions, such as were seuerally deliuered in
councell: they concluded in the end to write to king Floridamant,
that within three dayes following he should come
vnto them, and bring with him the two prisoners Angrafolt
and Mycrophon, commaunding him to bee guide to the
prisoners himselfe, accompanyed with the best knights
that then were in the Cittie, six in number. Likewise to
bring two hundred of the fayrest maidens, all Uirgins, and
of mariageable yeeres, not excéeding fifteene or sixteen
                     •
                   at
the most, that they might vse theyr pleasure with them. In
meane while, to sende all the riches and treasure, which

both himselfe and his Cittizens had in their most secret cō
                  fers
or cabinets, for search whereof, they would send fiue
hundred of theyr Souldiers into the Cittie: and euer after
it should continue as a yeerely tribute to the chéefe of theyr
Armie, twenty Uirgins of noble familie and exquisit beautie,
beside two Millions of Golde.
               Moreouer, he and his knights should come bare headed,
and without any armour, to aske parden of great king
Grandowin for the death of his sonnes, in reuenge whereof
this warre was commenced: withall, that hee and his
knights should voluntarily submit themselues to his mercie,
that hee might dispose of their liues and goods as seemed
best to him: when peraduenture he would take pittie
on them, not putting them to death so cruelly, nor race the
Cittie, nor murther all the rest of his people, as otherwise
he intended to doo, (if he denied theyr demaund) with such
ruine and desolation, as neuer was mention made of the
like.
               To carrie these newes of this fayre resolution, was immediatly
dispatched a messenger towarde king Floridamant,
to whome the gate of the Cittie was presently opened,
to vnderstand the cause of his comming: and hauing
performed what hee imagined concerning his deuoyre, deliuering
the before named Letters to the king: wherevpon
his maiestie grewe presently into excéeding great anger
and rage: yet cunninglye shaddowing his conceiued displeasure,
hee made no other answere to the messenger,
but that his intent was not to accomplish and performe anie
of those seuerall demaundes, in that they were ouer
iniurious and vnreasonable, and not to bee allowed of in
any wise.
               Beside that (hee said) if his enemies eyther had or
should set downe such a resolution concerning his ruine
and destruction: hee with his councell and Nobles were
concluded to stande on theyr defence, in resistance of the

least euill that might 
                     •
                  e. For the rest, each one should doe
their vttermost endeuour, according as himselfe hither to
had doone, and neuer yet could any enemy compell him to
matters against his will, wherefore it was too late for
him now to begin: and so (quoth he to the messenger) yee
may returne with this answere. Which presently he did,
whereat the Pagans greatly meruayled, that a man hauing
so few to helpe him, should containe such hardinesse, as to
talke to them of resistance: aboue all the rest, old Grandowin
was extreamely e
                     •
                  raged, saying, that this was not the
first act, wherein appeared the effects of king Floridamants
oure-wéening, wherefore he would spéedily take such order
with his people, as should sharpely make him repent his
follie and rashnesse.
               Wherevppon, within thrée daies following at the most,
each one should prepare himselfe readie to armes, when
such an assault should be made against the cittie, as not one
stone should be left standing vppon another, but bee rased
and extermined altogether. In regard whereof, euery one
should withdraw himselfe to his quarter, and giue order for
all things needfull against the day of assault. Heereof the
Christian king being aduertised, commaunded the Pagan
Mycrophon to bee closely locked vp, to the end that during
this troublesome time, hee might compasse no meane of
working any treacherie or treason. But as for the king of
Corse, hee restrayned not him of libertie, which hee had to
walke within the walles of the Pallace royall, where was
roome sufficient and verye spacious: well perceiuing that
he was so carryed away with the loue of his daughter, with
whom and the Queene Bellizene he still kept company, assuring
them, that he would expose himselfe rather for theyr
defence then offence: and in respect of the conuersation he
had had with them, no iniurie should bee offered to theyr
honor.
               In which spéeches the Queene reposing some confidence,

but the mayden especially: the more willingly they would
conuerse with him, and among other familiar conferences,
the Quéene made him recount the number of straunge nations,
the diuersitie of kings and great captaines that were
in theyr Armie, their estate, forces and deedes of chiua
                     •
                  rie,
by them in former times performed▪ By which reports they
cunningly gleaned from this imprudent Pagan, what best
might serue for the defence of the Cittie, and thorow ouermuch
talke, he discouered how, on which side, and by what
secret meanes, the enemyes had concluded to assaile and
seaze on the Cittie: withall hee declared to them, the manner
and custome that those nations were wunt to obserue
and vse in such warre, which was most likelyest, and
which not.
               By these meanes king Floridamant had knowledge of
many things, that serued as speciall rules of discipline to
his Court of guard, and therfore appointed his men in readines
against the threatned daye: continually trauayling
day and night with Grandilaor, Fertand, Candior, Sylban, and
other hardie knights of name that were in the Cittie with
him, who (according to his commaund) busied themselues
very carefully, letting nothing flip that any way concerned
theyr change. During which time, one night secretly arriued
at the Cittie wall, the two valiant knights, Andregon
Duke of Suffolke, and Lampridion Countie of Norffolke,
both Cosens germaine, and highly belooued of king Floridamant.
The first came from demaunding helpe for the
Christians, of Dorian king of Spayne, and the other from
the like affaires in the kingdome of Gaule, whether they
were sent, before the Pagan armie had engirt the Cittie
with siedge, and both returning at one selfe same time, after
many aduentures befalling them in the expedition of theyr
voyages, met together on the way, and so trauailing in company,
arriued there about the houre of midnight, not being
espyed by any of the enemies Campe, who then were in

their dead sleepe, and comming to the foote of the wall, on
that side, where the king of the Suitzers had charge, and
where as then a good Cittizens was Sentinell one of the richest
and best Souldiours of the Cittie, being called Hoaster,
that knew them very well, because he had familiarlie
frequented the houses of these two Christian knights, and
and they well perceiuing, that Hoaster knew them by their
spéech, sent presently woord of their arriuall to king Floridamant,
who caused the neerest gate of the cittie to them to be
opened, when they safely entred, not being at all discouered
by the enemie. Hee that came from Spaine aduertised his
maiestie, how king Dorian vnderstanding his war against
the Pagans, concluded immediatly to come himselfe in person,
attended on by a strong and puissant armie, to assist
king Floridamant his old companion, and the christian people
that inhabited great Brittaine: for which cause he summoned
a méeting of his subiects, promising to be in England
in very short time. These tidings brought Andregon, and
Lamprydion deliuered the like from king Belligand of Gaule
how forward hee was in deuoire to send him succour, his
armie being leueyed and readie to depart, and had 
                     •
                  re then
set forward, but that the king daylye expected the Prince
Diodamas his sonne, a man of great valour, who had not
long before receiued his order of knighthood: being gon in
quest of an other knight, that had in his keeping a Fayrie
Launce, where of hee had robd the king his father, which
Launce hee heard was againe recouered by the young
prince, and he returning home ward, when being come, hee
should away to England with the armie. For these glad
tidings king Floridamant thanked God, trusting in him
and to the speeding supplie each houre expected: resoluing
to defend himselfe if he should be assayled, without any issuing
foorth to the enemie, neither to sight, except he should be
enforced there vnto, vntill these Armies were ioyned with
him. Attending which time, he thought good to prolong

day of the assault, kéeping their enemies in breath, and these
affayres in good foresight: which to comp
                     •
                  sse, he thought on
euery likely and expedient remedie, as yee may perceiue in
the Chapters following.
            
            
               CHAP. 16.
               
                  Howe the Princesse Polydamie, beholding from the
height of a Tower, the Campe and countenance of
the Pagans, was shewen by Angrafolt, who were
the cheefe commaunders in so great a multitude.
And the Princesse, seeing the Scythian monster,
swouned with conceit of feare, when Angrafolt
conueyed her thence into the Queenes chamber.
               
               
                  MEane while, to finde some meane of deferring
the generall assault, which the
Pagans in their councell had determined
against the Cittie of London: king
Floridamant consulted with the hardie
knights of his councell, and other noble
personages, that then were in the Cittie
with him to receiue aduise from them, what best might be
doone 
                     •
                  or defence of the Christians against all euents, wanting
honest excuses to delay the day of battaile, and tarri
                     •
                  
for the supplie which was comming. The Pagans on the
other side disposed their men (being many in number) to assayle
the besiedged, forca
                     ••
                  ing all the best wayes and
m
                     •
                  anes for the same that might be possible. And as these affayres
passed on in this sort, the fayre Infant Polydamie being
on the top of a high Tower of the pallace royall, where
she might behold the confused and bad ordered multitude of
enemies: sawe them martching foorth of their pauillions,
which were erected a pretty way off from the 
                     •
                  ittie, that they

might to raine themselues néerer, where the Archers, Crosbowes
and Slings might eastlie reache the towne with
their shaftes and stones: as in those times the Pagan nations
knew how to vse the same, as well in assayling as in
defending, or where they soonest might come to handie
gripes, or make some sudden surprise in the night, whereat
the beautifull maide was greatly abashed. But had they
beene assembled there, to some better purpose then they
were, shee might haue conceiued excéeding pleasure, in beholding
so many goodly Ensignes or Guydons, such riche
gilt glistering armour, so many pikes and launces, so many
braue Captaines well furnished, so many hardie knights
well mounted in equipage, so many Drummes, Fyfes, and
Trumpets, which with warlike noyse chéered vp the souldiers
hearts: as one would haue sayd, seeing the footmen
leape and daunce so merrily, and the horsemen carryre so
brauely, that they rather were prepared for a wedding then
the fight: yet notwithstanding this pleasing sight, she curssed
them in her minde, desiring bet
                     •
                  ter pastime, and more
agreeable to her contentment.
               Continuing in this displeased thought and contemplation,
Angrafolt the king of Corse came vp to hir, hauing long
sought her in many chambers of the Castell, and not finding
her, ye may guesse his greefe by his humor: for he was
so passionate and impatient in his loue, that beeing absent
from the fayre Infants sight, he could enioy no rest, wherfore
finding her by her selfe, after hee had so long sought hir
in euery likely place: iudge yee whether he were pleased or
no, and the Prince
                     ••
                  e contrarywise displeased, to be alone in
such a place, farre from the Queenes company and the other
Ladyes, with such a mightie enemie to hir modestie,
which (as she well knew) bee sought all meanes to attempt:
yet 
                     •
                  éeling himselfe to be a prisoner, fearing likewise to raise
any further offence in his enemies against him, and especially
being ouerruled by the force of loue, which made him so

milde and gentle as I tolde 
                     〈◊〉
                   before, he vsed such rega
                     ••
                   of
the Princesse, as not so much as with a looke or a word, he
would be drawne to vse any force or violence towards her.
Which when the Lady noted, with a benigne and gracious
welcome, wishing him to abandon those melancholly humours,
she intreated him to shew and tell her perticulerly,
who and what were the chéefest leaders in that multitude.
And séeing a chariot 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  edeckt with golde and siluer,
drawne by foure lustie 
                     〈◊〉
                   Coursers brauely caparosonued,
wherein sat an auncient knight, his heard white, and
countenance reuerend, enuiro
                     •
                  ed with a goodly troope of
horssemen, that rode before him along the field, all shewing
dutie to him, and rainging which way hee pleased: she was
desirous to know the estate of this old man, whom first her
eyes had taken view of, wherefore she thus began.
               I pray yee sir knight, if ye beare me such loue as ye haue
made speeche of: tell me truely what this old man is, that
rides in such riche and fayre a Chariot, to sport himselfe along
the Ca
                     •
                  pe. Lady, quoth Angrafolt, I shall willingly tel
yee without fabling, for in obeying your commaund, I
would make no spare of my life, much lesse then deny to satisfie
yee in this. Among these matters of so great importance,
know madame, that this is the puissant king Grandowin
my father, cheefe of all this great multitude of men
by him leuied, in his youth he hath doon
                     •
                   many fayre 
                     〈◊〉
                  
and worthie deedes of memorie, and although (by reason of
his yeares) hee is not as hee hath beene readie in force and
prowesse for the fight: yet is hee so wise and pollitique in
councell, concerning these affyres of warr
                     •
                  , a Prince 
                     〈◊〉
                  
riche, opulent and redoubted withall, as all the Pagan nations
stand in awe of him, respecting onely his 
                     •
                  ommaundem
                     •
                  nt.
All these which you sée heere, are 
                     〈◊〉
                   for his
defence (the renowne of his vertue and 
                     〈◊〉
                   beeing so
spred through the world) are all at his direction, to fight, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
citties, or what else beside, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   are they to learne

                  
                     〈…〉
                   Then tell me sir, quoth she, what is yonder portly
knight of stature, whose countenance appeareth so proud
and arrogant, that with his great blacke Courser fetcheth
such 
                     〈…〉
                   hauing so rich and fayre a plume
of 
                     〈◊〉
                   blew and white in the treast of his Helmet, an
                  
                     •
                  wering
the same in couller that are on his horsses head: his
Beuer being open, makes me coniecture by the small sight
of his face, that hee should bee a man of high resolue, and in
martiall: enterprises a couragious warriour. Beside, if

                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  ye deceiue mee not, hee somewhat resembles your
selfe in countenance, the couller of your haire nothing diffe
                  
                     •
                  ing:
for his armes, as I guesse standing so farre off, hee
beares in his shéeld three bloudie rampant Lions in a field
blewe.
               He
                     •
                   whom yee speake of Madam, answered Angrafolt,
                  
                     •
                  ée
                     •
                  ing to hardie and magnanimous, is my brother Brandissan
                        •
                     ,
a man repleat with wounderfull prowesse, valiant
and readie at armes beyond all the rest of the armie, a riche
and mightie prince hoth in lands and treasure, who in his
tender youth held such warre against his enemies, as ouer
                  
                     •••••
                  ing
and 
                     •
                  anquishing them, he conquered with all sundrie

                     〈◊〉
                   and 
                     〈…〉
                   rich and fertile, well
garnished with people, borne and brought vp to follow the
warres. But he (quoth Polydamie) whom I behold yonde
                     •
                   a
little on the left hand, who priding in the course of his horse,
makes him carrire toward king Brandissant your brother:
he 
                     •
                  eares in his sheeld 
                     •
                  oure Giants, and the figure of a
monster dead or 
                     〈◊〉
                   as I 
                     〈◊〉
                   by the painting, and
there stands a knight 
                     〈◊〉
                   in the conquest: what is
he? and what are those other three that follow in the same
course, all seeming to be of one minde or disposition. They

are (quoth Angrafolt) foure great Pagan princes, the subiects
and seruants to king Brandissant my brother: the first of
them is called Solazard, that beares the monster and the
Giants slaine, as yee perceiue by the painting in his shéeld,
those in times past hee alone vanquished in a foughten
field.
               He is a riche and puissant Lorde, a man of great valour
and addresse at armes, and by reason of his prowesse worthie
estimation: though he were deformed and of monstrous
fashion, as ye might sée if he were vnarmed. The other likewise
that follow, are knights of marke and great reputation,
the one, is king of Niuarie, a riche and opulant kingdome,
that with one Launce, brought to death thirtie Cantabres,
when king Brandissant my brother made warre vpon
them, wherefore at this day he beares them all depainted in
his shéeld, as yee might behold, if the gréene shaddow were
away wherewith it is couered. As for the other two, they
are the valiant Cambarell and Pag
                        •
                     traff, Kings of the Iunonian
Isles, in riches and valour they are not equall to
their two former brethren, but in age onely and nothing
else: and further of in midst of the troupe, where ye sée yond
multitude of goodly pauillions, are their people, tarrying
but when they shall bee ranged in order for the assault: toward
king Grandowin are they now martching, to vnderstand
his aduise and councell, in what place they should assemble,
while the rest of their companie beeing merrily disposed,
fall to such pastimes as martiall men are wunte to
exercise.
               And fronting that troope, yee may behold my six Giants,
which shew so high aboue the other, as stéeples in a cittie ouerpéere
the lowest buildings: and they are prepared (as
they were when I maistred them) to resist a verye puissant
armie. But what is he, quoth the princes, on the right hand,
that rides on the roane Courser, managing a strong launce
vppon his thigh, clad in blacke Armour grauen all ouer

with golde, glittering so brauely as hee rides to an other
troope some what further off.
               You meane he Madame, said Angrafolt, that beares thrée
golden Sunnes in his sheeld, deciphered in a greene field,
and bordered round about with purest golde? He I meane,
answered the Princesse, that talkes with another knight of
like apparaunce, hard by the multitude, mounted on a sorrell
Courser, with a very strong Launce in his hand, and in
his shéeld thrée Leopards heads in a Sable field. It is, replyed
the Corsean prince, the worthie king Tauladas of Canada,
a man woonderfull a
                     ••
                  able and debonaire, albeit no
lesse hardie with swoord or Launce, then anye other in all
the Campe: euen so is he with whome you see him talking▪
the redoubted Barant king of Carybe, they both being come
to associate this warre, rather for proofe of man to man in
combate, (against king Floridamant your father, the fame
of whose renowmed vertues called them hither) then any
desire to doo him hurt or damage: but true it is, that to fortifie
our Campe, they haue brought with them from theyr
countries and kingdomes, great store of armed men and
well appointed. I am much deceiued, sayd the princesse, if he
whom I see standing with his face toward vs, bee n
                     •
                  t some
Pagan king of great name▪ he I meane, that now marcheth

                     〈…〉
                  , all bearing Ensignes
or Guydons of diuers coullers in their hands, and he riding
somewhat aloof
                     •
                   before them, on a horsse more whyte then
any Swanne, harnessed with 
                     ••
                  mosin veluit, the 
                     ••
                  uddes
and buckles of perfect golde: and if mine eyes fayl me not,
he 
                     〈◊〉
                   three 
                     〈…〉
                   sheeld, and those I
take to be his armes.
               Madame, answered the Pagan, I did not well note his
countenance, beacuse he suddenly turned back toward his

                     〈…〉
                   but if hee beare such arms as
you speake of it 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  Marton, king of Biscay
or 
                     〈…〉
                   (among other things) to

conduct men of warre on the Seas, where in our 
                     •
                  omming
hith
                     •
                  r hee was cheefe leader of all our Armie, hauing the
whole gouernment and charge thereof, by reason of the
great valour abiding in him, and long experience in manie
affayres: they that follow him are all knights of esteeme,
whose charge is to manage the Ensignes and Standards
in the ships.
               I haue not yet séene, sayd the Princesse Polydamie, two
more braue and comely knights, then these two that ryde
hitherward, ech on a black Stéed, marked alike with white
in their foreheads, their backs and legges richly harnessed
with greene veluet: one of them beares two Collomes in
his sheeld, figured in an Azure field: the other a flourishing
braunche of Roses, carrying theyr liuely Roses in a golden
field, and each hath in his hand a Iaueling pointed with
golde, and garnished with siluer studdes: theyr horsses trot
alike, both of one 
                     〈◊〉
                   and height, I am 
                     〈◊〉
                   they
are none of the m
                     •
                  anest in your companie, I pray ye sir tell
me what they are. These two (Madame) are arriued heere
since I was taken, but as I haue heard by messages from
my noble father, they are the two princes Orentes and Phoas,
the one king of Marocco, the other of Alger, two neighbouring
kingdomes on the coast of Barbarie, abounding in
riches and treasure, so likewise of their persons they are as
hardie and valiant as any in the world, and as heauie enemies
to the Christians and their religion, the expresse cause
of theyr comming hither, to hurt and destroy them so much
as possiblie they may.
               As the Corsean king held on this speech to the princesse,
the kings Maurus and Phorbon, and betweene them the
monstrous Tryphon king of Scithia, Gotia, Sarmata, and Geta,
came foorth of their pauillions to dorayne theyr people,
and as the young Ladie noted theyr gestures and countenance,
intending to enquirs what they were, c
                     •••
                  ing her
eyes vppon the Scythian Mou
                     ••
                  er, m
                     •
                  unted and 
                     •
                  quipped

in such forme and manner as before I haue tolde yee: shee
was so surprized with feare at the verye sight of him, her
heart beeing tender, daintie and delicate, as giuing a loud
shrike, she fell in a swoune or traunce, which the Pagan king
perceiuing, and dreading some wurs inconuenience would
ensue: he tooke her vp in his armes, and caryed her thence
verye gentlye and modestlie into the Queenes Chamber,
where he declared the occasion of her feare, and continued to
them the discourse of those thrée before named kings: which
the Ladyes heard very attentiuely, and while the Pagan
bethinkes himselfe where to breake off his discourse, heere
thinke I good to conclude this Chapter.
            
            
               CHAP. 17.
               
                  How king Floridamant hauing assembled his Councell, to receiue
aduise from the cheefe of his friends, and well wellers,
concerning what was best to be done in this necessitie:
After he had heard the diuersitie of their oppinions, in the
end hee set downe his rest on the councell of the wise and
aged duke Candior of Normandie.
               
               
                  KIng Floridamant was all this while in
Councell, to be aduised (as I tolde ye in
the former chapter) how hee might best
delay the assault, and by likelye meane
de
                     •
                  erre it, till the expected ayde from
Gaule and Spaine were arriued. In
which councell, there were many of different
and contrarye oppinions, for some thought good to
temporise a while without fighting, vntill they should bee
somewhat stronger, to endure so sharpe and cruell an assault
as the Pagans intended against them; because in very déede
they were ouer-weake, to withstand so fierce a charge as

was like to be offered, for if theyr mishap should be such (as
the issue of fightes and batta
                     •
                  les is most certainlye vncertaine)
to be vanquished, and the Cittie taken in the assault:
the hoped for supply so long attended, were vaine, and would
profit them nothing after theyr death, for hardlye should
they become conquerours after they were conquered, therfore
the counsell of stay was reputed most honest, and without
anye shewe of cowardise of these doubtfull meanes to
chuse one.
               Or else to sende a Letter to the heads and cheefe of the
Pagan Campe that if twelue such knightes as they could
choose in theyr Campe, euen the very brauest, where of they
had great numbeer, (except the mightie king Tryphon of
Scithia) durst enterprise the combate in field enclosed, with
what armes they would, against king Floridamant, and eleuen
such knights as hee would elect for his companie: if in
this combate they happened to be victors, king Floridamant
would obey the decrées and conditions by them before proposed,
satisf
                     •
                  yng whatsoeuer they demaunded by their messenger.
But if the conquest turned to king Floridamant and
his Knights, the Pagans should bee bound to deliuer their
foure vallant prisoners, and depart with bag and baggage,
not offering iniury or displeasure to any Christian. For
assurance of which conuentions, the prisoners on eyther
side should remaine ostages, vntill the vanquished had obeyed
to such order as they had thus promised by inuioble
oathe.
               Otherwise they were of opinion, to enforce the Pagan
prisoner write to them, with whom his credit was so great,
and whose losse the king Grandowin greatly feared, because
extreamely he loued his Children: that so soone as they began
to assault the cittie, the Christians were minded cruellie
to put them to death. Others humors were far contrary
héer to, and said, it were more necessary to incite the Corsean
king, to write rather of a treatie of mariage with the kings

daughter, beeing become so amourous of her, as hee could
gladly elect her as his wife: and while they should consider
on this marriage contract, it might bee a meane of peace
with Floridamant, for the cittie were to stand frée from the
least mollestation, vntill he secretly vnderstood his fathers
will, whether it should be a marriage or no, for which season
they might lawfully require a truce or peace: thus feigning
some forwardnes in themselues to this marriage, they
should induce the Pagan to write the more willingly. But
king Floridamant, who had his spirit more vigilant and diligent
about his affayres, and for the conseruation of his
honor: reputed these opinions (of the king Grandilaor and
Ferrand, with the princes Andregor and Lampridion, who
had thus conferred together) to be very straunge and farre
from reason: wherefore he addressed himselfe to graue olde
Candior of Normandie, desirous to vnderstand if he were so
minded or no, whereto the Duke thus answered.
               My Lord, I haue euer esteemed and accounted the kings
Ferrand and Grandilaor, as also the Duke of Suffolke and
Countie of Nor
                     ••
                  olke, to be hardy and couragious knights,
aboue all in your court, theyr deedes haue beene verye generous,
and full of high chiualrie, as by very honourable effects
they haue beene manifested to me: but I tell yee boldlie
in their presence (seeing it is your pleasure) without any
flutterie, that 
                     〈◊〉
                   I had not good and certaine knowledge of
them, yea, had not mine eyes seene in many encounters, the
vndoubted proofe of their valour and vertue: hearing them
of such opinion in these affayres, questionles I should think
them other then they are, or else dreading doubt of the danger
wherein we now are, hath made them vse these tearms
of feare, 
                     •
                  ather to the losse of your estate, so many good cittizens,
women and young children as are in this cittie, then
any hazard of their owne persons. Therefore whatsouer

                     〈◊〉
                   thereon, I may not follow their aduise, for many reasons
and considerations, which if it please you, and all the

assistants, to listen with fauourable eares, I will describe
vnto ye. In the first place, if we should write to our enemies
and defie certaine of them in combate against like number
of ours: they presently would conceiue opinion, that all our
strength and valour consisted in the hardinesse of a doozen
men, which might be easie for them to discomfite, and no other
hope remaineth now for vs, where as yet hither to they
haue beene of a farre contrary minde. For howsoeuer readie
they bee to assayle vs, they imagine vs to bee a greater
number then we are, as ye may gather by so many likelyhoods
lately seene, disposing their campe into so many and
sundrie places, all to hinder our issuing foorth vppon them
by day or night: the rest in farre fewer number, are ranged
into foure direct places, where best they may make their assault.
Farre better it is for vs it should bee so, then otherwise,
because if all were prepared to assayle vs, wee should
finde our selues more seuerely 
                     〈◊〉
                  , then we can do by the
order that is nowe disposed: and this will fall out for certaine,
if we write to our enemies as these good Lords haue
aduised.
               Secondly, whereas we would combate, as it is thought
méet to be demaunded, or else we will do or can do nothing:
if we be so desirous of the combate, twelue against twelue,
we shall bring our selues into very great hazard. For it is
necessary to consider, as euer more in taking things at the

                     〈◊〉
                  , that be it wee gaine or we loose the battaile, we shall
be sure euery way to loose: because in a case of victorie, we
can take no assurance of our enemies 
                     •
                  aith, they hauing
none at all. Nor are we anyio
                     •
                  e to trust the 
                     〈◊〉
                   prisoners,
which wee haue in our custodye, by reason they haue
more of ours, whome we prize and esteeme more them they
doo or can doo theyr
                     •
                  . Beside, they haue among them diuers
nations of contrary
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , some of them (against the
will of the 
                     〈◊〉
                  ) may 
                     〈◊〉
                   vppon our twelue knights, and
murther them, if they bee not miraculously preserued from

so great daunger: and which is more▪ what likelihood can
be gathered, that twelue men, the cheefe and head of a sufficient
great and puissant armie, should go foorth to hazard the
liues and libertie of so many persons? where being vnited
together within the Cittie, and fenced round about with
strong walles, me thinkes, that although all the Pagans in
the world were héere assembled to enforce vs, yet should it
be impossible for them. And before they can get entrie, their
siedge will be longer then that of Troye was, but we must
make no issue out vpon them, neither wil we any way condiscend
to this combate: for it were but a faint harted trick,
if they should take vs at our woord, and we our selues afterward
glad to refuse it, this for euer will redounde to our
great shame and dishonour, which we should rather flie then
the losse of our liues. Nowe for constraining the Pagan
prisoner to write any thing thereby to respite and delay the
assault, I mislike that more then the other, because wee
ought not vse any force or violence against a prisoner, vrging
him to write any matter whatsoeuer, that may be preiudiciall
to him or his: least that our enemies who are
Pagans, and in whome yet neuer appeared any sparke of
loyaltie or fidelitie (as well we knowe) should intend some
thing against our prisoner, both hurtful vnto them and vs,
and I am of opinion, that if vnbeléeuing men containe such
good thoughts, as to vse kindnes and benignitie towarde
their enemies, the like or more ought appeare in them that
professe faith and loyaltie. Wee then that follow the right
path of a farre better religion, should thinke on no fraude
or trumperie whatsoeuer, and much lesse in time of a kinde
intreaty, as we promise to our prisoned enemie, vnder hope
whereof, they whom our enemies detaine of ours, may receiue
such fauour from them, as they shall not be compelled
to doo any thing hurtfull to themselues. Let vs not then
constraine him to any thing against his will, much lesse let
vs speake or once open our mouthes concerning any marriage,

in that it will seeme a matter incredible to our enemies
that against the lawes of our religion, wee would permit
the marriage of a Pagan with a Christian: this were but
to make them veryly beléeue, that we would altogether forsake
our God, and the con
                     •
                  idence we haue hitherto reposed
in him, to worship with them their false gods, Iupiter, Mahomet,
Mercurie, Phoebus, and such like idols as they reuerence
as things celestiall, so altogether to take their parte:
whereas we ought not shew them the least attaint of our
thoughts, but firmely to stand on our strong faithfull foundation
toward God, who euermore hitherto hath maintained
and preserued vs, by his exceeding mercie and inuincible
dower. And still in his goodnes we ought to resolue
with our selues, that all the Bethulians were in times past
deliuered, from the miserable and cruell siedge of cruell
Holofernes, onely by power diuine, that for their deliuerance
raised vp a woman, who by vndauntable stomach cut off the
head of their chéefest enemie: we by the like or greater miracle,
by his supreame and diuine grace shall be deliuered
from our proud enemy: for whose destruction if our strength
be two feeble, or in any sort wanteth, hee can by his will, if
we firmely trust in him, make flye on them againe, eyther
the Sword of Gedeon or Aioth, or else an other Iudeth, to
ouerthrow and exterminate theyr dayes altogether, so to
preserue and deliuer them that abide in faithfull obedience
and trust, continuing theyr firme hope and assurance onely
in him.
               We sée by many holy and sacred misteries and examples
wherewith the diuine and holy Scriptures are plentifully
stored and furnished from how many euils and mischiefes
he deliuered, and miraculouslie preferued the Children of
Isaack and Israell, that trusted in his goodnesse and mercie,
and did with hearts full of deuotion and penitence, call for
his helpe and succour in theyr calamities and afflictions:
let vs then altogether trust & hope in him, beleeuing that he

is at this present, euer hath beene, and for euer will bee, as
gracious and mightie as then hee was, and in this hope let
vs take paine, valiantlye and couragionslie to defend our
selues: for if we had this resolution in vs, though we were
as men without hart or power, I am perswaded that fiue
hundred of vs, shall suffise to impeache the entrance of our
enemie, were they as many more in number as they are,
and so attend the arriuall of our hoped succour, albeit they
should tarry a moneth yet longer in comming, when he had
concluded in this sorte, the wise and vertuous king Floridamant,
seeing by 
                     •
                  xteriour demonstration, that the greater
part of the assistants, approoued and highly praysed the good
councell of the val
                     •
                  ant olde Candior Duke of Normandie:
fastened on his words, and thus began himselfe.
               My good friends and faithfull companions, if in this aduers
                     •
                  tie
(which hath not béene common with you or mee) I
haue some cause of greefe, to sée my selfe in extreame danger
of loosing my estate and Crowne, which my predecessours
by their prudence and vertue, so long time happilie
preserued in all flourishing ioy and prosperitie: yet withall
I haue now great reason to comfort my selfe, séeing so manie
vertuous and valiant persons embarqued in the same
ship, readie to run in like daunger of fortune with me, who
not onely by effects of their prowesse and valour lets mee
apparantly behold, what good will they beare to the conseruation
of the christian weale publique: but likewise do trauaile
by their aduise and councell, to acquaint both mine
eyes and certaine experience, with what zeale and affection
they embrace the conduct of mine estate, and howe forward
they are for the preseruation of all Christendome, which
would bee meruaylously shaken, if this wofull distressed
kingdome (at this instant the most flourishing estate of all,
where the name of Iesus Christ is knowne, honored and
glorified) should fall as a praye to the enemie, that séeke to
take and vtterly ruinate it. For which I ought chéefely to

thanke my God, as vnfaynedly I doo, that he hath not altogether
forsaken mee in this calamitie and miserie: but not
onely hath prouided me of such valiant knights and warriours
as you all are, but withall hath lent me men so skilfull
and aduised. It séemeth then good to me, that according to
the discréet councell of Duke Candior of Normandie, that
we should not séeke to delay, but patiently endure the enemies
assault, when they shall againe with their great number
giue the attempt, and without any shew of feare eyther
without or within the Cittie, carrie no regard of our liues
or goods, but imploye our selues together manfully, to defend
so iust a quarrell as this for which we fight. And let vs
so behaue our selues, that our enemies may know, how the
Lord God that assisteth vs, and can (if hee please) take our
ca
                     •
                  se in hand, is onely mightie, and will by vs deliuer such
testimonie of fortitude to the worlde, as neither is in their
power, or the false idolatrous Gods which they worship, to
doo, in vaine then shall they thinke to feare vs, or worke
such ruine to vs as they intended. In this deliberation each
of you take courage, and he assured, that whosoe
                     •
                  dr dyeth
in hardie tryall of this fight, it shall bee a perpetuall honor
to him in this world, and a glorious life to him in the endlesse
world, where he shall triumphe of the fayrest victorie.
Neuertheles, I doo not reiect the good councell and aduise
of the king Ferrand, Grandilaor, and others agréeing with
them whereto if we sée vrgent necessitie constraine vs, wee
may vse them as we find cause, to vphold our selues on our
feete what euer betide vs: marie yet we must not so slightlie
condiscend thereto, without further feeling of our enemies
force, then as yet we haue, without any great disaduantage.
Hauing thus sayd, ech commended and agréed on
this resolution, and so rysing from councell, they went to
prepare to withstand the assault, as héereafter ye shall read,
because we must héere conclude this chapter.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 18.
               
                  How the Pagans prepared themselues to the assault, and how
the besieged Christians endeuoured to the contrarie, in such
sorte as they withstood it valiantly. How many braue bickerings
passed betweene them, compelling the Infidels (after
a great slaughter, and on needfull occasion) to withdrawe
themselues toward their Campe and Pauillions.
               
               
                  WHen the Christian Princes departed
from Councell, it was almost night, and
hauing a lighted Torche before him, as
is the manner in the Realme of England,
the chéefe and most noble Lordes
went to the Pallace royall, to take theyr
repast in companie of their king, who
feasted and entertayned them very magnificently, the better
to encourage them in their deu
                     •
                  ire. After supper was
ended, the guarde and watch was orderly placed, each one
of the inhabitants thus resoluing, rather to die the death,
then turne their backes on their enemies, or forsake the
walles, which they manned and fortified very strongly, expressing
iuuincible and neuer quayling courage. The princes
were there in person, and hauing in the night made
sundrie roundes about the Cittie, to see if any thing wanted
in any place: they found all well and in good disposition,
through the carefull dilligence of the Captains by them
appointed, and according as the king had commaunded for
conduct of the footmen. This doone, they departed for a
while to the pallace againe, that they might take a little
rest, because they had beene so ouertrauailed the dayes before.
Not three houres or thereabout had they slumbringly
slept, but they heard a great rumour and noyse thorow all
the Cittie, the cause whereof was, in respect the enemies

had sounded their drums and trumpets, giuing an allarme
to the inhabitants: wherevpon king Floridamant arose
immediatly, and all the Christian kings and Princes that
bare him companye, who betooke themselues as the king
had appointed, to the rampiers and contremures seuerally
prouided, to withstand this first and sudden assault of the
Pagans. And as each one was come to his place of charge,
they found the enemies alreadie verye busie, against foure
places of the Cittie at once, with their Trepans, Rammes,
Bricolles, Scorpions, Crowes, with other such like engines
and instruments for warre, wherewith in those times they
vsed to breake and beat downe the walles of Citties, they
saw withall▪ that they had erected theyr high terrasses and
platformes that commaunded ouer the Cittie, and on the
principall of these Fortes, they had builded certaine bastils
or houses of wood, wherein were placed great store of Archers
and crossebows, who standing with assurance against
the enemie, might greatly iniurie such as attempted to impeache
the escalade, appointed in these places and for this
purpose. For this cause likewise, they commanded their Elephants
to be brought neere the wals, to the number of two
or three hundred, carrying little castles of wood vpon theyr
backs, wherein also were a number of Pagan Archers hid.
Beside, many were appointed with Torches and burning
firebrands against the gates of the cittie, where they layde
store of pitch barrels, to make the fire the sooner do his office
when the gates being burnt downe, they entered in great
number the citty, while the christians was busied to defend
the breach or scaling of the wals: when king Floridamant &
his hardie knights had notice 
                     •
                  éereof, with all spéed they haste
                     •
                  ed
thither, where séeing how they laboured against the
high bulwarks of earth, with their pioners they made new
fortifications vpon them, casting such déepe trenches round
about, as should hold them rougher worke then the wal had
done: for the trenche was made with speciall good soldiours

                  
                     〈1 page〉
                  
                  
the number of thrée or foure thousand, being armed wyth
pikes and stéeled cuirasses, so worthily stood vpon theyr defence,
as the Pagans, who verily thought they had won the
daie alreadie, were quickly repulsed from that bridge, for
king Grandilaor, Andregon and Lampridion, who were
appointed to kéep that quarter with their companies, droue
them so furiously ouer the false rouered déepe trenches, as
at this first onset fell therein wounded, slaine and spoyled,
fouretéene or fiftéene hundred Pagans together, that were
striuing, who should be formost before his fellow. Whereat
the f
                     •
                  erce & proud Brandissant chafed out of measure, when
being followed by the foure Pagan kings his vassalls, all
armed in most goodly glittering armour, each hauing in his
hand a mightie mase, garnished with sharpe stéele pointes
round about: they laid vpon the Christians so outragiously,
as the port of the bulwarke (where into the greater part ran
for safetie of their liues) being too straight to let them in so
fast as they came, there were presently slaine out-right in
this brunt more then fiue hundred men. Brandissant pressing
still on, by chance met with the Citizen Hoaster, who
had charge of a braue armed troup in the citie, and such was
his vnconquerable courage, as hee woulde resist this bloudthirstie
pagan: but he receiued such a stroke on the creast of
his morion, where stood a faire plume of snowie white feathers,
as pearcing quite through the harnes into the brains
there this worthie citizen yéelded vp his soule to God: which
when his sonne behold, the sole heire of a meruailous wealthie
patrimonie, which his father had heaped together for
him, beeing a valiaunt young man and of towardly hope, he
was ouercome with such extreame rage and despight, as in
the heate of his 
                     •
                  urie (not dreading the force of this stout pagan)
he ranne vpon him to reuenge the death of his father,
and hauing his sword drawen in his hand, he deliuered such
a stroke at the pagan, as (but for the goodnes of his shielde)
had deeply wounded him, for the swords point brake of with

out anie further harme to his enemie, but the Pagan making
no account of the blow, thought in scorne to passe by
him, and meddle no more with him, whereat the yong man
called Dondye, was so vexed, as running againe at Brandissant,
he challenged him the combat: when the Pagan entering
into his wonted choler, made him die the same death
his father had done before, and holding on his waie in this
furie, made such hauocke of the Christians, as before hee
wold take a breathing, he slew fiue & twentie or thirtie men
of marke, as braue and hardie as any in that companie. Agaros
a man of authoritie, who before time had lead men in
the warres of the de
                     •
                  eased king Brandismel, was slayne as
he fought verie couragiously; for after hee had killed foure
pagan souldiers hand to hand, himselfe fell downe deade by
the hand of this cruell and bloudie Brandissant, So likewyse
did Taurisque the braue leaper and the good drinker Grinos
albeit he tooke not his drinke well inough that morning, for
which it séemed he was so sorrowfull in dying as he yelded
forth his soule at his mouth, crying for some friend to bring
him his liquor. With them bare companie Anglidor King
Floridamants player on the Lute, and the valiaunt knight
Andron, who somtime had bene his page, with his two brethren
Iumeaux Marcis, and Mausis, goodly young men of the
wealthiest familie of the citie of London, greatly affected to
the good and safetie of the weale publique, and so many beside
of speciall name, as if I shoulde particularly sette them
downe in writing, it would require more time than in this
case is limited me. For if the fierce pagan put ten to death,
his followers apparantly imitated his valour, in murthering
seauen or eight at the least, according as they coulde
possibly reach them. Salazard with his semitarie smote off
the head of Norgal among others, and quickly did the like to
Longaro his cosin, two lustie young men, that were counted
the best Fencers in all the city, but albeit their cunning and

                     •
                  encing made a fine shewe in their masters hall, it little auailed

them against the vnspeakable force of this valyant
pagan, who (with them) sliced through the middest of the bodie.
Aridos the good pilot, hee that in his life time had made
many a voyage on the mediteranean sea, and from one side
to another cutte through the wyde Ocean, to places whereof
the names were neuer knowen. Cambarel cruelly slaughtered
Medion a gallant disposed yong man of the city, whose
father dying not long before left him abounding in goods
and riches, and he beeing at libertie was affianced (for her
beautie and vertue) to the fairest maide in the Citie, albeit
she had no great dowry to her mariage, because her parents
and friends were verie 
                     •
                  oore. But this rich citizen beeing
amorous of her, minded soone after to marrie her, and so liuing
in this sort, the pagan gaue end to his loue and hope at
one s
                     •
                  roke, which so grieued Caluis, the brother germayne to
fayre Auciana, the affianced maide, as hee woulde do his deuoir
to reuenge his death, but Cambarel 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   him with his
sword from the head to the middle, and likewise slew Amiris
the good Archer, as he was sending an arrow toward the
fierce Zarlot, who on the other side made great spoile of the
poore christians: but he had not the leasure to do it, for as he
held vp his brasi
                     •
                  l bow, tipt at ech end with good harts horn,
he fell downe dead to the earth, the blacke bloud issuing abundantly
out at his mouth, through the cruell stroke the
pagan gaue him with his sharpe skein. Not contented herewith,
he smote the cunning cooke Piscan on the flank, he that
was woonte to keepe the keyes of the gate of the Cittie, to
open them in the morning and shut them at night, and so
the good souldier fell dead to the ground: as likewise foure
germaine brethren, who all that morning had laboured to
repulse the enemie, and in the first shocke flew halfe a dozen
with their guilded pikes, but when they brake through the
throng, to driue the puissant Phago
                        •
                     roff backe againe from
the breach, all striuing to auenge the death one of another,
were in the ends slaughtered and spoyled in the breache

by the right hande of this strong pagan Phagotroff, which
proued very great losse to the christians, for besides that they
were descended of verie noble race, their vertues and hardy
courage made them worthie of high commendatious: the

                     〈◊〉
                   being named Flexin, the next Lampos, the third Artaxe,
and the youngest Robly, the foure sonnes of the loyall
knight Tamiris, who long time serued king Floridamant, as
master of his housholde, and died in his seruice, as now dyd
his foure sonnes, in the defnce of theyr liues and Countrie-King
Grandilaor that beheld this blodie slaughter and mercilesse
murdering of the Christians, as well by these accursed
pagans before named, as also the sixe huge gyantes belonging
to Angrafolt, became so passionate in his thoughts,
that to reuenge the death of these foure hardie Gentlemen,
he put himselfe forward against the pagan Phagotroff, who
thinking to handle him as he had done the rest, was greatly
stonned when he sawe and knew by effectes, that hee had
made an ouer-rash account, the christian prince laying such
strokes on him with his sword, as in his life he had not felt
the like. Wherefore looking more narowly to his busines,
he couered himselfe with his shield, whereof Grandilaor had
pared awaie a great part, and to began betwéen them a verie
hot skirmish, for if the christian prince was valiant and
redie to armes, the bold pagan was no lesse than he. Which
Zarlot and his brother perceiuing, trauailed so gréedilie to
kill this Christian, as in despight (lea
                     •
                  ing the conflict wher
they were dealing) they made great hast to runne furiously
vpon him, but one of the ar
                     •
                  hers sent an arow so right from
off the rampart, as entering the 
                     •
                  ight of his helmet, was
soundly planted in the midst of his eie, whereof hee felt such
excéeding paine aud anguish, as hee f
                     •
                  ll downe in the place
where he stood. Now is it not to be doubted whether Brandissant
and his thrée brethren were offended hereat, for yee
must thinke the
                     ••
                   a
                     •
                  ger to be such, as they laid on the Christians
ten 
                     〈…〉
                   than they had done before.

And the Christians withall were so ioyfull, to sée one of their
enemies chiefe pillers layd along, as they began likewise to
vse better defence for thems
                     •
                  lues then they 
                     •
                  yd before, and
the rather, for that the princes Andregon and Lampridion
(being néere on the other side) had slaine the two fierce Gyants
Astort and Morganos, beside Rogemont that ventured
first on the wall in the esca
                     •
                  ade, was by them so shamefully
repuls
                     •
                  d, as falling plainly from the toppe of the breach, he
was glad to get him out of the fight, with his leg broken in
the middest: but the multitude of the pagans was so strong
and valiant, as no man was able to stand before them, for as
they sought to carrie awaie the wounded body of Zarlot, the
Christians stroue to take it from them, in which attempt to
many of them were slaine, as they were faine to let them
haue the pagans bodie halfe dead, and flie for assuraunce of
their owne liues, behind the rampart and bulwarke, which
theyr labourers had raised before the breach, and thence to
repell the enemies accesse was verie difficult. When King
Floridamant noted this, hee went and came from one breach
to another, euen where he perceiued the fight to be most vilent,
and where a souldier might best set himselfe to worke:
and holding his bloudie curtelar in his hand, séeing Grandilaor,
Andregon, Lampridion, and others sustaining the assalt
on the side halfe vanquished, the breach being wel néere lost,
such was the strength of the pagan kinges, princes and abounding
multitude, hee cryed and called out vnto them in
this ma
                     •
                  ner.
               A
                     •
                   valiant knights and worthie men at armes, in whom
gloryously shineth such prowesse and valour, as vnder the
vault of heauen was neuer séene the lyke, now experience
tels me, that your vertue is inuincible, and albeit the force
of our enemyes is most great, ye haue notwithstanding such
vnconquerable spirites, as the dread of death cannot cause
ye to forg
                     •
                  t your deuoir, beeing so long since 
                     •
                  aught, that it
is much better to die with 
                     〈◊〉
                  , then liue with shame

and disgrace, which your generous mindes coulde neuer
brooke, to haue your fame by the verie least meane impayred.
If alreadie you haue and still doe giue such terrour to
to the enemie, as he knowes not whether he were best forsake
the place or no, deliuering you the signall of victorie in
y
                     •
                  elding you his roome: assure your selues that whatsoeuer
countenance they shew of hauing the better, yet in this extremitie
they know not to which of their Gods they should
now make recourse. Courage, courage then most valyaunt
knights and Gentlemen, boldly beate backe these heathen
Infidels, I am here yet whole and sound to giue ye succour,
and as your faithfull companion will liue and die with ye,
not budging one foote from it, till either I be slaine or you

                     •
                  onquerours.
               These wordes pronounced most chéerefully, and comming
from so great a personage, gaue such courage to the
Christian princes and souldiours there about him, especially
when they sawe the king not only in words, but in deeds
endeuoured for theyr assistance: as king Grandilaor so rudely
charged the pagan Phagotroff, who was climbing vp the
top of the rampire, that he made him come tumb
                     •
                  ing down
againe so loutishly, as he mist but verie litle of breaking his
necke: neuertheles hee was so astonied and amazed, as his
brethren and the rest which sawe him thought he had bene
dead indéed. This 
                     •
                  o inflamed theyr chiefe leader Brandissant,
that he ranne with such furie on this valiant prince, as
but for the spéedie helpe of king Floridamant he had there bin
slaine out right, for he had giuen him such a peisaunt stroke
with his 
                     •
                  ace, as shiuering his 
                     •
                  hield had almost broke his
arme, and withall made him fall in a trance to the ground,
which the pagan well no
                     •
                  ing, ranne to finish vp the last accent
of his life, but king Floridamant steped before him with
such force and hardie courage▪ as the pagan feeling foure or
fiue good strokes well and soundly layde vpon him, was
gladde honestly to gette him gone, and forsake the rampyre

which he thought to haue wonne, shewing notwithstanding
in his recoyling some valour in his countenance. Nor can I
compare his retire to anie thing better, than that of a mastiue
dogge, that being well bitten with the teeth of one that
is stronger than himselfe flyes without making semblance
thereof, shewing his teeth for all that to the other that 
                     〈◊〉
                  
him.
               Thus threatned the pagan, when he was forciblie beaten
from the rampire, shewing back his mightie mase with
some meane ostentation, as though he would kill him that
durst presume to 
                     •
                  ollowe him. But king Floridamant, seeing
that it was not so 
                     •
                  xpedient to followe him, but rather to
helpe Andregon and Lampridion, who were strongly beset
by Salazard and Cambarell, as also a great nomber of theyr
companie, against whom (
                     •
                  auing so few soldiours) it was
very ha
                     •
                  d for them to make resistance▪ therefore presently
he directed his course thither, leauing the pursuite of Brandissant,
and there so brauely behaued himselfe, that the Pagans
perceiuing their cheefe leaders driu
                     •
                  n from the rampart
by the renowmed Christian king, the tr
                     •
                  nche likewise

                     〈◊〉
                   againe, and many Pagans of name lay weltring in
theyr bloud: they also tooke themselues to flight, wh
                     •
                  reat
the olde Grandowin, who galloped with his Chariot hithe
                     •
                  
and thither, to courage and harten vp his men, remembring
how forward they were at the first▪ and no
                     ••
                  e to flie with
such manifest disgrace and shame, especially the king of T
                        •
                     
                     uariffe
his sonne▪ Howe n
                     •
                  we Brandissant? 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   I
thought the place where you would giue the first assault,
should be our vndoubted entrance into the Cittie: yet now
to the contrary I behold, that you who should serue for an
example of valour and ha
                     •
                  dines to all our h
                     •
                  ste, are the first
that inciteth them to take their héeles, thereby to desist from
so faire an enterprise, begun and hitherto continued hapily.
If thou turne not once againe with thy men to the place frō
whence thou camst, I will flatly say thou art not my sonne:

neuer more will I thinke on thée or Angrefolt thy brother,
if thou reuenge not theyr death slaine by the christian king,
and this notorious iniurie offered vs. Retourne thou then
with spéed vpon the enemie, without hope of euer comming
backe againe, except thou bring the victory and spoyle of the
Christians, for this is the daie or neuer, that must needes
make vs Lozdes and commaunders in this strong and well
defended citie.
               The magnanimious Infidell strouting himselfe, and hauing
with meruailous grauitie deliuered these wordes, his
cruell sonne (followed by all his people at once) moued with
excéeding rage and auger, retourned so 
                     •
                  uriously vppon the
Christians, as quickly made them re
                     •
                  ire within their rampires,
so y• to behold theyr sallying forth, flight backe again,
and eager pursuit of their gréedie enemies, I may well resemble
it to the mercilesse flotes of the Caspian sea, when the
waters driuen by violence of the windes, beate fiercely against
the hard 
                     〈◊〉
                  , wherwith it is enuironed, when the

                     •
                  lames and billowes extreamly thereon rent asunder, con
                  
                     •
                  usedly
r
                     •
                  turne back again into the midst of the sea whence
f
                     •
                  rst they went, and then re
                     •
                  ouering fresh vigour, againe and
againe runne on the rockes more violently then before, so
by going and comming still in vaine, theyr labour is bestowed
to no purpose or benefite. In like manner beganne and
continued this new assalt, both by the scaling ladders, and in
at the 
                     〈◊〉
                  , as I wil declare vnto ye in Chapters following
tending to such matter. For the 
                     •
                  rueltie of this war
hath now surprized me with such griefe of minde, as I am
constrained a while to discontinue the historie, to
speake of matters more pleasing, & which
deliuer more swéetnes.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 19.
               
                  How the Princesse Porphiria beeing in a castle neere to Constantinople,
ouercome with amorous thoughts, and desirous
to heare some tidings of her louer, importuned the Phisition
Sagibell, to tell her by his Magicall art, whether he were aliue
or dead. Which he could not then performe, albeit hee
put his skil in practise, and withdrew his spelles, by reason of
farre geater knowledge that remained in another. Notwithstanding,
soone after she had some consolation concerning
her loue.
               
               
                  I Stand in doubt I shall bee greatly blamed,
for hauing so long time let sléepe in
silence, the successe of the amourous sicknesse
of the most fayre Princesse in the
world, whose historie I haue discontinued
since the first chapter of this booke, by
reason of the sundrie occurrences of
warres, combates, and other aduentures, which compelled
the flight of my pen to take that course, following a path
not before trode or beaten, as ye haue read: wherein if your
iudgements finde that I haue any thing fayled, I will at
this instant make amends for that fault (if you account it
a fault in so dooing) and speake so sufficiently thereof, as
you shall haue reason to be contented. If then I forget not
the scope of the story concerning hir, and the last spéeches we
had in her cause, it may appeare, that we left her from the
Cittie of Constantinople, in a Castle of pleasure or recreation
belonging to the Emperour her father: where (to finde
some ease for her amourous passions, though shaddowed vnder
the change of ayr
                     •
                  ) the Phisition Sagibell wrought the
meanes of conducting her thither, as yee haue read in the
place before expressed. You remember likewise, in what

                  
                     •
                  quipage she was conuayed from the Court, and howe the
Emperour kept the treasure and wealth of his Empire in
this fortresse, impregnable of anie force: it remayneth then
that I tell yes at this present what happened while she soiourned
there, and howe her inflamed des
                     •
                  res were satisfied.
               It behoueth then that ye call to minde, how earnest she
was to know certainly, whether her louer were aliue or
dead, for which without ceasing, she importuned her phisition,
who, as well ye remember, was excellently skild in the
magique art, whereby she should present to her eyes aliue or
dead, the figure of him that gaue nouriture and some contentment
to her amorous thoughts, that she might perceiue
in what estate he was. The skilfull man ouercome with
importunitie, prepared himselfe heereto, and settin
                     ••
                   owne
such parcels as he thought meete for the purpose, hee found
                     •
                  
by rare chaunges and contradictions, that o
                     •
                  efarre better
experimented in this arte than himselfe, medled with the
same matter, whereby he was compelled to leaue his enterprise
imperfect and without 
                     •
                  ffect. Wherefore, if while the
more skilfull partie called on the spirites, he should haue offered
to pr
                     •
                  céed further therin, the double strife would haue
growen to such a confusion, as the smoke and tempest wold
haue ouerthrowen or carried awaie the castle, wherein the
princely maide for her pleasure was inclosed. To preuent so
great an euil, the phisition gaue ouer in time, and withdrew
his charmes in verie good season▪ declaring the occasion to
the princesse, why he could not then bring to passe the thing
she so much desired: yet assuring her withall, that very sone
she should heare newes in some sorte, for which shee shoulde
not tarrie anie long time, which proued true and came to
passe as Sagihel had foretolde, for fiftéen daies after or therabout,
one night when the princes was in her chamber, disrobing
her selfe to go to bed, betwéene the hours of nine and
ten at night, she heard a voice, and the sound of a lute, agréeing

together so mellodiously, as among humane creatures
was neuer heard swéeter harm
                     ••
                  ie. And the song séemed to
come from some ship on the sea, at the foot of the castle, wher
then was appointed the princesse chamber, the effect of which
song hereafter followeth.
               
                  The song which the Princesse Porphyria heard in the Castle.
                  
                     THou that within this tower art inclosed,
                     And with loues cruell fire all inflamed:
                     This night giue rest vnto thy languishing.
                     For Atropos as yet mindes not thy murdering.
                  
                  
                     The destinies as yet consent not to end thy life,
                     But these blacke houres must change of amorus strife
                     And thou before thy death shalt see quite ended,
                     The strong assaults of griefe that hath offended.
                  
                  
                     Loue vowed not thy ruine though vnrest,
                     A golden shaft he shot into thy brest,
                     He for whom thy hart indures this sicknes,
                     Triumphs not ouer thee, for thou art mistres.
                  
                  
                     Euen with the selfe same shaft his heart is maimed,
                     And plungd in sharper woes, of ioyes restrained,
                     Faire maide then grieue not, this is but loues finger,
                     They finde rest in the end that loue and linger.
                  
                  
                     Cease, cease thy teares, complaintes and sorrowing,
                     Cherish vp thy beautie fairer than the morning,
                     A daie will come if thou wilt giue me credence,
                     That of thy loyall loue thou shalt haue recompence.
                  
                  
                     Angelicall beautie, liue thou then happily,
                     And in thy sweet passions vse no extremitie.
                  
               
               
                  
As the fay
                     •
                  e Porphyria heard this Song begin with such
an hermonio
                     •
                  s sound, shee was so rauished in conceit, as
suddenly she ran and layd her head to the windowe, albeit
she was neere disro
                     •
                  ed of all her garments▪ so s
                     •
                  e by the
siluer shining rayes of the Moone, that this calme night
shewed her bright and argentine face ouer the vauts of heauen,
who it was that sung and played so swéetly, and came
at such a late houre to performe the same. But she could not
discerne any thing, neither beneath the Tower or anye
where else, whence this most heauenly voice might procéed:
onely she vnderstood the daintie mellodie of the Lute, and
the voyce very perfectly which sung the song, the wordes
whereof made her the more to muse, in that they better agréed
with her disposition, then the sweetnes of the musique
could giue her pleasure. Especially when she heard what
consolation this vnknowne musitian promised, by the certaine
hope of a future felicitie, of seeing him whose sight she
so extreamely desired: and withall, to haue her amorous
torments asswaged, which she had so long time impaciently
suffered, and still enflamed her heart with most ardent desire
of his loue.
               Heerevpon, hauing forsaken the windowe, and beeing
laid in her bed, all this night she could thinke on nothing
but this song, imagining with her selfe, whence this knowledge
of her passions should proceed: then againe conceiuing
this opinion, that the matter contayned in the Song was
most certaine and true, deliuered from some person that
bare her intire affection, and who (for her pleasure) was
thus sent to comfort her amourous oppressions. Then remembring
how little assurance was to bee reposed, in the
credence of such things as carryed no apparaunce of true similitude,
nor hauing any foundation on reason: shee was
on the other side carried away with contrary opinions, verily
beléeuing, that this was but some charme doone by her
Phisition, or else some other appointed by him, to make her

hope well in her despaire, and fréed her selfe with vanitie in
the middest of her misfortune, 
                     •
                  herein shee was so soundly
and surely intrapped, which humour bearing stroke with
with her more this waie then the other, inforced her to renue
her former tears, fighs and intire lamentations. Then
tourning againe to remember what fewe daies before her
phisition had tolde her, how one better skild than himselfe,
had contraried his spels, whereby hee sought to giue her assurance
of her desire, comparing this with her first conceiued
imaginations, she then remained as doubtful as b
                     •
                  fore.
These diuerse and contrarie opinions thus hammering in
her head, made her tosse and tumble euerie waie in her bed,
with great impatience, and these amorous tormentes compelled
her to breath forth such vehement sighs, as her cousin
Harderina (lodging in the same chamber) hearing her, demanded
what new disease had so surprized her, for i
                     •
                   shee
would beginne againe her former immoderate vexations,
especially at such a time when shee had so greate occasion of
comfort, by so late good hope prophetically deliuered in the
the song, which with such admiration they had hearde that
night, in her opinion she was well worthie to be chidden. Ah
swéet cosin, answered the princes, I know not what I shuld
saie or thinke thereof, this is my feare, that I haue hearde,
are but abusing charmes to deceiue me withall, to make me
in the meane while lie languishing before my death, which
euer yet and at this instant I earnestly wish for, for no way
can I deuise to turne my selfe to finde my rest, wherefore I
praie thée deare cosin, tell me faithfully what thou doest immagine
of all these passed euents, think
                     •
                  st thou there is not
some bodie in the worlde, that by one meane or other either
generall or particular, can tell me what shall happe
                     •
                  , or else
shew me some proofe, wherein I may repose some trust, how
little to euer it be? Madame, quoth Harderina, I wyll tell
you truly what I thinke, agréeing with what I haue
                     •
                  often
here
                     •
                  ofore heard.
               
                  There are certaine maligne spirits deceiuers of men,
which through the meanes of many Magitians, as there
are too many: by a thousand illusions know how to deceiu
                     •
                  
such as are lesse skild in that wicked science, making them
to beléeue what is not, and so deceiue the sences of men or
women, in causing them to credit certainly what they
heare or see. The charmes of such doo vanish awaye like
smoake, hauing no more vigor or efficacie then a dreame,
so that the memorie thereof is as soone lost as found. There
are other called bonum Genies or good angels, which by the
meanes of good persons that call them in better sort, they
are commanded in general what shall happen, without spe
                  
                     •
                  ying
any thing: and to reueale perticulerly what is to
come, which kinde of spirits I haue oft times héeretofore
heard, that a Fayrie of good disposition, dwelling in some
parte of great Brittaine, which place of her abode could
hardly yet be found: she (I say) knowes very well howe to
command them, as also so skilfully to imploy them, albeit
by diuine permission as is said: that shee makes them goe
whether she thinkes good, locking them vp as shee list, and
by charmes enclosing them in the bodyes of beautifull damosels,
that inuisibly are transported hither and thither,
wheresoeuer she commannds them, and not else. These damosels
are called Fayries or Nimphes, one whereof perhaps
by her commaund, did sing the Song to giue you some
comfort: which if it were so, then verely I dare credit
whatsoeuer the song disclosed: but for better knowledge
of the trueth heerein, it is necessarie that to morrow you
conferre with Sagibell, to vnderstand what in this case he
will reueale to yee. Trust me Cosen, answered the Princesse,
I thinke ye may say true, for one reason which as yet
you touched not, and whereof I was remembred by your
spéech, to wit, that my knight (if mine I may name him) is
commonly called the Fayrie knight, because a certaine fairie
(as he said) dwelling in the same countrey you named,

and called Ozyris, as hee tolde vs, had giuen him nourishment,
and sent him likewise to my fathers court, there to
receiue his order of knighthood. But how can that bee?
(quoth then the faire princesse againe, continuing her spéech
and doubting what reason should mooue her so to do) what
knowledge hath she of me? can shee tell whether I loue or
no? who should reueale it to her? or how can she diuine on
matters so strange? this can neuer enter into my vnderstanding.
               Well Cosen, well (replyed Harderina halfe a sléepe, wearyed
to heare her talke so long in a place appointed for rest)
sléepe, sléepe with patience, till to morrowe your phisition
tell yee other newes, and in the meane while trouble not
your selfe: but sléepe, and let mee doo the like, for all this
night you haue not suffered me to enioy any quiet. When
the faire Uirgin perceiued her cosen and deere companion
wearie of talking, she held her peace, and soone after falling
into a slumber, shee soundly slept vntill the next morning:
when the sunne arose a little more earlye then shee did, on
which day what happened, yee may read in the Chapters
that follow héereafter.
            
            
               CHAP. 20.
               
                  How the Princesse was instructed by Sagibell, in the
meane to know who sung the Song at the foote of
the Tower: and how she had resolution, in what
she most desired to know and vnderstand concerning
her looue, euen as she would, by the meanes
of the Nymphe Aegle, seruaunt to the Ladye Ozyris.
               
               
                  
                  WHen the cléere morning had shewed her
fayre countenaunce ouer the world, according
as she was wont, and alredy the
steads that drew Phebus chariot, were
wel entered on theyr waie, to deliuer abroad
the splendor of his looks, the beutifull
infant Porphyria awaked, dreaming
yet on the past song, and of the conference she had wyth
her fayrie cosin and faithfull companion Harderina, especially
of that she tolde her, for resoluing of her doubt, which
was, to talke with her phisition Sagibel, and vnderstande
his opinion. For this cause with all spéed she sent her damsell
Marcella to séeke him, at whose command the good and
skilfull phisition fayled not to come presentlie, and being entered
the chamber, finding the princesse as yet in her bedde,
she discoursed vnto him all that happened the night past, as
also what spéeches passed betwéene her cosin and her, in selfe
same manner as ye read in the Chapter going before, earnestly
intreating of conclusion of all, to tell her his aduise,
what might be gathered thereby, most agréeing with truth,
if by his art it were possible to comprehend anie matter certaine,
wherunto the phisition (hauing noted euerie circumstance)
thus answered.
               Madame, I cannot presently giue ye anie certaine resolution
in these affayres, but betwéene this & mid day I will
promise to tell ye truth of all, or at the least shewe yee some
meanes whereby to knowe it. I praie thée then my good
Sagibel, quoth the princesse, that thou haue precise regarde
of the promised houre, or sooner, if it may be possible, go then
and in the meane while vse what diligence yee can best deuise,
that at least I may knowe what thou coniurest, or else
canst gather of this wonderfull accident. Immediatly the
wise man departed the chamber, to compasse that she had inioyned
him, for the intreates of the mightie are strict commandements
to the meaner sorte, and so diligently heerein

he behaued himselfe, that at the houre promised, hee fayled
not to séeke his Ladie and mistres, finding her new risen
from the table, hauing this daie dined with her cosin Harderina.
               Not a little ioyfull was she to sée him, being perswaded
in her thoughts that her phisition had nowe promised some
cataplasme for ease of her griefe, but the consolation she receiued
was not 
                     •
                  erie great, for the phisition onely tolde her,
that he could know nothing of all that was done. But his
spirites had reuealed vnto him, that to knowe the certaintie
in this case, it was expedient, that the Ladie which desyred
such sound knowledge in these affayres, shoulde one nyght
plaie on some instrument, and sing at the same windowe
where shee hearde the song before: withall, the effect of her
song should be, to aske the voice that had song what it was,
the wordes and circumstance wherof should agrée with one
that he had made for the same purpose, which he opened and
gaue her, and shee learned it by heart euen at that instant.
Now albeit the princesse receiued not such intire comfort,
as then presently she expected, yet were her passions somewhat
mittigated, and this song serued her as a pastime all
the after noone, to learne the lines perfectly and sing them
well, as before night with her lute she made it agrée verie
excellently, and so cunningly could she touch euerie string,
that both the dittie and musicke fitted passing well her
owne desire.
               When the daie was passed, and night approched, for that
she could not with patience tarrie till the next morrow, she
tooke her Lute in her hand, and going vnto the windowe,
playde thereon meruailous swéetly, and shaping her swéete
voyce to the daintie melodie, sung this song as heereafter
followeth.
               
                  
                  The Princesse Porphyrias Song to the voice.
                  
                     TEll me celestiall voice,
                     if thou be that voice pittifull,
                     Which didst replie Narcissus plaints,
                     from out the woods so mercifull.
                  
                  
                     And playing so pleasantly,
                     vpon the skilfull Thracians instrument,
                     Wouldst with thy pleasing harmonie,
                     Asswage my amorous languishment.
                  
               
               When shee had song these two verses of this song, shee
sodainly ceased, according as the Phisition had instructed
her: to trie if the voice woulde beginne againe to aunswere
as immediatly it did, playing and singing in the verie same
tune shee dyd, and thus was the voyces answere.
               
                  The voices answere to the Princesses Song.
                  
                     VNderstand thou faire Princesse,
                     that I am not the Goddesse called Eccho,
                     Who did resound Narcissus death.
                     through all the world with sorow so.
                  
                  
                     Nor am I as thou thinkest,
                     Orpheus that skilfull man of Thrace,
                     But I am Aegle the faire Fairie,
                     whose golden locks hang dangling down her face.
                  
               
               This made the Princesse continue on her song, being verie
glad that she had answere to her interrogations, and des
                     •
                  rous
to haue further matters tolde her, in her song she beganne
againe in this manner to question with the voice.
               
               
                  
                     Porphyria.
                     I would not wish more happines,
                     fayre Nymph, but to haue knowledge of thee,
                     As thou canst soundly giue assurance,
                     herein then shew such fauor to me.
                  
                  
                     And likewise grant mee but to know,
                     what most afflicts me with contagion,
                     If he liue whom my thoughts obey,
                     and makes me feele this loue passion.
                  
                  
                     The Nymph Aegle replies.
                     I am the voice of Nymph Aegle,
                     the faire and faithfull damosell,
                     Vnto the great and powerfull Fairie,
                     that vnderneath the heauens doth dwell.
                  
                  
                     One daie when thou doest sleeping sit,
                     ha
                           •
                        d by a streaming fountaine,
                     The rest shall be reueald to thee,
                     that will asswage thy amorous paine.
                  
                  
                     Porphyria.
                     Alas then wilt thou flie from me,
                     Nymph with faire eies behold me still,
                     And as thy promise let me know,
                     what els my tender heart will kill.
                  
               
               
                  
So breaking off her song in this sorte, the voyce would
make her no more answere, which made her more curious
and full of greefe then before: yet remembring what the
voyce had said, that one day when she should sit alone by a
Fountaine, she should be satisfied in the rest of her demanud
and finde ease for her languishing: héervpon seauen or eight
daies together continually, without letting scape any day,
she went & lay downe in the Arbor or Garden, where were
thrée or foure verie stately fountaines, and by euery one
she sate downe to sléepe, that she might haue answer according
as the voyce had promised: but this desire was so profoundly
aduanced within her thoughts, as shee could compasse
no way to forget it, and the remembrance therof compelled
her as far from sléeping, as she most coueted to come
néere it: for the restles humors and fantacies did so continually
beat vppon her heart, as would not permit her the
very least moment of quiet, and the neerer shee approached
the Fountaines to fasten on a sleepe, the more did these abounding
vexations torment her. Hauing continued in
these insupportable agonies the space of eight dayes, the
length and vehemence of, which trauaile had so ouerweakened
her, as now she wexed heauie and desirous of sleepe:
one day when she least thought h
                     •
                  ereof, she was sequestred
from all her companie, and going alone into the Garden
(not perceiued by any one) about the time of midday, she sat
downe by a Fountaine in the middest of the Garden, which
was round beset with daintie. Arbours and Cabinets of
Gessemine, Rose trées, with floures and hearbes of all sorts
that smelled most swéetly: and excellent pure water flowed
from the fountaine, being brought thither in pipes from
foure fayre Griffons, that were placed in the foure corners
of the Garden, which was equall square euery waye.
On the side of this fountaine sat downe the young Princes
who had past so many nights without receiuing any rest,
and thinking nowe but to 
                     •
                  lumber a little, shee slept there

soundly the space of two houres, without knowledge to any
of her attendants what was become of her: each one supposing
verily she had lockt her selfe into her chamber, as diuers
dayes before (to couer her melancholly) she was wunt
to doo. It so happened, that about the verye latest moment
of her sleeping, the water of the Fountaine murmured
and made such a mightie noyse, as oftentimes the troubled
sea dooth, when beeing stirred with great and most
tempestuous winds, the fierce billowes beat either against
some stonie rock, or driues vp the sandes against some promontorie,
aspiring vp sharpe pointed from the middest to
the top: by meanes whereof the faire Infant quickly awaked,
dreaming that she was not by the side of so faire a fountaine,
but on the raging of the sea, which leaped against the
foundations of the Castell wall, and mooued very extreamlie
as séemed to her.
               Being thus awaked, the bruite of the water ceased, and
appeared before her the most fayre Nimphe Aegle, resembling
in beautie not any humaine or liuing creature, but
rather some deitie or matter celestiall: such as comming
néere the newe built walles of Carthage, appeared to the
Troyan prince her sonne. Euen so this beautifull Naiade
séemed to the princely maide, who at the first sight of her
was some what astonied, doubting whether she should take
her selfe to flight, or tarie still there, or whether this apparision
was to encrease her heauinesse, or bring her comfort.
This being well perceiued by the fayre Nimphe, who héertofore
had amazed the most assured by her presence: she spake
to her in this manner: bee not afrayd (O princesse of rare
vertues, and the fayrest creature in the world) nor be a
                     •
                  ashed
at my vnexpected appearing into your presence: for I
am the Nimphe Aegle, seruant to the fayrie Ozyris your
knights Nursse: by her commaundement, and according to
the promise I made ye eight or nine daies since, I am come
to yee in this place, not any way to astonnish or affright ye

but rather to bring yee ioy and consolation, by giuing yee
certaine resolution in a doubt, wherein yee haue liued and
languished too long, to wit, whether your knight bee dead
or aliue: to acquaint ye moreouer, with what I knew of his
birth and valour.
               The young princesse lending eare attentiuely to these
wordes, cheered vp her thoughts, and tooke great pleasure
in contemplating the excelling beautie of this fayre Noiade,
as also to heare her swéete and gratious language, the sence
and substance whereof concerned the thing shee most desired,
and was so agréeable to her. So that longing to heare
what the Nimphe had promised, after a modest and ciuill
kinde of questioning, she thus made answere. Whatsoeuer
thou be (most faire and gentle Nimphe) right welcome art
thou into this place, and albeit thy presence at the first
brought me some cause of feare and displeasure: yet now
on the contrary, I am as glad and ioyfull héere to beholde
thee, for reasons as yet knowne to thy selfe: and this ioye I
receiue by sight of thée, procured the motion and change
thou didst note in my countenan
                     •
                  e, not any fright, feare, or
discontent, receiued through thy beeing with mee. If then
thou hast any thing to tell mee, chéefely concerning that I
most desire to know, I pray and intreat thée againe and againe,
by the reuerence and respect thou bearest to thy Mistresse
Ozyris, by these Fountaines and waters which thou
hauntest, and wherein thou delightest vsually to bathe thy
selfe: likewise, by the loue and honest affection thou bearest
my knight, by the golden tresses of thy haire, with the swéet
fauour and beautie I beheld in thy face: I coniure thée not
to depart from me, vntill thou hast tolde me, who and what
the knight is that beareth name of the Fairie, of whence
hee is, where and in what part hee is at this present, and
whether he be dead or liuing. Tell me withall, if his affection
be such to me, as mine is to him, what ease, helpe and
comfort, or loue like recompence, I shall receiue in the end

for the loyall affection I beare him, and what will bee the
issue of both our loues.
               Thy knight (faire princesse) answered the Fayrie, is a
man vertuous and of great valour, for he is the onely valiant,
and most accomplished knight in all perfections, that at
this day liueth, or heereafter shall liue vppon the earth: in
like manner, his exhor
                     •
                  ation or originall hath he receiued
from a father, that is the most hardiest king on earth, no one
so worthie to weare a crowne royall, namely, the great
monarch Floridamant of England, a prince so perfect and accomplished
as may be possible. He being in quest of sundrie
strange aduentures, which long time hee exercised as a
knight errant, onely to acquire honor and reputation: left
his quéene conceiued with childe, wherof she was deliuered
in the absence of her king, and he was nourished vnder the
wing and gouernement of the quéene his mother, vntill the
age of seauen or eight yeares: when the skilfull Fayrie Ozyris,
who all her life time bare good affection to the king,
in the countrey where shee her selfe inhabited, as also to all
that were of his familie: knowing and perceiuing well by
her skill▪ that if the young prince should remaine long time
in his fathers Court, hee was destined to incur some great
mis
                     •
                  haunce, euen no lesse then a strange and cruell death: by
sudden inuention she found the meane to rob her of her Son,
in respect, that if this misfortune had happened, it would
haue prooued such an exceeding domage and preiudice, not
onely to all the realme of great Brittaine, but likewise all
the Christians that liue vnder heauen neuer felt the like,
in regard of the good they should one daye recei
                     •
                  e by him.
Hauing then so subtilly gotten him away, I will not tell
you how or in what manner, because it requireth too long
a discourse, and I intend to tell yee but breefely, the principall
points of this historie.
               She nourished and brought him vppe long time, in her
riche and opulent Fayrie, which is as huge & big or rather

greater, then the wydest kingdome in the worlde, and there
enstructed him in all good manners, vntill hee was of able
age, and capable to beare knightly armes, whereby hee
might discouer what hee was. She prouiding him of all
things necessarie for a knight, chusing and appointing him
as her loyall and faithfull seruant, she being the wisest and
most faire princesse liuing, as likewise he is the most valiant
and vertuous knight in the world: directed his course, sending
him as thou knowest and canst very well testifie and
witnesse, to the princely Court of the great Emperour thy
father: where what befell him, thou canst tell without my
reporting, as also thou wast not ignorant of his departure.
               What is become of him euer sithence his departure,
would require a long time to recount, & the houre of my departure
so vrgently presseth me, as at this instant I can tel
thee no more, because I am constrained to leaue thee. But
to morrow, at the selfe same houre I came this day, I promise
to returne againe, not onely to tell the rest of his aduentures,
but to let thee sée them all, to thy great pleasure
and contentment. Hauing thus spoken, the Nimphe plunged
her head at the first into the water of the Fountaine,
and so departed, where likewise I meane to finishe this
Chapter.
            
            
               CHAP. 21.
               
                  How the Nimphe Aegle (by the will of hir Mistresse
Ozyris) appeared another time to the fayre Porphyria,
and made her for to see her knight in a
Sphere, withall the aduentures that happened to
him, since the time she saw him last.
               
               
                  
                  THe nymph Aegle hauing thus left
the company of the yong princes,
she remained very pensiue, & more
desirous than before, to know the
newes of her knight, for now shée
would faine bee acquainted with
what the nymph had concealed,
not contented with what was alreadie
reuealed, though in some
sort pleased, by knowing that her part and amorous desires
aimed at no meane or base obiect, but so sortable and worthy
as she could make choice of. And verie certaine it was, that
in those times there was no Empire or monarch more renowmed
nor anie king or Christian prince more esteemed,
then was the realme of great Britaine, & the worthie king
Floridamant. For his predecessors and himselfe had inlarged
and augmented theyr gouernment further a great deal
then the continent of England, not onely by their force and
prowesse, but likewise by their swéete curtesse and benignitie,
so valiant did they euermore shewe themselues to bee, as
also humane and affable withall, yet al this aduantage was
not sufficient to satisfie the princely maide, but rather vrged
her to more pensiuenes and impatience, vnderstanding him
to be of such rase and originall, whome before shee reckoned
and estéemed but as a simple knight arrant: now proouing
to be of so high extraction and great birth, hauing seated her
affections in place of such dignitie, she remayned still doubtfull
whether he were aliue or dead, for so long absence might
verie well raise great and vehement suspition thereof. Here
vpon she withdrew her selfe secretly into her chamber, beeing
much discomforted and verie passionate as before, musing
and pondering much more profoundly on her new and
fresh conceites, than on the discourse of the beautifull and
fayre Nymph Aegle: and albeit shee was indifferentlie
comforted thereby, yet made shee no signe or semblaunce

thereof to her cosin. Wherefore when the night was come,
thinking in the darke shade the nymph would come again,
and resolue her in the rest of her desires, shee went to the
window and song the same vearses which the phisition had
taught her, but all was in vaine, for shee hearde no song but
her owne, nor anie mellodie but her Lute, which made a
heauenly concordance with her voyce. Fayre Aegle was
deafe for this night, and woulde not make answere to her
musicall questions, but when the morning was come, and
the rising Sunne made shew of a new daie, the young princesse
hauing enioyed no rest all that night, amorous imaginations
had so carryed her thoughts to and fro, with wishing
and rewishing for the midde daie houre. So wearing awaie
the tediousnesse of the time with as greate patience as
he could, at the last she got her againe to the same fountains
side, where she had slept the daie before, and the nymph Aegle
retourned thether agayne while the princesse slumbered,
making lyke noyse as at the first she dyd, wherwith the
Infant awaked, marie not so much afrighted as earst shee
had béene, but beeing verie gladde to beholde and see the
fayre face of the demie goddesse, from whome shée hoped to
receiue greater consolation then shee had done in the daie
before.
               Now the Fayrie had brought with her a sphere, or for
your better vnderstanding, a bowle of peeces of engrauen
wood, made in forme round lyke a sphere, wherein appeared
the whole vniuersall world, how it was inclosed, and namely
the earth, with all the prouinces contained therein, painted
after the lyfe, and in such sorte, as within it ye might beholde
the mouing of the starres of heauen, the foundation
of the massie earth, the cloudie ayre, wyth the fluxe and reflowing
of the Ocean, the other seas, and the riuers that
binde in the earth, with all the roundnesse of the terrestriall
globe.
               These things might there be discerned with more pleasure

and contentment than they can conceiue that trauaile
farre, to see a little portion or many particulars, of that
which this fayre Nymph shewed at one time to the Infant
Porphiria. For you must vnderstand, that hauing drawen
from forth the siluer waters of the cleere fountaine, this diuine
peece of workemanship so lately named, shee opened
a certaine little couerture, which was expressely made to
discouer all the rest within, at the opening whereof she vsed
these wordes to the princesse.
               I will let thée sée heerein, vertuous and fayre princesse,
all the vniuersall world, presented in the proper lyfe and
figure, wherein likewise thou shalt beholde thy knight, and
all his aduentures, which happened since his departure
from thee.
               Speaking these wordes, hauing opened the doore that
was aboue, wherein was contained the figure of heauen
and the starres, shee parted in three partes the rest of the
round Gloabe, which when the princesse sawe discouered,
she cast her lookes on that parte where Affrica was represented,
and questioning thereof with the fayre A
                     •
                  gle, shee
sa
                     ••
                  e, I praie thée beautious Nymph, fauour me more than
with the bare sight of the wide world, before thou shifte to
anie other place, tell mee what parte is this heere first described,
inhabited with people so barbarous, grosse and rusticall,
because they come first to sight, and tell mee what desarts
these are, that nourisheth and bréedeth such infinite
number of sauage and cruell beasts. This is that part, answered
Aegle, which is named Affrica, defenced on the one
side toward the Sunne rising, with the greate floud, which
ye heare with such mercilesse noise come from the mountaines,
and by seauen chanels or mouths runs into the bosome
of Thetis, called Nylus. On all the other sides it is
enuironed with the sea, especially on the North coast with
the Libique sea, whereon the auncient people called Penes,
exercised many outragious and extreame piracyes,

these people came of the 
                     •
                  henicians, that passed thether
with Dido Qu
                     •
                  ene of Carthage and the Gréekes, more ancient
than they that passed thether before with Hercules.
And to tell thée in few words (least I should offend yée with
tediousnes) with what other regions this land is inhabited,
ye must vnderstand that Ethiopia is this which ye sée rising
from the red sea, and butting on Arabia, neighbouring towarde
the North with the Egyptians and Lybians, who
were so called after a man named Aethipos, that the olde
Pagans sayde was the sonne of Uulcan: he being the first
king, all the region tooke the name of him. Then may yee
discerne here on the other side, the habitation of these olde idolatrous
Egyptians, a verie fertile region, which in elder
time was called Aeria, and since thē cleped Egypt, by a brother
to Danaus so tearmed. On the west is the limitrophing
borders of Cyrena, towards the east it beholdeth Palestine,
and on the North side the mediterranean sea. The
great citie which yee sée in this region so well seated, with
walls so ancient, and whose proud pallaces are now like an
olde ruined mazure, is the ancient citie of Thebes, whereof
Amphion is sayd to laie the first foundation, and the king to
whom Andromache, wife to the hardie Hector, was daughter,
being there slayne when cruell Achilles entered to sacke
and spoyle the towne, murdering seuen of his children, the
future hope of his genealogie: since which time this ancient
citie hath continued in such had estate as ye beholde it. But
afterward in this other place was builded by king Alexander
the great this other beautifull citie, the walles whereof
are not so ancient as the other, and according to the name of
the edifier, it is named Alexandria. Sée on the other side in
the same prouince the citie called Abiros. Here is proud Babylon
and the citie of Memphis, renowmed by reason of the
meruailes which Queene Semyramis there builded and erected.
               This other greate Citie and wonderfull strong,

whose walles are more fresh, as also beeing more newlye
builded then all the other: is the famous Cittie of Hieropolis,
so called in former times, but at this present is named
the graund Cayre, which signifieth a Fortrosse in Egyptian
language: in this Cittie lies the king or Soldan
of all the countrey. Héere in this parte, not farre from the
people I told ye off before, that made many courses and piracies
on, the Lybian sea, I meane the Phoenitians, which
are deuided into sundrie regions and prouinces: for héere
are the Namasones in Lybia and Marmarica, drawing towards
the kingdome of Barcha néere the sea: there are the
Guydanes their neighbours, who in steed of bearing bucklers
with them to the warres, doo carrye the Skinnes of
Cranes.
               On the other side, countenauncing the sennes Trytonia,
are the Machlides, that weare theyr hayre (as there ye may
beholde one) long behinde, and are powled short before, contrary
to these other called Anses, who as the painter discribes,
weare theyr hayre long before and shorte behinde:
theyr daughters once a yeare fight extreamely with stones,
in honour of the Goddess Minerua, whom they adore. The
great mount ye sée not farre from this place, is the mount
Atlas, whereby the neighbouring people are called Atlantide,
which in the greatest heate of the day rayle the sunne,
and cu
                     •
                  sse it with many iniurious spéeches. They that are
on this side, hauing the right side of their heads shor
                     •
                  e, and
raced toward the-left side: are called Maxes▪
                   that vsuallie
paint their faces with Uermillion, and make vaunte of
theyr discent from the Troyans: as likewise do these Zigantes,
being not farre off from them, and they liue by the
flesh of Apes, wherwith the countrey meruailou
                     ••
                  ie aboundeth.
               These other abiding in the region of the Hesterues, are
named Troglodites, otherwise Megauares: people that being
dead make no account of buriall, but after the decease

of buriall, but after the decease of one of them, they vsually
come to the place where he is, and being loden with stones,
in a great laughter they throw them at him, and so retur
                     •
                  e
againe without any thought of death. To these are next
neighbours the Hylophages and Spermatophages: the first
are so called, because that for their nourishment or food, they
climbe and craule vp Trées like Squirrels, and there cutting
the tender sprigs or branches, feed thereon and so liue.
The other are so named, because they substantiate their bodies
with many séedes of hearbes, that come from the midst
of the marishie grounds in that soyle. There hard by likewise
are the Ceneigdes, which inhabit the woods, and sit
sleeping all the night on the trées, like birds. Furthermore
concerning such like people, in the deserts of Lybia, are the
Acridophages, which liue onelye but by Locusts that are
found is those deserts, and therevpon they are so called. In
the extreame being of this part of the world, are the Cynanimes,
so called by the Greekes in their language, but wee
call them sauage men. They which yee see heare all naked,
are the Ichtipophages, and there is the place called the cape
of Gardafuni, which lookes on Arabia named the happie,
where are the kingdomes of Adel and Barnagas. In this
marshie Isle, neighbour to Aethiopia and mount Atlas, named
Hesperia, within the Tritonian 
                  
                     •
                  ennes: dwell the Amazones,
women experimented in feates of warre, and which
onely manage the affayres of theyr common wealth, with
out men medling or inhabiting among them. I leaue all
the other people that are heere in this parte, because it
would be ouer long to expresse their names, life, manners,
and dayly behauiour: wherefore passing ouer this straite,
that seperates the great Ocean from the Mediterranean
sea, called Gibaltare or Hercules pilles: is the kingdome of
Hea, which hath on the north side the Ocean and Athlantique
sea, and toward the middest, the great mount Atlas I
shewed ye before: there also are the kingdomes of Phez,

Marocco, Alger and Thunis, inhabited with terrible and
cruell people, and soure Pagan kings all cosens germaine:
in their possessions they are very mightie men, well skild in
warring against theyr enemies. But aboue all, the king of
Phez is of high resolue and meruailous valiance, as I will
declare to yee anon, when seeing the place where hee is at
this present, I shall recount the meruailous aduenture happening
him, so long since forborne: and with speech of him,
I will likewise tell ye tidings of your Colen Pharisor, who
is as sorrowfull as you for the wante of his companion.
They that gouerne these two kingdomes of Marocco and
Alger, the one named Phoas, and the other Orontes, haue
led in their conduct a great multitude of the barbarous
people of theyr Realmes, to sight against the Christians,
and with huge numbers of Pagans expressely assembled,
séeke to destroye the great and famous Cittie of London,
wherein king Floridamant father to your knight, is cruelly
besieged, in danger to loose his li
                     •
                  e, or see himselfe disposest
of crowne and kingdome: but God of his infinite goodnes
will prouide some helpe, that such misfortune shall neuer
befall him.
               As for the third, vnder whose lawes and commaundements
they of Thunis are gouerned, to wit, Adylas: I will
likewise tell yee more when we meet him in place where he
is, to let ye know what he hath doone, and then shall yee see
him that yee are so desirous of. But before this may bee
doone, or you attaine to behold the long wished place: I
will tell yee what these fayre Islandes are which you
see within the Sea, the neere bordering neighbours to
this kingdome.
               Knowe then that these are the Hesperides, otherwise
called Fortunate Isles, and commonly Canaries, not such
as many haue esteemed them to bee, they are greatlye abounding
in Dogges: but much more fertile are these
aforesayde Isles abounding in store of Reedes or Canes,

from which are made the Melasses Cassonades, and then Sugars
most fine and swéete, abounding in very great quantitie.
The people there dwelling, are subiects to a puissant
Pagan king, who at this daye swayes the scepter thereof,
named Brandissant, that chased thence sometime Argamor,
the cruell father to foure sonnes, who succoured king Brandissant
in so dooing, because the king had promised to each
of them, one of these Isles for his part, and seuerally they
should weare kingly crownes, such was their greedie desire
to reigne before theyr fathers death, whose life was more
offensiue to them, then any infectious disease to a healthfull
time: according to which promise, after that Argamor was
then chased thence, who afterward dyed with extreame
greefe: the foure brethren, the eldest whereof is named
Salazard, the second Zorlot, the third Canibarell, and the
fourth Phagotroff, had the gouernment of the foure isles by
them demaunded, conditionally, that thence
                     •
                  foorth they
should be obedient to the commaundements of great king
Brandissant, and liues as they ought vnder his Empire: all
these are likewise at this instant in these warres, with
great multitude of the Islanders, and other neighbours
that owe tribute and allegeance, in company of the father
to Brandissant, who hath engirt with siedge (as I told ye before)
the famous Cittie of London, assisted by many more
whereof ye shall know anon. Thus breaking off, the faire
Nimphe Aegle turned and quickly ioyned together the seperated
partes of the sphere, which beeing inuisibly closed
and brought into the former estate, and casting it into the
Fountaine, immediatly she threw her selfe in after it: promising
to returne againe vpon the more owe, to tell what
remained to the princesse of Constantinople: she sitting
still by the fountaines side, rauished with ioy and delight
for seeing such are sights, and heere because the day continued
no longer▪ wee gaue great reason to knitte vp thys
Chapter.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 22.
               
                  How the Nymph Aegle appearing againe to the Princesse
Porphyria, daughter to the mightie Emperour of Constantinople,
made her see in her Globe of all world, all that
which Asia containeth, and in what part her louer was, with
the pursuit of his high enterprises and aduentur
                        •
                     .
               
               
                  GReat pleasure tooke the fairest of fayre
Princesses in the world, daughter lykewise
to the most mightie Emperour in
the worlde, to beholde so many notable
thinges in so small a time or space, as I
haue declared to yee in the Chapter going
before: and desirous to knowe with
all what yet remained, the next day she failed not to be at the
selfe same place, experting the comming of the Nymph Aegle,
who should discouer the deapth of her desire. In like maner,
the Nymph, according to her promise, came in such equipage
as she had done the daie before: and beeing there ariued,
found the princesse willing to sée the other meruaylous
strange and arteficial matters, that were diuinely engrauen
within the round bowle, where before she had noted
so many singular things alreadie exercised. The fayre
Nymph opened agayne that rare péece of workemanshippe,
bidding her behold and touch with her finger all that which
Asia contained, and first on the East side leading towardes
the North, shee shewed her the seconde parte of the worlde▪
bounding on the great floud of Nylus, which watereth Egipt
from Tanais to Mors maior or the Euxine sea, and one
part with the mediterranean, but on all sides it is enuironed
with the hoge Ocean: in shewing whereof, the nymph
thus spake. This land which ye sée is named As
                     •
                  a, beeing of
such gret
                     •
                  es, & comprehend such spacious circuit of ground,

as it containeth more vnder the name than doth Affrica or
Europe. It is vnder a calme and temperate heauen, the soil
being verie fertile and fruitful, in bringing forth all sorts of
hearbs and plants, the reason thereof is, because it ab
                     •
                  undeth
in all kinde of beasts. It is also inriched with golde and
siluer, and such drugs as are not common to other countries
or parts of the world: likewise with brasse, yron, wooll, saffron,
and many other things of great price and value, especially
in this part of Arabia which is called happy, containing
within it 
                     •
                  elf an Ile called Pauchaia, vpon the gulfe of Persia,
enriched with thrée fayre and stately cities, to wit, Dalida,
Hirracida, and Occeanida, wher the country is also most
fertile, abosiding in wines, myrrhe, incense, gold, siluer, lead
and other like mettals, which by particular ordinaunce, the
Pauchaians will not permit to bee transported foorth of other
countries. Assyria, that long since was named Assur the
sonne of Sem, is this region which yee sée heere, hauing the
countries of India and Media towarde the East, and westward
the violent floud that passeth by the citie of Rome, called
Tigris: about the midst it regardeth the soile of Sus
                     •
                  an,
and by North it is neighbor to mount Caucasus, wher rain
faileth, this countrie is watered by the riuer Euphrates, as
Egypt in like manner is by flowing Nylus: not by naturall
propertie or abounding of the riuer, but by industrie of the
inhabiting people. Here southward to the Egyptian or meterranean
sea, ye see the country so far famed & renowmed,
called Iudea or the land of Chan
                     •
                  an, and here is Palestine,
which by helpe of the floud Iordane is made verie fruitfull
in many things for the life of man, especially in producing
the best balme in the world. The middest of this region is so
seated as ye may behold it, that neither heat or cold are at anie
time more ouer vehement there, but the aire is so temperate,
as the Israelites sometime imagined this to bee the
land of promise, euen the same that God had promised to Abraham.
In this countrie may ye sée your fayre cosin Pharisor
                  
for the gentle knight, who disguised like a pilgrime trauayleth
in search of your knight: but going on full of deuotion to
worship the holy sepulchre of the worlds sauior, he hath met
with the braue king of Phez who hath a little hindered his
iourny. In speaking these words the nymph shewed the princesse
her cosin Pharisor, in the same place where we left him,
listning to the good king of Phez, who recounted his aduenture
and genealogie to the holy hermit, by whose meanes he
receiued cure of his wounds, which brought her such exceeding
pleasure as is impossible to be imagined, much lesse to
be written And had it not bene for earnest desire to sée her
owne knight, she would haue intreated the nymph to tel her
by what aduenture he came thether, and likewise what the
king of Phez was: but she was so earnest in her owne affections,
as hauing a while pleased her eies with loking on her
cosin, she importuned the fayre nymph more pearcingly then
before, to shew her speedily the place where her own knight
was, being now in farre better hope of seeing him, then at
anie time else: the nymph willing to satisfie her lōging, thus
continued on her spéech. If your affection drewe mee not so
so soone from this Land, I would shewe yee therein manye
more meruailous things, as the behauiour and manner of
life, of the auncient Iewes that inhabit it, with sundrie other
strange occasions, worthie to bee vnderstood: but beeing
sent hither onely to accomplish your will, and to let yee
see what is most agréeable to ye, let vs passe on, viewing awhile
the Medes and Armenians. The countrey of the first
tooke name by one of the sonnes of Medea, and king Aegens
that long since commanded in Athens: albeit it is more
likely, of one Medos, sonne to Iaphet, one of Noahs children.
This neighboring sea on the north side, is the Caspian sea,
and that to the weast is great Armenia and Assiria: to the
south are the Persians, of whom wee will speake anon, to
the East lie the Pa
                        •
                     theans & Hirceans: these people haue bin
mighty in war, & had large domination ouer diuers regions

as credible histories doe amplie beare witnes: but at this
present they are as slaues and subiectes to the mightie and
puissant monarch of Persia, who in former time conquering
their king, made them tributarie to his owne Empire. Marie
that wil be but of slender continuance, by reason of your
so farre famed beautie, which will prooue as hurtfull and
dangerous to them, as Helens did to the Gréekes and Troians:
and seeing now we are in talke thereof, I will let you
knowe both the present and future aduenture, and, by the
same discourse, the fairie knight your long desired and wished
loue.
               The great monarch, who by his valour hath dayly augmented
and inlarged his monarchie, shewing himselfe in
all places inuinsible to his enemies, hauing by fortune séen
the portraite of your beautie somewhat figured nere the life
became so surprised with your loue, as neuer since hath hée
inioied anie rest, which was the cause (as not long since you
vnderstood) vppon amorous constraint hee required you in
marriage of the Emperour: but by reason of his difference
in religion, the Emperour 
                     •
                  ound an excuse to refuse the mariage.
But notwithstanding this refusall, hee is growen so
obstinate in his opinion, of inioying yee eyther by force or
fayre means, thinking he cannot liue without ye: as hauing
caused his people to change their religion, to take away the
former allegation of refusall, he is departed long since from
his kingdome, and commeth in person into this country, only
to require ye once more in marriage: when if he be denied,
he meanes to carry ye hence, wherof it behoues ye to take
héed, for he will doe his vttermost, which, ye must perswade
your selfe, will proue no little matter. But I hope my Lady
Ozyris will assi
                     •
                  t ye wi
                     •
                  h such good councell, as in the end
ye shall escape the hands of this tyrant, who, to speake s
                     •
                  oth,
beareth ye entire & earnest affection. But soone after, when
once he might glut himselfe with the swéetnes of your loue
and fauours, he will so hate and set
                     •
                  e his heart agaynst you,

as the most foule woman in the world, shall be more fayre
and amiable in his eye, then 
                     〈◊〉
                  , such is the nature of this
barbarous king.
               Now while hee trauailes in vaine about these affayres,
he shall one day sée himselfe depriued of Crowne and Scepter,
which he will take from him, whom he seekes to rob of
his greatest good for this effect. Sée héere alreadie his kingdome
troubled and deuided, for you must note that all the
people in his realme are reuolted one against another, because
some are good and true Christians, and others, onely
gouerned by frenzie, fearing that their king will renye his
Christianitie: & by force of armes seeke to reduce the rest
to their former religion, which beeing vnable to compasse,
such venemous hatred and despight is kindled amongst
them: as hee must hope of another remedie for so great an
euill, but euen a new mutation of the kingdom and gouernment,
which will so come to passe in very short while. For
your knight, who is arriued heere but lately since, shall
prooue to be their new Lord and king, after he hath somewhat
more trauailed and suffered for the same. Then when
he hath brought all into quiet, and gathered the people vnder
his obeysance: the destenies, who will not staye his
course from better fortunes, in a place so straunge, and with
so few exploits of his vertue and prowesse: shall fill his
sailes to more high desires, especially the incomparable
loue he beareth you, and extreame affection in him, to let
you sée by effects, the seruice hee hath vowed to your diuins
beautie: this shall make him (for some while) abandon this
famous Monarchie, for euer to continue in dooing déedes
of vertue, laudable and worthie of great admiration. During
which pursuite, these people being againe reuolted, he
shall send hither a strong and valiant knight, who with
great paine and trauaile, shall once more bring these mutinous
rebels vnder his awe and obedience: his name, by
reason of his generous acts and braue enterprises, shall be

knowne from this part to the other side of the Pole, yea, hee
shall bee so redoubted and feared, as the verye hardiest shall
tremble to heare him spoken of. In this time, the Sophie,
transported with amourous affections, not able to compasse
his desseignes and enterprises: will vnfortunately
end his dayes, as your selfe in time shall perfectlye beholde.
You tell me meruayles, answered the princesse, but yet yee
shewe me not where the knight is, according to your former
promise: of whom though I was desirous to heare, yet
should I be much more pleased so behold him. Lady, quoth
the Nimphe, it is as necessarie for yee to knowe all these
things, as it is expedient for you to sée him, because I am
assured, both the one and other is agreeable to yee. Looke
now then on this Orientall region, which is called Persia,
of Perseus the sonne to Iupiter, and fayre Danae daughter to
Acrisius, king of the Argiues, according as poeticall fables
testifie. Regard I pray ye, how many thousand armed men
are heere asse
                     •
                  bled, euen for the occasion so lately expressed.
See this famous Cittie called Tauris, neighbour to the
Medes, a people not long since spoken of: behold how it is
besieged by the Persian pagans, vnder the conduct of a
young foole named Mauspasian, brother to the Sophie, hee
that hath caused all this warre: behold into what extremitie
these poore Christians are brought, that are within the
Cittie, they haue nothing left but bread and wine to preserue
life withall, and within these fewe dayes they were
constrained, to 
                     •
                  éede vppon the flesh of their horsses, which
was openly solde in the butcheries of this faire goodly cittie:
yet will they not (for all this) yeeld to theyr enemies, or
forsake their religion, but trusting in succour from aboue,
because else-where they cannot expect anye, rather desire
héere to finish their liues miserablie. Sée the other goodlie
Cittie of Susa, almost in the same necessitie: looke on distressed
Ariodant, the prop and sole comforte of the Christians,
who by flight escaped the hands of Adylas king of Thunis,
                  
that would haue slaine him by treason, because he refused
to yéeld him selfe prisoner: On this other side, beholde
the braue minded knight Taffinor, who halfe dead, by good
hap fell into your knights company, and he healing him of
a mortall wound, vndertakes to reuenge the iniurie doone
him by the traitour Adylas: O inestimable, and (not to bee
comprehended) curtesie, of so braue a knight. Sée I pray ye,
with what deuoyre he begins to pursue this vengeance, see
Argontes, the fauourits of king Adylas, dead on the ground
vnder his horsse, slaine by the valiant right hand of this renowmed
knight, with many other of his complices, the
most appara
                     •
                  t and best knights in the host of Adylas. Not
contented heerewith, note with what fierce hardinesse hee
assayles the mightie pagan, euen within his Tents, notwithstanding
he is accompanied with three or foure hundred
knights of name and marke, euen the men of greatest
valour in all the kingdome. It will not be long, before a hot
and dangerous fight happen betweene them, from which Adylas
shall not escape (by my aduise) so well as he wee
                     •
                  eth,
Thus spake the fayre Nimphe, and euermore as shee discoursed,
shewed all these things vnto the princesse, who was
so ioyfull, seeing her knight represented to the life, as shee
forgot to vse any more questions: and albeit the figure of
him was very little, yet I thinke no tongue can expresse,
no pen can set downe, neither hath any heart the power, to
comprehend the surpassing c
                     •
                  ntentment she enioyed at this
instant.
               The historie reporteth it to bee so great, that she wept
with conceit of ioy, and loosing all countenance, so far forgat
her selfe, that she offered to run and embrace him in her
armes, yea, to salute him with a sweete kisse: but her labour
was in vaine, as well in regarde, that the workmanship
and vis
                     •
                  on of all these things, were not to bee touched
by humaine creatures: as also because the fayre Nimphe
hindered her, and would not permit her to come neere it.

Ouer and beside all the former representations, she shewed
her the dead figure of the Sauage Polyppe, recounting the
wonderfull combats Gerileon had with him, in such sort as
yee haue read in the Chapters treating thereof. The shape
heereof was so fearfull to her, as shee became troubled in
minde out of measure: which made the Nimphe quicklye
remooue it from her sight, and plunging into the Fountaine
water, vanished away, with whose departure we knit
vp this two and twenteth Chapter.
            
            
               CHAP. 23.
               
                  How the king of Phez recited his genealogie and aduenture,
to the holye Hermit and the fayre Pilgrime, and howe the
Hermit tolde him a goodly discourse, to confirme him in
the Christian religion. Moreouer, howe Squamell was
conducted by diabolicall artes, into an obscure Chamber
hard by Auernus, hoping to bee healed of his woundes by
the helpe of deuils, with that which happened to him afterward.
               
               
                  BEcause the change of discourse, brings no
lesse delight to the Reader, then the varietie
of daintie viands contenteth such as
take theyr repast: for a while I intende
to change our purpose, leauing a part the
amourous flame of the fayre princesse
Porphyria, to come againe to the historie
of the valiant king of Phez, not long since made a Christian
miraculously, as yee haue heard before. To let ye vnderstand
withall, according to the truth in writing of him, his
genealogie and aduenture, whereof himselfe maketh recitall
to the holy Hermit and fayre pilgrime, when hee was
thereto by them required, beginning in this or the like maner.

It is a long while since, that Artabaz sometime king of
Persia, was enamoured on the 
                     •
                  ayre Quéene Lyxandra, the
most fayre and wealthie Ladie in riches and other goods of
fortune, that was in those times: for vnder her obedience
and Empire, as also her lawes, liued in flourishing prosperitie
the people of foure opulent kingdomes, which are on
the coast of Barbarie, to wit, Phez, Marocco, Thunis, and
Alger. But Looue had not touched with selfe same shaft
the hart of Lyxandra, as he did the hart of Artabaz, because
the more earnestly he loued, the more mortally she hated: 
                     •
                  y
reason, that in the life time of king Brunon her father, hee
had dayly vexed him with warres, seeking to depriue him
of his kindomes and Signories. For this cause he trauailed
and molested him, as no man in the world could doo the
like: so that being ouercome with wea
                     •
                  ines of the passed
warres, Brunan finished his dayes, after hee had made some
treatie or accord of peace with the king of Persia, euen
then when first he began to loue the fayre Lyxandra: who
hauing auncient mallice engrauen in her heart, continued
dayly in resolution to hate him more and more.
               Héerevpon, she not willing to graunt marriage with the
Persian king, nor to listen his solicitings, requests, and
temptations, which stretched so farre as he could deuise, the
perticuler discourse whereof were too long to rehearse: hee
concluded to winne her by force of armes, and to renew the
former warres against her, more sharpe and cruelly then
euer hee did, against the deceased king Brunon her father.
Which being thus pursued, he brought the vertuous princesse
into such necessitie, as hee left her neither kindome,
Cittie, towne, nor burrough, place nor Castell, but all was
brought vnder his obeysance, and all of them spoyled, the
strong Cittie of Phez onely excepted, wherein being constrained
to shut vppe her selfe, he so long time continued the
s
                     •
                  ege against it, as she was on the pointe of yeelding to his
mercie, or else to take away her owne life: but then (by

good hap) a young Knight, so highly accomplished as any other
whatsoeuer, arriued on the coast of Barbarie, euen as
the Quéene was in this great perplexitie, deuising with
her selfe what she were best to doo: he hearing by the common
reporte blazed abroad, what harde holde the Queene
Lyxandra had against the Persian Tyrant, beeing brought
so neere the place, by violence of the windes that droue him
on the seas: was willing to succour her, beeing touched
partly with pittifull affection, which the goodnes of nature
had endned him withall, and partly prouoked on by fayre
desire, to make appearance of his hardie valour, the fame
whereof alreadie was bru
                     •
                  ed through most places in the
world: but seeing at this first attempt, that his accesse and
entraunce into the Cittie (so narrowly besiedged on eueri
                     •
                  
side) would prooue very difficult, the gates being ramd vp,
and the walles enuironed with Persian men at armes. An
indifferent while he deuised with himselfe, by what meane
both easily and couertly hee might get entrance. Hauing
some space considered heereon, the Historie saith, that he especially
noted one side of the cittie wall, where the enemies
had made a very great breache, to enter thereby on the morowe,
vpon the answer Quéene Lyxandra should returne to
king Artabaz: and this breach was guarded by certaine armed
men of the Cittie, while the Quéene assembling her
councell, should agree on some expresse resolution of answer
concerning her submission to her enemie. The assaylants
on the other side of the breache, were making banquets,
passing away the time very merrilye, vnder certaine assurance,
that now the cittie should be yeelded or taken, vppon
theyr request within of composition: and well ye wot, that
a Cittie comming to composition, is more then halfe taken.
This was the cause, that the young knight beeing come
neere the breache, and séeing they that kept it were verie
carefull of their charge, hee softly whispered with them, to
know by what meanes hee might enter the cittie, to haue

some spéech with the queene Lyxandra, concerning matters
of importance that would prooue profitable to her, desiring
them to let her vnderstand thereof, in that the cause of his
comming thither, was earnest desire to imp
                     •
                  oy himselfe for
her defence in this warre.
               The Souldiers made him answere, that one should presently
goe do his errand, and the Queene being aduertised
heereof, was very glad, knowing well by his renowme and
valour, that he was the gentle knight of the Flower, (for
so was he called, because as then hee loued a Ladye named
Florixa, in regard of whose name, he bare a Uermillion Gilliflower
painted in his sheeld) a man so hardie and valiant,
as hee was esteemed beyond all the knights of that time.
Héere vpon she gaue comman
                     •
                  dement, that he should be let
into the Cittie, by a doore that passed from her Castell▪ to
the Towne: marrie it was to be doone in the dead time of
the night, and that so couertly or closely as might be: thus
escaped the knight in, vnseene of the enemie, with his armour
and horsse, and one Squire that bare him companie.
In breefe, to tell ye what passed betweene them, the quéene
letting him vnderstand the occasion of this warre, the successe
thereof, and the extremitie whereinto she was brought
farre more in effect then the knight had heard reported: she
fell downe on her knées before him, and with the teares
trickling downe her chéekes, intreated him, to helpe her
both with councell and valiance, promising to deliuer vp
all the treasure of her kingdome into his handes, if in this
darkenesse he could illuminate them with some meanes,
whereby they might escape the tyrants power, that forciblie
sought to make a rape of her, wherevnto before shee
would condiscend, shee minded to murther her selfe with
hir owne hands.
               When the knight of the Flower had noted his words, desire
of honor prouoked him rather to fight for her, then all
her teares, & promised her, with the helpe of God, that dread

of death, should not with-hol
                     •
                   him from defence of her case,
which according to her recitall, séemed to him most iust and
reasonable. In this resolue, he thus aduised the Quéene to
answer the Persian tyrant, that shee would not yeelde her
selfe to his mercie, before shee made some proofe of the loue
he bare her, a
                     •
                  d whether it were so effectuall, that he durst
on the morrow aduenture the combate, against one knight,
man to man, with what armes himselfe would choose. For
one should be sent foorth of the Cittie, armed at all pointes,
whom if hee could vanquish, shee would condiscend to his
will: but if the contrary happened, and he were conquered
he should raise his siedge, and depart with his hoste from
before the Cittie, deliuering and restoring into her repossession,
all such Citties, townes, borroughes, places, castels,
lands and seigniories, as he had taken and ruined, rendering
and restoring to her likewise, all the treasure, which
she spent to maintaine her resistance in warre, the vale we
and summe whereof he should credit a
                     •
                  d beleeue vpon her
owne oath.
               If he pleased not to accept this offer▪ she was determined
to kill her selfe with her owne handes, rather then shee
would graunt what he so earnestly desired. This councell
was so agreeable to the Queene, that presently she dispatched
a messenger to Artabaz, to heare from him some answere
or resolution. At this message hee did nothing but
smile and laugh, in derision and mockerie (as it were) assuring
himselfe of the victorie: and therefore accepted the
Combate, with knightes ordinarie armes of Launce and
Swoord: but to make short, the knight of the Flower and
hee combatted the next day man to man, in such sort and so
long time, as (after a fierce and extreame cruell fight) Artabaz
was vanquished, and yeelded prisoner to the Queene
Lyxander: where by meanes of the knight of the Flower,
he forcibly was compeld to performe the articles & conuentions,
sollemnly sworne on either part before the combate.

When Artabaz was enlarged from the Quéenes prison,
conquered despight and despa
                     ••
                  e, hee ranne himselfe vppon
his owne sword, to let out the loue he before had conceyued
towardes the Quéene Lixandra, who thus was deliuered
from miserie and captiuitie, as also the violent furie of so
great an enemie. Nor fayled 
                     •
                  he to thanke the yong knight
the mean of her deliuerance, entertayning and feasting him
there the space of a whole yere, euen perforce, as it were,
causing him to tarrie with her, so that in the end she became
enamoured of him, and but that she was a Pagan and hée a
Christian, he being lykewise else where vowed, she woulde
haue ioyned with him in marriage. And notwithstanding
this prohibiting bond, both of the one and other religion, she
could not support the extreame flame of this amorous fyre,
but being ouercome with incontinencie, was constrayned
to yeld her selfe in such sort, as she had knowledge of him almost
against his heart and will. Howe oft this continued I
knowe not, but within short time she was conceiued, which
the young knight perceiuing, beeing wearie of these amourous
sportings, which else where ought to be emploied, euen
in place where his heart serued, one daie secretly getting
from his companie, and being disguised, hee went whether
the winde and fortune would conduct him. At his departure
she was meruaylously discomforted, causing diligent search
to be made for him in all places her lande, as also far and
neare to enquire after him, being willing to change her religion
and become a Christian, onely to marrie with him, or
once more to get him in her custodie. But hearing by credible
reporte, that hee was the valiaunt Brandismel, king of
great Britaine, who being a young knight, so chaunged his
name and disguised his armes, hauing espoused his Florixa,
from whome came the king Floridamant, of whome at this
daie is held such account: she comforted her selfe so well as
she could, and couered her fault so cunningly, that albeit shée
was great with child, she married with the worthie Knight

Florinor, at that day king of Armenia, in time of whieh mariage,
by about seauen 
                     〈◊〉
                   after, she was deliuered of
a goodly son called Florant, in remembraunce of the knight
of the Flower his father. Within thrée years after she had
thrée other sons, one named Adylas, the second Phoas, & the
third Orontes, all found such hardie & aduenterous knights
as euer liued in anie time.
               Now because Ferramond was chased forth of Armenia,
by Clarion brother to Artabaz, who was king after him
and father to Mutinel at this time raigning, a long while he
vexed him with warres, to recouer home his kingdome agayne,
but he could not compasse what hee intended, vntyll
Florant grew strong and abie to carrie armes, who beeing
assisted with a mightie and puissaunt armie, and especially
imployed in these affayres, went forward with his charge so
effectually, that hee expelled thence Clarion and his people,
who grew into such vexation heereat, as séeing he was no
longer able to stand agaynst him, he caused him traiterously
to be slayne by foure Persians, who counterfeiting to
come in embassage to him, with letters pretended from Clarion,
as he talked alone with them in his chamber, they c
                     •
                  uelly
murdered him with certaine pistols, which for the purpose
they had closely hid vnder theyr mātles. Florinor who
tooke himselfe to be his father, was so offended and grieued
hereat, as a good father will naturally be for the death of so
valiant a sonne, and sent Adylas his other sonne, with a far
more great and stately armie, to reuenge the death of Florant
his brother, but hee followed his busines so slenderly,
that albeit he was a valyant knight, ther he lest his life and
his armie discomfited, which went so neere the hart of Florinor,
that with conceyt of griefe he dyed, being then aged in
yeres, as lykewise was his Quéene Lixandra, who carefully
nourished me vp being the sonne of Florant, and endued
with his name, as also young Adylas, bearing likewise
name after his slaine father. In this time or soone after the

death of Florinor, Phoaz and Orantes, seeking after aduentures
as knigh
                     •
                  es arrant, prickt forward with desire of
fame and honour, were slayne in two seuerall encounters
by king Floridamant, beeing then as they were, a young
knight, and following the same affayres. Eache of them
left a sonne behinde them bearing their owne names, who
lykewise remayned in the charge and kéeping of Queene
Lixandra our grand-mother, shee verie carefully nourished
and brought vs vp, especially me, to whome verie often shée
discoursed these accidents: and litle before her death (which
rather was through age than anie other extremitie) she parted
and diu
                     •
                  ded the kingdomes betwéene vs, appoynting to
one the realme of Phez. Adylas, Phaos, and Orontes, my cousins,
had giuen to them the three other seigniories, to witte,
Morocco, Thunis and Alger, wherewith wee all haue beene
well contented, without quarrelling or falling at debate for
anie cause whatsoeuer.
               But we being as yet verie young, were assayled again
by Mutinel the king of Persia, in reuenge of Artabaz death
his predecessor, and would haue depriued vs againe of our
kingdomes: but we so well defended our selues, as he coulde
not altogether defeate vs of our right, but in regarde of our
ouer young yeres, we promised him certayne yerely tribute,
and obeisance or homage, when he woulde commaund vs to
haue it done, which euer since we haue dayly continued, and
in consequence hereof, being charged by him to arme themselues
agaynst the king of great Britaine, in companie of
king Brandissant and his brethren, to ruinate and destroie
all christendome together, wee entered on the seas with a
goodly great armie thitherward, and sayling merrily certayne
daies in our voiage, we were surprized with a greate
tempest, which separated vs one from another, in such sort,
as I know not what is become of the rest. Well wot I, that
my ship was wrackte against a huge rocke, and none saued
aliue of all that were with me but my selfe alone.

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
               
               
                  
Since when, hauing recouered horse and armour, such as by
fortune I brought with me into the forrest of great aduentures,
wher méeting a proud and arrogant knight, that challenged
all passengers to combate with him, promising for
prize of theyr victorie a goodly horse, a fayre armour, and a
golden cup of inestimable value: desirous to gain these thrée
if I could, I entered the combat with him, and all daie wee
fought together, without apparance of victorie on either side
till the verie declining of the daie, when wee were euen on
the point to knowe where the lot woulde fall, when another
knight no lesse valiant than proud, came to trouble our intent,
very suriously assayling vs both. In which sirange conflict
it chanced that this curteous Lord came, and seeing our
confused order of fighting, behelde howe I was wounded, of
which hurts, through the mighty and supreame diuine vertue,
I am now healed.
               Thus good Father, haue I fully sat
                     •
                  sf
                     •
                  ed your request,
if ye will command me anie other seruice, assure your selfe
I will doe it verie gladly. Thus king Florent of Phez ended
his discourse, when the olde hermite began an excellent
exhortation to confirme him soundly in the christian fayth,
charging him to liue and die in defence thereof, and not to
persecute it as before he had done. Taking occasion by the
example of Saint Paul, to incite him forward to his dutie,
according as he procéeded in Gods soruice after hee was so
diuinely called. When he had finished his sermon, wher with
the king was highly satiffied and contented, after hee hadde
humbly thanked him for so great good receiued, he departed
in companie of the faire pilgrime, with him to go visite the
holy sepulchre of Iesus Christ: where what happened to
them afterward, you shal reade at large in the third volume
of this worthie historie, which (if God permit) you shal
see verie shortly.
               
                  
                  The discourse of the Giant Squamell.
                  
                     
                        SQuamell the ouer wéening proud knight,
mightie in strength and of Giantine stature,
was conducted on the blacke riuer
(as yee haue heard) very farre vnder the
earth, by the diabolicall arte of the Necromancer
Charonifor, euen into a dark
chamber full of fyre and smoake, the verie
next neighbout to black Auernos: wherein hee was no
sooner arriued, but certaine young spirits or deuils, the
waiting seruants on the sorcerer, came quickly about him,
foure bringing vnguents, others clothes, another a candle
of Rosen to light their maister, that he might make readie
his necessarie emplaisters, wherewith the Giants wounds
should be healed. And he being halfe dead, was laid along on
a banke before a great fire, that burned extreamly within
the chamber, which onely serued to giue them light night
and day: thrée times he swouned, while Chironifer his chirurgion
felt the depth of his mortall woundes, which notwithstanding,
by his speedy helpe, succour, and dilligence,
within few dayes after were made verye whole and sound.
Right well he knew how to thank the Necromancer, vowing
his loue for euer after to him: and Charonifer likewise
as glad of his health exhorted him still to follow his aduenture,
and returne to the Forrest where hee was wounded,
there to stay till he met a knight in black armour, mounted
on the horsse which was one of the prizes of the combate,
assuring him, that hee was one of the best knights in the
world. If therefore he 
                        〈◊〉
                      at honor and reputation, such
as beséemed 
                        •
                     he order of knighthood, hee should not rest till
he had fought with him and slaine him, otherwise it he failed
in this 
                        〈…〉
                      great

                        〈…〉
                      performe

                        〈◊〉
                      departing frō his nightly shade, after he had taken leaue

of the Necromancer: he was conducted back againe by the
same way he went, entring the black Boate, to goe view
the light of the sunne, which hee had neuer seene since hee

                        •
                     ame thither. Beeing in little while arriued in the forrest
of high aduentures, and riding by the morning light, the
space of an houre: he found a Ladie of meruailous beautie
hanging by the neck on a Tree, the fatall instrument, being
the laces that bound vp her hayre, which being discheueled
round about her, hung downe to her very feete. The Giant
presently knew her to be the Lady Lucinda whom somtime
he loued, and now so mortally hated, as hee was not a little
ioyfull to behold this sight: lauding his gods, especially Cupid,
who so meritoriouslie reuenged the rigour, which shee
in former time had vsed toward him: for when he intirelie
loued her, she scorned him, wherfore in 
                        •
                     esting maner he imbraced
the dead bodye, swinging her about from one side to
another: but at last hee was ware of a paper, which with a
small thred was fastened on her bosome, which hee taking
downe, and seeing them to be verses, read them to himselfe
in this manner.
                  
                     The verses written on a little Labell, and fastned about
the Ladyes neck, as she hung vpon the Tree
                     THou that goest by, if pittie thee possesse,
                     then take compassion on this noble dame:
                     Who foyld by loue, and fortunes forwardnes,
                     heere (as thou seest) hath doone a deed of shame.
                     Making her hands the engines of her death,
                     And on this Tree sent foorth her latest breath.
                  
                  
                     If 
                           •
                        hou be knight, and valour doost containe,
                     doo thy deuoire, to wreake her haplesse end:
                     On cruell Squamell, honors foulest staine,
                     whom teares nor treates could make a Ladies frend.
                     But full of rancor, pride and high disdaine:
                     Still made her breath her sighes & sutes in vaine.
                  
                  
                     
                     If thou be Lady, or some vertuous dame;
                     and knowst the man that holds thy fauours deere:
                     Loue him againe, and thinke not on my name,
                     in whom the effects of scorne dooth well appeare,
                     I was beloou'd, and then I would not fauoure,
                     I sued for loue, and haue this for my labour.
                  
                  
                     As when he lou'd, I coyly made refuse,
                     so when I lou'd, he did disdaine my sight:
                     I would not yeeld when liked him to chuse,
                     he would not graunt when I would if I might.
                     Let this vile death for my contempt suffice:
                     And my example make all other wise.
                  
                  When Squamell had read these lines, he was so ouercome
with choller and despight, as letting fall the writing, he set
hand to his Semitarie, where with hee smote at the Ladie,
and cut her quite thorowe in the middest by her girdle: so
that the one part of the bodie, to wit, the head, neck, shoulders
and sides remained hanging on the tree, and the belly,
flankes, thighes, legges and féete tombled on the ground, a
thing very cruell, hideous, and gastly to be seene. Hauing
in this sorte some what appeased his anger, hee did nothing
but laugh, breathing foorth many iniurious spéeches against
her: at which very instant, an other Giant of meruailous
stature, exceeding Squamell in heighth by the head, arriued
there, who hearing him speake such vile wordes, and seeing
withall such an inhumaine déed: thought good to check and
reprooue him for it in this manner.
                  Knight, thou mayst well blush with shame, that any one
should euer see thee beare marke of chiualrie, and the arms
which thou doost weare: imploying them so hadly as thou
hast doone, vpon a poore and miserable creature, whose vnhappie
destenie brought her to this end. I thinke if thou
wouldst shew thy selfe so vertuous and valiant, to so many
braue knights, which ordinarily passe thor
                        •
                     w this forrest,

as thou hast witnessed thy selfe most monstrous and cruell
toward this poore body: thou shouldst finde other affayres
better beséeming a knight then this
                        •
                     , and wherein thou
mightest with greater honestie spend thy time. How nowe
companion? answered Squamell, darest thou be so bolde as
come hither to reprooue my actions, which are so vertuous
and worthi
                        •
                     , as heauen, earth, and all contained therein do
admire them? especially this last déede by me doone vppon
this Ladie, is so deseruedly to be praised, as if thou knewest
the occasion thereof, thou wouldst commend and reckon me
among other knights of vertue, that doo dayly make high
estéeme of mee, and that more worthilie, than thou canst
dare thus rashlye to reprehend mee: but because I repute
thée vnworthie to know this occasion, I haue nothing else
to say vnto thée, but if with speed thou get thee not gon: I
will learne thee against an other time to speake more wiselie,
in that I haue the power both to tame and teache. And
albeit thou art of bigger constitution then I, yet will I
shew thée, that in all the rest thou art farre lesse aud inferiour
to me: and for I am loth to laye anye hand vpon thee,
but onely the very greatnes of my name, which is sufficient
to make thee flie quickly out of my pro
                        •
                     ence, know that
I am the great and puissant knight Squamell, the renowne
of whose vertue enuirones all the worlde, and serues as a
terror to the most audacious and hardiest knight.
                  Knight, replyed the Giant, I haue heard speeche of thee,
and the bruite of thy name hath often héeretofore pierced
mine eares: yet (for all that) I am nothing hastie of flight,
because I doo not imagine thée to be so hardie and valiant,
as the thundering reporte that hath beene blazed of thee
for if thou hast heard report of the mightie Ferclaste, Androfort
and Ergofe
                           •
                        ant, thou hast well vnderstood, that neuer
might any knight bee equalled in force and prowesse with
them: but the hardyest and stowtest indeed haue fled at
the 
                        ••
                     nowne of their names.
                  
                     
Theyr 
                        •
                     ame while they liued was noised farre and néere,
so likewise was the worthie 
                        ••
                     abot: then maist thou well
thinke and assure thy selfe, that I who am Ergoferant, the
onely suruiuer of those thrée, doo greatly scorne to flie from
thée, except some greater matter enforce or constraine mee.
What, answered Squamell, art thou one of those thrée huge
Colosses, that serned as a terror to all Gréece? and of those
thrée remaineth none aliue but thée? Tell mee what is become
of thy brethren, for if they be dead, assure thy self I am
greatly displeased, in respect of the earnest desire I hadde to
combate with them, and conquere ye all thrée one after another,
not for anie loue I dyd euer beare ye, or doubting anie
hatred ye all durst beare me. Content thy selfe, sayd Ergoferant,
that thou know
                        •
                     st ther were such thrée, thou must now
enter the combate alone against me, I shall bee sufficient to
breake thy foolish pate, and cause thée quickly giue ouer this
proud daring spéech. To knowe what is become of my brethren,
how they were slaine, and by whome, I am not to tell
thée, because thou hast shewen to little curtesie to me, in scorning
to tell me this. Ladies misfortune, and the occasion of
thy hatred to her, vrging thée to committe such a monstrous
and inhumane act, in this respect I thinke thée vnworthie to
knowe theyr mishaps. I perceiue wel (quoth Squamel) why
thou darest not tell mee, because theyr ende was with such
shame and reproch, as it were thy dishonour, being their brother,
to make report thereof, for perhaps, as it is no other like,
some knight of smal valour hath slain them, and by conquest
brought thée likewise vnder his obeisance. Thou liest in thy
throate, answered Ergoferant, for a knight of slender valor
could not conquere them, nor yet subiect me to his obedience,
but if I yelded my selfe to anie one, assure thy selfe hee was
no meane man of vertues. And that thou maist beare record
thereof, we trifle too much time in prating, let the effects declare
which of vs two proueth most valiant, otherwise thou
doest but séeke occasion to shunne the combat, which take as

thou will, for I will dally no longer. So saying, with a
mightie mase which he bore, he let driue at his aduersarie, &
the stroke fell with such violence, he standing with his semitarie
drawen to defend it, as had hee not withstoode it with
wonderfull strength, it had layde him on the grounde. But
Squamell well awarded this horrible blow, without receiuing
anie great domage therby, and deliuered back a sound
answere for the same with his semitarie, which the gyaunt
escaped in as ample manner: and thus began between them
a sharpe and cruell fight, continuing the space of two hours,
without discouery which side had most aduantage, but in the
end it so fell out, that Squamel was readier to fight on horsbacke
than the other, knowing howe to tourne and manage
his horse for most harme to his enemie, mary Ergoferant
was nothing so nimble, only his strokes were more waightie
than his aduersaries, but he was nothing comparable in
dexterie and nimblenes, which is the onely thing required
in a combat. At length Squamel began to be verie sore trauailed,
when sodainely ariued in place a knight of so little
stature, as he might easily stand vnder the cleft of eyther of
them, he galloping with the full carrire of his horse, hauing
a fayre broad glistering sword in his hand, which hee handled
so lightly, as if it had bin a litle riding wād, yet was it in
sight so heauie, as it he could not haue lifted it with both his
hands. To each of the combattants hee gaue a meruaylous
stroke, saying, holde and cease your fighting, to tell me forth
the occasion of your combat. Ergoferant was astonned here
at, as giuing his horse the bridle, without conduct or gouernment
he ranne awaie, kéeping no direct course, but here and
there ouer the forest, as in short space he was farre inough
from his enemie. Squamel likewise was so amazed with
his stroke, as albeit hee rained his horse as strongly as hee
could, yet ran he away with him swifter than the wind, carrying
him also as far off the other waie. Heereat they both
meruailed not a litle, especially the short knight, who séeing

them fight so fiercely, reputed them of greater valor than to
flie awaie so spéedily. But kn
                        •••
                     ng as then no reason hereof,
he fel into a great laughter, til sodainly he espied the ladie
hanging, when hauing a prettie while behelde her, both
the mangled trunke and the rest lying on the ground, perceuing
she had bene of singular beautie, he toke some 
                        •
                     ompassion
on her misfortune, especially after he had read the verses,
which he found on the ground wher Squamel had throwen
them: and so entirely was he moued with pitie, as hee
resolued to know who had caused her mishap, to the end hée
might worke some re
                        •
                     enge therefore. Herevpon he would
ride to méete one of the two combattants, by force or fayre
meanes to know how this happened: now while he is searching
them, not onely wil I here conclude this Chapter,
but also the sceond booke of this famous
Historie.
                  Thus Gentlemen, here knit we vp the second part of Gerileons
historie, if this may find but wished entertainmēt, the third
partshall follow with all speed possible. In meane while an old
promise remaineth to be performed, namely, the first booke of
Primaleon o
                        •
                      Greece, which by Gods permission yee shal haue
the next Tearme, if it may be finished so soone. Let then Gerileons
welcome hasten on Primaleon.
                  A. Mundy.
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   