
      
         
            
            
            THE
CENTER
OF
THE CIRCLE
OF COMMERCE.
            
               OR,
A Refutation of a Treatise, Intituled
The Circle of Commerce, or The Ballance of
Trade, lately published by E. M.
            
            By GERARD MALYNES Merchant.
            Magna est Veritas, praeualuit, 
                  〈◊〉
               
semper praeualebit.
            
               LONDON,
Printed by VVilliam Iones, and are to be sold by
Nicholas Bourne at the Royall Exchange.
1623.
         
         
            
            Regina Pecunia Loquitur.
            Haec gaudere facit sapientis nomine stultum,
            & graue Prudentis munus obire viri,
            Quisquis in hac non est sapiens quasi stultus habetur
            & quasi quod Vacuum, sit Ratione caput,
            Regnat in incertis Regina Pecunia Rebus,
            moribus Ambiguae, quae stat in orbe deae.
         
         
            
            TO THE MOST
Illustrous and most excellent Prince
CHARLES,
Prince of VVales, Duke of Cornwall,
Earle of CHESTER, &c.
            
               It may please your Highnes.
            
            
               
                  THE Oracle of Apollo at Delphos,
being demanded why Iupiter
should be the chiefest of the
gods, sith Mars was the best
Souldier: Answered, Mars is
valiant, but Iupiter wise; concluding by this,
that Councell and Policy are of more force to subdue
then Valour; Parua sunt Arma foris, nisi
sit Concilium domi, saith Cicero: but forasmuch
that neither wisdome nor valour can well
subsist without treasure, since Moneys haue obtained
the title of the sinowes of war, and the life

of Commerce: I hope that the accumulating thereof
may properly be called The Praeheminent
study of Princes, when the same is procured by
Trade: which is the sole peaceable instrument to
inrich Kingdomes and Common-weales.
            This Trade is performed betweene vs and forreine
Countries vnder three simples, namely
Commodities, Moneys, and Exchanges for
Moneys, which being ioyntly and distinctly considered
in their proper natures, will cause our decayed
Trade to flourish: but because one Edward
Misselden did omit to handle the Praedominant
part of Trade (in a Treatise Dedicated vnto
your Highnes, Intituled) Free Trade, viz. the
Mistery of Exchanges, and that not without an
aspersion laid vpon me I was moued to make an
answer thereunto, shewing his maine scope to be,
to haue the moneys of the Realme inhaunced, and
the forreine Coyne to be currant at an equall value:
which was to reforme things by a Remedy
worse then the disease; for the inhauncing of our
Moneys wil increase the prices of all things, whereby
the Kings most Excellent Maiestie shall become
the greatest loser in the reuenewes of the Crowne,
and the Nobility and Landed men also: and to

make forreine Coyne currant within the Realme,
will ouerthrow his Maiesties Mint, and abrogate
a marke of Soueraignty, the Coyning of Moneys.
            Hereupon hauing in the Epistle Dedicatory of
the said Treatise vnto his sacred Maiestie, intituled,
The Maintenance of Free Trade: compared
the same vnto the Little Fish mentioned by
Plutarch, swimming before the Great VVhale:
because I had then vnder the Presse a great volume
of Lex Mercatoria, Dedicated likewise vnto
his Maiestie, and both presented vnto your
Highnes.
            The said Misselden (carping at the Simile,
and directing his course from your Highnes) hath
lately published an opposition to the said Bookes,
called the Circle of Commerce, copious of vnciuill
speeches, whereby (in respect of priuat cause)
I haue great occasion to implore his Maiesties fauour
against him; As Homer did Ptolome the
great King of Aegipt, against the rayling cōmentaries
of Zoylus. But the matter concerning the
Publike, and being of farre greater consequence
then a centention for Learning, I am compell
                  •
               d
humbly to beseech your Highnes to intercede for
me vnto his sacred Maiestie, to be well pleased to

peruse this my third Booke, intituled The Center
of the Circle of Commerce, wherein the meanes
to prouide his Kingdomes and Dominions with
Bullion & Moneys are more distinctly declared,
according to the said Center of Cōmerce, which
is (gaine,) without which his Circle is (vaine.)
            To make A Definition of the Center of the
Earth is difficult euen amongst learned Philosophers
and Schoolemen, considering Aristotle his
Doctrine grounded vpon Leuity of things ascending,
and Grauity of things falling to their Center:
and the opinion of Copernicus, or rather of
the Pithagorians, ascribing a Stability to the
Heauens, and a Mobility to the Earth; But to
make a Definition of this Center (gaine) is easie,
and engraffed in euery mans iudgement.
            This Center maketh a perfect Orbe, including
all Geometricall proportions, and can answere
all Mathematicall Problemes of Trade,
for the doubling of the Cube of Solids, and
the Quadrature of the Circle in Plaine, without
Platos Exposition, or Misseldens conceited
Ballance of Trade: for all the weight of Commerce
falleth within the Circuit of the Circle of
this Center (gaine:) insomuch, that if the due

consideration hereof be neglected in the course of
Trade, nothing can be expected but the decay of
Trade, and destruction of Common-weales, according
to the Demonstration of the following Allegory
to a diseased body naturall so that Statesmen
and Politicians are to bend their iudgements
in all publike causes to this Center (gaine, which
beareth the sway in all humane actions,) thereby to
finde out all fallacies and misprisions of Trade, to
the increase of the Kingdomes stocke, without priuate
regard of particular Merchants making their
benefit by the generall losse of the Kingdome: there
is no man so simple but will auoide a losse if he can,
and on the contrary, procure a gaine where he may
or can; Shall it be imagined then that Bullion &
Moneys will be imported when the bringer thereof
becommeth a loser, or that moneys will remaine
within the Realme, when so great a gaine can be
had by the exportation thereof? Or will any man
think that Trade can be driuen conueniently without
moneys and Exchanges? will not the want of
it make a dead Trade within the Realme when
this Vitall spirit of Commerce faileth? surely
it is questionles in euery mans vnderstanding.
            Your Highnes therefore may be pleased to aduance

the establishing of this Center in the course
of Trade, whereby his Maiesties Kingdomes and
Dominions will flow with Bullion and Moneys,
and infuse life thereunto, which will be felt by the
Pulces, the Hammers of the Mint: vpon my
life and reputation of knowledge, which time and
occasion seeme to further by the price of Exchange,
inclining thereunto since this Treatise hath beene
vnder the Presse. If any thing therein shall seeme
impertinent to the Grauity of the Center, I beseech
your Highnes to attribute the same to the
Leuity of the Circle, the rather because Nugae
seria ducunt. Thus with all humblenes taking
leaue, I shall continue my feruent Prayers to the
Almighty, to preserue your Highnes in health and
happinesse, to his glory, and your eternall felicity.
London the 20. of Nouember. 1623.
            
               Your Highnes most
obedient Seruant
GERARD MALYNES.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE
CENTER OF THE
CIRCLE OF COMMERCE.
            OR,
A Refutation of a Treatise, intituled
The Circle of Commerce, lately
published by E. M.
            
               The Proeme.
               
                  STrong imagination, nourished
by opinion, may cause most
men to suppose, that Edward
Misselden,
                  Salust of S
                        •
                     allenger. in whom the Babilon
of learning seemeth to bee:
would not publish any thing
which were not serious & substantiall,
which moued me to enter into consideration
of the Reasons, which caused him to intitle his
Treatise, The Circle of Commerce: and imagining
that Giotto the Painter (hauing in the turning of an
hand made a perfect Circle without a Compasse:)

was the cause thereof. I did instantly perceiue, that
the comparison was most proper and apt, to make
the matter perspicuous: for euen as the Circle of Giotto,
was made without a Center, even so is his Circle
of Commerce, without substance or Center, like vnto
a stone cast into a standing water, which maketh a
Circle, and that circle begetteth many Circles vpon
circles: but at last they all vanish away, and leaue
neither Center nor any thing beside to build vpon.
               For when I doe compare his circle to the Celestiall
Sphere,Epist. Dedicatory. comprehending the figures or constellations
within the twelue Signes: I am first encountred
with Comets or Blazing starrs of Adulation; and
with diuers Meteors of watry vapours of high presumption;
& then approaching neere to the Starres,
I doe find him to endevour, that all his inferrences,
might be as powerfull, as their influences to revenge
his quarrell against me, which concerneth the whole
kingdome.
               
                  In the great and litle Beare,
                  Absurdities in all the parts of his Treatise. he findeth an accusation
of Scandalum Magnatum. In the Dragons Taile, vox
Pecudis concerning the whole kingdome. In Hercules
a Club to defend the errors of Marchants. In Serpentario,
calumniation & detractiō. In Agitator, Logicke
turned into Rimes & rayling. In Pegasus, vaine
imaginations, swimming in his braine: In the Whales
belly,
                  Great Whale and little fish. he is like the Sexton in the Belfrey. In the little
fish, euerstriuing contradictions. In the great and little
Dog, barking and biting. In the Ship, he is sayling
without a Rudder or Compasse. In Centaure, frenzies
and biting scurrility. In Putius, A puddle of vntruthes.
In vultur volans: a devouring of fame. In

the Harpe, noyses and vnpleasant tunes. In the Triangle,
dreames of Iewes and Grecians. In Andromuda,
accusation of ignorance. In Perseo, scandelous Aspertions.
In the crowne, presumptuous exhortations to
Superiours. In Sepheo, obstinacy & vayne disputations.
In Orion, matter and forme by former & later.
In vultur Cadens, deprivation of modestie. In the cup
A defence of Vinteners. In the Swanne, a preiudicating
humor. In the Crowe, vexation of innocence. In
the Dolphine, An intention of fishing. In via lactea, a
coniuration of circles. In the flying Horse, flattery of
particular persons and Societies. And finally in the
other figures or constellations, a running with the
streame of ignorance, to maintayne errours & fallacies,
cutting downe with Arcturus Syth, all wholesome
Lawes and Ordinances, made for Reformation
of abuses.
               To contract all these into the imaginary Circle
of the 12 Signes, would be more offensiue, thē troublesome,
because of the application of the Cornuted
beasts of Aries, Taurus, & Capricorne: But I haue resolued
to make Libra the ballance of our discourse,
and to vse modest termes in opposition of vnciuill
speeches. So that finding no Center in the Celestiall
Sphere:
                  Time a destroyer. 
                  Abbaddon comming by told me, that the Terrestiall
Globe was the Center of it, vnlesse (saith he)
you will make this man to be the Center, and place
him in the middle thereof (as he speaketh of Sapor
King of Persia,
                  P. 142. sitting in his great Globe made of
glasse:) And so draw all the lines of his circle, frō the
circumference of his aforesaid Passions to the vndeuided
poynt of the Center of his heart, frō whence

they haue their Originall.
               Herevpon calling to mind his owne confession,P. 5.
that he knoweth not how he is inclosed within this
his Circle, & that he will through the Center thereof
draw a Diamiter, and deuide the whole circle into
two Semi-circles to get out of it, (much like to the
maget in a haselnut, which after she hath devoured
the kernell, maketh a hole to creep out, and then it
is but newly borne:) I haue resolued to gird him
within his owne circle, by the fi
                     •
                  e Zones or Girdles
of this Terrestiall Globe, beginning from the Artike
circle vnto the Tropicke of Cancer, equidistant and
correspondent to the Antartike circle and the Tropicke
of Capricorne, placing the Equinoctiall in the
middle of the fiue chapters following. And when I
doe exclude all the Stuffe contayned in the former
absurdities, together with the Logicke & Geomitry of
Ramus: There remaineth little or nothing, but may
be compared to the conceited and wittie enterprise
of Aesop, who would vndertake the drincking vp of
the mayne Ocean: So as the Riuers were separated
from it. Heere you must now imagine him to be able
to determine with the Philosophers of the principles
of naturall things,P. 11. whether they be one, two,
three & ten, & how they may be discerned frō their
essence, & thē to conclude with Aristotle his opiniō,
besides all this, he can discourse of colours, Sounds,
Smells, Tasts & qualities of touching, which doe offer
thēselues to his cōmon sense, & are carried into
the inner closet of his Phancy, in whose mirror they
are represented to his simple vnderstanding by simple
termes, he will tell you in what respect a Man is

sayd to be a Man, that when a house is made of the
pieces of a Ship: the Ship is depriued of her fashiō,
& other the like singularities, of all which I might
make a pleasant application. For these (forsooth)
are very materiall matters of Commerce, but the
remembrance of the picture of two fooles, deriding
one another, made by our moderne Paynters, with
an inscription: Wee are three, meaning the looker
on for one, (deseruing no lesse commendation, then
Apelles his apprehension; Ne sutor vltra crepidam;)
caused me to set hereunto a Period.
               
               But some will say, Why doe you so much inculcate
about a Center, when it is apparant, that he
maketh his Ballance of Trade ot be the Center? I answer,
this imaginary Ballance is without a Parallell,
as his Circle is without a Center; and may rather
be termed the periphery or circumference of his
Circle, then a Center, as shall be demonstrated hereafter.
To prosecute therefore our Simile; it is recorded
that when G
                        •
                     otto had made his Circle for his
master-peece, another Painter (perceiuing the same
to be without a Center) did instantly with a pinsell
make a point within the same, which made a perfect
center; whereupon his Art was much extolled
and preferred before Giotto's conceit; which caused
me to intitle this Treatise the Center of the Circle of
commerce.
                  Gaine is the Center of Cō
                     merce. For therein is shewed, that gaine is the
center of Traffique and commerce, which being
the scope of Merchants, draweth more forcibly then
the Adamant stone; and all the direct lines of the
circumference of the body thereof, must be drawne
to that center which is the end of Trade, and ruleth

the course thereof. This gaine is procured by Merchants,
by or vnder the three essential parts of Traffique,
either by Commodities, or by Moneys, or by
exchange of moneys, according to euery mans profession
and occasion in the course of Trade; some
by Commodities only, others by money, & others
by exchanges for moneys, or by all three meanes,Three meanes of Trade. or
some of them, which yeeldeth most benefit, as we
shall declare in the sequel of this Discourse in plaine
and significant words, fit for euery mans vnderstanding,
without affectation of superficiary termes of
Art, by demonstratiue reasons and infallible arguments,
illustrated by similies, notwithstanding
the Refuters obiections, which I intend to answer
as they shall occurre vnto me, hauing by this Index
Purgatorius dissolued some franticke diseases of his
braine, which might haue obscured the things materiall
of this important businesse.
               Thus hauing resolued to containe my selfe within
the circle of modestie, remembring the saying
of Socrates, If an Asse kicke thee, wilt thou kicke him
againe? I am only to addresse some few speeches vnto
him by way of imitation.
               Alas poore man, you do so often deplore my ignorance
by these words, to extoll your learning,
who was neuer graduated in Schools, do you think
to coniure me within the circuite of your Circle,
wherein you are inclosed? I am not to follow your
method of circulation, especially when you striue
to commend and make good that within booke
which was neuer in question, and maliciously vrge
some things without booke, that were neuer meant

by words nor writings to be defended; neither can
I be drawne from the matter by your Meanders or
excursions and vaine disputations De lana Caprina,
you do embrace with Ixion, a cloud for Iuno, and
with Narcissus (louing your owne shadow) for a
water Nymph. Leaue your prophanation of Gods
word, in your passionate writings; for the highest
point of knowledge is to know that we know nothing.
And so I end, with an obseruation onely of
such other absurdities as are fit to be noted for the
better vnderstanding of the matters to be intreated
of.
            
            
               
               The Contents of the fiue Chapters
or Zones.
               
                  Chap. 1.
                  That exchange for moneys, by bils of exchanges
is the publike measure between the Realme
of England and other countreys, placed vnder
the Articke circle.
               
               
                  Chap. 2.
                  That the Moneys of the Realme are vndervalued
in exchange betweene vs and other countreys,
in the Tropicke of Cancer.
               
               
                  Chap. 3.
                  That Gaine is the center of the circle of commerce:
and that the vndervaluation of our
moneys in exchange, is the efficient cause of
the ouerballancing of Trade, placed in the Equinoctiall.
               
               
                  Chap. 4.
                  An examination of the Center of commerce,
in the Trades from England into other countreys,
placed in the Tropicke of Capricorne.
               
               
                  Chap. 5.
                  The meanes to ballance the Trade of England
by the said Center: or the Remedies against
the causes of the decay thereof, placed in the
Antartike circle.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. I.
               
                  That exchange for moneys by bills of exchanges
is the publike measure between the Realme
of England and other Countreys.
               
               
                  ENtring into the first Zone or Artike Circle
of the North, let vs direct our compasse
according to this North Starre of
the publike measure betweene vs and other
Nations, and so proceed methodically.
               There is no Rule so generall in any thing, which
admitteth not some exception: but to ground any
thing vpon an exception, and to leaue the generall
rule, is neuer done by any man of iudgement. All
Misseldens contradictions are grounded vpon exceptions,
and the generall rule is neglected. As for
example:
               The Ship named the Dragon, comming from the
East Indies,Misseldens absurdities. was driuen by necessitie to saile a great
part of her way without a Rudder:P. 22. shall wee make
a rule hereof, and saile without a Rudder or compasse?
               States-men haue obserued for a generall rule, that
the inhauncing of the coyne doth generally raise
the prices of commodities: shall wee terme this a
fallacie,P. 39. because that the linnens in Germanie haue
these two or three yeares last, come thence so cheap,
notwithstanding they were bought with moneys

giuen out at high rates, especially when intestine
warres make things good cheape, as Monsieur Bodine
hath obserued in France and other places?
               Againe, when the price of commodities is raised
generally with the price of moneys inhaunced;P. 25. shall
we contradict the same, because one commoditie,
as Cloues, is not risen, but sold as a staple ware?
               Likewise when moneys are not imported, when
there is a losse by the bringing of them:Moneys decaied of their price are imported againe. shall we denie
this principle when moneys are brought in, being
decried or made bullion beyond the seas, as the
Iacobus and other coines haue bin of late in Holland
and those parts, which caused some quantitie (for
a time) to be imported againe?
               When generally all Diuines doe interprete and
vnderstand the Hebrew word Neshech to be the biting
of a dog, or a gnawing as a dog doth vpon a
bone, concerning vsury, which the learned Doctor
Felton now Bishop of Ely, and Doctor Wilson the
Ciuilian haue so plainly expounded in their two
Treatises of Vsury:P. 44. shall we disallow hereof, because
one Rabbi Bechai doth take it to be the biting
or sucking of a Serpent?
               The generall Trade, all the world ouer, is made
by the rule and square of moneys, which is therefore
called publica mensura in all countreys where
moneys are vsed to set a price vnto all cōmodities.
Now albeit that there are some countries where
they haue no moneys, but commodities are bartred
by way of commutation in kind: shall we abandon
therefore the generall rule or institution
of moneys, and iudge by the particular or exception?

                  Absit ignoranti
                        •
                     .
               
               
                  Misselden doth confesse:P. 20. That Money is the Publicke
measure betweene man and man, but exchange
for moneys he vtterly denieth to be so, betweene vs
and forraine Nations. This assumed opinion of his
by a certaine Chymera swimming in his braine,
might find some kind of entertainment in a weake
mans iudgement, if the Lawes of the kingdome did
not prohibite the Transportation of moneys. But
where moneys are forbidden to be carried out,
there must of necessity some other meanes be found
to answer the same, vnles we should returne againe
to the Commutation of Commodities in kind, and then
moneys will not be vsefull. And this was the beginning
of exchange for moneys.
               This exchange for moneys cannot be otherwise,
but with a consideration of the very value of the
materialls whereof the money is made, for we doe
not exchange for cockle shels, so that the inward
value of Siluer and Gold by weight, is the foundation
of this exchange, as shalbe declared, and consequently,
this exchange is the publike measure,
which all men will confesse.
               And to apply the common saying,P. 13. 
                  Mendacem
oportet esse memorem, by way of retortion, his owne
argument (like vnto Goliaths sword) will conuince
him, and take away the breath of his wilfull opinion,
for he did speake plainely a little before, but it seemeth
that some Tobacco smoake did offend his memory;
which made him forgetfull.
               
                  
                  
                     There is no Merchant (saith he) of any experience,P. 17.
but as he hath one eye vpon the value of his commodities,
so hath he the other eye vpon the money, both
Intrinsique in the inward value or finenes, and
Extrinsique, in the outward denomination or account,
as it is currant in euery Countrey, together
with the course of Exchange, whither he doth direct
his trade. Otherwise, if the money rise in denomination,
aboue the true worth in valuation, and the
Exchange also rise accordingly: if this Merchant do
not raise the price of his Commodity in due proportion
answerable thereunto; he shalbe sure to come
home by weeping crosse, how euer he make his returne,
whether by Exchange; or in Money, Bullion,
or wares. &c.
                  
                  IF I should take vpon me to discourse vpon this
Text, & make no other answer vnto all his Assertions,
surely here is matter enough to conuince him
of all his folly, which by the Prouerbiall Text in the
Title of his Pampflet is quoted, but I intend to be
briefe and substantiall.
                  All men of iudgement may easily perceiue, that
the maine point in question concerning our differences,
doth consist in the abuse of Exchanges, touching
the value of moneys of other Coūtries inhaū
                     ced
of late yeares, when the moneys of the Realme
did remaine at a stād, & that there is an vnderualuatiō
of our moneys in Exchange, whereby the denomination
of forraigne coine doth in some part answer
vs, as if by exchange we did really receiue the
value thereof, there is no man blinder then he that

will not see, if he were in the Indies, where the inhabitants
call the Europians,
                     Free Trade. 113 one Eudman, as he hath
obserued out of Mafscius History, they would call
him blind by his owne reasons. He saith that Merchants
of experence doe diuide (as it were) their
eyes, by casting the one vpon commodities, and the
other vpon moneys, with a consideration of the inward
value, and outward valuation thereof, if they
did so, there is no difference betweene him and me
in this principall point. So as the words Together
with the course of Exchange, were also considered of,
and that the price of Exchange did rise proportionally
with the rising of the moneys, whereof we doe
complaine: Shall this Merchant come home by
weeping crosse that doth not the same? and shall not
Exchange for moneys be the publike measure? you
will buy cloth of a Draper by the yard at a certaine
price, and yet the yard whereby it is measured must
not be called the measure.
                  But some will say, why doe you take Missolden so
short, doth not he say that Merchants of experience
doe so, and herein he doth vse a little equiuocation,
or rather prouidence in pondering of his words▪
well, I must craue pardon, and proue that Merchants
doe not so, and then it must follow that experience
is wanting: but howsoeuer the Maxime is true: That
Exchange is the Publike Measure betweene vs and forraine
Nations, where we deale by Exchange, according
to which all our domestike Cōmodities and
forraine wares are bought and sold,The ground of Exchange. for the same is
grounded vpon the moneys of the Realme, and the
moneys of other Countries respectiuely, according to

their inward value, truely to be expressed by outward
valuation imposed vpon them, by the Authority
of Soueraigne Princes and States, which are to
sit at the Sterne of Trade, for Merchants may commit
great errors in Trade, seeking their priuat gaine,
and the Common wealth doth receiue an incredible
preiudice thereby, as shalbe made plaine hereafter.
                  To make this more euident,Generall Rules, consider we of these
generall rules, euen as plenty of money maketh
things deare, and Scarsity of money maketh things
good cheape: euen so plenty or scarsity of commodities
maketh the price thereof to rise and fall according
to their vse more or lesse, which rule is not
without exception, howbeit, Money must not be bereaued
of her function, as the right iudge thereof.
And so it is in matters of Exchanges, whereby commodities
are dearer or better cheape, according to
the Positiue Exchange,
                     Positiue Exchange. wherein the prices of commodities
do perpetually follow the rates of Exchange:
but the Exchange hauing also another course of rising
and falling in price, according to plenty or
scarsity of moneys, and the few or many Takers or
deliuerers of money,Currant Exchange. which may be termed The currant
Exchange: hath not the like operation, to make
dayly (as it were) the prices of commodities to rise
and fall according to the said Exchange, for as the
few or many takers or deliuerers of money doth
proportionate this price of Exchange in all Countries,
according to the true value or aboue the same,
grounded vpon the said Positiue Exchange, so doth
plenty or scarsity of money doe the like, and the
commodities so bought by moneys taken vp by

Exchange, are calculated by Merchants of experience
in price to cost accordingly. So that euen as
money doth still remaine the rule for commodities;
so doth Exchange for money, remaine the rule of
moneys, and consequently of commodities,Exchange doth rule Moneys. &c. without
any such contradiction, as he vntruly alleageth.
                  This caused me to obserue, that Exchange had
two courses like vnto the Sunne, the one Annuall,
which may properly be called Positiue: the other by
dayly rising & declinatiō 
                     currant exchange as aforesaid.
But Misselden will no more vnderstand this,P. 20.
then he doth the Simbolization of the elements,
which (as it were) by striuing doe subsist and are
agreeing by Concordi Discordia, and are not therefore
to be termed in this A Dissimilitude, should I
carpe at euery word, and be rauished with a foolish
admiration at the word (vpheld) and make the same
an Oratory, I might be as good a Rhetorition, as the
Clarke was in calling a flocke of sheepe to be an Auditory,
which I thinke was the man, that would
needes goe in all hast to dwell in the immaginary
flourishing common-wealth of Vtopia without money,
so much by him extolled.
                  
                     Misselden (changing his immodest stile in a more
t
                        •
                     mperate maner) saith,P. 93. 
                           •
                        
                      That Exchanges in generall
may be said to be Personall and Prouinciall: the Personall
Exchange is a plaine buying and selling of
commodities and of moneys, and why not for exchanges
of moneys by bills of Exchanges or letters
of credit? And here commeth in his former and latter,
the one is matter of Trade, the other is matter

of State: and so all kingdomes and common-weales
are made Prouinciall, and the money changers are
brought in by ray
                        •
                     ing termes, because they were
whipt out of the Temple for abusing the place, if it
were onely for the place, surely himselfe for abusing
the places of Scripture deserueth a worse punishment.
                  Leauing the name of Exchange,
                     Par pro Pari. he bringeth in
an other distinction of Naturall and Politike, and the
Naturall Exchange, he will not call Par pro pari, but
value for value, according to the inward finesse,
which is knowne by the assay and melting, separating
the pure from the impure, the fine siluer and
gold, from the allay or copper; and herein is no other
obseruation, but looke how much fine siluer or
gold you receiue in one place, iust so much and no
more you must pay and deliuer in another place.
But you may not call this Parity nor Purity. This
saith he, is a better direction then limitation of exchanges;
whereby you may vnderstand how he is
mistaken, supposing that the price of the Currant
exchange should be limited, and not rise and fall according
to the nature of exchange, vpon plenty or
scarsity of money, and the many or few takers or deliuerers
of the money, as hath beene declared. So
that he maketh no difference betweene the Positiue
exchange, and the Currant exchange, the Positiue exchange
is properly the matter of state, that concerneth
               
               
                  
                     The King and kingdome,P. 99. (as himselfe confesseth,
howbeit without any mistery therein) It concerneth
the King, when by the benefit of exchange
his Maiesties affaires of state and high concequence
may be furnished with moneys in forraine parts
vpon all occasions, without exportation of any of
his owne treasures: It concernes the Kingdome,
both in respect of Noblemen, and Trades-men, including
therein the Clotheir and all Subiects in
generall.
                  
                  
                     
HEre now he is fully perswaded to haue spoken
both ingenously and effectually, for presently
after (like a silly Hare) he insulteth ouer a dead
Lyon, as the Prouerbe is: But we may say with the
Fox that found a dead mans scull, O quale Caput &
Cerebrum non habet, will any man of iudgement
commend this Politique exchange, to secure the King
and Kingdome, when there is a greater losse to both,
by the abuse thereof in the deliuering of moneys by
exchange, then by the transportation of the moneys
inspecie, because when our moneys are vnderualued
in exchange, the money is not onely exported, but
all the commodities of the Realme are vndersold by
so much also, and forraine commodities are (in the
nature of moneys inhaunced) put vpon vs. If this
man did heare me, he would cry out,P. 14. 
                     what is the man
mad? hath he no lesse a crime to accuse our Merchants
of then ignorance, as he doth the kingdome
of Depudations: I leaue him and it to the iudgement
of the State. It is pitty such stuffe as this should passe
the Presse.
                  Good Sir haue patience, let not any strong immagination
preuent your iudgement. Tell me (I
pray you) if the King or the Nobility and all other

men should deliuer money by exchange at so low a
price, vnder the true value of the moneys, that there
were ten or twelue in the hundreth to be gotten in
a moneths time, betweene the money inspecie and
by exchange, whereby he that taketh the money,
hath an ability giuen him to export that money by
all secret conueyances: to pay his bill of exchange
therewith beyond the Seas, and to put the ouerplus
(of this incomparable gaine) into his purse, do not
you thinke that the money will be exported by
them that are the takers thereof? whereby the
kingdome loseth the money, and you that are the
deliuerers of the money: the benefit which they
reape thereby, which you ought to haue giuen you
by iust and true exchange? Are not the King and
the Nobility great loosers hereby in deliuering of
their moneys? hereunto he replieth, you are wide,
there is no such matter, you mistake the busines,
this cannot be proued, it is the maine pillar to support
that strange and perillous Proiect of the Par,
the foundation whereof I haue rooted out,P. 101. for by
taking that away, all Malines allegations are fallen
to the ground, there is not any such vnderualuation
of our moneys in exchange,P. 76. it is but foppery and
delusion proceeding of a weake braine.
                  
                     De homine imperito nunquam, quic quam iniustius:
                     Qui nisi quod ipse facit, nihil rectum Putat.
                  
                  To this peremptory opinion, me must ioyne a
peremptory issue, and come to the proofe, putting
him neuertheles in minde, that he doth maintaine:
that the low exchange for moneys is profitable for
our Merchants, that are commonly the takers of

moneys here in Engla
                        •
                     d, and so beyond the Seas
where they are deliuerers, now how a low exchange
can be imagined without the vnderualuation of our
moneys in exchange, I referre to his deepe apprehensions,
come we therefore in the next place to
proue this vnderualuation of our moneys in Exchange,
and then such as deserue the name of Mountebankes,
Iugglers, or impostures of Trade, will be
found out as easely by the Center of Commerce,
                     P. 17. as
the Cu'man Asse, was (wearing the Lyons skin) by
the stranger that had seene a Lyon, who knew him
by his eares and braying: maruell not therefore
that I haue written of Merchants Lawes, which are
extolled, and not disgraced thereby, or by such a
fellow who willeth you to remember Maximilians
Foole, telling the Emperour that if he would deriue
his pettigree from Noahs Arke, whereas now he reuerenced
him like a God, if he came once to the
Arke, he should be his fellow, for he was sure that
he also descended from thence.
                  This vndervaluation being proued, will verifie
the Prouerbe, who is the foole now: and Horace his
Crow will be found to haue lost his Cheese by tooP. 144.
much Chattering: or Aesops Dog his Bone, by too
much gaping, which similies himselfe hath vsed.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. II.
               
                  That the Moneys of the Realme are vnderuauled in
Exchange betweene vs and other Countries.
               
               FRom the North Starre of the Artike Circle or
Pole, we are come to the Tropicke of Cancer, to
intreate of the vnderualuation of our moneys
in Exchange, which may well be compared vnto
Cancer the Crab in going backe, for so doth the
wealth of the Realme (by these meanes) decay, for
wee looke one way, and goe another way, like men
that row on the water, or like Crabs on the Land.
               Wee haue obserued heretofore, that Polititions
or Statesmen haue noted, that the often comparing
of a thing vnto his Principle or Original, produceth
the longer continuance, shewing (by Digression)
how the same is decaied, and may be reduced to the
first integrity and goodnes.
               To reduce therefore the course of Exchange for
moneys to the first institution, may seeme very necessary
to explaime this important matter.
               It is about 80. yeares since that there was an equal
Exchange between England and the Netherlands,Aequall Exchange.
which in true value may be called Positiue, and according
to alteration in price Currant, at which
time, twenty shillings of their coine, and twenty
shillings Starlin, were alike in denomination, that is
to say, were named all one in price, & of intrinsique
or inward value, for their Imperial Royall of gold was
valued and went currant for Ten shillings Flemish,
and our Angell was valued at Ten shillings Starlin,

being all of a goodnes of Gold in value, which we
call Waight and finesse by the termes of the Mint, so
the French Crowne which was valued here at Six
shillings Starlin,English & forraine coyne all one in Exchange. and beyond the Seas at six shillings
Flemish, was correspondent: the Phillip Doller of
siluer was valued at fiue shillings Flemish, and so
was the Edward Crowne of silucr fiue shillings Starlin:
our ten Groats being three shillings and foure
pence, was correspondent to the Emperours Florin
of twenty Stiuers: and the Flemish shillings of six
Stiuers or twelue pence Flemish, was all one with
our shilling or twelue pence Starlin: for an ounce of
Starlin siluer was valued as fiue shillings, for there
was fiue peeces or shillings made out of an ounce:
and although the Standards of moneys did differ in
the finesse or goodnes of the siluer and gold, yet
the quantity in waight did answere and made good
the same: as for example, the Starlin Standard being
11. ounces 2. d. waight in fine siluer, in the 12
ounces Troy to the pound waight made into 60 s.
caused the ounce to be fiue shillings; and the Philip.
Doller being but ten ounces of fine siluer in the like
pound weight of 12 ounces Troy: was correspondent
and currant for fiue shillings, or the said pound
was valued at 60 s. This Philip Doller weigheth 22
pennie weight, which is two pennie weight more
then an ounce, to answer our siluer by the more
weight of such siluer as is not so good as ours, because
it containeth more allay or copper: so that
their inward value of siluer is made by weight answerable
and correspondent to ours. And so the
names for the price and value of the coine, were named

alike; and the prices of commodities (both here
and beyond the seas) were likewise named accordingly;
whereby all fallacies concerning the value
of moneys and the prices of commodities were excluded;
and then Merchants (to accommodate one
another by exchange) would giue or deduct either
3 d. 4 d. or 6 d. or thereabouts vpon the pound of
our 20 s. or a pennie or two pence vpon the Noble
(wherupon exchanges were then commonly made)
to pay or receiue their moneys by exchange here or
beyond the seas, according as they could agree: in
so much, that 20 s. Starlin hath beene giuen here
to receiue beyond the seas 19 s. 6 d. Flemish by exchange.
And the like hath been giuen beyond seas,
to receiue here 20 s Starlin, according to the occasions
of Merchants.
               From this equalitie or paritie of exchange, we are
fallen to very great inequalitie, by the inhauncing of
moneys beyond the Seas, whereby the price was
there altered in name or denomination, our moneys
remaining here at a stand; and the standards of moneys
both here and beyond the Seas also remaining
vnaltered, and so continued beyond the Seas vntill
this day, albeit they haue caused diuers new coines
of other standards to be made since that time,
which is to be obserued hereafter, the rather for that
it is a maxime, That the siluer coines doe rule the
markets in all places, because of the abundance
thereof,Siluer coyne do rule the Markets and Exchange. being 500 to one of gold, which causeth
the exchanges to be made according to the siluer
coines, which ouerruleth the coines of gold.
               The first inequalitie crept in by the inhauncing

of moneys, was vpon the Philip Doller, which was
come from 30 Stiuers or 5 s, as aforesaid, to 33 and
35 Stiuers; whereby the price of exchange began to
alter in the yeares of our Lord 1563 and 1564, which
then was looked into by the Merchants Aduenturers,
according to the complaints of Mr. Hussey their
Gouernour, and that made them to make exchanges
vpon our pound of 20 s Starlin at 22 s. 6 d. and
23 s. Afterwards in the yeare 1575, the said Philip
Doller went currant for 36 Stiuers, or 6 s Flemish,
which was inhaunced full twentie in the hundred,
or foure shillings vpon twentie shillings; whereby
the paritie of exchange was altered in name from 20
to 24, because that 24 s with them beyond the Seas
and our 20 s here was all one in value: so that 500 l
Starlin was correspondent or answerable to 600 l
Flemish, by reason of the said valuation, without any
alteration of Standards. Before that time, that
is to say, in the yeare of our Lord 1567, the Burgundian
Rickx Doller was coined in the Empire for 32
Stiuers lups, or two Marks lubish, of 16 shillings the
Marke. So that then one shilling lubish and one Stiuer,Shilling Lubish and Stiuers all one.
was betweene Germanie and the Netherlands
all one in name; as we haue more amply declared
in Lex Mercatoria and elsewhere.
               From this position, let vs come now to the vndervaluation
of our moneys in exchange by three seuerall
and infallible meanes; and therein obserue the
progresse of valuation and the course of exchange,
for the maine places of Trade.
               First, by the Assayes of moneys made in former
times, and the calculations of exchanges made thereupon,

upon, according to the prices or valuations of the
moneys inhaunced beyond the Seas, and not inhaunced
with vs in England.
               Secondly,Three meanes to proue the vnderualuation of our moneys in Exchange. by true calculations deriued from the
said Assayes and inhauncing of forraine coines, as
also of our moneys beyond the Seas, which rule
cannot faile: so long as the Standards of the moneys
are not altered.
               Lastly, By the triall of Assayes both of our
moneys and the coines of forraine Countries lately
taken, concerning both the premises, by which
three meanes, any man of iudgement may perceiue
that the Exchange is the Publike meanes betweene
vs and other Countries already proued. Concerning
the first, it appeareth of record, that in the said
yeare 1575. there was (by order of the Right Honourable
the Lords & others of her Maiesties then
Priuy Councell of the late Queene Elizabeth of
blessed memory) diuers Assayes made of the moneys
of sundry Countries, and the price of Exchange,
that is to say of the Positiue Exchange, was
set downe accordingly, whereof I haue made this
Abstract, for so much as maketh for the purpose.
               The Phillip Doller of 10. ounces fine at 36. Stiuers
or 6. s. Flemish, made the price of the said Exchange
24. s. as aforesaid, accounting 4 Dollers for the l.
               
               The Rickx Doller of 10. ounces 12. penny waight
at 32. shillings lubish or Stiuers Flemish made the
said Positiue Exchange to be 24. s. also,Exchange at 14. s. at Hamborough and the Low Countries. accompting
foure, and a halfe Doller for 20. s. Starlin.
               The Rickx Doller being inhaunced to 33. shillings
lubish, made the price of the said Exchange at one

shilling more, vpon the 4. prices and a halfe to be at
24. s. 9. d. which contained for a long time at Hamborough
and other places in Germany,Exchange at 24. s. 9d. in Germany. and all their
owne coines were correspondent thereunto in the
inward value: but in the Low Countries the valuation
did alter, and moneys were inhaunced by intermissiue
times, by the warres and deuision of the
17. Prouinces.
               Come wee now to the yeare 1586. when Robert
Lord Dudley Earle of Leycester went ouer to take the
Gouernment of the Vnited Prouinces, at which time
moneys were much inhaunced, and the States did
coine the great siluer Royall of the goodnes of the
Phillip Doller, as also Rickx Dollers, in euery prouince
of the goodnes of the said Imperiall or Burgundian
Dollers, and the Arch Duke Albertus of Austria did
the like in the reconciled Countries vnder his Gouernment.
               Hereupon there was Assayes made againe of the
said coynes and other moneys, and the goodnes of
them was by the said Assayes correspondent in
weight and finesse, and so the Positiue Exchange was
made accordingly vpon the valuation made in the
said Countries, namely the said Phillip Doller being
risen and valued at 50. Stiuers, or 8. s. 4. d. Flemish
made the said Exchange (by the said 4. peeces) to
be 33. s. 4. d. for 20. shillings Starlin: the said Rickx
Doller was valued at 45. Stiuers, or 7. s. 6. d. Flemish
made the Exchange to be after 4 peeces and a halfe
to the pound Starlin 33. s. 9. d. but because our shilling
was valued at 20. d. Flemish, or 10 Stiuers,
whereof 20. s. made 33. s. 4. d. Flemish, it was agreed

by the Commissioners,Exchange for the Low Countries at 83 s. 4 d. that the Positiue Exchange
should be 33. s. 4. d. for our 20. s: and all other moneys
had correspondence with the said price or
thereabouts: and the Spanish Royall of 8. was valued
at 42. Stiuers, or 7. s. Flemish, as appeareth by
the Placeart or Proclamation then made by the said
Earle of Leycester.
               
               If you will be sure whether the said Assayes and
Valuations are truely calculated in exchange,Calculations vpon Assayes and Moneys. the
Accompt by the Golden Rule is easie for any man of
meane iudgement to be cast vp, that is to say, if the
Phillip Doller of 36, Stiuers made the price of exchange
to be 24. s. what must the price now be,
when the said Doller is valued at 50. Stiuers, facit
33. s. 4. d, againe if the Rickx Doller at 33. Stiuers giueth
in exchange 24. s. 9. d. what will 45. Stiuers
giue in exchange, facit 33. s. 9. d: so that you see the
Assayes and Valuations doth agree in the price
of exchange, and rather somewhat to our disaduantage.
               In the yeare 1600. (by a Commission granted to
Sir Richard Martin Knight, and Master of the Mint,
Sir Richard Saltonstall, Sir Henery Belling sley knights,
Thomas afterwards Lord Knynet, Mr. Iohn Williams,
my selfe and diuers others) there was an examination
taken concerning the goodnes and valuation
of moneys in exchange, and there ensued but an
alteration in the valuation of gold concerning the
proportion, with some small reformation concerning
the Standards: but in Exchanges nothing
was effected, for some reasons here not declared:
come wee now to this present time, and see how

much the said moneys haue beene inhaunced,Calculations vp on the last valuation. not
by the tolleration of Merchants to receiue them aboue
their price, but according to the Placcart or
Edict of Proclamation of the said Estates made the 21
of Iuly 1622.
               There you shall finde that the Phillip Doller is
made Bullion: that is to say, not currant, as they
haue also done of other coynes: but the Rickx Doller
of Germany and the Nether-lands are inhaunced
and valued by Publike Authority (besides their
tolleration to goe aboue the same) at 50. Stiuers,
now cast hereupon what the Positiue Exchange must
be, when 45. is made 50. or when 5. is gotten in 45,
which is iust one ninth part: take the ninth part of
one hundreth, and it is 11. and 1/9. that the said Dollers
and other moneys are in haunced thereby. But
our Shillings or 12. pence Starlin (albeit they must
be deliuered by waight) is but aduanced to tenne
Stiuers and a halfe, which is but 5. d. 100. when it
should be 11 1/9. part, or 11. l. 2. s. 2. d. ⅔. The Rule is.
               If 45. giue 5, what shall 50. giue? Facit 11. & 1/9.
parts.
               Or if 45. giue in true Exchang 33. s. 9 d, what 50?
Facit 37. 
                  s. 6. d.
               
               Or if 42. for the Royall giue 33. s. 4. d, what giues
48? Facit 38. 
                  s. 1. d.
               
               So that it plainely appeareth by grounded calculation
vpon Assayes, that from 33. s. 4. d. the moneys
of the Realme between vs and the Low Countries
are vnderualued 11. l. 2. s. 2. ⅔. d. in euery hundred

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
pounds,Exceeding great gaine by the exportation of our moneys. whereby we vndersell our home commodities,
and buy the forraine Commodities so
much dearer, and loose for euery hundreth pounds
so much in the Kingdome stocke, for we doe receiue
but 88. l. 17. s. 9. ⅓. d. for one hundreth
pounds: and he that exported our money may get
ipso facto, or euery moneth aboue 11. per cent, which
is 132. per cent by the yeare, and no money or Bullion
can be imported from thence without the like losse
to the bringer thereof, vnlesse by gold, which is here
more esteemed then in other Countries, whereby
he may saue some part of his losse, especially the
same being made Bullion beyond the seas, as aforesaid.
               And because Misselden will not allow of the supposition
set downe vpon the rates of 30. s. for 20. 
                     •
                  .P. 75.
Starlin, to shew how Merchants may be correspondence
accomodate each other, to the Kingdomes
great losse, by the meanes of a low Exchange, which
must in the comparison needs be vnder the price
supposed in Exchange, and not at 33. s. 4. d, which
is called low in regard of the present, and hereupon
he doth miscast 100. l. in 1000. l. betweene the
Londoners and the Amsterdamers, with other cauillations
in the answering thereof: I though good to
obserue the same betweene the price of equall exchange,
altered by the inhauncing of moneys beyond
the Seas at the beginning, when 20. s. Starlin
was made 24. s. by exchange, whereby 500. l. made
600. l. beyond the Seas as aforesaid, for the said
600, l. Flemish was correspondent in accompt betweene
the said Londonner and Amsterdammer, after

the said rate of 24 s. by exchange, so long as the
value was made good by exchange: but if the Exchange
had not risen in price according to the moneys
inhaunced, and had remained at 20 s. for 20 s.
and they had still so kept their accompt betweene
them; All men of iudgement can very well see
that the 500 l. Starlin (being transported) will make
600 l. Flemish: But the Londoner hath not the like
meanes to import his money in specie from beyond
the Seas, where the same is inhaunced: so that
if he do not receiue their 600 l. in liew of his 500 l,
he becommeth a looser of so much, and the Kingdome
is bereaued of the others money, which the
Amsterdammer caused to be sent ouer vnto him, as
shalbe made plaine in the next Chapter.
               To returne to our aforesaid declaration of the
vndervaluation of our moneys.Exchange at 358. for the Low Vnited Countries. True it is, that since
the said Proclamation of the States, whereby our
shilling is valued at 10 ½. Stiuers, the price of exchange
is risen to 35 s, which some vnderstand to
be value for value, or Par pro Pari: and others will
say, who knoweth whether the said Assayes were
truely made and reported accordingly, and so speak
against our benefit. I answer, admit that the losse
be but 6 1/9. per centum for a moneth, is this tollerable,
when by the exportation of our moneys there may
be gotten aboue 73 per centum by the yeare, which
is a gaine exceeding all other gaines, besides the
losse of our Treasure?
               This is conuenience being opened to the Grand
Commission of 51. Persons, of diuers quallities and
degrees appointed for matters of Trade, namely,

The Right Honourable the Lord Vizcount Man-deuile,
                  The Grand Commission for Trade.
Lord President of the Councell. The Lord
Brooke. Sir Iohn Suckling Knight, Comptroller of
his Maiesties Houshold, Sir Iulius Caesar Knight,
Master of the Rolles, and diuers other Knights,
Baronets, and others: It pleased them to send for
his Maiesties Assay-master, Master Andrew Palmer
a man of rare knowledge and experience, and willed
him to make Assayes of the principall forraine
coynes, and to compare the same vnto ours by way
of Exchange, after the rate of 35 s. Flemish for
20 s. Starlin, whereupon he made the report here
following, in the Moneth of March last past, 1623.
               Twenty shillings English money,Master Palmers report to the Commissioners. containeth in
fine siluer 3 ounces, ten pennie waight, 23 graines,
4 mites, 12 droicts, 7 periods, 17 blancks. Fiue
and thirty Hollands shillings containes in fine siluer,
3 ounces, 6 pennie waight, 14 graines, 6 mites,
16 droicts. Whereby the difference of fine siluer is
4 pennie weight, 8 graines, 17 mites, 20 droicts.
               Euery penny weight of fine siluer is worth in our
currant siluer moneys, three pence farthing and
halfe a farthing full: so the difference in value betweene
the moneys aboue said, is 14 pence halfe
pennie and one farthing, which is vpon the hundreth
pounds, sixe ponnds three shillings.
               Euery Holland shilling containes in fine siluer,
one pennie waight, 21 graines, 13 mites, 8 droicts,
which is in value to our siluer moneys, six pence
3/
                     •
                   parts: euery Holland Stiuer of the best containes
in fine siluer, 7 graines, 12 mites, 5 droicts, 6 periods
16 blancks: which is in value two ounces, one pennie,

1½ mites, euery 5 shillings English siluer containes
in fine siluer, 17 penny waight, 17 graines, 16 mites.
               Euery Holland Doller containeth in fine siluer
16 pennie waight, 4 graines, 10 mites: the difference
in fine siluer is one pennie waight, 13 graines,
6 mites, which is in value Starlin, 5 pence full.
               Euery peece of 8 Royalls of Spaine, containeth in
fine siluer 16 penney waight, one graine: the difference
is one penny waight, 16 graines, 16 mites.
And in value Starlin, fiue pence, halfe penny full.
               So to the difference of six pounds, three shillings
in euery hundreth pounds, the 5 vpon the hundreth
added betweene 33 s. 4 d, and 35 s. is in Totall 11 l.
3 s, by this calculation of Assay.
               Thus it appeareth vnto men euen of the meanest
vnderstanding, that our moneys are vndervalued in
exchange for the Low Countries, and for Hamborough
& other places much more, where the Rickx
Doller is risen to 52, and 54 shillings lubish, which
by the precedent rules, maketh the price of this Positiue
Exchange to be aboue 40 s. of theirs for our
20 s, which to auoide prolixity, I leaue to euery
mans iudgement to calculate.
               Now because we haue spoken of men of meane
capacity,Inconueniences of the vnderualuation of our. moneys. and that I doe labour to expresse my selfe
in the plainest maner: I pray you, is there any man
liuing that will not conceiue, that this exceeding
great gaine had by exportation of our moneys, will
still depriue vs of our Treasure? And on the contrary,
that this great losse had by the importation
of money, doth still debarre vs from any to be
brought in? Againe, when greater gaine is giuen

vpon the Spanish Royalls beyond the Seas, will
not the same be diuerted from vs and carried thither,
or if some be imported vpon occasion or by
accident, will not other men transport them againe,
and so take away the life of Trade, and cause the
Vitall Spirits thereof to languish? Surely all men
are able to vnderstand this, yet it shalbe made more
plainer.
               Thus may we obserue the Disgression and inequallity
betweene the said moneys, which can neuer
(conueniently) be reducted to their first price and
equallity: I might likewise make instance of the
coines of gold which are more inhaunced, for the
Soueraigne of 20 s. is now currant at 37 s. 8 d. Flemish
But the premises declare sufficiently the vndervaluation
of our moneys in exchange, both by
calculation and triall of the suttle Assay.
               
                  Misselden in his former Treatise misnamed Free-Trade,
setteth downe,P. 7. that the immediate cause of
the want of money in England: is the vnderualuation
of his Maiesties coyne, which hindereth the
importation, and causeth the exportation of ours,
whereupon he would haue the Kings coine raised▪
and forraine coine to be made currant at equall value:
And in his Circle of Commerce he saith:P. 101. that I
would perswade the world, that there is a great vnderualuations
of our moneys in exchange to those
of Germany and the Low Countries, which is the
maine Pillar to support the Par, and so now there is
no vndervaluation. And thus with the Saytre he▪
bloweth hot & cold at one instant with one breath▪
and withall he doth acknowledge, that if the premises

by vs declared were true (as true and manifest
they are) That they be fearefull effects, and againe,
that moneys are not so little inhaunced as 20 in the
hundreth since the inhauncing begunne, which we
haue proued to be double, or 100 vpon the hundreth,
well in good time, tis mistaken, to make it
serue his turne.
               He accuseth me of grosse errors, for that the exchange
is risen in price according to the valuation
of moneys, which euen now we haue proued to be
false: and if exchange should rise and fall accordingly,
that is to say, if moneys rise beyond the
Seas, that the price of exchange should rise accordingly:
and if moneys doe rise here, that then on
the contrary the exchange should fall in price here,
what remedy can there be then in the inhauncing
of the moneys, when the price of exchange will still
ouer rule the same,Misseldens Errors.
                   as it were an inhauncing vpon
an inhauncing betweene vs and other Countries
vpon the price of exchange, which (as hath beene
shewed) is the Publike Measure?
               
               But he will make this perspicuous by a familiar
example, surely one of the familiars of his Circle
hath del
                     •
                  ded him herein: for if a Gentleman maketh
ouer 100 l. for Amsterdam at 33 s. 4 d, and receiueth
for it there 166 l. 13 s. 4 d. Flemish in Holland
Dollers, called Lyon Dollers; at two Guilderes
or 40 Stiuers the Doller, which amounteth iust 500
Dollers, and vpon occasion after he hath receiued
the same, he is to deliuer them there againe by exchange
to be paid in London: the question is not
vpon the inhauncing of two Stiuers vpon euery

Doller and 35 s, which he must giue there to haue
heere payd him, 20 s. Starlin for euery pound,
whereby the said inhauncing of the Doller there,
and the price of Exchange doe iust concurre, and
there can be neither gaine nor losse. But the point
is, whether these 500. Dollers do containe so much
fine siluer by waight, as there is in 100 l. Starlin
here by him deliuered, whereby it might be at his
choice to import the said 500. Dollers inspeci, or to
deliuer them there by exchange, to receiue the value
thereof in England without losse: and vpon
examination hereof, the difference (according to
the premises) will be found so great, that it cannot
be put into one eye, for it will fill such an emptie
skull without braines: as the Fox before spoken of
had found by chance; and wee now perceiue, here
you may distinguish his Personnall Exchange concerning
Trade, and his Prouinciall Exchange concerning
State, to be handled in the next Chapter, for
the said Lyon Doller was by the said Proclamation
of the Earle of Leycester valued at 36 Stiuers,Phillip, Dollers, which
is now inhaunced to 40 Stiuers,Rick
                        •
                      Dollers being iust one
ninth part as before is declared.Lyon Dollers al proportionable. Concerning others
Dollers, and maketh 11 1/9 part in the 100 being 11 l.
2 s. 2⅔d, whereby we may perceiue that there is a
proporcionable valuation of these coynes: so that
the Gentleman was (according to the true value)
to receiue at Amsterdam 
                  
                     •
                  55. Hollands or Lyon Dollers,
and 5/9 parts, or 20 Stiuers, and euen so much
is our money vndervalued, from 33 s. 4 d. Flemish,
as the Assay doth demonstrate. And according to
the said Rule, if 42 Stiuers made the exchange vpon

the Spanish Royall of 8. to be 33 l. 4 d, what shall
the same be at 48 Stiuers for the said Royall, Facit,
38 s. 1 d. as aforesaid: This Flemish reckonning is
true, and truer then the Spanish reckonning, whereupon
Misselden directeth his Argument. And if
the said Gentleman had bestowed the last yeare
the said 100 l. in Royalls of 8, at 22 s. for the 5 prices,
and payd them out there at 51 Stiuers, and so
returned his money by exchange at a low rate, or
33 s. 4 d, or vnder, he might haue gotten 25 Per
Cento, where the said Royalls (when he bought
them) did cost him but tenne vpon the hundreth:
and thus you may see what deepe speculations this
man hath (whilst he is inclosed within his Circle)
to find out these Misteries, & yet no Misteries: like
vnto the Man,An Eunuch. that was no Man: which threw a
Stone,A Pumex. that was no Stone: at a Bird, that was no
Bird: sitting vpon a Tree,A Bat. A dead Tronke. that was no Tree: at
which a Dog did barke,A Beech. that was no Dog: And
this is the maner of his Sophistry.
               But he will come a little closer, and leaue all the
vncertaine rates of exchanges, and so bring me to
the touchstone of the said last Proclamation of the
States of the Vnited Prouinces, whereby the Royal
of 8 is cried downe to 48 Stiuers, or 8 s. Flemish.
And here he hath calculated matters to a haire, by
the English waight of English and Ases, and pennie
waight and graines, reckoning after 32 Ases for the
pennie weight or English, the pennie waight being
but 24 granes, and making 4 peeces 3/
                     •
                   parts to be equall
with our 20 s. in value, which at 10 
                     〈◊〉
                  ; Stiuers
for our shilling, according to the said Proclamation,
                  
iumpeth all at 35 s. Flemish in exchange for the said
2 s. Starlin; this is very prettily contriued by the
dexterity of his ingenous spirit, or rather by his supportes,
who would helpe a lame Dog ouer the stile,
as the prouer be is by abating the price of the Royall,
and aduancing the price of exchange, taking
care onely for the present rate & time of exchange,
wherewith he chargeth me with a p
                     •
                  ace of Scripture,
with such a Magnanimity,P. 113. as if he were riding
in his Triumphant Chariot, drawne by ignorance
and impudency, as a cupple of Coatch Horses: immitating
Caligula, who following the example of
Iulius Caesar in conquering Brittaine,Suetornius & Di
                        •
                     n. and conducting
his Army to the Sea side, commanded his
Souldiers to gather shells, which he called the
spoiles of the Ocean, and binding a few Germaines
that neuer fought against him, led them in triumph
to Rome: Euen such is the behauiour of Misselden,
who hauing gathered the shelles of knowldge,
could neuer attaine to the solide flesh of truth and
prudence, for an answere therefore to this vntrue
Assertion, I vtterly deny, that 4 Royalls 
                     •
                  /8 parts, doe
answer our 20 s. Starlin, and by the aforesaid Rule
of Arithmitike, if 22 s. will buy 5 peeces or Royalls
of 8, then 20 s. requireth 4 6/11 peeces, and although
the said Royall be decried, yet is the same currant
aboue the price of the Proclamation in most places:
moreouer by the said rule, if one shilling was worth
ten Stiuers and more, when the Rickx Doller was
valued at 45 Stiuers, which is now inhaunced, and
currant aboue 50, which is 1/9 part increased: then it
followeth that the said our shilling ought to be valued

aboue 11 Stiuers and 1/9 part, especially now the
same must be deliuered by weight, which is the
cause that aboue sixe in the hundreth profit will be
giuen in the Mintes there, according to the pollicy
in Mint affaires, when there is an intention to melt
downe forraine coyne, as we haue amptly declared
in the second Part of Lex Mercatoria: now concerning
the exchange for Hamborough,
                  The vnderu
                        •
                     luation of our moneys by Exchange at Hamborough. where after the
rate of 4 Rickx Dollers and one halfe, wee are to
looke for 450 Dollers for one hundreth pound
Starlin. I am conscious by bills of exchanges made
at Hamborough the last yeare betweene English money
and lubish amongst the Merchants Aduenturours,
that for 381 Dollers deliuered there, there
haue been paid 100 l. here in England, which is 69
Dollers vnder the true value, whereby they sold
their clothes better cheape there, and so the Kingdomes
stocke must answer for it, to the impouerishment
thereof. There is no man that hath the name
of a Merchant, that hauing there 381 Dollers, will
import the same into the Realme, knowing that he
shall make but 4 s. 6 d a peece, which maketh but
85 l. 14 s. 6 d. when he can haue by exchange 100 l,
which is 14 l. 5 s. 6 d. more in two moneths time.
Is not this an intollerable intrest betweene Merchants,
falling vpon those that haue small stockes
and are takers vp of money, when they ought to be
deliuerers paying 70 and 80 vpon the hundreth to
the vnderselling of our natiue commodities: let him
here apply the saying, Animus Meminisse horret, luctuque
Refugit.
               
               I his vndervaluation of our moneys in exchange

by the inhauncing of forraine coyne is so plaine,
and Luce Meridiana Clarius in euery mans vnderstanding,
that there needeth not any further explanation,
yet Misselden will not acknowledge, that
the 15 Per Cento,
                  P. 25. more gotten by the Royalls of 8
beyond the seas then in England, commeth to passe
by reason of the low exchange and vndervaluation
of our moneys, in giuing there little by exchange
to receiue much for it here: in the same maner as
the precedent example of Hamborough doth demonstrate,
for he denieth that the price of commodities
doth rise with the inhauncing of the moneys,
which he mistermed Value of Moneys: and this is
meere contrary to his former Assertion, Pag. 17.
where he saith: That if the Merchants do nor raise
the price of their Commodities in due proportion
to the moneys inhaunced in Exchange, they shall
come home by weeping crosse: the best is, he can
swallow vp many of these Guggions, and put
down things neuer by me affirmed. As that the Exchange
in the yeare 1586, or at any time since, went
constantly at 33 s. 4 d, and here he might produce
more then 1586 witnesses and Merchants Bookes;P. 28.
Surely this man doth imitate the countrey Corydon,
who seeing a signe for Horses to be let to hire and
liuery, with the yeare of 1622 thereunto added:
was looking where those great Stables stood, that
could containe so many Horses. For he dare say
and affirme any thing, though it be neuer so vntrue,
and being conuinced thereof, is no more ashamed,
then a Horse which hath ouerthrowne his
Cart.
               
                  
There was of late yeares a Merchant of great
experience,A Worthy consideration in Exchange. who (by ruminating of his braine)
was of opinion, that although sometimes the price
of exchange went low for some weekes, it went
high againe at other weekes, and so accomp
                     •
                  ing
one weeke with an other, this vndervaluation
might be recompenced and found to be correspondent:
this consideration was very materiall, and
moneys were not then at all inhaunced at Hamborough,
neither so much risen in the Low Countries,
whereupon it was thought conuenient to cast
vp the weekely price of exchanges one with another,
according to the Brokers Bills of the prices of
exchanges which they deliuer weekely, and (that
for certaine yeares) after 52 weekes for the yeare,
casting the Medium thereof, by certaine tables
made thereof: and although the difference was not
so much as it hath beene, and continued these 12
yeares since by one third part; yet the losse sustained
thereby, came yearely to 35 and 37 Per Cento, by
the yeare, the operation whereof was to be felt in
time, as now we doe in the want of moneys, for in
the great bodies of Common-weales, things are not
sensible but in progresse of time: which causeth me
to compare the working thereof to the Planet
Saturne, making his Sphericall course in Thirty
yeares.
               The Rule therefore (which Misselden called,Aniufal
                        •
                     ible Rule. a
Precept) is infallible, that when the exchange doth
answer the true values of our moneys, according
to their inward weight and finesse, and their out-ward
valuation: they are neuer exported, because

the gaine is answerable by exchange, which is the
cause of exportation: to this he answereth. That
the stranger commits the fault, and I would haue
the English punished, which is as sententious for
him to lay, as that I teach Gentlemen a way how to
improue their wooles,To the Reader. and to cosen the Kingdome
of the Cloth; if the Reader will beleeue him, there
is not a word in his Pamphlet,P. 29. but of some vse: But
my discourse is piect together with stollen stuffe: If
I do borrow of others that haue written learnedly,
(as all Authors doe) why will your slanderous pen
blame me, especially when you do nothing else but
traduce the writings of others, and some whom you
doe name, had first their light from me?
               Now if I should conclude this point and say,P. 16. that
to the iuditious Merchants I haue giuen cause of
offence to haue written so much in the defence of
exchange, (as I may well doe) do I, by your peruerted
constitution bewray my want of wit and
honesty? A Mule is a beast begot of a Horse and a
she Asse, and so are these answers begot betweene
wit and idlenes.
               That serious obseruation of those most graue and
Honorable Councellors of State in the yeare 1576.
concerning the Feates and Bankers,Maine of Free Trade. P. 16. and the examples
of the French King Lewis the nineth, & Phillip
the faire, confiscating their goods, which was also
done by Phillip de Valois, who indited them as cosonners
of the Common-wealth: are not to be past
ouer with iests and vntruths, for wise men looke for
better things,Suetonius in viat Vesp. and will not be reasted withall, which
caused Vespatian to remoue such a Busphoon as iested

at his friends, willing him to iest at himselfe.
               The Acts of Parliaments, Proclamations and
Ordinances made vpon this consideration, with the
treaties and conferences with other Princes, hereafter
to be declared, will manifest the importancy
of this matter of State, which is canker of the
Commonwealth, and therefore placed in this Zone
of the Tropicke of Cancer, as before is noted: the operation
whereof wilbe more perspicuous vpon examination
of it, by the Center of Commerce to be intreated
of in the Equinoctiall, being the middle and
third Zone of the Globe of Trafficque and Trade, according
to our distribution, whereby the olde
Adage will approue. That yong men do thinke that old
men are Fooles: But old men do know that young men
are Fooles which hath a reference to the generall,
and may be applied in this particular, Least per aduenture
he be wise in his owne eyes, Prouerbes 26. v. 5.
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  That gaine is the Center of the Circle of Commerce, and
that the vnderualuation of our Moneys in Exchange,
is the efficient cause of the
ouerballancing of Trade.
               
               
                  Now that we come to the Equinoctiall Line,
where the Center of the Circle of commerce
is to be found, vpon the rule of equitie and
Parity, to be obserued betweene moneys and exchanges
of moneys by Bills: let vs note, that Aristotle
in his fourth Booke of Metaphysickes, (which is

commonly called the Booke of Distinction) hath
largely confirmed, that all errors proceeds from Indistinction,
now forasmuch as a Distinction can be no
other thing then the enumeration of sundry significations
of the same,Difinition of Distinctions. with an apt application to the
thing in question: obserue we the plainest way to
distinguish the opperatiō of the said Center (gaine)
in the course of Traffique: for euen as a spider hath
the best quallity of feeling sitting with the head
downewards in her circular web, (as the Center
thereof) to ketch her liuing in all the parts of the
circumference of her web: euen so haue all men
(but most especially worlings looking downe wards
with the Kite) an Action and feeling of their
benefit and gaine, which ruleth the course of
Trade in generall, by Gods direction to be obserued
therein.
               The wealth of a Kingdome cannot properly decrease,Three meanes to decrease the Wealth of the Realme.
but three maner of wayes, namely: by selling
our natiue Commodities too good cheape: by buying
the forraine Commodities too deare: and by
the exportation of our moneys inspecie, caused by a
low exchange for moneys by Bills of exchanges, as
before is declared.
               In the managing whereof, wee are to make three
distinctions.
               The First, concerning the King and the Nobility,
Gentlemen and Trauellers,Three Distinction considerable. who are here deliuerers
of money to serue their occasions beyond the
Seas, or else they are takers vp beyond the Seas by
letters of credit, to their greater losse, when the
price of exchange is low, or foraine coyne is inhaunced

or ouervalued in exchange vnto vs, as is
before declared in the first Chapter.
               The Second distinction concerneth particular
Merchants, who doe make a priuate benefit by moneys
and exchange to the preiudice of the Kingdome,
by a low exchange, and vndervaluation of
our moneys.
               The Third, concerneth the whole Kingdome in
generall, wherein the said perticular Merchants do
beare some losse vnawares, although they haue a
greater gaine by a disordered Trade another way,
to the vtter vndoing of all Trade, and destruction
of the Realme, which we are now to distinguish.
               It is demanded,P. 17. whether it be lawfull for Merchants
to seeke their Priuatum commodum in the exercise
of their calling, whether gaine be not the end
of Trade, and whether the priuate be not inualued
in the publike? The answer is extant, that Albeit
the generall is composed of the particular,
                  Maine of free Trade. P. 3. 
                  yet it may fall
out, that the generall shall receiue an intollerable preiudice
and losse by the particular benefit of some, the opinion
and councell therefore in the reformation
of abuses of some priuate Merchants, is to be held
in suspition, and Kings and Princes are to sit at the
sterne of Trade, which caused the wise man to say:
               Consult not with a Merchant concerning Exchanges.Ecclesiasticus 37. ver. 11.
               
               The gaines which are preiuditiall to the Common-wealth,
and beneficiall to some Merchants in
particular, are these as followeth.
               English Merchants (being here the takers of money
by exchange) haue a great gaine when they
take the same at a low exchange,Pernitious Asguments. giuing lesse by

their Bill of exchange in forraine parts, and in 
                     〈◊〉
                  
maner beyond the Seas, in giuing Flemish or other
moneys there, to haue here Starlin money for it,
they being there commonly the deliuerers of money,
so that a low price of exchange by the vndervaluation
of our moneys is profitable to the Merchant:
and to maintaine this, it is inferred, that
merchant strangers would export more moneys out
of the Realme into forraine parts, if English Merchants
did not take the said moneys by exchanges,
and that at a low price, whereby the English Merchant
becommeth a gainer, and the Merchant stranger
a looser.
               Againe, if an equall exchange were vsed, according
to the Standards of moneys of other Nations
and ours: then could not English Merchants sell
our natiue Commodities so good cheape beyond
the Seas, to vndersell other Nations, casting their
calculations of buying and selling according to the
low price of exchange.
               Also, if the price of exchange were high beyond
the Seas: then the Spanish Merchants could not
make such gaine by the Royalls of 8 which they
transport thither, making returne of the proceede
of them by a low exchange, to their great benefit of
25 Per cento, where they can make here but ten vpon
the hundreth.
               If the moneys were not inhaunced beyond the
Seas, Merchants could not sell our natiue commodities
at the prices they now do, and returne the value
thereof by a low exchange from thence, or taking
vp the same heere, giue so little by exchange there.
               
                  
English Merchants buying here cloth vpon their
credits, and selling the same beyond the Seas, haue
a good gaine to returne their money by a low exchange,
to pay the seller of the Cloth with his
owne, & so trading without stockes: are instruments
to sell the natiue Commodities of the Realme.
               If the exchange were not low vnder the value of
the Standard, Merchants could not make a great
benefit by taking vp moneys here (be he either
English or stranger) and transport the same to pay
their Bills of exchanges beyond the Seas, and reserue
a great part of the money for their benefit,
neither could they buy forraine Commodities beyond
the Seas vpon long dayes of payment, and
transport money to pay the seller at the said times.
               All this is done by maintaining the vndervaluation
of our moneys by a low exchange,The Rule of iustice & equity. which must
be distinguished from the true rule of iustice and equity,
which requireth an equall valuation in exchange,
or an aduantage ouer and aboue to accomodate
the course of Trafficque, and then it will
be found that the vnderualuation of moneys in exchange
is intollerable, and that this gaine procured
to the hurt of the Kingdome (although profitable
to particular Merchants) is to be abolished.
               The like is done by selling of our Cloth good
cheape beyond the Seas in greater quantity, when
Merchants haue beaten downe the price with the
Clothier, whereby the Clothier is forced to do the
like with the Woolegrower, which disimproueth
the reuinew of lands. But the Merchant imployeth
the lesser stocke, and hath not therefore the lesse

benefit: the Woolegrower and the Clothier bearing
the losse, besides other priuate dealings of Merchants,
which are errors of Trade, declared in out
former Treatise. P. 75, 76.
               The third distinction concerning the whole
Kingdome, is now to be examined by way of Antithesis
or conterpointing, shewing how gaine doth
command and direct Trade, in the said three simples
of Trafficque, namely Commodities, Moneys, and
Exchanges, and especially in the exchanges of moneys
which ouerruleth the other two, whereby the
ouerballancing of forraine Commodities, with our
natiue Commodities in price is procured: and this
may be auoided and preuented by the contrary, if it
be put in practise according to the said rule of iustice
and equitie.
               
                  
                     Inconueniences arising to the Realme of England, by
the vnderualuation of our moneys in Exchanges
vpon the pound of xx. shillings for the maine places
of Trade.
                  
                  FIrst, when our moneys are vnderualued in exchange,
whereby there ariseth a gaine betweene
the inward value of the moneys and the price of exchange:
then are our moneys continually exported
into forraine parts, for the like gaine can neuer
be made by any Commodity.
                  2 This exportation of money, causeth not onely
the lesse moneys to be employed vpon our natiue
Commodities, and returneth in forraine wares, but
taketh away also the Vitall spirit of Trafficque, and giueth

a great cause of ouerballancing of cōmodities.
                  3 The said vndervaluation of our moneys in exchange
doth the like, and causeth our natiue Commodities
to be sold better cheape beyond the Seas,
for want of knowledge of the true value of our moneys
and theirs: euen as the inhauncing of forraine
coyne beyond the Seas, caused the forraine wares to
be aduanced in price, according as the said money
is inhaunced, whereby the said ouerballancing must
needes come to passe of course.
                  4 It doth hinder the importation of Bullion and
Dollers from the said places of Trade, which wee
haue had in times past: for the said inhauncing
coyne not being truly valued by exchange, cannot
be imported but to an exceeding losse, and Merchant
strangers will not take the same at a low exchange,
so that our Merchants are compelled to make their
returnes by forraine Commodities, thereby greatly
increasing the said ouerballancing of Trade.
                  5 Young English Merchants are constrained to
take vp a great part of the said money at a low exchange,
to maintaine their rechanges to their losse,
or else must make quick sales of their commodities,
whereby they spoile the markets of others, which
causeth them to set ouer their bills obligatory (receiued
for their Clothes sold there) either for money,
to pay the money taken vp heere by exchange,
or for forraine Commodities at deere rates by the
said inhaunced moneys and otherwise, which cannot
but breed an ouerballancing of Commodities.
                  6 The said low exchange (whereby the Spanish
Merchants make a diuersion of the Royalls of 8 vnto

to those parts finding there more gaine, when they
can make ouer their moneys by a low exchange
doth also diuert from vs a great Trade, by such imployments
as are made there vpon forraine Commodities,
as Bayes, Sayes, and other new Draperies
made in those parts, which might be employed vpon
our Commodities, and can this negotiation be
without argumenting of the said ouerballancing?
                  7 If by occasion or accident moneys or Bullion
is impotted: (which might be carried to the Mint,
and the moneys made thereof would be deliuered
by exchange to our Merchants, and so by them employed
vpon our Commodities, if the said were
high or indiffetent:) it falleth out, that the said
moneys or Bullion are exported againe by other
Merchants, which bring in forraine wares for it,
for gaine still beareth the sway.
                  
                  Thus by buying forraine commodities (as it were)
by forcible meanes of course, by reason of the said
vndervaluation of our moneys by exchange: and
selling our natiue Commodities by a false measure
of exchange to our losse,The causes of ouerballancing and decay of Trade. at the pleasures of other
Nations: and by conuerting their inhaunced coine
into Starlin money by a low exchange, and the continuall
exportation of our moneys affording such
great gaine, and being debarred to bring in moneys
because of the losse had thereby, is our trade decayed:
and would be so, although there were no more
wares in Christendome, for these be the causes of
ouerballancing, whereby the Realme is impouerished:
which shalbe more amply declared. Sublata
Causa, T
                           •
                        ll itur effectus.
                  
                  
                     
Now albeit that the contrary hereof doth produce
the benefits to the Common-wealth, and doth
properly belong to the remedies of the inconueniences
of Trade, to be handled in the last Chapter:
yet because it is more intelligible in this place, let
vs declare the same.
               
               
                  
                     Benefits which will arise to the Realme of England by
the true valuation of our Moneys in Exchange,
to meete with the said inconueniences.
                  
                  FIrst,Meanes to preuent the ouerballancing of Trade, and to restore Trade. when the exchange doth answer the true
value of our moneys, then there is no gaine to be
made by exportation, which is preuented thereby.
                  2 The transportation of moneys being preuented,
will cause the greater employment to be made
vpon our natiue Commodities, either by the Merchant
stranger, or by English Merchants to whom
the stranger will deliuer his money by exchange,
for by the exportation he shall haue no gaine, and
therefore he will expect the taker of it: by which
plenty of money there will be a liuely Trade, and the
cause of ouerballancing will diminsh.
                  3 The true value of our money or aboue being
answered by a high exchange, causeth Merchants
strangers to sell their Commodities according to
the true value of the money, whereby the ouerballancing
must needs decrease of course,
                  4 The vndervaluation of our moneys, and the
inhauncing of forraine coyne being met withall,
and calculated in exchange, causeth moneys and
Bullion to be brought into the Realme without

losse, and most times with gaine, and sometimes
with a little disaduantage, because our Merchants
will rather then to buy forraine commodities deere▪
haue their money ready to be employed again. 
                        •
                     
this doth also meete with the said ouer ballancing.
                  5 Young English Merchants which are takers of
moneys beyond the Seas, will receiue more by an
high exchange there, and finding plenty of money,
shall not be driuen to make rash sales or barters to
their losse, and hinderance of others, which will also
moderate the said ouer ballancing.
                  6▪ When the Spanish Merchants shall not be able
to deliuer their Royal
                        •
                     s of 8, or the money receiued
for them by a low exchange beyond the
Seas, but according to the true value required by a
iust and lawfull exchange: then they will find no
more gaine there then here, which will cause them
to import the said Royalls here, where the inward
value will be answered vnto them: & the diuerted
Trade by these meanes will returne into England,
to employ the said Royalls or the moneys made
thereof, vpon our Bayes, Sayes, and other Draperies,
which of course wil quallify the said ouerballācing.
                  7 Thus moneys and Bullion will then be imported
by a necessitie of nature beyond all resistance,
and the Dollers, Royalls of 8, and other coynes
brought in vpon occasion or accidentally, will remaine
within the Realme, when there shall be no
gaine by the exportatiō, because this true exchange
(Rising and falling neuerthelesse aboue the value, and
not vnder) will answer the said value, and preuent
that gaine, which is now procured in danger of the

Lawes, aduenture of the Seas, and of lewd persons.
                  So that by comparing the precedent benefits
with the former inconueniences,An application of the comparison. euery man of
iudgment may easily see how hurtfull the low exchange
and vnderualuation of our moneys is to the
Common-wealth: and on the contrary, how beneficiall
the true valuation or high exchange will be,
concurring with equitie and true pollicy, whereupon
the Center of the Circle of Commerce is grounded.
                  Consider wee now this Center (Gaine) in euery
particular vpon the premises, drawing from the
Circumference all direct lines into it, and excluding
all obliquie, curuey, and Helicall lines, and we shall
find, that Nothing doth force Trade but Gaine.
                  
                  
                     Gaine had vpon moneys by vnderualuation in exchange,
and inhauncing of forraine coyne beyond
the Seas: causeth our moneys to be exported.
                  
                     Gaine had vpon moneys by exchange and true valuation,
causeth moneys to be brought in.
                  
                     Gaine vpon moneys being taken away and answered
by true exchange, keepeth moneys within the
Realme.
                  
                     Gaine giuen vpon moneys imported heere, equall
to the gaine made beyond the Seas: will preuent
the diuersion of the Royalls of 8.
                  
                     Gaine more made by our moneys, then by our commodities
exported: causeth lesse employment
to be made vpon our Commodities, and greater
exportation.
                  
                     Gaine made by a low exchange, vndervaluing our
moneys, causeth them to be sold lesse beyond

the Seas, and forraine wares deerer, to ouerballance
vs.
                  
                     Gaine made vpon our natiue Commodities, is Really
imported by moneys and Bullion, when there
is no losse by the importation of moneys.
                  
                     Gaine had vpon forraine coyne within the Realme,
being preuented by the value in Exchange,
keepeth the coyne within the Realme and
Mint.
                  
                     Gaine vpon moneys being greater beyond the Seas
then with vs in England, draweth moneys
thither, and hindreth moneys to be imported,
the want whereof maketh a dead Trade.
                  
                     Gaine had by exchange vpon young Merchants of
smal meanes, spoileth the vent of our commodities,
by ouerthrowing the Market of others.
                  
                     Gaine giuen by exchange of moneys by Bill, according
to the true value or aboue the same:
causeth forraine Commodities to be sold better
cheape within the Realme, and giueth a
direction (Tacite) to sell our natiue Commodities
with more gaine and reputation.
                  
                     Gaine procured by our Commodities outwards,
more then by forraine Commodities inwards,
which meanes to import Bullion and moneys
to be done by this true valuation in exchange
as aforesaid, will preuent the ouerballancing
of Trade, and bring all things in tune, when
the Center (Gaine) findeth rest in Proprio Loco.
                  
                  The consideration hereof excludeth all vniust, vnlawfull,
and priuate gaine, made to the preiudice of
the Realme by the ouersight of Merchants, which

seeme to steere the helme when Palynicrus was
sleepie.
                  This is that Geometricall Axiom or Maxime, Circulus
Tangit Planum vnico Puncto heretofore obserued,
this is properly the Scope of Merchants,P. 104. all the
Misteries of Personall and Prouinciall Exchanges are
comprised in this Mistery, which Misselden will
make to be no Mistery, and to vse his owne words
neuertheles. All the knowledge of Commerce is presented
and represented in this History. All the riuers
of Trade spring out of this source,P. 142. and empt themselues
againe into this Occean. All the waight of
Trade falles to this Center, and comes within the
circuit of this Circle. This is that Par pro Pari, that
waighes downe Misseldens Ballance of Trade, which
is without a Paralell: which to proue let vs now
examine what is presented and represented by his
vncertaine Ballance.
                  
               
               
                  
                     A Merchant saith he, when he will informe himselfe
how his Estate standeth,P. 130. is said to take a Ballance
of his Estate: wherein he collecteth and considereth
all his Wares, and Monyes, and Debts, as if he
would cast euery-thing into the Scale to be tried.
&c.
                  
                  IF this Merchant should not looke to the Center.
(Gaine) in the meane time, what will the taking of
a Ballance auaile him, or to what end and purpose
will this tend? Surely onely for a triall to find out
whether he hath gained or lost, this is all a Ballance
can doe. And although a Merchant can (in some sort)

doe this: It followeth not that the Royall
Merchant or a Prince can doe it, albeit he is the Father
of the great familie of the Commonwealth, for
the cause of Trade is not in his owne power, but
Merchants doe manage the same, who (as hath bin
shewed) may procure their priuate gaine, and
yet impouerish the Kingdome. So that the Casting
vp of this Ballance,
                     P. 116. can neuer be an excellent and policique
inuention to shew vs the difference of weight
in the Commerce of one Kingdome with another, vnles
the three Essential parts of Trade be wisely directed
and obserued by the Prince, according to the
said Center of Commerce, and not by this conceited
Ballance.
                  
                  
                     Misselden hauing found an auncient worm-eaten
Ballance vpon Record, which is said to be made in
the 28 yeare of Edward the Third: might very well
haue ouer past the same, seeing the imperfection
thereof:P. 30. and that he found it in that Maniscript
that he so little esteemeth, from which (as he saith)
I haue stored my selfe. For therein diuers Commodities
of the Kingdome, as Lead, Tinne, Butter,
Cheese, Tallow, Hides, Skinnes, Iron, and other
Staple Wares, are not mentioned, and yet concerne
the said Ballance: so that his comparison betweene
those auncient,P. 123. with these moderne times, is but
vaine and a Superfluous tale. But he delighteth i
                        •
                     
words for want of matter or substance.
                  Then he commeth to a Positiue constitution of the
forme of a Ballance in the yeares of our Lord 1612, and
1621. And here lieth the Pot of Roses, to know whether
the natiue Commodities exported, and the

forraine Commodities imported doe ballance or ouerballance
one another in the Scale of Commerce:
                     P. 121.
and if the natiue Commodities exported doe waigh
downe and exceed in value the forraine Commodities
imported,P. 127. that ouerplus must either come in (as
he saith) in money or Merchandise,P. 117. if not in money,
then in Merchandise.
                  Surely he did not consider this without a nightcap,
for it deserueth to be written in Capitall Letters.
Moneys will not be imported so long as there is a
losse by the bringing in of them: and if Commodities
be brought in, it increaseth the said ouerballancing,
as a Deceptio Visus vpon your Scale of Commerce,
whereby you cannot discerne the truth: but
you must of force find your Ballance false,
                        The Ballance, A deceptio Visus. and your
iudgement vncertaine: and herein is no more hope
of a remedie, then there is to ouertake a man which
runneth to the East, and you persue him towards
the West, running from him.
                  But let vs come somewhat closer to the consideration
of this Ballance, and suppose, that by increasing
our Manifactures by foure or fiue hundreth
thousand pounds yearely more to be exported, this
ballance will be reformed, is not this like and feasible
to be done? I answere, that although it were feasible
to make and vent such a quantity of Manifactures
yearely: yet is it not like to moderate the ouerballancing.
For all men of iudgement will say, that the
proceed or returne of the said Manifactures will
come vnto vs in forraine Commodities, because
moneys and Bullion cannot be brought in but to
losse, as the case standeth. So that still our ouerballancing

increaseth, for when more Commod
                        •••
                     
are imported, then the Kingdome spends: 
                        〈◊〉
                     
must be exported againe for other places, and ot
                        •••
                     
Commodities are imported againe for the retu
                        ••
                     
thereof, to augment the said ouerballance, nay
                        ••
                     
force vs to weare more forraine wares through the
aboundance of it, and to neglect the vse of our natiue
Commodities.
                  But saith he,P. 123. the forme will illustrate this conceited
course of Ballance: Tot sensus, quot capita:
As many mindes, as men: euery man abounding in
his owne sence: a maruelous grounded rule to build
vpon where there is so many Cannons, must wee
needs saile betweene Scylla and Charibays of an vncertaine
Ballance without a Paralell,
                     Absurd to admit such vncertainties. when the Compasse
of our Center doth direct vs in the very negotiation,
and nothing can be directed vnto vs by this
Ballance without the said Center?
                  
                  The vncertainty of this Ballance doth consist of
many particulars, whereby it is so farre from vnderstanding,
as conclusion is from order.
                  First. This Ballance cannot be certainly prescribed
by one yeares time,The vncertainties of the Realme. or any certaine or limited
time, for sometimes (and that vnexpected) some
East India Ship or other rich lading may come in,
or the Spices and other goods already come in, and
to be exported, are not carried out, when the calculation
of the Ballance is made.
                  Secondly for moneys secretly exported: the returne
in Commodities may be yet to come, or if it
be for gaine had by intrest money or exchanges, it
neede neuer to returne for the Merchant stranger:

as also for moneys taken vp by exchange to be employed
vpon Commodities and other meanes
whereof the Ballance cannot be sensible, not comming
to be Ballanced.
                  Thirdly, The profit made vpon our natiue Commodities,
as also for the forraine Commodities and
the charges is incertaine, both in the exportation of
the one, and the importation of the other, which he
bringeth vpon the Ballance by estimate, and is
meerely coniecturall.
                  Fourthly, The forraine Commodities are not
vnderrated by one third part in the Custome
Bookes, in comparison of our natiue Commodities.
                  Fiftly, The fine goods secretly conueyed inwards
more then outwards, by one hundreth thousand
pounds yearely, is but a supposition.
                  Sixtly, The payment of Customes being vncertaine,
and the concealing of Custome comming to
be twenty for one in the calculation, maketh the accompt
to be most incertaine.
                  Seuenthly and lastly, There may be so much
gotten by Commodities exported & retransported,
and for that gaine forraine Commodities brought
in, that it may seeme to be an ouerballance, when
it is not.
                  The premises considered, what Center is there in
this Ballance? is it not like vnto those great Balloons,
that men play with all fild with wind? for there is
not any sollid substance,P. 126. but all is coniecturall and
immaginary, neither is it practised by other Princes
and Countries, as he vntruly alleadgeth. For other
Princes and States are carefull to augment

Trade, by increasing of their Manifactures, and 
                        〈◊〉
                     
sell them to benefit, as also to make their Territor
                        •••
                     
(as it were) Magazins for all Commodities,Gaines to be procured by Commodities, moneys, and Exchanges. and as
they get by Commodities, so doe they also by moneys
and exchanges, which cannot but preuent the
ouerballancing.
                  We all agree that there is an ouerballance, which
must be remeded by the redresse of the causes, and
not by the study of Ballances, which demonstrate
little in truth and certainty, but much in imagin
                        •••
                     .
on and conceit. It is Gaine that beareth the sway,
and it is more then necessary to Tautologize and to
repeate things of this nature, for they produce fearfull
effects, we feele them, we complaine of them:
and wofull experience sheweth vnto vs, that it is
high time to reforme them. For Abyssus Abyss
                           ••
                        
inuocat.
                  
                  
                     By the aforesaid distinction, euery man of vnderstanding
can discerne the particular & priuate gaine
from the generall benefit, whereby he may the better
perceiue the weaknes of Misseldens obiections.
                  
               
               
                  
                     He saith.P. 108. The higher the exchange is in England, the
more losse is it to the taker. And the more gaine
to the deliuerer,1. Obiect. which is the Merchant stranger.
                     Againe. The higher the Exchange is in Dutchland,
the more losse to the deliuer, and gaine to the taker:
which is likewise there the Merchant stranger,
and this he declareth by example.
                  
                  THis Obiection is the first Pernitious Argument
noted in this Chapter, (which representing vnto

vs the Equinoctiall Line) requireth equallity and
equity in the valuation of Moneys and true Exchanges
for the generall good, as before is demonstrated:
the absurdity of which obiection let vs now declare.
                  Suppose that (notwithstanding the inhauncing
of the forraine coyne beyond the Seas) the price
of exchange were still at euen money, as it was about
80 yeares past, as hath beene declared, namely
at twenty shillings here with vs, which is a low exchange
vpon the Ballance of Trade. A Merchant
stranger selling heere his forraine Commodities
bought beyond the seas with the inhaunced coine,
finding this low exchange to make his returne by,
will resolue either to buy our Commodities, or to
export our moneys, for by this low exchange he
shall be a very great looser: so that our English
Merchants shall find no money to be taken vp by
exchange, to make their ready employment vpon
our Commodities, and the Merchant stranger will
buy them, or else the money will be conueyed away
for the most part, notwithstanding the Statute of
employment, which as it is a losse to the Realme:
so is it to the English Merchants in particular, who
might haue employed the same. So then è contrario.
                  
               
               
                  
                     The lower the Exchange is in England, the lesse mony1. Answ.
is deliuered by exchange vnto English Merchants,
and the more is the Trade driuen into the Merchant
strangers hands. As also the more moneys
are exported.
                     Againe. The lower that the Exchange is in Dutchland,
the lesse money is taken vp by the Merchant
stranger there, and the more 
                           〈…〉
                        
are imported, both by the English Merchants and
the Merchant strangers,
                  
                  
                     
VVHich bringeth an ouerballancing, and increaseth
the transportation of our moneys:
and is also a hinderance to the importation, because
their moneys are inhaunced, whereby it is manifest,
that one extremity enforceth another.
                  What is now the Medium, or rather,The generall benefit to be prefered before the particular. which of these
extreames shall take place? The one conterneth
the generall welfare of the Realme: The other
concerneth priuate Merchants. Shall not the rule
of iustice and equity be preferred, whereby the
Common-wealth is inriched, and the priuate be abolished,
which destroyeth the Kingdome? yes
questionles.
                  But this reformation or Par of exchange,2
                           •
                         Obiect. threateneth
the decay of Cloth Trade. For the exchange
is that,
                     P. 109. 
                     which representeth to our English Merchant, his
whole estate beyond the Seas, for his ready vse and employment
thereof in England vpon all occasions. So that
if there should be a stop in the course of exchange,Exchange the publike measure then
either the English Merchant will for beare to take vp
money by exchange; or else he will locke to recouer his
losse of exchange, vpon his Cloth.
                  
                  I answere.2. Answ. That giuing more to the Merchant
stranger by exchange then formerly, the Trade will
be aduanced. For the English Merchant will finde
more mony for his ready employment then before,
and the money will not be transported. So that to
surmise, that the English Merchant will forbeare to

take vp moneys by exchange, or will be so in
                        •
                     urious
to his Countrey to maintaine an 
                        〈◊〉
                      of
our moneys in exchange, contrary to his Maiesties
Proclamation, and the lawes of the Realme, is altogether
without ground and sensles. The course of
exchange rising and falling shall haue no stop, neither
will there be any stand in Blackwell Hall, whereby
the remedy will be farre worse then the disease.
As Misselden laboureth to proue.
                  But the English Merchant must needes recouer the3. Obiect.
loss
                        •
                      of the exchange vpon the Cloth, which must either
be done in the buying of it at home, or selling of it abroad:
But it cannot be done in the sale of Cloth abroad, for
the Cloth Trade grones already vnder the burthen, as
appeareth by the quantity and the price thereof which is
diminished: and to bring it vpon the Ch
                        ••
                     hier, is a
matter of grieuous consequence.
                  Experience (as I haue said) maketh a full answer,3. Answ.
that as there wanted no takers of money, when the
late inhauncing of money at Hamborough caused the
exchange to rise from vnder 28 s. to aboue 35 s,
which is farre more then the intended reformation,
and Wooll was at 33 s. the Todd, which is now at
20 s. and vnder; so there will want no vent for our
Cloth: for if there were sale for duble the quantity
then, when Cloth was sold dearer by full one third
part, wee neede not to doubt of vent, when other
Nations are as willing to buy the same, as they are
willing to vent their Commodities vnto vs: and it
standeth with more reason to aduance the price
thereof, when the same is good cheape, and to reforme
the price of exchange then when this deare.

Albeit wee neuer heard any complaint of the deerenesse
of our Cloth.
                  
                     Misselden will insinuate of many obiections that
can be made against this reformation so much requisite:
but they are but words,P. 11
                           •
                        . as all former considerations
doe manifest, the taker will be ruled by
the deliuerer. For albeit that Trade requireth a
naturall liberty, (which in no Countrey is so much
restrained as in England) yet Gaine the true Center
doth ouerrule all (as it were) by a voluntary command,
which maketh the voluntary contract by the
mutuall consent of both parties by him alleageth:
and when the Gaine of exportation of moneys faileth,P. 113.
then the statute of employment is better obserued,
and moneys are more plentifull by exchange.
                  For all these Arguments are as Lime Twiggs or
Hops to keepe him still inclosed within his Circle.
He replieth, that although there wanted not Takers
of money by exchange for Hamborough, when the
exchange rise from 28 s. to 35 s, yet it doth not follow,
that therefore there would be Takers at the Par
of Exchange, for it is a different case. Indeede he
doth not vnderstand the case,P. 114. for the Takers did not
gaine, neither did the deliuerer loose (as he saith)
by the fast rising of exchange at Hamborough, onely
he that was to take vp money backe againe to pay
his Bills of exchanges taken vpon him, might therein
become a gainer, although by the buying of
Commodities he might haue beene a looser by the
induring of Commodities there, vpon the inhauncing
of moneys.A Particular maketh no rule. These accidents are particulars,
and make no generall rule.
                  
                     
That he vnderstandeth not himselfe in the Par of
Exchange, (which I haue distinguished by the Positiue
Exchange from the Currant Exchange) appeareth
also by his inferrence, That it may proue also another
bar to Trade, and cause the Cloth Trade both in the Clothier
and Merchants hands to be so much dearer to them,
and cheaper to the stranger by how much the naturall
course should be altered in exchange, when it should be
answered by the price of exchange, to the great aduantage
of forraine Nations, and losse of the Kingdome.
This man seeketh a knot in a Bulrush, and concludeth,
that all he hath alleaged is as cleare as the
Sunne: and that vntill the Kingdome come to an
ouerballance of Trade,P. 131. 
                     the causes of the decay of Trade
cannot be taken away: for the decay of Trade, and the
ouerballance cannot stand together. That is to say, a
sicke body cannot be in health vntill it be cured:
which is a sentence containing many sentences, when
the ouerballance is the decay of Trade.
                  To speake ingeniously, can the making of a Ballance
cause moneys and Bullion to be brought in, or
hinder the transportation of moneys? or can the
calculation of the said Ballance procure that our
natiue Commodities exported, shall surmount in
price and quantity the forraine Commodities
brought in. And lastly, can the said Ballance bring
to passe that Spanish Royalls of 8 (now diuerted
from vs) shall be imported, and when the said Royalls
and Dollers are brought in, that they shall not
be carried out againe, but be brought to the Mint:
as the said Center (Gaine) will doe by the true course
of exchange, to the enriching of the Realme, and

preuention of ouerballancing?
                  Questionles it cannot, for the end of the Ballance
(by his owne confession) is last in place, but first
and chiefest in purpose,P. 130. or in the beginning, which
is nothing else but to make a triall of things past: so
that put this Circle of Commerce into the Seals of the
Ballance, and lay a feather against it, and it will
weigh downe the same.
                  But some will say: Why doe you expostulate or
make inquiry of the end of this Ballance,P. 132. hath not
he contracted all the causes of our vnderballance
in two words? Pouerty and Prodigallity grounded
vpon Idlenesse and Excesse; and therein vsed such a
Ciceronian stile, to exhort the learned Diuines and
prouident Statesmen, that we may say Mouit Cornicula
risum, assuredly he hath: but this may not be
ascribed to the Ballance of Trade, for riot and excesse
may be knowne without such a Ballance, and Pouerty
and want is not without feeling, neither ought
to be without commiseration. For the transportation
of moneys to heauen is lawfull, by charitable
giuing to the poore, which God himselfe hath promised
to reward, although men were neuer so vnthankfull.
                  Here (according to Misseldens maner) I haue
occasion offered me, to make a very ample discourse
concerning his presumption aboue the wisedome
of the City of London, his vncharitable disposition
to preuent tenne thousand pounds yearely cast
away to the poore, and his peremptory and absolute
conclusion in the gouernment of State-affaires,
wherein he is a meere nouice. But my intention is

to be briefe and substantiall.
                  To end therefore this matter of Ballance, it may
be thought strange that some men would be seduced
thereby,Discourse of the East India Trade, by T. M. P. 49. 52. and giue bridle to the present course of
Trade, expecting an ouerballance to happen on our
side without remouing of the causes, after they had
spoken well concerning exchanges: although they
confessed to be a ground, as a matter much too
high for their handling: saying, That the abuse
thereof is very preiuditiall vnto this Kingdome in particular,
whilst in the interim the benefits doe arise vnto
other Countries, who diligently obseruing the prices,
whereby the moneys be exchanged, may take aduantage
to carry away the gold and siluer of this Realme, at those
times when the rate of our Starlin money (in exchange)
is vnder the value of that standard, vnto which place
they are conueyed, for in respect the prices of the exchanges
doe rise and fall according to the plenty and scarcity
of money, which is to be taken vp or deliuered out:
the exchange is hereby rather become a Trade for some
great moneyed men, then a furtherance and accommodation
of Recall Trade of Merchants, as it ought to be in
the true vse thereof: and thus many times money may
be made ouer hither by strangers to a good gaine, and presently
carried beyond the Seas to a second profit. And
yet the mischiefe ends not here: for by these meanes the
Takers vp of money in forraine Countries must necessarilie
driue a Trade to those places from whence they draw
their moneys and so do fill vs vp with forraine Cōmodities,
without the vent of our owne Wares▪ &c. And thus
wee see how the ouerballance of Commodities is
proceeding from the abuse of exchanges, which

ouerrule moneys, and moneys ouerrule Commodities,
as heretofore is manifestly declared.
                  That the vnderualuation of our moneys in exchange
is the efficient cause of the ouerballancing of
Trade,Vnderualuation of our moneys inexchange is the efficient cause of the ouerballancing. doth appeare vpon the consideration of the
causes depending one vpon another, inforced by
this Primum-Mobill, as followeth.
                  1. The vnderualuation of our moneys in exchange,
2. proceeding of the inhauncing of moneys beyond
the Seas, which causeth 3. (by gaine) the transportation
of our moneys, 4. and debarred (by losse to
be sustained) the importation of moneys and Bullion,
5. hindreth also the bringing of Royalls of 8.
vnto vs, being otherwise diuerred. 6. The forraine
Commodities are risen in price according to the
moneys inhaunced. 7. The natiue Commodities
are in price vndervalued according to the vndervaluation
of our moneys, all which are feareful effects.
For the treasure is exhaunced, the Realme impouerished,
and money is made a Merchandise. And this
cannot be cured but by the contrary, as shall be declared
in the remedies.
                  Hitherto wee haue obserued and manifestly proued.
First, That exchange is the publike measure
betweene England, and all places where wee deale
by exchange. Secondly, That the moneys of the
Realme are vndervalued in exchange betweene vs
and other Countries. And thirdly, That Gaine is
the Center of the Circle of Commerce, and that the said
vnderualuation is the efficient cause of the ouerballancing
of Trade: and withall we haue showed that

                        〈◊〉
                      
                     conceited Ballance of Trade proposed by Misselden,
                     
can be but a Triall and Discouery of the ouerballancing
of Trade, without that it can produce any
other benefit to the Common-wealth.
                  By his last Ballance wee may perceiue, that all the
Commodities exported, and the Commodities imported
yearely, doe amount vnto fiue Millions, or
fifty hundreth thousand pounds, according to our
obseruation in the Canker of Englands Common-wealth.
Now if the losse by exchange were but ten
vpon the hundreth, (which wee haue proued aboue
three-score and tenne) it would amount to fiue
hundreth thousand pounds yearely:P. 37. The losse
whereof is greater to the Kingdome, then all the
moneys employed to the East Indies commeth vnto,An incredible losse.
which Misselden affirmeth to be an abominable
vntrueth, which I cannot but retort vpon him, because
he is vnfortunate to finde out the truth, as
shalbe made more plaine in the following Chapter,
for he is in league with equiuocation in all his refutations,
which challengeth to be Cusen Germaine to
trueth, making his speeches a Centaure, halfe a man,
halfe a horse: or like one of the broodes of Nilus,
halfe earth, halfe froggs, a thing both shapelesse,
and shaped in one mixture, which it thus distinguished
by the Equinoctiall in this place.

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  An Examination of the Center of Commerce in the
Trades from England into other Countries.
               
               
                  THe Tropicke of Capricorne being the fourth
Zone or girdle by our distribution, is to
vnderp
                     •
                  op and sustaine (by the gaine of
Trades) the said Center or Gaine within the circumference
of the Circle of Commerce, not by an absolute
power to be left vnto Merchants in the managing
of Trade, or in the disposing of moneys, Commodities
and exchanges for moneys: but by a direction
grounded vpon Lawes, Ordinances, and Proclamations.
For in regard of State affaires, Merchants
are ignorant in the course of Trafficque, for asmuch
as they doe onely study for priuate benefit, so that
they must haue leaders and conductors: whereunto
Buckes and Goates haue been compared in times
past, leading the silly sheep to feede in mountainous
places. To proue therefore that this is no new
doctrine or inuention of mine, as Misselden alleageth:
let vs enter into consideration of the following
obseruations, before our intended examination
of the Center of Commerce in forraine Trade
                     •
                  .
               It is neere 350. yeares since King Edward the first
did erect the office of the Kings Royall Exchanger,Ancient Office of Exchanges.
which did continue successiuely by 16 seuerall Letters
Patents of the Kings of this Realme: by meanes
whereof the moneys were preserued within the
same, and the Commodities were orderly vented,
& the Merchandising exchange was then vnknown.
               
                  
King Edward the third, did constitute diuers exchanges9. E. 3. 7.
in sundry places of the Realme, and caused
tables of exchanges to be set vp at Doner and elsewhere,
to answere the value of our moneys in the
coyne to be paid for it beyond the Seas, according
to the very value, with some allowance to be giuen
to accomodate Merchants affaires and trauellers occasions.
The like was done by Richard the second:5. R. 2. 2.
and this was the true Par pro Pari,
                  2. H. 6. 6. then vsed and continued
by Henry the sixt, and Edward the fourth,4. E. 4. 16.
but more especially by that wise and politike Prince2. H. 6. 6.
King Henry the seuenth,3. H. 7. 6. absolutely forbidding the
making of exchanges and rechanges for forraine
parts, without the Kings especiall license had and
obtained for the same; to which end all the seuerall
Acts of Parliament touching the directing and ordering
of moneys and exchanges haue been made,
as in the margent.
               In primo of King Henry the eight, Sir Thomas
Bullen Knight, was the Kings exchanger by Letters
Patents for all changes and rechanges for forraine
parts, as by the Records appeareth in his Maiesties
Exchequer: and there also you shall finde, that
during the r
                     •
                  igne of the said king Henry the seuenth,
one Petrus Contarin a Veneti
                        •
                     n Merch
                     •
                  nt, was sued
in the tenth yeare of his raigne vpon the said Statutes,
and the like 
                     •
                  u
                     •
                  e was brought in the ninteenth
yeare following, against Dominico Polli
                        •
                     o
                        •
                     o the
Popes collector. And Lorenzo Alb
                        •
                     rti vpon the
like condemnation did pay 933 l.
                  
                     Graftons Cron.
               
               This caused the said King Henry the eight in the
twenty two yeare of his Raigne, to make a very

seuere Proclamation, that no person should make
any exchange contrary to the true meaning of the
said Acts and Statutes: but as Warres discompound
all good orders, and necessity hath no law: so (in
the latter end of this Kings Raigne) by reason of
the base money then coyned, this office of exchanges
did discontinue; And in Edward the sixt his time,
the practise of exchange was for a time prohibited,
but vpon vrgent necessity of the conueniences therof,
againe admitted vnto Merchants.
               In the beginning of the Raign of the late Queen
Elizabeth of blessed memory, the abuses of exchanges
were called in question by Mr. Hussly, gouernour
of the Merchants Aduenturors: afterwards
the Lord Burghley, Lord Treasurer of England, had
a grant by Letters Patents of the said office for 23.
yeares, who not being informed how the same
should be truely Gouerned, (after Proclamation
made) could not finde conuenient meanes to establish
the same: this in progresse of time did touch
the said Lord so much in his honor and reputation,
that his Sonne Sir Robert Cecill, Lord Treasurer of
England after him, would neuer incline to establish
the said office, much lesse to reforme the abuses
thereof: besides some other consideration might
moue him, because the busines was propounded by
others. So that Misselden doth speake vntruly that
the same was reiected,P. 92. for it hath still continued and
beene in agitation, euen as the fishing Trade:
(hitherto neglected) whereof more hereafter.
               The importancy of the matter of exchange,Treaties of Exchanges with other Princes. doth
not onely appeare by the said generall Acts of Parliament

hitherto vnrepealed, and now most necessary
then euer to be put in practise: but also by diuers
Treaties that the Kings of England haue had
by many conferrences with other Princes and states.
concerning the losses sustained thereby, now vtterly
neglected. Let it be considered what incredible
losse England sustaineth, when wee loose aboue two
                     •
                  shillings
in the pound, when the Dutchesse of Sauoy▪
                  
Regent of the Low Countries, alleageth that one
halfe penny in the pound losse, would ruine the
State of those Countries: as by antient records in
the Exchequer appeareth.
               King Henry the eight being come to Callice, required
the Arch-dutches of Austria, then gouernor of the
Low Countries, to permit his gold and siluer to
passe currant in her Dominions a little aboue the
true value thereof, for the better inabling of his
Souldiers and Merchants.
               The Dutchesse dispatched Thomas Gramay generall
of her mints, and Iohn Dewsbrooke her Assay-master,
with instructions to the King of England; aduertising
him,Notable considerations. that to suffer the English coyne runne
at an ouervalue, was against all Statutes and ordinances
of the Mint: and that it would redound to
the great scandall, losse, and harme to the common-weale,
and the harme and losse should be so great,
that it were imposible to esteeme it: for the Merchant
findeth that more might be gotten in England,
then in her Do
                     •
                  inions for Bullion: by this
ouerualuation of the English coyne, would carry
away all fiue gold molten and vnmolten, not onely
in ingotts, but also in peeces of gold, made in the

Arch-Dukes Mint, to conuert them into Angell
Nobles, by which meanes the Countrey and Subiects
of the same should be totally consumed, spoyled
and destroyed, which would turne to a domage
inestimable.
               The like is affirmed to ensue by the tolleration of
our English siluer moneys to be ouer valued,Gaine is still the Center. because
all Merchants for their gaine would carry into England
not onely the materialls of siluer, but also peeces
coyned, wherby the entercourse of Merchandise
should cease, and the Merchants should become
Merchants of siluer, without selling any other ware
or Merchandise.
               Furthermore she pleaded, that neuer any Prince
would permit strange money to passe higher then
his owne, but that of custome they vse the contrary.
               And which is most effectuall, she vrged that the
ordinances of the Mints for the benefit of the Prince
and his Subiects, ought euer to be kept of good
policy for a Law, firme and stable, forasmuch the
meanes of Princes and of Noblemen, together with
the rents, fees, and wages of all his Subiects are
taxed and valued, and all Merchandise ruled and
gouerned thereby: wherefore without great necessity
or evident vtility, no alteration ought to be
made in the price of moneys.
               Vpon this remoustrance, the Arch-Dutchesse
Commissioners & the Mint-masters of the Tower
made assayes of all English and Flemish coynes, and
after long disputing and wrangling, the King could
neuer obtaine to haue his coyne passe at an halfe
penny aboue the true value.
               
                  
What shall wee say of these our dayes, wherein
we suffer so great an vnderualuation of our moneys
in exchange, and inhaunoing of forraine coyne:
whereby the Trade is decayed, the Realme impouerished,
and euery man (in a maner) vndone? Are
all the precedent Lawes and ordinances made in
vaine and forgotten?
               When Hercules had lo
                     •
                  t his oxen,Bateman in his Leaden gods. and had long
time sought them in vaine, they were at last discouered
by their bellowing to be in Cacus Denne: now
Cacos in Greeke signifieth Euill, which draweth men
backwards by the taile as Cacus did the oxen: whenc
I doe conclude, that the said Lawes and ordinances
are hid in Misseldens Denne; for in his Circle he will
take no notice of them,P. 9. but keepeth them backe.
But thankes be giuen vnto God, and honor to the
King, who out of his Princely care and prouidence
hath Hercules strength to put the said Lawes in execution:
to which purpose, and to aduance Trade,
his highnes hath beene gratiously pleased; First, to
grant a speciall Commitee to examine the causes of
the decay of Trade: next, an especiall Commission
directed to diuers Noble Personages and Priuie
Councellors of State, associated with most worthy
persons of quality, to diuise wholsome remedies for
these diseases, wherein they bestow vnfatigable industry
and paines to receiue all informations, which
may conduce them to finde out the true remedies,
and discerne them from all fallacies: to them (I
doubt not) my labours will be acceptable, done
freely and sincerely for the common good. It may
be that the reformation hereof hath also been reserued

vntill these dayes, now the Right Honorable
Lyonell Baron Cranfield, Earle of Middlesex, is Lord
High Treasurer of England, (whose name Misselden
hath omitted in his Epistle Dedicatory) for his Lordship
hauing knowledge of moneys and exchanges,
is better inabled to aduance this important matter,
if it be possible that this time can entertaine good
things; wherein I am the more confident, because
the King himselfe in his high wisedome was desirous
to be informed hereof, by the Lord Vizcount
Mandeuill, Lord President of the Councell, who calling
(by his Maiesties commandement) vnto him, Sir
Robert Cotton, Knight and Baronet, Sir Ralph Maddyson,
Knight, Mr. Iohn Williams, his Maiesties Goldsmith,
Mr. William Sanderson, Merchant Aduenturer,
and my selfe, in the Moneth of Aprill 1622, deliuered
to the Kings Maiestie a Remonstrance made
by vs,A Report touching Exchanges, containning in substance: That hauing examined
the nature of exchange of moneys by Bills,
how it went in the elder and euener times, and how
it is now carried to the preiudice of the Realme,
and what will be the best meanes to reduce it to the
former equity and parity according to the Rule of
exchange, which is Par pro Pari: wee did find that
this equall and ancient Rule is broken by the inhauncing
of the price of moneys beyond the Seas,
whereby (in effect) wee exchange part of the intrinsicque
value of our moneys for their outward
denomination or valuation, and that the redresse of
this vnequall exchange betweene vs and forraine
nations may be done by his Maiesties Proclamation,
without inhauncing of our moneys at home, or

meddling with the finesse or allay thereof, in such
maner and forme as therein is declared, and hereafter
expressed, according to our former declaration
in Print, both in the Treatise of the maintainance
of free Trade, and Lex Mercatoria, wherein Gaine the
Center hath a Predominant power. And hereby it
may appeare that I haue not forgotten Cato his lesson,
Ad consilium non accesseris, antequam v
                        •
                     ceris:
neither am I so audatious and vnmannerly as Misselden
would proclame me to the world, he hath neede
of a leather case for his tongue, that in all his Circle
supped vp such hot broath,P. 17. 
                  Contra verbosos noli Contendere
verbis, &c.
               
               
                  To examine now the Center (Gaine) in euery particular
Trade of the Realme for forraine parts, wee
will begin with the song of foure parts, so termed
by Misselden;
                  P. 52. and answer most of his Satyrike speeches
with merry conceits, which may proue harmonious
to the wise, but if any thing shall seeme to be
extreuagant, let it be attributed to this Region of
Capricorne, where Corneited beasts will be skipping,
the voyces of his song is of strangers, of the staplers,
of the Interloopers, and of the Ports, and the poore
Merchants Aduenturors are made the burden of
the song,P. 49. on whom I doe indeuour (as he saith) to
lay a Tacite and secret Aspersion, of which he maketh
himselfe to be the informer. A Sycophant is taken for
a flatterer, of the Greeke word Sycos, which signifieth
a Fig: for the Kings in times past did so much
esteeme that fruit, as Princes doe now their Deere,
and such Promouters as gaue information of the
taking of figgs, were so called, which agreeth with

ours; howsoeuer I hope that his song will be a
recantation of his errors, (as all good Patriots
ought to doe) albe
                     •
                  t, he may perhaps (for a time)
recantare, that is, sing it ouer againe. Humanum est
errare, sed perseuerare Diabolicum.
               
               As I will not scatter any society or corporations,
in that which proueth preiuditiall to the Common-wealth,
so haue I forborne to speake that
which neuerthelesse is very considerable, and hath
beene obserued by that worthy Councellor and
Secretary of State, Sir Francis Walsingham, touching
Corporations, where the absolute disposing of
the Trade is left vnto them, without the Prince his
guide and direction for Commodities, Moneys, and
Exchanges: all my writings are emblazoned with
the praise and commendations of Merchants, albeit
Misselden goeth about to make me distastfull in peruerting
or misconstruing of them after his maner,
especially that I would haue the indraping of our
Woolls to be done in forraine parts, which he can
neuer proue: neither will I make any other answer
in defence thereof then is made already; For it is
recorded, that he who will make a great fire continually,
must rake together much meane fewell:
and he that will be alwayes shaking the spleene of
others, must haue (as this man hath) much curiosity,
more words, and most lyes, his face must be
as hard as the shell of a Tortis; his tongue as sharpe
as the quills of a Procerpine; his heart as vncleane as
the Stable of Augnis, before Hercules brought in the
riuer Alpheus to clense it. He saith.
               
                  
                  
                     That the State hath beene abused by information, that
the Dutch could not subsist without our English
Cloth.P. 51.
                     
                  
                  THere is not any such thing in my writings, neither
did I euer stand so much vpon the necessary
vse of our Woolls: but I did insist vpon two
principall points concerning the sale of Cloth,The aduantage of the sale of our Cloth.
which was, that other Nations (buying heretofore
our Clothes, when they were sold deerer by the
one halfe in price then they be now sold) did neuer
complaine that the Clothes were sold too deere,
but they did alwayes complaine of the false making
of Cloth: and againe, that other Nations are as
willing to sell vnto vs their forraine Commodities,
as we can be to sell our Clothes to them: for those
that make Clothes in their Countries, haue no occasion
to buy forraine Wares, or the Commodities
of other Countries, but seeke to sell them for ready
money, or to be paied at some times of payment:
whereby England hath a great aduantage, and may
enioy the benefit of it in selling their Cloth with
reputation, which is euer accompained with request,
and causeth Commodities to be sold at good
rates; whereas vilifying the price of Wares, can neuer
establish a Trade, nor make Commodities more
vendible, and this requireth great consideration.
               
               
                  
                     That one man which Malynes out of Mallice Pickes
and Points at, is indeede an ample Trader in colloured
Cloth, but not in Kerseys: yet so as there
are very many others of the Company that are also
Traders in coloured Cloth as well as he.
                  
                  
                     
HAd not this man beene one of his supporters,
by whose mouth his pen speaketh: I would
haue imagined, that he had beene in the Citty of
Butus, and had consulted with the Oracle of Laton
                           •
                        ,
where those that sleepe before her image can make
a Prediction by the first word of them that next met
them.Herodotus in Euterpe. I bare no malice to the man, nor to the Secretary
of the said Company, in whose commendation
he so much speaketh.P. 65. For I am assured, that vpon
better consideration of the matters in question,
they will willingly imbrace the true reformation
of these great abuses.
                  
                     Aspis a viper a venenum Mutuatur: Here Misselden▪
                     
doth mount his great ordinance against the Merchants
of the Staple and my selfe: for he stares as
wildly vpon vs,P. 62. Metamor. 3. as Agane did vpon her Sonne Pentheus,
when shee tooke him from a Bore: Ille mihi
seriendus Aper, &c. Accuseth vs both to be profest
aduersaries to the Merchants Aduenturers, for
saying, that the Staplers haue obserued, that the Merchants
Aduenturers haue an ineuitable oppertunity of
combination, to set what price they please vpon Cloth to
the Clothier, of Woole to the grower, and of all Commodities
exported and imported: and to make this to be but
a Suggestion, he careth not to accuse the said Company
of an extraordinary discord, whereby they do
more bid and out bid one another at the market,
then any other Companies: surely his allegation
that the Cloth Trade grones vnder the burthen &

cannot recouer, is then most vntrue,P. 110. for Merchants
will not striue to runne into an eminent danger of
losse, but (as is noted before) they will be sure to
impose all vpon the Clothier & the Wooll grower,
to the disimprouing of the reuinew of Lands, and
losse of the Kingdomes stocke: and on the other
side, the Staplers would not be so desirous to deale
in Cloth if they saw no meanes to make a benefit
thereby, and that farre greater then now is done,
which would deserue the name of Free Trade, especially
when we should be inable to make our choice,
to returne the proceede of our Natiue Commodities
by all the three simples of Trade to our best
aduantage,Commodities Moneys and Exchange. whereby they should not be subiect to
my penne, neither to his defence that presumeth so
much to haue deserued at their hands by extolling
their wisedome and prouidence, which cannot be
compleate, vnlesse the Commodities of the Realme
were aduanced by them in price and sale for the
generall good of the Kingdome, which he calleth
the Dowry and the Axis of the Common-wealth,P. 64.
whereon all the other Trades of the Realme doe
seeme to turne and haue their reuolution, so that
the Center must be found in the middle of this Axis.
Againe, the stranger would not be desirous to deale
in Cloth if there were no Center, nor the inhabitants
of other Ports. Lastly, the Interlopers would
be quiet if there were no gaine to be made, and the
noyses of their songs would not be heard all in one
tune, but these latter will be preuented and cut
off: now that Misselden is employed beyond the
Seas by the Merchants Aduenturors, who hauing

the Art of discouery to giue information, will spy
them out: I cannot but lament their case. For when
Sixtus Quintus was Pope, he made such an extraordinary
search in Rome for to discouer inueterated
offences: that the image of Saint Peter standing on
the one side of the portal of his Cathedrall Church,
did expostulate with Saint Paul standing on the
other side, concerning these strict proceedings, and
was resolued to depart had not Paul diswaded him:
not withstanding that he had good cause, for hauing
cut off Malchus his eare;P. 74. For the like feare may befall
the said Interloopers by Misseldens examinations
of all their ancient and moderne offences. To conclude
this point of the Cloth Trade, which would
be in danger to be wholy ouerthrowne. I say: that
euen as there was a man, that bringing his Mare to
drinke, thought that he saw the Moone drunke vp
by his Mare, which indeede was onely hid and
obscured in a cloud: the next day consulting with
his neighbours of Gotham, after much laying of
their Cods heads together, it was concluded, that
they should rip the Mare and let out the Moone:
and euer since these Goates of this Tropicke of Capricorne,
haue thought all the world beholding to them
for the recouery of the Moone. Euen so are the
Merchants Aduenturors: nay, all the Kingdome
beholding vnto Misselden for the preseruation of
the Cloth Trade.
                  
                  By this time he is come to Monopolies,
                     P. 66. and here
he doth say: that there is not any worse Monopoly
in the Kingdome, then I would make of the exchange.
And Monsieur Bodins allegation touching

the French Prouerbe, Il entend le par, is no good
phrase in French: here he will correct Magnificat,
et nescit quid significat. The reformation of the abuse
of exchange is to be done by all men, and therefore
cannot be termed a Monopoly. And for the con
                        •
                     iderations
requisite in Monopolies, I referre my selfe to
the Chapter of Associations in Lex Mercatoria.
                  
                  Now for his finding fault with a Sillogisme made
before he was borne,P. 91. drawne from Negati
                           •
                        es: if I
were but a Smatterer in any Science, and had
knowne the vse of his Pill Panchreston, I would proue
as good and skilfull in equiuocation, as he is found
to be in altering the state of a question, which is nothing
but an equiuocation, as for example: Quite
Animal dicit, verum praedicat, & quite Asinum idem
et te Animal dicit ergo. The Elenches of Accidents
secundum quid, are lurking: and yet withall the
question is changed, for the reason is drawne (as
his maner is) from a particular to an vniuersall,
which is preposterous and retrograde. So where the
question is begged, the streame of the disputation
turnes his channell. And this will serue for an answer
to his Paralogisme.
                  
                  It followeth,P. 69. to make also some briefe answer to
his exception of the comparison I made of things
actiue and passiue, because hee will not vnderstand
the application of it; for he replieth and confesseth
               
               
                  
                     That the cloth doth not measure the yard, but the yard
the cloth. But he addeth, the greater the measure is,
the fewer yards the cloth containeth; and the lesse
the measure, the more yards.
                  
                  
                     
MAy it not be said, that the yard is actiue and
the cloth passiue,
                     P. 40 wit
                        •
                     out Pacius explication,
as the bough proceeding from Aristotle the 
                        •
                     oote?
Let him remember that our famous Recorder of
London made this distinctiō very perspicuous, whē
                     Dunscomb had stricken Cox; did not he giue sentence
that comb should be takē from Duns who was actiue,
and be giuen to Cox to make him a Coxcomb, because
he was passiue. If he wil not beleeue this, Staffords law
may make him feele it, when he meeteth with impatient
men. It is enough for me to proue, that exchange
is actiue, and commodities and moneys are
passiue, wise men do know it, and fooles will not vnderstand
it, though you bray them like Anaxarchus
in an iron morter. And so much might be said for
the difference betweene things done virtute officij
& colore officij.
                     P. 70. But this matter requireth a more
ample exposition and answer: for when he meetes
with my recitall of some short obseruations concerning
the decay of trade, which I gathered out of
notes that past from the Merchants of the Staple,
and other Merchants at the last Session of Parliament,
hee seemes by his winsing to be somewhat
galled, and that makes him turne and wriggle vp
and downe, that he cannot containe himselfe within
his circle, but breakes out into sundry contrarieties
and contradictions, quarelling on the behalfe of the
Merchants Aduenturers, at the multitude of their
aforesaid aduersaries, whom he cannot name without
enuie, nor let them passe his pen before he hath
cast his As-pis and other his viperous venome vpon
them, as aforesaid. And in his Oratiō to his Masters,

the Merchants Aduenturers, he magnifieth them,
and brayeth out: O ye Merchants Aduenturers, that
haue worthily obtaine
                           •
                         honour of his Maiestie,
                     P. 63. 
                     fauour of
the Nobilitie, fame in the world, loue of strangers, good
report of all. This proceeds from some distemper, and
is worse then the wilde goose race he taxeth me withall:P. 68.
where (by the way) I obserue that this Omnibus
visus, that hath such skill in canting,
                     P. 52. 
                     quacksaluing,
                     P. 91.
and what not, hath here in this phrase of hunting
mistaken his terme, as he often doth his matter. For
if he read Mr. Markham his booke of Huntmanship,
and others Writers of that subiect, he may find discourses
of a wilde goose chace, but the wilde goose race
is his owne. Wherefore I will leaue him, and follow
the chace, as he pursueth the forenamed supposed
Aduersaries, of which I would haue spoken in order
as he hath named them, but that according to
the maner of wilde goose chace, he hauing got the leading,
I must follow, and that within distance. And
first he leades me into a defence of that that I said,
the Merchants Aduenturers had ingrossed into their
hands by colour of their last Letters pattents, the sole
power of exporting cloth, &c. this he saith is but my libertie
of speech, and so he endeuours to refute it by
extenuating (as it were) his Maiesties fauor towards
them in point of exportation. For saith he, pag. 53.
in point of exportation of white and coloured clothes,
kersies, bayes, sayes, and other new draperies, there is no
more power giuen them in the said later, then his Maiesty
and his royall Predecessors haue honored them with in
former Letters pattents, of which he recites the catalogue,
and begins but in the eighth yeare of Hen. 4.

by which he saith the aforesaid trade of cloth, &c.
was intrusted vnto them. Let that be taken for granted,
and it will plainly appeare that they haue no
priuiledge at all in this behalfe, but onely power to
assemble themselues to chuse a Gouerner to rectifie
their owne abuses, and by way of iustice to punish
one another for their misdemeanours; and to that
purpose that foresaid grant was made vnto them,Power of the Merchants Aduentu
                           •
                        ers Letters patent.
wherein one William Oueray was assigned to be their
Gouerner, as by the said Letters pattents at large
appeareth. And of this power and priuiledge, all
Merchants and Mariners of England, Ireland and
Wales are to be equally partakers without exception,
limitation or difference of person, countrey or
commoditie. And whatsoeuer freedome of trade
into the parts therein expressed, his Maiesties subiects
are now barred of, is meerly vsurped. And
if you aske me, what meanes he then to mention
such large grants of Henry the 4. and other succeeding
Kings, with new titles and priuiledges granted
vnto them, and that with prohibition of all other,
as he relates? I answer, this man either hath not seen
or not vnderstood the main of this matter, but hath
dealt in it either ignorantly or concealedly: for the
making plaine whereof, let vs obserue, that in that
time of Hen. the 4. (which he mentioneth to be the
beginning of the Merchants Adventurers) there
was then,The antiquitie of the Merchants of the Staple. and long before that time setled (both in
England and beyond the Seas) another famous Societie
of English Merchants, called the Merchants
of the Staple, as by sundry ancient records hereafter
specified appeareth; these were the Merchants

then entrusted with the trade of exporting the Staple
commodities of the kingdome, whereof Wooll
and cloth were the chiefe, which they exported in
such abundance, that they being trusted by the State
to collect the Kings Customes amongst themselues,
they haue paid out of the Staple into the Exchequer
68 thousand pounds starling per annum, as appeareth
by record of 36 of Hen. 6. at which time
an ounce of siluer was valued but at 30 d. which is
now 5 s being iust double the said summe in value,
or 136 thousand pounds. These were the Merchants
that (before cloth was made in England) exported
the materials of this Land, as Wooll, Lead, Tin, &c.
and returned for the same Gold or siluer, either coin
or bullion; and to that purpose they made worthy
lawes and ordinances amongst themselues, still extant,
to which euery Merchant of that Societie was
sworne, and they did likewise giue good bond to
the Maior of the Staple (before their goods were
suffered to passe) that they should not barter away
the Staple cōmodities of the kingdome, but should
returne a great proportion (if not the whole value)
in coine or bullion, whereby this kingdome was
at all times made rich and potent. And vnder these
Merchants, trade was so managed, that cloth making
began in England; and they exported cloth before
the Merchants Aduenturers or the Leidges their
predecessors had a name or being. And if you aske,
how then came those Leidges and these Merchants
Aduenturers to ship cloth, not being free of the Staple?
I answer, that the purpose of the State was
then so bent to cherish the manufacture of cloth,

that there was libertie giuen to all sorts of Merchants
and Mariners (subiects of this Realme) for
the exportation thereof. And though it was accounted
a Staple commoditie, and exported by the Merchants
of the Staple, yet other Merchants were
likewise permitted to export the same, though they
did not at all times returne coine and bullion, according
to the lawes of the Staple; whereupon many
Merchants and Mariners of England, Ireland and
Wales, not free of the Staple, did trade with English
cloth in forrein parts: and then finding themselues
encombred with many euils (which proceeded from
want of gouernment) some of them procured of
King Henry the 4. the aforesaid Letters pattents,
granted (as before obserued) to all the Kings Leidges,
trading beyond the Seas, into Holland, Zeland,
Brabant, and other Countries in amitie with this
Kingdome. This was the first originall and foundation
of the now Merchants Aduenturers, and from
that their beginning, there was not any other power,
priuiledge or proprietie of trade, or any other title
or addition giuen vnto them, but a meere confirmation
of that first grant (as appeareth by Misselden
his owne booke) vntill the xx. yeare of Hen. 7.
when (saith he) they were honoured with the title
of Merchants, and had power giuen them to keepe
their Courts at Callis. Herein he dealeth reseruedly;
for though he sets forth the truth, yet he sets not
forth the whole truth; and that which he concealeth,
is the chiefe direction of that which he expresseth.
He sets forth their authoritie to keepe their
Courts in their Towne of Callis, but he conceales

two matters of consequence contained in their Letters
pattents, viz an Exception and a Command:An exception & a command of the Merchants Aduenturers grant.
the Exception, that if in their Courts they make any
law or ordinance contrary to the honour, dignitie
royall or prerogatiue of the King, or to the diminution
of the common weale of the Realme, it is
of no force. The Command: We streightly charge
and command, that all and euery Merchant or subiect,
any way vsing or exercising the art or feat of a
Merchant Aduenturer, be obedient vnto the Gouerner,
and come into the said Fellowship of Merchants
Aduenturers, and be free of them, paying
the Haunce of ten marks sterling, according to a certaine
Act of our high Court of Parliament made
within the time of our reigne, &c.
                  And no maruel though he conceale it, for that the
practise of the Merchants Aduenturers is so contrary
vnto it: for, to say nothing of their orders, but of
this disorder, they do not onely refuse to admit his
Maiesties subiects to be free of their Companie, according
to the said Command contained in their
Letters patents, and according to that good and
worthy law yet in force, as aforesaid, but (as I am informed)
they haue vtterly reiected and of late driuen
out of trade (by procuring the imprisonment
of their persons, and seizing their goods, and other
like vexations) such as haue been brought vp in the
trade of merchandize most part of their liues, and
so many as haue been obserued to trade for an hundred
thousand pounds per annum and more; yea
notwithstanding that some great ones (whom I
thinke not fit for me to name) haue spoken, yea

and written in some of their behalfes.
                  Now to proceed according to his booke. From
this time the Merchants Aduenturers continued
without any other addition or alteration vntill the
sixt yeare of Queene Elizabeth,
                     P. 34. at which time (saith
he) they were inscribed by the name of Merchants
Aduenturers of England, and had authoritie to exercise
their gouernment within this Kingdome;
wherein is to be obserued, that the power and priuiledge
giuen them by their former grants, was but
for their gouernment and vse in forreine parts,
wherin such abuse was cōmitted, yt they were at two
seuerall times greatly complained of in Parliament,
in the 36. of Hen. 6. for interrupting of the Staplers,
and in the 12. of Hen. 7. for disturbing of other English
Merchants, vnder pretence of a particular relation
that they seemed to haue to S. Thomas Becket,
for redresse whereof there were at the same times
two worthy and memorable lawes made, that are
yet in force, wherein there is a large expression of
the complaints and remedies. And whereas he relateth
that in the 28. of Queene Eliz. these Merchants
Aduenturers had a new grant for enlargement
of their trade into Germanie, with prohibition
of all other her Maiesties subiects not free of their
said Fellowship, to trade into any of their priuiledged
places, which (he saith) he hath not by hearesay,
but by his owne collection. I wish he had made
a true collection, and expressed the especiall prouiso,
that nothing therein contained should any way
impeach or preiudice the Maior, Constables or Societie
of the Merchants of the Staple, but that they

and euery particular brother of that Companie
should and might vse their trade and priuiledges, as
formerly they had done, &c. And at that same time
the Merchants of the Staple had as free trade and
large priuiledges in the Low Countries and Germany
as the Merchants Aduenturers. And in his recitall
of the Letters patents made vnto the Merchants
Aduenturers by his Maiestie, he continueth his former
course, setting forth the tenor of the grant to
the vtmost, but not a word of the limitation and exception.
For it likewise pleased his Highnesse into
those Letters patents granted vnto the Merchants
Aduenturers in the xv. yeare of his reigne, to insert
a most gracious prouiso and large exception for the
Merchants of the Staple. The prouiso followeth
in haec verba, viz. Prouided alwayes, that these our Letters
patents, or any thing in them contained, shall not in
any wise be preiudiciall or hurtfull to the Maior, Constables
and Fellowship of Merchants of the Staple of England,
or to their successors, or to any particular Fellow
of the said Fellowship that now is or hereafter shall be,
but that they and euery of them shall and may haue and
enioy all and euery such grants, liberties and priuiledges
as heretofore haue bin granted vnto them by Vs or any other
our progenitors or predecessors as they or any of them
haue lawfully vsed or had, in as large and ample maner
and forme as they or any of them might or ought to haue
had or enioyed before the date of these presents, any
clause, article or restraint in these patents contained to
the contrary notwithstanding. If they obiect that this
prouiso was in respect of the trade of wooll, and not
of cloth. I answer, that cannot be so: for that his Maiestie

by his publique Proclamation had forbidden
all exportation of Wooll three yeares before; so that
there was nothing to be reserued to the Merchants
of the Staple by this prouiso, but their trade of
cloth. And whereas he saith, that the Merchants
of the Staple neuer shipped any clothes at any time
as Staplers, but as Merchants Aduenturers. I answer,
that the Merchants of the Staple in their notes
aforesaid, exhibited to the high Court of Parliament
at the last Session, did set forth that they had
vsed the trade of shipping cloth before the Merchants
Aduenturers or the Leidgers their predecessors
had a name or being, as is before recited: and
that they afterward exercised the same trade into
the same Countries together with the said Merchants
Aduenturers, as they affirmed they could
proue by Indentures of composition made betwixt
the said two Companies. They likewise signified,
that they haue had their trade of exporting all Staple
commodities, whereof cloth was one, continued
and confirmed vnto them by sundry Acts of Parliament,
viz. in the 27. of Edw. 3. and likewise in the
36. of Hen. 6. together with many other in the times
of succeeding Princes, and also by diuers and sundry
the gracious Letters patents of Edw. 2. Edw. 3.
Ric. 2. Hen. 4. Hen. 5. Hen. 6. Edw. 4. Hen. 7. Hen. 8.
Edw. 6. with a large and ample grant of new titles
and priuiledges in the third yeare of Queen Eliz of
famous memory, which she enlarged vnto them in
the 26 yeare of her reigne; and that all these haue
been effectually confirmed vnto them by his Highnesse
gracious Letters patents. And for further

proofe of their vse of the cloth trade, they exhibited
a report of three reuerend Iudges, viz. Sir Christopher
Wray Lord chiefe Iustice,The report of three reuerend Iudges in the behal
                           •
                        e of the Merchants of the Staple. Sir Gilbert Gerrard
Master of the Rolles, and Sir Roger Manwood Lord
chiefe Baron, vnto whom the examination of that
businesse was referred by the right Honorable the
then Lord high Treasurer Burleigh, about the 25
yeare of Queene Eliz. The report followeth in haec
verba, viz.
                  
                     
                        
                           We haue since our last certificate thereof
made to your Lordship, according to your Lordships latter
direction, sundry times heard both the said parties and
their counsels, and thinke it best now to certifie to your
Lordship more at large: the effect of all materiall things
that hath bin alledged and shewed of either partie for the
proofe or disproofe of the matter now in question between
them, whereof some part now shewed to vs is more then
was shewed before.
                        
                        And first for the effect of the proofe for the Merchants 
Staplers touching their antiquitie and their
trade of woollen clothes, is as hereafter followeth,
that is to say, they haue shewed that in the 51 yeare
of Hen. 3. there was a Wooll Staple, and wooll shipped,
and officers belonging to it.
                        And also that there was a Maior and Company 
of Staplers in Antwerpe an. 12. of Edw. 2. as appeares
by a records out of the office of the Clarke of the
Pipe in the Exchequer.
                        Also they doe shew forth three seuerall Statutes,
one in the 14. of Ric. 2. & another in the 11. of Hen. 4.
ca. 8. and one other in the 9. of Hen. 5. ca. 9. whereby
amongst diuers other things woollen clothes are recited
in the preambles to be merchandizes of the
Staple.
                        
                           
                           
                           Item, that the Merchants of the Staple haue shipped
woollen clothes, tempore Hen. 6. as by the Custome
booke of Boston appeareth, wherein is entred
that the Merchants of the Staple shipped cloth versus
Leiden in Holland, and also in the ships of Camphire
and Sirecsea in Zealand, which they alledge is
probable to go into the Low Countries, for that
at that time there was no trade into Spaine with
clothes, and for France there is no trade of broade
clothes thither, and the ships be named in the Custome
bookes Nauiculae, and therefore not meet to
brooke the Spanish seas to carry clothes thither.
                        
                           
                           Item, that the Merchants of the Staple haue proued
aboue an hundred meere Staplers not free of
the Merchants Aduenturers, to haue been shippers
of woollen clothes, in the reignes of King Ric. 2.
King Hen. 6. King Edw. 4. and King Hen. 7. against
which no proofe hath been made by the Aduenturers
to the contrary, besides those which shipped
in the reigne of Hen. 8. and her Maiesties reigne.
                        
                           
                           Item, that King Hen. 6. an. 36. of his reigne, by his
Charter to the Merchants of the Staple, did publish
that the Charter of Hen. 4. granted to his Leidges,
and now alledged by the Merchants Aduenturers
for their part, were not meant to trouble or disquiet
the Merchants of the Staple in bodies or goods in
the Low Countries; and therefore concerning the
Merchants of the Staple or their goods, the said
Charter of Hen. 4. should not extend.
                        
                           
                           Item, it is also proued, that the Merchants of the
Staple haue shipped woollen clothes in the reignes
of King Hen. 8. and some in this Queens time, as wel

as in the reignes of Ric. 2. King Hen. 6. Edw. 4. and
King Hen. 7. already reported.
                        
                           Item, That her Maiestie an. 3. of her Highnesse 
reigne granted and confirmed to the Merchants of
the Staple, all such priuiledges and liberties as they
did, might or ought to haue enioyed a yeare before
the losse of Callis, by grant of Charter, law, prescription
or custome, notwithstanding none vse,
forfeiture, abuse, law or statute, or any other thing
to the contrary whatsoeuer.
                        
                           
                              14. May 1583.
                            
                           Thus subscribed,

                                 C. Wray.
                                 G. Gerrard.
                                 Roger Manwood.
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           This is a true copie of the originall.
                           
                              Ex. per A. Maynard.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Vpon these, together with many other weighty
reasons concerning the conueniences and profit of
this State, then tendered to their graue considerations,
the said house of Commons did passe a Bill for
them, intituled. An Act restoring the Free Trade of
the Merchants of the Staple, for the exportation of Cloth,
and all other Manufactures made of Wooll in the parts
beyond the Seas; as by the said Bill appeareth: so
that whereas out of false premises Misselden makes
this conclusion, whereby it is manifest saith he, that
the Cloth and other the Manufactures of this kingdome,
haue with the fauour of the State, beene
conferred vpon the Merchants Aduenturers: not
onely by their last Letters Patents, but by many other
former grants before recited. I answer, That
by this reply it is most apparant, that the Merchants

Aduenturers from their first Grant, made in
the eight of King Henry the 4, vnto the last Grant
made vnto them in the fifteenth yeare of his Maiestie:
they neuer had any propriety or trust of
Trade committed to them, but with exceptions
and limitations as is before expressed. And it is
also most manifest that the Merchants of the Staple
might, and did from time to time Ship Cloth in
their owne right into Holland, &c: as Staplers, and
not as Merchants Aduenturers: wherefore the
power which the Merchants Aduenturers now assume
vnto themselues, to restraine the Merchants
of the Staple from Trading with Cloth, as formerly
they haue done, and the practise which they vse, to
keepe out other Merchants being Subiects of his
Maiestie from being free of their Company, is
meerely by collour, and not by virtue of any of
their Grants or Letters Patents whatsoeuer: and
hereby Misselden may vnderstand what the difference
is:P. 70. betweene Authority and the Princes Letters
Patents, and find cause not to maruell, but to wonder
at his exception.
                  And whereas he hath put another glosse,P. 56. saying:
the Merchants of the Staple may Ship Cloth still,
such of them as are free of the Merchants Aduenturers,
whereof (saith he) there are many. I answer,
That of all the Merchants Aduentuers that are
now Traders in Cloth, there are but o
                        •
                     ely three of
them free men of the Staple.
                  Thus farre haue I followed him in his chace after
the Merchants of the Staple. And now I finde
him persuing another of his supposed aduersaries

viz. the Merchant Stranger,Concernin
                           •
                         the Trade of Merchant Strangers. and their losse or the
lessening of their Trade he would salue with a distinction
of Cloth dressed and vndressed, affirming
that the Merchant Stranger could neuer ship Cloth
vndrest, by reason of certaine Statutes made against
it: and for Cloth dressed, and other Manufactures
he saith, they may ship them still paying Strangers
Custome, and perhaps better cheape also. This point
I thinke, and especially the (perhaps) is worth the
examining. It is true that there are Statutes against
shipping Cloth vndressed aboue a certaine value,
but there haue beene euer or for the most part
meanes to dispence with the said Satutes, as the
Lord of Cumberland his Lycence, and others of that
kinde, for which busines there hath beene vsually
heretofore an Officer in the Custome House ready
to admit composition with Strangers aswell as with
others, and so the Strangers paying Strangers Custome,
might ship Cloth vndressed aswell as the
Merchants Aduenturers: but now the Merchants
Aduenturers haue ingrossed the foresaid dispensations
into their owne hands, so that the Strangers are
now preuented of shipping Cloth vndrest, as formerly
they haue done: by reason whereof, one
other meanes whereby great quantities of Cloth
haue beene heretofore vented, and the prices thereof
aduanced, is by the Merchants Aduenturers
wholly intercepted.
                  But now come to the (Perhaps) the Merchants
Strangers may now ship dressed Clothes, Karsies,
and all other new Draperies, paying Strangers
Custome: and (Perhaps) better cheape saith he;

How may this better cheape be? I answer, perhaps
he may compound with some Merchant Aduenturer
for the vse of his name, viz. to enter the
Strangers goodes in the Merchant his name, paying
a certaine rate vpon euery parcell of goods, as
vpon euery Karsey, Bay, Say, Parpetuana, and
likewise vpon euery dozen of Stockings, which
composition being paid, the Stranger shall ship his
goods for English Custome. And for proofe that
this is so, I referre my selfe to the Blanck Bills lately
shewed forth in Parliament by certaine Merchants
of London, with the Seale of the Merchants Aduenturers
fixed, and their Deputie his name also
subscribed: into which Bills being left blanck for
the purpose, the goods of any other English Merchant
not free of their Company might be entred
without enquiry whether he were Probatae fidei, or
an Interlooper, a Nouice, or a new Merchant, that
for want of experience might betray the Trade into
the hands of Strangers; and if any Strangers
goods of any value whatsoeuer might haue beene
entred in the said blanck Bills, and so shipped forth
vpon English Custome, I leaue to Misseldens examination,
being not desirous to informe.
                  The third sort of those that he would chase out
of trade, he calleth Interlopers.
                     Of the Interlopers. This word of interloping
is a Brat of their owne breed: for such of their
Companie as will not obserue the shippings and
Mart Townes appointed by their orders, but conuay
ouer goods in other ships and to other places,
are vsually punished for interloping, and hence comes
this terme of Interloper: but hauing worne it thridbare

amongst themselues, they now put it as a note
of ignominie vpon all other English Merchants not
free of their Companie, if they haue any trade into
their territories, whether they be Merchants of the
Staple, or any other English Merchants residing in
London or any other the ports of this Realme,
whereof there haue been heretofore so many as
haue vsually shipped forth most part of the coloured
clothes, kersies, and all other new Draperies of
the kingdome. For vntil the 15 yeare of his Maiesty,
that the Merchants Aduenturers obtained their
new Letters patents, other English Merchants constantly
and continually traded therein as well as the
Merchants Aduenturers, as may appeare by the
manifold entries daily made in al the Custom-books
of this Kingdom; for which purpose the Merchants
Aduenturers in their former Grants (as is before
obserued) procured this clause to be inserted, viz.
That other English Merchants that should trade into
their territories, might be compelled to obserue the Merchants
Aduenturers orders; whereby it appeares plainly,
that though the Merchants Aduenturers haue
procured a free licence of exporting certaine thousands
of white clothes to themselues (non obstante)
the Statutes, yet the State neuer intended that they
should also ingrosse the whole trade of all coloured
clothes, kersies, bayes, and other new Draperies into
their hands, to the vtter ruine and wearing out of
all other Merchants that traded therein as now the
Merchants Aduenturers would haue it. For they
now challenge an absolute power and proprietie of
trade into those parts, with all the foresaid English

manufactures, and seek to exclude all other English
Merchants from that trade, vnder this terme of Interlopers:
and haue of late (as aforesaid) brought so
many vexations vpon them, that most of them are
now constrained either to steale trade by secret
means, to the preiudice of themselues and the trade
of the kingdome, or else they must learne to trade
by Misseldens perhaps.
                  
                  The last sort of those that trouble him, are the
Ports,Of the Merchants of the Ports. that is to say, all the Merchants of the outports
of the Realme, who because they made a loud
crie of late in the Parliament hou
                        •
                     e, he affirmes to
beare a part also in this song, whereof (saith he) the
Merchants Aduenturers are made the Burden; here he
hath found a fit Epithete for his Masters. If he had
been willing to set downe all the Singers, he might
haue found a very large Quier; for at that time
not onely those that he pickt out, as the Merchants
strangers, the Merchants of the Staple, the Interlopers,
and the Ports, but the Clothiers of all sorts
from all parts of this Realme, and Wooll-growersOf the Clothiers and wooll-growers.
of all Counties of England and Wales being there
assembled did sing the same song, that they were all
weary of this Burden, the Merchants Aduenturers, as
at large appeareth by their seuerall petitions, reasons,
repetitions, and continuall suites for reliefe and
remedy in that behalfe; whereupon the Act for restoring
the free trade of the Staple was drawne for
their reliefe, and passed the house of Commons, as
is before related.
                  Thus haue I followed him to the end of this chace;
and now I refer it to the iudgement of the Reader;

whether the Merchants Aduenturers haue not ingrossed
(and that by colour of their last Letters pattents)
the trade of the Merchants strangers, the
Merchants of the Staple, the Merchāts of the Ports,
and of many other English Merchants, concerning
the exportation of cloth and all other manufactures
made of Wooll into Holland, Zeland, Brabant, and
other parts of the Low Countries and Germany; and
last of all I refer the remedy (as I am most bound in
dutie) to the matchlesse wisedome of his most excellent
Maiestie.
                  And now hee leades mee to the place where hee
seemes to be angry for my saying,P. 59. 
                     if they had ingaged
their trade for a summe of money, which I supposed
was for the vse of their Companie; hee confesseth
the action, but trauerseth the occasion, saying, it was
borrowed for the seruice of the State, by which one
word he hath barred my reply; but onely this I obserue,
that his Masters whom he saith are probatae fidei,
and trusted with that (axis) of the Commonwealth,
he freely confesseth they haue laid this axis
to pawne, and presseth hard for help to redeem the
same. And I cannot but wonder when I compare
that small summe with the great losse, which others
say they haue borne by their appropriating trade
these six yeares to themselues, and with the great
summes they haue raised by impositions vpon cloth
and vpon other natiue commodities of that kind, I
cannot but wonder I say, that they haue not long
fithens fetched their axis home. Thus endeth Misseldens
song, with my Contrator, concerning the
cloth trade, wherein we find a center for the publik

good in generall.
                  Come we now to the examination of the trade
from England to the East Indies,The trade for the East Indies. by the said Center
of Commerce, namely Gaine, where Misselden (according
to his ordinary custome) thus chanteth against
me; and we shall find that the said Trade is vnprofitable
for England.
               
               
                  
                     This Companie also, that deserueth so much pitie, cannot
escape Malynes enuie: for here he endeuoreth
closely and cunningly to insinuate, that the cause
of the want of money, is the ready money sent to
the East Indies in Reals of plate.
                     Againe,P. 37. Malynes taketh notice of M. Mun's discourse
of the East India trade; whereby he is forced
to confesse, that the emploiment of the East India
Companie is very profitable and necessary, that
the gaine of the Trade is very good; that thereby
the increase of the stocke of the kingdome is very
great; that the same is a meanes to bring in much
treasure, &c.
                  
                  COncerning the first part, That I do insinuate, that
the cause of the want of mony is the ready mony sent
to the East Indies; I am so far from that, that although
there were one hūdred thousand pounds sent yearly
where there is onely appointed thirtie thousand, I
would find no fault with it, if Trade were so caried,
that moneys were imported; and that the returne
of the East India commodities retransported, did
procure moneys from other places; and more especially
if there were a center or gaine answerable to

the aduenture; which caused me to say, If the discourse
of the trade from England into the East Indies be
truly collected, no doubt the said Trade may be found
very profitable hereafter, albeit it hath bin very difficult
in the beginning.
                  
                  But forasmuch as Misseldens words and constructions
haue moued me to examine the said discourse
farther, and for that my opinion hath always been,
That our excessiue charges would consume all; I
haue thought conuenient to examine the said Discourse,
as it is laid downe. According to which, to
frame our Arguments abeffectis, let vs lay our foundation
vpon Mr. Mun's Abstract of the accounts,
collected out of the diuers volumes of the East India
bookes, of all the moneys and commodities sent
thither from the beginning of the said Trade vntill
Iuly 1620, being the space of 20 yeares or thereabouts,
as appeareth pag. 39. which was done to satisfie
the Parliament concerning the imputation of
the moneys exported by them.
                  All the ready money sent out of the Realme, and
from all other places whatsoeuer beyond the Seas,
he saith to be 548090 l starlin; and all the commodities
both English and forreine wares which haue
been sent thither during that time, amounteth in all
but 292286. So the stocke of moneys and commodities
sent in all is 840376 l.
                  Brought home in diuers sorts of wares within
that time 356288 l. The losse sustained by the Hollanders,
and charges estimed at 84088 l. So there
remaineth for both the ioynt stocks in the East Indies
400 thousand pounds, which doth ballance this

account, whereof diuers returnes are made.
                  The nature of the commodities is to be considered
by way of Commutation called Negotiatiua,
                     The nature of commodities to be consideted. whether
they be Naturall or Artificiall, or Both, wherein
the Manufacture is much to be regarded; for the
Rule of Polliticions requireth, that the commodities
exported should be sold proportionably to the
commodities imported, with a consideration of
customs, charges, aduenture, shipping, and regard of
time, persons and place, with the circumstances, &c.
                  The commodities imported being 356288 l. as
aboue said, were sold (although the most part was
transported for other places) for 1914 thousand
and sixe hundreth pounds: according to which proportion,
the commodities exported should produce
1558 thousand 858 l: that is to say, fiue and
one third part for one: whereas our commodities
haue produced by this account but 22 pro cento in
liew thereof, which is not one forth part of one, for
they did cost 292286 l. as aforesaid, and there is in
returne but employed 356288 l, which is but
64002 l. more: so that the principall is but come
home, and the said 64 thousand pounds, which is
but 22 pro 100 in three yeares time, with great aduenture,
to the Kingdomes losse in stock, shipping,
Mariners, and all things besides, to be gotten and
saued otherwise.
                  This disproportion is farre greater, if we consider
that the said goods were carried thither by our
shipping, and we pay them greater Customes for
their Commodities, then they pay without aduenture
of the Seas, and the circumstances aforesaid.
               
               
                  
                  
                     The first Assertion then is. That by our natiue Commodities
to be sent into the East Indies,1. Assertion. there is
no benefit to be made, but rather an euident losse:
and the forreine Commodities sent thither, namely
Oliphants Teeth, Quick-siluer, Vermillion, and
other things haue yeelded more gaine then our
Clothes, Lead, Tinne, &c: which vpon due consideration
is no gaine, but a meere losse.
                  
                  COnsider we of the commodities returned and
sold for 1914 Thousand 600 pounds, producing
fiue and one third part for one towards custom
charges, and all other thiings as aforesaid: and we
shall be rauished with admiration vpon examination
of the prices in particular, by the said Author
declared. This calculation is to be made betweene
the commodities bought in the East Indies, withall
charges, and the sale of them in England without
charges.P. 11 & 44.
                  
                  
                     Pepper at 2 d ½ the pound, sold for 20 d, is 8 for 1.
                  
                     Cloues at 9 d, sold for 5 s, is 6 and two thirds for 1.
                  
                     Nutmegs at 4 d. the l, sold at 3 s, is full 9 for 1.
                  
                     Mace at 8 d. the pound, sold for 6 s, is full 9 for 1.
Indico at 14 d. the l, sold for 5 s, is but 4⅓. for 1.
                  
                     Raw-Silkes at 8 s. the l, sold for 20 s, is but 2 ½ for 1.
                  Wherein the quantity of each kind of commodities
is much to be respected, to make a true calculation.
                  Hereupon any man of meane iudgement may
easely perceiue, that the inferrence to make the East
India Trade more profitable, by the employments
to be increased of Indico and Silkes by the Persian
                     P. 7. & 14.
                     
                     Gulfe, is altogether mist
                        •
                     ken. For if Spices which
yeeld 7. 8. and 9. for one, haue procured but small
gaines: how shall Silkes and Indico augment and
increase the same, when they produce but 2½. for
one and 4 ⅓? which is very deede breedeth a losse
vpon the aforesaid employment, and decreaseth the
same.
               
               
                  
                     The second Assertion therefore is,2. Assertion. that this imaginary
blessing arising by the intended employment to be
made in Silkes and Indico, is mistaken, and hurtfull
to the Realme: especially if the Manufactures
of Silke be increased in derogation of the Manufacture
of our natiue materialls.
                  
                  BVt some affectioned East India Merchant will
say, that the generall account aforesaid to make
fiue and one third part for one, is a great matter of
benefit towards custome, charges, and all other
things incident to trade. For the Author doth say,
that 10 s.
                     P. 13. employed in Pepper in the East Indies,
will require but 35 s. for all charges whatsoeuer deliuered
in London, which is 3 •2. for one.
                  This Merchant cannot inforce his argument for
want of a true iudgement; for he might haue made
a better conclusion, to say Pepper doth cost but 2 d ½
the pound, and is sold for 20 d. which is 8 for one, as
aforesaid. And if with all charges in London it cometh
but to 3 ½, then the benefit of 4 ½ for one is an
admirable gaine to inrich himselfe and the common
wealth.
                  This iudgement vpon a particular, seemeth to

proue a far greater gaine then the abouesaid generall
gaine of 5 ⅓ for one. But to find out the truth,
there must be a nearer calculation made, by a true
distinction of the managing of the Stock remaining
at home, which was neuer adventured, and the aforesaid
stock of moneys and commodities sent into
the Indies, and what both these did amount vnto.
Next, if the goods taken from the Indians and Portugals
be comprehended in the said returne, whereof
the said sum of 1914 thousand 600 l was made,
then the case is altered, and wil not produce the one
halfe. Lastly, the building and repairing of Ships,
Wharfes, houses, magazins, and the like emploiment
of the stocke at home, together with the allowances
of Officers, Mariners, and seruants wages,
will come to an incredible summe.
                  But let vs come to the generall consideration of
this Trade, respecting the weale publicke, by comparing
the same to the former trade maintained by
the Portugals along the Cape of Good Hope; which
is more proper then to compare the same to the
trade betweene vs and Turkie and the said East Indies:
for the trade of Portugall made the Merchants
trading Turkie, to sell the Spices brought from Aleppo
to losse, because the Camels back could not passe
the needles eye, without great charges & difficulty:
neuerthelesse that trade was very profitable to the
kingdome,The Trade for Turkey. selling our kersies, broad-clothes, tinne,
and many other our natiue commodities with 60
pro cento gaine; and there is far more to be gotten
by raw silkes bought at Aleppo at 12 s the pound,
then to be brought from the East Indies at 8 s the

pound, which is the difference which the said Anthor
maketh, ascribing such happinesse to the trade
of silke, whom Misselden doth imitate.
                  I may affirme by experience, that before the open
warres with Spaine, the trade of Portugall and the
Ilands was very profitable to the Realme:The Trade for Portugall and the Ilands. for wee
made an ordinary gaine of 25 vpon the hundred,
by Bayes, Sayes, Reding and Kentish clothes, Northerne
and Westerne kersies, stockings, and diuers
other commodities: and the debts being turned ouer
to the Contraction house, returne was made in
Spices and Sugar in lesse then six months time, with
little aduenture, fraught and charges, whereby the
manufactures of the kingdome were aduanced, and
moneys from time to time imported; and the life of
Trade was felt by Merchants; Trades-men and
the Mint did flourish: so that for matter of commodities,
there is no comparison in the sale of them into
Portugal with 25 pro cento in lesse then 6 months,
and 22 pro cento for the East Indies in 3 yeares, besides
the aduenture of the Seas and enemies. And it
will be proued, that the natiue commodities of the
Realme vented in Portugal and Spaine before the
East India trade began, did amount to 300 thousand
pounds worth more then since euery yeare, which
is more then all the domestique and forreine commodities
come vnto, sent into the East Indies by the
Companie those 20 yeares, to say nothing of the
mortalitie of men and destruction of ships. And
from Spaine we had the West India commodities,The Trade for Spaine.
as Cutchenelle, Ginger, hides and other commodities,
with the wines, raisins, oyles and all other commodities

of their growth for returne of ours, especially
abundance of Royals of plate, now much hindred
by the emploiment of Tobacco.
                  Let vs now examine the price of Spices in those
dayes within the Realme, and we shall finde that
Pepper was sold for 2 s the pound, Cloues 6 s, Mace
7 s, Nutmegs 3 s, and Indico 6 s; which small differenc
in price, for so much as is yearely spent in England,P. 44.
may be declared by the proportion set down
by the said Author, which being calculated at 4 d.
vpon a pound of Pepper, and 12 d vpon Cloues,
Mace and Indico, and 6 d vpon Nutmegs, amounteth
but to 21166 l. 13 s 4 d.
                  
                  This true account wil be proued by ancient Merchants
bookes, and the weekly price currant of the
Brokers bils, before the open warres with Spaine.
But the said Author doth set downe the prices as
they were in the time of warres, when Merchants
charges,P. 45. aduenture and all things were increased;
and herein he maketh his comparison with Turkie,
and according to that computation hee affirmeth,
that the trade in Spice and Indico onely, saueth the
kingdome yearely 74966 l. 13 s. 4 d: and that lesse
then one quarter of this summe shall buy in the Indies
the proportion of the yearely consumption
thereof, being 400 thousand of Pepper, 40 thousand
of Cloues, 20 thousand of Mace, 160 thousand
of Nutmegs, and 150 thousand of Indico; which
calculated by the prices of them, as they were sold
coming from Portugal, wil amount to 128 thousand
pounds, and not 183500 l, as hee reckoneth them
coming from Turkie: so that the difference between

                     Portugal and Turkie in this account is 55500 l, being
in truth but 21666 l. 13. 4. to be reckoned vpon
the said allegation.
               
               
                  
                     The third Assertion is,3. Assertion. that the kingdome saueth not
yearely the summe of 74966 l. 13. 4. by Spices and
Indico, as the said Author alledgeth.
                  
                  FRom the particular account of Spices and Indico
concerning England, come we to the generall
account laid downe by him for all Christendome,P. 12.
whereunto he hath added the raw silke valued
at 400 thousand pounds; and thereupon he affirmeth,
that in comparison of the said Turky trade,
there is saued yearely 953543 l. 4 s. 4 d. starlin in
ready moneys, that heretofore hath been transported
out of Christendome into Turkie.
                  
                  Deduct the said 400 thousand pounds for silke
from the generall emploiment of 511458 l. 5. 8. that
the total summe amounteth vnto, and there remains
but 111458 l. 5. 8. for Spices and Indico. Calculate
now what the said proportion for England did cost
in the Indies according to the said prices, and you
shall find it to be 16749 l. 15. 0. which is almost the
sixt part of all the Spices and Indico spent in Christendome:
and this being sold in England, produceth
108333 l. 6. 8. Now deduct of the abouesaid
953543 l, the gaines of the silke being 200 thousand
pounds, there remaineth 753543 l, whereof the sixt
part saued for England, cometh neare to 108 thousand
pounds, which is as much as all the Spices and
Indico sold in one yeare in England cometh to, as

aforesaid. Whereby it appeareth, that England sauing
yearely that summe, there is (as it were) nothing
spent in Spices and Indico, which he may very
well call to be incredible. So that
               
               
                  
                     Our fourth Assertion is,4. Assertion. That there will be found an
apparant great losse by all this negociation, and detriment
to the kingdomes stocke both for moneys
and commodities; and that there is not 953543 l.
saued in moneys yearely in Christendome, especially
the Portugall East India trade considered.
                  
                  NOw if vpon the matter we do consider the Customes
and Impost, the Factors, Officers and
Mariners wages, without interest of moneys and
assurances, all will proue but transmutations without
increase, but with the great decrease of the
Kingdomes stocke.
                  But to proue that the said accounts are made at
random,P. 27. rouing at the matter, let vs consider of the
proportion made by him of 100 thousand pounds
in ready money to be employed yearely, whereof
there are 52499 l in raw silks and Callicoes, and but
47501 l in Spices and Indico, which should produce
500 thousand pounds or thereabouts: he doth allot
120 thousand pounds to England, and 380 thousand
pounds for transportation; and of this 120
thousand pounds there is 108333
                        •
                     . 6. 8. in Spices
and Indico named in the sequel of his discourse,
which is now become one third part of all the Spices
and Indico to be brought in by the emploiment
of the said 100 thousand pounds, amounting to

337083 l. 6. 8. Now if we take the like proportion
of raw silks & Callicoes of 162916. 13. 4. to make vp
the said 500 thousand pounds, which is one third,
it will amount to 54305 l. 6. 8. which with the
108333 l⅓, maketh 162638 l. 13. 4. which is
42638 l. 13. 4. more then hee hath allotted to England
to be spent in a yeare; which is a manifest contradiction.
                  The consideration hereof caused some Merchants
of that Companie to be as craftie as Aesops Fox, who
being desirous to drinke, found a Well with two
buckets, and entring into one of the buckets, descended
suddenly into the water; but hauing satiated
his thirst, could not get out, vntill one of the
Goates of this Tropick of Capricorne came to the said
Well,Primum mihi, secundum tibi. whom he perswaded (by the goodnes of the
water, and by making her beleeue that the Moone
shining in the water was a Holland cheese to be diuided
betweene them) to enter into the other bucket,
which done, downe came the Goate by reason
of her weight, and vp came the Fox, leauing the
Goate in the Well: euen so haue some Merchants
done, by extolling the great gaine of this trade, vntill
they had drawne themselues out, by selling their
aduentures, leauing the buyer to the hazard of the
losse, which was (no doubt) to them well knowne.
For to make the best construction hereof, we may
conclude, that 400 thousand pounds lost by his account
in the said Indies, are since come home, and
employed by the seuerall Factors in the said Indies,
and most of it in Silks and Indico, and yet there is
wanting 148 thousand pounds of the stock of 840

thousand aduentured, accounting the former returnes
made, to proceed of the commodities & gain,
as aforesaid, which is almost one sixt part of the stock
aduentured to the Indies, whereof this account giueth
no satisfaction at all, vnlesse the 31079 l lost
in six ships cast away, were parcell thereof.
                  The conclusion which the said Author maketh,
is, That the East India trade alone (although it be driuen
in no ampler maner then is afore written) is a meanes to
bring in more treasure into this Realme then all the other
Trades of this Kingdome (as they are now managed) being
put together. For if the rule be true, That when
the values of our commodities exported doth ouerballance
the worth of all those forrein wares which
are imported and consumed in this kingdome, then
the remainder of our stocke which is sent forth, must
of necessitie returne to vs in treasure, we must imagine
it will do so with vs in time.
                  Here you may see from whence Misselden drew
his Ballance of Trade, which he neuer dutst vndertake
to maintain before the aforesaid his Maiesties Commissioners,
who haue often called him by Warrants
and otherwise; for he was not able to maintaine an
other mans Proiect. We haue already shewed the
incertaintie of the said Ballance, and in the Remedies
wee shall intreate thereof further; neuerthelesse I
cannot omit Obiter, to say that this Rule may serue
for a Demonstration: but it can neuer be found true
vntill it concurre with the Center (Gaine:) for so long
as treasure cannot be imported without losse, we
shall still receiue wares in returne, and augment the
cause of ouer-ballancing. And which is more, suppose

there were an ouer-ballancing of Trade 
                        〈◊〉
                     
our side, whereby moneys should be forced vpon
vs, yet should we find it would be to the incredible
losse of the Commonwealth, by the inhauncing of
the forreine coine beyond the Seas; and the vndervaluation
of our moneys in exchange, which may
be demonstrated by a trifle, as well as by hundreds
and thousands.
                  One buyeth a paire of Gloues for 5 s starlin,An example of losse by an ouer ballance on our side. and
selleth them beyond the Seas for 5 s. 6 d. where he
receiueth a Rickx Doller for 5 s. or 50 Stiuers: and
moreouer, 5 single Stiuers taken to be worth 6 d. and
so getteth 10 pro cento. Suppose now that the ouerballance
is on our side, and this alledged necessitie
shewed her operation, and that he that sold the said
Gloues bringeth ouer this Rickx Doller and the 5
single Stiuers; and going to exchange them, no man
wil giue him aboue 4 s. 6 d. for his Doller, and 4 d for
his 5 Stiuers, which is the true intrinsique value.
Where is now his gaine of 10 pro cento, when he loseth
2 d of his 5 s, besides his labour, charges and
customes? But how shall this reuolution of ouerballancing
euer come to passe, when wee vse no
meanes thereunto, as other nations do, as shall be
declared in the next Chapter?
                  To conclude then with the East India Trade,
wherein we find no Center; let vs haue a care that
the moneys proceeding of Spices and Silks, may be
partly imported into the Realme to increase treasure.Trade for Russia.
                  
                  The Trade for Russia was in times past very profitable
for the venting of our coloured clothes, and

returning from thence very vsefull commodities, as
Tallow, Wax, Hides, Furres and other wares, which
for the most part being caried out againe for France
& other places, made prouisiō for wines, canvas, &c.
For heretofore the commodities of the Realme &
other were vented in France in great quantities,Trade for France. and
by deliuering one third part in ready money, and
two thirds in cloth, kersies, stockin, and other natiue
commodities; our Merchants made their emploiment
in wines, which is now done with ready
money; wherein the exchange is to be considered
in a contrary course vpon their French crowne; but
I will omit to handle the same, to auoide intricatenesse,
hauing declared the same in Lex Mercatoria.
                  
                  The Trade for Eastland and those parts,Trade for Eastland. wanteth
a center; for Merchants can hardly make returne in
any commodities for their cloth: and vpon moneys
inhaunced, without the reformation of exchange,
they are great losers.
                  The Barbary Trade bringeth vs some Gold;Trade for Barbary. but
our Cloth is there sold with so small profit, that it
cannot quite charges and aduenture: nay it is come
to that passe, that other nations can maintaine these
trades for Russia, Eastland and Barbary, with our natiue
commodities, better then we do.
                  
                     Misselden (passing ouer all these serious considerations,
replieth, that Malynes hauing runne himselfe out
of breath, and ouerrunne Monopolium with telling tales)
sheweth to be one of this Climate of Capricorne: for
men of his humour are called by the Italian 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
I shall therefore conclude this enco
                        •
                     nter, and
remember,Aristotle Oemund▪ Cap. 1. that they that came to Athens, the first

yeare were wise men, the second yeare Philosophers,
that is, louers of wisedome; the third yeare Rhetorieians,
that is, meere babblers: the meaning is, first
they deemed themselues to be wise, casting vp moutaines
to heauen, like the sonnes of Aeolus; after feeling
themselues puft with a Tympanie of Pride,
                     Metamor. 11. they
desired that to be in themselues which they admired
in others; lastly, seeing the more they strayed,
the lesse they could go backe, they found a haruest
of wilde corne was left them, and that was between
Athens and Thebes,
                     P. 68. where I left Misselden with his
hounds (about one yeare since) which haue lo
                        •
                     t
their sent, not knowing whether the Deere is gone,
East, West, North or South; for a wilde goose chace
is fitting for him that hath lost his Game: and for
his verses, I referre him to Taylor the Water-man to
rime with him, who can furnish him with a paire of
Oares, to transport him (with his Hebrew & Greek
which hee hath learned at the greater South doore
neare Christ Church in London, together with his
Parrets and Buls) into the Iland of Antisera or Psittacorum
Regio, to haue his braines purged with Helibon,
and to reade there Historia Ventorum.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  The meanes to ballance the Trade of England by the
said center; or the remedies against the
causes of the decay thereof.
               
               FRom the Tropicke of Capricorne wee are come
to the Antarticke Circle in the South, to make a
perfect Orbe, to keepe Misselden and his Ballance
                  
enclosed within his owne Circle. For in this Region,
the transparent and splendent beames of the
Sunne of truth, do dispell all foggie mysteries of deceitfull
fallacies, insomuch that men of meane capacitie
and vnderstanding may very well demand
a reason, wherefore we do not preuent (by contraries)
the knowne Spring of this disease, whereby the
body of the Commonwealth is so much distempered.
               For Res ipsaloquitur, that Gaine the Center of commerce
is excluded by error of Trade, because no money
or bullion can be imported but to losse, neither
can any money be kept within the Realme by reason
of the great gaine had vpon moneys by exportation:
so that (Returnes being made continually
of our natiue Commodities by forrein Commodities)
nothing can be expected but an increase of the
ouerballancing of our Trade in nature before alledged.
               But some Supporter of the conceited Ballance of
Trade will say, that Time by the increase of Trade
will turne the Tide, and bring all things in tune againe,
by a necessitie of nature beyond all resistance,
when the sale of our natiue commodities in forreine
parts shall surmount the value of the commodities
imported vnto vs. Is not this in substance the hunting
of our owne shadow? suffering other nations
to vse all meanes for their benefit, and wee shall amend
all things when we come to Rome, and we neuer
dispose our selues to vndertake the voyage to go
thither: neither are the causes with vs alike with
forreine nations, whereby wee might expect the

like effects. For,Effects cannot be without causes.
               
               We do not inhaunce our moneys as they doe all
forreine coine and their owne; neither do we ouervalue
our moneys by exchange vnto them, as the
Low Countries and East-land do vnto vs, breeding
exportation, and hindrance of importation of moneys,
as hath been amply declared.
               Wee do not sell our natiue Commodities according
to moneys inhaunced, as they do theirs, but
at an vnder value, according as our moneys are calculated
in exchange, to our losse and their benefit.
               We do not deliuer money at interest beyond the
Seas, as the Merchant stranger doth here at 10 pro
cento, which is there at 5 and 6 vpon the hundred
to be had; neither do they pay 15 and 20 vpon the
hundred by exchange, as we do.
               We do not procure by Gaine or Pollic
                     •
                  e the importation
of Bullion or Royals of 8 as they doe, by
inhauncing all moneys, and diuerting the said Royalls
and dollers from vs, to be brought in as in times
past.
               We doe not procure plenty of money to make a
liuely Trade, as they doe by the two Reall meanes
of impo
                     •
                  tation, and tolleration of exportation: as
also by the two Politike meanes of Transfering 
                     〈◊〉
                  
of debts betweene man and man, and the payment
by assignations.
               Wee doe not preuent that the Trade of Bayes,
Sayes, and new Draperies should not be carried
from vs by diuerting the Royall or 8 from vs, nor
that other nations should driue a Trade with our
Cloth and other commodities for Barbary, Russia,

Eastland, and other Countries; for being depriued
of our owne moneys, and of the said Royalls, we
doe loose the Trade also.
               We cannot make returne for our natiue commodities
by the three ordinary meanes,A matter of great consequence. either by money,
or by exchange, or by commodities at our
choice and best aduantage as they doe: but are compelled
(of course) to buy forreine commodities
at deare rates, by a disordered Trade; how is it
possible then, that we should expect any such imaginary
ouer-ballancing of Trade to happen on our
side, when we haue not the like causes to produce
the like effects?
               Others are of opinion, that some moderation
might be procured herein, by making the Spanish
Royalls of 8 currant within the Realme at 4 s. 7 d,
or 8 d: that is to say, aboue the value. But they
doe not consider effectually of the inconueniences
which will ensue, as follweth.
               First, It will be the vtter ouerthrow of his Maiesties
Mint, and vndoing of the poore Moneyers,
aswell for the coynes of gold as of siluer; for gold
will not be brought so frequently when siluer is aduanced
by altering the proportion, and reducing
the same to 12 to one, or thereabouts.
               Secondly, The forreine coyne will be aduanced
by these meanes 7 vpon the hundreth aboue our
Starlin moneys, and thereby increase the exportation
of the said Royalls.
               Thirdly, The King will loose his coynage money,
being aboue 2 d. vpon an ounce: and the melting
downe of his moneys and effacing of his

stampe, is a great derogation of his Prerogation
Royall, it being a marke of Soueraignty.
               Fourthly, The inhauncing of the said Royalls
will alter the price of Plare, as also of other commodities
within the Realme: which is a matter much
respected hitherto.
               Fiftly, When moneys are inhaunced beyond
the Seas, the price of exchange doth also inhaunce
in some measure: but when moneys are inhaunced
here, the exchange abateth, which causeth the exportation
of our money to increase. As for example,The propery of true exchange.
If to make siluer equiualent to gold of 12 to
one, the ounce should be valued at 5 s. 6 d, whereby
it would be inhaunced tenne Pro cento, should be
though conuenient, it would make the price of exchange
to fall 10 Pro cento, or more: which for the
Low Countries would fall to 30 s. and vnder, and
so it will be still transported: and the making of forreine
coyne currant within the Realme aboue the
value of ours, is not vsed vpon any good order, as
we haue noted by the Arch-Dutchesse of Austria.
               
               To come therefore to the true remedy, wee are
to consider the true causes of their operations, to
which end we haue declared in the Equin octiall, the
losse which the Realme sustaineth by a low exchange
or the vndervaluation of our moneys: as
also the benefits which will arise by the high exchange,
as meerely opposite vnto it; so that we may
conclude certainly,Causes to preuent the ouerballancing. 
                  è conuerso, I that when the exchange
shall be rectified, and our moneys be truely
valued in exchange, 2 according to the inhauncing
of moneys beyond the Seas, 3 then will the transportation

of moneys cease, 4 and the more natiue
commodities will be exported, and consequently
the losse of that inhauncing being preuented, 5 will
cause Bullion and moneys to be imported, 6 and
the lesse forreine commodities to be brought in: 7,
the Royall of Spaine will not be diuerted, nor the
Trade depending thereupon, 8, which will procure
plenty of money, 9, to aduance the price of our
commodities, 10, and abating the price of the forreine
commodities, thereby effectually preuenting
the aforesaid ouerballancing.
               This is to be done onely by his Maiesties Proclamation,The way to restore Englands Wealth.
according to the aforesaid Statutes and
Proclamation of exchanges, prohibiting that after
3 moneths next and ensuing the same, no man shall
make any exchanges by Bills or otherwise, for moneys
to be paied in forreine parts, or to be rechanged
towards this Realme vnder the true Par or
value for value of our moneys, and the moneys of
other Countries in weight and finesse: but at the said
rate, or aboue the same as Merchants can agree,
but neuer vnder the same: which shall be declared
by a paire of Tables vpon the Royall Exchange in London,
with such cautions and obseruation as formerly
haue beene noted, whereunto I must referre my
selfe to be seene at large in Lex Mercatoria.
               
               For the better vnderstanding hereof, and to shew
that the like hath beene formerly done: but therein
onely direction was wanting hitherto: I haue
thought conuenient to put downe the same verbati
                        •
                     ,
as followeth.
               
                  
                  
                     A Proclamation for the ordering of the exchange of
money vsed by Merchants,Queene Eliz. according to the 
                           〈◊〉
                        
and Statutas of the Realme.
                  
                  FOrasmuch as there are so great abuses of 
                        〈◊〉
                     
yeares growne by the corrupt dealing of sundry
Merchants and Brokers, as well Strangers 
                        〈◊〉
                     ,
vpon bargaine of exchanges and rechange of
moneys, to be paid both out & within this Realme,
as not onely the good laudable and profitable vse
of naturall Merchandising is greatly decayed, the
true values of the moneys of this Realme much 
                        •
                     
                     based,
and her Maiesties Customes and subsedies
(that are the ancient inheritance of this Crowne▪
diminished and withdrawne, with sundry of 
                        〈◊〉
                     
inconueniences, to the notable damage of 
                        〈◊〉
                     
Realme; for the due remedy whereof, there 
                        〈◊〉
                     
beene made heretofore sundry good Lawes and
Statutes of this Realme, which doe still continue
                        ••
                     
their force. The Queenes Maiestie intending 
                        〈◊〉
                     
haue such great enormities and mischiefes 
                        〈◊〉
                     ,
doth giue all maner of Merchants, Broken,
& all other persons vsing to bargaine by exchange
and rechange, to vnderstand that her meaning 
                        〈◊〉
                     
haue such Lawes and Statutes put in executi
                        •••
                     
haue beene prouided, and doe remaine in force for
this purpose: and therefore warneth all maner of
persons to haue hereafter due regard thereunto, 
                        〈◊〉
                     
on such penalties as in the said. Lawes, Statures, 
                        〈◊〉
                     
other ordinances remaning in their force is p
                        ••
                     
                     uided.
                  
                     
And for the lawfull satisfaction of all such as shal
haue necessary cause to take or deliuer any money
by exchange, there shall be certaine orders in 
                        〈◊〉
                     
set vp in places conuenient declaring the rates
thereof, as the same shall or ought to be paid to the
vse of her Maiestie, or to her Ministers and Officers
thereunto authorized. Giuen at Green-wich the 20
of September 1576, in the eighteenth yeare of the
prosperous Raigne of the Queenes Maiestie.
                  The Noble and renowned the Baron of Elsmere,
Lord Chancellour of England deceased, (vnto
whom I owe perpetuall obligation) did at fouerall
times aduise at the Councell: Table to publish the
like Proclamation with some other good obseruations,
seeing therein is nothing required but equity
and iustice, agreable to the Lawes of Nations; But
the euill man sowing Thres in the night, made the
weedes to grow so fast that the good feed could not
prosper: so that inueterated diseases breaking forth
at last, makes vs to feele the smart thereof. For some
men (vpon priuate respects) will cast doubts beyond
the Moone.The nature of vnexperience. Others will propound more
questions in an houre, then a wise man can answere
in a yeare. And others are alwayes consulting, and
neuer deliberating. So that the graue and discre
                        •
                     te
Councellours of State are to determine these serious
businesses; And to the other I may say, Know
you not that the s
                           •
                        ept the Doctrine of Pyrrh
                           •
                        , Ariston,
and Heri
                           ••••
                        , hath beene long agoe hist out of the
Schooles, or rather banisht and confined amongst
the Barbarians? will you cause vs to doubt of all
things: then shall wee doubt whether you doubt

or no: it is possible you can carry bread in the 
                        〈◊〉
                     
hand, and a stone in the other: neuertheles to 
                        〈◊〉
                     
vnto these men some satisfaction, which make 
                        〈◊〉
                     
whether the said his Maiesties Proclamation 
                        〈◊〉
                     
obeyed here & beyond the Seas; I am to proue that
the Center of Commerce will effect the same: for gaine
will command effectually,The Center will Command. 
                     Por el Dinero, bay la 
                           〈◊〉
                         Perro,
said the Spaniard, A Dog will d
                           •
                        unce for money.
                  
                  The Merchant Stranger being here commonly
the deliuerer of money (casting his eyes vpon the
Center) will easely be induced to make the most of
his owne, receiuing by exchange more for his money
beyond the Seas: and if the English Merchant
(being the taker of the said money) would be so iniurious
to the State, as to giue lesse beyond the Seas
then the value of the money of the Realme by exchange
contrary to the said Procla
                        •
                     mation, the deliuerer
of the money will not let him haue it: besides
that the takers occasions are (in a maner) enforced
by necessity, and he can be no loser, for by
this direction he shall sell his commodities ac
                        ••
                     
                     dingly.
                  English Merchants being the deliuerers of mony
beyond the Seas, and the price of exchange altering
there accordingly, will haue the like consideration,
and the Merchant Stranger will prouoke him thereunto
by the Center (gaine) whereupon their eyes
are fixed: and if there be no takers of Merchants
Strangers, the English Merchants may bring 
                        〈◊〉
                     
the money inspecie, wherein he shall become
gainer when the exchange is rectified, where now
he is a loser, which causeth him to import no moneys:

although as Misselden saith, There gates
stand wide open,P. 135. you may carry out as much mony
as you will. So that vnlesse we haue are gard to the
premisses by procuring importation of Bullion and
moneys, and preuenting the exportation according
to the said Lawes and Statues it were better for the
Kingdome to set all at liberty, howbeit with 
                        〈◊〉
                     
direct on in exchanges.
                  Now forasmuch as we haue already answered
the obiections to be made against this remedy in
the Equinoctiall. Let vs now examine the rem
                        •
                     dies
propounded by Misseldens conceited Ballance, and
whether the calculation of the same be more then a
triall, as we haue declared.
                  The remedy,Misseldens Remedies. is in a word (saith he.) nothing else
but to make our importation lesse, and our exp
                           •
                        ctation
more, by the importation of superfluous things 
                        •
                     o
be restrained, and the exportation by Manufactures
to be improued: but what can the casting of a Ballance
effect herein? Iust nothing. There is a practise
required to set the people more on worke vpon
the materialls of our owne growth, or of forreine
growth: and therein examples is the best precept;
And hereupon we are sent to the 
                        〈…〉
                     
to learne frugality; industry, and policy, in whose
commendation he seemeth to speake: like vnto the
Temporising Frier Cornelius of Bridges, (who (according
to the euents of things) would in his Sermons
speake of the Prince of Orenge, during the
late war
                        •
                     es of the Low Countries, as the succes fell
out, and call his auditory to witness that be ne
                        ••
                     er
spake 
                        〈◊〉
                      the Prince, when he 
                        〈◊〉
                      and

railed of him beyond measure at other times 
                        〈◊〉
                     ,
vntill some other accident falling out on the 
                        〈◊〉
                     
trary. So this man moueth a question, and like him
selfe, kicks downe all at once what he had spoken,
saying,P. 37. 
                     And why not the Belgicke Grashopper? for the
Grashopper hath no King, yet they march out 
                           〈◊〉
                        
Troupes, they are a multitude by Sea and Land, and thy
feede vpon Rootes and Herbes; as he saith in 
                        〈◊〉
                     
the margent,P. 134. which is onely for the learned; as the
said Fryer Cornelius was wont to say, when (speaking
of Heritickes) he said there was a thousand
burnt, Sed erant Cespites, they were 
                        〈…〉
                     
this a full Frenzie. Like vnto the Daughters of P
                           ••
                        
                        tus,
that tooke themselues to be Kine: raging like
Hercules and Aiax in the Tragedie? Thinke you
that Endimion did euer dreame such dreames▪ Or
the seuen Sleepers, that slept from the 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     Decius, to the dayes of Theodosius. But what will not
nouelty and singularity bring forth? I leaue this
Ianu
                           •
                        
                      to his feeding of rootes in the Low Countries,
seeing he is fallen from a Gallum
                           •
                        frey 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                     Hotchpotch of other mens Cookeries:P. 30. making 
                        〈◊〉
                     
a doubt whether Her
                           ••
                        litus teares were more see
                        ••
                     ly
to lament his 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      ignorance o
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
laughter to reproue his foolishnes. Surely this 
                        〈◊〉
                     
proceede of some deepespeculation;P. 142. Sitting (by
imagination) which Sapor King of 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      in the
Center of the Globe (of a Glasse, beholding the 
                        〈◊〉
                     
reuolutions of Commerce represented 
                        〈◊〉
                     
Ballance, acted by these Grashoppers, which 
                        〈…〉
                     
full for the winter (as the P
                           •
                        smire is) to 
                        〈◊〉
                     
wealth: whereas the Grash
                           •
                        pper is a 
                        〈…〉
                     
                     
Summer, and dieth in winner, and is found to be
one of the plagues of Aegipt.
                  
                  Being in this humor he falleth into timing:P. 138. 
                     The
Persian trade will not let me passe, nor the fishing neither
without a word of either. The Persian Trade for Silkes
is of far lesse benefit then the Trades of Spices and
other East India commodities; and the increase of
the Manufactures thereof will decrease the indraping
of our Woolls, and increase our ouerballance:
vnlesse moneys were imported for the greatest part
of the returne thereof. But the Fishing Trade
(propounded so many yeares since by Mr. Iohn
Keymer, with the assistance of the Noble Lord Sheffield,
Sir william Cokaine Knight, and diuers other
worthy persons of quallity, who haue promised
to lay out great summes of money therein) will
effectually improue our exportations, and afford
much more benefit then any Persian or East India
Trade can doe, if his Maiestie were pleased to encourage
them with preuiledges and immunities, as
the 
                        〈◊〉
                      of the action deserueth. But the enuious
man sleepeth not, who is able (vpon one
mans vndigested opinion sometimes) to ouerthrow
the long industrous study of others that sincerely
intend the common good. Shall we propound the
example of other nations concerning their industry
and pollicie▪ and shall we not be able to imitate
them? Can they increase Manufactures vpon the
materialls of other Countries?) And cannot we do
the fame of our owne stuffes and materialls? Shall
we runne into remote Regione and Countries for
their Commodities to make a benefit, and neglect

Gods blessings at home before their owne doores?
Doe we feele the Politike Body of the Common
wealth distempered and full of diseases, and 
                        〈◊〉
                     
found out the efficient causes thereof) shall wee not
be able to prouide the Remedies?
                  If things cannot be vnderstood in plaine terms
it may be the Allegory following will make vs more
sensible of naturall Remedies.
               
               
                  
                     An Allegory of the decayed Trade of England, compared
to a diseased Body naturall: with the Remedies
to cure the same.
                  
                  
                     STates-men or Politicians (which are the Phisitians
of Common-weales) hauing entred into serious
consideration of the estate of the Politike Body of
Trafficque, do finde that the externall parts thereof
looke wan and pale, prognosticating a consumption
of the liuer: (Money) which causeth the decay of
Merchants and Trades-men; hollow eyes and dim
sighted, through the exhalation of the R
                           •
                        dicall
Moisture of the Body, by the excessiue vse of Tabac
                           •
                        ,
whereby the memory is decayed: and the sinowes
of the ancient Statutes and Proclamations are de
                        •
                     ilitated:
the ordinances for the gouernment of the
braine, (Exchange) and rectifying of the Liuer
(Money) to comfort the heart of (our Natiue Commodities)
are put in obliuion; Tobacco is imported
in the liew of Spanish Royalls and Pistolets, which
causeth the prises (the Hammers of the Mint) to be
weake and faint: the Vrine they found to be of a
cleere greenish colour, proceeding from weakne
                        •
                     
                     
and the vse of too much white Wine sophisticated
into Claret, the Leggs full of dropsicke humors of
consumption, by the immoderate wearing of Veluets,
Silkes, Cambricks and Lawnes: engendring
an ouerballancing (or surfet) of forreine commodities,
so that the Vitall Spirits of Bullion and Monly
doth languish with a continuall Flux of exportation.
                  Considering the internal parts, they found the liuer
(Money) obstructed, and the condinct pipes of
Bullion and Moneys for importation stopt, whereby
the Hepaties could not minister good bloud, with
spirits sufficient to comfort the heart of (our natiue
commodities) by a naturall heate: for the gaule of
Customes and impositions is ouerflown also, depriuing
the stomacke of his appetie: hence the braine (Exchange,
wanting sleepe) is distempered, whereby
the body is ouertaken with a Trepidation or shaking,
shewing the very Symptomes of death.
                  Hereupon some Empricke (being more forward
then the learned Phisitians) did deliuer his opinion,
that the said body (by a surset, or ouerballancing
of forreine commodities) is fallen into a consumption:
yet that nature is so strong, that (without
Phisicke) she will recouer againe her former health
in progresse of time; But herein he shall finde himselfe
as much deceiued, as the Spaniard was (who being
to go a iourney on foote) resolued to go fasting,
conceiuing he should go the lighter: but fainting
by the way, cryed out, Aora hallo que las Tripas Ile
                        
                           ••
                        anel
vientre, y no el vientpe las Tripas: now do I find
that the Guts do carry the Belly, & not the Belly the

whereupon he vsed afterwards meate and 
                        〈◊〉
                     
for his sustenance vpon the like occasion: and found
on the contrary, that the abuse thereof did 
                        〈…〉
                     
surfeits in the Body naturall: euen as the abuse of
money and exchanges doth in the Body of Traffique,
whereunto Phisicke must be ministred vpon
necessitie, according to the disease.
                  Another Practitioner in Phisicke was of opinion;
that the Flux of exportation should be diuerted and
stopt by opening the Meridian Veyne, suffering moneys
to be exported at the pleasure of Merchants▪
but vpon better consideration of the weaknes of the
Body, (through the former profusion of Bloud) he
did alter the said opinion: obseruing that Art giuen
no facility, when nature wanteth ability for to increase
Manufactures and Fishing, thereby to cu
                        ••
                     
the said surfeit or ouerballancing.
                  Whereupon the learned Phisitians of experience
(hauing examined the causes of the diseases of this
Body) did resolue to apply and vse proper Remedies.
                  First, That the continuall Flux of exportation
of our moneys must be stopt by taking away the
cause thereof, which is (Gaine) had vpon moneys,
proceeding of the vndervaluation of our moneys in
exchange, and the inhauncing of moneys beyond
the Seas.
                  Next, That the obstruction of the Liuer, (Money,
and the conduict Pipes of Spanish Royalls and
Germaine Dollers) must be opened by the meanes
of the Braine, (Exchange) to minister good Bloud
and Spirits to the Heart of our natiue Commodities,
                     
to make a liuely Trade, whereby Bullion brought
to the Mint, will cause the hammers (as the 
                        〈◊〉
                     
of the Body of Trade) to beate with temperate
strokes, by meanes whereof the distemperature of
the Braine (Exchange) will be qualified: the bitternes
of the Gaule shall prouoke appetie, when customes
and impositions shall be moderated in the
rates, without diminution of substance: the Sin
                        •
                     wes
of the necessary ancient Statutes and Proclamations
for the gouernment of Trade will be corroborated;
the Eye sight will be illuminated when the
ouer much smoake of Tobacco is vanished away: and
the Complection will be liuely when Merchants
shall be encouraged.
                  Wee shall not neede to vse Mechoacan or Indian
Rootes against the Dropsie, or Prohibitions against
the ouermuch importation of forreine Commodities
in the wearing of them (which will enforce
the like vse in other Countries:) for the humors of
the Leggs will be euacuated, and the convulsion of
the face (by our natiue Commodities truely made
and vented) will be extenuated: for plenty of money
shal aduance the quantity and price of them, and
abate the price of forreine Commodities, whereby
the Surfit or ouerballancing will be remedded, if we
preserue the good Bloud in the Body by the wisedome
of the Braine (Exchange) where the seate of
Iudgement is placed to increase the same for the
comfort of the Heart, (our natiue Commodities)
which shall receiue thereby his tintered Chylus by
his owne mouth and stomacke: and the bloud full
of Spirits shall fill all the veines, and strengthen the

Sinowes: by supplying the want of moneys, the
easie course and recourse of whose Exchange (finding
rest by the Basis of true valuation) shall supple
the Ioynts and settle the bloud to serue all mens
turnes, whereby the said shaking of the body will
cease, the colour of the vrine will be rectified, the
too much vse of white Wine shall not be so much
offensiue, but in some measure reioyce the Heart,
and take away the melancholike disease of the mind,
which commonly procureth the disease of the Body.
Finally, The Body will be cured of the said consumption,
and grow fat againe by a true and lawfull
replection, of the generall good of the King
and Common-wealth, through Gods blessings.
                  If this Allegory be truely considered, we shall find
that therein is a liuely expression of the diseases of
the Politike Body of Trade: and if a naturall Body
had all the said diseases, there is no other remedy
nor way to to cure the same but after the maner here
declared, as the learned Phisitians of experience
will confesse: for the reasons are plaine and euident,
and without Phisicke it is impossible to cure it. Will
any man of iudgement thinke that the Flux will be
stopt of course by the strength of nature, so long as
we minister such things which of themselues are laxitiue?
Or shall we expect that the Veines will be filled
with Bloud, when the Hepaties want their operation?
Or if Bloud did increase, shall the Body receiue
nutriment so long as there is a profusion of
Bloud? Or shall the Heart be comforted with the
liuely spirits of the Bloud? Shall the Braine receiue
rest, vnlesse she doe finde meanes to strengthen the

Heart: and that the Liuer, the Heart, and the 
                        〈◊〉
                     
may all in one Simpathy performe their functions?
The Stomacke cannot disgest, euery thing prouoketh
a surfet: the Gaule (by her ouerstowing) hindereth
appetite, which bringeth a distemperature to
the whole Body, and filleth the same with crude
humours, engendring Dropsies and other diseases,
which at last turne into a consumption: the Braine
wanteth sleepe, for the spirits are fatigated and
troubled.
                  To make application hereof to the Body Politike
of Trade, we know that euen as in naturall Bodies
the Heart (which is the Center of the Body) receiueth
life first, and retaineth the same last; So Commodities
in Traffique are first, and moneys came
afterwards, whereby Commutation or Barter was
brought into a Trade: and to preserue that money,
(as the Bloud in the Body) exchange was deuised
as a spirit to quicken the same; and shall it be vsed
to destroy the Body because the true vse of it is not
vnderstood, and the same is made a Merchandise?
                  Shall we imagine that the exportation of our moneys
shall be preuented, when by taking inhaunced
coyne beyond the Seas aboue the true value in
exchange, wee feede the causes of exportation? Or
shall we expect that moneys shall be imported vnto
vs, when there is a losse by the bringing of them,
which losse is measured according to the price of
exchange: which to auoide, compelleth vs to buy
forreine Commodities? Or if any moneys are imported,
(by accident or occasion) shall the Body of
Trade be the better by it so long as they are carried

out againe? Shall the Trade of our natiue Commodities
be liuely, when moneys are wanting? Can
the exchange haue his due course, vnlesse the foundation
thereof according to Parity and Equality be
respected, howsoeuer the price thereof may rise and
fall according to the occasions of Merchants, and
the plenty or scarsity of moneys? Shall not the price
of this true exchange impose a price vpon our natiue
Commodities, so that Commodities, moneys
and exchanges may (according to equitie and iustice)
be gouerned in their proper natures accordingly?
The Kingdome cannot consume the forreine
Commodities imported, but they cause an
ouerballancing; the Customes and Impositions
(which might be moderated in the rate, and yet not
decrease in value by the greater employment of
Trade) doth discourage Merchants, which bringeth
a distemperature in Trade: forraine wares are
oueraboundantly brought in, in the liew of moneys,
whereby the Realme doth swell with forreine Commodities,
which (being retransported) bring still
other Wares in returne: so that moneys and bullion
(the vitall spirit of Trade) is neglected, which
is properly the decay of Trade; For the exchange
(which ruleth Commodities and money) is ouerruled
by other Nations. Let vs therefore practise
the contrary, to finde a full remedy for Contraria contrarijs
curantur.
                  
                  The Turke,
                     The Policy of the Turke Persian and Russian. the Persian, and the Russians doe exceeds
in Policy, preuenting the exportation of their
moneys, by maintaining the price of exchange aboue
the valuation of their moneys, causing Merchants

thereby to make employment vpon their
Commodities of course, and not by precept or compulsion,
whereby they accumulate treasure.
                  The King of Ba
                           •
                        tan and other Princes in the East
doe the like, selling their corruptible Wares for siluer
to hoord vp the same; cannot this awake vs to
imitate them, when it may be done by so easie
meanes through the Center of Commerce so often repeated?
I say no more, but leaue it to the high wisdome
of the King and State to direct it, wherein
Misseldens Ballance is as necessary as the first wheele
in a Wagon.
                  To make an end therefore with his Copia Verborum,
                     P. 143.
he much reioyceth that (by Acadnes thred) he
is got out of the Labyrinth of the Little Fish and
Great Whale; but this little Spawne will sticke so
fast in his Throate, that he shall neede of Cranes to
plucke it out: so that I might very well retort vpon
him his conceited dismission and capritious farewel,
borrowed of the ancient Fathers. But it is sufficient
for me to shew that (as it is the fable of the Fox) he
hath onely licked the out side of the Glasse of true
iudgement of this matter of State, but could neuer
come to the Pottage or Center, according to the olde
obseruation:Lucians Dialog. shewing how Iupiter was fed with
bones and fat, Promethius reseruing vnto himselfe
the solid flesh: whereby is meant sound knowledge,
by the fat, the fleeting shew of superficiary termes
of Art, and by the bones are deciphered the inextricable
and perplexed labour in the curiosities of
euerstriuing contradictions: wherein he doth aabound.
Sed magna est veritas & praeualet: He did

thinke once to haue made an Index 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      of
my writings: but (finding that his durty broome
had employment to clense the Stables at Hack
                           ••
                        y
and now to finde out the Interlopers beyond the
Seas) he left it. I still do striue to be temperate, but
publike slaunders cannot be washed off but by publike
defences: sure I am that my Bookes are acceptable
vnto wisemen, and Lex Mercitoria is translated
into Spanish and French, and much respected beyond
the Seas; In the Conclusion of which Booke to
the Indicious Reader I gaue notice long since, that
Enuy would command Triple headed Cerberus to let
loose the Satyres, Zoylus, Momus, and Mastix: for
this latter was already come on a Hackney Horse with
a Blattant tongue to carpe at the actions of any man▪
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , To hurt.
although it were as commendable as Homers learning,
or Hercules Acts, whereof Virgil the Prince
of Helicon was not free: neither the worthy one of
former ages, whose vertues darkened like the Moone
with some blot are registred (with the point of Diamond)
in the Glasse of true History.
                  Thus hauing made his Circle vsefull in some respect
by placing of a Center in it,P. 2. it will be more close
and durable, for (himselfe saith in the Proeme) that it
is slightly set vp and pinned together to try how the
parts and ioynts thereof would trent and fit the
square, for by his Apostrophe ad Regem (whose most
iudiciall eyes can easely discerne wilfulnes and ignorance)P. 14. 5
that of Horace is verified.
                  
                     
                     Pindarum quis quid studet aemulari,
                     Iuli ceratis ope Dedalea,
                     Nititur Pennis, vitreo daturus,
                     —Nomina Ponto.
                  
                  
                     Iulus who striues, Pinder to emulate
                     With waxen wings, which Dedals Art did make:
                     He flies in vaine, to giue by haplesse fate
                     Names to the Icarian glassie blewish lake.
                  
                  For Misselden hauing in his former Treatise (either
ignorantly or willingly) omitted to handle The Pradominant
Part of Trade, namely the Mistery of Exchange,
which is the Publike Measure between vs and
other nations, as we haue poued now in this his Circle
of Commerce; he hath vndertaken (with the Artificiall
wings of his supporters set on with wax) to
fly so high in the discourse thereof, that this hot climate
of the Antartike Circle or South Pole hath dissolued
the wax, and the splendant Beames of the
Sunne of truth hath dispelled all foggy misteries of
deceitfull fallacies as aforesaid: so that he is drowned
(with his Ballance) in the Sea of Exchanges, according
to Ouids Allusion.
                     Ipse Misseldemus nomina facit aquis.
                  
               
            
            
               THE CONCLVSION.
               VNto you therfore Noble Lords and Right Honorable
Priuy Councellers of State, with the

rest of the Right Worshipfull his Maiesties Commissioners
for Trade, (whom I haue at all times attended
as becommeth me) vnto your graue wisdomes
and discretions (I say) belongeth properly
the serious consideration of this Center of Commerce.
This is the firme North Starre of Trade, by which
your Compasse is to be directed according to the
Lawes, Statutes, and Ordinances of this Realme of
England; This is the Rudder of the Ship of Traffique
to guide & steire Commerce to her right ports
or Hauens of profit. This is that true Par of Exchange
approued by the Lawes of nations, that hath no imposture,
froth, nor fallacy to amuse or abuse vs with:
as the casting of a deceitfull Ballance hath, wherein
no certainty can be found.
               Let not your Heroicall Vertues for the Publike
good be blemisht with priuate Centers of Commerce:
but be you a meanes that Phebus himselfe will be
pleased to driue the Chariot of Trade: this Center,
whereby the Horses of all societies and corporations
my draw a like in the course of Trade by his wise
guiding and direction:
                     Masterr Milles Acroamata. let the procuring of Bullion
be your first study to set his Mint on worke, which
is recommended vnto you by the efficacy of other
mens words.
               For Money of it selfe (be it more or lesse) in
whose hands so euer, without Bullion to supply, is
but water in a Cesterne taken from the Spring, that
by vse becomes exhausted, or being but let alone,
consumes it selfe to nothing by strikes and putrifaction.
So Coyne becomes but Medals, out of vse, of
out of fashion.
               
                  
For Bullion being the Fountaine, Money is but the
Water, and Exchange the Riuer that serues all priuate
turnes.
               
                  Bullion being the Sun, Money is but the Beames,
Exchange the Light that makes the world to see.
               
                  Bullion being the Pilot, Money is but the Sterne,
Exchange the Compasse that guides all courses right.
               
                  Bullion being the Chylus, Money is but the Bloud,
Exchange the Spirit that quickens all the Body.
               To be short, Bullion is the very Body and Bloud
of Kings, Money is but the Medium betweene Subiects
and their Kings, Exchange the heauenly Mistery
that ioynes them both together.
               Next therefore let the exportation of moneys, the
profusion of Bloud, be preuented by the meanes of
this Center, (wherein the vitall spirit of Trade doth
consist) and procure plenty of Money and Bullion
by all Reall Substantiall and Politike meanes; For
plenty of Money will improue your Lands, aduance
the price of your natiue Commodities, increase your
Manufactures, establish the Fishing, maintaine forreine
Trades, augment the Kings reuinewes, make
forreine Wares better cheape, preuent the ouerballancing,
and inrich the Kingdome with an aduancement
of all the dependances of Trade, contained in
the Articles of your Commission. God grant a
blessing in all, to his Glory, the Kings
Honor, and the Kingdomes
welfare.
               
                  Obsta Principijs, sedo Medicina Paratur.
               
               FINIS.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ERRATA.
            
               
                  
                     Pag. 5.
                     lin. 11.
                     read.
                     Reprehension, for apprehension.
                  
                  
                     p. 17.
                     l. 27.
                     r.
                     Depredations, for depudations.
                  
                  
                     p. 18.
                     l. 29.
                     r.
                     Wee, for me.
                  
                  
                     p. 25.
                     l. 2.
                     r.
                     Peeces, for prices.
                  
                  
                     p. 37.
                     l. 8.
                     r.
                     Peeces, for prices.
                  
                  
                     p. 38.
                     l. 2.
                     r.
                     20 
                           •
                        , for 2 
                           •
                        .
                  
                  
                     p. 42.
                     l. 20.
                     r.
                     Construction, for contution.
                  
                  
                     p. 44.
                     l. 17.
                     r.
                     Good, for Gods.
                  
                  
                     p. 58.
                     l. 14.
                     r.
                     Caution, for cannon.
                  
                  
                     p. 58.
                     l. 22.
                     r.
                     Confusion, for conclusion.
                  
                  
                     p. 64.
                     l. 18.
                     r.
                     Hoopes, for hops.
                  
                  
                     p. 64.
                     l. 31.
                     r.
                     Indeering, for induring.
                  
                  
                     p. 68.
                     l. 8.
                     r.
                     Mobile, for Mobill.
                  
                  
                     p. 77.
                     l. 22.
                     r.
                     Cornuted, for corneited.
                  
                  
                     p. 78.
                     l. 7.
                     r.
                     Flatter, for scatter.
                  
                  
                     p. 78.
                     l. 30.
                     r.
                     Procupine, for procerpine.
                  
                  
                     p. 80.
                     l. 20.
                     r.
                     For, for from.
                  
                  
                     p. 81.
                     l. 12.
                     r.
                     Inabled, for inable.
                  
                  
                     p. 101.
                     l. 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                     
                        
                           •
                        
                     
                     Contratenor, for contratos.
                  
               
            
            
         
      
   