
      
         
            
            
            SAINT GEORGE
FOR ENGLAND, ALlegorically
described: By GERRARD DE MALYNES
Merchant.
            Veritas Temporis filia.
            Imprinted at London by Richard Field for
William Tymme Stationer, and are to be sold
at the signe of the Floure de luce and
Crowne in Pater-noster
row. 1601.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
HONORABLE SIR
THOMAS EGERTON
KNIGHT, LORD KEEPER OF
THE GREAT SEALE OF ENGLAND,
Chamberlaine to the County-Palatine of Chester,
and one of her Maiesties most honorable
priuy Counsell, G. de M. wisheth all
health, increase of honor, and
euerlasting happinesse.
            
               THE inuented
historie of S.
George (right
honorable and
my singular
good Lord)
howsoeuer heretofore abused,
may conueniently be applied to

these our dayes of her Maiesties
most happy gouernement, wherin
the beames of the Orientall
starre of Gods most holy word
appeare vnto vs most splendent
and transparent, to the singular
comfort of all faithfull. For wheras
vnder the person of the noble
champion Saint GEORGE our
Sauiour Christ was prefigured,
deliu
                  •
               ring the Virgin (which did
signifie the sinfull soules of Christians)
from the dragon or diuels
power: So her most excellent
Maiesty by aduancing the pure
doctrine of CHRIST IESVS in
all truth and sincerity, hath (as an
instrument appointed by diuine
prouidence) bene vsed to performe

the part of a valiant champion,
deliuering an infinite nūber
out of the diuels power, wherunto
they were tied with the forcible
chaines of darkenesse. In
which sēse retaining S. GFORGE
for England, not onely as the patron
of the noble order of the
garter, but as the head & patron
of our eternall glorie, both those
that be knights of that noble order,
and all other of what degree
or calling soeuer, haue iust cause
to reioyce, & to expect their deliuerance
purchased by the spilling
of his most precious bloud,
following him as our generall, &
hearing only his voice sounding
in his most holy word. For euen

as right soldiers hauing the signe
of marching forwards giuen thē,
do take vp all their trinkets:
but hearing the note of battell,
lay them downe againe, preparing
and making themselues ready
with heart, eyes, and eares, to
execute whatsoeuer is by their
generall commanded: So ought
al Christians alwaies to be ready
to abandon all worldly goods &
honours, for to follow their said
generall IESVS CHRIST chearfully
& with courage, for they do
heare the note of battell daily
preached vnto them, vnder the
most peaceable gouernement of
her most excellent Maiesty. The
due consideration of which preparation

is the only & principall
point that the noble knights of
this renowned order are to study
wearing the liuery of the holy
crosse imprinted in their minds,
as being true knights of Malta,
to defend and aduance true religion,
& the welfare of their coū
               trey:
the prosperity of both being
ouermuch hindered by the
meanes of a cruell dragon, hath
giuen me cause to explaine the
same, and to describe the history
of Saint GEORGE Allegorically
in this treatise, the dedicatiō
therof properly belonging
vnto your honor, whom her Maiesty
by diuine inspiration hath
bene pleased to aduance to the

authoritie of that honorable
place, where the crueltie of this
dragō is qualified, & in some sort
bridled: his operations & effects
are tending to the ouerthrow of
equality & concord, two things
required in euery well gouerned
comonwealth; which being
neglected, all policy of gouernment
is broken, concord within
the realme amongst the seuerall
mēbers of the same, and equality
in the course of traffike between
the realme and other countries.
Pardō (my good Lord) my boldnes
in publishing this testimony
of good will and duty vnto your
honor in these few words, seeing
that so many are the honorable
fauours receiued at your Lordships

hands, that an Epistle dedicatory
vnto a treatise cannot cō
               taine
the same, vnlesse I would
seeme to build a high steeple vnto
a litle cotage. VVherefore hū
               bly
commending this treatise to
your iudicial eies & protectiō, &
crauing pardō for my presūption
proceeding from an affectionate
desire to your honours seruice,
whereunto before all men I acknowledge
my selfe bounden, I
beseech the eternall God to increase
his graces in your L.
that his glory may more thereby
appeare, & multiply your daies
as the dayes of heauen. London
this 24. of May. 1601.
            
               Your Lordships most humble
and in all duty bounden,
GERRARD DE MALYNES.
            
         
         
            
            To the louing Reader.
            
               GENTLE Reader, I
haue layed open in this
treatise the operations or
effects of the subtill and
cruell dealings of a Dragon,
of whose manner and behauiour diuerse
haue written heretofore, and declared
the same to haue bene the cause of the
ouerthrow of kingdomes, states, commonweales
and families. But forasmuch as
they haue not made the application euident,
some writing thereof according vnto
Diuinitie, others according to the prohibition
of diuerse lawes, I haue taken occasion
to describe briefly and allegorically,
the historie of Saint George for explanation
thereof: the rather, for that I do
find recorded by Cornelius Tacitus a renowmed

author, that this Dragon is the
chiefest head and cause of rebellion and
variance in countries, and was therefore
altogether banished in the old time, when
least corruption of life appeared amongst
men. For he ouerthroweth the harmonie
of the strings of the good gouernment of a
common-wealth, by too much enriching
some, and by oppressing and impouerishing
some others, bringing the instrument
out of tune: when as euery member of the
same should liue contented in his vocation
and execute his charge according to his
profession. For albeit, that equalitie wold
be the cause that euery man should haue enough,
which made some of opinion that
goods ought to be common: yet forasmuch
as the same was neuer vsed or established
in any age, reason requireth, that according
to the course of humane affaires, all
things should be gouerned in the best and
most assuredst maner that can be deuised,
and as it were, seeking a certaintie, euen in
vncertainties, which is tearmed Pollicie:

For all worldly and transitorie things being
mutable, maketh the world properly
to consist of strife, warre, discord, enuie,
rankor, burning, sacking, wasting, spoyling
and destroying: a very vncertaine
ground to build vpon. And yet a certaine
equalitie and concord is required in euery
well gouerned commonwealth, the prince
or gouernor hauing the disposing both of
the one and the other. Equalitie concerning
the trafficke and negotiation betwixt
his dominions and other countries in the
trade of merchandize: and Concord amongst
the members of a commonwealth,
when euery member thereof doth liue contentedly
and proportionably in his vocation.
Both these are brought to confusion
and vtter destruction by the means of this
Dragon, a monster found out by couetousnesse
the roote of all euill: whereunto Ambition
is annexed which mooueth sedition
and ciuill warre: when pride doth oppresse
loue, which prouoketh disdaine and kindleth
malice, confoundeth iustice, and at

length subuerteth states: whereas humanitie
stirreth vp affection, augmenteth amitie,
maintaineth loue, supporteth equitie,
and most soundly preserueth cities and
countries. This Dragon bringeth inequalitie
in a commonwealth by the meanes of
his taile, wherein lyeth his greatest
strength, making the expences thereof to
surmount the reuenues. For he depriueth
the Prince (which is the father of this
great houshold) of his treasure and readie
money, which are Nerui bellorum, and
is the cause of many other inconueniences,
as both in this and in another treatise I
haue described vnto you. This he effecteth
by falsifying the valuation of mony, which
is the rule and measure of things, which
money he caused to be made vncertaine,
and as it were a merchandize, giuing
thereby a wonderfull ability to some of the
members of a commonwealth to oppresse
the other: whereby the concord is broken,
and men cannot liue in their vocation, by
that whereunto they were borne or bred.

Hence do arise the causes that states-men,
or magistrates which haue the managing
of the gouernment of kingdomes, and are
the Phisitions of commonweales, are many
times blamed and found fault withall,
for not lealing effectually the biles, botches,

                  •
               ankers and sores thereof, albeit the
fault proceedeth not of any act or negligence
of theirs, neither is the same properly
to be attributed vnto them, but vnto this
old venimous sore, being primum mobile,
and yet not spyed out: in the curing
whereof they would be thought to be very
foolish Phisitions, if by their medicine the
bodie were cast into a more dangerous sicknesse.
Wherefore as the wounds of this
dragon are inueterated, so must he be dealt
withall by degrees and lenitie, depriuing
him first of the strength of his taile, which
will cause a great obstruction to his
breath, whereby his power shall so much
be weakened, as he may easily be brought
into a consumption: albeit that the pollitike
gouernment of some states do admit

him, as a necessarie euill, with the keeping
of a lombard to qualifie his extreame deuouring
of the poore. This dragon is called
Foenus politicum, his two wings are
Vsura palliata and Vsura explicata,
and his taile inconstant Cambium. The
virgin is the kings treasure: the champion
Saint George is the kings authoritie, armed
with the right armor of a Christian:
who with the sword of the spirit of Gods
most holy word, explained and corroborated
with seuerall other lawes, signified by
the Pybal horse whereon he was mounted:
did destroy the cruell dragon, rescuing the
kings daughter, and deliuering the commonwealth,
as by the circumstances of the
historie may appeare: the Allegorie whereof
requireth a due consideration, which
would dilate vnto another treatise. Wherfore
leauing this to thy good acceptance
and friendly censure, I wish and pray that
all things may be well, although it be impossible
to haue perfection and soundnesse
of life in all men, and amongst all states.

God graunt that all men may amend their
liues in euery vocation, and that his kingdome
may come hastily amongst vs, to the
comfort of his chosen people. Farewell,
London this 24. of May. 1601.
            
               Yours to vse,
GERRARD DE MALYNES.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Saint George for England:
Allegorically described.
            
               APRILL hauing
with his sweete
showers moystened
the drought
of March, bathing
euery veine of the
rootes of trees &
ingendring floures, Zephirus with his
pleasaunt breath prouoking tender
crops by vertue of young Phebus, holding
her course in Aries. Abstinence in
Lent performing her accustomed race
feeding on waterie creatures, the
Moone being entred into the aquatike
signe of Pisces, and my bloud increasing
with the nource of digestion, caused
me to slumber, and no sooner did

I discharge some part of that tribute
due vnto nature, when suddenly falling
into most strange dreames, or rather
visions, which seemed to dimme my
sight, I was partly amazed, and partly
rauished with such admirations: which
by apprehension haue left such deepe
impressions in the treasurie of my
braines, as I am now compelled to cō
               mit
some of them to the generall recordor,
whose bodie (after the amputation
of his head) called for blacke
drinke to staine the ouerbeaten clouts,
to ease my fatigable memory, the receptacle
whereof is otherwise barred
from all succeeding matters, like a
trammell replenished with fish, which
can containe no more then her full (as
it were) naturall imbibition.
            Me thought according to the prouoked
motion, that being in a ship sailing
on the seas with a prosperous
wind and pleasant trauell, I did arriue
into a most fruitfull Iland, whose

beautifull and pleasant sight, with sauorie
and delicious fruites distilling
the iuice of Nectar, ministrated such
delight and health vnto my wearied
bones and drowsie mind, that by the
delectable obiect of mine eyes, of
faire running riuers with their siluer
streames, of greene fields with their
varietie of floures, of easie high waies
set with fruite-trees on euery side, of
stately hils gracing their Horizon as
the nose doth the face, of liuely fountaines
of refreshing water, and by the
sweete and harmonious melodie of
birds, whose warbling notes did penetrate
my eares, all my sences were reduced
to puritie; my sight without colour,
my hearing without sound, my
smelling without smell, my tasting
without smacke or feeling, and my feeling
without sence or tasting: all of thē
being simple in themselues, seemed to
haue obtained fruition of their wished
desires, as if all things with a Simpathy

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
of a generall applause had bene entertaining
them, and prognosticating
vnto me all worldy felicitie. Trauelling
along with a setled pace, taking the benefite
of these rare blessings, an insupportable
loathsome smell scaled the
fortresse of my nose, depriuing me of
some part of the former pleasures. But
the sence of smelling not hauing
so great operation with the heart as
the motion of the eyes, made the sence
of seeing to remaine predominant:
howbeit by the interposition of the
facultie of hearing. For behold a man
of meane stature, stricken in age, yet
bearing his bodie vpright, did stand on
the high way, in whose face did shine
such amiable reuerence as was pleasant
to behold, notwithstanding his
pale colour caused through the stinking
smell; who told me with a loude
voice these or the like speeches.
            Not without cause (courteous gentleman)
do you stop your nose to auoid

this pestiferous smell, as dangerous to
the smelling as the cockatrice is to the
sight, proceeding from a terrible cruel
Dragon, which deuoureth and destroyeth
daily the inhabitants of this
(otherwise) flourishing Iland, the king
himselfe being in great ieopardy, with
his sweet and welbeloued daughter: as
heretofore his predecessor hath bene,
whome Saint George that valiant champion
(through his great faith and valour)
did rescue and saue miraculously,
deliuering therby the whole state of
this common wealth from the like dā
               ger.
The consideration whereof doth
comfort and reuiue our dead hopes,
that God will be pleased to stirre vp
some other champion, who like vnto
the noble Romaine Marcus Curtius
shall deliuer our weale publike, and destroy
this hideous monster, wherwith
we haue bene troubled almost these
30. yeares▪
            
            Hearing the same, me thought I

was possessed with a most feruent desire
to vnderstand the particularitie as
well of that Dragon whereof he complained,
as of the other which is reported
to haue bene slaine or vanquished
by Saint George: for I had many times
inquired very diligently where that Iland
might be situated where that dragon
was destroyed, and how it was
possible that he could deuoure such an
infinite number of creatures as is reported,
which made me to be very importunate
with this man to know euery
thing with the circumstances therof,
whome I found to be not onely by
learning, but also by nature of singular
eloquence, and in reasoning and
debating of matters of politicke gouernement,
what by his naturall wit,
and what by daily exercise, surely he
had in my iudgement few fellowes, by
reason whereof, he gaue me full satisfaction
and answer to all my demands,
and seemed in his discourse to discharge

the part of an Orator.
            This flourishing Iland (quoth he)
which ouerfloweth with milk and hony,
is called Niobla, and lyeth vnder the
kingdome of Persia, the chiefe citie
whereof called Diospolus standeth
partly vpon the side of a low hill, in fashion
almost foure square. For the
breadth of it beginneth a little beneath
the toppe of the hill, and still
continueth by the space of one mile.
The length of it which lyeth by the riuers
side is somewhat more. The riuer
called Semath riseth aboue foure score
miles aboue Diospolus out of a little
spring: but being increased by other
small riuers and brookes that runne
into it, before the city it is halfe a mile
brode, and farther broader, and fortie
miles beyond the citie it falleth into
the Ocean sea. By all that space that lyeth
betweene the sea and the citie, and
certaine miles also aboue the citie, the
water ebbeth and floweth sixe houres

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
together with a swift tide, when the
sea floweth in, for the length of thirty
miles it filleth al the riuer Semath with
salt water, and driueth backe the fresh
water of the riuer: and somewhat further,
it changeth the sweetnesse of the
fresh water with saltnesse. But a little
beyond that the riuer waxeth sweete,
and runneth foreby the citie fresh and
pleasant. There goeth a bridge ouer
the riuer, made not of piles or of timber,
but of stone-worke, with gorgeous
and substantiall Arches, at that
part of the citie that is farthest from
sea: to the intent that ships may passe
along foreby all the side of the citie
without let: from this riuer the water
is deriued and conueyed downe in
channels of lead diuerse waies, euen into
the highest part of the citie, which
doth the inhabitants great seruice.
The citie is compassed about with
high and thick stone walles, with some
bulwarkes, and a dry ditch somewhat

broade and ouergrowne with bushes,
briers and thornes. The streetes are
commodious and reasonable broade
for the most part, with diuerse gorgious
and faire buildings standing together
without partition, diuerse gardens
are enclosed by the backe part
of the streete, all in good order and
most commodious. Almost in the
middle part of this citie in a most sumptuous
and stately building, being
foure square, all of marble & free stone,
erected vpon seuerall pillars curiously
wrought, hath this Dragon his principall
and most ordinarie habitation,
albeit he wandreth through the whole
Iland at his pleasure, and beareth a
wonderfull commaund in deuouring
& destroying an infinite number, altering
the course of our gouernment.
For the the execution whereof, what
with his venimous breath, what with
his subtilty of setting men together by
the eares, what with his naturall deuouring,

or what with his alluring Serenian
songs, he hath all the meanes
that can be excogitated, euen vnder
the colour of religion and iustice.
            Wonder not (good sir) for this
monstrous beast waxing euery moneth
bigger one then another, is like
vnto the Serpent that with the subtile
guile of Sathan seduced our great
grand-mother Eue, and brought all
her posterity into exile, and misery
vppon mankind, and so doth this
monster bring al misery and calamitie
vnto our common-weale. Therefore
with great reason it was recorded,
that great was the faith of
Saint George, whereby he was corroborated
and made valiant to deliuer
this commonwealth of the like cruell
and execrable monster, which daily
deuoured so many oxen, sheep, and other
cattell, and at last all reasonable
creatures, vntill by the fatall lot the
kings daughter was in danger and appointed

to be deuoured. Neither must
you imagine, that this infernall dragon
doth deuoure so many creatures, as it
were consuming them, but by sleight,
deuises and stratagemes, he causeth
them to destroy one another, in such
sort as I haue determined to tell you.
            But first I will tell you in what maner,
and by what meanes the inhabitants
of this Iland did liue before this
monster was bred in hell, next what
the conditions and qualities are of
those that be in league with him. And
lastly what practises this dragon vseth
with euery member of our weale publicke,
to the generall destruction therof.
O Codrus of Athens, wert thou aliue
to destroy this serpentine dragon, that
creepeth not vpon his belly, as the serpent
of Paradise was condemned to
do, and feedeth not on earth, but domineereth
on his foure indented Harpyon
feete, feeding on the most precious
meate, which doth command all

other meates and delicacies. And behold
his cruelty by so much the greater,
as most vsually this meate is prepared
vnto him by the poorer sort, and
vpon them he feedeth most greedily.
And whether euer that serpent went
skipping vpon his taile before the
curse, I know not: but I am sure this
beareth his taile aloft like a conquerer,
riding in his triumphant chariot. The
curse of the Scripture denounced against
him is neglected, the writings
of Diuines hath no efficacie, the
Canonists cursings is without vertue,
the prohibition of Ciuilians is ouercome
by the tolleration of the Statute
Law, and the manner of mens actions
before this monster did tyrannize, is
cleane forgotten, whereas Licurgus
did banish this canker worme out of
Sparta, Amasis did punish him seuerely
in AEgypt, Cato did banish him also out
of Sicilia, and Solon did condemne him
in Athens. And should not we do the

like, if some Lucullus would deliuer vs
of this contagion, wherewith we are
infected, when as Sergius Galba being
president of Affrica, vnder the Emperour
Claudius, caused one to be punished
with death by famine, for feeding
and entertaining this monster, which
like a whirle-poole swalloweth whatsoeuer
it catcheth?
            The inhabitants of this noble Iland
did liue by the naturall richesse of the
lands they were borne vnto, or by the
artificiall riches they were bred vnto,
according to their educatiō & professiō,
euery man vsing and enioying his
own, & nothing but his own, which in
regard of charity euery mā possessing,
yet seemed not to possesse at all: Clergy
men and magistrates did liue by
their reuenues and pensions, Noblemen
and Gentlemen of their lands,
husbandmen by their farmes, merchants
and citizens by their trade, artificers
by their craft and handyworke;

all of them making a perfect consent
and harmony of the gouernement of a
common-wealth, in proportionable
manner with exercise of religion, and
due administration of iustice in time
of peace, and necessary prouision for
warre, which the Prince is to prouide
for in the two seasons of peace and
warre. And from the Prince as from a
liuely fountaine all vertues did descend
into the bosome of that common-wealth,
his worthy counsellors
were with the magistrates as ornaments
of the Law, and did ministrate
(like Phisitions to the weale publicke)
good potions for the ridding out of all
distemperate humors: euery man was
contented to liue in his vocation with
true obedience: so that experience it
selfe made manifest proofe, Iustice to
be ordained of God, as a measure amongst
men one earth, to defend the
feeble from the mighty, for the suppressing
of iniuries, and to roote out

the wicked from among the good, prescribing
how to liue honestly, to hurt
no man wilfully, and to render euery
man his due, carefully furthering what
is right, and prohibiting what is
wrong: to which intent euery man did
endeuor himselfe for the good of the
cōmon-wealth, obseruing concord, &
all things in the course of traffike were
caried with an equalitie, free lending
was vsed, hospitality maintained, commiseration
towards the poore was exercised,
and loue which is the very
summe and substance of the Law, did
flourish to the generall comfort of a
Christian society.
            But since the accursed comming of
this hell hound, the concord is broken,
charity is growne cold, inequality
is crept in, by falsifying our measure:
the generall rule, Do as thou wouldest
be done vnto, is broken, free lending is
banished, oppression must needs flourish,
and no man seemeth to be contented

to liue in his vocation, as
though Pride sitting vpon the highest
degree, did contend with Ambition
for preheminence. Briefe, our common-weale
will in time be more like a
prison, where this beast with his adherents
liueth like a Iaylor, with his family
in pleasure and wealth, whiles all
other weepe and smart for it. Auarice
found out this monster, which nourisheth
idlenesse, and idlenesse is the
bringer forth of euils.
            Our society and weale publicke is
furnished with sixe necessary things,
namely diuine seruice, iudgement,
armes, riches, arts and sustenance, all
which are brought out of their due
course and proportionable order, and
those that haue the managing thereof
as Clergy men, Magistrates, Noblemen,
Merchants, Artificers and Husbandmen,
and such as are comprehended
vnder these, cannot execute their
charge according to their profession.

For behold the insinuating dealings
which this monster vseth with some of
the better sort, and his cruell proceedings
with the inferiour.
            He giueth them ability to destroy
one another, and many times the seuen
leane kine of Pharao do deuoure
the seauen fat kine, and yet proue no
whit fatter themselues.
            Some neglecting their charge, haue
their minds filled with worldly cares,
and ability giuen them with Simon
Magus to buy that which ought to be
freely giuen, which maketh them to
sell that which they shold freely giue.
            Others he maketh with Ananias &
Saphira to dissemble with God, tempring
the holy Ghost, boasting of false
liberality, being like cloudes and wind
without raine.
            Hospitality is by his meanes turned
into Iacke Droms entertainement, and
and Laban and Nabal, two Churles
in the Scripture mentioned, hauing

but one name preposterously taken, as
being too many, are propagated into
an infinite number.
            Others he causeth to measure Gods
blessings by worldly riches, and with
the kite to mount exceeding high in
outward shew, but neuer looking vpwards
to heauen, hauing the eyes of
their minde set and fixed below on
worldly things.
            Others do blow with him the windy
bellowes of the organs of vaine
glory, and without his helpe they
should giue but little sound.
            Others do neglect to relieue the
poore, and put innocent Ioseph (being
in prison) in obliuion.
            Others are by his meanes so inticed
with the feeding of delicacies, that setting
all religion aside with Festus, they
accuse Saint Paule of madnesse, euen
in the presence of Agrippa.
            
            Others he maketh with Lot to be so
loytering and trifling in Sodome, that

the Angell is faine to plucke them out
with violence, when God is pleased to
saue them.
            Others he maketh to go loaden
with gold and siluer, gauling their
soules vntill they be despoiled thereof
by death, and cast into the loathsome
stable of damnation: like vnto the
mules of Princes, going all the day
loaden with treasure, and couered
with faire clothes vntill they be shaken
off into a sorry stable.
            Others he maketh voide of all charity,
which will lend no money but for
gaine, vnto such men as they esteeme
to be good, but nothing to the poore
man, although the pawne of the
Gospell doth assure them, that God
is the poore mans surety, and will for
his promise sake pay all mens debts,
though the men be neuer so vnthankfull.
            Others he maketh to vse the Lawes
like vnto cobwebs, to catch onely litle

flies, and to haue ability to purchase
dignities.
            Others haue ability giuen them by
the multiplicities of sutes grounded
vpon bonds and counterbonds, to accumulate
riches, and to incorporate
farmes, and to make vnlawfull inclosures
of grounds, to the decay of manie.
            Others he causeth to account nothing
to be science or learning, but
that wherewith money is to be gotten
to feede him withall, because they find
that a lūpish blockhead churle, which
hath no more wit then an asse, shall
haue many wise and good men in subiection
and bondage, onely for this,
because he hath a great heape of gold
and siluer.
            Others he causeth to put the kings
daughter in danger, feeding thereuppon
with this dragō to the kings great
losse and hinderance, if he haue present
occasion to vse his reasure, which by

the meanes of the dragons taile may
be exported.
            Others hauing of this meate belonging
vnto the king, do detaine the
same into their hands to please this
monster, and to share the booty betweene
them.
            Others he causeth to put the king
in remembrance of certaine olde
mo
                  •
               th-eaten lawes, of euery man forgotten,
as a way vnto him honorable
and profitable, hauing a shew and colour
of Iustice, and all this for to be
meate for him to feede vpon.
            Others haue a present greater
abilitie giuen them to liue licenciously,
following whores, harlots,
wine-tauernes, and many other vnlawfull
games, to their vtter destruction.
            Others do augment by his meanes
the number of vagabonds, which
through idlenesse the (root of all mischief)
do commit robbery and theft,

and then are they destroyed by the
gallowes.
            Others he causeth to spend their
stockes by prodigall riot, sumptuous
fare, and strange and proud new fangles
in their apparell, growing insolent,
and riding a gallop with a
lame jade, and yet are they too,
soone destroyed by warre or otherwise.
            Others hauing spent their goods,
he beateth with the whores and harlots
(like to the prodigall sonne) out of
doores, when they haue no more for
him to feede vpon.
            Others he maketh to whet their
kniues vpon a chalke stone, neuer sharping
them, spending their time and
dulling their wits, with the vse of dicing
and carding, when the boxe
doth carrie away the gaines on both
sides.
            Others hauing deuoured and consumed
by his meanes all what they

could come by, or had about them, do
creepe out like the vermine out of the
nut, and then are they but newly
borne.
            Others he maketh not to be contented
to liue idle thēselues like dorrers of
that which others haue laboured for,
polling and shauing their tenants to
the quicke: but to carry about with
them at their tailes a great flocke or
traine of followers: which being turned
off, when he hath vndermined
their maisters liuing, become vnthrifty,
and hauing neuer learned any
craft whereby to get their liuing, fall a
stealing, & are by the gallowes cut off,
if by warres they suffer not a commendable
death.
            Others he maketh to be like raging
and roaring Lions, spoyling and deuouring
all that they can catch or
come by.
            Others haue ability giuen them to
be like vnto great flouds and swelling

riuers, when they ouerflow their channels,
and do breake through their
bankes, by reason of their raging and
violent streame, hurting what they
find in their way, polling and pilling
the richesse and substance of the silly
weake and poore, filling their purses
with the bloud of innocents, and building
their houses and dignities by the
destruction of others.
            Others he maketh wealthy and rich,
and like sheepe and kine which are
put into pasturs to be prepared for the
shambles, or like oxen wearing the
garland against the day of their slaughter.
            
               Hercules his exploit in killing the
Serpent Hydras was great, because it
had many heads, and after the amputation
of one, another did arise: But
the heads of this monster do multiply
without that any be cut off, and those
that are infected therwith, are as swelling
monsters, like vnto those that are

diseased with the dropsie, which the
more they drinke, the more increaseth
their desire of drinking.
            Some he causeth with Sampson to
discouer the secret of their strength,
vnto Dalilah, and before they do perceiue
the same, their lockes are shorne
off suddenly, and their strength is taken
away.
            Others he causeth to bestow all
their wealth vpon the opinion of men,
in gemmes and precious stones, as fit
meate and commodious for him to
feede vpon, in hope that the folly of others
shall pay for all: wherby he bringeth
some to destruction; for these
things increasing and not wearing away,
neither being consumed, must of
necessitie consume others.
            Others he causeth to deuoure one
another, and by his posteriors he doth
auoide them both as excrements.
            
               Diana is preuented to cause Acteon
to be deuoured of his owne

dogges. Hero and Leander may drown
themselues without an Ocean. For this
monster is the right firebrand which
Samson put betweene the foxes tailes
to burne the rickes and standing corn,
with the vineyardes and oliues. For
the world consisting of strife, warre,
and discord, must needes bring a confusion,
and fall into wasting, spoiling
and destroying, when this monster
doth augment the causes thereof.
            Consider then, how iustice and religion
can flourish? the one shewing
vs how we ought to liue in this life,
and the other teaching vs of the life to
come.
            Will not religion suffer shipwrack
in time, when charitie decayeth and
the bonds of loue are broken, and diuersities
of opinions are the causes of
Schismes? Shal I with the Philosophers
describe iustice to be of foure sorts:
Celestiall, Naturall, Ciuill and Iudiciall:
I shall but knocke at a deafe mans

doore: yet in hope of the antiquitie
thereof, which (as Cicero saith) will
make the same flourish, I demaund
where Celestiall iustice (which is the
perfect consideration and dutie to
God) is found, seeing that Naturall
iustice, which all men should haue amongst
themselues by nature, is banished,
which was the cause that Ciuill
iustice was made, grounded vpon the
law of nature, the statutes of the people,
the consultation of the Senators, or
the authoritie of graue and wise men,
as the deuice of Princes, whereupon
also Iudiciall iustice dependeth, for the
commoditie of the common-wealth.
In regard whereof we are in hope that
one day this monster shall be destroyed.
For the better accōplishmēt wherof,
I would our images of Iudges were
erected againe, hauing neither hands
nor eyes. O Manlius Torquatus who
shall imitate thee in the execution of
of iustice, not sparing thine owne son?
            
               
The members of our common-wealth
which haue the managing of
the naturall and artificiall riches, are
dealt withall in most strange and subtill
manner by this monster, which
hath his principall delight therefore
to feede vpon them, & with his scornfull
looke, recreating his mind with
the internal miserie of the mind of his
leaguors, and with the externall calamity
of the body, & inward troubles of
the mind of others, he beareth a wonderfull
sway.
            Those that be in league with him, &
become miserable in mind, he haled
with a cable rope of vnsatiable desires,
causing thē to make no period or comma
frō the highest Zodiacke or Climate
to the lowest Centre, & to be more foolish
thē 
               Tantalus, amidst the water dying
of thirst, obtaining with Mydas the
transmutation of all things they touch
into gold, & staruing for want of food:
for they make by his instigation of

abundance, indigence, to the end that
by possessing more, they should haue
lesse, as not hauing a hart giuē thē (as
the wisemā saith) to enioy their wealth
            He maketh them thinke with the
Ape that is tyed to the clogge, that he
keepeth the clog, & not the clog him,
for they keepe not their riches, but riches
keepeth them, and entangleth
their minds.
            He maketh them like vnto the Asse
which carrieth meate for his maisters
belly, & the clothes for his backe, yet
himselfe is contented to feede vpon
grasse, and to weare a haire skinne, for
miserie hath assaulted their soules.
            He maketh them like vnto the Indian
Ants or Emets, who gather the gold
and keep it, although they cannot vse
it, and to hunt after goods, graunting
them onely the sight, and not the vse
thereof: he maketh their riches to increase,
as though he would make
them contented, seeming to quench

the fire by casting oyle into it, and making
them more couetous.
            He causeth diuerse to get their
goods fraudulently, and by taking of
forfeitures, which maketh them to
hide their treasure, or to purchase lāds
therewith: when as their heires shall
vnthritily spend that, which they haue
vnlawfully gotten.
            Some he maketh like vnto the
wolues of Syria, which delight to bark
against the Moone, spending their
time about nothing, and entertaining
Podagra, for the most part of the yere.
            He caused him that did dreame to
haue spent a great summe of money in
a banquet, to haue so strong an imagination,
that by the apprehension therof,
thinking the same to be true, went
to hang himselfe most desperately, hauing
bought for the purpose a two penie
halter, and being saued from hanging
by the meanes of his friends
which did cut the halter, would notwithstanding

make his friends pay for
that halter.
            He caused the vnthriftie sonne to
hang himselfe, that gaping for his fathers
death for to enioy the goods of
this nature, became desperate vpon
the witches declaration, that his father
should yet liue thirtie yeares.
            He caused that miser (who hauing
hid his treasure in a hollow tree, and
finding the same taken away) to hang
himselfe, changing his treasure with
the halter that a poore man left: who
by the finding of this treasure was saued
from hanging, being through the
cruell dealings of others become desperate.
            Some he causeth to haue all their
wealth in paper and inke, or parchment,
which they accompt as precious
as the golden fleece, multiplying
the same in their imagination vntill
they die, when as the debtors haue of
a long time bene insoluent, and they

deceiued with false pleasure, like vnto
those who hiding their gold in the
ground do depriue themselues of the
vse of it, hoping for ioy: when as the
gold hauing bene stolen and they ignorant
thereof, dye ten yeares after,
and all that ten yeares that they liued
after the money was stolen, haue fed
themselues with a vaine conceipt.
            Others he maketh to grow and
spread as great oakes full of branches,
by whose dropping he destroyeth and
suffocateth the young little sprigs.
            Others he causeth to be more doggish
then the dogs themselues, which
will sooner licke the vlcers and sores of
Lazarus, then they will giue any releefe
to the poore.
            Others he causeth to sel their lands
and goods, and to liue obscurely, like
vnto the staring owle, which will not
looke vpon the bright sunne.
            Others he maketh to seeme that
which they are not, like vnto the hypocrites
               
which are as a wooden leg set to
the body, being no member thereof.
            Others he maketh like vnto madde
men, desiring nothing so much as to
get water, by reason of their excessiue
distemperature, when as there is nothing
so much tormenting them; as
the abundance of riches.
            Others he maketh like vnto the
Moone when she is at the full, and
then farthest from the sunne of whom
she hath her light: and so by increasing
their riches, remoueth them farther
from God and godlinesse.
            Others which be leane, like vnto the
henne which daily did lay an egge, or
in poore estate did good deedes and
were vertuous, he causeth to become
fat, leauing the laying of egges, and
to become wealthie and vitious.
            Others he maketh like hogges to
feed vpon acornes vnder the oake, and
in steed to looke thankefully vpward,
to deuoure the garment of him

that feedeth them.
            Others he causeth to be like vnto
the fawning Spaniell, which oftentimes
fetcheth his maisters gloue, in
hope to change it for a better morsell:
doing a small pleasure, to the end they
might reape a greater aduantage.
            Others he maketh to be like flouds,
which send their waters into the sea,
and leaue the dry land (which is thirstie)
vnwatered, bestowing or leauing
their goods vnto those that need them
not.
            Others are exalted like vnto the Iuie
sticking to the boughes of trees,
and yet by an ouerhard embracing do
hinder the growing of the trees, making
meane men to oppresse their
betters, by whose meanes they haue
bene aduanced.
            Others he maketh to liue idle, and
their braines to become a shop for the
Diuels Alchemy, sowing tares amongst
the wheat, whiles men are asleepe, setting

with the traiterous seruant, the
doore open to the theefe.
            Others he maketh to thinke that
the increase of riches commeth by
their owne meanes: whereas with king
Kanutus who in this Iland would haue
commaunded the waters, they should
learne, that they were commaunded
by the heauenly power.
            Others he maketh like vnto the two
theeues of Esops fable, the one stealing,
and the other the receiuer or
conueyer.
            His strength lyeth chiefly in his
taile: for triall whereof, euen for his recreation
and sport, after a full stomack,
he will many times encounter with
great Elephants, clapping his taile about
their mil-post legges, and neuer
leauing them vntil he haue felled their
vnweildie bodies to the ground.
            But behold his subtill proceedings,
for he will not onely change colours
with the Camelion, but also weepe for

their ouerthrowe with the Crocodiles
teares, when as hee intended to
make them instruments to serue his
turne.
            With the wild boare and swine,
which are wont to eate and destroy all
other corne, he will beware of bearded
wheate, because of the prickie beards
which do hurt him, as the authoritie
of great men. Yet sometimes like the
boare franking in his stye, he will consume
men of many miles off, by the
means of his leaguors and attendants,
whereby he knoweth the lands and abilities
of noble men and gentlemen,
yeoman and husbandmen, and here
he will gobble vp a whole towne, and
there a goodly parke, here a Lordship
or Manor, and there a most pleasant
wood.
            Some he causeth to weaue continually
Penelopes cloath, vndoing by
night that which they made in the day,
and loosing one way that which they

get another way.
            Others he setteth on Icarian wings
with waxe, and maketh them to flie euen
aboue the cloudes, when as the
waxe by the heate of the sunne dissoluing,
they are drowned vnawares.
            Others that vpon pleasure entertaine
him, and haue taken him vp out
of the snow, being almost dead with
the snake of AEsope, do find him readie
to bite of their throate in processe
of time.
            Others he causeth to serue his turn,
whose labour like vnto the Cats paw,
he maketh to serue as the Ape did, to
take the chesnuts out of the fire for
his owne vse.
            Others he maketh with the hauke
to mount so high, trusting to their
wings and other mens feathers, that
they lose themselues, and their wit and
wisedome is ouercome.
            Others he maketh so poore, that they

are alwaies in prison, forth-comming,
but neuer comming forth.
            Others he causeth alwaies to be
waited on by Serieants, and their
clokes cannot take hold at a butchers
hooke, but they imagine that the Serieants
Mace taketh them by the
backe.
            Others he playeth withall like the
Cat with the mouse for a time for to
eate her vp, or like the flie about the
candle, and in the end are brought to
destruction.
            Others he maketh like vnto AEsops
Iay, clad with the feathers of other
birds, which being discouered and
stript of all, for a reward are throughly
scorned, and turned from their scarlet
Gownes, into blacke threed-bare
cloakes.
            Others he maketh like vnto bondmen
and slaues, that though they toile
and labour neuer so much, all is for
their maisters, and they get nothing

for themselues.
            He causeth Mariners to conspire against
their ships, and the diuell Bommery
to arise to boare holes to make
them sinke and perish.
            He maketh many owners of ships,
and by their discord to destroy shipping.
For he is like vnto the worme
called of Plinie Teredo, that breedeth
in timber, which being touched or
handled seemeth gentle and soft, and
yet hath so hard teeth that he destroyeth
all manner of wood.
            He draweth with the Lady Claudia,
the ship wherein the idoll of the Goddesse
Bona is, and maketh that the
Mariners (like vnto the young men)
not once do stirre.
            He causeth the water to get in secretly,
and to increase by the Pumpes
of their shippes, so that both they and
their ships are drowned.
            He causeth many apprentises to become
vntimely maisters, whē as swimming

with other mens bladders, they
are soone drowned.
            He maketh them to spoile their
maisters occupation and their owne,
and not to be able to liue by that they
were bred vnto.
            He maketh the husbandman vnable
to liue by his farme, and giueth ability
vnto others to incorporate them
to the decay of husbandry.
            He maketh sheepe to become deuourers
of men, destroying the lustie
husbandmen which are alwaies the
best souldiers.
            He maketh the husbandman to
make money of his woods and trees,
in proyning his old trees, and neuer
to mipe or graffe young settes, so that
the woods do daily decay, and the
trees dye within few yeares.
            He maketh them to sell their
croppes halfe for nought, and to buye
such things deare as they haue neede
of.
            
               
He will like a thorne-bush succour
and shelter a poore silly sheepe in
some storme or tempest a litle while:
but when she departeth from the
bush, keep backe a peece of her fleece,
and that so often vntill all be consumed.
            He bringeth with the Bee sweete
hony in his mouth, but a very sharpe
sting in his taile.
            The horse of Gargantua had
not so much strength in his taile
as he hath, for the same being pricked
of flies, did beate downe with
his taile, all the trees of a great
wood. But this Dragon by the
meanes of his taile causeth others to
transport whole woods, with trees,
houses and lands into forreine countries.
            He maketh the prosperitie of
common-wealthes to be like vnto the
grasse on the house top, which for
lacke of roote withereth afore it can

grow vp to be mowne, and the Princes
bare of flesh, and voyd of strength,
like vnto harts that can find no pasture,
for the common-wealthes treasure
(which he transporteth) is accounted
theirs.
            He is the cause that the kings treasure
is like water powred into a siue or
basket, which presently runneth out,
and is neuer filled.
            By the meanes of his taile he maintaineth
a league with forreine nations,
and causeth them to serue his
turne, by bringing in superfluous commodities
at a deare rate, and they to
feede vppon our natiue soile, to the
common-wealthes destruction.
            He doth falsifie our weight and
measure, and bringeth thereby inequality,
to our ouer-great hinderance,
making of money a merchandize.
            He carieth out our treasure in bullion
and money, empouerishing our
commonweale, in giuing vs chalke for

cheese, making vs like vnto AEsops
dog, going ouer a bridge to snatch at
the shadow of the flesh, loosing the
flesh it selfe.
            He causeth vs to spend farre aboue
our reuenues, and maketh vs to buy
more then we sell, and to sell our home
commodities good cheape, and to
pay deare for the forreine commodities,
all tending to our destruction.
            He feedeth vppon both kinds of
commodities, and maketh the husbandman
vnable to liue by his farme,
and the merchant by the trade of our
owne commodities.
            He bringeth inequality betweene
the estimation of the naturall riches
and the artificiall riches, and a great
part of our wealth to be imaginatiue.
            He giueth ability vnto landed men
to incorporate more lands and farmes
conuerting arable ground into pasture
to the decay of husbandry, and destruction
of souldiers.
            
               
He giueth ability to the grower, not
to haue cause to bring his corne or
cattell to the market, but rather to engrosse
more, and to sell them deare, or
to haue it transported vnto other nations.
            He is the cause of dilapidations of
cities and townes, and depopulations
of inhabitants, with the decay of their
occupations and handiworke.
            He gnaweth the poore artificer to
the bones, and sucketh out the bloud
and marrow from him, feeding on him
most greedily.
            He causeth by the incorporation of
many farmes into few mens hands, the
kings subsidy much to decrease, and
the kings rewards or recompenses to
be supplied diuerse wayes.
            He is like Naa
                     •
                  
                the Ammonite
warring against the men of Iabes Gilead,
who would not raise his siege, but
vpon condition that he might thrust
out all their right eyes, for he putteth

out the right eyes of the iudgement
of gouernors, in the course of politike
gouernement, to bring commonweales
to destruction.
            He is the cause of rebellion and
variance in countries, which many
times is imputed vnto the gouernours
thereof, and maketh men generally
vnable to liue by the naturall or artificiall
riches whereunto they were
borne or bred.
            He maketh in some barren and vnfruitfull
yeares many thousands of
people to starue for hunger, and yet
diuerse mens barnes to be well furnished
with corne.
            He setteth vp pride and new fangled
apparell, by the meanes of the
merchant that bringeth in those commodities
which please mens humors,
for pride doth not measure wealth and
prosperity by her owne commodities,
but by the misery and incommoditie
of other.
            
               
He giueth ability to intemperance
the daughter of excesse, which maketh
men slaues to the mouth and belly,
bringing them both wayes to destruction.
            He maketh money to be the creede
of the world, and perswaded men to
seeke first money, and that honesty
then will follow of course, and that
learning and wisdom is nothing without
it.
            He causeth men to commence sutes
in law for euery trifle, and exaction
and extortion to flourish, relying vpon
the penalties and forfeitures of bonds
and counterbonds.
            He striketh out with the rauen, first
of all the sheepes eyes, and so bringeth
to passe that men cannot see the way
to escape his tyranny.
            He is the right Cannibal, feeding
onely vpon raw flesh, especially of
men, and like an Apothecary he couereth
his bitter bils with some sweete

substance, to make them to go downe
the easier.
            He maketh men to fall into the
mire, & the more they stirre, the more
are they defiled and brought into his
danger: for like a bitter and pinching
blacke frost, he killeth and destroyeth
the tender, sweete and beautifull blossomes.
            He will not haue men to depend vpon
the reward of God, but vpon the
reward of man, for charity and free
lending he causeth to be banished,
and preferreth the brittle mettal before
the eternall treasure.
            He maketh the hearts of his leaguors
not to be inflamed with a true
and sincere loue to God: but to be
wide open vnto all temptations, like
vnto a pot full of sweete liquors ouer
the fire (which not boyling) are corrupted
by flies, and they are become
the wolues of our Iland, since that all
other wolues haue bene destroyed: for

they deuour both leane and fat
sheepe.
            He maketh men generally like vnto
the decreasing moone, hauing here opē
side hanging downward, & their harts
set onely on worldly things, whereas
with the moone increasing & open towards
heauē, they should be gathering
light, and not step aside to gather feathers,
and leaue to runne the golden
game of inestimable value.
            He maketh men to be discontented,
and to iudge as bondmen do of
those that are free, neuer being contented
with their state, alwayes beholding
how much inferior they are vnto
others.
            And to conclude, whereas euery well
gouerned common-wealth is to keepe
a certaine equality cōcerning the trafficke
betweene them and other countries,
& a concord amongst the members
of their common-wealth, when euery
member thereof liueth contentedly

in his vocation, this dragon
hath brought in discord and inequalitie.
And if this Gangrena be not cured,
it will in time subuert the whole
state of the realme, for Synons horse
was not so dangerous to the Troyans,
as this dragon is to our common-wealth.
            Conceiue now (I pray you) in your
imagination on the one side, the cruelty
of this monster, and his subtile
practises and dealings, and on the other
side the meekenesse and innocency
of the creatures deuoured by him
and by his meanes. And because the
consideratiō there of wold amaze your
iudgement, do but remember the tender
and inexplicable loue of a father
towards his child, and especially of a
most victorious king towards his faire
& peereles daughter: the bright splendent
beames of whose angelicall beauty,
do dim my sight, and captiuate my
vnderstanding. Hide Absolon thy

cleare guilt tresses, and you Hester
your meeknes & beauty, giuing place
to this Virgin and noble creature; you
Penelope, Marcia, Lauine and Helleni,
make no comparison with her: neither
you Lucrece and Polixene, Dido,
Laodomia or Tisbe, that haue bought
your loue so deare; or thou Cleopatra
with all thy passions, you all may be
handmaids vnto her: for her melodious
voyce doth command the heathen
Gods, Bacchus, Pan, Ceres & Minerua,
and by her sweete breath a second life
is inspired into you all. Venus her selfe
giueth her the preheminence, for
the strength of Cupide without her
countenance will soone decay, his
firy darts will soone be cold, and his
wings loose their viuacity. Mars, Pallas
and Bellona cannot subsist, if this
Virgin should withdraw her fauour,
she remaineth still a Virgin immaculate,
though all the world seemeth to
be contaminated by her, for her constancy

is singular, she is bright shining
as the Moone, although the Eclipse
doth darken her for a time, to
make her brightnesse to appeare more
glorious: and albeit she receiued her
light from the transparent Sunne,
yet in a manner she seemeth to be
predominant, and by a voluntarie
loue to command, for she is the rose
of the field, and the lilly of the vallies,
whose fragrant smell as the sauour
of good ointments poured out, doth
reioyce and make glad the king, and
maketh him runne after her, for his
soule loueth her, and he hath brought
her into his chamber, where like a
bundle of mirrhe she lyeth betweene
his breasts, his left hand is vnder
her head, and his right hand doth
embrace her, for she is faire and
pleasaunt. She came accompanied
with a Lambe representing her innocencie,
her amiable eyes the
messengers of her perplexed heart,

distilling salt teares, did wound & penetrate
the cruellest mind: the lockes
of her golden hanging haire did adorne
her as a triumphant Goddesse:
her yuory white teeth stood like a flock
of sheepe in good order: from her scarlat
lips did drop the sweetenesse of hony
combes, for hony and milke was
vnder her tongue, and the sauour of
her garments was odoriferous as the
smell of Lebanon: her straight snow
white necke like a prety towre of iuory
was compassed with chaines of orientall
pearle, wearing the garland of her
virginity of most precious stones, as a
royall Diademe: and yet from her
two breasts (which were like two yong
Roes that are twinnes feeding among
the lillies) two liuely fountaines of
celestiall water did runne, nourishing
an infinite number: her cheekes were
as a bed of spices, and as sweet floures
delectable: the ioyntes of her fingers
were delicate, making the

whitenesse of her hands to haue a
strong attraction. For in briefe such
was her perfection, that Dame Nature
was ashamed to see her selfe ouercome
and vanquished of her owne worke:
her admirable body was couered with
a garment of white silke Damaske
hanging loose about her, embrodered
with letters of gold Patientia victrix,
wherein the Sunne with the assistance
of AEolus did seeme to play
her illustration, with the repercussion
of the varietie of colours of the garments
of the Virgines following her.
            Consider now the agony of her
mind tempered with magnanimity,
notwithstāding the aggrauating therof
by the lamentation of her associats,
and although the lot cast for her was
not so fatall as the rash vow of Iphtah
was to his daughter: yet she had
greater cause to go to the mountaines
with her companions, to lament and
bewalie her virginitie, because the

deuouring of the dragon was farre
more crueller then the fire wherewith
Iptahs daughter is sayd to haue
bene consumed; when as this Virgin
being brought vp like a kings daughter
in all pleasures and delicacies, was
brought to the sight of this cruell
monster, and that she was ready to
abandon her ornaments, preparing
her gentle body to his cruelty with a
perfect patience.
            If Griselde was worthy of commendation,
and obtained the name of
Patient, for being aduanced by the
Marquesse of Saluzze, who tooke her
from a poore estate to be his wife, and
afterwards to try her, made a shew to
relinquish her againe, vnder colour
that he would haue maried another,
which (vnknowne vnto her) was her
owne daughter had by him, and thereupon
depriued her of all her ornaments;
if she (I say) was renowned
for enduring all this patiently,

much more without all comparison
is the patience of this rare Virgin to
be had in perpetuall remembrance,
who abandoning all her peculiar prerogatiues
and pleasures, suffered her
body to be expounded to the cruelty
of this monster. And the greater was
the exployt of Saint George in deliuering
her, who like a valiant champion
being arriued into this Iland, and vnderstanding
of the danger she was in,
came with a Princely resolutiō to deliuer
her, mounted on a pyball horse of
seuerall colours, armed like a conquerour,
to fight the cōbat with the shield
of faith, hauing on the breast-plate of
righteousnesse, the helmet of saluatiō,
his loynes girt about with verity, and
being adorned with the liuery of the
Crosse, did with the sword of the Spirit
destroy this monster, and deliuered
this Indian Phenix & this Iland, of that
contagion & abominable hell hound,
being not moued or amazed at his

terrible sight and fashion; neither regarding
those that were in league with
this dragon, or tooke vpon them to
speake in his defence.
            What vnspeakeable ioy came therby,
let the consideration rauish your
mind, and ease me of the amplification
thereof. For I must now exactly
describe vnto you this dragon concerning
his compounded body, as I
haue already done his properties, and
the effects of his mischieuous condition
and qualities.
            His ordinary mansion (I haue told
you) to be about the middle part of the
city, which is beset with many grashoppers
round about, without any
green fields wheron to feed, for they be
not wild, sauage, or noysome, diuerse
of those that be in league with the dragon
are like toades, which drinke the
iuice of grapes so fast, till ouercharged
with the broath, their bowels do burst,
casting their venimous poyson and infecting

many, and yet the aire is soft,
temperate and gentle.
            Here may you behold this hideous
monster, swelling euery moneth bigger
one then another, with his fierie
flaming eyes, seeming to cast fire at euery
moment, by the means of his tri
               
                  •••
               ted
toung like vnto a Turkish dart,
his body vnweildy like an Elephāt, but
his taile nimble, & continually wauering
& inconstant, for therin consisteth
his greatest strength & actiuity, to the
commonwealths destruction: and the
same is marked with the new Moon of
the Turkes, like vnto the letter C, and
his forehead with an F, like a fellon, he
walketh vpon his foure Harpion legs,
like a theefe closely to surprise any mā
either by night or day: for he omitteth
no time, albeit he seemeth with the index
of the dyall not to moue, when he
is continually moouing, and stirred in
such sort, that when men begin to perceiue
his motion, and pretend to

runne from him: he doth so allure
them, that the more they runne, the
more he seemeth to follow them, as
the moone doth to the little children,
whereby his motion is the lesse regarded.
He rideth vpō the wings of time,
and by imagination hasteneth the
course thereof: so that he that sitteth
surest may be ouerthrowne, for he
hath two wings to fly withall, the one
hauing an internall strength from the
mind, and the other an externall from
the bodie: that of the mind is (as it
were) couered with a vaile: but the other
is plaine and naked: howbeit both
of them are indented with seuerall
braunches, wherewith according to
the Adage, the Diuell seemeth to be
God to some bodie, and maketh those
to speak in his defence. For in abusing
iustice to the hurt of many, he seemeth
to do good vnto some particular: these
therefore (although they be ashamed
of him) do allow him as a necessarie

member in a common-wealth, like vnto
the hangman which for executions
sake must needes be had. Others doe
compare him to be admitted, as the
husbandman suffereth many weedes
to grow in his ground which he likes
not, and that so he is to be tollerated;
when as in the like manner they might
speake for murtherers and theeues,
and say that the naturall rule (Do as
thou wouldest be done vnto,) is to be taken
generall without any exception
in all things and in all respects: whereby
the Magistrate must of loue spare
the conuicted malefactor: for if he
were in the malefactors case, he wold
be glad to be spared and pardoned
himselfe: albeit they would not be
bound by this rule, to giue all their
goods vnto another, seeing their gripple
mind is such, that they would willingly
an other man should giue them
all his substance. They would be contented
to haue mony freely lent them,

yet they would lend none freely themselues,
for (say they) I must make a
gaine of my money, which is as lawfull
for me to take, as others do of the
rents of their houses, reuenues of
lands, or gaines of corne and cattell,
or wares and merchandizes: whereas
they do not consider, that money was
ordained as a pledge or right betwixt
man and man, and in contracts and
bargaining a iust measure and proportion,
which measure is by them
falsifyed: and this monster causeth
them to incorporate the same, so that
no man can come by it without their
consent and paying for it, falsifying
and altering the same. And yet can
they find fault, and hold for very absurd,
if vpon plentie or scarcitie of
corne, or abundance of cloth, or scarcitie
thereof, the measure or yard
should be altered vpon all occasions,
considering that a measure ought to
remaine at a certaintie. But what cannot

this dragon bring to passe? when
he will seeme to be a protectour of orphanes,
as though Magistrates or tutors
could not prouide for them, for
vnlesse he should carie some shew of
good, he could neuer haue raigned so
long: he seemeth to fauour iustice,
for if any man borrow money for an
other, and do enter his bond for it,
and take of him the like that receiued
the money, he will see him that borrowed
the money recouer that by
lawe ex damno habito which he is
damnified, albeit there be meanes
otherwise to satisfie him. Againe,
if a shopkeeper lend money freely
to his neighbour till such a day, hauing
then occasion to vse it at some
faire to lay it out in wares, if he breake
touch, he helpeth the shopkeeper
with all extremitie vnder colour of
iustice ex lucro cessante, to recouer so
much as he sustained losse for want
of his money to lay out; as if at an

other time the other could not lend
him the like summe of money, and
make him recompence another way.
Whereas these euents come to passe
vpon abuses which this monster hath
brought in, hauing with the operation
of his taile (being a very Canker) transported
the moneys of our Iland, and
within our land altered the nature and
valuation of the money, making one
hundred pounds, to be one hundred
and ten pounds, and hauing ouerthrowne
charitie and free lending.
Hence did the cause proceede, that the
statute lawes were repealed, which
did banish this monster, for therein it
was like vnto the water which the
more it is pent, the more it swelleth,
and like a theefe, who when he is locked
in at the prison doore, breaketh
out at the windowes, falling to his
shifts, subtilties and deuises. For if
money had remained plentifull with
vs, this monster could neuer haue preuailed,

nor charitie should haue waxed
so cold, neither casuall and aduenturous
bargaines would haue bene so
hunted after. And to conclude, no law
can do good which admitteth an inconuenience
as a necessarie euill.
            I am not ignorant, that with a wet
finger, some do point at those that are
growne rich by the meanes of the feeding
of this monster, which maketh
me to remember a pretie historie to
my purpose. A man comming into a
certaine church, and seeing it fraught
full of images made of waxe, demanded
what might be the cause of such
an vnwoonted sight; answer was made,
that those whom these images did represent,
were certaine persons, which
on a time were saued from drowning
by calling vpon our Lady. Nay then
(quoth he againe) where be the images
of those (I pray ye) that called vpon
our Lady and were drowned notwithstanding?
So say I in this case, if

any man will set before me the instances,
and as it were the images of those
who haue fed this dragon, and yet are
not become poore: I would demaund
on the other side, that he shew foorth
the hundreds and thousands of those,
whose estates and persons he hath deuoured,
they will be found a million
for one, yea to be without all comparison:
for this monster is an actiue element
that consumeth all things.
            He demaundeth consideration for
that which is none of his owne, and
moreouer two recompences for one
entire thing: by reason whereof he
bringeth foorth inequalitie for his aduantage,
making men to forget that
euer they liued without him, by that
which they were borne or bred vnto.
But let this hideous monster be destroyed,
and euery man will returne
vnto his quietnesse, and liue within
his bounds and calling, vsing such
trade as he ought to do. Plentie will

soone increase, and money will
abound, if you take away but the
strength of his taile, and we shall feele
our libertie and deliuerance.
            Will not the daunger that the leaguors
of this Dragon do runne into,
giue them warning, when as at one
time fiue hundreth Iewes were transported
with Carons boate the ferrie
man of hell, which were slaine by
the Cittizens of Troynouant for feeding
him? Let the punishments assigned
for them, put them in feare if
they haue any feeling.
            The curse of God denounced against
them in the holy Scripture, in
Exodus 22. Leuiticus 25. Psalm. 15.
Ezechiel 18. and Luke the sixth chapter,
expounded by the auncient and
learned holy Fathers, vpon which
ground the temporall punishments
haue bene ordained against those that
should feed this monster: whereby
their condemnation appeareth.
            
               
They are diffamed persons by the
lawe, and if any man make by his last
will any goods vnto them, the testament
may be broken, neither should
they be admitted to communicate
with Christians, or enter into their
congregation, or offer any oblation.
            When they are dead, they should
not be buried in Christian buriall, and
if they be, the doers thereof are excommunicated:
for they are not worthie
of such reuerence, which dumbe
beastes, and euen a silly Asse (who like
vnto Balaams Asse was inspired) did
manifest, for one of these leaguors
being departed out of this world, a
certaine zealous & godly parson wold
not bury him, notwithstanding his
great riches, whereof part was offered
vnto the parson to the same effect.
Wherupon his friends vnderstanding
that the parson had an asse which
brought his books from his parsonage
daily to the church, being a pretie distance

in sunder, they politikly desired
to obtaine this fauour of him, that as
his asse did daily cary his seruice books
to the church, so it would please him,
that for this one time the quicke Asse
might take pain to carie this dead asse
in a Coffin; with this condition, that
wheresoeuer the asse stayed, there the
body should be buried, perswading
themselues, that as the asse by an ordinary
course, vsed euery day to go from
the parsonage to the church with a
burden of bookes vpon his backe: so of
course he would take the same way
with this dead mans corps being chested,
euē straight to the church; which
being granted by the parson, had not
that euēt. For the asse feeling a weightier
burden vpon his back then vsually,
did seeke all the meanes to be disburdened,
running and flinging along the
streets, vntill he came to a paire of gallowes
at the townes end, and there did
neuer leaue tumbling and tossing himselfe

vpon the bare ground, till he was
clean disburdned of so miserable a carion,
leauing a sacrifice to that altar as
miraculously assigned for it: for it was
not without cause that priests were
forbiddē to giue vnto such any ghostly
comfort, but vpon euident proofe of
repentance; also that they must make
their willes without witnesse, which
wills are not of any force except satisfaction
be made, or else their goods to
be forfited to the higher powers, with
many other hard cēsures which ought
to moue any reasonable man in the obseruatiō
of so easy a comādement as to
forbeare to feed a monster vnto whom
Cerberus in hell, and all those monsters
that Hercules subdued are inferior in euill.
Alas poore creatures, how are
you tossed with the waues of care to
satisfie this dragon before you are destroyed?
you know by experience, that
the feare of death is more then death it
selfe: what shifts, deuises, or extremities

are not you driuen vnto? Aristophanes
hath painted foorth your agonies
and perplexed minds, vnder the
person of an aged mā altogether shipwracked
by fraighting with this monster,
who thinking to haue found out
the way to be eased of his slauerie, did
propound vnto Socrates this demaund:
That if he should by a witch of Thessalia,
and by her enchantments fetch the
Moone out of heauen, and bring it away,
and afterwards inclose it in a case
of glasse, and so keepe it, as if he
would keepe a flye in a boxe: Socrates
demaunding, what good that would
do him: he answered, If the Moone do
neuer rise againe, and I being constrained
to feede this monster by the
new Moone, shall be freed of that
trouble. A straunge shift, that this
poore man was driuen vnto, to plucke
by violence the Moone out of heauen
for his helpe. For in truth the witch
did her best, and beganne to

charme the Moone, which when the
leaguor of the dragon vnderstood, did
put him in such a pelting chafe, as was
wonderfull to heare: for accusing this
poore man of enchantment, at last he
went himselfe to another witch, not
onely to keepe the Moone from comming
out of heauen, but also to hasten
the course of it faster, that the monster
might be the sooner fed. Good
God what a trouble was the Moone
put vnto betweene these two witches?
What stormes and tempestes did
arise? What horrible wind did blow?
What great raine did fall? What
floudes ensued euery where? What
countreys were almost drowned and
vnder the water in many places? But
herein (say some) was the dragon to
be blamed, for troubling or oppressing
a poore man, or feeding vpon
him, which he ought to haue done
vpon the rich: for they conclude that
to be lawfull, in regard of the prohibition

of the other; as who would say,
it is not lawfull to vexe a poore man
by lawe, therefore it is lawfull to vexe
or trouble a rich man by lawe: whereas
neither rich or poore, young or old,
lowe or high, should be troubled or
vexed at all to feede this monster: for
it taketh away the chiefest comfort
of the poore, which is the quietnesse
of their minds, and deuoureth their
gaine before it can be gotten; and to
the rich it giueth abilitie to doe all
the mischiefe that can be deuised, as
I haue told you. Others say Volenti non
fit iniuria, when as money being made
a merchandize, hindreth the course
of commodities, and that euen the
politicke course of our gouernement
driueth men to feede this monster,
and for the most part vpon an imaginatiue
wealth, when by meanes of
his taile he hath transported our treasure
into forraine parts.
            Arise thou ô Prophet Daniel, and

make knowne vnto our most gracious
king the deceipts and cruelties of the
false god Bell and of this dragon. Let
the footsteppes be seene of those that
are in league with their false God
Mammon and this Dragon, in the
ashes of the efficacie of holy Scripture,
and our most wholesome lawes,
and let them be vsed as pitch, fat and
haire, to burst this Dragon in sunder.
            He is not contented with the spending
daily of twelue great measures of
fine flower, forty sheepe, and sixe great
pots of wine: but he consumeth thousands
of measures of corne, innumerable
flockes of sheep, and whole ships
lading of wines, euen with al the creatures
that haue the managing thereof:
for he doth not feede threescore & ten
priests with their wines and children
only, but an infinit number that are in
league with him and their followers,
to the commonwealths destruction.
            
               
The aspect, countenance, and behauiour
of creatures doth many times
prouoke loue towards thē. But behold
his vgly and fearfull countenance, his
ill fauored shape and cruel behauiour,
and you will wonder how it is possible
that any man can loue him.
            With that, me thought he tooke
me by the hand, and shewed me a certaine
place, where this monster stood
wallowing like a bear, which expecteth
the comming of the dogs; presently al
my sences did assaile him, Prima facie
I saw him, then I imagined him and
my fancy did delude me, as if I had
seene some satire, halfe a man & halfe a
beast, which made so deep an impression
into my memory, that by the apprehēsion
therof, I was possessed with
a great feare & ashonishment, which
made me to cry and awake from slumber,
remaining still pensiue aboue
measure: for on the one side I knowe
the passions of men and the debility of

nature, and on the other side I do consider
the difference betwixt dreames
and visions.
            Such are the naturall passions of
men, that some not fearing to fight
with the strongest and stoutest man,
will notwithstanding cry out, and
sweat at the sight of a cat, or any other
abiect creature: others are alwayes in
feare, if they be alone, and cannot abide
to haue their doores locked in priuate:
nay, some cannot endure the pointing
of a finger or any iesture towards
them, or but the rehearsing or telling
of a dreame, for they do for the time
participate so much of the melancholike
humor, that reason and discretion
is not able to conquere it: dreames
being prouoked according to the disposition
of the mind and of the body,
and dilating into fansies and illusions,
I can hardly conclude them to be visions;
for visions are really seene, and
fansies are but represented or imagined.
            
               
But howsoeuer this came to passe,
and may be importeth little, so long
as the morall of it declareth with all
the history of Saint George, wishing
with all my heart, that I might haue
seene also that valiant champion prefigured
vnto me as the dragon was,
for then no doubt the deliuerance expected
and long required would ensue;
and this my dreame (howsouer
displeasing to some) might be admitted
for a vision to the welfare
of the commonwealth.
            
               Exitus acta probat.
            
         
         
            
            A conclusion to the Christian
reader.
            COuetousnesse the roote of all euill,
brought foorth the tree of Politicall
vsury, whose roote with the body and
branches, together with their operations
and effects in the course of politicke gouernement,
we haue layed open in this
treatise vnder certaine Metaphores and
Similies, the Morall whereof we do leaue
to thy good construction and amplification.
For albeit that the substance with the
application of the effects thereof is here declared:
yet vpon due consideration many
branches more may be handled, which
the deuines at their pleasure may apply
and amplifie, for they haue the word of
God for their warrant, without which all
humane pollicy is vaine. So that as he
would be accounted foolish, that would
take vpon him to plant or set a fruitfull
tree into a vault or seller, where the Sunne
hath no operation: much more without

all comparison are those foolish, that will
seeme to set this tree of Politicall vsury in
the gouernement of any common-wealth,
seeing that the same is both depriued of the
blessings of the most glorious Sunne, and
accompanied with the heauy curse of Gods
most holy word. For with this holy word
all humane lawes should agree and concurre,
notwithstanding that the lawes are
sayd to he made according to the people of
euery countrey, and euery countrey to haue
his influences according to the climate,
whereas many of such lawes might be abolished,
if the causes of offences were preuented,
among the which vsury is the chiefest,
and giueth therefore iust cause of admiration
that polititians will any manner
of wayes suffer the same. Wise was that polititian
who perceiuing that there was not
any punishment so horrible to punish theft,
that it could keepe men from stealing,
would haue Magistrates not to be like euill
schoolemaisters, which be readier to beate
then to teach their schollers: But rather

to preuent the causes, & to prouide meanes
whereby men might get their liuing, wherby
no man should be driuē to this extreame
necessity, first to steale, and then to dye: the
chiefe cause of this necessity or pouerty is vsury,
which doth too much enrich some
few, and doth impouerish too much a great
many. So that men cannot liue contentedly
and proportionably in their vocation,
according to their profession, taking away
the chiefest comfort of the poore, which is
the quietnesse of their minds, and giuing
ability to the rich to do all the mischiefe
that can be deuised: which being duly
considered of, will no doubt in proces of
time worke effectually for the good of the
realme. Meane time I pray God that we
may all become Spirituall vsurers in the
Lord, vsing pitty and compassion towards
our neighbours, for which God himselfe
will pay vsury: to whom be all honor,
praise and glory, for euer and
euer. Amen.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   