
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  THE FLORENTINE Hiſtorie.
                  WRITTEN IN THE ITALIAN TONGVE, BY NICHOLO MACCHIAVELLI.
                  CITIZEN AND SECREtarie of Florence.
                  
                  And tranſlated into Engliſh, By T. B. Eſquire.
                  
                  LONDON Printed by T. C. for VV. P. 1595.
                  
                     NON TIBI SPIRO
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
               
                  bookplate
                  Sr. Richard Newdigate of Arbury in the County of Warwick Baronet 1709
               
            
         
         
            
            
               
                  royal blazon or coat of arms
               
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE SYR CHRISTOPHER HATTON, KNIGHT OF THE ORDER, ONE OF HER MAIESTIES PRIVIE COVNCELL, AND LORD CHANcellour of England.
            
               MY VERIE GOOD LORD, It hath bene (and yet I thinke is) an vſe allowable, to preſent thoſe whom we honour or loue, with ſuch things as either for their value be profitable, or for their noueltie pleaſing. Wanting power to performe the one, I make bold to do the other: and according to my promiſe) ſend you this old Hiſtorie newly tranſlated. Which albeit your L. hath heretofore read in the Italian toong, yet may it be, that (for varieties ſake) you will againe vouchſafe to peruſe it in our Engliſh: written by him that is all yours. Sure I am (and by reading hereof, your L. ſhall be aſſured) that neither I haue fully expreſſed the Authours conceit, nor the writer well performed his dutie. Notwithſtanding, ſith both thoſe wants may be ſupplied by your iudgement, I aduenture the Booke into your L. hand, whom I dare truſt with any pardonable error. For as I haue taken in hand this labour, more to enterteine my ſelfe, (not otherwiſe occupied) then thereby to merit your thanks, or the commendation of others: ſo doo I recommend the ſame to your L. rather to be looked on at leiſure, then as a thing of perfection worthie to be ſtudied. Yet do I thinke (and ſo do others of more iudgement) that this Hiſtorie doth equall or excell the moſt part that haue bin written: not ſo much for the order and argument of the matter, as the iuditiall diſcourſes and obſeruations of the Authour. Wherein be diſcouered the cauſes of forraine and domeſticall diſcords, the commodities and diſcommodities of treaties, and the ſecret humours of Princes: with diuerſe other things verie conſiderable, chiefly of ſuch as be called to conſultation of publike affaires & gouernment. And as the end of all Hiſtories ought be to mooue men vnto vertue, and diſcourage them from vice, ſo do I thinke, there is not any that conteineth more examples to that purpoſe, then this writer: who leauing aſide all partialitie,

and the cuſtome of thoſe that ſtudie to flatter whom they fauour, and miſreport whom they loue not, doth ſeeme greatly to follow the truth, and ſetteth forth rather the cauſes and effects of euerie action, then ouer-much extoll or diſgrace the perſons of whome the ſtorie entreateth. But (as of all other things) ſo hereof your L. can beſt iudge. Wherefore moſt humbly reaccommending to your good fauour, this poore Preſent, and my faithfull ſeruice, I take leaue. At the Court, this eight of Aprill, 1588.
            
               Your L. moſt humble and aſſured to commaund, Thomas Bedingfeld.
               
            
         
         
            
            The Proeme of the Authour.
            
               MY meaning was, at ſuch time as I determined to write the Actions of the Florentine people, both within and without the Citie, to begin my Narration from the yeare of the Christian Religion, 1444. at which time the houſe of Medici through the merits of Coſimo and Giouanni his father, aſpired to more reputation then any other in Florence. For I thought that Leonardo of Arezzo and Poggio (two excellent Historiographers) had particulerly ſet downe all things that till thoſe dayes had hapned. But hauing afterwards diligently read their writings, to ſee with what order and meanes they proceeded (to the end that following the ſame, our Historie might be by the Readers better allowed) I found that in their deſcription of the warres made by the Florentines, both againſt Princes and other forraine States, they had vſed exceeding great diligence: but of the ciuill diſcords and inward enimities, & of the effects by them brought forth, they had vtterly omitted one part, & ſo brieflie deſcribed the other, as the Readers could not thereby gather any profit or pleaſure at all: which I thinke they did either becauſe they iudged thoſe matters ſo meane as were not worthie the writing, or elſe, feared to offend the poſteritie of ſome perſons who ſhould thereby haue bene euill reported. VVhich two reſpects (be it ſpoken without offence) ſeeme to me, vtterly vnworthie men of great reputation. For if there be any thing in Histories that delighteth or teacheth, it is that, which maketh particuler deſcription. Or if any reading be profitable for men that gouerne in Common-weales, it is that, which ſheweth the occaſions of hate and faction: to the end that being warned by harme of others, they may become wiſe, and continue themſelues vnited. Alſo if euery example of Common-weales do moue the mind, thoſe we read of our Country doo moue most, and be moſt profitable. Moreouer, if the diuiſions of any Common-weale haue euer bene notable, the diuiſions of Florence are of all others moſt notable. For the most part of other Common-weales (to vs knowne) were content with one onely diuiſion, ond thereby, according to the accidents ſometimes encreaſed, and ſometimes ruined their Cities. But Florence not content with one, had many diuiſions. In Rome (as euery man knoweth) after the Kings were expulſed, diuiſion grew betweene the nobilitie and the multitude: which continued till the ruine thereof: the like hapned in Athens, and all other Common-weales which in thoſe dayes flourished. But in Florence, first the noble men became diuided among themſelues. Then the nobilitie and the people. And at last the people and the multitude. Yea many times it hapned, that one of theſe being victorious, diuided it ſelfe into two. Of which diuiſions, followed ſo many murthers, ſo many banishments, and ſo many ſubuerſions of Families, as neuer chaunced within any Citie, that can be remembred. And ſurely it ſeemeth to mee, there is nothing that witneſſeth ſo well the greatnes of our Citie, as that which dependeth vpon theſe diuiſions, being of force ſufficient to ſubuert any Citie of what greatnes or power ſo euer. Notwithſtanding our ſtate ſtill encreaſed. For ſo great was the vertue of thoſe Citizens, by their wiſedome and courage to work the aduancement of themſelues and their country, as they that hapned to eſcape ſo manifold miſchiefes, could by their vertue procure more encreaſe to the Citie, then the diſpleaſure of thoſe accidents which wrought the decaie, could decreaſe it. And withouc all doubc, if Florence had bin ſo happie, as it might vpon the deliuery thereof from the Empire, haue taken ſome forme of gouernment, which would haue holden the ſtate vnited, I know not what Common-weale either

auncient or moderne, that for vertue of Armes and induſtrie, before it could haue bene preferred. For moſt true it is, that after the Ghibilini were banished in ſo great numbers that all Toſcana and Lombardy was full of them, the Guelfi with the reſt that remayned at the warre againſt Arezzo one yeare before the iourney of Compaldino, drew out of their owne Cittie of Cittizens onely 1200. men of Armes, and 12000. footmen. After that time, in the warre againſt Filippo Viſconti Duke of Milan, hauing rather to proue induſtrie, then their owne proper Armes (for at that time they were decayed) we ſee in fiue yeares, which that warre continued, the Florentines ſpent three Milions and fiue hundreth thouſand Florins. And that warre being ended (as not pleaſed with peace) to shew more of their greatneſſe, they beſieged the Cittie of Lucca. I cannot therefore conceiue any cauſe why theſe diuiſions should not be particulerly written. And if thoſe notable writers before named, were withholden by feare, to offend the poſteritie of ſuch as they should haue made mention of, they greatly deceiued themſelues, and ſeeme to know little the ambition of men, with the deſire they haue to make the names of their Anceſtors and themſelues to continue perpetuall. Neyther do they remember, that many men wanting occaſion to win themſelues fame, by ſome laudable deede, by ſome impious acte, haue laboured to aſpire thereunto. And they conſidered not, that the actions of men which haue in them greatneſſe, as gouernments and authorities, howſoeuer they be handled, or what end ſoeuer they haue, do ſeeme alwayes to giue men more honor then blame. VVhich I hauing thought vpon, did determine to change my meaning, and reſolued to begin my Hiſtorie at the beginning of our Cittie. And ſith my intent is not to vſurp the place of others, I will particulerly ſet downe what chanced onely within the Cittie till the yeare 1334. and of ſuch things as hapned without, I will not ſay more then that, which for the vnderſtanding of the other shall be neceſſarie. The yeare 1434. being paſſed, I will particulerly write the one and the other. Moreouer, to the end this Hiſtorie may be the better vnderſtood, before I intreate of Florence, I shall diſcourſe by what meanes Italy became ſubiect to ſuch Potentates as in thoſe dayes there gouerned. The firſt Booke shall briefly recite all accidents hapned in Italy from the declination of the Romayne Empire, till the yeare 1434. The ſecond will shew what things hapned from the beginning of Florence, till the warre which the Florentines made againſt the Pope, after expulcion of the Duke of Athene. The third doth end with the death of King Ladiſlao of Naples, Anno 1434. In the fourth Booke we wil intreate what other things chanced till the yeare aboueſaid. And from thencefoorth diſcourſe particulerly of ſuch accidents as befell within Florence, till this our time.
         
         
            
            
               
                  royal blazon or coat of arms
               
            
            To the Reader.
            
               NOT by my ſuite, though by my conſent, this Hiſtorie is now become publike. The tranſlation thereof was diuerſe yeares paſt deſired by an honorable perſonage, not now liuing; yet for loyaltie to his Prince, loue to his Countrey, and vertuous deſeruing of all men, worthie a longer life: had not God in his diuine prouidence otherwiſe ordeyned. Loth I was to medle with matter of ſo much waight, in regard of mine owne inſufficiencie, being neither learned, nor making profeſsion of learning: and lother it ſhould be publiſhed, for that the Author (in ſome other his works) hath not (as is thought) written with due reſpect to pietie. Howſoeuer that be, in this Booke (being a meere relation of the Florentines fortune, when they were gouerned Ariſtocraticallie) appeareth not any thing vnfit to be knowne, or that may receiue euill conſtruction.
            The firſt part, ſheweth the occaſions of ruyne in the Romaine Empire;The ſubiect of this Hiſtorie. and how the Prouinces of Italy became diuided into diuerſe gouernments: with their often variations. Secondly, by what meanes the Pope, the Venetians, the King of Naples, and the Duke of Milan, poſſeſſed the greateſt parts of Italy. Laſtly, how that the Florentines, abandoning obedience to the Emperour, liued (almoſt continually) in faction and ciuill partialitie, vntill the houſe of Medici, by the great vertue of Giouanni, Coſimo, Piero, and Lorenzo, atteyned to a ſinguler reputation in that State; where now (and ſome yeares paſt) they gouerne as Princes, with great honor, iuſtice, and integritie: which happineſſe they could not finde in their Ariſtocraticall pollicie. Yet diuerſe notable Polititians and wiſe law-makers, haue not onely allowed, but alſo highlie commended it aboue others: Affirming,Mediocritie the ſcope of Ariſtocracie. that as mediocritie is in all things moſt praiſeable, and extremities reproueable, ſo the Ariſtocracie (being the meane betweene the multitude and one Prince) is ſpeciallie to be preferred. Alſo for that the authoritie to commaund, is due to the moſt worthie, and worthineſſe conſiſteth either in honor, in vertue, in riches, or in them altogither, the ſtate Ariſtocraticall muſt needs be moſt allowed, bicauſe the noble, the riche, and vertuous men are in all places the feweſt number, and they onely in that kinde of gouernment haue authoritie. They alleage alſo how the rich men onely, as they that haue moſt intereſt in the State, do beſtowe moſt in publike ſeruices, and therefore to them the Gouernment ought be allotted: ſo was it in Rome after the Kings were depoſed, likewiſe in Athens, in Carthage, and at this day in Venice, Genoua, and Lucca.
            
            For anſwere of theſe reaſons in fauour of Ariſtocracie,Gouernment Ariſtocracie imperfit. wherein mediocritie ſeemeth to be ſpeciallie ſought for, who ſo ſhall duely examine thereof, may finde,

that to diuide things in the midſt, and thereby to marke out the vertue (which conſiſteth in reaſon) were impoſsible, as all Philoſophers haue determined. True it is, that the meane betweene all, and one is perfit, yet no where to be found: ſith in ſome Cities there are not one thouſand Citizens, and in ſome other more then an hundreth thouſand: which maketh the Ariſtocracie alwayes incertaine by the incertaintie of the numbers. And where the Gouernors be many, there are alſo factions many, the reſolutions ſlowe, and the ſecrets of State often diſcouered. For by experience is ſeene, how thoſe Ariſtocracies which haue in them feweſt Gouernors, are moſt durable: As that of the Lacedemonians, gouerned by thirtie perſons, and that of the Pharſalians by twentie. It is not therefore the meane betweene one and all, which cauſeth mediocritie.
            Now for beſtowing Soueraigntie vpon the moſt worthie, true it is, ſo it ought be, yet that argument maketh more for the Monarchie. For among the noble, rich, and wiſe, ſome one doth euer excell the reſt, and to him (by that reaſon) the authoritie ought be giuen, ſeeing it is not poſsible to find all thoſe things equally in all men. If it be alleaged, that among the greateſt number are found moſt vertuous and good men, that reaſon ſerueth not, either in that ſtate or the Democracie: ſeeing in them both (as in all Corporations) the moſt voices are preferred before the wiſe and better. To conclude, I ſay that in all States, wherein are moſt Gouernors, there are feweſt reſolutions, and moſt diſputations. The Venetians therefore (to meete with thoſe inconuenients) do commit the mannaging of their ordinarie affaires to the Senate, which conſiſteth of ſeuen perſons onely, as knowing that the fewer be made priuie, the more ſecretly they ſhall be handled: and no Ariſtocracie haue had ſo long continuance. Thus much touching Ariſtocraticall gouernment, of which kinde, was that whereof this Hiſtorie largely diſcourſeth.
            
               Equalitie the ſcope of Democracie.The State Populer, do likewiſe boaſt of the excellencie thereof, as that which obſerueth equalitie without exception of perſons, and reduceth the conſtitutions ciuill vnto the lawe of nature: For as nature hath not giuen riches, offices, or honor to one man more then to another, ſo the Gouernment Populer, tendeth to haue all men equall, without priuiledge or prerogatiue whatſoeuer. For by ſuch meane (they ſay) that auarice in thoſe that be riche, and inſolencie in them that be great, ſhall be taken away, which are the moſt perilous inconuenients that can happen to any Common-weale; and conſequently all thefts, oppreſsions, partialities, and factions, are remoued: adding, that humaine ſocietie cannot be nouriſhed without amitie, and the nouriſher of amitie is equalitie, and no equalitie can be found but onely in States Populer: it followeth therefore, that is the beſt and moſt commendable gouernment, bicauſe each man enioyeth libertie, naturall and equall iuſtice, without feare of tyrannie or oppreſsion. Theſe, and ſome other reaſons are framed in commendation of Gouernment Populer.
            
               Democracie imperfit.Whereunto I ſay, that this order of commanding, which chiefly reſpecteth equalitie, is not, nor hath bene in any Common-weale, bicauſe no ſuch equalitie of goods and honors could be obſerued. And he who taketh vpon him to beſtow them equally, ſhall proceed contrarie to nature. For as ſhe hath made ſome men more wiſe and aduiſed then others, ſo hath ſhe framed them to commaund, and others to obey. Some haue wiſedome and aptneſſe to direct, others haue ſtrength of bodie, and fitneſſe to execute what is commaunded. And touching libertie naturall (whereof Populer States do glory much) were that ſuch as is ſuppoſed, how could there be either Magiſtrate, lawe, or forme of gouernment: for where Magiſtracie is, there can be no generall equalitie. Beſides that, all wiſe and learned

writers haue miſliked that kinde of gouernment. Plato calleth it a market, where all things are to be ſould. Ariſtotle alloweth not thereof, nor of the Ariſtocracie. Seneca ſaith, it is impoſsible for any man to pleaſe the people, that taketh pleaſure in vertue. And how can a multitude (as a monſter of many heads) void of reaſon and iudgement, determine any thing good or profitable? Alſo to aske counſell of the people, as was anciently vſed in States Populer, is (as it were) that wiſe men ſhould ſeeke to be informed by mad folks. Which moued Anacarſis to ſay (ſeeing the Magiſtrates to propound matters, and the people to reſolue) that in Athens wiſe men moued queſtions, and fooles determined what ſhould be done. If any man produce the Populer Gouernment of the Suiſſes, continued more then three hundreth yeares: Thereunto may be anſwered, that the nature of that people is apt to be ſo gouerned. Beſides that, the moſt mutenous ſort of them are commonly from home in ſeruice of the warre vnder forraine Princes, and the reſt more tractable, do not care much how the State is handled. And among themſelues there is no diffidence, by reaſon the Nobilitie of thoſe Countreys were ſlaine, firſt at the battell of Sampac, and after at Baſil, the reſt willinglie baniſhed themſelues.
            By this which hath bene briefly ſaid,Monarchie, the moſt excellent Gouernment. appeareth how both the optimacie and Populer gouernments are ſubiect to mutation, diſorder and vtter ruine, and conſequently how fortunate thoſe people are, whom God hath deſtined to liue in the obedience of a ſucceſsiue royall Monarchie: where the Prince ſubmitteth himſelfe no leſſe to the lawes of nature, then he deſireth the ſubiects ſhould be obediēt vnto him, leauing to euery one libertie of life, and propertie in that he poſſeſſeth. Succeſſion argueth Gods prouidence, and gouernment naturall, planteth a certaine reciproke loue betweene the Prince and the people. One other reaſon of nature appeareth, in that the Monarke is alone in ſoueraigntie: for as God onely ruleth the whole world, and as the ſunne alone giueth light to all creatures, ſo the people of one land do moſt naturally yeeld obedience to one head and commander. Yea, all nations were firſt ſo gouerned, as the Aſsirians, Perſians, Egiptians, Iewes, Grecians, Scithians, Turks, Tartars, Englishmen, Frenchmen, Spanyards, Polonians, Danes, &c. and in the Indias were found no other gouernment. Neither do the ſacred Hiſtories make mention of other Rulers then Kings onely. And to confirme what hath bene ſaid of royall gouernment, reade the opinions of Plato, Homer, Herodotus, Xenophon, S. Ciprian, S. Ierome, with other as well diuine, as philoſophicall writers. Finally, it ſeemeth, that Soueraigntie in one onely perſon is more honorable and magnificent, then if the ſame were diuided among a fewe Lords (as is vſed in the Ariſtocracie) or among the whole multitude, as in Populer Gouernments. And experience hath proued, that for direction and commandment in the warre, pluralitie of Gouernors haue almoſt euer receiued preiudice and diſhonor. Which moued the Romanes (at ſuch occations) to make a Dictator. The like was done by the Lacedemoniās, and is (at this time) vſed of the Venetians, whome they call gran Proueditore. By theſe reaſons and examples (omitting many other) appeareth, that the Monarchie royall, is a gouernment moſt reaſonable, moſt naturall, moſt honorable, and moſt neceſſary. And ſuch is the happineſſe of our fortune, that by diuine prouidence, there liueth not in any land a more perfit paterne of an excellēt Prince, then is our preſent Soueraigne, who feareth God rightlie, and gouerneth her ſubiects iuſtlie: prudent in counſell, and valorous in execution. In proſperitie modeſt, in aduerſitie conſtant; faithfull to friends, and feared of enemies; affable to the good, and effroyable to the euill: vnder whoſe ſacred protection, our peace, our plentie, and our ſecuritie, hath many yeares proſpered.
            
               T. B.
            
         
         
            
            The Contents of many principall things worthie note, conteined in this worke.
            
               In the firſt Booke.
               THe occaſion how the Romane Empire became deſtroyed.
               Diuerſe incurtions of barbarous people into Italy.
               The ruine, repaire, and building, of ſundry noble Cities.
               The acts of Beliſario.
               The acts of Narcete.
               Of Comondo and Roſmonda.
               Of Clefi King of Gotti.
               The meanes whereby the Biſhops of Rome aſpired to greatnes. And how they at diuerſe times haue bene the ruyne of Italy.
               How long the Lombardy poſſeſſed Italy.
               How Pope Vrban, determined the enterpriſe of Aſia againſt the Sarafins.
               The originall of Venice.
               The warre betweene the Venetians and Genou
                     •
                  is.
               Of other warres in Italy.
               What famous Captaines in thoſe daies ſerued the Princes of Italy.
            
            
               In the ſecond Booke.
               THe originall of Florence.
               The firſt diuiſion of the Florentines.
               Of the factions, Guelfi and Ghibilini.
               The order and forme of the Florentine Common-weale.
               Manfredi chiefe of the Ghibilines: and the warre which hapned betweene thoſe ſides.
               The returne of the Guelfi, into Florence.
               New ordinances in the Citie.
               The Citie reduced into quarters.
               Of Giano della Bella.: and newe tumults in Florence.
               Bertaccio cauſeth the hand of one Lore to be cut off.
               Of the enimitie which aroſe betweene the Cherchi and Donati.
               Florence accurſed by the Pope.
               The comming of Carlo de Valloys, the Frēch kings brother into Florence.
               Of M. Corſo with certaine baniſhed men entereth the Citie.
               How the Lucchesi ſetled the ſtate in Florence.
               Florence both by fire and ſword tormented.
               Of a place called le Stinche, in the vale of Greue.
               Vguccione cheefe of the faction Ghibilina and Bianca.
               The Ghibilini baniſhed, and among them the Poet Dante.
               Of great miſery in Florence.
               New reformation in Florence.
               Caſtruccio of Lucca.
               The order of caſting Lots: and how it begunne in Florence.
               How the great Cittizens encreaſed their authority by two meanes.
               Conſpiracy againſt Giacopo de Agobio.
               League betweene the Florentines and Venetians.
               The Duke of Athene, made Lord of Florence.
               Proclamation of baniſhment made by that Duke: and murther of ſome Citizens.
               The Oration of certayn cheefe Citizens, before the Duke.
               The Dukes Pallace ſacked.
               Conſpiracy againſt the Duke.
               The Duke aſſaulted, and vanquiſhed.
               The Duke diſmiſſed out of Florence: his lyfe and condition.
               Andrea Strozzi entendeth to vſurpe the ſtate of Florence.
               At what time the great plague hapned in that City: whereof Boccatio hath at large written.
            
            
               In the third Booke.
               HOw the diſcord which groweth of ambition, are the occasion of deuision in Cities.
               The partialities of the Albizi and Rizzi.
               How M. di Riale of Prouenza, came to Florence.
               A law made against the Ghibilini.
               How the word Ammoniti, aroſe in Florence: and what it meaneth.
               An Oration of one Citizen, to the Lords.
               The occasion of the corruption of Italy.
               The cheefe of the faction of Guelfi.
               New tumults in Florence.
               The Oration of Luigi Guicciardini Gonfaloniere.
               New reformation of the City.
               One Simone, diſcouereth a conſpiracy againſt the ſtate.
               Michiele di Lando, an artificer, by his courage, aſpired to be choſen Gonfaloniere di Giuſtitia.
               New reformation in Florence.
               A commendation of Michiele di Lando.
               An accuſation of many Cittizens, for their returne being baniſhed.
               The inſolency of Georgio Scali.
               
                  The death of that Georgio.
               Exile and ſlaughter in Florence.
               The ſpeech of Benedetto Alberti to his cōpanions.
               Of the maner of creation of the Balia in Florence.
               Of Iohn Galeazzo Viſconti.
               The words of Veri di Medici.
               What qualitie the Florentines required to be in him that occupied the place of Gonfaloniere.
               Giacopo Acciaiuoli.
               The death of certaine Cittizens.
            
            
               In the fourth Booke.
               FIlippo Viſconti Duke of Milan, intendeth to become Lord of Genoa.
               Georgio Ordilaffi, Lord of Furli.
               The Duke of Milan maketh warre againſt the Florentines.
               Giouanni de Medici.
               New league betweene the Florentines and Venetians.
               Of an Impoſition among the Florentines, called Cataſto.
               Carmignuolo Generall of the warre in Lombardy.
               Peace taken with the Duke of Mylan and the League: and what Citties remained to the Venetians.
               The death of Giouanni de Medici: and his commendation.
               Of Coſimo his ſonne.
               Volterra rebelleth from the Florentines.
               The enterpriſe of the Florentines againſt Lucca.
               The violence offered to Sarauezeſi, and the ſpeech of one man of that place to the Senate of Florēce.
               Filippo Brunaleſco an excellent Architector.
               The defeate of the Florentine army, by Nicholo Piccinino.
               A conſultation to expulſe Cosimo di Medici out of Florence.
               The anſwere of Nicholo Vzano.
               Coſimo di Medici cited before the Senate, was impriſoned.
               Coſimo confined to Padoa.
               Coſimo returneth to his Countrey.
            
            
               In the fift Booke.
               BRaccio and Sforza, two great Captaynes in Italy.
               Nicholo Piccinino, Generall for the Duke of Mylan.
               Gattamelata, Generall for the Venetians.
               Baniſhment of many Cittizens in Florence.
               Alfonſo of Aragon maketh warre for Naples.
               The ordinances of the Cittie of Genoua.
               The ſpeech of Rinaldo delli Albizi to the Duke of Mylan.
               Rebellion of Genoua from the Duke.
               An Oration of an antient Cittizen of Lucca to the people.
               Franceſco Sforza, Generall of the league of Florence and Venice.
               Diſcord betweene Andrea Mauroceno, and Franceſco Sforza.
               Cosimo di Medici, Embaſſador to the Venetians.
               The Duke of Mylan determineth to take Romagna from the Pope.
               Sforza desiring to marrie the Duke of Mylan his daughter, practiſeth by diuerſe indirect meanes.
               Sforza refuſeth to paſſe the Po with his army.
               The ſpeech of Neri Capponi to the Senate of Venice.
               The diuerſe waies from Peſaro to Verona: and which of them the Earle Sforza made choiſe of.
               The Nauy of the Venetians taken by Nicholo Piccinino.
               The Earle remoueth to reſcue Breſcia.
               The ſcite of Verona.
               The Earle goeth to Venice.
               Piccinino paſſeth to Caſentino.
               The Caſtle of San Nicholo.
               The Earle breaketh the Dukes Nauy.
               The ouerthrow of Piccinino.
               Alberto de Albizi ſetleth himſelfe to dwell at Ancona.
               The taking of Poppi: and what words the Earle owner of that place vſed.
            
            
               In the ſixt Booke.
               A Deſcription of certaine lawdable cuſtomes vſed in auncient Common-weales.
               A proude requeſt made by Piccinino to the Duke of Mylan.
               The Duke marrieth Bianca his daughter to the Earle Franceſco Sforza: and giueth her the Cittie of Cremona.
               Alfonſo of Aragon beſeegeth Naples.
               Annibal Bentiuogli breaketh the forces of Piccinino.
               Baldaccio de Anghiari Generall for the Florentines.
               The Canneſchi murdered Annibal Bentiuogli.
               The people for that fact cut the Canneſchi in pieces: and killed Battiſta that ſlew Anniball.
               Santo Bentiuogli appointed to gouerne Bologna, vntill the ſonne of Anniball came to full age.
               Certaine Cities yeelded to the Venetians.
               The Earle Sforza beſeegeth Carauaggio.
               The taking of one Venetian Proueditor, whom the Earle ſet at libertie, hauing firſt informed him of his pride.
               The Venetians become bond to pay vnto the Earle a certaine number of Florins.
               Embaſſadors ſent from Mylan to the Earle, and their Oration.
               The Milaneſi made choiſe of that Earle for their Duke.
               The Embaſſadors of Venice denyed audience by

the Florentines.
               The Venetians begun warre agaynſt the Duke.
               Steffano Porcari determining to ſurprize Rome, is diſcouered and put to death by the Pope.
               King Rinato.
               Pope Caliſto 3. endeuoreth to make warre againſt the Infidels, giuing croſſes to the ſouldiers, and therefore the enterpriſe was called la Crociata: but it proceeded not.
               Meruailous tempeſt about Florence, and great harme proceeding thereby.
               Giouan di Augio in the name of the French King taketh poſſeſſion of Genoua.
               Diſſention betweene the Fregoſi and Giouanni.
               Giouanni vanquiſhed.
            
            
               In the ſeuenth Booke.
               HOw hard it is to continue a Common-weale vnited.
               The Cittizens of Florence deſire Coſimo di Medici to reforme the Cittie.
               Lucca Pitti.
               Lucca Pitti builded magnificently.
               The death of Coſimo di Medici.
               The commendation of Coſimo.
               A new enterpriſe againſt the infidels impeached.
               A conſpiracie of certaine Cittizens againſt Piere di Medici.
               Piero armeth againſt his enemies.
               The enemies of Piero baniſhed Florence.
               An Oration made by Piero in his houſe to the Senators.
               The Duke of Milan goeth to Florence.
               The Florentines againſt the Volterani.
               Federigo Duke of Vrbino an excellent Captaine.
               Bad condition of Galiazzo Duke of Milan.
               Treaſon againſt that Duke.
               The death of the Duke.
               The death of the Conſpirators.
            
            
               In the eight Booke.
               COnſpiracie againſt Lorenzo and Giuliano di Medici.
               The murder of Giuliano.
               The death of the Archbiſhop, and ſome other Conſpirators.
               The death of Franceſco Pazzi.
               The death of Giacopo di Pazzi.
               The Pope and King make war vpō the Florētines.
               The death of Lorenzo di Medici. 1492.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               
                  AA
               
            
            
               ❧THE FIRST BOOKE OF the Florentine Hiſtorie.
            
               THE people inhabiting the North, beyond the Riuers of Reyne and Danubio, being borne in a cold Region, yet wholeſome & apt to generation, do many times encreaſe, and become ſo populous, that part of them are cōſtrained to abandon their natiue countries, and ſeeke new places where to remaine.The order of the Northren people. The order which thoſe people hold in diſperſing the inhabitants, is, to diuide themſelues into three parts, yet ſo, as in euerie one, may be ſome of the nobilitie, and ſome of the people, ſome of the rich and ſome of the poore equallie diuided: which done, the one part (whoſe lot falleth ſo out) leaueth that country and ſeeketh fortune elſewhere to abide.The Northren people oppreſſed the Romane Empire. The other two parts of the people there remaining, doo poſſeſſe and enioy the landes of them that are departed. Theſe people were thoſe which deſtroyed the Romane Empire; whereunto the Emperours themſelues gaue ſome occaſion by forſaking Rome, the antient Emperiall ſeate, and ſetling themſelues at Constantinople: For thereby the Weſt part of the Empire became weake, leſſe regarded, & more eaſie to be harmed both of their owne miniſters, and others their enemies. Surely the deſtruction of ſo great an Empire builded vpon the blood of ſo many vertuous men, could not be loſt without the ſloath of Princes, infidelitie of miniſters, great forces, and much obſtinacie in them, who aſſaulted the ſame: for not onely, one ſort of people, but many multitudes in that action conſpired. The firſt enemies, which came to the deſtruction of the Roman Empire after the Cimbri (vanquiſhed by Marius the Romane) were the Viſigotti, which name in our language, may bee called Gotti of the Weſt. Theſe people, after ſome conflicts in the Empire, and through the ſufferance of the Emperours, long time continued their dwellings vpon the Riuer of Danubio. And although at ſundrie occaſions, and ſundrie times, they aſſaulted the prouinces belonging to the Empire, yet were they by the power of the Emperours from time to time impeached: and at laſt by Theodotio gloriouſly vanquiſhed. So that thereby being brought vnder his obedience, they could not againe make any King ouer them, but contented with the Emperours paie, vnder his gouernment and enſigne, they liued and ſerued. But Theodotio being dead, and leauing Arcadio and Honorio his ſonnes, heires of the Empire, (but not of his vertue and fortune) the time, with the Prince clearly altered and chaunged. Theodotio authorized vnto three parts of the Empire,The Empire diuided into three gouernments. three gouernours. In the Eaſt, Ruffino, in the Weſt Stillicone, and in Affrica Gildonio. Euerie one of theſe, determined after the death of their Prince, not to gouerne

as miniſters, but to poſſeſſe the countries as Princes. Of theſe three, Gildonio and Ruffino, were at their beginnings oppreſſed: but Stillicone better diſſembling his intent, ſought to winne himſelfe credit with the new Emperours, & neuertheleſſe diſturbe the quietneſſe of their ſtate. Then to the end he might the rather atteine the poſſeſsion thereof, and procure the Viſigotti to become enemies to the Empire, he counſelled the Emperour no more to paie them. Beſides that, Stillicone imagining theſe enemies were not of force ſufficient to diſturbe the Empire, found meanes that the Burgundi, Fraunchi, Vandali, and Alani (all people of the North, and appointed to ſeeke themſelues a new habitation) aſſailed the Romane countries. The Viſigotti then being diſcharged from their paie, determined (as of an iniury) to be reuenged: & creating Alarico their King,Rome ſacked by the Viſigotti. aſſaulted the Empire, deſtroyed Italy, and ſacked Rome. After which victory, Alarico died, and to him ſucceeded Ataulfo: who tooke to wife Placidia ſiſter to the Emperours, and through that alliance, agreed with them to ſuccour France and Spaine: which countries wereby the Vandali, Burgundi, Alani, and Fraunchi, (thereto moued by the occaſions aforeſayd) aſſailed. Whereof enſued, that the Vandali (who had alreadie conquered that part of Spaine which is called Betica) were ſore moleſted by the Viſigotti: and not hauing other helpe, were forced to accept the offer of Bonifacio,
               Bonifacio gouernor of Affrica. at that time gouerning Affrica for the Emperour: who required them to take in hand the conqueſt thereof, being by his meane in Rebellion: and he fearing leaſt his fault ſhould be to the Emperour detected. For theſe reaſons aforeſaid, the Vandali moſt willingly tooke the enterpriſe in hand, & vnder Genſerico their King, poſſeſſed Affrica. By this time Theodotio ſonne to Archadio was become Emperour, who litle regarding the affaires of the Empire in the Weſt, gaue great hope to theſe forrein people to enioy thoſe things they had conquered. So that, the Vandali poſſeſſed Affrica, the Alani and Viſigotti gouerned Spaine: the Fraunchi and Burgundi did not onely conquere Gallia, but alſo vnto the parts thereof, by them conquered,How Gallia became named Francia. gaue their owne names, calling the one Francia, the other Burgogna. The happie ſucceſſe of thoſe, encouraged new people to the deſtructiō of the Empire. For at that time the people called Vnni aſſailed and poſſeſſed Pannonia, a prouince adioyning to the Riuer Danubio,
               How Hungaria became ſo named. which at this day hauing taken the name of theſe Vnni, is called Vngheria. Vpon conſideration of theſe diſorders, the Emperour ſeeing himſelfe on euerie ſide aſſailed, to the end he might haue the fewer foes, beganne to take truce, ſometimes with the Vandali, and ſometimes with the Franchi: which did greatly encreaſe the reputatiō and power of the barbarous people, diſgracing and diminiſhing the credit of the Empire.Votigerio king of the Angli. Neither was in thoſe dayes, the Iland of Bretagna (at this day called England) aſſured from ſuch inuaſion: for the Bertoni fearing theſe people which had poſſeſſed France, and not finding how the Emperour could defend them, called to aide them the Angli, a people of Germany ſo named. Theſe Angli vnder Votigerio their King, tooke the enterpriſe in hand, ouerthrew the enemy, and in the end draue them out of the Iland,How the name of England was giuen to that Iland. themſelues there remaining & inhabiting. By the name of which Angli, that country was, and yet is called Anglia. The inhabitants whereof, being thus ſpoiled and driuen from their country, became deſperate, perſwading themſelues, that although they could not defend their own country, yet was it poſſible for them to conquere an other. Whereupon, they with their families paſſed the ſeas,The antient Engliſh people now inhabitants of Bretagna. and planted them on the other ſide neare the ſhoare, and called that country by their owne name, Bretagna. The people called Vnni, who, (as is aforeſaid) had conquered Pannonia, aſſembling themſelues with other people, called Zepedi, Eruli, Turinghi, and Ostrogotti, (which word ſignifieth in that language, Gotti of the Eaſt) prepared themſelues to ſeeke new countries: but not being of force ſufficient to enter France (being defended by other barbarous forces) they came vnto Italy, conducted

by Attila their king, who not long before, to gouerne alone in his kingdome, had ſlaine Bleda his brother. Thus Attila became mightie, Andarico king of Zebedi,
               Attila his comming into Italy. and Velamer king of the Ostrogotti, were made as it were, his ſubiects. Attila being arriued in Italy, beſieged Aquilegia, where without reſiſtance, hee continued two yeares, and during the ſiege, ſpoyled the country thereabouts, and diſperſed the inhabitants of the ſame: which (as hereafter ſhalbe declared) was the beginning of the citie of Vinegia. After the taking & ruine of Aquilegia, and many other cities, he marched towards Rome: from the ſpoyle whereof, at the requeſt of the Biſhop, he refrained. The reuerence & reſpect which Attila did bear towards this Biſhop, was ſuch, as perſwaded him to leaue Italy, and retire himſelfe to Austria, where he died. After his death, Velamer king of the Ostrogotti, and other the leaders of forraine nations, tooke Armes againſt Tenrico and Eurie his ſonnes, the one of them they ſlew, and conſtrained the other, with the Vnni to returne ouer Danubio, into their owne countrey. The Ostrogotti and the Tepedi, were ſetled in Pannonia, the Eruli and Turingi vpon the ſhoare on the other ſide of Danubio. King Attila thus departed from Italy, Valentiniano the Emperour in the Weſt, imagining to repaire the countrey, and hoping with more commoditie to defend the ſame from the barbarous people, abandoned Rome, and ſetled himſelfe in Rauenna. Theſe aduerſities happened to the Empyre in the Weſt, occaſioned the Emperours, who then dwelt at Conſtantinople, many times to graunt the poſſeſsion thereof to others, as a thing full of perils and expence. And the Romanes otherwhiles,The cauſe of the election of an Emperour in the VVeſt. ſeeing themſelues abandoned, without leaue created an other Emperour or ſome deputie, to performe that office, (as did Maſsimo the Romane) after the death of Valentiniano, who conſtrained Eudoſſa lately wife to the Emperour, to take him to her husband. This woman beeing borne of Emperiall blood, deſirous to reuenge ſo great an iniurie, and disdaining to bee married with a priuate Citizen, ſecretly perſwaded Genſerico King of the Vandali and Lord of Affrica, to come into Italy, ſhewing him the facilitie and profit of that enterpriſe. Hee enticed with hope of ſo great a ſpoyle came ſpeedily thither, and finding Rome abandoned, ſacked the Towne, and there remained foureteene dayes. Hee alſo tooke and ſpoyled diuerſe other Townes in Italy: and fraughting himſelfe and his Army with ſpoyle, returned into Affrica. The Romanes came home to Rome, and finding Maſsimo dead, elected Auito a Romane, for Emperour. After the death of diuerſe other Emperours, the Empire of Constantinople, came to the hands of Zenone: and that of Rome, to Oreste and his ſonne Augustolo, who through ſubtiltie had vſurped that Empyre. While theſe men thus poſſeſſed and determined to holde the Empyre by force, the Eruli and Turingi, who (as is aforeſayd) after the death of Attila remained vppon the ſhoare on the other ſide of Danubio) conſpired togither vnder the conduct of their Captaine Odoacre, came into Italy,
               The cōming of the Longobardi into Italy. and poſſeſſed ſuch places, as were by them left voyd. Then the Longobardi (people alſo toward the North) entered Italy: ledde thither by Godolio their King, who were, (as heereafter ſhall be declared) the greateſt plague of that countrey. Odoacre arriued in Italy, conquered the ſame, and neare vnto Pauia ſlew Oreste, forcing Augustolo to flie away. After which victorie (to the ende that Rome varying in gouernment, the gouernour might receiue a new title) Odoacre leauing the name of the Empire, cauſed himſelfe to be called King of Rome, and was the firſt Captaine of all the forraine people that inuaded Italy to inhabit there. Becauſe all the others, either for feare not to enioy that they had gotten, or elſe doubting to be driuen out by the Emperour in the Eaſt, either elſe for ſome other hidden occaſion, onely ſpoyled the country: and that done, ſought to plant their habitation

elſewhere. Thus we ſee, that in thoſe dayes the ancient Romane Empire was reduced to the gouernment of theſe Princes. Zenone remaining in Conſtantinople, commaunded all the Empire in the Eaſt.How the ancient Empyre became diuided. The Ostrogotti gouerned Meſia and Pannonia. The Viſigotti, Sueui, and Alani, poſſeſſed Guaſcognia and Spaine. The Vandoli ruled Affrica. The Franchi and Burgundi liued in France. The Eruli and Turingi remained in Italy. The kingdome of Ostrogotti came to the handes of Theodorico, Nephewe of Velamer, beeing in league with Zenone Emperour in the Eaſt, wrote vnto him, that it ſeemed a thing vniuſt to his people the Ostrogotti, that they beeing in vertue ſuperiours to all others, ſhould be inferiours in Empyre: And therfore he could not by any meanes hold them within the conſines of Pannonia. It ſeemed therefore neceſſarie to ſuffer them to take armes, and ſeeke new Countries: But firſt hee thought good to let him vnderſtand thereof, to the intent hee might graunt them ſome country, where with his good fauour and their greater commoditie, they might inhabite. The Emperour Zenone, partly for feare, and partly for the deſire hee had to haue Odoacre driuen out of Italy, graunted that Theodorico might come againſt Odoacre, and take the poſſeſsion thereof. Then Theodorico departed from Pannonia, leauing there the Zepedi his friends: and being arriued in Italy, ſlew Odoacre, and his ſonne; by whoſe example, hee tooke vnto him the title of King of Italy, making Rauenna his royall ſeate, moued by the ſame reaſōs, that induced Valentiniano there to dwell. Theodorico was a man both for warre and peace moſte excellent:Theodorico king of Oſtrogotti a moſt vertuous Prince. for in the one, hee was alwaies victorious, and in the other generally profited the cities and people to him ſubiect. Hee diuided the Ostrogotti with their Captaines into ſundry townes, to the end that in the warre hee might commaund them, and in the peace correct them: hee enlarged the Citie of Rauenna and reſtored Rome in all thinges (the diſcipline of warre except) giuing to the Romanes euerie other honour: & with his only authoritie kept in awe all the barbarous Kings vſurpers of the Empyre. Hee built townes and ſortreſſes betweene the Alpes, and the point of the ſea Adriatico, the rather to empeach the paſſage of other barbarous people that ſhould aſſaile Italy. And had not his great vertue bene in the end of his life blotted with ſome cruelties; committed vppon ſuſpition of his kingdome (as the death of Simmaco and Boetio, men of moſt godly life) he had bene in all reſpects worthy of honour and memorie. For the vertue and bountie of him, did not only repaire Rome and Italy of the afliction committed by the barbarous nations: but alſo reduced them into an order and gouernment moſte fortunate. And ſurely, if any times were euer in Italy, and the other Prouinces there-abouts by reaſon of barbarous oppreſsion miſerable, they were thoſe which happened from the time of Arcadio and Onorio, till his dayes. For who ſo ſhall conſider the great miſchiefs which happen to cōmon weales by the variatiō of gouernment, or change of the Prince, without any diſſention and diuiſion, ſhall finde the ſame alone of force inough to ruine any ſtate or kingdome, how mightie ſoeuer. It may therefore be imagined how great miſeries the Romane Prouinces endured: for they did not only alter their gouernment, but alſo their lawes, their cuſtomes, their maner of life, their religion, their tounge, their apparrell, and their names. All which things (nay any one of them conſidered vnſeene) would moue the hardeſt heart to cōpaſsion. At that time many cities were ouerthrowen, many begun, & many enlarged. Among thoſe that were ruined, were Aquilegia, Luni, Chiuſi, Popolonia, Fieſole, and others. Of thoſe which were buylt new, were Vinegia, Siena, Ferrara, Aquila, and other townes and caſtels, which for breuitie I omit. Thoſe which of ſmall Cities became great, were Fiorenza, Genoua, Piſa, Milan, Napoli, and Bologna, to the which may be ioyned the ruine and repaire of Rome, with diuerſe others Citties in like

ſort defaced and after amended. Among theſe ruines, and theſe new people, there grewe vp new languages, ſince that time vſed in France, Spaine, and Italy, which mixed with the ancient tongues of thoſe Countries, and the Romane ſpeech, haue framed languages neuer before time knowen. The names alſo of thoſe Prouinces, riuers, lakes, ſeas, and men, were vtterly changed. For France, Italy and Spayne, be full of new names, from the olde farre differing: as appeareth (omitting many others). The riuers of Po, Garda and the Archipelago, which are names diuers from thoſe of auncient time vſed. Men likewiſe commonly in thoſe dayes called Caeſari, Pompei, and ſuch like: are new baptized, Peter, Mathew, and ſo forth. But among ſo many variations, the chaunge of Religion was not the leaſt, for thoſe of the ancient faith, contending with the miracles of the new, wrought among men occaſion of great diſcord: but had the chriſtian Religion bene vnited, the diſorders had not bene ſo great. For the Greeke church, the Romane church, and the church of Rauenna, contended one againſt the other. Beſides them, many other differents aroſe among the chriſtian people, & into many opinions diuided the world. An example whereof was Affrica, which ſuffered more affliction by reaſon of the opinion of Arius (which the Vandoli beleeued) then by any other cauſe either of their couetouſnes or naturall crueltie. During the multitudes of theſe miſeries, euerie man beare (as it were) in his face, the markes of his diſcontented mind. For beſides the manifold miſchiefes by them endured, the greater number wanted the knowledge of God, by whome all creatures hope to be comforted. For the moſt of thoſe people being ignorant of the true God, wanting helpe and hope, moſt miſerably dyed. Thus it appeareth, that Theodorico deſerued no ſmall commendation, being the firſt that appeaſed ſo many troubles. For within theſe 28. yeares which he reigned in Italy, he reduced it to ſo great order and honour, as the markes of miſerie were ſcantly perceiued. But he being dead,The death of Theodorico. and leauing Atalarico for king (who was the ſonne of Amalaſciunta his daughter) Italy in ſhort ſpace returned to the former diſorders. For Attalarico ſhortly after his graundfather died, left the gouernment to his mother, and ſhe making Theodato her miniſter in the gouernment, was by him betraied. Theodato by this meane made King, became odious to the Ostrogotti, and Iuſtiniano the Emperour hoped the rather to driue him from Italy. To performe that enterpriſe, he deputed Belliſario to be his Lieftenaunt, who had alreadie conquered Affrica, and chaſing from thence the Vandoli, reduced the ſame to obedience of the Empyre. Belliſario alſo conquered Sicilia,
               The acts of Belliſario. & from thence paſſed into Italy, where he ſurprized Napoli, and Rome. The Gotti receiuing theſe ouerthrowes, killed their king Theodato as the cheife occaſion of their miſaduenture. In his place was choſen Vitigete, who after a few conflicts, was by Belliſario beſieged, and in Rauenna takē. Then was Belliſario before he had performed the whole victorie by Iustiniano reuoked, & to his charge, were appointed Giouanni and Vitale, men both for vertue and conuerſation farre inferiour: wherfore the Gotti tooke heart, and created a king called Ildouado, who was at that time Gouernour of Verona.
               The acts of Totila. After him (being within a few daies ſlaine) Totila aſpired to the kingdome, and diſtreſſed the Emperours armie, recouered Toſcana and Napoli, and brought vnder his obedience, well neare all thoſe ſtates which Belliſario had gotten. Wherfore Iustiniano thought good to ſend him again into Italy, who being come thither with ſmal forces, rather loſt the reputation he had gotten before, then encreaſed the ſame. For Totila, as it were before the face of Belliſario (who was then with his armie at Hostia) beſieged Rome and tooke it. Then conſidering with him ſelfe that he could neither hold it, nor leaue it without daunger, he razed the greateſt part of the Citie, driuing the people from thence, and leading away the Senatours as priſoners, which Belliſario
               
little regarding, marched with his armie vnto Calauria, to meete there with ſouldiers ſent in his aide from Greece. Thus Belliſario ſeeing Rome abandoned, determined with him ſelfe an honourable enterpriſe: and entering into the ruines of Rome, (with what ſpeed he poſsibly could) repaired the walles of the citie, & called home the inhabitants. But fortune (as it ſeemeth) enemie to ſo laudable an atempt, appoſed her ſelfe. For Iustiniano the Emperour at the ſame time happened to be aſſaulted by the Parthi, and for that cauſe called home Belliſario: hee to obey his maſter, leſt Italy at the diſcretion of Tottila, who anew poſſeſſed Rome, but not with ſo great crueltie as he had before time there vſed. For being entreated by S. Benedetto, (of whome in thoſe daies there was holden a great opinion of holines) he endeuoured him ſelfe rather to amend, then marre that citie. In this meane while, Iustiniano had concluded a peace with the Parthi, & intending to ſend a new ſupply into Italy, was empeached to performe that intent by a new people of the North called Sclaui, who hauing paſſed Danubio, aſſailed Illiria and Thracia: ſo as by that meanes Tottila got into his hands all Italy. But ſo ſoone as Iustiniano had ſuppreſſed the Sclaui, he ſent thither his armie conducted by Narſete an Eunuch, who diſtreſſed the forces of Tottila,
               The acts of Narſete. & ſlew him, with the remaine of the Gotti. After that ouerthrow, retired to Pauia, where they created Teia for their King. Narſete on the other ſide, after this victorie, ſurprized Rome, and at the laſt fought with Teia, not farre from the cittie of Nocera, ſlew him, and vanquiſhed his armie. By meane of which victorie, the name of Gotti, in Italy was clearely extirped, hauing there remained from the reigne of Theodorico, vnto Teia their Kings, threeſcore and ten yeares. But ſo ſoone as Italy was deliuered from the Gotti, Iustiniano died, leauing Iustino his ſonne to ſucceed him, who through counſell of Sophia his mother,The acts of Longino. reuoked Narſete from Italy, & in his place, ſent Longino his ſonne thither. This Longino following the order of his predeceſſors, inhabited Rauenna, & ſetled in Italy a new fourme of gouernment, appointing no Gouernours of Prouinces as did the Gotti, but created in euerie cittie and towne of importance a Chieftaine, whome he called Duke. In which diuiſion, he allotted no more honour to Rome, then to other townes, becauſe he tooke from thence the Conſuls and Senate, (which names till that day had bene euer there mainteined) reducing all vnder one Duke, who was yearely ſent thither from Rauenna, and his gouernment called the Romane Dukedome: but the generall Gouernour, who continually remained at Rauenna by the Emperours commaundement, and gouerned all Italy vnder him, was called Eſarco. This diuiſion, made the ruine of Italy to be more eaſie, and gaue opportunitie to the Longobardi to vſurpe the ſame. The gouernment of that country gotten by the vertue and blood of Narſete, thus taken from him,The acts of Alboino. & he being alſo by Sophia iniured, reuiled & threatned to be called home and ſpinne with women, moued him ſo greatly to chollor and offence, that he perſwaded Alboino King of the Lombardi (who at that time reigned in Pannonia) to come into Italy, & conquere it. The Longobardi beeing (as is aforeſaid) entered into thoſe countries neare Danubio, who had lately bene abandoned by the Heruli and Turingi, when by their King Odoacre they were led into Italy: for a time they there remained. But the kingdome being come to Alboino a man couragious & cruel, they paſſed the riuer Danubio, and fought with Comundo King of the Zepedi, and ouerthrew him in Pannonia, which hee then poſſeſſed. Alboino in this victorie amongſt others, happened to take priſoner the daughter of Comundo, called Roſmundo, married her, and thereby became Lord of Pannonia. Then mooued by the crueltie of his nature, hee made a cup of her fathers hed, whereof in memorie of the victorie) he vſed to drinke. But then called into Italy by Narſete (with whome in the warres of the Gotti hee had acquaintance and friendſhip) left Pannonia to the

               Vuni, who after the death of Attila (as is aforeſaid) were returned into their countrey. Then he came againe into Italy, where finding the ſame into many partes diuided, ſodenly wan Pania, Millan, Verona, Vicenza, all Toſcana, and the more part of Flamminia, now called Romagna. So that perſwading himſelfe through ſo many and ſo ſpeedie ſucceſſes, to haue already (as it were) gotten the victorie of all Italy, hee celebrated a ſolemne feaſt in Verona, whereat, being by drinking much, become very merry, and ſeeing the skull of Comundo full of wine, hee cauſed the ſame to be preſented to the Queene Roſmunda, who ſat ouer againſt him at the table (ſaying vnto her, with ſo loude a voice that euerie one might heare him) that ſhe ſhould now at this feaſt drinke with her father: which ſpeech pearced the Lady to the heart, and ſhe forthwith determined to reuenge the ſame. Then knowing that Almachilde (a valiant young gentleman of Lombardi) loued a maiden of hers, of whome hee obtained to lie with her, and the Queene beeing priuy to that conſent, did her ſelfe tarry in the place of their meeting, which beeing without light, Almachilde came thither, and ſuppoſing to haue lien with the mayden, enioyed the Queene her miſtreſſe, which done, the Queene diſcouered her ſelfe and ſaid vnto him, that it was in his power to kill Alboino, and poſſeſſe her with her kingdome foreuer: but if hee refuſed ſo to do, ſhee would procure that Alboino ſhould kill him, as one that had abuſed his wife. To this motion and murther of Alboino, Almachilde conſented. After the murther performed, finding that he could not according to his expectation enioy the kingdome, and fearing to be ſlaine of the Lombardes for the loue they bare to Alboino, the Queene and hee taking their princely treaſure and iewels, fled to Longino at Rauenna, who honorably there receiued them. During theſe troubles, Iustiniano the Emperour died, and in his place was elected Tiberio, who beeing occupied in the warres againſt the Parthi, could not go to the reliefe of Italy. Whereby Longino hoped that time would well ſerue him, with the countenance of Roſmunda and helpe of her treaſure, to become King of Lombardy and all Italy. And conferring his intent with the Queene, perſwaded her to kill Almachilde, and take him for her husband: ſhee accepted and agreed vnto that which hee perſwaded, preparing a cup of wine poiſoned, and with her owne hand ſhee offered the ſame to Almachilde, comming from a bath hote and thriftie: hee hauing drunke halfe the wine, and finding his bodie thereby greatly mooued, miſtruſting the poiſon, enforced Roſmunda to drinke the reſt, whereof both the one and the other within fewe houres died, and Longino bereft of his expectation to become King.The acts of Clefi. The Longobardi in the meane while aſſembling themſelues in Pauia, (which was the chiefe Cittie of their kingdome) elected there Clefi their King, who reedified Imola, which had bene ruinated by Narſete, hee wan Rimino, and almoſt euerie place from thence to Rome: but in the midſt of theſe his victories, hee died. This Clefi was ſo cruell, not onely to ſtrangers, but alſo to his owne ſubiects the Longobardi, as they were ſo terrified with his kingly authoritie, that after his daies, they determined no more to make anie King, but elected amongſt them ſelues thirtie perſons,The Lombardi refuſed to be gouerned by Kings. whome they called Dukes, giuing them iuriſdiction ouer the reſt: which was the cauſe that the Longobardi did not proceed in the conqueſt of all Italy, and that their kingdome did not extend further then Beneuento, and that Rome, Rauenna, Cremona, Mantoua, Padoua, Monſelice, Parma, Bologna, Faenza, Furli, and Ceſena, ſome of them defended them ſelues a time, and ſome other were neuer taken. Becauſe the Lombardi wanting a King, their warres proceeded the more ſlowlie, and after the election of a new King (by reaſon of their libertie) were leſſe obedient and more apt to mutinie among them ſelues, which thing, firſt hindered the

victorie, and in the end draue them out of Italy. The Longobardi being come to this eſtate, the Romanes and Longino made with them an agreement. The effect thereof was, that euerie one of them ſhould lay downe their armes, and enioy ſo much as they poſſeſſed.At what time the Biſhops of Rome, aſpired to authoritie. In that time the Biſhops of Rome began to aſpire vnto more authoritie then they had in times paſt: for by meane of the holy life of S. Peter, and ſome other Biſhops with their godly examples, and the miracles by them done, they became much reuerenced amongſt men, and greatly encreaſed the chriſtian Religion. In ſo much as Princes were occaſioned (the more eaſily thereby to appeaſe the great diſorder and confuſion of the world) to obey them. The Emperour then being become a Chriſtian and remooued from Rome to Constantinople, it came to paſſe (as is aforeſaid) that the Romane Empyre decaied, and the Church of Rome the rather thereby encreaſed: notwithſtanding till the comming of the Longobardi, Italy being ſubiect either to Emperours or Kings, the Empyre ſtill proſpered: and the Biſhops of Rome had no greater authoritie then their learning and good life did deſerue. For in all other thinges, either by the Kings or by the Emperours, they were commaunded,The remooue of the Emperiall ſeat from Rome, the cauſe of the Popes greatnes. and as their miniſters imploied, and ſometimes put to death. But he that made the Biſhops to become of greateſt authoritie in Italy, was Theodorico King of the Gotti; when he remoued his royall ſeate to Rauenna. For thereby Rome remaining without a Prince, the Romanes were enforced to yeeld their obedience to the Pope. Yet did not his authoritie thereby greatly encreaſe, becauſe he could not procure to him ſelfe more preheminence, then that the Church of Rome ſhould haue precedence before the Church of Rauenna. But the Longobardi being come, and Italy diuided into diuerſe parts, occaſioned the Pope to take the more vppon him: for he, then beeing as it were chiefe of Rome, the Emperour of Conctantinople and the Longobardi, did reſpect him ſo much, as the Romanes by his meanes, not as ſubiects, but as companions with the Longobardi and with Longino, ioyned. Thus the Popes ſometimes by the fauour of the Longobardi, and ſometime with the countenance of the Grecians,
               The Eaſt Empyre ſuppreſſed in the reigne of Eracleo. encreaſed their dignitie. But after the deſtruction of the Empyre in the Eaſt, (which happened in the time of the Emperour Eracleo) becauſe the people called Sclaui, aſſaulted & conquered againe Iliria, calling the ſame by their owne name Sclauonia, the other partes of the Empyre were aſſailed, firſt by the Perſians, and after by the Saraſins, who came from Arabia, conducted by Mahomet: and laſt of all by the Turkes. Theſe people amongſt them, poſſeſſed Soria, Affrica, and Egipt. So that the Empyre weakened, the Pope diſpaired to haue ſuccour there, in time of his neceſsitie. On the other ſide, the power of the Longobardi encreaſing, it behooued him to ſeeke ſome new friendſhip, and for the ſame reſorted to the Kinges of France.
               The troubles of Italy, cauſed by the ambition of Popes. So as after that time, all the warres made vppon Italy by forraine people, were by the Biſhops of Rome occaſioned: and all the barbarous nations, who repaired in ſo great multitudes to Italy, were for the moſte part by them called thither, which manner of proceeding continueth in our dayes, and hath heretofore kept, and yet dooth keepe Italy weake and impotent. Therefore in diſcourſe of ſuch thinges as haue happened ſince thoſe, to theſe our daies,By what meanes the preſēt Princes of Italy aſpired. more ſhall not be ſaid of the diſtruction of the Empyre, which is altogither caſt downe and ruined. But wee will heerafter diſcourſe by what meanes the Popes and thoſe other Potentates which till the comming of Carlo the eight, gouerned Italy, haue atteined to their greatnes, whereby we ſhal conceiue, how the Popes firſt by their cenſures, after with them, and their armes mixed with indulgences, became terrible & venerable: and how by euill vſing the one & the other, they haue altogither loſt the vſe of their armes, & in the other, they ſtand at diſcretion. But returning to the order of our matter, I ſay, that Gregorio the third, beeing atteined

to the Papacy, & Aistulpho to the kingdome of Lombardy, contrarie to the agreement afore made, ſurprized Rauenna, and made warre againſt the Pope Gregorio: who (for the occaſions aforeſaid) not truſting any more to the Emperour of Conſtantinople beeing then weake, neither repoſing truſt in the Longobardi, who had diuerſe times diſtreſſed him, fled for ayde to Pipino the ſecond, who from beeing Lord of Austracia and Brabancia was become King of France: not ſo much for his owne vertue, as his fathers Carlo Martello, and his graundfathers Pipino, becauſe Carlo Martello beeing Gouernour of that Kingdome, wonne that memorable victorie againſt the Saraſins neare vnto Torſci, vpon the riuer of Era: wherein were ſlaine two hundred thouſand Saraſins. For which cauſe Pipino his ſonne, for the reputation of his father and his owne vertue, became after, king in that kingdome: vnto whome Pope Gregorio (as is beforeſaid) ſent for ayde againſt the Longobardi. Pipino anſwered, that hee was very willing to performe his requeſt,Gregorio tertio. Pope Theodoro primo. but firſt deſired to ſee him, and in his preſence to honour him. For which purpoſe Gregorio trauailed into France, and without any let, paſſed the townes of the Longobardi his enemies: ſo great reuerence was then borne to that Religion. Gregorio arriued in France, was there greatly honoured by the King, and ſent back accompanied with the Kings forces, who in Pauia beſieged the Longobardi, wherby Aistulpho was enforced to make peace with the Frenchmen: which hee did at the requeſt of the Pope, who deſired not the death of his enemie, but that hee ſhould conuert and liue. In which peace Aistulpho promiſed to render vnto the Church all thoſe townes thereto belonging, and by him vſurped. But the French ſouldiers returned home, Aiſtulpho obſerued not the conditions of the peace, which beeing knowen to the Pope, hee prayed ayde a new of Pipino, who ſent againe into Italy, where hee ouerthrew the Lombardy, tooke Rauenna, and contrarie to the will of the Grecian Emperour, gaue the ſame vnto the Pope, with all other townes vnder his Eſarcato, adding alſo to them, the countrie of Vrbino and La Marca: during the time that theſe townes were in beſtowing, Aiſtulpho died; and Deſiderio a Lombard and Duke of Tuſcan tooke armes to vſurpe the kingdome, and praied ayde of the Pope, to whome hee promiſed his friendſhip: which requeſt was graunted, and the other Princes gaue place. Deſiderio at the beginning kept his promiſe, and according to the conditions made with Pipino, rendred the townes allotted vnto the Pope, neither did the Eſarco of Conſtantinople, after that time come any more in Rauenna, but all things were gouerned according to the pleaſure and direction of the Pope. Then died the King Pipino, to whome ſucceeded his ſonne called Carlo, who for the great and memorable exploites by him done, was called Magno. To the Papacy was at that time aſpired Theodoro Primo. He falling into contention with Diſiderio, was by Diſiderio beſieged in Rome, and conſtrained to craue ayde of Carlo, who ſpeedily paſſed the mountaines, beſieged Deſiderio in Pauia, and tooke him with all his Children. And hauing ſent them priſoners into France, went in perſon to viſit the Pope at Rome, where hee pronounced this ſentence, That the Pope beeing Vicar of God, could not be iudged of men. For the which,Great honour dore to the pope by Carlo magno, with indignitie to the Emperors the Pope with the people of Rome, created him Emperour. In this manner, Rome beganne to haue an Emperour againe in the Weſt. And where the Popes were woont to take their inſtaulation from the Emperours, after this time the Emperours in their election, would needes take their authoritie from the Pope: wherby the reputation of the Empire decreaſed, and the Church gained the ſame. By theſe meanes, the Popes grew great, and kept downe the authoritie of temporall Princes. The Longobardi hauing then bene in Italy 232. yeares, there was of them none other marke of ſtraungers then the name: and Carlo being deſirous to reforme that

Countrey (in the time of Pope Leo the third) was pleaſed they ſhould inhabit thoſe places, where they were borne, and called that prouince of their name, Lombardia. But foraſmuch as they had the name of Rome in great reuerence, hee commaunded that all the next Countrey to it adioyning (then in the obedience of the Eſarcato of Rauenna) ſhould bee called Romagna. Moreouer, he created Pipino his ſonne King of Italy, the iuriſdiction whereof extended to Beneuento: the reſt remained to the Emperour in Greece, with whom Carlo had concluded a league. About this time Paſcale the firſt was become Pope: and the prieſtes of the pariſhes in Rome,
               Pope Paſcale 1. by reaſon of their neareneſſe to the Popes perſon, and their preſence at his election, to honour their authoritie, with a more venorable title beganne to bee called Cardinals, taking vnto them great reputation, chiefly after they had excluded the Romanes from the election of the Pope,Originall of Cardinals, by Pope Paſcale 1. who (almoſt euer before that time) was ſome Citizen of Rome. Paſcale beeing dead, Eugenio ſecundo, of the order of Santa Sabina, was elected Pope. And Italy beeing then in the handes of French men, did partly alter the order of gouernment, and the more for that the Popes had in the temporalities thereof gained greater authoritie and made Earles and Marqueſes, as before time, Longino Eſarco of Rauenna had created Dukes. After a fewe other Biſhops, Oſporco a Romane, aſpired to the Papacy; who for the homelineſſe of his name,The firſt occaſion why the Popes did take new names at ther election. cauſed himſelfe to be called Sergio: which was the beginning why the names of Popes was chaunged at their elections. By this time Carlo the Emperour was dead, to whome ſucceded Lodouico his ſonne. After his death, there grew ſo great contention amongſt his ſonnes, that in the time of his graund-children, the Empire was taken from the houſe of France, and brought into Germany,
               At what time the Empire was taken frō the houſe of France. where the firſt Emperour of that nation was called Ainolfo: and by meanes of theſe diſorders, the family of Carlo, did looſe not onely the Empire, but alſo the kingdome of Italy, becauſe the Lombardi recouered their ſtrength and offended the Pope and Romanes ſo much, as the Pope not knowing how to bee helped, for neceſsitie gaue the Kingdome of Italy to Berengario Duke of Erieoli.
               The kingdom of Italy, giuen to Beringario. Theſe accidents encouraged the Vnni, who then remained in Pannonia to aſſault Italy. But beeing come to triall of battle with Berengario, they were vanquiſhed, and forced to returne into Pannonia, now called Vngaria: which countrey hath euer ſince reteyned their name. At that time Romano Chieftaine of the Emperiall Armie, depoſed his maiſter Constantino, and made himſelfe Emperour in Greece. By reaſon whereof, Puglia and Calauria rebelled from the obedience of the Empire, and ſuffered the Saraſins to come thither: who beeing there, and poſſeſsing the Countries, attempted to beſiege Rome. But the Romaines, (becauſe Beringario was occupied in the warres againſt the Vnni) made Albarigo Duke of Tuſcan their Captaine, by whoſe vertue, Rome was ſaued from the Saraſins. They beeing departed from the ſiege, builded a Caſtle vppon the mountaine called Gargano, and from thence they commaunded Puglia and Calauria, and diſturbed the reſt of Italy. Thus in thoſe dayes Italy was maruellouſly afflicted: towardes the Alpes, aſſaulted by the Vnni, and towards Naples, by the Saraſins. In theſe miſeries Italy many yeares remained, vnder three Kings of the Beringarii, one ſucceeding an other. In which time, the Pope and the Church were continually moleſted; and by meanes of diuiſion of the princes in the Weſt, and the weakeneſſe of the Emperour in the Eaſte, knewe not where to bee ſuccoured. The Cittie of Genoua, with all the Riuers thereto belonging, werein thoſe dayes by the Saraſins deſtroyed: whereof came the greatneſſe of the Cittie of Piſa, for thither manie people fled for refuge. This happened in the yeare of the Chriſtian religion, nine hundreth thirtie and one.

But Ottone ſonne of Enrico and Matilda Duke of Saxony (a man exceeding wiſe & of great reputation) being become Emperour, Agabito then Pope,How Italy was gouerned. Anno. 931. praied him to come into Italy, and ſaue him from the tyrannie of the Berengarii. The ſtates of Italy were in thoſe daies thus diſpoſed. Lombardy was vnder Berengario the third, and his ſonne Alberto. Toſcana and Romagna, were gouerned by the deputies of the Emperour in the Weſt. Puglia & Calauria, partly to the Emperour in Greece, and partly to the Saraſins obeyed. In Rome were elected yearly of the nobilitie two Conſuls, who according to the auncient cuſtome ruled that Citie. Vnder them was appointed a Iudge to miniſter iuſtice to the people. There was alſo a councell of twelue men, which gaue gouernours to the townes ſubiect vnto Rome. The Pope had in Rome more or leſſe authoritie, according to the fauour hee found with the Emperours, or others, that were there moſt mightie. Then came the Emperour Ottone into Italy, and tooke the kingdome thereof from the Berengarii: who therein had raigned, fiftie fiue yeares, and therewith had reſtored the Pope to his dignitie. This Emperour had one ſonne, and one nephew, both alſo named Ottoni, the one and the other of them ſucceeded in the Empire. In the raigne of Ottone the third, Pope Gregorio quinto, was by the Romanes driuen out, and Ottone came into Italy, to put him again into the poſſeſsion of Rome. The Pope then to be reuenged of the Romans,The election of the Emperour giuen to the Germans. Ann. 1002. tooke frō them the authoritie of creatiō of the Emperour, & gaue the ſame to the Germaines, appointing three Biſhops of Maguntia, Treueri, & Colonia: & three ſecular Princes; the Marques of Brandenburge, the Earle Palatine of the Rhein, & the Duke of Saſſonia to be electors, which conſtitution was made in the yeare 1002. After the death of Ottone the third, Enrico Duke of Bauiera, was by theſe electors, made Emperour, and after twelue yeares, by Pope Stephano the eight crowned. This Enrico and Simionda his wife, were perſons of moſt godly life, as appeareth by diuerſe churches by them builded and endowed. Amongſt which number was the temple of S. Miniato, neare to the Citie of Florence: Enrico died in the yeare 1023. After whom raigned Currado of Sueuia, and after him Enrico the ſecōd, who came into Italy, & the church thē being in ſchiſme, foūd there, three Popes: all whom he depoſed, & cauſed Clemente ſecundo to be elected,Three Popes depoſed by Enrico 2. & of him was he crowned Emperour. In thoſe dayes Italy was gouerned, partly by the people, partly by the Princes, & partly by the miniſters of the Emperour: of whō, the chiefe was called Chancelor. Amōg the Princes Gotfredi, & the Counteſſe Matilda his wife, borne of Beatrice ſiſter to Enrico the ſecond, were moſt potent: for ſhe and her huſband poſſeſſed Lucca, Parma, Reggio, and Mantoua, with all that countrey at this day called Patrimonio. The ambition of the people of Rome, did at that time make much warre with the Popes: for they, hauing helped the Pope to driue out the Emperors, and reformed the Cittie as to them ſeemed good, ſodeinly became enemies to him. And the Popes receiued more iniuries at their hands,The Romans auncient enemies to the Pope. thē at any other Chriſtian Princes. And euen in thoſe dayes when the cenſure of the Popes made all the Weſt of the world to tremble, yet euen then, the people of Rome rebelled. And both the Popes, and the people ſtudied for nothing ſo much, as how one of them, might ouerthrow the authoritie and eſtimation of the other. Nicholao ſecundo being aſpired to the Papacy, tooke from the Romanes the creation of the Pope,The creation of the Pope taken frō the Romanes. as his predeceſſour Gregorio quinto, had before taken from them, the election of the Emperour, hee made alſo a conſtitution that the election of the Popes ſhould from thencefoorth appertaine to the Cardinals. Neither was he ſo contented, but compounding with ſome Princes that then gouerned Calauria and Puglia (for ſuch reaſons as ſhall be hereafter declared) conſtrained all the officers appointed by the Romanes, to yeeld their obedience to the Popes, and remooued ſome of them from their offices. After the death of Nicholao, there happened a ſchiſme in the church, becauſe the Clergie of Lombardy
               
would not obey Alexander the ſecond, elected at Rome, but created Gadalo of Parma Antipope. Enrico, hating the greatneſſe of theſe Biſhops, ſent vnto the Pope Aleſſandro, requiring him to reſigne the Papacy, & command the Cardinals to go into Germany, there to elect a new Pope. This Enrico was the firſt Prince that felt the force of ſpirituall diſpleaſure.The originall of the Guelfi, and Gibellini. An. 1080. For the Pope called a new counſaile in Rome, whereat he depriued him from the empire and kingdome. After that time, ſome people of Italy followed the Pope, and ſome the Emperour, which was the beginning of the factions who called themſelues Guelfi and Gibellini. Thus Italy deliuered from forreine inuaſion, by ciuill diſcord began to be tormented. Enrico being excommunicate, was by his owne people conſtrained to come to Rome on barefoote, and kneele to the Pope for pardon. Which happened in the yeare 1080. Notwithſtanding ſhortly after, there happened a new diſcord betwixt the Pope & Enrico. Wherupon the Pope again did excommunicate the Emperour, who ſent forthwith his ſon (alſo called Enrico) with an army to Rome. He with the helpe of the Romanes (who hated the Pope) beſieged him in his caſtle, till Roberto Guiſcardo came from Puglia to the reſcue. Enrico tarried not his comming, but returned alone into Germany. The Romanes perſiſted in their obſtinacie:Rome ſacked. ſo that Rome was againe by Roberto ſacked and brought vnto the former ruine, notwithſtanding it had bene lately by diuerſe Popes repaired. And becauſe of this Roberto the kings of Naples be deſcended, it ſeemeth not ſuperfluous particulerly to ſet downe his actions and diſcent. After the diſunion happened among the heires of Carlo Magno, (as haue bene before declared) the ſame occaſioned a new people of the North, called Normandi to aſſaile France, and conquered that country, which is called of them, Normandia: of thoſe people, ſome part came into Italy, in the time that the Berengarii, Saraſeni and Vnni troubled the ſame. They alſo tooke ſome townes in Romagna, which warres, they vertuouſly performed. Of thoſe Normaine princes, one called Tancredi, begot diuerſe ſonnes: amongſt whom was Guglielmo ſurnamed Terabar,
               The diſcent of the kings of Napoli. and Roberto called Guiſcardo. The principalitie being come to Guglielmo, and the tumults of Italy ſomewhat ceaſed, the Saraſeni did notwithſtanding ſtill hold Sicilia, and continually made rodes vpō the land of Italy. For which cauſe, Guglielmo agreed with the prince of Capoua and Salerno, and with Melorco the Greeke, (who gouerned Puglia and Calauria for the Emperour of Greece) to aſſault Sicilia, and after victorie, it was condeſcended amongſt them, to diuide the places victored, by foure parts. This enterpriſe had fortunate ſucceſſe, and the Saraſeni driuen out, they poſſeſſed Sicilia. After which victorie Melorco ſecretly cauſed men to come from Grecia, and for the Emperour tooke poſſeſsion of the whole Iland, not diuiding the ſpoyle, but tooke all to his owne ſhare, wherewith Guglielmo became diſcontented, yet hiding his offence till a time more conuenient, departed from Sicilia with the princes of Salerno, and Capoua: who being departed vpon the way homewards, Guglielmo returned not to Romagna, but with his ſouldiers marched towards Puglia, where he wonne Melfi. And ſhortly after (notwithſtanding the forces of the Grecian Emperour) he poſſeſſed well neare all Puglia and Calauria. In which prouinces, he gouerned in the time of Nicholao ſecundo. Roberto Guiſcardo his brother, hauing many differents with his nephewes, for the inheritance of land, vſed the authoritie of the Pope, to compound them. And the Pope did willingly fauour him, being deſirous to haue the friendſhip of Roberto, to the end that againſt the Emperours of Germany, and the people of Rome, he might be defended, as in effect, it fell after out, and hath bene alreadie declared, how at the requeſt of Gregorio ſeptimo, he draue Enrico from the ſiege of Rome, & ſubdued the people therein. To Roberto ſucceeded Ruggeri and Guglielmo, his ſonnes. To their poſſeſsions he annexed Napoli, and all thoſe lands which lie betweene Napoli and Rome. He gaue alſo Sicilia vnto Ruggero. But Guglielmo going afterwards to Conſtantinople
               
to marry the Emperours daughter, was by Ruggero depriued of his Country. Ruggero after this victorie became inſolent, and called himſelfe king of Italy: yet after contented with the title of King of Puglia and Sicilia, was the firſt that gaue name and lawe to that kingdome, which to this day within the auncient boundes thereof, is mainteined. Notwithſtanding it hath many times exchaunged both blood and Nation. Becauſe the race of Normandie beeing worne out, the Kingdome came to the handes of the Germaines, from them, to the French men, from the French to the Aragoneſi, and at this day it is poſſeſſed by the Flemmings. Now was Vrbano the ſecond,Pope Vrbano. 2. become Pope, who being hated in Rome, and fearing through the diſuniting of Italy, he could not in ſecuritie there remaine: determined a glorious enterpriſe. Firſt hee went into France, accompanied with all his Clergie, and in the citie of Anuerſa, he aſſembled many people: to whom he made a ſolemne Oration, wherin he perſuaded an enterpriſe againſt the Saraſeni, which tooke ſo great effect, as the people were deſirous to performe the ſame; which enterpriſe (with all others to that purpoſe) were called Crociata. For all thoſe men that went in that iourney,La Crociata. weare vppon their Armours and garments, a redde Croſſe. The princes and chiefe leaders of that enterpriſe, were Gotfredi Eustachio, and Alduino di Bulgo, Earle of Bologna, with one Pietro an Hermit: who for his godlie life and wiſedome was greatly reſpected. To this iourney, manie Kinges contributed treaſure, and manie priuate men without paie, therein perſonally ſerued. So great effectes did the religion worke in thoſe dayes, to perſwade the mindes of men, moued with the example of ſuch as were their heads. This enterpriſe had in the beginning glorious ſucceſſe: for all Aſia minor, Soria, and part of Egipt, were therein conquered by the Chriſtians. At which time beganne the order of Knighthood of Ieruſalem,
               The originall of knights of Ieruſalem. which to this day continueth, and is the chiefe obſtacle to the Turkes. About that time alſo grew the order of the Knights, Templarii: which for their euil life was ſhortly after ſuppreſſed. In diuerſe times following, diuerſe accidents happened: wherin many nations and many particuler men were aduaunced. For the furniſhing of this enterpriſe, the Kinges of Fraunce and England, the Piſani, Venetians, and Genoueſi, paſſed the ſea, and gained great reputation, fighting in fortune variable, till the time of Saladino the Saraſine: whoſe vertue (the rather through diſcord of the Chriſtians) did in the ende recouer all, that before had bene gotten. So were the Chriſtians after foure ſcorce and tenne yeares driuen out of thoſe Countries, which with great honour and happineſſe they had wonne and defended. After the death of Vrbano, Paſcale ſecundo was created Pope:Pope Paſcale 2. and Enrico the fourth became Emperour, who went to Rome, pretending friendſhip to the Pope, but beeing arriued there, by force hee tooke the Pope priſoner, and put him with all his Clergie in priſon: from whence they could not bee diſcharged, till the Pope had graunted, that the Emperour might diſpoſe of the Churches in Germany as himſelfe thought good. Then died the Counteſſe Matilda, and made the Church heire of all her Countrey. After the death of Paſcale and Enrico the fourth ſucceeded diuerſe Popes, and diuerſe Emperours, till at length, to the Papacie was elected Aliſſandro tertio, and to the Empire,Pope Aleſſandro. 3. 
               Federigo Sueuo called Barbaroſſa. The popes in that time had manie quarrelles with the people of Rome, and the Emperours: which were encreaſed in the raigne of Barbaroſſa. Federigo was a man of warre moſt excellent, but therewith ſo haughtie of minde and courage, as hee diſdained to giue place to the pope, notwithſtanding, hee came to Rome to bee Crowned Emperour, and peaceably returned into Germanie: though hee remayned there not very

long contented. For ſhortly after, he came againe into Italy to reforme ſome Towns in Lombardy, which would not obey him. At that time it happened, the Cardinal of S. Clement, by Nation a Romane, deuided himſelfe from the Pope Aliſſandro, & found meanes (by fauour of ſome Cardinalls) to be alſo choſen Pope. At that inſtant, Federigo the Emperour was with his Armie before the Citie of Crema: to whom Aliſſandro complained of the Antipope; the Emperour anſwered, that both he and the Antipope ſhould come vnto him, and then he would decide their controuerſie, and iudge which of them were true Pope. This anſwere diſpleaſed Aliſſandro, who conceauing thereby, that the Emperour was inclined to fauour the Antipope, did excommunicate him, and fled to Phillip King of Fraunce. Federigo in the meane while, proceeding in the Warres of Lombardy, tooke Millan, and razed it: which was the cauſe, that Verona, Padoua, and Vicenza (by common conſent) determined to reſiſt him. Then died the Antipope, in whoſe place Federigo created Guido of Cremona. The Romanes by meanes of the Popes abſence, and the buſines of the Emperour in Lombardy, had recouered a little authoritie in Rome, & began to command ſome Townes vnder them▪ and becauſe the Tuſculani would not yeeld to their authoritie, they went popularly to aſſaile them; who being aided by Federigo, the Romanes were ouerthrowne with ſo great ſlaughter, as after that Ouerthrow Rome was neuer well peopled, nor rich. In this meane ſpace, Pope Aliſſandro was returned to Rome, perſwading himſelfe that through the enmitie of the Romanes and Federigo, he might there ſafely remaine: and the rather, by reaſon of the Enemies which the Emperour had in Lombardy. Neuertheles, Federigo (ſetting aſide all reſpectes) beſieged Rome: where Aliſſandro tarried not his comming, but fled to Gulielmo King of Puglia, who after the death of Ruggiero remained Heire of that Kingdome. Federigo driuen thence by the Plague, left the Siege, and returned into Germany. The Townes of Lombardy which were rebelled, to the end they might the rather recouer Pauia & Tortona, (which ſtood for the Emperor) built a new Cittie, to be the refuge of that Warre, calling the ſame Aliſſandria, in honour of the Pope Aliſſandro, and in deſpite of the Emperour Federigo. Then died Guidone Antipope: in whoſe place Giouanni of Fermo was created. He, through the fauour of the Emperours Faction in Montefiaſcone, there dwelled: Pope Aliſſandro in the meane time was gone into Tuſcolo, called thether by that People; hoping that with his authoritie he might defend them from the Romanes. Thither came Embaſſadors from Enrico King of England, to declare vnto the Pope, that their King was not culpable in the murther of Thomas Biſhop of Canterbury, as he had bene publiquely ſlandered. For triall whereof, the Pope ſent two Cardinals into England, to examine the truth of that matter: who found the King not guiltie. Neuertheles, in reſpect of the infamie, and that he had not honoured that holy Man according to his deſert; they enioyned the King for penance to aſſemble his Nobilitie, and in their preſence to ſweare and proteſt his innocencie:The King of England put to penance by Pope Aliſſandro. and was moreouer commanded, that with all ſpeed, he ſhould at his proper charge ſend two hundred Souldiers to Ieruſalem, and there paye them for one yeare; and himſelfe within three yeares to goe thither in perſon, and lead with him an Armie the greateſt that hee could poſsibly make: beſides that, hee ſhould diſanull all things done within his Kingdome, to the preiudice of the Libertie Eccleſiaſticall, and conſent, that all and euerie Subiect of his might appeale to Rome. All which things Enrico graunted: and notwithſtanding hee were a mightie King, ſubmitted himſelfe to that Iudgement, which (at this day) euerie priuate man would be aſhamed to yeeld vnto. But notwithſtanding the Popes great power ouer Princes farre off, yet could he not make himſelfe obeyed of the Romanes: by whom hee was not ſuffered to dwell at Rome, though he promiſed not to intermeddle in anie thing,

ſaue only the Eccleſiaſticall gouernment. Hereby may be noted, that things vvhich ſeeme to bee, and be not, are dreaded more farre of, then feared neare at hand. By this time, Federigo vvas returned to Italy, and being prepared to make nevv vvarres vvith the Pope, all his prelates and Barons gaue him to vnderſtand, that they intended to leaue him, vnleſſe he reconciled himſelfe to the church: vvhereby this Emperour vvas conſtrained to go vnto Venice, and there to adore the pope; vvhereof enſued a full pacification. In this peace the pope depriued the Emperor of all his authoritie in Rome, and named Gulielmo king of Sicilia and Puglia for his confederate. Federigo not content to liue in peace, but louing the warres, determined to enterpriſe Aſia, & ſo gain glory againſt Mahomet, which againſt the Pope he could not. But being arriued at the riuer Cidno, enticed with the excellencie of that water,The death of Federigo the Emperor. hee waſhed himſelf therin, & ſodenly died. Wherby may be imagined that water did more good to the Mahumetans, then the popes excōmunicatiō to the Chriſtians: becauſe the excōmunicatiō did only allay the Emperors ambitiō, but this water did vtterly quench it. Federigo being dead, it remained onely for the pope to reforme the diſobedience of the Romans: & after many diſputations touching the creation of the Conſuls, it was agreed, that (according to the ancient cuſtom) they ſhuld be elected by the Romans: yet before they tooke their office vppon them, they ſhould ſweare fidelitie to the church; which agreement, cauſed Giouanni the Antipope to flie to Monte Albano, where ſhortly after hee died. Then died alſo Gulielmo king of Napoli, who hauing one onely ſonne called Tancredi, the pope determined to take that kingdome from him, but the nobilitie thereof would not conſent to the pope, reſoluing to yeelde their obedience to Tancredi. At that time Celestino tertio was pope,Pope Celeſtino 3. who deſirous to take the kingdome from Tancredi, ſought meanes that Enrico ſonne of Federigo ſhould be made Emperour, and promiſed him the kingdome of Naples, vpon condition that he ſhould reſtore vnto the church all thoſe townes thereunto belonging. And to make that action the more eaſie, hee tooke out of a monaſtery, Gostanza an olde woman, daughter of Gulielmo, and married her vnto Federigo. Thus paſſed the kingdome of Naples to the Germaines from the Normands, who were the auncient founders thereof. So ſoone as Enrico the Emperour had ſetled all thinges in Germany, hee came into Italy, accompanied with Gostanza his wife, and his ſonne, but foure yeares old, called Federigo. Where, with ſome difficultie (becauſe Tancredi was dead, leauing onely a litle ſonne called Rogeri) he poſſeſſed the kingdom. Within a ſmall time after in Sicilia died Enrico, to whome Federigo ſucceeded in the kingdome, and to the Empire was elected Ottone Duke of Saſſonia, through fauour of pope Innocentio quarto. But ſo ſoone as he was crowned Emperour,Pope Innocentio 4. contrary to all expectation, hee became enemie to the pope, ſurpriſed Romagna, and prepared to aſſault the kingdome. For which dooing, the pope did excommunicate him, all other men left him, and the electors created Federigo king of Napoli. Then came Federigo to Rome for the crowne, but the pope fearing his greatneſſe, denied him, and ſought to remooue him out of Italy, as hee had done before to Ottone. Therewith Federigo offended, went into Germany, and made much vvarre againſt Ottone, and at length ouerthrevv him. In the meane vvhile died Innocentio, vvho (beſides other his notable vvorkes) builded the Hoſpitall of Santo ſpirito in Rome.
               Pope Honorio 3. erector of the order of S. Franciſco Anno 1218. After him ſucceeded Honorio tertio, in vvhoſe time, beganne the orders of Santo Dominico and Franciſco, the yeare 1218. This pope crovvned Federigo, vnto vvhome Giouanni deſcended of Bauldouino king of Ieruſalem, vvho (vvith the remaine of the Chriſtians in Aſia ſtill poſſeſſed that title) gaue his kingdome to his daughter in marriage. Hereof it commeth, that vvho ſo euer is King of Napoli, is alſo intituled king of Ieruſalem. Italy in thoſe dayes vvas thus gouerned. The Romaynes made no

more Conſuls in Rome, but in ſteed of them, they created (with the ſame authoritie) ſometimes one, & ſometime more Senators. The league which the cities of Lombardy had made againſt Federigo Barbaroſſa, ſtill continued. The Cities confedered againſt the Emperour, were Milano, Breſcia, Mantoua, with the greater part of Romagna: and with them Verona, Vicenza, Padoua, and Treuigi. On the Emperours part, were Cremona, Bargamo, Parma, Reggio, Modena, & Trento. The other Cities and Caſtles of Lombardy, Romagna, and La Marca Treuigiana, according to their neceſsitie, fauoured ſomtimes the one, and ſometimes the other part. In the time of Ottone the third, came into Italy a man called Ezelino,
               Ezelino. of whom remained one ſonne, who likewiſe begot an other Ezelino, he being rich & mightie, folowed Federigo the ſecōd, who was (as hath bene before ſaid) enemy to the Pope. This Emperour brought into Italy, by the fauour of Ezelino, tooke Verona and Mantoua, razed Vicenza, ſurprized Padoua, & vanquiſhed the army of the townes confederate: & in the end, marched towards Toſcana. Ezelino in the meane time, ſurprized La Marca Triuigiana, but he could not take Ferrara, being defended by Azone of Eſte, & other ſoldiers ſent by the Pope frō 
               Lombardy.
               Azone de Eſte firſt Duke of Farrara. The ſiege then leuied, the Pope gaue that citie in Feudo to Azone of Este, of whome be deſcended all thoſe princes, that till this day haue there gouerned. Federigo ſtaied at Piſa, & being deſirous to become Lord of Toſcana, the rather to poſſeſſe the ſame, & diſcouer thoſe that fauoured him, from the other that were his enemies, practiſed diuiſion among the people of the country, which was afterwards the ruine of all Italy. Becauſe then the factions of Guelfi & Ghibellini encreaſed, calling them Guelfi that followed the Pope, and Ghibellini that followed the Emperour. In Piſtoia, theſe names of faction, were firſt begun. Federigo leauing Piſa, by many meanes aſſaulted & ſpoiled the townes belonging to the church: Inſomuch, that the Pope not hauing other remedie, proclaimed his Crociata againſt him, as did his predeceſſours againſt the Saraſeni.
               The Emperor forced to entertaine Saraſins. 
               Federigo then fearing to be abandoned by his ſouldiers (as Federigo Barbaroſſa and other Emperours had bene) enterteined great numbers of Saraſins, and to make them more willing to ſerue (knowing that they feared not the Popes curſes) he gaue them the citie of Nocera in the kingdome: perſwading himſelfe, that they hauing that refuge,Pope Innocent 4. might ſerue him with the more ſecuritie. Innocentio quarto became Pope, and miſtruſting Federigo, went to Genoua, and from thence into France: and called a Councell at the citie of Lions. Whereunto Federigo determined to goe, but was withholden by the rebellion of Parma: from which enterpriſe repulſed, he went into Toſcana, and thence, into Sicilia, where he died, leauing in Sucuia his eldeſt ſonne Corrado, and in Puglia his other ſonne, (being baſe borne) called Manfredi, whome hee had made Duke of Beneuento. Corrado beeing come for poſſeſsion of the kingdome, arriued at Napoli, and there died, leauing one litle ſonne called Curradino: who at that time remained in Germany. Then Manfredi firſt as gouernour to Curradino, and after reporting that Curradino was dead) againſt the Popes will, & the Neapolitans alſo (whom he forced to conſent) made himſelfe king. During theſe troubles in the kingdome, happened many quarrels betweene the factions of Guelfi and Ghibilini, the one being fauoured by the Popes Legate, and the other by Ezelino, who poſſeſſed welneare all Lombardy, on the other ſide of the riuer Po. And becauſe in this warre,The death of Ezelino. the citie of Padoua rebelled, Ezelino put to death twelue thouſand Cittizens thereof, and he himſelfe before the end of the warre, being then thirtie yeares of age, was ſlaine. After his death, all the townes by him poſſeſſed became free. Manfredi king of Napoli, according to the cuſtome of his aunceſtors, continued enemie to the church,Pope Vrbano 4. holding the Pope (called Vrbano quarto) in continuall diſtreſſe: in ſo much as the Pope proclaymed the Crociata againſt him; which done, hee went vnto Perugia, where hee remained, aſpecting his ſouldiers. Who (comming

thither ſlowly and in ſmall numbers) thought that to vanquiſh Manfredi, thoſe forces were not ſufficient. He therefore praied aide in France, of Carlo Duke of Angio, brother to king Lodouico, creating him king of Sicilia, and Napoli, deſiring him to come into Italy, & take poſſeſsion of thoſe kingdomes. But before Carlo could come to Rome, that Pope died, and Clemente quarto elected. In whoſe time,Pope Clement 4. 
               Carlo with thirtie gallies came to Ostia, appointing the reſt of his army to march thither by land. During his aboad in Rome, the Romanes to honour him, made him a Senator of Rome, and the Pope inueſted him in the kingdome, with condition he ſhould paie yearely fiftie thouſand florines to the church. The Pope alſo decreed, that neither Carlo, nor none of his ſucceſſours in that kingdome, ſhould euer be elected Emperours. Carlo then went on in his iourny againſt Manfredi, whom he vanquiſhed and ſlew, neare to Beneuento, whereby hee poſſeſſed Sicilia, and the kingdome. Notwithſtanding Curradino, to whome by teſtament of his father that kingdome apperteined, aſſembling great forces in Germany, came into Italy againſt Carlo, and fought with him at Tagliacozzo, where he was ouerthrowne; and being diſguiſed, fled: yet afterwards was taken, and ſlaine. Italy then continued quiet,Pope Adriano 5. till the raigne of Adriano quinto, at which time, Carlo dwelling in Rome, and gouerning there by the office of Senatour, the Pope could not endure his authoritie, and therefore vvent to inhabit at Viterbo: from thence he ſent vnto Ridolpho the Emperour, deſiring him to come into Italy againſt Carlo. Thus the Popes ſometimes for loue of religion,The ambition of Popes, a ruyne to Italy. and ſometimes for their owne ambition, ceaſed not to call into Italy newe men, and ſtirre vp newe warres. For ſo ſoone as any prince was by them made mightie, repenting the ſame, they practiſed his ouerthrow. Neither would they ſuffer that anie ſhould poſſeſſe that Countrey, which themſelues (through their weakeneſſe) could not. Yet did the Princes alwaies feare them, becauſe either by fighting or flying, they preuailed: if they were not by ſome practiſe oppreſſed, as was Bonifacio octauo, and ſome others who were taken by colour of friendſhip, which the Emperours to them pretended. Ridolpho came not into Italy, beeing withholden with his warres againſt the King of Bohemia. In the meane time died Adriano, and in his place was created Nicholao tertio, deſcended of the houſe of Orſini,
               Pope Adriano 3. a man verie bolde and ambitious. Hee by all meanes poſsible ſought to diminiſh the authoritie of Carlo: and deuiſed that Ridolpho the Emperour ſhould complaine, that Carlo mainteined a gouernour in Toſcana in fauour of the Guelfi. Carlo gaue credite vnto the Emperour, and reuoked thence his gouernour. And the Pope forthwith ſent thither one of his nephewes a Cardinall, to be gouernour for the Empire. So that the Emperour for this honor done vnto him by the Pope, reſtored Romagna vnto the Church, which by his aunceſtors had bene taken away. The Pope then created Bertoldo Orſino, Duke of Romagna. And imagining himſelfe mightie inough to ſhewe his face to Carlo, tooke from him the office of Senatour: and made a decree, that no man deſcended of royall race, ſhould after poſſeſſe that dignitie. He had alſo deuiſed to take Sicilia from Carlo, and practiſed with Piero king of Aragon: which practiſe in the time of his ſucceſſour tooke effect. He intended moreouer, to make two new kings of his owne houſe, the one in Lombardy, the other in Tuſcan: whoſe powers might defend the church, both from the Germaines that would attempt to come into Italy, and from the French men, who were alreadie in Napoli. But with this determination, he died. And was the firſt Pope, that openly manifeſted his own ambition; practiſing (vnder colour to make the church great) to honour and enrich his owne kindred. For as before this time, no mention was made of the aduancement of Popes kinsfolkes or poſteritie, ſo afterwards, euery hiſtorie doth ſhew, that the Popes haue ſtudied for nothing more, then how to aduance their owne blood.

And as heretofore they haue laboured to make them princes, ſo (if it were in their power) they would now procure the Papacy to be heritable. Yet true it is, that hitherto all principalities by them erected, haue had no long being, for ſo ſoone as that Pope (who ordeined their aduancement) did faile, the honour of the perſon aduanced,Pope Martino 3. decaied with him. Then Martino tertio became Pope, who being a French man, fauoured Carlo, and in his aide, ſent ſouldiers vnto Romagna which then rebelled. And his campe being before Furly, Guido Bonati (a man learned in Aſtrologie) perſwaded the people, that ſo ſoone as hee gaue them a token, they ſhould preſently aſſault their enemies, which they did, & in that victory, al the French mē were takē & ſlain. About this time, the practiſe of Nicolao tertio with Piero King of Aragon, was put in execution. By meanes whereof, the people of Sicilia murthered all the French men that could be found in that Iland: which done, King Piero tooke poſſeſsion, alledging, that hauing married Gostanza daughter of Manfredi, that country to him apperteined. Carlo preparing for a new war to recouer his loſſe, died: leauing one ſonne called Carlo the ſecond. Who being taken priſoner in the war of Sicilia, and deſirous of libertie, promiſed to returne to priſon, if within three yeares he could not obteine of the Pope, that the houſe of Aragon ſhould be inueſted to the kingdome of Sicilia. Ridolpho the Emperour, intending to haue come into Italy, and recouered the reputation of the Empire, came not, but ſent thither an Embaſſador with authoritie to giue freedome to all thoſe cities, which would buy the ſame at his hands: as many did, & with their libertie, chaunged alſo their maner of liuing. Then ſucceeded to the Empire Adulpho of Saſſonia,
               Pope Celeſtino and Bonifacio 8. & to the Papacy Pietro Murone, named Pope Celeſtino: who being an Hermit and full of deuotion, within ſeuen moneths reſigned the Papacy, and Bonifacio Octauo was elected. The heauens knowing a time would come, when Italy ſhould be deliuered, both from the French men and Almaines, & that the country might be recouered wholy in poſſeſsion of Italians, to the end the Pope failing of ſtraungers, might not be able to hold his reputation, cauſed two mightie families to ariſe in Rome. The one called Orſini, the other Colonni: whoſe power and neareneſſe, might keep downe the Popes from aſpiring. The Pope Bonifacio aware therof, practiſed to extirpate the Colonni, & did for that purpoſe not onely excommunicate them, but alſo againſt them publiſhed the Crociata. Which proceeding, although it ſomewhat offended them, yet did it much more offend the church: becauſe thoſe ſwords which in defence of the faith had vertuouſly preuailed, being employed for priuate ambition againſt the Chriſtians, became blunt: and ſo the Popes deſire to enforce the minds of others, wrought a contrary effect, and by litle & litle diſarmed themſelues. This Pope did alſo depoſe two Cardinals of that houſe of Colonna, and the chiefe of them called Sciarra, diſguiſed himſelfe, and fled. Afterwards being taken by Pirates, was made a ſlaue in a galley, til arriued at Marſilia, was there by fortune knowne, redeemed, and ſent into France to King Philippo, who had bene excommunicate, & depriued of his kingdom by Bonifacio. Philippo conſidering with himſelfe, that to make warres with the Pope, either he was not ſtrong inough, or ſhould therin aduenture great dangers: determined to worke by practiſe, & pretending to procure peace with the Pope, ſent ſecretly Sciarra into Italy, who being come to Anagnia, where the Pope then was, with the aide of friends in the night tooke him. And albeit the people of that towne did ſhortly after deliuer him, yet of verie melancholly and ſorrovv, the Pope diſtraught of his vvits,Pope Bonifacio inuentor of the Guibileo. died. This Bonifacio vvas he that ordeined the Iubilie, in the yeare 1300. and commanded that euery hundreth yeare, the ſame ſhould be ſo ſolemnized. After that time happened many troubles betvveene the factions of Guelfi & Ghibellini. And by reaſon that Italy vvas abandoned by the Emperors, many towns became free, and many others by tyrants poſſeſſed. Pope Benedetto reſtored the Hat

to the Cardinals Coloneſi, and abſolued Philippo the French King.Pope Clements 5. To him ſucceeded Clemente quinto, vvho being a French man, remoued his court into France in the year 1306. In the meane ſpace Carlo the ſecond King of Napoli, died. To that kingdom ſucceeded Robarto his ſonne: and to the Empire, Arrigo of Lucemburgh: who notwithſtanding the abſence of the Pope from Rome, vvent thither to be crowned. By meane of that iourney, grevv many troubles in Lombardy, becauſe all thoſe that had bene baniſhed, either Guelfi or Ghibellini vvere admitted to returne to their townes, and there being, made ſo great quarrels among themſelues, as the Emperour vvith all his power could not appeaſe. The Emperour then departed from Lombardy to Genoua, and ſo to Piſa, vvhere he practiſed to take Toſcana from the king Robarto. But hauing no ſucceſſe, vvent on to Rome, where he remained not long, being driuen out by the Orſini, and the friends of king Robarto. Then returned he to Piſa, vvhere he deuiſed (for his better proceeding in the vvars of Toſcana, and the rather alſo to remooue king Robarto from his gouernment) that Frederigo king of Sicilia ſhould aſſault thoſe countries. But at ſuch time, as hee hoped at one inſtant) to performe both thoſe enterpriſes, he died: and Lodouico of Bauiera, was choſen Emperour. In this meane ſpace, was created Giouanni 22. In whoſe dayes the Emperour ceaſed not to perſecute the Guelfi,
               Pope Iohn 22. and the church which vvas chiefly defended by king Robarto, and the Florentines. Wherof grew great vvarre in Lombardy, by the Viſconti, againſt the Guelfi, and in Toſcana, by Castruccio of Lucca, againſt the Florentines. And becauſe the family of Viſconti, vvas that vvhich beganne the Dukedome of Milan (one of the fiue principallities that gouerned Italy) I thinke good more at large hereafter to intreate of them. After that the league of the cities of Lombardy vvas concluded, (as hath bene beforeſaid) and they reſolued to defend themſelues from Federigo Barbaroſſa: Milan alſo being repaired of the ruines, conſpired vvith thoſe cities of the league, to be reuenged of former iniuries. Which league brideled Barbaroſſa, and for a time gaue countenance to the faction of the church then in Lombardy. During theſe vvarres, the houſe of Torre grevv to great reputation, ſo long as the Emperours had in that country ſmall authoritie. But vvhen Federigo the ſecond, vvas come into Italy, and the Ghibellini (through the helpe of Ezelino) became ſtrong, the humour of Ghibilini ſprung vp in euery citie, and the houſe of Viſconti, taking part with that factiō, chaſed out of Milan the family of Torre: yet were they not long out, but by meane of a peace concluded betwixt the Emperour and the Pope, hee with his Court beeing in France, and Arrigo of Lucimburg going to Rome for the Crowne, was receiued into Milan, by Maffeo Viſconti, and Guido della Torre, who at that time were chiefe of thoſe houſes: yet Maffeo intending by helpe of the Emperour to driue Guido out of the Citie, and ſuppoſing that enterpriſe the more likely, becauſe Guido was in faction contrary to the Empire: hee tooke occaſion vpon the complaints of the people againſt the euil demeanor of the Germains, ſlily perſwading and encouraging euery man to take Armes, and deliuer themſelues from the ſeruitude of that barbarous nation. And when all things were made ready,A practiſe of Ma. Viſconts againſt the houſe of Torre. he cauſed a ſecret miniſter of his to mooue a tumult. Whereat, all the people tooke Armes againſt the name of Germany, and Maffeo with his ſonnes and followers, ſuddeinly armed, went to Arrigo, letting him vnderſtand, that this tumult proceeded frō thoſe of the houſe of Torre: who not contented to liue priuate in Milan, tooke occaſion to ſpoyle him, gratifie the Guelfi of Italy, and make themſelues princes of that citie. Notwithſtanding, hee perſwaded the Emperour to be of good cheare, for they and their followers would in euery reſpect ſaue and defend him. Arrigo beleeued all that which Maffeo had ſpoken, & ioyning his forces with the Viſconti, aſſailed thoſe Della Torre. Who beeing diſperſed in diuerſe places of the Cittie to appeaſe the tumult, ſo many of them as could be found were ſlaine, and the reſt ſpoyled & ſent into

               Italy. Maffeo Viſconti, thus made (as it were) prince of Milan, had diuerſe ſonnes, the chiefe of them were called Galiazzo, and Azo: and after them, Luchino & Giouanni. Giouanni became Archbiſhop of that Citie, and of Luchino who died before him) remained Barnabo,
               The meane how the Viſconti aſpired to be Dukes of Milan. and Galiazzo called Conte de Vertu. He, after the death of the Archbiſhop, killed Barnabo his vncle, and ſo became onely prince of Milan, and was the firſt that had the title of Duke. Of him deſcended Philippo & Giouan Mariangilo who being ſlaine by the people of Milan, the ſtate remained onely to Philippo, and he hauing no heires male, the Dukedome was tranſlated from the houſe of Viſconti to the Sforzi, as ſhall be hereafter declared. But to returne to our matter, Lodouico the Emperour to giue reputation to his faction, and take the Crowne, came into Italy, and being arriued at Milan, to the end he might leauy mony of the Milaneſi, offred to make them free, and for proofe thereof impriſoned the Viſconti. Afterwards, by mediation of Castruccio of Lucca, deliuered them, and went to Rome. Then the more eaſily to diſturbe Italy, he made Piero de la Coruara, Antipope: by whoſe authoritie and the force of Viſconti, he hoped to keepe downe the contrary faction, both in Toſcana and Lombardy. But Castruccio then died, which was the cauſe of his ruine: for Piſa and Lucca preſently rebelled. And the Piſani ſent the Antipope priſoner to the Pope, thē remaining in France. Whereupon the Emperour diſpairing of his enterpriſe in Italy, returned to Germany.
               The king of Boemia called into Italy. So ſoone as he was gone, Giouanni king of Bohemia, came into Italy, called thither by the Ghibilini of Breſcia, and poſſeſſed that Citie, with one other called Bergamo. And foraſmuch as the comming of this king was with conſent of the Pope (although hee fained the contrarie) the Legate of Bologna fauoured him: imagining, for that cauſe the Emperour would no more returne into Italy, by whoſe departure thence, the country was greatly altered. The Florentines and the king Robarto, ſeeing that the Legate fauoured the enterpriſe of the Ghibilini, became enemies to all thoſe that the Legate and the king of Bohemia fauoured: againſt whom (without reſpect of Guelfi or Ghibilini) many princes ioyned. Among them were the Viſconti, the family of La Scala Filippino Gonzaga of Mantoua, the houſe of Carrara, and Eſte: wherupon the Pope did excommunicate them all. The king for feare of this league, went home to aſſemble more forces, & returned with thē into Italy, & had (though hardly) the victorie, and then (though with diſpleaſure of the Legate) returned to Bohemia, leauing onely Reggio, and Modena, manned: recommending Parma to Marſilio and Piero de Roſsi, who were in that citie of moſt power. He being gone, Bologna reuolted to the league, and diuided among them, foure Citties apperteining to the church: allotting Parma to the houſe of Scala, Reggio to Gonzaga, Modena to Este, and Lucca to the Florentines. During the conqueſt of theſe Cities, grew great warres, but they were chiefly by the Venetians, compounded. It may perhaps be thought ſtrange, that among ſo many accidents of Italy, I haue omitted to ſpeake of the Venetians common weale, being for the order and power thereof, to be preferred before euerie other principallitie. To ſatisfie that admiration, the cauſe thereof being knowne, I wil looke backward to time long ſince paſſed: and declare what beginning that Cittie had.The originall of Vinegia. King Attila at ſuch time as he beſieged Aquilegia, the inhabitants of that towne (hauing long defended themſelues, & diſpairing) fled with their goods to the rocks within the point of Mare Adriatico. The Padouani ſeeing the fire at hand, and fearing that Aquilegia being wonne, Attila would aſſault them; carried all their moueables of moſt value into the ſame ſea, to a place there called Riuoalto: whither they alſo ſent their wiues, children, and aged men, leauing the youth to defend the citie. Aquilegia being taken, Attila defaced Padoua, Monſelice, Vicenza, and Verona. The Padouani and the chiefe of the others, ſeated themſelues in the mariſhes about Riuoalto. Likewiſe all the people of that prouince (which vvas aunciently called Venetia) vvere driuen

out by the ſame misfortune, did alſo flie thither. Thus conſtrained by neceſsitie, they abandoned faire and fertile countries, to inhabit theſe ſteril and paludious places void of all cōmoditie. And yet, becauſe great numbers of people were at one inſtant come thither, they made that place not onely habitable, but alſo pleaſant: ordeining among themſelues lawes and orders, which amidſt ſo great ruines of Italy, they obſerued; and within ſhort ſpace encreaſed in force and reputation. For beſides the inhabitants aforeſaid, many of the cities of Lombardy (chiefly thoſe that feared the cruelty of their king Clefi) fled thither, which was no ſmall encreaſe to that citie. So that in the time of Pipino king of France, when at the requeſt of the Pope, he came to driue the Lombardi out of Italy, it was agreed in Capitulations, betwixt him and the Emperour of Grecia, that the Duke of Beneuento and the Venetians, ſhould be ſubiects neither to the one nor the other, but among themſelues enioy libertie. Moreouer, conſidering that as neceſsitie had driuen them to dwell within the water, ſo it behoued them without helpe of the firme land, to ſeeke meanes wherby they might procure their own liuelihood. For which purpoſe they made ſhips & gallies, & with them ſailed throughout the world, and filled their citie with ſundry ſorts of marchandiſe, whereof other men hauing neceſsitie, required free acceſſe vnto them. At that time and many yeares after, the Venetians thought not vppon other dominions, then thoſe where the traffique of their marchandiſe might ſafely arriue. Then they wan diuers hauens in Grecia, Soria, and in the paſſages that the French men made in Aſia: becauſe they oftentimes imploying the Venetian ſhippes, appointed vnto them, (as a reward) the Ile of Candia. While in this eſtate and order they liued, their name by ſea was terrible, and vpon the firme land of Italy venerable. So that in all controuerſies that happened, they were (for the moſt part) arbitrators: as in cōtrouerſies which roſe in the league, by reaſon of thoſe cities which they had diuided amongſt them. For that controuerſie being recommended to the Venetians, they ordered that Bargamo & Breſcia ſhould appertaine to the Viſconti. But in proceſſe of time hauing conquered Padoua, Vicenza, Triuigi, Verona, Bargamo, Breſcia, with diuerſe cities in the kingdom, and Romagna, (entiſed with deſire of gouernment) they atteined ſo great an opinion of power and reputatiō, that not only of the princes of Italy, but alſo of the kings beyōd the mountaines they became feared. Wherupon thoſe princes conſpiring togither, tooke from them in one day, all the ſtates and countries vvhich they in many yeares, and vvith infinite expences had gained. And though in theſe late times they haue recouered part, yet not recouering their forces and reputation, do (like all other princes of Italy) remaine at the deuotion and diſcretion of others. Now was Benedetto 12. come to the Papacy, who ſeeing himſelfe driuen out of Italy,
               The decree of Pope Benedetto 12. againſt the Emperour. and fearing that the Emperour Lodouico ſhould become Lord thereof, determined to make all thoſe his friends, who had vſurped the townes which the Emperour poſſeſſed. To the end, that thereby they ſhould haue cauſe to feare the Empire, and ioyne with him in the defence of Italy. For the more aſſurance of this attempt, he made a decree, that all tyrants of Lombardy ſhould by iuſt title poſſeſſe the townes by them vſurped. But the Pope preſently vpon this grant, died, and Clemente ſexto, elected in his place. The Emperour then ſeeing with what liberalitie the Pope had giuen the towns belōging to the Empire,The Emperours decree to the Popes preiudice. determined to be no leſſe liberall of the Popes goods, then the Pope had bene of his: and therefore gaue freely all lands belonging to the church, which any tyrant had vſurped; and they to hold them, by authoritie imperiall. By meane whereof, Galiotto Malateſti and his brethren became Lords of Rimino, Peſaro, & Fano. Anthonio di Montefeltro of la Marca and Vrbin: Gentile da Varano of Camerino. Guido di Polenta of Rauenna. Sinibaldo Ordalaffi of Furli, and Ceſena: Giouanni Manfredi of Faenza, Lodouico Alidoſi, of Imola. Beſides theſe, many others poſſeſſed towns belōging to the church:

ſo as fevv remained out of the hands of one Prince or other, vvhich vvas the cauſe that the Church (till the comming of Aliſſandro 6.) vvas holden dovvne & vveake; but he vvith the ruine of theſe Lords or their poſteritie, reſtored the ſame. At ſuch time as the Emperor made this grant, he remained at Trento, & ſeemed as thogh he vvould paſſe from thence into Italy; wherby grevv many warres in Lombardy: & by that occaſiō, the Viſconti became Lords of Parma. Then died king Robarto of Napoli; of vvhom remained only tvvo grand children, vvomen, begotten by Carlo his Son, vvho long before vvas dead; bequeathing his kingdom to the elder of them, called Giouanna,
               Giouanna Q of Naples. vvhom he vvilled to marrie vvith Andrea ſonne to the K. of Vngaria his nephevv. This Andrea continued not long her husband, but vvas by her murdred, & ſhe married anevv to a brother in lavv of his, called Lodouico prince of Tarranto. But K. Lodouico brother to Andrea, to reuenge his death, came vvith Forces into Italy, & draue the Q. Giouanna vvith her husband out of the kingdom. About this time hapned in Rome a thing very memorable, vvhich vvas, that one called Nicholo di Lorenzo Chancellor in the Campidoll,
               Nicholo di Lorenzo. draue the Senators out of Rome, & made himſelf (vnder title of Tribuno) chiefe of the Romane Common vveale: reducing the ſame into the ancient forme of gouernment, vvith ſo great reputation of iuſtice & vertue, as not only the tovvnes nere hand, but alſo al Italy ſent Embaſſadors vnto him. Whereby, the ancient prouinces, ſeeing Rome reſtored, looked vp; and ſome of them moued vvith feare, and ſome vvith hope, honoured him. But Nicholo (notvvithſtanding ſo great authoritie, in the beginning of this action, abandoned himſelfe; and diſpairing (as it ſeemeth) to performe ſo great an enterpriſe, not being inforced by any man, ſecretly fled, and vvent to King Carlo of Bohemia: vvho by order of the pope (in deſpite of Lodouico of Bauieria, elected Emperour) apprehended Nicholo, & ſent him to the Pope priſoner. A vvhile after, (as it vvere to imitate this Nicholo) another man called Franceſco Barocegli,
               Franceſco Barocegli. ſurprized the Tribunate, and draue thence the Senators. Vpon vvhich accident, the Pope (the rather to repreſſe that diſorder) tooke Nicholo out of priſon, reſtored him to the Tribuneſhip, & ſent him to Rome. Nicholo there arriued, exerciſed the office, and put Franceſco to death. But the Colonneſi beeing enemies to Nicholo, ſhortly after killed him alſo, & reſtored the Senators to their places.Q. Giouanna depoſed. In the meanetime, the King of Vngaria hauing depoſed the Queene Giouanna, returned to his Kingdome. The Pope liking better the neighborhood of the Queene than of that King, found meanes that he vvas pleaſed to reſtore the Kingdome: vpon condition, that the Queenes husband ſhould content himſelfe vvith the title of Tarranto, and not be called King. The yeare 1350. being come, the Pope thought good that the Giubileo erected by Pope Bonifacio octauo at the end of euerie hundred yeare, might be reduced to fiftie yeare, and made a Decree, that aftervvards ſo it ſhould be. The Romanes receauing the ſame as a benefit, vvere content the pope ſhould ſend to Rome foure Cardinalls to reforme the ſtate of that Cittie, & make Senators there, thoſe, whom himſelfe thought good. The Pope alſo proclaymed Lodouico of Tarranto King of Napoli: for which fauor, the Queen Giouanna gaue vnto the Church the Citie of Auignion, which was her patrimony. By this time Luchino Viſconti was dead, wherby Giouanni Archbiſhop of Millan remained only Lord of that ſtate, who made many warres vpon Toſcana, & other countries his neighbors and therby became exceeding mightie. After his death ſucceeded Barnabo & Galiazzo his nephewes: but within ſhort ſpace Galiazzo died, leauing one ſonne called Giouan Galiazzo, who diuided that State with Barnabo. At this time Carlo K. of Bohemia was Emperor,Pope Innocentio ſexto. and Innocentio 6. Pope; who ſent into Italy Cardinall Egidio, by Nation a Spaniard, who with his vertue recouered great reputation to the Church, not onely in Romagna & Rome, but alſo throughout al Italy. He reſtored Bologna, vſurped by the

Archbiſhop of Millan: he conſtrained the Romanes to receaue one Stranger to bee a Senator, who yearely ſhould be ſent by the Pope: he made honourable compoſition with the Viſconti: he vanquiſhed and tooke priſoner Iohn Aguto an Engliſh-man, who with foure thouſand of his owne Nation ſerued in Toſcana to the ayde of the Ghibelini. Vrbano quinto being come to the Papacie,Pope Vrbano. 5. and vnderſtanding of ſo manie Victories, determined to viſite Italy and Rome: whether alſo came Carlo the Emperour; who (after a few months) went to the Kingdome, and the Pope to Auignion. Vrbano being dead, Gregorio duodecimo was created: and becauſe then died the Cardinall Egidio, Italy was returned to trouble, occaſioned by the Townes confederate againſt the Viſconti. Wherevpon the Pope ſent firſt a Legate into Italy with ſixe thouſand Brittaines, after in perſon followed himſelfe, and ſetled the Court in Rome, in the yeare 1376. which had continued from thence in Fraunce 71. yeares.The Papall court return
                     •
                  d to Rome. An. 1376. After the death of this Pope, was created Vrbano ſexto. Shortly after at Fondi, ten Cardinals (who ſaid Vrbano was not well choſen) elected Clemente octauo. Then the Genoueſi (who diuers yeares had liued vnder gouernment of the Viſconti) rebelled. Betwixt them and the Venetians (for the Iland called Tenedo) grew Warres of great importance, and deuided all Italy.
               Great artillery firſt vſed in Italy 1376. In theſe Warres was great Shot and Artillarie firſt ſeene, as Inſtruments then newly deuiſed by the Almaines. And albeit the Genoueſi had for a time in this Warre the aduantage, and diuers moneths beſieged Venice, yet in the end the Venetians had the better, and by mediation of the Pope made peace, in the yeare 1381. Then chaunced a ſchiſme in the Church, and Queene Giouanna fauored the Antipope: for which cauſe, Vrbano practiſed an enterpriſe againſt her, and ſent Carlo Durezzo (deſcended of the Kings of Napoli) into the Kingdome; who there arriued, poſſeſſed himſelfe, and forced the Queene to flye vnto 
                  
                     ••
                  aunce. The French King therewith offended, ſent Lodouico de Angio into Italy, to recouer the Kingdome for the Queene, remooue the Pope Vrbano, and put the Antipope into poſſeſsion: but Lodouico in the midſt of this enterprice died, and his Souldiers returned into Fraunce. The Pope in the meane while, went vnto Napoli, where hee impriſoned nine Cardinals, for hauing followed the faction of France, and the Antipope. That done, he quarelled vvith the king, for not hauing made a nephew of his Prince of Capoua: yet faining not to force much thereof, deſired to haue Nocera for his dvvelling, vvhere aftervvards he aſſembled great forces, and practiſed to depriue the king. (The king then marching tovvards him,) the Pope tarried not, but fled to Genoua, vvhere he executed thoſe Cardinals vvhom he had before impriſoned. From thence he vvent to Rome, and there to giue himſelfe reputation, created 28. Cardinals. At this time vvent Carlo king of Napoli to Vngaria, and vvas created king, and ſhortly after ſlaine: hauing left in Napoli his vvife vvith tvvo children, Ladiſlao and Giouanna. At this time alſo, Giouanni Galiazzo Viſconti, had murdered Barnabo his vncle, & taken into his hands the ſtate of Milan. And not content vvith the Dukedome of all Lombardy, he ſought to be alſo Lord of Toſcana. But vvhen he hoped to haue taken the poſſeſsion, and be crovvned king of Italy, died. Next vnto Vrbano ſexto, ſucceeded Bonifacio nono. Then died alſo in Auignion the Antipope Clemente ſeptimo. And in his place vvas elected Benedetto 13.Pope Benedetto 13. In theſe dayes liued in Italy many ſouldiers of forreine nations, English men, Almains, and Britaines: brought thither partly by thoſe Princes vvho many times had ſerued in Italy, and partly ſent by the Popes, vvhen they remained at Auignion. Againſt theſe people, the princes of Italy long time made vvarre, and at length Lodouico da Conio aroſe, vvho making a company of Italians, calling the ſame S. Giorgio, their vertue & diſcipline tooke from the ſtraungers all reputation, and brought the ſame to the Italians: of vvhom euer after the princes of Italy, in all their vvars vvere ſerued. The Pope by reaſon of the

controuerſie betwixt him and the Romanes, went vnto Sceſi, where he remained till the Iubileo in the yeare 1400. At which time, the Romanes for their profit were content he ſhould returne to Rome, and alſo place there one Senator at his election: and therewith alſo to fortifie the Caſtle of S. Angelo. With theſe conditions the Pope returned, and the rather to enrich the Church, he ordained that euerie Benefice falling void,The firſt frutes of Benefices taken by the Pope. ſhould pay the firſt frutes into the treaſure houſe. After the death of Gicuan Galiazzo Duke of Milan, albeit he left two ſonnes called Giouanniariangelo and Philippo, yet his Countrey became diuided into manie parts. And in the troubles which thereby happened, Giouanniariangelo was ſlaine, and Philippo for a time remained priſoner in the Caſtle of Pauia: yet by good fortune, and fauour of the Captaine, was ſet at libertie. Among others that vſurped the poſſeſsions of this Duke, was Gulielmo Della Scalla: who (being a baniſhed man) remained in the hands of Franceſco de Carrara Lord of Padoua; through whom he recouered the State of Verona, which hee enioyed not long, becauſe Franceſco procured him to be poiſoned, and ſurprized the Cittie. Thereuppon the Vicentini (hauing liued quietly vnder the enſigne of the Viſconti, and fearing the greatnes of Franceſco) yeelded their obedience to the Venetians: who preſently tooke armes againſt the Lord of Padoua, and firſt depriued him of Verona, and afterwards wan the Cittie of Padoua. In the meane ſpace died Bonifacio,
               Pope Innocentio 7. and Innocentio ſeptimo was elected Pope: to whom the people of Rome preſented an humble requeſt; deſiring it might pleaſe his Holines to deliuer into theyr hands the Fortreſſes, and reſtore them to their libertie: which ſute the Pope denied. The people then praied aid of Ladiſlao King of Napoli; yet afterwards falling to agreement, the Pope returned to Rome, being fled from thence for feare of the people, and remained at Viterbo, where he had created a nephew of his to bee Earle of La Marca; which done, hee ſhortly after died, and Gregorio duodecimo was created Pope: with condition, that hee ſhould reſigne the Papacie, whenſoeuer the Antipope did the like. By perſwaſion of the Cardinals, intending to make proofe, whether the Church could bee reunited or not; Benedetto Antipope came to Porto Venere, and Gregorio to Luca: where they practiſed manie matters, but nothing tooke effect; ſo that the Cardinals (both of the one and the other Pope) did forſake them. Pope Benedetto went into Spaine, and Gregorio to Rimini. The Cardinals on the other part, with the fauour of Baldaſarre Coſſa Cardinall and Legate of Bologna, ordained a Councell at Piſa,
               K. Ladiſlao depoſed by pope Aliſſandro 5. where they created Aliſſandro quinto, who did excommunicate Ladiſlao, giuing that Kingdome to Luigi de Angio: and then with the aide of the Florentines, Genoueſi, and Venetians, togither with Baldaſer Coſſa Legate, aſſaulted Ladiſlao, and tooke from him Rome. But in the heate of this warre died Aliſſandro, and Baldaſer Coſſa was elected, calling himſelfe Giouanni viceſsimo tertio. He, departing from Bologna (beeing there made Pope) went from thence to Rome, and there met Luigi de
                     •
                   Angio, come thither with a Nauie from Prouenza. Then preſently they aſſaulted Ladiſlao, and ouerthrew him: yet through the default of their Leaders, the victorie was not followed; by meanes whereof, within ſhort ſpace after, the King recouered an Armie, and againe ſurprized Rome. The Pope then fled to Bologna, and Luigi to the prouince. The Pope imagining how he might diminiſh the greatnes of Ladiſlao, found meanes that Sigiſmondo King of Vngaria ſhould be choſen Emperour, perſwading him to come into Italy; which he did, and met with the Pope at Mantoua. There they agreed to call a Councell generall, and therein to reunite the Church: the rather to become able to withſtand the force of their enemies. At that time were three Popes, Gregorio, Benedetto, and Giouanni, who made the Church exceeding weake,Three popes at one time. and without reputation. The place elected for this Councell, was Costanza a Citie of Germanie. But contrarie to the expectation of Giouanni, the

death of Ladiſlao, remoued the occaſion of Councell: notwithſtanding, being alreadie bound by promiſe, hee could not refuſe to goe thither. Being arriued at Costanza (ouerlate knowing this errour) he practiſed to flie thence, but was there ſtaied, put in priſon, and conſtrained to reſigne the Papacie. Gregorio alſo the other Antipope, by his meſſenger reſigned. Benedetto the third Antipope, refuſing to reſigne, was condemned for an heriticke, and being abandoned by his Cardinals, was in the end enforced to reſigne. The Councell then created Oddo Colonna, who was called Pope Martino quarto. And ſo the Church, after fortie yeares of diuiſion was vnited,The Curch after fortie yeares diuiſion, was vnited hauing bene all that time in the hands of diuerſe Popes. In thoſe dayes, (as hath bene beforeſaid) Philippo Viſconti, remained in the Caſtle of Pauia. But Fantino Cane, who (during the troubles of Lombardy) poſſeſſed himſelfe of Vercelli, Alliſandria, Nouara Tortona, and had alſo gathered great riches, then died. And not hauing anie heire, bequeathed his poſſeſsions to Beatrice his wife; deſiring his friendes to procure ſhe might be married to Philippo. By which marriage, Philippo became potent, and recouered Milan, with all the ſtate of Lombardy. Afterwards, to declare himſelfe thankfull for ſo great a benefit, he accuſed Beatrice of adulterie, and put her to death. Thus atteined to be a Prince moſt mightie, he beganne to thinke vpon the warres of Toſcana, before entended by his father Giouan Galiazzo. Ladiſlao King of Napoli, at his death, left vnto his ſiſter Giouanna, not onely the kingdome, but alſo a a great Armie, gouerned by the principall Leaders of all Italy. Among the chiefe of whom, was Sforza di Contignuola, in thoſe dayes a man of warre, of ſingular reputation. The Queene (the rather to eſchue a ſlaunder by one Pandolfello a man brought vp by her ſelfe) tooke to husband Iacobo Della Marchia, who was deſcended from the French Kings, vpon condition that hee would content himſelfe to be called Prince of Tarranto; and ſuffer her to enioy the kingdome, with the gouernment thereof. Notwithſtanding, ſo ſoone as he arriued at Naples, the ſouldiers called him King, whereof great warres followed betwixt the wife and the husband:VVarre betwixt Queene Giouanna, and her huſband. and ſometimes the one, & ſometimes the other, had the vpper hand. But in the end, the Queene remained gouernour of the ſtate, and afterwards became enemie to the Pope. Thereupon Sforza intending to driue her to a diſaduantage, and inforce her to be glad of him, contrarie to all expectation gaue vp his enterteinment; by which meanes ſhe remained vtterly diſarmed, and not hauing other, fled for aide to Alfonſo King of Arragon and Sicilia, adopting him her ſonne, and enterteined Braccio di Montone: who was in Armes no leſſe eſteemed, then was Sforza, & therwithall enemy to the Pope, for hauing ſurprized Perugia, with ſome other townes belonging to the church. Afterwards a peace was taken betweene her and the Pope. Then the King Alfonſo doubting leaſt ſhe wold entreat him as ſhe had intreated her husband) ſought ſecretly to poſſeſſe the Fortreſſes. But ſhe being ſubtil, fortified her ſelf in the Caſtle of Napoli. Suſpitions thus growing in the minds of the one and the other, they came to fight, and the Queene with the helpe of Sforza (who was returned to her ſeruice) vanquiſhed Alfonſo: draue him out of Naples,
               Lodouico de Angio adopted king of Naples. depriued him of his adoption, and adopted Lodouico de Angio; whereof grew a great warre betwixt Braccio who had folowed Alfonſo, & Sforza that fauoured the Queen. In the proceeding of theſe wars, Sforza occaſioned to paſſe the riuer of Peſcara, was there drowned: wherby the Queene became again diſarmed, & ſhould haue bene driuen out of the kingdom, if Philippo Viſconti Duke of Milā
                had not enforced Alfonſo (proceeding on in his iourney againſt the Queen) to be ſtaied. For hauing beſieged Aquila, the Pope (ſuppoſing the greatnes of Braccio not to be good for the church) enterteined Frāceſco the ſonne of Sforza, againſt Braccio, & at Aquila ſlew him, & ouerthrew his army. On the part of Braccio, Oddo his ſon was ſaued, frō whō the Pope tooke Perugia, & left to him

               Montone: yet ſhortlie after, fighting for the Florentines in Romagna, was there ſlaine. So then, of all theſe that ſerued with Braccio, Nicholo Piccinino, remained of moſt reputation. Now becauſe we are come with our hiſtory neare to that time which I determined (and that the reſt which remaineth vnſpoken, importeth for the moſt part nothing elſe but the wars which the Florentines & Venetians had with Philippo Duke of Milan, which ſhall alſo be diſcourſed hereafter, when particulerly we entreate of Florence) I will not ſpeak more therof, but briefly reduce to memorie in what termes Italy with the Princes and the ſouldiers of thoſe daies remained. Among the principall ſtates, Queene Giouanni 2. held the kingdom of Napoli; La Marca, Patrimonio and Romagna.
               How Italy was gouerned and diuided. Part of the townes to theſe belonging, obeyed the church, & part of them were vſurped by tirants, or their miniſters: as Farrara, Modena, & Reggio by the houſe of Este. Faenza by Manfredi; Imola by the Alidoſi; Furli by the Ordelaffi: Rimino and Peſaro by the Malatesti; and Camerino by the houſe of Varano. The Prouinces of Lombardy, were partly gouerned by Philippo Duke of Milan, and partly by the Venetians. For all thoſe that had therin any particuler ſtates, were extirped (except the houſe of Gonzaga) which gouerned ſtil at Mantoua. In Toſcana, the greateſt princes that gouerned, were the Florentines: onely Lucca and Siena, liued with their lawes. Lucca vnder Guinici, Siena as abſolutely free. The Genoueſi, ſometimes in libertie, and ſometime in ſeruitude to the houſe of France, or Viſconti, were without reputation, and among the meaner Potentates accounted. For all the principall Lords and Potentates, were at that time of their owne ſubiectes vtterly diſarmed. The Duke Philippo liuing at home, and not ſuffering himſelfe to be ſeene, his warres were altogither directed by miniſters. The Venetians, ſo ſoone as they began to make warres by land, loſt all that glorie which before vpon the ſea they had gotten. And (following the cuſtome of other Italians) by the direction of ſtrangers gouerned their warres. The Pope being a man of religion, and the Queene Giouanna a woman, did laie by their Armes: doing that for neceſsitie which others had done by election. The Florentines alſo, to like neceſsitie yeelded: for their ſundry ciuil diuiſions among themſelues, had clearly extirped the Nobilitie, and left the Common weale to be gouerned by thoſe that had bene brought vp in marchandiſe, and were therby enforced to abide the fortune of others. The diſcipline of warre then remained, only in the poore Princes, & Gentlemen that wanted liuing; and they not moued by any deſire of glorie, but rather to become rich and aſſured, armed themſelues. They then being wel practiſed in the warres (not hauing any other trade to liue) ſought by the wars to make themſelues ſtrong and honourable. Among this number for their value, moſt renowned, were Carmignuola, Frāceſco Sforza, Nicholo Piccinino, brought vp by Braccio, Agnolo della Pergola, Lorenzo, and Michelletto Attenduly: Tartaglia, Giacopaccio Cecolino da Parugia, Nicholo di Tolentino, Guido Torello, Antonio dal Ponte ad Hera, and others. Beſides them were thoſe great Lordes of whom I haue alreadie ſpoken. And with them, may be numbred the Orſini, and Calonneſi, Barrons of Rome, with ſome other Gentlemen of the kingdome, and of Lombardy: who making a miſterie or art of the warre, had among themſelues a ſecret league and intelligence, whereby they protracted the ſeruice for their profit. And ſo, the Princes for whom they ſerued, were on both ſides looſers. In concluſion, the warres became ſo cowardlie, that anie ordinarie Captaine, hauing in him but a ſhadow of the auncient vertue, might (to the admiration of all Italy) haue vanquiſhed thoſe ſouldiers: who through ſmall wiſedome, and want of iudgement) were much honoured. Of theſe idle Princes, and of theſe moſt baſe and cowardlie ſouldiers, this my Hiſtorie ſhall at large entreate. But firſt (as in the beginning I promiſed) it ſeemeth neceſſarie for me to returne backe, and tell the originall of Florence, letting euerie man

to vnderſtand fully, what was the ſtate of that Cittie in thoſe dayes▪ and by what meanes amongſt ſo many troubles happened in Italy (during the ſpace of a thouſand yeares) the ſame hath ſtill continued.
            The ende of the first Booke.
         
         
            
               ❧THE SECOND BOOKE.
            
               AMONG other great and maruellous orders of the auncient common weales, & principallities (at this time decaied) was that wherby new Townes and Citties were from time to time builded. For there is nothing more worthie an excellent Prince, or well gouerued common weale, nor more profitable to any Country, then the building vp of new Townes, where men may with commoditie, for defence and tilladge, aſſemble themſelues: which thing thoſe people might eaſily do, hauing in cuſtome to ſend dwellers into ſuch Countries as were either vnpeopled, or conquered; which people, were in thoſe dayes called Collonies. For beſides, that this order occaſioned new Townes to be built, the ſame alſo did make the Country conquered, to be more aſſured to the Conquerers thereof. It alſo repleniſhed the voyd places, and mainteined the people in ſuch orders as they were planted: which wrought this effect, that men moſt commodiouſly inhabiting, did moſt multiply. They were alſo in the offence of others the more readie, and in defence of themſelues more aſſured. That cuſtome (being through negligence of common weales and Princes of this time, diſcontinued) doth occaſion the weakeneſſe and ruine of their Countries, becauſe that only maketh euery gouernment aſſured, and euery Country (as is beforeſaid) plentifully inhabited. The aſſurance groweth, becauſe Collonies planted in any prouince newly conquered, is (as it were) a caſtle and gard, to hold the ſame in obedience. Beſides that, no country wel inhabited, can maintaine the inhabitants thereof, nor continue them as they be planted, without that rule and order: for all places are not plentifull or wholeſome, which is the cauſe that the people in the one do abound, and want in the other. So as if no meane be, to take away where is abundance, & ſupply where want is, that Country in ſhort ſpace muſt of force be ruined; becauſe the one part thereof, through the ſmall number of inhabitants becommeth deſolate, and the other being ouercharged, oppreſſed with pouertie. And for that nature could not reforme this diſorder, it is neceſſarie, that induſtry ſhould do it. For vnwholeſome Countries planted full of people, comming thither all togither, do make the ſame healthful, by reaſon that the tilling of the earth doth alter the ſoyle; and the fiers, do greatly purge the aire; which things nature by her ſelfe could not. The experience thereof is ſeene by the Cittie of Venice, ſeated in a place paludious, and vnwholeſome. Notwithſtanding, the aſſemblie of many inhabitants come thither at one inſtant, did make the ſame healthy inough. Piſa likewiſe, through the contagion of the aire, was neuer repleniſhed, but when Genoua,
               
and the riuers thereto belonging, were by the Saraſins deſtroyed, it enforced the people (driuen from their natiue countrey) to flye thither, and make that place well inhabited, and ſtrong. This cuſtome of ſending Collonies being diſcontinued, is the occaſion that countreyes conquered, are holden with more difficultie; thoſe that be emptie are not ſupplied, and countreyes ouer full are not disburthened, whereby, manie parts of the world, and chiefly Italy, in reſpect of the ancient times, are become deſarts. The reaſon thereof is, that there hath not bene, nor is not in Princes, anie deſire of true glorie, nor in Common-weales anie ordinance that meriteth commendation. In the old time we ſee, that through vertue of theſe Collonies, Citties were often made new, and ſome others (alreadie begun) encreaſed: of which number was the Cittie of Florence, begunne by the people of Fieſole, and inlarged by Collonies. A thing moſt true it is (as Dante and Iohn Villano haue written) that the Cittie of Fieſole being ſet on the top of a mountaine, to occaſion their markets to bee the more frequented, and giue commoditie to thoſe that with their merchandize would reſort thither, did giue order that they ſhould not clime vp the hill, but ſtay in the plaine, betwixt the foote of the mountaine, & the riuer Arno. Theſe markets (as I iudge) were occaſion of the firſt building in that place. The merchants alſo being deſirous to haue ſtorehouſes commodious for the receiuing of wares, made buildings there, which in time became houſes of habitation. Afterwards, when the Romanes (hauing vanquiſhed the Carthagineſi) had made Italy from forreine warres ſecure, in great numbers there they multiplied; for me
                  •
                doo neuer ſeeke the defence of themſelues, if by neceſsitie they are not incouraged: and, as feare of warre doth conſtraine them willingly to inhabit barren places and ſtrong, ſo that feare remooued, (allured with commoditie) more willingly they couet to dwell in Countryes pleaſant and profitable. The ſecuritie which grew in Italy by reputation of the Roman common-weale, might occaſion the number of the inhabitants to bee ſo great, as made this place to become (as it were) in forme of a Towne, and was at the beginning called Arnina. After that time, ciuill warres happened in Rome, firſt betweene Mario and Silla, then betwixt Ceſare and Pompeio, and at laſt betweene the murtherers of Caeſar, and thoſe which ſought to reuenge his death. It ſeemeth therefore, that firſt by Silla, and next by thoſe three Citizens of Rome (that after the reuenge made for Caeſar) diuided the Empire, Collonies were ſent to Fieſole, who either all, or part, did plant their dwellings in the plaine neare vnto the Towne alreadie begun: inſomuch, as the ſame was much enlarged, and ſo well repleniſhed with buildings, men, and other things neceſſarie for ciuill life, as it became to be numbred among the Citties of Italy. Yet whence this name Firenze ſhould be deriued,VVhereof the name of Florence is deriued. diuers men do diuerſly hold opinion. Some ſuppoſe it ſo called of Florino, one of the chiefe of the Colloni. Others would not conſent that it was called Florentia at the beginning, but Fluentia, becauſe it was neare the riuer of Arno, which floweth. And they alledge the authoritie of Plinny, where he ſaith, that the people Fluentini be neare vnto Arno: which may be falſe, becauſe Plinny maketh demōſtration where the Florentines were ſeated, not how they were called. And that word Fluentini muſt needes be corrupted, becauſe Frontino and Cornelio Tacito (who wrote almoſt in the time of Plinny) do call the Towne Florentia, and the people Florentini; for that long ſince in the time of Tiberio, they were gouerned according to the cuſtome of other Cities in Italy. Cornelio reporteth alſo, that the Florentines had ſent Embaſſadors to the Emperor, praying, that the waters of Chiane might not diſcend vppon their Countrie; neither is it reaſonable, that the Citie ſhould haue in one time two names. I beleeue therefore it was alwaies called Florentia. For what cauſe ſoeuer it was ſo named, or for what cauſe ſoeuer it had the

beginning, moſt ſure it is, that vnder the Empire of Rome, it had the foundation, & in the reigne of the firſt Emperours, Writers did make mention thereof. Moreouer, at ſuch time as the barbarous people did perſecute the Empire, Florence was by Tottila King of the Ostragotti defaced, and after 250. yeares by Carlo Magno reedified: from which time, till the yeares after Chriſt 1215. it continued vnder that fortune which others did, who then commanded in Italy. In which time, firſt gouerned there the poſteritie of Carlo, then Barengarii, and laſt of all the Emperours of Germanie, as hath bene in our vniuerſall diſcourſe before declared. The Florentines could not in thoſe times increaſe or do anie thing worthie memorie, for the authoritie of them, vnto whom it was ſubiect: notwithſtanding, in the yeare 1010. and the day of S. Romolo, (a ſolemne Feaſt with the Fieſolane) they ſurprized Fieſole, and demoliſhed the ſame; which they did, either with conſent of the Emperours, or elſe at ſuch times as one Emperor being dead, the other was not elected, whereby euerie man (for the preſent) remained at libertie. But ſince the Popes tooke vnto themſelues more authoritie in Italy, and the Germane Emperours grew weake, euerie Towne in that Prouince with leſſe reuerence to their Prince, was gouerned. Inſomuch, as in the yere 1080. in the time of Arrigo the third, Italy was openly diuided into faction betwixt him and the Church: notwithſtanding the Florentines maintained themſelues vnited, all the yere 1215. yelding to the victorious, without aſpiring farther thā to ſaue themſelues. But as to the bodies of men, the longer they bee healthie, the more dangerous and mortall are the ſickneſſes, when they happen: ſo Florence the more ſlowlie it followed the factions, the more ſpeedily and greeuouſly it was by them afterwards afflicted. The firſt occaſion of diuiſion in that Citie, is moſt publiquely knowen, becauſe it hath bene written by Dante and diuers others: neuertheles I thinke good briefely to ſpeake thereof. There was in Fiorence (among others) of the mightie Families,The firſt deuiſion of Florence. 
               Buondelmonti, and Vberti; next vnto them were the Amidei and Donati. In the houſe of Donati was a Gentlewoman, a widow and rich, who hauing one onely daughter, a maiden of much beautie, whom within her ſelfe, ſhee determined to marrie vnto Buondelmonti a yong Gentleman, and the chiefe of his houſe. This her intent, eyther through negligence or delay of time (none beeing made priuie thereof) was deferred ſo long, that Buondelmonti was contracted to the daughter of Amidei: wherwith ſhe greatly diſcontented, & ſuppoſing it were poſsible with the beautie of her daughter to ſtay the marriage, before the ſame ſhould be ſolemnized: one day, ſeeing Buondelmonti comming towards her houſe, came downe, her daughter following; and meeting him at the gate, ſaid, I am very glad that you are now become maried, yet was it my meaning you ſhould haue had this my daughter, and with thoſe words (ſhe opened the gate) and ſhewed her vnto him. The Gentleman beholding the beautie of the maiden (which indeed was rare) and therewith conſidering that her parentage and portion was not inferiour to hers, whom he had alreadie taken, became exceedingly deſirous to haue her. Then, not reſpecting his faith alreadie giuen, nor the iniurie he did in breaking the ſame, nor yet the inconuenience that might enſue thereof, ſaid: Sith it hath pleaſed you to reſerue your daughter for me, I ſhould bee vnthankfull (beeing yet all in time) to refuſe her. After the ſpeaking of theſe words (without farther delay) hee married her. This marriage beeing knowen, highly offended all the Familie of Amidei, and Vbarti: who were by his firſt marriage, allied. Then aſſembling themſelues, and conſulting together, in the ende concluded, that ſuch an iniurie might not bee borne without ſhame; nor the reuenge thereunto due, could bee other than the death of Buondelmonti. And albeit ſome did fore-caſt the inconueniences that might followe ſuch an Action: yet Moſcha Lamberti ſayde, that who ſo euer caſteth

all doubts, ſhould neuer reſolue anie thing; alleadging the auncient Prouerbe, A thing once done, is past remedie. Then gaue they the charge of this murther to bee performed by Moſcha, Stiatta, Vberti, Lambertuccio, Amidei, Odorigo Fifanti. Theſe men in the morning of Eaſter day, at the houre of Reſurrection, aſſembled themſelues in the houſes of the Amidei; by which ſtreete, Buondelmonti paſſed the bridge vpon a white horſe: and ſuppoſing (as it ſeemeth) that it had bene a thing as eaſie to forget an iniurie, as renounce a marriage, was at the foote of the bridge vnder an Image of Mars (which there is ſtanding) aſſaulted, and ſlaine. This murther diuided the whole Citie, the one halfe tooke part with Buondelmonti, the other with Vberti. Theſe Families, by reaſon they were ſtrong in houſes, towers, and men, fought manie yeares, before the one could chaſe the other out of the Cittie: till at length (without anie firme peace made) a truce was taken, which according vnto occaſion, was ſometimes kept, and ſometimes broken. Florence continued in theſe troubles, till the time of Federigo the ſecond: who being alſo King of Napoli, was perſwaded hee might encreaſe his dominion againſt the Church. And to make his authoritie more aſſured in Toſcana, he fauoured the Vberti and their followers, who thereby draue out the Buondelmonti:
               By what means the factiōs of Guelfi and Ghibilini aroſe in Florence. and ſo our Cittie (like vnto all other Townes of Italy) became diuided into Guelfi and Ghibilini. And it ſeemeth not ſuperfluous to make mention of the Families that depended of the one and the other. Thoſe that followed the faction of Guelfi, were Buondelmonti, Narli, Roſsi, Freſcobaldi, Mozzi, Baldi, Pulci, Gherardini, Faraboſchi, Bagneſi, Guidalotti, Sachetti, Manieri, Lucardeſi, Chiaramonti, Compiobbeſi, Caualcanti, Giandonati, Gianfigliazzi, Scali, Gualerotti, Importuni, Bostichi, Tornaquinci, Vecchietti, Toſinghi, Arregucci, Agli, Sitii, Adimari, Viſdomini, Donati, Pazzi, della Bella, Ardinghi, Tebaldi, Cherchi. For the Ghibilini, were Vberti, Mannelli, Vbriachi, Fifanti, Amidei, Infanganti, Maleſpini, Scolari, Guidi, Galli, Capardi, Lamberti, Soldanieri, Capriani, Toſchi, Ameri, Palermini, Migliorelli, Pigli, Baruchi, Cattani, Agollanti, Brunelleſchi, Caponſachi, Eliſei, Abbati, Tedaldini, Giuochi, Caligai. Beſides theſe noble houſes, manie popular families ioyned in that action: ſo that welneare all the Cittie became corrupted with this diuiſion. But the Guelfi being driuen out, retyred themſelues into Townes of the Vale of Arno, where their chiefe places of ſtrength were, and (the beſt they could) againſt the furie of their enemies defended themſelues. Federigo then dying, ſuch as remained in Florence and were men neuterall, hauing alſo credite with the people, thought better to reunite the Cittie, than holding it in diuiſion, vtterly to ouerthrow it. They therefore found meanes, that the Guelfi (ſetting all iniurie aſide) ſhould returne, and the Ghibilini (without ſuſpition) receaue them. They thus vnited, it ſeemed to them, that the time would well ſerue to frame an order for the libertie of the Cittie, before the new Emperour ſhould grow ſtrong. For which purpoſe, they diuided the Cittie into ſixe parts, and choſe twelue Cittizens for euerie part to gouerne the ſame,An vnion and policie, ſetled in Florence. whom they called Antiani, and were changed euerie yeare. Alſo to remoue all offences, that might ariſe by Iudges, they elected two Straungers to that office, calling the one Captaine of the people, and the other Podesta: who were authoriſed to iudge all cauſes that happened in the Cittie, either ciuill or criminall. Alſo, becauſe no order is aſſured without defenders thereof, they appointed in the Citie twentie Enſignes, and threeſcore and ſixteene in the Countrey; vnder which all the youth was muſtred, and commanded they ſhould bee readie armed, euerie man vnder the enſigne whereto he belonged, whenſoeuer he were either by the Captain or the Antiani called. And as the enſignes which thoſe ſoldiers were appointed vnto were diuers, ſo were the weapons diuerſly diuided: for the crosbowes had their priuate enſigne, & the holberdiers theirs. Alſo at euerie feaſt of Penticoſt,

with great pompe they erected new enſignes, and appointed new Captaines, & trained the ſouldiers to ſuch perfection, as euerie man knew in what order hee ſhould march, retire, and charge the enemy. Then they cauſed a great chariot couered with redde, and drawne by two Oxen, to carry their chiefe enſigne, of colour white and redde. Whenſoeuer they intended to aſſemble all their forces, they commanded this Chariot to be brought into the market place, and with great ceremony giue charge thereof to the chiefe Captaines of the people. They had alſo for the magnificence of their enterpriſe, a greatbell called Martinella, which was rung continually one whole moneth before their Army was brought into the field: to the end that the enemie might prepare for his defence. So great was the vertue of men in thoſe dayes, and ſo honourably they proceeded in their actions: where at this preſent to aſſaile the enemy ſodeinly and without warning, is thought to be a wiſe and honourable thing, in thoſe dayes the ſame was holden cowardly, and diſhonourably. This Bell was alſo carried with the Army, and by the ſound thereof the watches and other orders of the Campe were commanded. Vpon theſe martiall ordinances and ciuill rules, the Florentines laide the foundation of their libertie. Neither can it bee imagined how great authoritie and force that Cittie in ſhort ſpace atteined vnto. So that it became not onely chiefe of Toſcana, but alſo was accounted amongſt the beſt Cities of Italy, and ſhould haue ſo continued, had not the often and new diuiſions diſturbed the ſame: vnder this gouernment the Florentines liued tenne yeares, within which time they enforced the Pistoieſi, Aretini, and Seneſi, to make league with them. Returning from Sienna with their Army, they ſurprized Volterra, and demoliſhed ſome caſtles, leading the inhabitants of them to Florence. All which enterpriſes were performed by counſell of the Guelfi, who could do much more then the Ghibilini, becauſe they for their inſolencie during the raigne of Federigo were hated of the people. The faction of the church alſo much more loued, then the faction of the Emperour: becauſe the Florentines hoped thereby to preſerue their libertie, but beeing vnder the Emperour they feared to looſe it. The Ghibilini then ſeeing themſelues bereft of authoritie, could not liue contented, but ſtill aſpecting occaſion to recouer the gouernment, and ſeeing Manfredi ſonne of Federigo, poſſeſſed of the kingdome of Napoli, who had alſo diſcomforted the forces of the church, thought the time come to ſerue their purpoſe. Secretly then they practiſed with him to take their authoritie vppon him, but their practiſe was not ſo cunningly handled, but that the ſame was diſcouered to the Antiani, who preſently ſent for the Vbarti. They not onely refuſed to appeare, but alſo tooke Armes, and fortified themſelues in their houſes: wherwith the people offended, likewiſe tooke Armes, and ayding the Guelfi, enforced them and all the reſt of the Ghibilini to abandon Florence, and go vnto Siena.
               King Manfredi, a chiefe of the Ghibilini. From whom they prayed aide of Manfredi king of Napoli, and by the induſtry of Farrinata Vberti, the Guelfi vpon the riuer Arbia, receiued ſo great an ouerthrow and ſlaughter, as thoſe that were ſaued, returned not to Florence; but ſuppoſing their Cittie loſt, fled into Lucca. The chiefe Captaine of thoſe ſouldiers ſent by Manfredi, was Earle Giordano, a man of war in that time greatly eſteemed. Hee, after the victorie, went with the Ghibilini to Florence, reducing the citie wholly to the obedience of Manfredi, depoſing the magiſtrates, and altering euerie other order, whereby might appeare any forme of libertie. Which iniurie with ſmall wiſdom committed, was generally of the people taken in great diſdaine, and of friends to the Ghibilini, they became mortal enemies, wherof, with time, grew their vtter ruine. The Earle Giordano, hauing occaſion to return to Napoli for the ſeruice of that kingdome, left in Florence as deputie for the king, the Earle Guido Nouella, Lord of Caſentino, who at Empoli aſſembled a Councell of Ghibilini, it was neceſſarie to raze Florence, as apt (by reaſon the people were Guelfi) to

recouer force for the aide of the church. To this ſo cruell a ſentence in preiudice of that noble citie, there was no citizen nor friend (Farinata Vbarti excepted) that appoſed himſelf. He openly & without reſpect ſpake in fauour therof, & laid, that he had not laboured nor aduentured himſelfe in ſo many perils, but to the end he might inhabit his natiue country; & would not looſe that he had ſo long ſought, nor ſhunne that which fortune had laid vpō him. Yea, being no leſſe enemy to them that ſhould ſo determine, then he had bene to the Guelfi, he wold not refuſe to fauour his country,Farinata Vberti. hoping that his vertue which had chaſed out the Guelfi from Florence, ſhould alſo defend the ſame. Farinata was a man of great courage, excellent in the wars, chief of the Ghibilini, and greatly eſteemed of Manfredi: his opinion therefore preuailed, and new means were thought vpō how to preſerue the ſtate. The Guelfi (before fled to Lucca for feare of the Earles threatning) were ſent away from thence, and went to Bologna: frō whence they were called by the Guelfi of Parma, to go with them to an enterpriſe againſt the Ghibilini, wherin by their vertue the enimies were vanquiſhed, and they recouered their owne poſſeſsions.The Duke of Angio, called into Italy by the Pope. So that encreaſing in riches & honour, knowing alſo that Pope Clemente had ſent for Carlo of Angio, to take the kingdome from Manfredi, by Ambaſſaders they offered him their ſeruice: and the Pope did not onely receiue them for his friendes, but alſo gaue them his Enſigne; which euer ſithence the Guelfi haue carried in their warres; and is that, which at this day is vſed in Florence.
               King Manfre. diſlaine. Then was Manfredi by Carlo diſpoſſeſſed of his kingdome and ſlain. In which enterpriſe, the Guelfi of Florence happening to be preſent, their faction gained reputation, and the Ghibilini became the weaker. Whereupon, thoſe that gouerned with the Earle Guido at Florence, thought it meere by ſome benefit to winne the loue of the people, which with many iniuries had before that time bene loſt. For thoſe remedies which before this time of neceſsitie would haue preuailed, vſing them now without order, and out of time, did not onely hurt, but alſo haſten their ruine. They then thought good to make the people friends and partakers of ſuch honours and authoritie, as had bene taken from them: and elected thirtie ſixe Citizens Commoners, who with two Gentlemen (called from Bologna) ſhould reforme the ſtate of the Citie. They thus aſſembled, preſently diuided the Citie into Arts or Miſteries:New ordinances in Florēce. ouer euery one of which Miſteries, they appointed one Magiſtrate to do iuſtice to all thoſe within his gouernment. They ordeined alſo an Enſigne to euerie Miſterie: to the end, that all men might repaire therunto armed, whenſoeuer occaſion did ſerue. Theſe Miſteries, were in the beginning twelue, ſeuen great, and fiueleſſe. Afterwards, the leſſe Miſteries encreaſed to fourteene, ſo then the number was, (as at this preſent it is) twenty one. The thirtie ſix men appointed for reformation, practiſed many things for the benefit of the people. The Earle Guido for the paying of the ſouldiers impoſed a Subſidie vppon the Citizens: whom hee found ſo vnwilling therewith. as hee durſt not enforce them to paie thoſe ſummes that were impoſed. And ſuppoſing to haue loſt the ſtate, he ioyned himſelfe with the chiefe of the Ghibilini; which done, determined to take that frō the people by force, which they for want of iudgement had graunted. For that purpoſe aſſembling the ſouldiers Armed, and accompanied with the thirtie ſixe Reformers, hee made an Alarum, and foorthwith the Reformers retired themſelues to their houſes, and the Enſignes of the Miſteries came foorth, followed by many Armed men, who vnderſtanding that the Earle Cuido with his followers, were at Saint Giouanni, they made head at Saint Trinita, and there elected Giouanni Sodarini, theyr Captaine. The Earle on the other ſide, hearing where the people were, marched towardes them, who fled not, but aſſoone as the Earle drew neare, charged him neare vnto the place called Loggio delli Tornaquinci. There they

forced the Earle to retire with the ſlaughter, and loſſe of many his ſouldiers. The Earle fearing that his enemy (ſeeing his ſouldiers maimed and weary) would aſſault him, and in the night kill him: determined forthwith to flie, and ſo ſaue himſelfe. So as contrarie to the counſell of the gouernours and others of his faction, he preſently fled with his men to the Citie of Prato. So ſoone as hee came thither, finding himſelfe out of feare, being in a place of ſecuritie, remembred how great an errour he had committed: and deſirous to amend the ſame, the next morning earely, marched with his men towards Florence: offering to enter the Citie by force, which by cowardiſe hee had abandoned, but that attempt tooke no ſucceſſe, for the people which with difficultie might haue driuen him away, with facilitie could hold him out. So that with great ſorow and ſhame, he went vnto Caſentino, and the Ghibilini to their vilages. Thus the people remained with victorie, and for the comfort of thoſe which loued the common wealth, determined to reunite the citie, and call home all citizens as well Ghibilini as Guelfi: by meanes whereof, the Guelfi after ſixe yeares abſence from the citie were returned. And the Ghibilini (notwithſtanding the memorie of their late iniurie) were pardoned and put in their country: yet much hated both of the people and the Guelfi; for theſe could not forget their exile, and thoſe remembred too much the tyrannie which was vſed during their authoritie: which things, cauſed that neither the one nor the other were contented. While in this forme the Florentines liued, it was reported, that Corradino nephew to Manfredi, ſhould come with forces from Germany to the conqueſt of Napoli. Whereupon the Ghibilini tooke heart and hope, thereby to recouer their authoritie. And the Guelfi began to thinke how they might aſſure themſelues of their enemies: for which purpoſe, they praied king Carlo to defend them in the time of Corradino his paſſage. The ſouldiers of Carlo being in march, made the Guelfi inſolent, and amazed the Ghibilini ſo much, that two dayes before they arriued (without any violence offered) they fled. The Ghibilini thus departed, the Florentines reordeined the ſtate of their citie, & elected twelue chiefe men to be magiſtrates, and gouerne their citie for two moneths,New ordinances in Florēce by the Guelfi. whom they called not Antiani, but Buoni Homini. Next vnto them, they appointed a Councell of foureſcore Citizens, which they called La Credenza. After them, were an hundreth and foureſcore Commoners, who with the Credenza and the twelue Buoni Homini, were called the Councell generall. They ordeined moreouer one other Councell of a hundreth and twentie Citizens, of the Comonaltie and Nobilitie mixed, which ſhould giue perfection, & confirmation to al things determined in the other Councels. This gouernment thus ſetled, the faction of the Guelfi, togither with the Magiſtrates fortified the citie, to the end they might the better defend themſelues from the Ghibilini, whoſe goods they diuided into three parts: the one, they imployed to publike vſes: the ſecond was giuen to the Captaines; the third diuided amongſt the Guelfi, in recompence of their loſſes. The pope alſo to maintain the Guelfi in Toſcana, ordeined the King Carlo to bee Lieftenant Emperiall of that countrey. The Florentines thus holding themſelues in reputation, by vertue of theſe new orders, gouerned all things well, with their lawes at home, and with their armes abroad. Then died the Pope, and after long diſputation, in the end of two yeares, Gregorio decimo was elected: who hauing bene long time in Soria (and was at the time of his election) did not make ſo great account of the factions, as his predeceſſors had done. But returning home towards France, being arriued at Florence, to performe the office of a good Paſtor, ſought to vnite that citie: wherein he preuailed ſo farre with the Florentines, as they were content that Commiſsioners for the Ghibilini might be receiued into Florence, to ſolicit the return of their faction, which was concluded. Notwithſtanding, the Ghibilini were ſo terrified, as they durſt not come home. The Pope laid

the fault thereof to the citie,F
                     •
                  orence excomunicate. and being offended, did excommunicate the ſame. In which diſpleaſure, the Florentines continued all the life of that Pope: but after his death the citie was abſolued by Pope Innocentio quinto; to whom ſucceeded Nicholao tertio,
               The Pope euer ſuſpitious. deſcended of the houſe of Orſini. And becauſe the Popes had alwaies in ſuſpition thoſe that aſpired to greatnes in Italy, (although by the fauour of the church they were thereunto atteined) ſought alwaies to put them backe. Therof grew many tumults and often variations, for the feare of him that was become ſtrong, occaſioned the aduancement of an other that was weake, who beeing likewiſe growne vp, was forthwith feared, and being feared, caſt downe. This was the cauſe, that ocſioned the kingdome to be taken from Manfredi, and giuen to Carlo. This was alſo that which cauſed the Pope to miſtruſt Carlo, and ſeek his diſtruction. Nicholao tertio then, for the reaſons beforeſaid, ſound meanes through the helpe of the Emperour, that the gouernment of Toſcana was taken from Carlo: and in his place hee ſent thither Latino his Legate. At that time Florence remained in verie hard eſtate; becauſe the Nobilitie of the Guelfi were become inſolent, and feared not the Magiſtrates: ſo as euerie of them committed murthers, and other violences without any iuſtice or puniſhment of thoſe that committed the ſame; becauſe they were alwaies by one or other great perſon fauoured. To bridle this great inſolencie, it was by the chiefe of the people thought good to reuoke ſuch as were baniſhed: which gaue opportunitie to the Legate,New ordinances in Florence. to reunite the citie; and the Ghibilini returned home. In the place of twelue gouernours, there were foureteene made, for euerie part ſeuen, to gouerne the cittie during one yeare: and they to be elected by the Pope. Florence continued in this order of gouernment two yeares. Then Pope Martino aſpired to the Papacie, who being a French man, reſtored vnto king Carlo, all that authoritie which the Pope Nicholao had taken from him: wherby the factions in Toſcana were ſuddeinly reuiued. For the Florentines tooke Armes againſt the Emperours Gouernour, to depriue the Ghibilini of the gouernment: therewith alſo to hold the great men in awe, they ordeined a new forme of gouernment. The yeare 1282. beeing come, the companies of the Miſteries hauing receiued their Magiſtrates & Enſigns, became greatly eſteemed.Florence reformed. They among themſelues, elected in the place of the fourteene, three Citizens to remaine two moneths gouernours of the common-weale, and called them Priori: who might be either Commoners or Gentlemen, ſo that they were Merchants of ſome Miſterie. Afterwards the chiefe Magiſtracie was reduced to ſixe men, ſo as in euery part of the citie there might be one: which order continued till the yeare 1342. At which time the cittie was diuided into quarters, and the number of Priori encreaſed to nine, and diuerſe times in that meane while (by reaſon of ſome accident) they were in number twelue. This Office was the meane (as ſhall hereafter appeare) that the Nobilitie was ruined; for then by many occaſions they were excluded, and afterwards without reſpect oppreſſed; whereunto the Nobilitie at the beginning conſented: for they vnwilling to bee vnited with the people, and deſiring to haue all the ſtate into their hands, and the people hauing like deſire, became both looſers. Then they appointed a pallace for their office, where by auncient cuſtome, the Magiſtrates and Counſellours aſſembled, who were in honourable fort by Serieants and other Miniſters there attended, albeit at the erection of this office,Priori. the officers were called Priori: yet afterwards (for more magnificence) was ioyned therunto the name of Signory. The Florentines for a ſpace, among themſelues remained quiet, during which time they made warre vppon the Aretini, becauſe they had baniſhed the Guelfi: and in Campaldino moſt fortunately wonne the victory. The cittie then encreaſing in men and riches, thought good to encreaſe alſo the wals therof, and therefore inlarged the circuit of the ſame to that compaſſe, which now wee

ſee: for before that time the Diametre thereof, was onely that ſpace which is from the old bridge, to S. Lorenzo. The wars abroad, and peace at home,Diſcord between the nobility and the people. had (as it were) worne out of Florence the factions of Guelfi and Ghibilini. Then remained only thoſe humors (which naturally were wont to be in euerie cittie) betwixt the Nobilitie and the people. For the people deſirous to liue according to law, and the great men ſtudying to command them, becommeth a thing impoſsible they ſhould accord togither. This humour, ſo long as the Ghibilini held the citie in awe, was not diſcouered; but ſo ſoone as they were vanquiſhed, it ſhewed the force thereof: for euerie day ſome popular man was iniured, and Magiſtrates knew not by what meanes to puniſh the ſame, becauſe euerie Gentleman with the force of his friends defended himſelfe. The Magiſtrates of the miſterie, ſtudying to remedie ſo great a miſchiefe, prouided that euerie Senate in the beginning of their authoritie ſhould create one Gonfaloniere di Giustitia, a man elected in the number of Commoners, vnto whom was appointed one thouſand men, vnder twentie Enſignes readie at all occaſions to maintaine iuſtice, whenſoeuer they were by their Gonfalone or their Captaine commanded. The firſt choſen was Vbaldo Ruffoli, he drew forth the Gonfalone, and razed the houſes of the Galetti: becauſe one of that Family had in France ſlaine a popular man. It was an eaſie thing for the miſteries to make this order, by reaſon of the great hatred among the Nobilitie, who conſidered not of any prouiſion againſt them, till ſuch time as they felt the bitter execution thereof; which, at the firſt gaue them great terror: neuertheleſſe afterwards, they returned to their wonted inſolencie. For alwaies ſome one of the Nobilitie being an Officer, had therby meanes to hinder the Gonfaloniere, in execution of his office. Moreouer, for that euerie accuſer muſt produce his witneſſe to proue the offence offered, and no man for feare of the Nobilitie durſt giue witneſſe, the citie in ſhort ſpace returned to the former diſcord: and the people iniured in the ſame ſort as they were wont to bee; becauſe iudgement was ſlow, and execution thereof wanted. The populer ſort then not knowing what courſe to take, Giano della Bella, a Gentleman of auncient race (yet therewith one that loued the libertie of his Country) encouraged the chiefe of the miſteries to reforme the diſorders of the citie.New ordinances in fauour of the people. By this Councell it was ordeined that the Gonfaloniere ſhould remaine with the Priori, and haue foure thouſand men at his commandement. They likewiſe made all the Nobilitie vncapable of the Senate, and euery man that was acceſſarie in anie offence, to be as ſubiect to puniſhment as the principall. They decreed moreouer, that publique fame ſhould ſuffice to receiue condemnation by the lawes, which they called Ordinamenti della Giustitia. By this mean the people gained great reputation, and Giano della Bella much hated: becauſe thereby he became euill thought of by the Nobilitie, and reputed one that oppreſſed their authoritie. The rich Commoners did alſo enuie him, for that they imagined his credit ouermuch, which at the firſt occaſion was ſo proued. For it ſhortly after happened, that in a fraie, one of the people chanced to be ſlaine; at which conflict diuerſe Gentlemen were preſent; and among the reſt, Corſo Donati: vnto whom (as the moſt quarrelſome of the companie) the fault was laid, and by the Captaine of the people apprehended. Howſoeuer it were, either that Corſo had not offended, or that the Captaine feared to commit him, he was preſently ſet at libertie. Which deliuerie ſo greatly offended the people, that they tooke Armes and ranne to the houſe of Giano della Bella,
               Giano della Bella. deſiring him to be a meane that thoſe lawes might be obſerued, whereof he had bene the inuentor. Giano willing that Corſo ſhould be puniſhed, did not (as many thought he would do) cauſe the people to laie down their Armes, but perſwaded them to go vnto the Senate, and praie them to looke vnto the matter. The people, in the meane while much moued, and ſuppoſing the Captaine

to haue offered iniurie, and alſo that Giano had forſaken them; went not to the Senat, but vnto the Captaines pallace, which they tooke and ſacked. That fact greatly diſpleaſed all the Citizens, and thoſe that deſired the fall of Giano accuſed him, laying all the fault to his charge. Amongſt the Lords of the Senate, one of his enemies happened to be: who accuſed him to the Captaine, for hauing ſtirred the people to ſedition. During the time that this cauſe was in debating, the people armed, went againe to the houſe of Giano, and offered him defence againſt the Senators his enemies. But Giano would neither make proofe of this populer fauour, nor yet commit his life to the Magiſtrates, becauſe he feared the lewdneſſe of theſe, and the inconſtancie of thoſe, ſo as to take occaſion from his foes to offend him, and from his friendes to harme their countrey, he determined to depart, and ſo giuing place to enuie, and to deliuer the Citizens from that feare they had of him, went into voluntarie exile: notwithſtanding he had with his great perill, deliuered the citie from ſeruitude of the Nobilitie. After his departure, the Nobilitie hoped greatly to recouer their dignities, and iudging that all their euill was by his mean procured, they aſſembled themſelues togither, and ſent two of them to the Senate (which they thought did fauour them much) to entreate that by the ſame, the ſeuere lawes made to their preiudice, might in ſomething be quallified: which requeſt being knowne, troubled much the people,Diuiſion betwixt the Nobilitie and people. fearing that the Senators would grant the ſame: Inſomuch as the deſire of the Nobilitie, & the ſuſpitiō of the people, drew them to the ſword. The Nobilitie made head in three places, at S. Giouanni, in the new market place, and in the Piazza di Mozzi. Their Captaines were, Foreſe Adimari, Vanni di Mozzi, and Geri Spini. The people on the other ſide, with their Enſigne, in great numbers aſſembled at the Senators pallace, who at that time dwelt neare vnto S. Bruocolo: and becauſe the people had that Senate in ſuſpition, they ioyned with them ſix Citizens for the gouernment. While the one and the other part prepared themſelues to fight, ſome of the people, and ſome of the Nobilitie,Perſwaſions to the Nobilitie to laie downe armes. togither with certaine religious men of good fame, came betweene them and perſwaded a peace: Letting the Nobilitie vnderſtand, that the cauſe why the honours from them was taken, and the lawes againſt them made, proceeded of their owne pride and euil gouernment. And becauſe they had before that time, taken Armes to recouer that which through their owne diuiſion and euil behauiour had bene taken from them, it would not do other then occaſion the ruine of their country, and hinder themſelues. It was moreouer ſaid vnto them, that the people, in number, riches and mallice, was much their ſuperiour: and that theſe noble men by whom they thought to oppreſſe others, would not fight, but went their waies, ſo ſoone as the fight began. It was therefore a folly for them, againſt ſo great a multitude to contend.Perſwaſions vſed to the people. They perſwaded the people on the other ſide, that it was no wiſedome to ſeeke their will by way of extremitie, and that it was no part of iudgement to driue men into deſperation: for whoſoeuer hopeth of no good, feareth no euill. They ought alſo to remember, that the Noble men were thoſe, which in the warres had honored the citie: therfore it was no reaſon nor iuſt occaſion, why they ſhould be ſo greatly hated. And moreouer, although the Nobilitie could be content not to poſſeſſe the ſupreame offices, yet would they not endure to be driuen out of their Country. It were therefore well done to laie Armes aſide and grow to agreement, not truſting to the multitude of the people: for it hath bene often ſeene, that the greater number haue by the leſſe bene vanquiſhed. Vpon theſe ſpeeches grew diuers opinions among the people: many wold haue fought, as a thing that of force at one time or other muſt be; and therefore was better to do the ſame now, then afterwards when their enemies were become ſtronger. And though it were beleeued that by mittigation of the lawes, the Nobilitie wold become contented, yet the pride

of them was ſuch, as without enforcement would neuer reſt. Others of the people, wiſer, better aduiſed, and of more quiet diſpoſition, thought that the mitigation of the lawes was no great matter: but to fight one part againſt the other, was a thing of great importance. So in the end, this opinion preuailed, and it was prouided, that no accuſation againſt any of the Nobilitie, ſhould bee receiued without witneſſes. The Armes of the one and the other ſide, thus laide aſide, either of them continued full of ſuſpition: fortifying themſelues in their houſes, and preparing weapons anew. Then the people reordeined the gouernment, reſtraining the ſame into a ſmal number, mooued thereto, becauſe that Signoria had bene fauoured of the Nobilitie: of whom, the chiefe were, Mancini, Magalotti, Altouiti, Peruzzi, and Gerrettani. The ſtate thus ſetled, for more magnificence, and ſecuritie of the Senate,
               New reformation in Florence 1298. in the yeare 1298. they builded their Pallace, and made a Court before it, of that place where the houſes of the Vberti ſometimes were. At this verie time were alſo the common priſons begunne, and within few yeares after, finiſhed. For in thoſe daies, our cittie was in as great and happie eſtate, as at anie time it hath bene: being full of men and reputation. The number of Cittizens fit for the warres, were numbred at thirtie thouſand: and the people of the Countrey able for that purpoſe, amounted to threeſcore and tenne thouſand. All Toſcana, either as ſubiects or friends obeyed vs. And albeit betwixt the Nobilitie and people, ſome indignation and ſuſpitiō were, yet no euil effect thereof followed, but euery man neighborly & peaceably liued. And had not this peace bene by new enimitie within the cittie diſturbed, no forreine diſorder could haue moleſted the ſtate: becauſe the cittie ſtood in ſuch tearmes that it neither feared the Empire, nor thoſe that were baniſhed. And againſt all the ſtates of Italy, it was of force ſufficient to defend it ſelfe. That iniury therfore,New diuiſion of the Bianchi which external forces could not do, by inward diſcord was performed. There were in Florence two families, one called Circhi, the other Donati; in riches, Nobilitie, and men mightie. Betweene them (being both in Florence, and the Country neare neighbors) there grew diſpleaſure, yet not ſo great, as to occaſion the vſe of armes: neither would there perhaps thereof haue growne any great matter, had not the ſame bene by ſome new occaſions encreaſed. Among the chiefe houſes of Piſtoia, is that of Cancellieri. It happened that Lore ſonne of Guglielmo, and Geri ſonne of Bertaccio (both of that familie) playing togither, fell into quarrell, and Geri of Lore was lightly hurt. This chance greeued Guglielmo much: and thinking with curteſie to amend the matter, made the ſame much worſe. For he commanded his ſonne to go vnto the houſe, where the father of the hurt man dwelled, and there aske pardon. The yoong man obeyed his father. Notwithſtanding, that humble act, did no whit decreaſe the bitter diſpoſition of Bertaccio, who cauſed Lore to be taken and holden by his ſeruants, till his hand were cut off; ſaying vnto him, return home vnto thy father, and tel him that wounds be cured with ſteele, and not with words. The crueltie of this fact ſo greatly offended Guglielmo, that he armed his friends to reuenge it. Bertaccio on the other ſide armed, to defend himſelfe. Whereby, not onely theſe families, but all the cittie of Pistoia was diuided. And becauſe theſe Cancellieri, were deſcended frō one of that name, who had two wiues: the one named Biancha, the one party being deſcēded of that woman, called their faction Biancha: the other partie to take a name contrarie) was called Nera. Betwixt them, at diuerſe times diuerſe conflicts and ſlaughters of men followed. At length both parties growing wearie, and yet not knowing how to be reconciled, did deſire, either to make an end of their diſcord, or elſe to draw others into quarrels with them, and ſo encreaſe their faction. For which purpoſe they come to Florence. And the Neri hauing familiar acquaintance with the Donati, were by Corſo (chiefe of that houſe) fauoured: which the Bianchi vnderſtanding, to make

themſelues ſtrong and able to reſiſt the Donati, reſorted to Veri dei Circhi: a man in euerie condition no whit inferiour to Corſo. This humour come from Pistoia, encreaſed the olde hate betweene the Circhi and Donati: and was alreadie ſo apparant, that the Priori and other good Cittizens feared euerie houre, leaſt ſome ſlaughter would therof enſue: and the whole citie be diuided. For preuenting whereof, they reſorted vnto the Pope, deſiring him, that with his authoritie he would take order for theſe quarrels, which they themſelues could not. The Pope ſent for Veri, and preſſed him to make peace with the Donati, whereat Veri ſeemed to maruell, & ſaid, he had no quarrell vnto them, & becauſe euerie peace preſuppoſeth war, ſith no war was betweene them, he knew not why any peace ſhould be required. Then Veri returned from Rome without other concluſion. Theſe humours ſo encreaſed, that euery ſmall accident (as often it happeneth) was like to bring great diſturbance. In the moneth of May, (at which time the youth of Florence on feaſtiuall dayes doo diſport themſelues publiquely in the ſtreetes) it happened certaine yoong men of the Donati, with their friends, to come on horſebacke to behold the women dauncing, neare vnto S. Trinita, where ſtaying awhile, thither chanced to come certaine Gentlemen of the houſe of Circhi: they alſo bringing with them ſome of their friends. They not knowing that the Donati were there (who ſtood before them) deſirous to ſee the daunce, preſſed forward with their horſes, and ſhouldred them. Wherewith the Donati finding themſelues offended, drew their ſwordes: and the Circhi as brauely prepared themſelues to anſwere the aſſault. After many hurts giuen and taken, euerie man departed his way. This diſorder happened in a very vnhappie houre, becauſe the whole Citie vpon that occaſion was diuided: as well the people, as the great men, and the parties tooke name of Bianchi and Neri. The chiefe of the faction Bianchi, were the Circhi, and with them ioyned Adimari Abbati, ſome of the Toſinghi, Bardi, Roſsi, Freſcobaldi, Nerli, Mannelli, all the Mozzi, Scali, Gherardini, Caualcanti, Maleſpini, Bostechi, Giandonati, Vecchietti, and Ariguzzi. They were alſo followed by many populer families, and all the Ghibilini that were in Florence. So that through the great number that tooke part with them, they had welneare all the ſway of the Cittie. The Donati on the other ſide, were chiefe of the partie Nera, and with them the reſt of thoſe families before named, that ioyned not with the Bianchi: and beſides them, all the Pazzi, Spini, Buondelmonti, Gianfiliazzi, and Brunelleſchi. This humour did not only infect the Cittie, but alſo diuided the whole countrey. Whereupon the Captaines of miſteries, with euerie other of the Guelfi that loued the Common weale, did feare, leaſt the diuiſion ſhould with time, ruine the cittie, and reuiue the Ghibilini. Wherefore they ſent againe to Pope Bonifacio, to the end hee ſhould deuiſe meane to ſaue that cittie, which had bene alwaies a ſhield of the church: and now likely either to be deſtroyed, or become ſubiect to the Ghibilini. The Pope ſent then vnto Florence a Legate called Mattheo de Acqua Sparta, a Cardinall of Portugall, who finding difficultie in the Bianchi (which part as hee thought was the greater) feared the leſſe, and departing from Florence offended, did excommunicate the cittie: whereby it became in worſe eſtate then before his comming. Then the mindes of all men being full of offence, it happened that manie of the Circhi and Donati, meeting at a buriall, fell to words, and from words, to ſwordes. Whereof for that time followed nothing but tumult and diſorder, and ſo euerie man returned home. The Circhi then determined to aſſault the Donati, with great numbers of people went to ſeeke them. But by the vertue of Corſo they were put backe, and manie of them alſo verie ſore wounded. All the Cittie was vp in Armes, the Signori, and the Lawes were trodden downe with furie of greate men.

The wiſeſt and beſt Cittizens liued full of ſuſpition. The Donati and their partakers feared moſte, becauſe they could doo leaſt. Thereuppon Corſo, and the other heades of the Neri, togither with the Captaines of the miſteries, reſolued to entreate the Pope, to ſende vnto Florence ſome one of the blood royall, hoping by his meanes to oppreſſe the Bianchi. This aſſembly and reſolution was notified to the Priori, and of the aduerſe part complained vpon, as a conſpiracie againſt the libertie of the Cittie. Both the factions being at that time in Armes, the Senators (of whome Dante happened to bee one) by his counſaile and wiſedome, tooke courage and Armed the people, with whome alſo ioyned manie of the Countrey. And ſo inforcing the heades of the factions to laie downe their Armes, baniſhed Corſo Donati, with the others of the part Nera. Moreouer, the Senators ſeeming to be indifferent in this iudgement, confined ſome of the Bianchi: who ſhortly after vnder colour of honeſt occaſions returned home. Corſo and his friends imagining themſelues fauoured by the Pope, went vnto Rome, and with their preſence perſwaded the Pope vnto that, which before they had written.Carlo di valloys, made Gouernor of Horence. It happened at the ſame time that Carlo de Vallois the French Kings brother was in the Popes Court, called into Italy by the King of Napoli, to go into Sicilia. The Pope thought good (being deſired thereunto by the baniſhed men of Florence) to ſende him to remaine at Florence, till ſuch time as the ſeaſon of the yeare better ſerued to paſſe the ſeas. Then went Carlo to Florence, and although the Bianchi who then gouerned, had him in ſuſpition, yet becauſe hee was chiefe of the Guelfi and ſent by the Pope, they durſt not gainſay his comming, but to make him their friend, they gaue him authoritie to diſpoſe of the Cittie according to his owne diſcretion. Carlo hauing receiued this power, armed all his friends and followers: which gaue the people great ſuſpition that hee intended to vſurpe the libertie. For preuenting of which miſchiefe, order was giuen, that euerie Cittizen ſhould arme himſelfe, and ſtand with weapon at his owne doore, to be readie, if Carlo ſhould at his entrie happen to enterpriſe any thing. The Circhi and other heads of the faction Biancha (hauing bene a while chiefe of the Common weale, and borne themſelues in their offices proudly) were come into vniuerſall hatred, which encouraged Corſo and others, baniſhed men of the faction Nera, to come to Florence; knowing that Carlo with the Captaines of companies would fauour them. When the Citie through the miſtruſt of Carlo was armed, Corſo with the baniſhed men and many others that followed him, came vnto Florence: and without let, entered the Citie. And though Veri de Circhi, was perſwaded to haue encountred him, yet would he not, ſaying that the people of Florence (againſt whom he came) and not he ſhould puniſh him. But the contrary came to paſſe, for he was by the people receiued, and not puniſhed. And it behoued Veri for his owne ſafetie to flie. For Corſo hauing entered the gate called Pinti, made head at S. Pietro Maggiore, neare to his owne houſe, whither many friends and many people deſirous of noueltie, came. And firſt deliuered all the priſoners that had bene either for publique or priuate cauſe committed. Then they enforced the Senators to returne to their houſes as priuate perſons: and elected in their places populer men of the faction Nera. For fiue dayes alſo they ſacked thoſe that were the chiefe of the part of Biancha. The Circhi and other Princes of that faction were gone out of the Citie, and retired to their places of force. And not ſeeing Carlo to entermedle, the greater part of the people became their enemies. Wherupon though they would not before follow the Councell of the Pope, now they were inforced to pray his aide, letting him vnderſtand, that Carlo was come to diſunite, and not to vnite the Citie. Then the Pope ſent againe his Legate, Mattheo d'Acqua Sparta, who perſwaded a peace

betweene the Circhi and the Donati, confirming the ſame with new alliances and marriages. Hee alſo laboured that the Bianchi might bee partakers of the Offices in gouernment: whereto the Neri (miſtruſting the ſtate ſhould receiue thereby ſome hinderance) would not conſent. The Legate thereuppon grew offended, and departed from thence as diſcontented, as hee had bene the time before, leauing the Cittie diſobedient and curſed. Thus remained the one and the other part euill ſatisfied. The Neri ſeeing their aduerſaries at hand, feared leaſt with their ruine, they ſhould recouer the authoritie by them loſt. And the Bianchi ſeeing themſelues depriued of authoritie and honour, therewith being had in diſdaine and ſuſpition, were offered new iniuries. Nicholo de Circhi, accompanied with diuerſe his friendes, and going towards his poſſeſsions, paſſing the bridge Affrico, was there aſſaulted by Simone ſonne of Corſo Donati. This conflict was great, and of either ſide verie bloodie: for Nicholo was ſlaine, and Simone ſo hurt, as the next night hee died. This chaunce troubled all the Cittie anew, and albeit the part Nera was therein moſt culpable, yet by thoſe that gouerned, they were defended. Alſo, before iudgement giuen, was diſcouered, that the Bianchi had entered a conſpiracie with Pietro Feranti, a Barron belonging to Carlo. In which treaſon, they practiſed to place themſelues againe in the gouernment. This matter came to light, by Letters which the Circhi had written to the Barron: yet ſome men held opinion that thoſe Letters were not true, but forged by the Donati, to ſhadowe the infamie, that by the death of Nicholo they had incurred. Thereuppon all the Circhi were confined, with all their followers of the parte Biancha: amongeſt whome was Dante the Poet. Their goods were ſolde, and their houſes razed. Theſe baniſhed men, ioyned with many Ghibilini, diſpoſed them ſelues into manie places, and hoping with new trauailes and troubles to finde new fortune, and Carlo hauing done that in Florence for which hee came, departed and returned to the Pope, to go on his enterpriſe of Sicilia: wherein hee ſhewed himſelfe no wiſer, nor better then hee was in Florence. So that with the loſſe of many of his, hee returned into Fraunce diſhonoured. After the departure of Carlo, the Cittie continued quiet.New troubles by Corſo Donati. 
               Corſo onely was enclined to trouble, becauſe hee thought himſelfe not in that authoritie that hee ought to bee, but ſawe the gouernment in the hands of populer men, farre his inferiours. Hee then mooued with theſe paſsions, thought to performe a diſhoneſt intent, by an honeſt occaſion, ſlaundering manie Cittizens, who had the cuſtodie of the publique treaſure: ſaying that they had imployed the ſame to their priuate commodities, and therefore it were well done to examine their dooings and puniſh them for the ſame. This his euill opinion was allowed by manie that were men of the like diſpoſition: with whome alſo manie others, through ignorance ioyned: becauſe they thought Corſo had beene indeede mooued thereunto with the loue of his Country. On the other ſide the Cittizens ſlaundered, hauing loue borne them of the people, defended themſelues. In ſo much, as this diuerſitie of opinions, after ciuill diſputation brought them to Armes. On the one part was Corſo Donati and Lottieri, Biſhoppe of Florence: with manie great men, and ſome Commoners. On the other part, was the Senate, with the greater number of the people: ſo that the moſte part of the Cittizens did fight. The Senators ſeeing the daunger wherein they were to bee great, prayed aide of the Luccheſi, and ſuddeinly all the people of Lucca were in Florence: by whoſe authoritie, for that time, all thinges were compoſed. Theſe tumultes appeaſed and aſſwaged, the people continued in their authoritie, and the libertie preſerued, without any other puniſhment

of him that mooued the ſlaunder. The Pope vnderſtanding the troubles of Florence, to pacifie the ſame, ſent thither his Legate called Nicholao de Prato, who beeing a man for degree, learning, and good behauiour, greatlie reputed, obteyned eaſily ſo much fauour, as to haue authoritie to diſpoſe of the ſtate as himſelfe thought good; and for that hee was in faction a Ghibilin, hee intended to call home thoſe that were baniſhed: yet firſt thought good to win fauour of the people. To that end he renued the auncient companies, which greatly ſtrengthened him, and weakened the Nobilitie. The Legate then (perſwaded that the people were become all his) practiſed to call home thoſe that had bene baniſhed. For the compaſsing whereof he proued many meanes, which did not onely take euill ſucceſſe, but alſo made himſelfe thereby ſo much ſuſpected among thoſe that gouerned, as he was therby enforced to depart, and returne home to the Pope, leauing Florence full of confuſion, and excommunicate. In the citie at that time remained not only one humour, but many, to the diſturbance thereof: being there in the diſpleaſure betwixt the people and the Nobilitie, the Ghibilini and the Guelfi, the Bianchi and Neri. All the citie tooke Armes, becauſe many Cittizens who deſired the returne of the baniſhed men, were euill content with the Legates departure. The chiefe of thoſe that moued the quarrell, were the Medici and Guigni,
               Medici and Guini. who togither with the Legate were diſcouered to fauour the Rebels: In ſundrie parts of the citie the people fought. To which diſorder, there happened a fire, firſt in Orto Sante Michele, at the houſes of the Abati: from whence it paſſed to the houſes of the Caponſacci and burnt them; with the houſes of Mazzi, Amieri, Toſchi, Cipriani, Lamberti, and Caualcanti, and all the new market. From thence it paſſed to the gate of S. Maria, and burnt all that, returning about Ponte Vecchio, and conſumed the houſes of Gherardini, Pulci, Amidei, and Luccardeſi, with many others, that the number amounted to 1700. or more. Some were of opinion that this fire happened by chance in the fury of the conflict. Others affirme, that one Neri Abbati Prior of S. Pietro Scaragio, a man diſſolute and deſirous of miſchiefe, kindled the ſame. For ſeeing euerie man occupied in the conflict, knew he might do that diſpleaſure, which no other could remedie. And to the end it might the rather haue ſucceſſe, hee ſet fire in the houſes of his owne companions. It was the yeare 1304. in the moneth of Iuly, when the citie of Florence was with fire and ſword in this ſort afflicted. Corſo Donati was hee, that of all others in theſe tumults armed not himſelfe, becauſe hee hoped the rather to be Iudge and Vmpire betwixt the parties: when being weary of fight, they ſhould be content to be perſwaded. Notwithſtanding, weapons were laide downe rather for very wearineſſe and neceſsitie, then through any pacification or perſwaſion of peace. For this onely followed thereof, that the Rebels ſhould not returne, and the faction that fauoured them remained with diſaduantage. The Legate returning to Rome, and hearing the troubles that were begunne in Florence, perſwaded the Pope, that for the vniting of that Cittie, it was neceſſarie for him to ſend thither for twelue principall Cittizens, whereby the roote of the miſchiefe remoued, it ſhould be the more eaſie to quench the ſame. This Councell was by the Pope allowed, and the Citizens ſent for, appeared. Amongſt whom was Corſo Donati. When theſe Cittizens were abſent, the Legate wrote vnto the Rebels, that the chiefe of the Cittizens were from home, and therefore the time ſerued well for them to returne vnto Florence. Which encouragement being receiued, they aſſembled their forces and came to the Cittie, entering where the walles were not fully finiſhed: and paſſed forward, till they came to the Piazza di Saint Giouanni. It was a thing notable, to ſee how thoſe cittizens, who had lately fought for the Rebelles, ſo long as diſarmed they deſired reuocation, beeing now armed,

and forcing the citie, became their enemies, and tooke armes againſt them. So much the common good was by thoſe Cittizens eſteemed and preferred before priuate friendſhip. Wherefore they vniting themſelues with all the people, enforced the rebels to depart and returne from whence they came. This enterpriſe had no ſucceſſe, both becauſe the baniſhed men had left part of their forces at Lastria: and for not hauing tarried the comming of Toloſetto Vbarti, who ſhould haue come from Pistoia with three hundreth men. But they imagined, that expedition ſhould haue preuailed more then force (as often in like caſes it ſo happeneth) that delaies do hinder occaſion: and haſte wanteth force. The Rebels being gone back, Florence returned to the wonted diuiſions. Then to take authoritie from the houſe of Caualcanti, the people by force remoued them from poſſeſsion of the Caſtle called Le Stinche, ſeated in the vale of Greue aunciently belonging thereto. And becauſe the ſouldiers therein taken, were the firſt that were put into that priſon newly builded, that priſon euer after, was called Le Stinche, by the name of the Caſtle from whence the priſoners came. Alſo thoſe that were chiefe of the Common-weale,New reformation in Florence. renewed the companies of the people, and gaue them Enſignes as had bene before ordered: making Gonfalonieri of the miſteries, calling them Colleggio di Signori. They ordeined alſo, that the Senate ſhould reforme all diſorders, in time of warre, by Armes, and in time of peace, by Counſell. They ioyned vnto the two old Rettori one Eſſecutore, who, togither with the Gonfalonieri, ſhould reforme the inſolencie of the great men. In the meane time died the Pope, and Corſo with other Cittizens was returned from Rome. The Cittie ſhould then haue continued quiet, had it not bene with the vnquietneſſe of Corſo anew diſturbed. He, to gaine himſelfe reputation, euer vſed to hold opinion contrarie to men of moſt authoritie: and wherunto he found the people enclined (to gaine their fauour) that way he directed his authoritie. Whereby he made himſelfe head of all new opinions, and to him reſorted all thoſe who ſought to obteine any thing by extraordinary meane. For that cauſe many great Citizens did hate him, which hatred encreaſed ſo much,Corſo Donati. as the faction of Neri came to open diuiſion, becauſe Corſo imployed priuate forces, and ſuch as were enemies to the ſtate. Notwithſtanding, ſo great was the authoritie of his perſon and preſence, that euerie man feared him: yet to winne from him the populer fauour (as by ſuch kinde of meanes might eaſily be done) a brute was put foorth, that he went about to tyrannize the citie: which was eaſily beleeued, becauſe his maner of liuing did in troth ſurpaſſe the charge of ciuil expence. That opiniō was encreaſed greatly, after he tooke to wife the daughter of Vguccione della Faggiola, chiefe of the faction Ghibilini & Bianca, in Toſcana moſt mightie. This alliance come to knowledge, the aduerſe part tooke Armes; and the people for the ſame occaſion refuſed to defend him: the chiefeſt of them ioyning with his enemies. The greateſt of his aduerſaries were Roſſo della Toſa, Pazzino de Pazzi, Geri Spini, and Berto Brunelleſchi: they with their followers, and the greater part of the people, aſſembled themſelues armed at the foote of the Pallace, of the Signori. By whoſe order an accuſation was preferred to Piero Brancha (Captain of the people) againſt Corſo Donati, for that he, with the aide of Vguccione, ſought to make himſelfe a tyrant.Corſo condemned. Then was he cited to appeare, and after for contumacie iudged a Rebell. Betwixt his accuſation & the iudgement pronounced, was not longer time then two houres. This ſentence giuen, the companies of the people vnder their Enſignes, marched towards him. Corſo on the other ſide was not diſmaied, (though he were abandoned by many his friends) nor for the ſentence pronounced, nor yet with the authoritie of the Senators, nor the multitude of his enemies: but fortified his houſe, hoping there to defend himſelfe, till he were reſcued by Vguccione, for whom he had ſent. All his houſes, & all the waies vnto them, were fortified & made cloſe:

and within, many of his faction to defend them. So that, the people (though in great numbers come thither) could not enter. The conflict was great, many ſlaine, and many hurt of either ſide. And the people ſeeing that by thoſe wayes they could not preuaile, brake the houſes of his neighbours, and by that deuiſe not miſtruſted, did enter. Corſo then ſeeing himſelfe beſet with enemies, and no longer truſting to the helpe of Vguccione, reſolued to ſee what meane he could finde to ſaue himſelfe, ſith of victorie hee vtterly diſpaired. Then with Gherardo Bondini, and many others his moſt valiant and faithfull friends, he charged his enemies with ſo great furie, as he brake them, and made way to paſſe through to the gate of the Citie, where they got out. Yet were they ſtill purſued, Gherardo vpon the bridge Affrico, was by Bocaccio Cauicciuoli ſlaine. Corſo alſo was taken at Bouezano, by certaine horſemen belonging to the Senate. Notwithſtanding beeing brought towardes Florence, hating the ſight of his enemies, and the glorie of their victorie, he fell from his horſe,The death of Corſo Donati 1308. and was by one of them which ledde him, there murthered. The bodie was after taken vp by the Monkes of S. Salui, and (without any honor) by them buried. This was the end of Corſo Donati, vnto whom, his country, & the faction of Neri, for many deeds both good and bad, muſt acknowledge it ſelfe beholding. But had his diſpoſition & mind bene more quiet, the memorie of him had deſerued great honour. For indeed he was a Citizen ſo rare, as had at any time before bene ſeene in our citie. Yet true it is, that his factious mind bereft him of that honour which by his country and confederates was due: and in the end, procured his owne death, with many other miſaduentures. Vguccione comming to the reſcue of his ſonne in law, & arriued at Remoli, heard there that Corſo was by the people taken. Wherupon, knowing that he could by no means then helpe him, for not hurting himſelfe, returned backe. Corſo thus ending his life (which happened in the yeare 1308. was the cauſe that all tumults ceaſed, and the citie continued quiet, till ſuch time as intelligence was giuen,The Emperor Arrigo called into Italy. 1312. that Arrigo the Emperour (who fauoured by the Florentine Rebelles) was come into Italy, followed by them, and intending to put them againe in poſſeſsion of their country. For preuenting of which miſchiefe, the Magiſtrates of the citie thought good to call home all thoſe that had not bene by ſpeciall name baniſhed: whereby the number of their enemies ſhould be the leſſe. The greater number that remained in exile were Ghibilini, and ſome fewe of the faction Bianca, among whom were Dante Alighieri, the ſonnes of Veri de Cerchi, and Giano della Bella. They ſent alſo for aide to Roberto King of Napoli, which not obteined at his hand as their friend: they were enforced to giue him the citie for fiue yeares; to the end, he might defend them as his ſubiects. Then the Emperour paſſed into Italy, and by the way of Piſa, went to Rome, there to be crowned, in the yeare 1312. Afterwards, determining to reforme Florence, hee returned thither by Perugia and Arezzo: and lodged his Campe at the Monaſtery of S. Salui, diſtant one myle from the citie; where he remained fiftie dayes, without any good done, and therfore as deſperate of ſucceſſe, remoued to Piſa; where he agreed with Federigo King of Sicilia, to aſſault the kingdom of Napoli. Being with his Army there arriued, in great hope of victorie, and the King Roberto in great feare of his diſtruction, at Buouconuento he died. It happened ſhortly after, that Vguccione di Faggiola,
               The death of Arrigo. became Prince of Piſa, and not long after of Lucca: brought thither by the faction of Ghibilini, with whoſe aide he greatly iniured his neighbours. Amongſt whom, the Florentines to be deliuered, gaue vnto the brother of King Roberto, the gouernment of their Army. Vguccione on the other ſide, for the encreaſing of his power, laboured continually, till by force and ſubtiltie he had gotten many Caſtles in the vale of Arno and Nieuole. Then marching towards Monte Catini, with intent to beſiege the ſame, the Florentines thought it neceſſarie to reſcue that place, leaſt the loſſe thereof might

diſturbe the whole countrey. Then aſſembling a great Army, they paſſed into the vale Nieuole, where they fought with Vguccione, and in the end of their battaile, two thouſand or more of their men were ſlaine, with Piero the Kings brother their Generall; whoſe bodie afterwards was neuer found: neither was this victorie without loſſe to Vguccione, whoſe ſonne was alſo killed, with many Captaines and Leaders of his Armie. The Florentines after this ouerthrow, fortified the townes about them,New diuition, in Florence. and the King Roberto ſent them a new Generall called Andrea Earle Nouello. By whoſe gouernment, (or rather by the naturall inclination of the Florentines, diſcontented with euerie ſtate, and diuided by euerie accident) notwithſtanding the warres they lately had with Vguccione, fell to faction. The one part whereof, called themſelues the Kings friends, the other the Kings enemies. The chiefe of the Kings enemies, were Simon della Toſa, the houſe of Magalotti, with certaine other populer men, in whom reſted the chiefe of the gouernment. Theſe men found meanes to ſend into France and Germany, to leauie Captaines and ſouldiers to remoue the Earle Andrea Gouernour for the King. But their fortune was ſuch, as could not bring to paſſe that they deſired: yet did they not abandon the enterpriſe, but beeing diſappointed both by France and Germany, they found out a Gouernour in Agobio, and before his comming,Lando de Agebio, made Gouernor of Florence. remoued Andrea. Lando de Agobio being come, was made their miniſter, or rather their hangman, hauing receiued abſolute authoritie ouerall the citizens. He, being a man couetous and cruell, accompanied with his ſouldiers (all armed) viſited euerie ſtreete, murthering euerie man, whom thoſe that elected him, would require. Yea, (ſuch was his inſolencie) that he cauſed falſe mony to be quoined with the ſtampe of Florence, and no man durſt gainſay the doing therof: ſo great was the authoritie whereunto the diſcord of the citie had brought him. Great and lamentable was the eſtate of this towne, which neither the memorie of paſſed diuiſion, neither the feare of Vguccione, nor the authoritie of the King could reforme. In moſt miſerable plight it then remained, when the country abroad was ſpoyled by Vguccione, and the citie within by Lando of Agobio ſacked. The Kings friends were all contrary to Lando and his followers. Likewiſe all Noble houſes, the chiefe of the people, & al the Guelfi. Notwithſtanding, becauſe the aduerſe party had the gouernment, they could not without perill to themſelues be diſcouered. Yet reſoluing to be deliuered from ſo diſhoneſt a tyrannie, they wrote ſecretly vnto the King Roberto, to make the Earle Guido Buttifolle his Lieftenant in Florence: which the King preſently did, and the aduerſe part (notwithſtanding that the Senators were contrarie to the King) durſt not for the reſpect they bare to the Earle, finde fault. But the Earle had not therby much authoritie, becauſe the Senators & the Gonfaloniere were by Lando and his partie fauoured. During the continuance of theſe troubles in Florence, the daughter of King Alberto comming from Germany, paſſed that way in her iourny towards Carlo, the ſonne of Roberto her husband. She was greatly honoured by the Kings friends, and they imparted vnto her the ſtate of the citie, and the tyrannie of Lando with his followers. In ſo much as by the fauour of her, before her departure the citie was pacified, Lando remoued from his authoritie, and with riches, blood, and ſpoile, ſent home to Agobio. The gouernment alſo of the King ouer the citie, for three yeares was continued. And whereas there had bene before ſeuen Senators elected by Lando, ſix more were choſen for the King, ſo the Magiſtrates were for a time thirteene. After, they were reduced to the auncient number of ſeuen. About this time Vguccione was depriued of his authoritie in Lucca & Piſa; and Caſtruccio Castracani,
               Caſtruccio caſtracani. from a priuate Cittizen, aſpired to be Lord of Lucca: for hee being a yoong man of great courage, & in euerie enterpriſe fortunate, became in ſhort ſpace the principall Leader of all the Chibilini in Toſcana. For which reſpect, the Florentines
               
ſetting aſide priuate diſcord, deuiſed with themſelues by what meanes Castruccio might be kept downe: and how his forces alreadie growne might be reſiſted. And to the end that the Senators might with better counſell be aduiſed, & with more authoritie execute the ſame, they elected twelue Cittizens, whome they called Boni Homini: without whoſe conſent and counſell, the Senators might not do any thing of importance. In this mean while, the gouernment of king Roberto was expired, & the citie became Prince ouer it ſelfe, with the auncient Magiſtrates and gouernors therof. Alſo the great feare they had of Castruccio, did hold the ſame vnited, hee hauing done many things againſt the Lords of Lunigiana, and aſſembled Prato. The Florentines hearing thoſe newes, reſolued: and determining to reſcue that towne, ſhut vp their ſhops and went confuſedly togither, to the number of twentie thouſand footmen, and fifteene hundreth horſe. Alſo to diminiſh the ſtrength of Castruccio, and encreaſe their owne, the Senators by proclamation gaue notice, that whatſoeuer Rebell of the faction of Guelfi, would come to the reſcue of Prato, ſhould be after the enterpriſe reſtored to his country. Vpon this proclamation more then foure thouſand Rebels came preſently thither. This great Army in haſte conducted to Prato, ſo much terrified Castruccio, that without triall of his fortune by fight, he retired to Lucca. Then grew great controuerſie within the Campe of the Florentines, betwixt the Nobilitie and the people: for theſe would haue followed the enemie, hoping by fight to haue ouerthrowne him; and thoſe would returne backe, ſaying, it ſufficed that they had hazarded Florence to ſuccour Prato. Which was well done, being conſtrained by neceſsitie, but ſith the cauſe was now remooued, no wiſedome would (where litle was to be gotten and much to be loſt) that fortune ſhould be further tempted. This matter (the people not agreeing) was referred to the Senators, who found among themſelues the ſame diuerſitie of opinions that was betweene the people and the Nobilitie: which being knowne, much company aſſembled in the Market place, vſing great words of threatnings to the Nobilitie; In ſo much that they for feare, gaue place to the will of the people: but all too late, becauſe in the meane while the enemy was with ſafetie retired to Lucca. This diſorder brought the people into ſo great indignation of the Nobilitie, that the Senators would not performe the promiſe, by their conſent giuen to the Rebels: which the Rebels vnderſtanding, and hoping to preuent the Senate before the Campe arriued at Florence, offered to enter the gates. But their intent being diſcouered by thoſe in the Citie, were repulſed. Then they ſought to compaſſe that by perſwaſion, which by force they could not, and ſent eight Ambaſſadours to put the Senators in remembrance of their promiſe, and the perill they had vnder the ſame aduentured, hoping of that reward which was by them offered. The Nobilitie thereby put in mind, & knowing themſelues by promiſe bound, laboured greatly in the fauour of the Rebels. Notwithſtā
               ding, by reaſon the people were offended, for not following the enterpriſe of Caſtruccio, nothing was obteined: which afterward proued the great ſhame & diſhonour of the citie. For many of the Nobilitie therewith diſpleaſed, did aſſaie to win that by force, which by entreatie they could not. For which purpoſe, they conſpired with the rebelles to enter the Cittie armed, and they would take armes alſo for their aide. This appointment before the day of execution, was diſcouered: whereby the baniſhed men at their comming found the cittie armed, and order giuen to apprehend them abroad, and keepe downe thoſe that were within. Thus this enterpriſe was in euerie reſpect without ſucceſſe. After the departure of the rebels, the citizens deſired to puniſh thoſe by whoſe meanes they did come thither. And albeit euerie man knew who were the offenders, yet no man durſt name them, much leſſe accuſe them. Therefore to vnderſtand the troth without reſpect, it was ordered, that ſecretly

the names of the offenders ſhould bee written, and priuilie deliuered to the Captaine. In this accuſation were named Amerigo Donati, Teghiaio, Freſcobaldi, & Lotteringo Gerardini: who hauing Iudges more fauourable, then perhaps they deſerued, were onely condemned in pecuniall puniſhment. The tumults which grew in Florence by comming of the Rebels to the gate, made triall that one Chieftaine for all the companies of the people did not ſuffice: and therefore they required after, that to euerie company might be appointed three or foure Leaders; and to euerie Gonfaloniere two or three others, whom they would haue called Pennonieri. To the end, that in time of neceſsitie all the companie not aſſembling, part of them, vnder one head might be imployed. Moreouer (as it happeneth in all common weales after any accident) ſome old lawes be diſanulled, & ſome others are made new: ſo the Senate before appointed from time to time, the Senators with the Collegii which then were (to the end their force might be the greater) had authority giuen them and their ſucceſſors, to continue in office during the ſpace of fortie moneths. And becauſe many Citizens feared their names not to be put into the bagge, they procured a new Imborſation. Of this beginning, grew the election of Magiſtrates, as well within, as without the Citie: which election was in thoſe dayes called Imborſation. Afterwards the ſame was called Squittini. And for that euerie three, or at the moſt fiue yeares, this order was taken, the occaſion of tumults in the Citie, at the choice of Magiſtrats, was remooued, yet were they ignorant of ſuch diſcommodities, as vnder this ſmall commoditie was hidden. The yeare 1315. being come, and Castruccio hauing ſurpriſed Pistoia, was growne to that greatneſſe, that the Florentines fearing the ſame, determined before ſuch time as he was ſetled in his Principallitie, to aſſault him, and bring him vnder their obedience. For which purpoſe they leuied twentie thouſand foote men, and three thouſand horſe. With theſe forces they beſieged Altopaſsio, in hope by hauing of that Towne, to impeach the paſſage of thoſe that would come to the ſuccour of Pistoia. The Florentines preuailed in this enterpriſe, and hauing taken the place, marched towards Lucca, ſpoiling the country where they went. Notwithſtanding, through the ſmall wiſedome of the Generall, or rather his infidelitie, little good enſued thereof.Ramondo di Cardona, Generall for the Florents. This Captaine was called Ramondo de Cardona. Hee, ſeeing the Florentines to haue bene liberall of their libertie, giuing the ſame ſomtimes to Kings, and ſometimes to the Legates of Popes, and men of meane qualitie: thought it poſſible to bring himſelfe to be a Prince; if firſt he could lead them into ſome great neceſsitie. He gaue them therefore to vnderſtand, that for his better reputation, it was meete for him to haue the ſame authoritie within the Citie, that he had in the Army: otherwiſe he ſhould not haue that obedience of his ſouldiers which belonged vnto a Generall. Whereto the Florentines not conſenting, the Army proceeded ſlowly, or rather euerie day loſing ſomewhat: and Castruccio continually gained. Becauſe, by that time were come vnto him diuerſe ſupplies ſent by the Viſconti, and other tirants of Lombardy. Caſtruccio by this meane growne ſtrong, and Ramondo hauing neglected his ſeruice:The Florentines ouerthrowne by Caſtruccio. as for want of fidelitie he did not proſper at the firſt, ſo he could not after ſaue himſelfe: for whileſt he lingered with his Camp, Castruccio did aſſault him, and ouerthrew him, neare vnto Altopaſsio. In which conflict many Citizens were ſlaine, and with them Ramondo himſelfe: who thereby found the puniſhment of fortune, which his infidelitie and euill ſeruice to the Florentines deſerued. The diſpleaſures which Castruccio did after the victorie, by ſpoyling, diſtroying, burning, impriſoning, & killing, cannot be told. Becauſe without any reſiſtance he rode vp and down in the country, where himſelfe liſted, ſpoyling, and committing what cruelties hee thought good. The Florentines ſcantly able, after ſo great an ouerthrow, to defend the citie: yet were they not ſo greatly diſmayd, but that they made much prouiſion,

both of men and money: ſending alſo to their friends, to haue their aide. All which ſufficed not to bridle the furie of ſo mightie an enemie. Wherefore as conſtrained, they made choyſe of Carlo Duke of Calauria, ſon to King Roberto, to be their Prince: offering him, not their friendſhip, but their obedience, and prayed him to defend their Citie. But Carlo being occupied in the warres of Sicilia (and therefore not at leiſure to come in perſon, ſent thither Gualtieri, by Nation a French man,The Duke of Athene, Gouernour of Florence. and Duke of Athene. He as deputie for his maiſter, tooke poſſeſsion of the Citie, and placed officers according to his owne diſcretion. Notwithſtanding, his behauiour was ſo modeſt, and contrary to his owne nature; that euerie man loued him. Carlo hauing ended the warres of Sicilia, being followed with a thouſand horſe men came to Florence, and made his entry in the yeare 1326. whoſe comming ſtaied Castruccio from ſpoyling of the Florentines countrey. But that reliefe which was found abroad, was loſt within, and thoſe diſpleaſures which the enemies could not, were by friendes performed. Bicauſe the Senators did nothing without the Dukes conſent: who within the ſpace of one yeare, leuied in the Citie foure thouſand Florins, notwithſtanding that by the capitulation with him taken, it was agreed, hee ſhould haue but two thouſand. So great impoſitions were daily by him or his exacted. To theſe diſpleaſures new ſuſpitions, and new enemies were diſcouered. For the Ghibilini of Lombardy ſuſpected ſo much the comming of Carlo into Toſcana, that Galiazzo Viſconti & other tyrants of Lombardy, by mony and promiſes,The Emperour Lodouico called into Italy. procured Lodouico di Bauiera Emperour elected, againſt the Popes wil to come into Italy: who being arriued in Lombardy, marched towardes Toſcana, where with the helpe of Castruccio hee became Lord of Piſa. And being relieued with mony, he went towards Rome: which cauſed Carlo to leaue Florence, and returne to the kingdome, leauing Philippo de Sagginetto his Lieftenant. Castruccio, after the Emperours departure poſſeſſed Piſa, and the Florentines tooke from him by practiſe, Pistoia, which Castruccio after beſieged, with ſo great vertue and reſolution, that although the Florentines many times aſſaied to reſcue the Towne, ſometimes aſſailing the Army, and ſometimes diſturbing the Country: yet could they neuer either by force or induſtry, remoue him from that enterpriſe. So greatly he thirſted to chaſtiſe the Pistoieſi, and offend the Florentines. By meanes whereof, the Pistoieſi were conſtrained to receiue him for their Prince: which thing, albeit were greatly to his glorie, proued in the end his diſaduantage. For being returned to Lucca, there he died. And becauſe that one good or euil hap,The death of caſtruccio & carlo Duke of calauria. commeth ſildome vnaccompanied, with the like: alſo at the ſame time died Carlo Duke of Calauria Prince of Florence, as it were, to the end that the Florentines beyond all expectation might be deliuered from the gouernment of the one, and the feare of the other. They thus become free, reformed the cittie, diſanulled all orders of the olde Councelles, and created twoo newe Councelles: the one hauing in it three hundreth Cittizens Commoners, and the other two hundreth and fiftie Gentlemen, and Commoners, mixed. The firſt of theſe,New reformation in Florence. was called the Councell of the people, the other the common Councell. The Emperour beeing arriued at Rome, created an Antipope, and ordered many things in preiudice of the church, and many other things alſo hee attempted without effect. And therefore with this honour he remoued from Rome to Piſa; where, either of melancholy, or for want of mony to paie eight hundred Almaine horſemen, who were rebelled, and at Montechiaro had fortified themſelues, died. They,The death of Lodouico. ſo ſoone as the Emperour departed from Piſa to go vnto Lombardy, ſurpriſed Lucca, and draue out of that cittie Franceſco Caſtracani, left there by the Emperour. Then being poſſeſſed of that cittie, and intending to make profit thereof, offered to ſell it to the Florentines, for threeſcore thouſand Florins, & was refuſed by the Councell of Simon della Toſa. This refuſal would

haue bene to our cittie moſt profitable, if the Florentines had euer continued in that minde: but becauſe ſhortly after they changed opinion, it was greatly to our loſſe. For if at that time for ſo ſmall price, they might ſo peaceably haue had it, and would not, afterward deſiring it, and offering much more then was required, they could not obteine it: which was the occaſion, that Florence many times with great preiudice hath changed the gouernment. Lucca being thus by the Florentines refuſed, was by Gerardino Spinola of Genoua, for thirtie thouſand Florins bought. And becauſe men be more ſlow to laie hold of that which they may come by, then to deſire that they cannot attaine vnto: ſo ſoone as this bargaine made with Gerardino was knowne, and how ſmall a ſumme of mony he paid; the people of Florence became greatly deſirous to haue it, repenting themſelues, and blaming thoſe that were the cauſe that the bargaine proceeded not. Then ſought they to get that by force, which for money was refuſed. For obteining whereof, they ſent their ſouldiers to ſpoile the country belonging to Lucca.
               The troubles and war in Florence all ceaſed. In this meane time, the Emperour was gone out of Italy, and the Antipope by order of the Piſani, ſent priſoner into France. The Florentines then, from the death of Caſtruccio (which happened in the yeare 1328. til the yeare 1340. continued quiet within, & attended their matters of ſtate abroad. They alſo made many wars in Lombardy, for the comming thither of king Iohn of Bohemia, & in Toſcana, touching the ſtate of Lucca. They likewiſe ornefied their cittie with new buildings. For in that time, the Tower of S. Reparata, according to the direction of Giotto (an excellent Painter), was builded. And becauſe, in the yeare 1333. by meanes of a maruellous flood, the Riuer of Arno into many places ouerflowed the cittie, more then 12. cubits; many bridges and buildings were thereby decaied, which with great care and expence were now reſtored. But the yeare 1340. being come, new occaſions of alteration were growne vp. The cittizens of moſt power, had two meanes to encreaſe and maintain their greatneſſe. The one, by reſtraining the number of thoſe that ſhould be elected Magiſtrates, whereby the offices of authoritie came either vnto them, or their friends. The other, becauſe themſelues being chiefe at the election of the Rettori, they were by them in their offices the more fauoured. And this ſecond cauſe they eſteemed ſo much, that to theſe two ordinarie Rettori, they alſo ioyned a third: whom they in thoſe dayes brought in extraordinarie, vnder the title of Captaine of the Guard, and placed therein Iacamo Gabrieli de Agobio, giuing him abſolute authoritie ouer the citizens. He, day by day, before the face of them that gouerned, committed many iniuries, & among thoſe that were iniured, was Piero de Bardi, and Bardo Freſcobaldi.
               Conſpiracy againſt Iacomo Gabrieli of Agobio. They, being gent. and naturally proud, could not endure that a ſtranger wrongfully, and in the preſence of ſome Magiſtrates had done them iniurie: which, both againſt him, and thoſe that gouerned, they conſpired to reuenge. Into that conſpiracie, entered many Noble families, and ſome of the people; whom the tyrannie of him that gouerned, did offend. The order of execution agreed vpon, was, that euery man ſhuld aſſemble into his houſe as many armed men as he could, and in the morning of All Saints day, when euerie bodie was in the church, to take armes, and kill the Captaine. Which done, they determined to place new Senators, and with new orders to reforme the ſtate. But becauſe enterpriſes of perill, the more they be thought vpon, the more vnwillingly be performed. It alwaies happeneth, that cōſpiracies not ſuddenly executed, are for the moſt part diſcouered. There was among the conſpirators one called Andrea de Bardi, (in whom the conſideration of puniſhment could do more, then the hope of reuenge) reuealed all to Iacamo Alberti his brother in law. Then Iacamo enformed the Priori, and the Priori enformed the Gouernours. And becauſe the day of danger grew neare (which was the feaſt of All Saints) manie citizens conſulted in the Pallace, and thinking it dangerous to deferre

the time, iudged it beſt that the Senators ſhould cauſe the bell to be rung, and thereby call the people to armes. Taldo Valori was Gonfaloniere, and Franceſco Saluiati,
               Taldo Valori. one of the Senate. They being to the Bardi kinſmen, would not haue the Bell rung, ſaying it were not well done, vpon euerie light occaſion to arme the people. For authority being giuē to a looſe multitude, could worke no good effect. It was alſo eaſie to moue tumults, but to appeaſe them, hard. It were therfore much better, firſt to examin the troth of the cauſe, & puniſh the ſame by law, thē correct it diſorderly with ruine of the citie; which words were not willingly heard. For the Senators with many iniurious and preſumptuous ſpeeches, were enforced to ring the Bell: vpon hearing wherof, all the people ran ſodeinly into the market place, armed. On the other ſide, the Bardi & Freſcobaldi, ſeeing themſelues diſcouered, intending to winne their purpoſe with glory, or die without ſhame, tooke armes: hoping to defend that part of the citie where their own houſes were: and on the other ſide of the riuer fortified the bridges, truſting to be ſuccoured by the nobility of the country, & other their friends. Which purpoſe was diſappointed by the people that inhabited where their houſes were, who tooke armes in fauour of the Senat: ſo that finding themſelues diſapointed, they abādoned the bridges, & retired to the ſtreet where the Bardi dwelt, as a place of more ſtrength then any other, & that very valiantly they defēded. Iacobo de Agobio knowing all this conſpiracy to be againſt him, fearful of death, & amazed, at the pallace of the Senators in the midſt of the armed men, placed himſelf. But there was more courage in the Rettori, who had leſſe offended: and moſt of all in the Podeſta, called Maffeo de Maradi. For he preſented himſelf to thoſe that fought,Maffeo de Maradi. & as a mā ſenceles, & without al feare, paſsing the bridge Rubaconte, entred in amōg the ſwords of the Bardi, making ſignes to ſpeak with thē. Wherupon they cōſidering the reueuerence of the man, his vertue, & other his good, & great qualities, ſtaied their weapons, & quietly heard him. He then with modeſt & graue words blamed their cōſpiracy, laying before them the perils wherto they were ſubiect, if they gaue not ouer this populer enterpriſe: giuing thē alſo hope, that they ſhould be fauourably heard, and mercifully iudged. And promiſed moreouer, to be the mean wherby their reaſonable offences ſhould find compaſsion. Then he returned back to the Senators, and perſuaded thē not to be victorious with the bloud of their own citizens, neither to iudge before the cauſe were heard. And his perſuaſion preuailed ſo much, as by cō
               ſent of the Senate the Bardi & Freſcobaldi with their friends, were ſuffered to abandō the citie & return to their caſtles. They being gone, and the people diſarmed, the Senators proceeded onely againſt the families of Bardi and Freſcobaldi,
               The Bardi and Freſcobaldi condemned. who had taken armes. And to ſpoile them of ſome part of their power, they bought of the Bardi, the Caſtle of Mangona, and the Caſtle of Varina, and made a lawe, that no Cittizen might poſſeſſe a Caſtle within twentie miles of Florence. Within fewe monethes after, Stiatta Freſcobaldi was beheaded, and many others of that familie proclaimed Rebelles. It ſufficed not the Gouernours to haue oppreſſed the Bardi, and Freſcobaldi, but they did (as men commonly doo) the more authoritie they haue, the worſe they vſe it, and the more inſolent they become: ſo, where was before one Captaine of the Guard who oppreſſed the Cittizens within Florence, they alſo choſe an other in the Countrey, to the ende, that men to them ſuſpected, ſhould neither within the Cittie nor without, haue anie dwelling. So earneſtly were they bent againſt the Nobilitie, that they forced not to ſell the Cittie to be reuenged: aſpecting onely occaſion, which came well, and they better vſed the ſame. By meanes of many troubles which hapned in Lombardy & Toſcana, the poſſeſsion of the citie of Lucca was come into the hāds of Maſtino della Scalla, Lord of Verona, who (notwithſtanding hee was bounde to deliuer the ſame to the Florentines) did not,

becauſe he thought himſelfe able to hold it, the rather, by being Lord of Parma, and therefore of his promiſe he made none account at all, which moued the Florentines to offence. For reuenge whereof, they ioyned againſt him with the Venetians, and made ſo hotte warres vpon him, as thereby he was inforced almoſt to abandon his country. Notwithſtanding therof followed nothing, but ſome ſatisfaction of mind, to haue oppreſſed Mastino. For the Venetians (as all other doe that ioyne in league with ſuch as be weaker then themſelues) after they had ſurpriſed Triuigi and Vuenſa, without reſpect of the Florentines made peace with Maſtino. Shortly after, the Viſconti Princes of Milan, hauing taken Parma from Mastino, and hee fearing for that cauſe, that Lucca could not be kept, determined to ſell it. Thoſe that deſired to buy that citie, were the Florentines and the Piſani. In beating the bargaine, the Piſani perceiued that the Florentines richer then they, would obteine it. Therefore they ſought to winne it by force, and with the aide of Viſconti beſieged it. The Florentines notwithſtanding proceeded, and bargained with Mastino, paying part of the money in hand, and for payment of the reſt, deliuered hoſtages, Naldo Ruccelai, Giouanni the ſonne of Barnardino de Medici, and Roſſo de Rici: and then by order of Mastino, the poſſeſsion of the Citie was deliuered. The Piſani notwithſtanding purſued their enterpriſe, and by all meanes poſsible laboured to get the Cittie by force: yet went the Florentines to reſcue the Cittie, and remooue the ſiege. But after a long warre, the Florentines were forced with loſſe of their money and honour to depart: and the Piſani became Lords of the Citie. The loſſe of this Towne (as in like caſes it euer happeneth) made the people of Florence greatly offended with thoſe that gouerned, whome in euerie Market place they defamed, accuſing them of couetouſneſſe and vnaduiſed counſell. At the beginning of this warre, the authoritie thereof, was giuen to twentie Citizens, who elected Malatesta of Rimini for their Generall. He gouerned the ſame with ſmall courage, and leſſe wiſedome.The Duke of Athene. They alſo praied aide of Roberto King of Napoli, who ſent vnto them Gualtieri Duke of Athene: and (as fortune would, prepairing all things for future miſchiefe) arriued in Florence, at the ſame inſtant when the enterpriſe of Lucca was vtterly loſt. Whereupon the twentie, ſeeing the people diſpleaſed, thought by chuſing a new Captaine, to bring them into new hope. And to the end that the Duke of Athene might with more authoritie defende them, they created him firſt their Defender, and after gaue him the title of Captaine Generall, ouer their men at Armes. The great Cittizens, who for the occaſions beforeſaid, liued diſcontent, and many of them hauing alſo acquaintance with Gualtieri, at ſuch time as they gouerned Florence in the name of Carlo Duke of Calauria, thought the time was come to alter the ſtate, & oppreſſe the people, who had ſo long oppreſſed thē. For the bringing of that to paſſe, they thought good to reduce the gouernment vnder one Prince, who knowing their vertue, & the inſolencie of the people, might reward the one and puniſh the other. They might alſo hope the more of the Princes fauour, if he by their meanes, aſpired to that dignitie. To compaſſe this intention, they manie times met in ſecret, & perſwaded the Duke to take the gouernment, offering to aide him to the vttermoſt of their powers. With theſe Gentlemen, ioyned ſome populer families, as the Peruſsi, Acciaiuoli, Antelleſi, and Buonacorſi, who being greatly indebted, and not able to paie of their owne, deſired with the ſeruitude of their country, and the goods of others to deliuer themſelues from the daunger of their creditors. Thoſe perſwaſions mooued the ambitious minde of the Duke, to great deſire of gouernment, and the rather to make himſelfe beloued, and accounted vpright, therewith alſo to winne the fauoure of the people, hee perſecuted thoſe that had gouerned the warres of Lucca, and put to death,

               Giouan de Medici, Naddo Ruccellati, and Guglielmo Altouiti: many alſo were baniſhed, and manie in money condemned. Theſe executions amazed much thoſe of the meane ſort, onelie the Gentlemen and baſeſt people were therewith ſatisfied. Theſe, becauſe their nature is to reioyce at euill, and thoſe for that thereby their iniuries receiued of the people, were reuenged. When ſo euer the Duke paſſed the ſtreetes, his fauourers would publiquely ſpeake to his honour, and wiſh that the fraude of the Citizens might be by him examined and puniſhed. The office of the twentie thus became diſeſteemed, the reputation of the Duke growne great, and all men for feare, or affection, ſeemed to honour him. And in token thereof, ſet the Dukes Armes vpon their houſes. In ſo much, as this Duke wanted nothing that belonged to abſolute authoritie, ſauing the title of Prince. Then he perſwaded himſelfe, that whatſoeuer he attempted might be ſafely done, and therefore ſent vnto the Senators, letting them vnderſtand, that for the better gouernment of the citie, it behoued him to haue the full abſolute authoritie & gouernment: and ſeeing that all the reſt of the Citizens were therto conſenting, he deſired that therwith they would be alſo pleaſed. The Senators albeit that long before they had foreſeene the ruine of their Countrey, yet were they all with this requeſt greatly troubled. And though they knew alſo the perill, yet not to omit the dutie to their Countrey, they boldly denied the Duke. This Duke to make himſelfe be thought the more religious, and well diſpoſed, did chooſe for his dwelling, the Monaſterie of Saint Croce: and being deſirous to execute his euill intent, hee cauſed to be publiſhed by proclamation, that his pleaſure was the people ſhould reſort vnto him, at the gate of the ſaide Monaſterie. This proclamation amazed the Senate much more then the meſſage, deliuered them by word. Wherefore they thought good to ioyne with thoſe Cittizens, whome they knew to be louers of their Countrey. Neither did they thinke (knowing the Dukes forces) that there was other remedie, to diuert the Duke from the enterpriſe, then to entreate him: and ſo make proofe what effect faire words might worke, to perſwade him to vſe himſelfe in the gouernment more mildly. Then went certaine of the Senators vnto the Duke, and one of them ſpake as followeth. My Lord, we are come hither, firſt moued by your Graces requeſt, and next by your commandement to aſſemble the people. For it ſeemeth a thing certaine, that you intend to obteine that extraordinarily, whereunto by ordinarie meanes wee haue not conſented. Our meaning is, not by force to hinder your deſignes, but onely laie before you, how greeuous a burthen you put vpon vs, and how perillous an action you take in hand. To the end you may hereafter remember our Councels, and waigh the ſame with theirs, who not for your profit, but for the execution of their owne furie, haue counſelled you. You labour to bring this citie in bondage, which hath euer liued in libertie. For that authoritie which we haue graunted to the Princes of Napoli, was companie, and not ſubiection. Haue you conſidered of what importaunce and how ioyfull a thing the name of libertie is, in euerie Cittie like vnto this? The vertue whereof, no force can ſubdue, no time can conſume, nor no merite can deſerue. Conſider (my Lord) how great forces it behoueth you to haue, to hold ſo great a Citie in ſeruitude. Thoſe ſtraungers, whome you haue enterteined, bee not of force ſufficient: and theſe that be within the walles, are not to be truſted. For ſuch as be now your friends, & haue counſelled you to this enterpriſe, ſo ſoone as they haue with your authoritie beaten down their enemies, wil ſeek alſo by what means they may to oppreſſe you, & make themſelues Princes. The baſe multitude alſo in whom you truſt, vpon euery accident, (be it neuer ſo litle) do chaunge their opiniō. So that in ſhort time, you may looke to find this citie your foe, which

ſhall be the ruine thereof, and yours alſo. Neither can you find remedie for ſuch a miſchief, ſith thoſe Princes onely can gouern ſecurely, who haue few enemies: becauſe thoſe few, either by death or exile may eaſily be remoued. But againſt vniuerſall hatred, no aſſurance can be found: becauſe you know not where the miſchiefe groweth. And who ſo feareth euery man, cannot aſſure himſelfe of any man. Alſo, if you ſeeke to be aſſured of others, you enuiron your ſelfe with perils: becauſe thoſe that remain, do hate you the more, and are the more readie to reuenge. A thing moſt certain it is, that no time can weare out the deſire of liberty. For we know, where the ſame hath bene in a citie reuiued by thoſe, who neuer taſted thereof, ſaue onely by the memorie of this name libertie, which their anceſtors by traditiō did leaue them. Therfore hauing recouered it, with all obſtinacie and reſolution they wil defend it, and if our anceſtors had neuer left any ſigne of libertie, yet ſhould we be put in mind therof, by theſe publike Pallaces, by theſe places made for Magiſtrates, & theſe badges of freedom & libertie: which things be publikely knowne, and with great deſire euery citizen ſtudieth to know them. What can you do, or what can by any meanes be done, to counteruaile the ſweetneſſe of life in libertie, or make the people forget the commodities therof? Yea though you could ioyne all Toſcana to the dominiō of this ſtate, or might euery day return to the citie, triumphing ouer your enemies, yet all ſhould not ſuffice. Becauſe that glory ſhould not be yours, but ours. And our citizens ſhould cōquer no ſubiects, but encreaſe companions in ſeruitude. Albeit your maners were godly, your behauiour curteous, and your iudgements iuſt: yet were they not of force inough to make you be loued. If you would beleeue, they did ſuffice; you therin ſhould deceiue your ſelf. For to men accuſtomed to a life in libertie, the lighteſt clog ſeemeth heauie, & the loſeſt bands do pinch. A thing impoſsible it is for any ſtate by violence gotten, to be by a good Prince mainteined: becauſe of force he muſt become like vnto his gouernmēt, otherwiſe the one & the other wil periſh. You muſt therfore thinke either to hold the citie with extreame violence, as caſtles, garriſons of men, & forrein friends (& yet many times they ſuffice not) or els be content, with that authoritie, which we haue giuen you. We therefore perſwade you, and pray you to remember, that ſuch obedience is durable, as is alſo voluntary. And labor not (being blinded with ſome ambition) to ſet your ſelf where you neither can ſtand nor clime higher without your great preiudice & ours, & ſo be forced to fall. Theſe words moued not at all the hardened heart of the Duke,The Dukes anſwere to the Senate. ſaying, his intention was not to take away, but reſtore the liberty of the citie. For cities diſunited were not free, but thoſe that were vnited. And if Florence by reaſon of factions, ambition, and enmitie, had loſt the libertie, hee would reſtore it. Saying moreouer, that not his owne ambition, but the ſute of many Cittizens, brought him to take this burthen: and therefore they ſhould do well to be content with that, wherewith others were contented. As touching thoſe perils which hee might by this occaſion incurre, hee feared them not at all. For it was the office of no good man, to leaue the good, for feare of euill, and the propertie of a coward, for feare of good ſucceſſe, to abandon a glorious enterpriſe. Alſo hee hoped ſo to beare himſelfe, as they ſhould haue cauſe in ſhort ſpace, to confeſſe that they truſted him too little, and feared him too much. The Senate then ſeeing no more good to be done, agreed that the next morning with their authoritie to giue the gouernment vnto the Duke for one yeare, with the ſame conditions, it was giuen to Carlo Duke of Calauria. It was the eight day of September 1342. when the Duke accompanied by Giouan della Toſa, with all his followers, and many Cittizens, came into the Market place, and there in preſence of the Senators, aſcended vp to the Ringiera (for ſo they called that place of the ſtaires belōging to the Pallace) where the conditions between

the Senate, & the Duke were read. And when the Reader pronounced thoſe words, which gaue the Duke authoritie for one yeare: the people cried for his life. Then Franceſco Rusticheli (one of the Senate) roſe vp to ſpeake, and appeaſe the tumult: but his words, were, with ſhouting of the people interrupted. So as by conſent of the multitude he was created Prince, not for one yeare only, but for euer: & being carried by the multitude about the market place, his name was proclaimed. It is the cuſtome, that whoſoeuer is appointed to the Guard of the Pallace, ſhall in abſence of the Senators be ſhut vp therein. To which office at that time was Rinieri di Giotto appointed: hee being corrupted by the Dukes friends, without anie violence offered, receiued the Duke into the Pallace. And the Senators therewith amazed, and diſhonored, went home to their owne houſes. Then was the Pallace by the Dukes ſeruants ſacked. The Gonfaloni del Populo thruſt out, and the Dukes Armes ſet vppon the Pallace, to the great and ineſtimable griefe and ſorrow of all good men, and the great content of thoſe, who either for ignorance, or wicked mind thereunto conſented. The Duke hauing gotten the gouernment, intending to take all authoritie from thoſe that were woont to defende the libertie of the Cittie, did forbid the Senators to aſſemble anie more in the Pallace,Ordinaunces made by the Duke of Athene in Florence. and appointed them a priuate houſe. Hee tooke alſo the Enſignes from the Gonfalonieri of companies. Hee remooued the order of iuſtice againſt the Nobilitie, and deliuered the priſoners that had bene committed. Hee called home the Bardi, and Freſcobaldi, who had bene baniſhed, and gaue generall commandement that no man ſhould weare weapon. Alſo for his better defence within the Citie, he wanne himſelfe forraine friends, and for that purpoſe pleaſured the Aretini, and all others vnder the Florentine gouernment. Hee made peace with the Piſani, notwithſtanding hee were created Prince purpoſely to make warre with them. Hee tooke the obligations from thoſe merchants, that in the warre of Lucca had lent mony to the ſtate. He encreaſed the old Impoſts, and erected new: taking all authoritie from the Senators. The Rettori by him appointed, were Raglione da Perugia, and Guglielmo da Sceſi: with whom he ioyned, Cerrettieri Biſdomini; and thoſe three men were his onely Councell. The taxes which he impoſed vpon the Citizens were extreme, his iudgements vniuſt, & that grauitie & curteſie which he had before fained, was conuerted into pride, and crueltie. For many citizens both wealthy and noble were condemned, and diuerſe alſo by new inuented tortures, tormented. Moreouer to ſhew his authoritie in like ſort abroad, as it was in the citie, he authorized ſix Rettori for the country, who oppreſſed and ſpoiled the rurall people. He had the great men in ſuſpition, although by them hee had bene pleaſured: and that ſome of them by his meanes had bene reſtored to their Countrey. For hee imagined that ſuch Noble mindes as commonly are in Gentlemen, could not be contented with his gouernment. Hee ſought therefore to winne the good will of the people, hoping with their loue, and the aide of ſtraungers, to defende his tyrannie. Then the moneth of May being come, at which time the people were accuſtomed to make ſport and triumph, he cauſed the companies of the Common people, and baſeſt ſort to haue Enſignes, and money, with honourable titles to bee giuen them. Wherupon the one part of them, went from place to place feaſting and triumphing: and the other part with great pompe receiued the triumphers. When fame had diſperſed abroad the new principallitie of the Duke, many of the French Nation came vnto him. And hee to euerie one of them (as men moſt to be truſted) gaue countenance and enterteinment. So that Florence within ſhort ſpace was not onely ſubiect to the French men, but alſo to their factions and apparrell. Becauſe both men and women, without reſpect of ſhame, did followe them. But aboue all

things that diſpleaſed, was the violence which he and his, without reſpect, vſed to the women. The Citizens liued then with great indignation, ſeeing the maieſtie of their ſtate ruined, their ordinances broken, their lawes diſanulled, honeſt life corrupted, and all ciuill modeſtie extinguiſhed. For the Citizens, not accuſtomed to ſee any regall pompe, could not without ſorrow behold the Duke amidſt his guardes of armed men, both on foote and horſebacke: for ſo with their owne ſhame, they were forced to honour him, whome they moſt hated. Whereunto might be ioyned, the feare and death of many Citizens, and the continuall exactions, wherewith he impoueriſhed, and conſumed the citie. All which indignations and feares, were well inough knowne to the Duke, yet would he not be thought to miſtruſt any thing, but ſhew himſelfe as though he were beloued of all men. For it happened that Matteo di Moroſo, either to gratifie him, or acquite himſelfe of danger, reuealed a conſpiracie practiſed by the houſe of Medici, and ſome others. The Duke enformed therof,Matteo di Moroſo. did not onely not examine the cauſe, but alſo cauſed Matteo moſt miſerably to be put to death. By which doing, he tooke courage from all thoſe that would tell him anie thing for his good, and encouraged others that went about his ruine. He cauſed alſo with great crueltie, the tongue of Bettone Cini to be cut off, who after, therof died. And this puniſhment was done, becauſe Bettone had found fault with the exactions laid vpon the Cittizens. Theſe cruelties encreaſed offence in the people with their hatred to the Duke, becauſe that citie which was accuſtomed freely to do and ſpeake all things, could not endure to haue their hands tied, and their mouthes cloſed. Theſe offences and this hatred grew to that ripeneſſe, as mooued not onely the Florentines, (who could neither maintaine their freedome nor ſuffer ſeruitude) but euen the moſt ſeruile people of the world, to recouer libertie. And therupō many citizens of all eſtates reſolued, with the loſſe of their liues to recouer their libertie loſt.Conſpiracy againſt the Duke of Athene. Then practiſed they three ſorts of conſpiracies, the one among the Nobilitie, the ſecond among the people, the third among the artificers. Theſe conſpiracies, beſides the general reſpect, were for particuler reaſons willingly taken in hand. The great men deſired to recouer authoritie. The people were ſorrowfull for hauing loſt the gouernment. And the Artificers found their trades and earning of money to be decaied. At that time Agnolo Acciaiuoli, was Archbiſhop of Florence, who in his Sermons and otherwiſe, had extolled the actions of the Duke, and done him great fauour among the people. But afterwards ſeeing him Prince, and knowing his tyrannous proceedings, knew how much he had deceiued his country: and therefore to make amendes of that faulte, determined, that the hande which had made the wound, ſhould alſo cure it. Wherefore he became head of the firſt and greateſt conſpiracie: wherein were the Bardi, Roſsi, Freſcobaldi, Scali, Altouiti, Malagotti, Strozzi, and Mancini. The chiefe of the ſecond conſpiracie, were Manno and Corſo Donati, and with them the Pazzi, Cauicciulli, Cherchi, and Albici. The principall of the third conſpiracie, was Antonio Adimari, and with him the Medici, Bordini, Ruccelai, & Aldobrandini: whoſe intent was to haue ſlaine the Duke in the houſe of Albezi, whither (as they thought) he intended to go vpon Midſomer day, to behold the running of horſes. But thither he went not, and therfore that enterpriſe became fruſtrate. Then they ment to aſſault him walking in the citie; but that ſeemed ha
                  •
               d to do, becauſe he was well accompanied, and alwaies armed, therewith alſo euerie day changed his walke, ſo as they knew not in what place certaine to wait for him. It was likewiſe the opinion of ſome, that the beſt were to kill him in the Councell: and yet that were hazardous; for though he were ſlaine, the conſpirators ſhould be at the diſcretion of his forces. During that the conſpirators communed of theſe matters, Anthonio Adimari, diſcouered the matter to ſome of his friends of Siena, whoſe aide hee hoped

of, and tolde them the names of ſome conſpirators, ſaying that the whole Citie was bent to recouer libertie. Then one of them imparted his knowledge to Franceſco Brunelleſchi, not with intent the practiſe ſhould be laid open, but ſuppoſing that hee alſo had bene of the ſame conſpiracie. Franceſco either for feare of himſelfe, or for the hatred he bare towards ſome other, reuealed all to the Duke: and preſently Pagolo del Mazecchia, and Simon da Mantezappoli were apprehended; Who detecting the qualitie and quantitie of the conſpirators, did thereby much amaze the Duke, and was therefore counſelled rather to ſend for them, then arreſt them: For if they fled, then he might without his owne diſhonour, by their baniſhment aſſure himſelfe. The Duke therefore cauſed Antonio Adimari to be called, who truſting to his companions, preſently appeared. Adimari being ſtaied, the Duke was aduiſed by Franceſcho Brunelleſchi, and Vguccione Buondelmonti, to ſearch the Citie, and kill ſo many as could be taken. But that the Duke thought not good, ſuppoſing his forces not ſufficient to encounter ſo many enemies, and therefore proceeded an other way, which hauing taken effect, ſhould both haue aſſured him of the enemies, and alſo gained him ſtrength. The Duke was accuſtomed at occaſions, to aſſemble the Citizens, and to take their counſell. Hauing therefore ſent out to aſſemble the people, he made a bill of three hundreth Citizens names; and cauſed his Serieants vnder colour of councelling with them, to warne them to appeare: and being appeared, he intended either to kill them, or impriſon them. The apprehenſion of Antonio Adimari, and the ſending for other Citizens (which could not be ſecretly done) did greatly diſmay euery man: but moſt of all, thoſe that knew themſelues guiltie. Inſomuch as men of greateſt courage would not obey him. And becauſe manie had read the bill, wherin one ſaw an others name, the one encouraged the other to take armes, and choſe rather to die like men, then as Calues to be led to the butchery. By this means within an houre, all the three conſpiracies became knowne one vnto the other: and determined the day following (which was the twentie ſixt of Iuly, in the yeare 1343.) to raiſe a tumult in the olde Market place: there to arme themſelues, and call the people to libertie. The next day, about high noone, according to appointment, euerie man tooke armes, and all the people hearing the name of libertie, armed themſelues, and euerie man in his quarter prepared him vnder the Enſigne of the peoples armes, which the conſpirators had ſecretly cauſed to be made. And the chiefe, as well of the Noble houſes, as of the populer families, came forth and ſware both their owne defence, and the Dukes death, (excepting ſome of the Buondelmonti and Caualcanti, with thoſe foure families of the people, which procured him to be made Prince. They, togither with the Butchers, & people of baſeſt condition, came armed to the Market place in defence of the Duke. At this vproare, the Duke armed all his Court, and his ſeruants in ſundrie places lodged, mounted on horſebacke to come to the Market place. But in many ſtreetes they were beaten downe and ſlaine, and onely three hundred horſes came vnto him. The Duke in the mean while ſtood doubtfull, whether he were better to come out and fight with his enemies, or defend himſelfe within the Pallace. On the other ſide, the Medici, Cauicculi, Ruccellai, and other families moſt iniured, did feare that if the Duke would come out, manie that had taken armes againſt him, might happily become his friends. And therefore to remoue the occaſion of his comming forth, and encreaſing his forces, made head, and went vp to the market place. At whoſe arriual, thoſe populer families, that ſtood there for the Duke, ſeeing the Cittizens couragiouſly to charge them, chaunged their mindes. After the Duke had thus altered his fortune, and euerie man reuolted to the Citizens, ſauing Vguccione Buondelmonti, who went into the Pallace: and Giannozzo Caualcanti with part of his men, retired vnto the new Market, and there

ſtood vp, deſiring the people to arme themſelues to defend the Duke. Alſo the rather to terrifie the people, he threatned them, that if obſtinately they followed the enterpriſe againſt the Prince, they ſhould be all ſlaine. But finding no man to follow him, nor yet any that purſued him, and ſeeing himſelfe to haue laboured in vain, tempting fortune no further, retired vnto his owne houſe. The conflict in the meane while (betwixt the people and the Dukes ſouldiers) was great, and though the Dukes forces defended the Pallace, yet were they in the end vanquiſhed: ſome of them yeelded to their enemies, and ſome leauing their horſes, folowed into the Pallace. While in the Market place the fight continued, Corſo and Amerigo Donati, with part of the people brake the priſons, burnt the Records of the Podesta, & of the publique chamber: ſacked the Rettori and their houſes; and ſlew all the officers of the Duke, that they could laie hand vpon. The Duke on the other ſide, ſeeing the Market place loſt, and all the citie againſt him, not hoping of any helpe, made proofe, whether by any curtuous act the people might be appeaſed. Therfore he called vnto him the priſoners, & with gentle words deliuered thē, & made Antonio Adimari (though nothing to his owne contentment) a Knight. Hee cauſed alſo his owne armes to be raſed out of the Pallace, & ſet the peoples armes in the ſame place. Which things being done too late and out of time, by enforcement, and without order, helped litle. Thus as a man diſcontented & beſieged, he remained in the Pallace; and found by experience, that by coueting too much, he loſt all: and therefore looked within fewe dayes, either to die by famine or ſword. The Citizens intending ſome forme of gouernment, aſſembled themſelues in Santa Reparata: and created there foureteene Citizens, halfe of them great, and the other halfe populer, who with the Biſhop, ſhould haue full authoritie to reforme the ſtate of Florence. They chuſed alſo ſixe to haue the authoritie of the Podesta, till hee were come. There were in Florence at that time, diuerſe ſtraungers come thither to aide the people: amongſt whom, were ſome Saneſi ſent from Siena, with ſixe Embaſſadours, men in their country much honoured. They betwixt the people and the Duke practiſed reconſiliation, but the people refuſed to common of any agreement, vntill Guglielmo da Sceſi, and his ſonne, with Cirretieri Biſdomini were deliuered into their hands. The Duke would not thereunto conſent, till being threatned by thoſe that were ſhut in with him, ſuffered himſelfe to be inforced. Certainly the furie is greater, and the harmes more, when libertie is in recouering, then when the ſame is recouered. This Guglielmo and his ſonne, being brought among thouſands of enemies, (the yoong man not being eighteene yeares of age) could neither by his youth nor innocencie be ſaued from the furie of the multitude. And thoſe that could not ſtrike him aliue, would needs wound him being dead. Yea not being ſatisfied by cutting him in peeces with ſwords, with their nailes and teeth, they alſo tare his fleſh. And to the end al their ſences might haue part in the reuenge, hauing alreadie heard him lament, ſeene his wounds, and touched their torne fleſh, would alſo that their taſte ſhould take part, ſo that all ſences both without & within might be pleaſed. This terrible furie though it were greeuous to Guglielmo and his ſonne, yet was it profitable to Cirretieri. Becauſe the multitude, being weary with the crueltie executed vpon thoſe two, did clearly forget him, remaining ſtill within the Pallace not called for. Then, the night following, by certaine of his friends, hee was conueyed away and ſaued. The multitude being appeaſed with blood of theſe two:The Duke of Athene baniſhed by the Florentines. A concluſion was made, wherin was let downe, that the Duke and his, ſhould ſafely depart with bagge and baggage, and renounce all his authoritie ouer Florence. And afterwards, ſo ſoone as he ſhould come to Caſentino vpon the confines, ratifie the ſame. After this compoſition, the ſixt day of Auguſt he departed from Florence, accompanied with many Citizens. And arriued in Caſentino, he ratified (though vnwillingly)

the reſignation of his authoritie: for had he not bene by the Earle Simone threatened to be brought backe to Florence, he would not haue performed his promiſe. This Duke (as his proceedings do ſhew) was couetous and cruell,Diſcription of the Duke and his diſpoſition. no willing hearer of complaints, and in his anſweres, haughtie; hee looked for ſeruice of all men, and eſteemed the loue of no man: yet deſired he to be beloued, more then feared. His perſon and preſence did deſerue to be hated, no leſſe then his conditions; his bodie was ſmall, his face blacke and hard fauoured, his beard long and thin; ſo as both in appearance and being, hee merited the loue of no man. Thus within the tearme of ten moneths, his euill behauiour loſt him that gouernment, which fooliſh Councell of others had giuen him. Theſe accidents being happened within the citie, gaue encouragement to all the townes which had bene ſubiect to the Florentines, to returne alſo to their libertie: whereby Arezzo, Caſtiglione, Pistoia Volterra, Colle, and S. Gimignano, rebelled. After the Duke was thus driuen away, the foureteene Cittizens, togither with the Biſhop, thought better to pleaſe their ſubiects with peace, then make them enemies by warre. And therfore ſeemed as much content with the libertie of them, as with their owne. Then ſent they Embaſſadors to Arezzo, to renounce all their gouernment and intereſt in that citie, & make a league with the Citizens there. To this end, that ſith they could not haue their aide as ſubiects, yet they might haue it as friends: with other townes they likewiſe practiſed to continue them in friendſhip. This counſell wiſely taken, had happie ſucceſſe: becauſe Arezzo after a fewe yeares returned vnder the gouernment of Florence, & the other townes within a fewe moneths came to their auncient obedience. Whereof may be conceiued, that many times things fled or not deſired, are with leſſe perill and ſmaller charge obteined, then if the ſame had bene by extreame trauell & great force followed. All things thus ſetled abroad, they turned their ſtudie to deale with matters within: and after ſome diſputations betweene the great and populer Citizens, they agreed that the great men ſhould haue a third part in the Senate, & in the ther offices the halfe. The citie (as hath bene beforeſaid) was diuided into ſix parts, ſo that one of the Senators was appointed to euery ſixt part, vnleſſe vpon ſome accident twelue or thirteene were created: but ſhortly after they were reduced againe to the number of ſixe. It was therefore thought good to reforme the gouernment in this point, as well for the euill diſtribution of the parts, as becauſe they intended to deliuer charge of the gates to the great Cittizens; it was neceſſarie to encreaſe the number of the Senators. Therfore the citie was againe diuided, into quarters: allotting to euerie quarter three Senators, leauing out the Gonfaloniere Della Iustitia,
               Florence againe reformed. and the Gonfalonieri of companies. And in lieu of the twelue Buoni Homini they created eight Councellours, of either ſort foure. This gouernment with this order ſetled, would haue continued quiet, if the great citizens had bene content to liue with that modeſtie, that to a ciuill life apperteined: but they followed a courſe cleane contrarie. For when they were priuate, they would no companions; and being in authoritie ruled as Lordes. So as euerie day ſome proofe of their inſolencie and pride was ſeene, which thing greatly diſpleaſed the people, ſuppoſing that in place of one tyrant ſent away, there was growne vp a thouſand. The inſolencie of the one part,The people of Florence offended with the nobilitie. and the offence of the other, grew to that greatneſſe, that the heads of the people did expoſtulate vnto the Biſhop the diſhoneſtie of the great men, who were not by anie meanes content to liue like companions and neighbours. And therefore perſwaded him to finde meanes that the great Cittizens might be contented with the meane offices: and that the Magiſtracie of the Senate ſhould be onely left to them. The Biſhoppe was naturally good, but eaſily perſwaded to alter opinion: which was the cauſe, that by perſwaſion of his companions, he firſt fauoured the Duke of Athene,
               
and ſhortly after by the counſell of other Citizens conſpired againſt him. So now he ſeemed in reformation of the ſtate, firſt to fauour the great men, and after to allow better of the people, moued by thoſe reaſons, which the populer Citizens had tolde him. He therefore ſuppoſing to find as ſmall conſtancie in others, as in himſelfe, perſwaded betwixt them a compoſition. Then he aſſembled the foureteene, who yet continued in their authoritie, & perſwaded them to yeeld the office of Senate to the people, alleadging that would be the quiet of the citie, and the deniall, the ruine thereof. Theſe words did greatly chaunge the mindes of the great men, and Ridolpho de Bardi, with bitter words reproued the Biſhop, calling him a man not to be truſted: laying before him the friendſhip which he entered with the Duke vnaduiſedly, and how he baniſhed him afterwardes, traiterouſly. And in concluſion he ſaid, that thoſe honours which they with their perill had gotten, with their perill ſhould be defended. Thus being diuided from the Biſhop, he & his companie tooke leaue, and went vnto others of their conſort, imparting the matter to all the Noble houſes in the Cittie. The people likewiſe brake their mindes to ſuch as were men of their condition. While the great men prepared themſelues to the defence of their Senators, the people thought good to be alſo readie, and ſuddeinly ranne vnto the Pallace armed: crying aloud, and requiring that the great Citizens ſhould renounce the Magiſtracie. The rumour and tumult was great, and the Senators found themſelues abandoned: becauſe all the people beeing armed, the great Cittizens durſt not take armes, but euerie one remained in his owne houſe. By meane whereof, the new Senators appointed by the people,The autoritie of the nobilitie, taken from them. firſt appeaſed the tumult, and then gaue knowledge thereof: ſaying that their companions were modeſt and good men, and that they were faine, for auoyding a worſe inconuenience to take this courſe, & ſo ſent home the other Senators ſafe to their houſes. The great Citizens thus remooued from the Pallace, the office was alſo taken away from the foure great Counſellours. In whoſe place, they appointed twelue of the people, with the eight Senators that remained. They created one Gonfaloniere de Iustitia, & ſixteene Gonfalonieri of the people. They alſo reformed the Councels, ſo as, all the gouernment remained at the diſcretion of the people. At ſuch time as theſe things happened, there was great dearth in the citie: by meanes whereof, both great Citizens and the baſeſt ſort of people became diſcontented. Theſe, for hunger, and thoſe for hauing loſt their authoritie: which occaſion made Andrea Strozzi to imagine, that it were poſsible for him to vſurpe the libertie of the citie.Andrea Strozzi. He perſwaded with that imagination, ſolde his corne much better cheape then others: by meanes whereof, many people reſorted vnto his houſe. And one morning hee mounted on horſebacke, being followed by ſome of them, tooke courage to call the people to armes: which done, within leſſe then one houre foure thouſand people were aſſembled; with whom he went to the Senate, deſiring the Pallace might be opened for him. But the Senators with threatnings and force, ſent him from thence, and after with proclamations ſo terrified him, that by litle and litle euerie man returned to his houſe. So as Andrea being left alone, could ſcantly flie and ſaue himſelfe from the Magiſtrates. This attempt, although it were vnaduiſed, and had ſuch ſucceſſe, as commonly all others like thereunto haue, yet did the ſame giue hope vnto the Nobilitie, that they might eaſily oppreſſe the people, ſeeing the pooreſt ſort miſliked them.The nobilitie aſſaie to recouer their honours. For not looſing this opportunitie, they determined to arme themſelues with all ſorts of aide, and recouer that reaſonably, which vniuſtly and by force, had bene taken from them. The aſſured hope they had conceiued of ſucceſſe in this enterpriſe, grew ſo great, that openly they prouided armes, fortified their houſes, and ſent to their friends in Lombardy. The people on the other ſide, togither with the Senate, made their prouiſion, and arming them, ſent to the Saneſi and

               Perugini for aide. The aſsiſtaunce of the one, and the other beeing come,The People armed againſt the nobilitie. all the Cittie was in Armes, and the Nobilitie made head on this ſide Arno in three places. At the houſes of Cauicciulli neare to S. Giouanni: at the houſes of the Pazzi and Donati, in S. Piero Maggiore: and at the houſes of the Caualcanti in the newe Market. The others beyonde Arno, fortified the bridges and ſtreetes next to their houſes. The Nerli at the bridge Caraia; The Freſcobaldi and Mannelli, at S. Trinita. The Roſsi and Bardi, at the olde bridge; and the bridge Rubaconte defended themſelues. The people on the other part, vnder the Gonfaloniere della Iustitia, & the Enſignes of companies aſſembled themſelues. Being thus prepared, the people thought good no longer to delaie the fight. The firſt that gaue the charge were the Medici and the Rondinegli, who aſſaulted the Cauicciulli, in that way which leadeth from the Court before S. Giouanni to their houſes. There the conflict was great, by reaſon that from the Towers ſtones were caſt downe to the harme of many, & below others with Croſſe-bowes were ſore hurt. This fight continued three houres, and ſtill the people encreaſed. Then the Cauicciulli ſeeing themſelues by the multitude ouermatched, and wanting aide, yeelded to the people: who ſaued their houſes and their goods, and tooke from them onely their weapons, commanding them to diuide themſelues, and remaine in the houſes of ſuch Commoners as were their kinsfolks and friends. This firſt troupe vanquiſhed the Donati & the Pazzi, who being of leſſe force were eaſily ſubdued. Then remained only on this ſide Arno, the Caualcanti, who by men and the ſeat of the place were ſtrong. Neuertheleſſe ſeeing all the Gonfalonieri againſt them, and knowing the others to haue bene by three Gonfaloni vanquiſhed without any great reſiſtance yeelded. Thus were three parts of the Cittie in the hands of the people, one part more remained to the Nobilitie: which was hard to be wonne, by reaſon of the ſtrength of them which defended it, and the ſeat of the place, it being ſo fortified with the riuer of Arno, that the bridges muſt firſt of force be ſurpriſed, which were defended in that ſort as is beforeſaid. The people then knowing that there they laboured in vaine, aſſaied to paſſe the bridge Rubaconte: where finding the like difficultie, they left for guard of thoſe two bridges, foure Gonfaloni; and with the reſt aſſaulted the bridge Caraia. Where albeit the Nerli manfully defended themſelues, yet could they not withſtand the furie of the people. Both becauſe the bridge wanting towers of defence, was weak, & the Capponi with other populer families alſo aſſailed them. In ſo much as being on euery ſide diſtreſſed, they retired and gaue place to the people; who forthwith likewiſe vanquiſhed the Roſci: by reaſon that all the people on the farre ſide of Arno ioyned with the victorious. Then the Bardi were onely left, whom neither the ouerthrow of others, nor the vniting of the people againſt them, (nor the ſmall hope they had of reſcue) could any whit amaze: for they did chooſe rather to die fighting, ſee their houſes burnt, and their goods ſpoyled, then voluntarily ſubmit themſelues to the mercie of their enemies. They therefore defended themſelues with ſo great reſolution, that the people many times in vaine aſſaulted them, both vpon the old bridge, and vpon Rubaconte: and were with death of many, and the hurting of more, repulſed. There was in times paſt a lane, whereby men paſſed from the way that leadeth towardes Rome, by the houſe of the Pitti, to go vnto S. Giorgio. By this way the people ſent ſix Gonfalonieri, with commandement to aſſault the back ſide of the houſe of Bardi. That aſſault made the Bardi to looſe their hope, and occaſioned the people to aſſure themſelues of victorie: for ſo ſoone as thoſe who defended the ſtreetes knew their houſes were aſſaulted, they abandoned the fight, and ranne to ſaue them. This was the cauſe that the chaine of the old bridge was loſt, and that the Bardi on euerie ſide fled: who were by the Quarateſi Panzaneſi, and Mozzi encountred. The people in the

meane while (chiefly thoſe of baſeſt qualitie) being greedie of ſpoyle, ſacked their houſes, razed their Towers and burned them, with ſo great furie, that euen he that is moſt foe to the Florentine name, would haue bene aſhamed to behold ſo great a crueltie.The Nobilitie oppreſſed. The Nobilitie thus oppreſſed, the people ordeined a gouernment. And becauſe the Cittizens were diuided into three ſorts, that is to ſay, great men, meane men, and baſe men. It was ordered that of the great men there ſhould be two Senators, of the meane men three, and of the baſeſt men three. Alſo the Gonfalonieri ſhould ſometime be of the one, and ſometime of the other ſort. Moreouer the ordinances of Iuſtice, againſt the Nobilitie were confirmed. And to make the Nobilitie weaker, they tooke ſome of that number, and mixed them with the populer multitude. This ruine of the Nobilitie was great, and ſo much weakened their faction, as after that time they durſt neuer take armes againſt the people: but continually remained poore and abiect of minde; which was the occaſion that Florence became ſpoyled, not onely of armes, but alſo of all generoſitie. After this ruine, the citie continued quiet, till the yeare 1353. In which time, happened that memorable plague (whereof Giouan Boccacio with great eloquence) hath written. Of which died in Florence, 96. thouſand perſons. The Florentines made then the firſt warre with the Viſconti, occaſioned by the ambition of the Archbiſhop, then Prince of Milan. That warre being ended, beganne ſuddeinly new factions within the Citie. And albeit the Nobilitie was deſtroyed, yet fortune found meanes to raiſe vp new diuiſions, and new troubles.
            The ende of the ſecond Booke.
         
         
            
            
               
                  royal blazon or coat of arms
               
            
            THE THIRD BOOKE.
            
               THE greeuous and naturall enimities betwixt the people, and Nobilitie, through deſire of the one to commaund, and the other, not to obey: are cauſes of all euils, which happen in euerie citie. For of the diuerſitie of theſe humours, all other things which diſturbe Common weales doo take their nutriment. This was that which held Rome diſunited. And this (if we may compare ſmall matters to great) was that which continued Florence diuided. Notwithſtanding, in thoſe two cities, the diuiſions, did bring forth two ſundrie effects. For the enimitie of the people and Nobilitie in Rome, was at the beginning ended by diſputation: but the diuiſion of the people and Nobilitie of Florence, was with ſword and ſlaughter determined. That of Rome by lawe; but that of Florence by exile, and death of many Citizens was ended. That of Rome did alwaies encreaſe the vertue militarie, but that of Florence, vtterly extinguiſhed the ſame. That of Rome, from an equalitie of the Citizens, to a great diſequalitie, reduced the citie: but that of Florence, frō diſequalitie, to a maruellous equalitie was changed. Which diuerſitie of effects, muſt of force be occaſioned, by the diuerſe ends, which theſe two people had. For the people of Rome, deſired not more, then to participate the ſoueraigne honours with the Nobilitie, but they of Florence would be alone, and gouerne all without companie of the Nobilitie. And for as much as the deſire of the Romane people was more reaſonable, the offences done to the Nobilitie became the more tollerable. By meane whereof, that Nobilitie, without reſiſtance gaue place: and after ſome diſputation, a lawe was made to the peoples ſatisfaction, they being content that the Nobilitie ſhould continue their dignities. On the other ſide, the deſire of the Florentine people was iniurious and vniuſt; by reaſon whereof, the Nobilitie prepared themſelues for defence, and without baniſhment and bloud of the Cittizens, their contentions were not ended. Alſo thoſe lawes which were afterwards made, not for the common commoditie, but altogither in fauour of the people, were ordeined. Thereof proceeded likewiſe, that by victories of the people, the citie of Rome became more vertuous. Alſo the people hauing ſometime authoritie in the warres, and commaundement in gouernment with the Nobilitie, were indowed with like vertue, and cauſed that citie by encreaſe of vertue in men, to encreaſe alſo in power. But in Florence, the people hauing victorie, the Nobilitie were depriued of Magiſtracie, and being deſirous to recouer it, it behoued them by their behauiour and manner of life, to endeuour themſelues, not onely to ſeeme, but alſo to be men populer. Heereof, came the alteration of Enſignes, and the chaunge of titles, which the Nobilitie (to ſeeme common people) were conſtrained to make. So as that vertue in armes and generoſitie

of minde, which had bene in the Nobilitie, was extinguiſhed; and could not be reuiued in the people, where it was not: which is the cauſe that Florence euer after becam the more abiect. And as Rome knowing the vertue of it ſelf grew to ſuch pride, as without a Prince could not be mainteined: ſo Florence was reduced to ſuch termes, as euery wiſe law maker might haue brought the ſame to any order or forme of gouernment: as by reading of the former booke may partly be perceiued. Now hauing already ſhewed the beginning of Florence, & the original of the liberty therin, with the occaſions of diuiſion: and how the factions of the nobilitie and of the people, with the tyrannie of the Duke of Athene, did end: & laſtly how the Nobilitie were deſtroyed. It remaineth to diſcourſe the enimitie betwixt the people and the multitude,The enimitie betweene the people and the multitude. with ſuch accidents as of thoſe diuiſions proceeded. So ſoone as the authoritie of the Nobilitie was oppreſſed, and the warre with the Arch-Duke of Milan finiſhed; it ſeemed that no occaſion of diſpleaſure or offence, remained in Florence. But the froward fortune of our Cittie, and the euill orders thereof, cauſed newe diſſention to ariſe, betwixt the families of Albizi and Ricci: which diuided Florence, as by the Buondelmonti and the Vberti, and as by the Donati and Circhi it had before beene diuided. The Popes, who at that time remained in Fraunce, and the Emperours in Germany, to maintaine their reputation in Italy, ſent thither at ſundrie times, ſundrie multitudes of ſouldiers, English men, Germaines, and Brittaines. They, (the warres ended) beeing without paie and entertainment, ſometime vnder the Enſigne of one Prince, and ſometimes vnder an other, ſpoyled the Countrey. In the yeare 1353. one of thoſe companies came into Toſcana, vnder the conduct of Monſigneur Reale, whoſe comming amazed all the Citties of that Prouince. And the Florentines did not onelie in that reſpect publiquely leuie forces, but alſo diuerſe priuate Cittizens.The faction or diuiſion of Albizi and Ricci. Amongeſt whome, the Albizi and Ricci, for their owne defence, Armed themſelues. Theſe two houſes hating one the other, ſtudied howe they might one oppreſſe the other: yet were they not come to Armes, but onely contended in the gouernment, and in Councell. The Cittie then vpon this occaſion armed, there happened by chaunce a quarrell in the olde Market: whither many people (as is at like occaſions the cuſtome) reſorted. During the brunt of this brute, newes were brought to the Ricci, that the Albizi aſſailed them. And in like maner it was tolde to the Albizi, that the Ricci ſought for them. Vpon theſe rumours, all the citie aroſe, and the Magiſtrates could with difficultie hold backe the one and the other of theſe families, from dooing of that violence, which without any fault or intent of theirs, was occaſioned. This chance (though of no importance) ſomwhat kindled the minds of thoſe gentlemen, & euery of them were the rather deſirous to allure partakers. And foraſmuch as by the ruin of the nobilitie, the Citizens were reduced to ſuch an equalitie, that the magiſtrates had more reuerence then they were wont, either of them determined by ordinary meane, and without priuate violence to oppreſſe his aduerſary. We haue alreadie tolde, how after the victory of Carlo the firſt, the Guelfi were created Magiſtrates, and to them great authoritie giuen ouer the Ghibilini. Notwithſtanding through tract of time and new diuiſions, that law became ſo much neglected, that many deſcended of Ghibilini,
               A new lawe againſt the Ghibilini occationed by a priuie reſpect. aſpired to the moſt principall offices. Vguccione de Ricci then chiefe of his family, found meane, that the law againſt the Ghibilini was reuiued: of which faction (as ſome thought) the Albizi were, who many yeares paſt did come from Arezzo to inhabit Florence. Vpon reuiuing of this law, Vguccione hoped to depriue the Albizi of authoritie, becauſe thereby it was ordeined, that whoſoeuer was deſcended of the Ghibilini, ſhould not in any wiſe beare office in the ſtate. This practiſe of Vguccione
               
was diſcouered to Piero ſonne of Philippo degli Albizi, who determined to fauour it, leaſt doing the contrarie, he ſhould declare himſelfe a Ghibilino. This lawe although renewed by ambition of the Ricci, yet did it not diminiſh, but encreaſe the reputation of the Albizi, and was the originall of many miſchiefs. Neither can any lawe be made more preiudiciall to a Common weale, then that which hath relation to time, long ſince paſſed. Piero hauing thus conſented to the law, that, which his enemies had deuiſed for a let, was the high way to lead him to his greatneſſe. For being made as chiefe of this new ordinance, he ſtill encreaſed in reputation, and became more fauoured of the Guelfi, then any other. And for as much as there was no Magiſtrate appointed for diſcouerie of the Ghibilini, the lawe alreadie made, ſerued to ſmall purpoſe. It was therefore prouided that authoritie ſhould be giuen to the Captaines, to detect thoſe that were of faction Ghibilini, and finding them, to giue admoniſhment that they ſhould not take vppon them any office in the ſtate: Or if they ſhould diſobey the ſaid admoniſhment, then to be condemned. Hereof it commeth, that ſince that time, all thoſe that be diſabled to beare office in Florence,
               Ammoniti. be called Ammoniti. The captains thē by this authority grew to be ſo inſolent, as they did not only admoniſh thoſe that deſerued admonition, but alſo euery man, whomſoeuer it pleaſed them, being thereto moued by any cauſe whatſoeuer, either of couetouſneſſe or ambition. So that, from the yeare 1357. (at which time this ordinance was made) til the yeare 1366. more then two hundreth Citizens were admoniſhed. By this mean, the Captaines, & faction of Guelfi were become mightie, becauſe euery man fearing to be admoniſhed, honoured them. The chief of them were, Piero delli Albizi, Lapo d
                     •
                   Castiglionichio, and Piero Strozzi. And albeit this inſolent order of proceeding diſpleaſed many, yet the Ricci were of all other moſt diſcontented. For they ſuppoſing themſelues to be the occaſion of this diſorder, ſaw the common weale ruined, & the Albizi their enemies, contrary to expectation, become of moſt authoritie. Wherfore Vguccione de Ricci, being one of the Senate, deſired to ſtaie this miſchiefe, whereof he & his friends were the beginners: and by a new law he prouided, that the ſix captains ſhould be encreaſed to the number of nine, of whom, two ſhould be of the ſmal miſteries. And ordeined moreouer, that the detection of the Ghibilini, ſhould be by 24. Citizens of the ſect of Guelfi confirmed. This ordinance for the time, qualified the authoritie of the Captaines, ſo as the admoniſhment grew colde. And if anie happened to be admoniſhed, they were not manie. Notwithſtanding, the factions of Albizi and Ricci, continued: and the leagues, practiſes, and reſolutions, deuiſed in hatred one of the other, did proceed. In this vnquietneſſe, the citie liued from the yeare 1366. till 1371. In which time the Guelfi recouered their forces. There was in the family of Buondelmonti, one Gentleman called Benchi, who for his merit, in the warre againſt the Piſani, was made one of the people, and thereby become capable of the office of the Senate. And when he looked to be choſen to that honour, a lawe was made, that no Gentleman become one of the people, might exerciſe the office of the Senate. This greatly offended Benchi, wherefore conſulting with Piero delli Albizi, determined with the admonition to oppreſſe the meaner ſort of the people, and the reſt alone to enioy the gouernment. Then through the fauour which Benchi had with the olde Nobilitie, and through the affection of manie of moſte mightie people borne to Piero, the faction of Guelfi recouered ſome force: and with new reformation, they handled the matter ſo, that they might both of the Captaines and the twentie foure Cittizens, diſpoſe as themſelues thought good. Wherevppon they returned to admoniſh more boldlie then they were woont and the houſe of Albizi, as head of this ſecte, ſtill encreaſed. On the other ſide, the Ricci failed not by their owne force and friendes to hinder their

enterpriſes all they were able, ſo that all men liued in ſuſpition, and euerie one miſtruſted his owne ruine. For which cauſe, manie Cittizens mooued with the loue of their Countrey, aſſembled themſelues in Saint Pietro Sceraggio, and reaſoning of theſe diſorders, went to the Senators: vnto whome one of moſt authoritie ſpake thus.The Oration of the cittizens touching factions. Wee haue (my Lordes) doubted (although for a publique occaſion) to aſſemble our ſelues by priuate conſent, fearing to be noted for preſumptuous, or condemned as ambitious. Yet conſidering that euerie day (without reſpect) manie Cittizens conferre both in the ſtreetes and in their houſes, not for anie common commoditie, but their owne ambition: we do hope, that as they haue come togithers for the ruine of the Common weale, ſo it ſhall not be offenſiue, that we conſult by what meane the ſame might be preſerued: Neither is there cauſe why we ſhould regard them, ſeeing they of vs, make none eſtimation at all. The loue (my Lordes) which we beare to our Countrey, did firſt bring vs togither, and the ſame alſo hath ledde vs hither to intreate of theſe inconueniences, which are now great, and daily encreaſe in this our Common weale. In the redreſſe whereof, we offer our ſelues to aſsiſt you. And (albeit the enterpriſe do ſeeme hard) yet may it be performed, if it ſhall like your Lordſhips to laie by all priuate reſpects, and with publique forces imploy your authorities. The common corruption of other Citties of Italy, doth alſo corrupt ours. For ſith this Prouince was drawne vnder the Empire, all Cities (wanting Gouernours able to rule them) haue gouerned themſelues: not as free, but as townes into ſects and faction, diuided. Out of this, be ſprung vp al other diſcords that are to be found. Firſt, among the Citizens, there is neither vnion, nor friendſhip, but onely among ſuch, as haue againſt their countrey or priuate perſons, conſpired ſome lewde enterpriſe. Alſo, bicauſe religiō & feare of God is in euery man almoſt extinguiſhed, othes and faith giuen, are none obligations equall to profit, which all men couet. Yet do they ſtil vſe both promiſing & othes, not to obſerue them, but the rather to deceiue thoſe, that truſt them. And the more eaſily & ſafely they can deceiue, the more they account their praiſe & glory. For this reaſon, hurtfull men be commended as induſtrious, & good men blamed as fooliſh. Yea, I aſſure my ſelfe, that all corruption, or that can corrupt others, is to be found in the cities of Italy. The young men are idle, old men wanton, euery ſects, and euery age full of lewde conditions: which good lawes, being euil vſed, do not amend. Hereof the couetouſnes which we ſee in Citizens, and the deſire, not of true glory, but of ſhamefull honors, do proceed: wherevpon depend hatred, enmitie, diſpleaſures, & ſects. Alſo of them do follow murders, baniſhments, perſecution of the good, & aduancement of the euill. For good men truſting in their owne innocencie do not (as euil men) ſeeke extraordinary defence. Whereby vnſupported and diſhonoured, they are ſuffered to ſinke. This example occaſioneth loue of the factions, and their forces: becauſe the worſt ſort for couetouſneſſe and ambition, and the beſt for neceſsitie, do follow them. It is alſo worthie conſideration (as that which is more perillous) to ſee how the leaders of theſe enterpriſes do colour their lewdneſſe with ſome honeſt or godly tearme. For (albeit they are all enemies to libertie) yet vnder the word Ottimacy, or popularitie, they cloake their euill intent. Becauſe the rewarde which they aſpect of victorie, is not glorie, by hauing deliuered the Cittie, but the ſatisfaction they take to be victorious, and vſurpe the gouernment thereof. Wherewith allured, there is nothing ſo iniuſt, nothing ſo cruell, or couetous, that they leaue vnattempted. Hereof it proceedeth, that lawes, and ſtatutes, not for the common, but the priuate profit, be made. Hereof it proceedeth, that warre, peace, and leagues, not for publike glory, but for the pleaſure of a few, are contracted. And albeit ſome other Cities

be touched with theſe diſorders, yet none ſo fowly infected as ours. Becauſe the lawes, the ſtatutes, and ciuil ordinances, not according to a life in libertie, but according to deſire of the faction victorious, haue bene, and yet are, ordeined; which is the cauſe that euer one faction driuen out, or one diuiſion extinquiſhed, ſodeinly ariſeth an other. For that citie which is mainteined more by faction, then law, ſo ſoone as anie faction hath gotten the ouer hand, & is without oppoſition: it muſt of force be, that the ſame becommeth in it ſelfe diuided. For by thoſe priuate meanes which were made for preſeruation therof, it cannot be defended: which to be true, the ancient, and moderne diuiſions of our citie do make triall. Euerie man thought that the Ghibilini extirped, the Guelfi ſhould euer haue continued in honour. Notwithſtanding within ſhort time, the Bianchi and Neri aroſe. The Bianchi vanquiſhed, our citie continued not long without partes, but was ſometimes troubled with fauouring thoſe that were baniſhed, and ſomtimes with the enmitie betwixt the people, & nobilitie. Yea, at length (giuing that to others, which by accord either we would not or could not poſſeſſe our ſelues) ſometimes to the King Roberto, ſometimes to his brother, & laſt of all to the Duke of Athene, we yeelded our libertie. And in troth we neuer ſetled our ſelues in any eſtate, as men, that could not conſent to liue free, nor be willing to obey: neither feared we liuing vnder a King (ſo greatly are our orders diſpoſed to diuiſion) to preferre before his maieſtie, a man of moſt baſe condition, born in Agobio. The Duke of Athene may not without ſhame of this citie be remembred: whoſe bitter and cruel mind might make vs wiſe, and inſtruct vs how to liue. But he being ſent away, we ſuddeinly tooke armes in hand, and with more malice and fury, fought among our ſelues, til all our auncient nobilitie were oppreſſed and left at the peoples diſcretion. Then was it thought by many, that neuer for any occaſiō it were poſsible to ſtir vp new troubles or factions in Florence, they being caſt down, whoſe pride & vnſupportable ambition was the cauſe thereof. Yet is it now ſeene by experience, how eaſily the opinion of men is deceiued. For the ambition and pride of the nobilitie was not quenched, but remoued into the people: who now (according to the cuſtome of ambitious men) hope to aſpire to the moſt ſoueraigne offices. And not wanting other meane to vſurpe the ſame, they moued new diſcords, & new diuiſions in the citie, raiſing vp the name of Guelfi & Ghibilini, which, (had they neuer bene knowne) ſhould haue made our country the more happie. Beſides that, (to the end in this world ſhould be nothing in continuance or quietnes) Fortune hath prouided, that in euery ſtate, there ſhould be certaine fatall families, borne, and deſtined, to the deſtruction thereof. Of theſe, our Common weale hath bene more then anie other, repleniſhed. For not one, but many of them haue diſturbed the quiet therof. As, firſt of all the Buondelmonti and Vberti; then the Donati and Circhi. And euen now (a ſhamefull and ridiculous matter) the Ricci and Albizi do trouble and diuide our Citie. We haue not remembred you of thoſe corrupt cuſtomes, and our continuall diuiſion, to diſmay you, but call to your minds the occaſions of them, and enforme you, that the example of thoſe, ſhould not make you to diſpaire the reformation of theſe. Becauſe the power of theſe auncient houſes was ſo great, and the fauour that Princes did beare towards them ſo much, that the lawes and ciuill ordinances were not of force ſufficient to hold them in quiet and due obedience. But now the Empire hauing no force, the Pope not feared, and that all Italy, & this Citie alſo, is reduced to ſo great equalitie, as may by it ſelf be gouerned, the difficultie cannot be much. And this our common weale (notwithſtanding the ancient examples to the cōtrary) may not only be brought to vniō, but alſo in good cuſtoms & ciuil orders be reformed, if your lordſhips be diſpoſed to do it. Wherunto, we moued with the loue of our coū
               try, & no priuate paſsiō, do perſuade you. And albeit the corruptiō thereof be great,

yet allaie that diſeaſe which infecteth, that furie which conſumeth, that poyſon that killeth: and impute the auncient diſorders not to the nature of men, but the time: which being changed, it may hope, that by meane of new orders, new fortune will follow, whoſe frowardneſſe may be by wiſedome gouerned, in putting a bridle vpon the ambitious, diſanulling ſuch ordinances, as were nouriſhers of factions, and vſing thoſe that to a ciuill life and libertie, are agreeable. Be ye alſo pleaſed to do this by vertue of lawe, rather now, then deferre the ſame, till ſuch time, as by armes you ſhall be enforced thereunto. The Senators moued with theſe reaſons, which themſelues had before conſidered, and thereunto adding the authoritie, and comfort of the men, gaue commiſsion to fiftie ſixe Citizens, to prouide for the ſafetie of the Common weale. True it is, that the counſell of many is more fit to conſerue a good order, then to inuent it. Theſe Citizens then ſtudied rather to extirpate the preſent factions, then take away the occaſion of future diuiſion. In ſo much, as neither the one or the other, was brought to paſſe: becauſe not remouing the occaſions of new diuiſion, and the one part of thoſe ſects which were preſent, being of greater force then the other,New reformation in Florence. became the more perillous to the ſtate. Wherefore, out of euerie office (excepting thoſe that were in the handes of the Guelfi) for three yeares they depriued three men of the families of Albizi, and three of the houſe of Ricci: amongſt whom, were Piero delli Albizi, & Vguccione dei Ricci. They prohibited all Citizens to come into the Pallace, ſauing at ſuch times as the Magiſtrates ſate there. They prouided, that who euer was ſtriken, or letted to poſſeſſe his owne, might call his aduerſarie to the Counſels, & proteſt him for one of the Nobilitie. Theſe ordinances diſcouraged the Ricci, and incouraged the Albizi. For although they were equally noted, yet the Ricci were the more iniured. And albeit the Pallace of the Senate was forbidden to Piero, yet the counſell houſe of the Guelfi (where he had great authoritie) was open for him. Therefore if he and his followers were at the firſt earneſt in admoniſhing, now after this iniurie, they became much more earneſt: and to that euil diſpoſition,Pope Gregorio. new occaſions were ioyned. At this time Gregorio 11. was aſpired to the Papacie, who liuing at Auignion, did (as his predeceſſors) gouerne Italy by Legates. They being men inclined to pride and couetouſneſſe, had thereby greatly afflicted many Cities. One of theſe Legates being in Bologna, taking occaſion of the dearth which happened that yeare in Florence, determined to make himſelfe Lord of Toſcana. And therefore he not onely withheld from the Florentines, preſent reliefe, (but alſo to remoue all hope of future prouiſion) at the beginning of the next ſpring, with a great Army, entered their Countrey: imagining the people (diſarmed and famiſhed) might be eaſily conquered. And happily the enterpriſe had taken effect, if the ſouldiers that ſerued him, had bene faithfull and not corruptible. For the Florentines not hauing other remedie, gaue vnto them 130. thouſand Florins, and for that mony the ſouldiers abandoned the enterpriſe. To begin a warre, is in the power of euerie man, but to end a warre, no man can, when himſelfe ſo liketh. This warre by the ambition of the Legate begun, was by the offence of the Florentines followed. For the better execution thereof,A new Commiſsion for the gouernment of war. they made league with Barnabo, and with all the cities enemies to the church; and elected eight Citizens to gouern the ſaid war: vnto whom authoritie was giuen, to proceed without appeale, and ſpend without account. This warre begun againſt the Pope (notwithſtanding the death of Vgucciono) encouraged thoſe that followed the faction of Ricci, and had againſt the Albizi alwaies fauoured Barnabo, and disfauoured the church: and the more, for that the eight were all foes to the faction of Guelfi: which was the reaſon that Piero delli Albizi, Lapo di Castiglionichio, Carlo Strozzi, and the reſt, diuerſe times ioyned, to the offence of the aduerſarie. And while the eight made warre, and they admoniſhed, the warre continued

three yeares, and by death of the Pope was ended. This warre was with ſo vniuerſall ſatisfaction, and ſo great vertue gouerned, that the office of the eight, was from yeare to yeare continued in thoſe men, and they were called Santi, notwithſtanding they litle regarded the Popes curſes, ſpoiled churches, and forced the Clergie. Thus without reſpect, they preferred the ſeruice of their country before the Popes indignation. And thereby taught the church, that as being friend thereunto, they had defended it, ſo being enemie, they were able to annoy it, hauing procured all Romagna, La Marca, and Perugia, to rebell. But notwithſtanding all theſe warres made by the Florentines againſt the Pope, yet could they not defende themſelues from the Captaines of their owne factions and their followers. For, the enuie which the Guelfi bare vnto the eight, made them to become inſolent, and though they ſpared the reſt of the Nobilitie, yet reſted they not to iniure the eight. Alſo the Captaines of factions, were growne vp to ſo great arrogancie, as they were more fauoured then the Senators, and men with more reuerence reſorted to their houſes, then to the Pallace. In ſo much as euerie Embaſſadour that came to Florence, brought with him ſome commiſsion or inſtruction to entreate with theſe Captaines. Then died Pope Gregorio, whereby the citie being deliuered of forreine warre, preſently begun great confuſion at home. For on the one ſide, the inſolencie of the Guelfi was inſupportable,New tumults in Florence. and on the other ſide, no meane could be deuiſed to oppreſſe them. Onely this hope was left, that euerie man ſhould take armes, and ſo make triall whether partie ſhould preuaile. On the part of the Guelfi, were all the old Nobilitie, with the greater number of the mightieſt people: of whom (as hath bene declared) Lapo, Piero, and Carlo were the chiefe. On the other ſide, were all the people of leaſt reputation, who had for Leaders, the eight Gouernours of warre, Georgio Scali, Tomazo Strozzi, and with them the Ricci, Alberti, and Medici. The reſt of the multitude (as in like caſes it euer happeneth) ioyned to the partie diſcontented. It ſeemed then to the Guelfi, that the forces of their aduerſaries were great, and therefore themſelues in much daunger, whenſoeuer any vnfriendly Senate ſhould happen to be choſen. Therefore thought good for the preuenting of that miſchiefe, to aſſemble themſelues in ſome place conuenient, where they might conſult of the ſtate of that Citie. For it ſeemed that the Citizens admoniſhed, being in number growne great, the moſt part of the Citie were their foes. Whereto they could not deuiſe other remedie, but as they had taken from them the honours, ſo alſo to baniſh them the Citie, take the Pallace by force, and reduce all the ſtate, to the order wherunto it was by the auncient Guelfi reduced: who liued not ſecure for any other reaſon, but onely becauſe they had driuen out all their aduerſaries. To this plot euerie man conſented, but of the time of execution, they diſcented. The yeare 1378. being come, in the moneth of Aprill, Lapo thought good not to deferre the time ſaying, there was nothing that hindred time ſo much, as time: and then ſpecially becauſe in the next Senate, Saluestro de Medici was likely to be choſen Gonfaloniere, whom to their factiō they knew moſt contrary. Piero delli Albizi thought otherwiſe, for his opinion was it ſhould be deſerred, becauſe the execution of their intent required forces, which without publiſhing of the matter could not beleuied, & if the matter were diſcouered, they ſhould therby incurre manifeſt daunger. His opinion therefore was, it ſhould be delaied till the feaſt of S. Iohn (then at hand:) at which time, many people would reſort to the towne, among whome they might conuey in vnknowne, as many friendes as they thought good. Moreouer, to finde meanes how to preuent the election of Salueſtro, it was thought fit to admoniſh him: and if that deuiſe ſeemed not good, then to put into the election an other alſo of the ſame quarter. So as, it might fall out, that inſteed of him, ſome other of his companions ſhould be choſen. This cauſe was ſet

downe as a reſolution, (notwithſtanding that Lapo vnwillingly thereunto, conſented) iudging, delaie was dangerous, and that no time can be in euerie reſpect fit for execution. For whoſoeuer tarrieth all opportunities, either he ſhall neuer performe anything,The Conſpiracy reuealed. or if he doth, the ſame (for the moſt part) falleth out to his diſaduantage. The Colledge was warned, and Saluestro not repulſed, but choſen Gonfaloniere: for the eight hauing diſcouered the practiſe, found meanes to preuent that which was looked for. Thus Saluestro ſonne of Alemanno di Medici, who being of a verie noble populer houſe, could not endure that the people ſhould be by a few great men oppreſſed. And hauing deuiſed how to end their inſolencie, ſeeing the people fauoured that enterpriſe, he did communicate his intent to Benedetto Alberti, Tomazo Strezzi, and Georgio Scali: and they promiſed to bring him all the aide they poſsibly could. Thē was there a law ſecretly eſtabliſhed, wherby the ordināces of iuſtice againſt the great men were renewed: & the authoritie of Captains was diminiſhed. The ſame alſo, reſtored power to the admoniſhed, to haue reſtitution of their dignities. And becauſe (as it were at one inſtant) they intended both to propound and obteine, hauing firſt to paſſe the Colledge, & after to determine in the Councels, finding Salueſtro Preſident (which place in thoſe dayes, for the time being, made him be placed as Prince of the Citie) they cauſed the Colledge & Councell in one ſelfe morning to be aſſembled. And firſt to the Colledge onely, they propounded the lawe made, which as a new thing was by that ſmall number reiected. Whereby Saluestro, ſeeing his wings clipped, wherewith he hoped to aſcend to his deſire, fained for his neceſſitie to depart the place; and contrarie to expectation, went to the Councell: and ſtanding vp where he might be both ſeen and heard of euerie man, ſaid. He thought himſelfe made Gonfaloniere,
               The ſpeech of Salueſtro di Medici. not to determine of priuate cauſes, (which haue their ordinary Iudges) but to attend the ſtate, correct the inſolencie of the great men, and qualifie the rigor of thoſe lawes, which were found by proofe to hinder the Common weale. And albeit he had with diligence trauelled in theſe matters, and to his power preuented all inconueniences, yet the ſiniſter diſpoſition of men, ſo greatly oppoſed it ſelfe to his iuſt indeuour, that the way of well doing was ſtopped: and their intent was altered, not onely from determining well, but alſo from hearing thereof. Wherefore, ſeeing that he could not do aniething more for the ſtate, or the common commoditie, he knew not to what end he ſhould continue longer in that office, which either he deſerued not, or (as it was thought of others) he would not hereafter deſerue. For theſe reſpects he intended to retire home, to the end the people might put in his roome, ſome other of more vertue, or greater fortune. This ſpeech ended, he departed from the Councell towards his houſe, ſuch as were in the Councell his friends, with ſome others alſo deſirous of Innouation, began to murmure. Then the Senators and Colledges drew neare, and finding their Gonfalone departing, by entreatie, and authoritie ſtaied him, and into the Councell, (being full of tumult) perſwaded him to returne, where many noble Citizens were with words moſt iniurious, threatned. Among whom, Carlo Strozzi, was by an Artificer taken by the bozome, and had bene ſlaine, if the ſtanders by had not ſaued him. But that which ſtirred the greateſt tumult, and put the citie in armes, was the motion of Benedetto Alberti, who from the window of the Pallace, cried aloude to the people to take armes. Wherupon ſodeinly all the Court was full of armed men. By that mean, the Colledges were forced by threatnings and feare, to do that which being deſired they would not. In the meane time, the Captaines of the factions had aſſembled many Citizens, and conſulted how to defend them againſt the order of the Senators. But ſo ſoone as they heard the rumour appeaſed, and vnderſtood what was by the Councell reſolued, euerie man fled to his owne houſe. For there is no man that moueth

any alteration in a Citie, that knoweth how either to worke it at his owne wil, or ſuppreſſe it, at his pleaſure. It was the intent of Saluestro to create a law, & appeaſe the Citie: but the matter fell out contrarie. For the humours moued, had chaunged euerie man ſo much, that the ſhoppes were ſhut vp, Citizens were aſſailed at their houſes, many conueyed their goods to Monaſteries, and hid them in Churches, as though euerie one looked for ſome miſerie at hand. The companies of miſteries aſſembled, and euerie miſterie elected a Sindaco. Then the Priori called their Colledges, and the Sindachi conſulted with them, how the Citie might be made quiet, but their opinions being diuerſe, nothing was determined. The next day following, the miſteries drew forth their Enſignes, which the Senators knowing, & doubting that which happened; called the Councels to put order: but ere they were all aſſembled, a tumult was begun, and preſently the Enſignes were come out, followed by armed men to the Pallace. Thereupon the Councell to giue hope of contentation to the miſteries and the people, and take from them the occaſion of ſuſpition, gaue generall authoritie to the Senate, the Colledges, the Eight, the Captaines of parts, and the Sindachi, to reforme the Cittie, for common commoditie thereof. While theſe matters were in hand, certaine of the Enſignes of miſteries, with others of leſſe qualitie (thereby moued by ſome that deſired reuenge of the laſt iniuries receiued of the Guelfi) ſhrunke away from the reſt, and went vnto the houſe of Lapo di Castiglionichio, ſacking and burning the ſame. He hearing that the Senate had done an enterpriſe contrarie to order taken by the Guelfi, and ſeeing the people in armes, hauing no other remedie, but either hide himſelfe or flie; firſt hid him in Santa Croce, & after in the habit of a Frier fled into Caſentino: where he was heard complaine of himſelfe, for conſenting to Piero delli Albizi; and of Piero, for that he would needs deferre to aſſure the ſtate, till the feaſt of S. Giouanni. But Piero and Carlo Strozzi, at the beginning of the vprore hid themſelues, thinking that the brunt paſt, their friends and kinsfolkes were of force ſufficient to continue them ſecure in Florence. The houſe of Lapo being ſacked (becauſe miſchiefes are hardly begunne, and eaſily encreaſed) many other houſes (ſome for hate vniuerſall, and others by priuate diſpleaſure) were alſo ſpoiled and burned. And the miniſters of theſe miſchiefes, to make their companie the more forcible, for the ſpoyling of other mens goods, brake the Gayles, & let forth the priſoners. They alſo ſacked the Monaſterie of Agnoli and S. Spirito, where many Citizens had beſtowed their goods. Neither had the publique chamber of Florence eſcaped the hands of theſe diſordered ſpoylers, if one of the Senators had not taken vpon him the defence thereof; who on horſebacke followed with ſome armed men, reſiſted the furie of the multitude. This populer madneſſe, partly by mediation of the Senate, and partly for that the night drew on, was appeaſed.New reformation in Florence. The next day, the Balia reſtored fauour to the Citizens admoniſhed, with condition that within the next three yeares, they ſhould not be capable to exerciſe any office. They alſo diſanulled the lawes made by the Guelfi, in preiudice of the Citizens. They proclaimed Lapo di Castiglionichio, and his companions Rebels, and with them diuerſe others hated of the multitude. After theſe reſolutions, they publiſhed new Senators, among whom Luigi Guicciardini was Gonfaloniere: whereby hope was conceiued, that all tumults wold ceaſe, becauſe they were holden quiet men and louers of peace. Notwithſtanding the ſhops were kept ſhut, the Citizens ſtill armed, and great watches throughout the citie charged. For which cauſe the Senators receiued not their office without the Pallace with the pompe accuſtomed, but within, not vſing any ceremonie at all. Theſe Senators thought nothing ſo neceſſarie to be done at their entry into office, as to procure a peace in the citie, and therfore cauſed al armes to be laide downe, the ſhops to be opened, and the people of the countrey (called

thither in the fauour of Citizens) to be diſpatched away. They ordeined Guards in many places of the citie; ſo as if the Citizens admoniſhed, could haue liued content, the people had bene quiet. But they not willing to abide three yeares from honour, did finde meane, that for their ſatisfaction, the miſteries againe aſſembled, and demanded of the Senate, that for the good of the citie and quiet thereof, no Cittizen might any more be admoniſhed as a Ghibilino, either by the Senators, the Colledge, Captaine, or Conſull. Moreouer, they required new Imborſation to be made of the Guelfi, and the old to be burned. Theſe demands were preſently accepted, both by the Senate, and all other Councels: becauſe thereupon it was ſuppoſed, all newe tumults would ceaſe. But mans nature doth not onely content it ſelfe with his owne, but will alſo couet other mens, and be reuenged. Thoſe that hoped in the diſorder, declared to the miſteries that they ſhould neuer be aſſured, vnleſſe many of their enemies were driuen out, and oppreſſed. Which requeſt being preſented, the Senators called before them, the officers of miſteries, & the Sindachi, to whom Luigi Guicciardini Gonfaloniere ſpake in manner following.The Oration of Luigi Guicciardini. If theſe Lordes, and I alſo, had not knowne the fortune of this cittie, the cuſtome whereof is, that ſo ſoone as it hath made peace abroad, the warre within beginneth: we would haue more maruelled at the tumuls paſſed, and therewith haue bene more greeued. But becauſe things accuſtomed, do bring with them leſſe ſorrow, we haue endured theſe troubles with great patience, and the rather, for that they were begun, without any our default, and ſhall (we hope) end, as all others before haue done, ſith we haue alreadie, in ſo many, and ſo great demands, ſatisfied you. Neuertheleſſe perceiuing that you neuer reſt contented, but ſtill with new iniuries ſeeke to diſturbe your Citizens, and condemne them to newe baniſhments: of your diſhoneſt dealings, our greeuous ſorrow groweth. And truly, if we had thought, that within the tearme of our gouernment, this citie ſhould haue bene ſo troubled, we would either by voluntary or violent exile, haue ſhunned theſe honors. But hoping to deale with men, in whom remained curteſie and loue to their country, we willingly receiued theſe offices, beleeuing our clemencie, ſhould haue ſuppreſſed your ambition. But, we now ſee by experience, that the more mildly we beare our ſelues towards you, the more proud ye are, and the more diſhoneſt requeſts ye demand at our hands. This plainneſſe of ſpeech we vſe, not to offend you, but to remember you, for our meaning is, that others ſhall ſpeake that which pleaſeth you, and we that which is beſt for you. Tell vs (we pray you) what is that, you can honeſtly more require at our hands? You required that the authoritie ſhould be taken from the captains of factions, & ſo it was. You deſired the Imborſations ſhould be burnt & new reformation made, to that we cōſented. You demanded the reſtitutiō of the admoniſhed Citizens to their honors; and they were reſtored. We haue alſo at your entreatie pardoned thoſe that burned houſes, & robbed the churches. Yea for your ſatisfactiō, we haue ſent into exile, many honourable and mightie Citizens. The great men alſo by your meanes are with new lawes brideled. What end will thoſe your demands haue? Or how long will you abuſe your libertie? See ye not that we with more patience did endure to be victored, then you to be victorious? Whither will theſe miſdemeanours drawe this your citie? Do ye not remember that by like diſunion, Castruccio a poore Citizen of Lucca, did oppreſſe it? And the Duke of Athene, a priuate Captaine of your owne, did conquere it? So long as it liued in vnion, the power of an Archbiſhop of Milan, and a Pope, could not preuaile againſt it: but after, a warre continued diuerſe yeares, abandoned the enterpriſe with ſhame. Why would ye then, that your own diſcord, ſhould in peace bring this citie in bondage, which ſo many mightie enemies haue (notwithſtanding their warre) left free? What profit ſhall you looke for by your

diuiſion, other then ſeruitude? Or what commoditie will riſe of the goods you haue robbed, other then pouertie? For they are thoſe, that by our induſtry haue fed the citie: wherof being ſpoiled, it can no longer be nouriſhed. And they that ſhall vſurpe them, wil (as of things euil gottē) not know how to keep them. Wherof ſhal follow famine and pouertie. I, and theſe Lords commaund yee, and (if without indignitie we ſo may) earneſtly praie you to ſtaie your minds, and reſt contented with thoſe things which by vs are ordeined. And whenſoeuer you deſire anie new ſute at our hands, ſeek the ſame ciuilly, and ſtriue not with tumult & armes to obtaine it. For whatſoeuer you reaſonably aske, will be graunted, and men euill diſpoſed ſhal want occaſion to oppreſſe our citie to your ſhame, and the ruine therof. Theſe words (becauſe they were true) greatly moued the citizens, and much they thanked the Gonfaloniere, for hauing performed the office of a good Lord & citizen, offering to obey, wherin ſo euer it ſhould pleaſe him to command them. The Senators alſo, to giue the occaſion, did authorize two citizens of euery principal office, togither with the Sindachi, to practiſe a reformation, to the common quiet, and report their doings to the Senate. While theſe matters were in hand, an other tumult aroſe,New tumult in Florence. which troubled the ſtate more then the former. For the greater part, of the burning & ſpoyling in times paſt, were done by the baſeſt ſort of people, who notwithſtanding that being altogither, they were audatious, yet they euer feared that the furie once paſt and appeaſed, they ſhould receiue puniſhment for their defaults, or (as it often happened) be abandoned by thoſe that encouraged them to the performance of the diſorder. Whereunto was ioyned a hatred of the baſe people, towards the rich Cittizens and heads of the myſteries, iudging themſelues not ſo well paide for their labours, as they had deſerued. Becauſe at ſuch time as the cittie was firſt by Carlo diuided into myſteries, and euerie myſterie a head thereunto appointed, it was enacted that the ſubiects of euerie myſterie ſhould be in all ciuill matters iudged by the head thereof. Theſe myſteries (as we ſaid before) were at the beginning twelue, afterwards encreaſed to 21. and they became of ſo great power, as in fewe yeares they had all the gouernment of the Cittie. Alſo to the end there ſhould be difference betwixt thoſe that were more, or leſſe honourable, they were diuided, and ſeuen of them were called great myſteries, and foureteene named the leſſe myſteries. By theſe diuiſions, and ſome other occaſions before recited, grew the inſolencie of the Captaines of factions. Becauſe thoſe Cittizens which aunciently were Guelfi (vnder whoſe gouernment that office continued) did euer fauour the people of the great myſteries: and perſecuted the leſſe myſteries with their protectors. Whereuppon followed all the tumults that we haue rehearſed. And for that in ordering the bodies of the myſteries, many occupations exerciſed by diuerſe of the baſe people, and common multitude had no place of their owne in the bodie of the myſteries: they were referred & put vnder ſome other myſteries like vnto theirs. Whereof followed, that they either were not ſatisfied for their labours, or by their maiſters oppreſſed, and ſo forced to complaine to the Magiſtrates, of thoſe myſteries who gouerned them: at whoſe handes (as they thought) they receiued not that iuſtice that to them belonged. Alſo that myſterie which had in it the greateſt number, was the myſterie of wooll, which being of moſt force and authoritie, did nouriſh and entertaine the greateſt part of the multitude, and baſe people. The multitude then as well of the myſterie of wooll as others (for the cauſe before ſaide) was full of offence: therewith remembring the burning and ſpoiles by them committed, diuerſe times aſſembled in the night, and reaſoning of matters paſt, euerie man tolde other the daunger wherein they ſtoode. The one of them, a man of moſt audacitie and experience, to animate the reſt, ſpake to this

effect.A ſeditious perſuation of one of the multitude. If we were now to conſult whether it be beſt to take armes, robbe the Cittizens, and ſpoile the churches, my ſelfe would thinke it a matter conſiderable, & happily ſhould preferre a quiet pouertie, before a perillous profit. But ſith armes be alreadie taken, and many diſpleaſures done, mee thinkes, it behoueth vs not to let goe the aduantage, but ſeeke meane how to aſſure our ſelues. I certainly thinke, that if no man would therein aduiſe vs, yet neceſsitie alone might counſell vs. You ſee all this citie full of diſpleaſure and hatred againſt vs. The Citizens do often aſſemble, and the Senate is alwaies accompanied with officers. You ſee they laie ſnares to entrap vs, and prepare new forces to oppreſſe vs. Therefore it ſtandeth vs vpon to procure two things, and in our Councels to haue two endes. The one, that for your late doings we may not be puniſhed, the other, that we may liue with more libertie and ſatisfaction, then heretofore we haue done. It behoueth therefore (as I thinke) that to obtaine pardon of all former faults, our beſt meane is to commit ſome new: doubling all our miſdeeds, by burning, robbing, and ſpoiling, and therein to make many companions. For where many offend, none are puniſhed, and ſmall faults are chaſtiſed, but great and greeuous offences be rewarded. Alſo where many are iniured, fewe do ſeeke reuenge. Becauſe vniuerſal diſpleaſures, are with more patience, then particuler wrongs endured. Therefore the multiplying of miſchiefes is the readieſt way to forgiueneſſe, and the beſt meane to obtaine thoſe things, which for our libertie are deſired. Surely it ſeemeth, we go now to a certaine victorie: for as much as thoſe, that ſhould impeach vs, be diſunited and rich. Their diſunion ſhall giue vs victorie, and their riches (being made ours) ſhall maintaine it. Let not the antiquitie of their bloud (wherof they ſo much boaſt) diſmaie you: for all men hauing one beginning be equally auncient, and are by nature made all after one maner. Behold them naked, you ſhall finde them like to vs, and let vs be clad with their garments, and they with ours; we ſhall aſſuredly ſeeme noble, and they of baſe condition: becauſe only pouertie and riches are thoſe things, which make the diſequalitie. It greeueth me to thinke, that many of you do in conſcience repent things done, and intend to refraine doing the like. Surely it is true, that you are not thoſe men, I thought you to be: for indeed, conſcience, nor infamie ought to feare you, ſith hee that winneth victorie, in what maner ſo euer it be, doth neuer receiue ſhame thereof. As for conſcience, none account is thereof to be made. For who ſo ſtandeth in feare of famine and priſon, as you do, ſhould not be daunted with dread of death and hell. And if we conſider the maner of mens proceedings, we ſhall find, that all thoſe who haue gained great riches or glorie, either by fraude or force are aſpired. And thoſe thinges, which they haue either by craft or violence obteined, (to cloake the infamie of their theft, and make it ſeeme honeſt) do call the ſame purchaſe. Yea, whoſoeuer for want of wit, or rather plaine folly, doth not follow this courſe, either ſinketh in ſeruitude, or periſheth in pouertie. For in troth faithfull ſubiects are ſlaues, and good men be ſtill plagued with want. Such as eſcape bondage, be the moſt faithleſſe, and audatious; and they that ſhunne lacke, be onely couetous perſons, or craftie. For God and nature haue laide fortune before all men; of whom we ſee more enclined to robberie then induſtry: and more to the bad, then to good actions diſpoſed. Hereof it commeth, that one man eateth an other, and he that can do leaſt, muſt ſuffer moſt. You ought therfore to vſe force when occaſion is offered: which can be at no time more then now. The Citizens are diuided, the Senate fearefull, and the Magiſtrates diſmayed. So that before they can be vnited, and reſolued, it is moſt eaſie for vs to oppreſſe them. By which oppreſsion, we ſhall either become wholly Princes of the citie, or at the leaſt, owners of ſo much, as we ſhall thereby, not onely haue pardon of paſſed errors, but alſo authoritie to threaten new. I cōfeſſe this reſolution is bold

and daungerous, but where neceſsitie pincheth, deſperation is iudged wiſedome. And in great enterpriſes, valiant men account not of perill: becauſe thoſe attempts which begin with daunger, do end with glorie. Alſo from one daunger men do not eſcape, but by hazarding an other. I likewiſe thinke that ſith we ſee the priſons, torments, and death prepared for vs, we ought rather feare to ſtand ſtill, then ſeeke to aſſure our ſelues: for by the one, the miſchiefe is certaine, by the other doubtfull. How often haue I heard you complaine vpon the couetouſneſſe of your ſuperiors, and the iniuſtice of your Magiſtrates? Now is the time not onely to be deliuered from them, but alſo to become ſo much their ſuperiors, as they ſhall haue more occaſion to feare you, then you them. The opportunitie which this occaſion offereth, doth paſſe, and being paſt, cannot be called againe. You ſee the prepare of your aduerſaries, let vs preuent their intention. For which ſo euer of vs do firſt take armes, ſhall no doubt be victorious, with ruine of the enemie, and aduancement of himſelfe. Thus may many of vs gaine glorie, and euerie man enioy ſecuritie. Theſe perſwaſions greatly kindled their minds, alreadie warmed with deſire of miſchief. In ſo much as they reſolued to take armes, and the rather, hauing drawne vnto them more companions of their diſpoſition: whome by oath they bound to helpe them when any ſhould happen by the Magiſtrates to be oppreſſed. While theſe men prepared to ſurpriſe the ſtate, their intent was diſcouered to the Senators, who had in hand one called Simone, of whom they vnderſtood all the conſpiracy, & that the next day they ment to make a tumult: which perill perceiued, the Colledges did aſſemble, & with the Sindachi practiſed to vnite the citie, but before euerie man was come, the night drew on. Then were the Senators aduiſed to ſend for the Conſuls of myſteries, who being togither, agreed that all men of warre within Florence ſhould be warned to appeare: and the Gonfaloniere, the morning following with their companies to be armed in the Market place. At ſuch time as Simone was tormented, and the Cittizens aſſembling, one called Nicholo da San Friano, kept the clocke of the Pallace, who being aware of that buſineſſe in hand, beganne to ſpread rumours among his neighbours, ſo as ſuddeinly in the Market place of Santo Spirito, more then a thouſand armed men were aſſembled. Theſe newes came to the eares of the other conſpirators, and San Piero Maggiore, and San Lorenzo (places by them appointed) were full of men armed. By that time day appeared, which was the twentie one of Iuly. At which houre, came not to the Market place in fauoure of the Senate, aboue eightie men of armes, and of the Gonfaloniere, not one: for they hearing the Cittie was all in Armes, feared to leaue their houſes. The firſt of the multitude that came to the Market place, were thoſe that aſſembled at San Piero Maggiore: for whoſe comming the men of Armes remooued not. Then the reſt of the multitude came, and finding no reſiſtance, with a terrible crie demaunded of the Senate to enlarge the priſoners, and not ſeeing them deliuered vpon that threatning, ſought by force to haue them, and ſet fire on the houſe of Luigi Guicciardini. Whereupon the Senate, for auoyding a worſe inconuenience, deliuered the priſoners. Hauing obteined this demaund, they remooued the Gonfalone della Giustitia from the Eſecutore, and vnder him burned the houſes of many Citizens, perſecuting thoſe, that either for publique or priuate occaſion was hated. Alſo manie Cittizens to reuenge priuate iniuries, brought them to the houſes of their enemies. For it ſufficed that anie one man cried, let vs goe to ſuch a place, or holding the Gonfalone by the hande, looked that way. They likewiſe burned all the writings belonging to the myſterie of wooll. Thus hauing committed manie euilles, to accompanie them with ſome lawdable deede: they made Saluestro de Medici, and diuerſe other Knightes, to the number of three ſcore

and foure. Among whom, were Benedetto and Antonio degli Alberti, Tomazo Strozz, and ſuch others their truſtie friends, yet were ſome of them enforced thereto. In which accident, more thē any other thing, it is to be noted, that ſome of them whoſe houſes they burned, were in the ſame day (ſo neare was the benefit to the iniurie) made knightes: which experience was ſeene in Luigi Gonfaloniere della Giustitia. The Senators amidſt theſe tumults, finding themſelues abandoned by the men of armes, grew doubtful of the heads of the myſteries, and their Gonfalonieri: for none of them according to order giuen, came to the reſcue. And of ſixteene Gonfaloni, onely the Enſigne of the golden Lyon, and that of the Cowe and Calfe, with Giouanni Cambini, appeared. And they alſo tarried not long in the Market place, becauſe they were not followed by the reſt. On the other ſide, the Citizens ſeeing the furie of the vnbrideled multitude, and the Pallace abandoned, ſome remained in their houſes, others followed the troupes of armed men, hoping the rather to ſaue their owne houſes and defend their friends. By meane whereof the power of the people encreaſed, and the forces of the Senate diminiſhed. This tumult continued all that day, and the night being come, at the Pallace of Stephano behinde the Church of S. Barnabo, it ſtaied. The number of theſe men paſſed ſixe thouſand. And before the day appeared, the next morning they cauſed by threatning the myſteries to ſend for their Enſignes. Then came foorth the Gonfalone della Giustitia, and accompanied with the Enſignes of the myſteries, went to the Pallace of the Podesta: who denying to yeelde the poſſeſsion of that houſe, they fought with him, and at length wanne that place. The Senate deſirous to make compoſition with them, ſith by force they could not appeaſe them, called three of their Colledges, and ſent them to the Pallace of the Podesta, to vnderſtand the intent of the people: who founde, that the heades of the multitude with the Sindachi of the myſteries, and ſome other Citizens, had determined what ſhould be required of the Senate. So as, they accompanied with foure of the people ſpecially appointed, returned with theſe demaundes.Demaunds of the People. Firſt that the myſterie of wooll, might not from that time foorth haue anie ſtraunger for their Iudge. That three new corporations of myſteries ſhould be erected: one to conteine the Carders and Diars; the ſecond to conteine the Barbars, Hoſiers, and ſome other mechanicall Artes; and the third, for the poore people. Alſo, that of theſe three newe myſteries, there ſhould be two of the Senate: and of the foureteene leſſe myſteries, three. That the Senate ſhould prouide houſes for the meetings and aſſemblies of theſe newe corporations. That no man within theſe bodies corporate, ſhould within two yeares, be conſtrained to paie anie debt of leſſe ſumme then two duckets. That the banckes ſhould take no preiudice, but the principall onely to be reſtored. That all men baniſhed or condemned, ſhould be called home. That all the Cittizens admoniſhed, ſhould be admitted to their honours. Many other things in the fauour of their priuate friends they demanded: and likewiſe the contrarie, that many their enemies might be confined and admoniſhed. All which demaundes notwithſtanding they were diſhoneſt and vnfit for the ſtate: yet for feare of worſe, were by the Senators, Colledges, & people graunted. Alſo to the end they might receiue full perfection, it behoued to haue them allowed by the common Councell. And (becauſe in one day two Councels could not be aſſembled) that cōſultation of force was deferred til the next day. In the meane time, it was thought good, that the myſteries & people ſhuld reſt content & ſatisfied, they promiſing, that ſo ſoon as the law were in perfectiō, all tumults ſhuld ceaſe. The next morning while the cōmō coūcel debated the matter, the multitude impatiēt & voluble, vnder their enſigns wēt to the market place, ſhouting & crying ſo terribly, that all the Councel & the Senat were diſmaid. Wherupon

               Gueriante Marignuolo, one of the Senators (mooued rather with feare then any other priuate paſsion) vnder colour to keepe the gate, went downe and fled to his houſe: yet could he not ſo ſecretly paſſe, but was by the multitude knowne. Otherwiſe they did him no iniurie, then crie out ſaying, that the Senate would all abandon the Pallace, vnleſſe their children were ſlaine, and their houſes burnt. In the meane ſpace, the lawe was made, and the Senators returned to their chambers. Alſo the Councell came downe and ſtaied in the Galleries and Courts without going further, as men diſpairing of the citie, either becauſe they perceiued ſo great diſhoneſtie and frowardneſſe in the multitude, or ſo great cowardice in others, who had power to oppreſſe, or at the leaſt, to allaie the rage of theſe tumults. The Senators were alſo amazed, and diſpairing of their countrey, beheld one of their company fled, and no other Cittizen that would either aſsiſt them with force or counſell. Therefore they reſolued of that they could, being incertaine what elſe they ſhould do. Tomazo Strozzi, and Benedetto Alberti, either mooued with priuate ambition, deſiring to be onely Lords of the Pallace, or elſe becauſe they ſo thought beſt, perſwaded the others to giue place to this populer furie, and as priuate men returne home to their houſes. This counſell giuen by thoſe that were heads of the tumult (notwithſtanding that the reſt gaue place) made Alamanno Acciaiuoli, and Nicholo del Bene, (two of the Senate) to become offended. Yet after being come to themſelues, they ſaid; that if other men would depart, they could not let them: but for themſelues, they would not go, till their time appointed, vnleſſe that with their authoritie they did alſo looſe their liues. Theſe contrarieties of opinion, doubled the diſpaire of the Senate, and the peoples offence. In ſo much as, the Gonfaloniere, deſiring rather to end his office with ſhame, then perill, reſigned the ſame to Tomazo Strozzi, wholed him from the Pallace, and conducted him to his houſe. The other Senators in like maner, one after an other, went home. Then Alamanno & Nicholo, to ſhew no more courage thē wiſdome, ſeeing themſelues left alone, departed alſo: whereby the Pallace remained in the hand of the multitude and the eight gouernours for the warre,
                  The Gouerment gained by the multitude.
                  Michele Lando.
                who had not giuen vp their offices. At ſuch time as the people entred the Pallace, one Michele di Lando, a Carder of wooll, bare the Enſigne of the Gonfaloniere Giustitia, hee being bare legged and raggedly apparrelled, followed with the multitude, went vp the ſtaires, and being come to the preſence of the Senators, ſtaied, and turned himſelfe to the multitude, ſaying; Doo you not ſee that this Pallace and this cittie is yours, and in your hands? what doo you now thinke good to doo? Whereto euerie man aunſwered, that hee ſhould be Gonfaloniere, and Lorde to diſpoſe, and gouerne the cittie as himſelfe thought good, Michele accepted his authoritie, for hee was indeede a man verie wittie, and more bounde to Nature, then Fortune. Then hee determined to appeaſe the cittie, and ſtaie the tumults: alſo to hold the people occupied, and winne himſelfe time to giue order, commaunded one Sir Nuto, to be ſearched out, who had bene by Lapo Castiglionichio, appointed a Serieant. To the execution of which ſeruice, the greater number of thoſe that were preſent did goe. Then to begin that gouernment with iuſtice, which by fauoure of the multitude was giuen him, he commanded by proclamation, that no man ſhould ſteale or take iniuſtly from another. And the rather to terrifie all men,Ordinaunces of Michele Lando. hee erected a Gibbet in the Market place, he diſplaced the Sindachi of myſteries, and made new; he depriued the Senate and Colledges, & burned the Borſi. In the mean time Sir Nuto was by the multitude brought into the market place and there hanged by one ſoote. Euery mā with his ſword cut him in pieces, til at lēgth there remained not any thing but his foote. On the other ſide, the eight gouernours for the war (ſuppoſing themſelues by the departure of the Senators to be only Lords of the citie, appointed new

               Senators: which Michele knowing, ſent one to tell them, they ſhould preſently depart the Pallace, becauſe hee would let all men vnderſtand, that hee alone without their counſell could gouerne Florence. That done, he cauſed the Sindachi of myſteries to aſſemble, and created foure Senators of the baſe multitude, two of the great myſteries, and two of the leſſe. Moreouer he made new Squittini; diuiding the ſtate into three parts, commaunding that the one ſhould belong to the new myſteries, the ſecond to the leſſer, and the third to the great myſteries. Hee gaue vnto Saluestro de Medici, the rentes of the houſes vppon the olde bridge. To himſelfe the Podesteria of Empoli: and on many other his friends of the multitude, he beſtowed benefits: many others at his hand receiued pleaſure and were reſtored to their owne, not ſo much for their good as that he might the rather be by them, from the enuie of time defended. Then it ſeemed to the poore multitude, that in this reformation of the ſtate, the better ſorte of people were too much partakers thereof: and they not to haue therein ſo much authoritie as to defend themſelues, if neede ſhould require.The multitud offended with Michele Lando his lawes. Wherefore ſet on with their accuſtomed boldneſſe, they tooke armes againe, and vniting themſelues vnder their Enſignes came anew into the Market, demaunding of the Senators to come downe to the Ringhiera, and conſult of new matters concerning their ſecuritie and good. Michele ſeeing their arrogancie, (yet not to moue them to more offence, without asking what they would) blamed the maner of their demaunding, and perſwaded them to laie downe armes, ſaying, that ſhould be graunted vnto them, which with the grauitie of the Senate through force, might not be graunted. The multitude with that offended, aſſembled neare the Pallace of S. Maria Nouella, where among themſelues they appointed eight heades with their miniſters and orders, which gaue them reuerence and reputation. So as, the citie had two places of ſtate, and was by two diuerſe officers gouerned. Theſe heads determined among them, that euer eight, named by the bodie of the Myſteries, ſhould dwell in the Pallace with the Senate, and whatſoeuer the Senators ſhould determine, muſt be by them confirmed. They tooke from Saluestro de Medici and Michele, all that, which in their former Councels was giuen them. They appointed many new officers, & allowances for their degrees. Theſe appointments taken, to make them the more aſſured, they ſent two of them to the Senate, to require their conſent, intending, that if that were not graunted, that then by force they would haue it. Thoſe meſſengers, with great audacitie and more preſumption, declared their Commiſsion to the Senate: and told the Gonfalone what honour and authoritie they had giuen him, and with what ingratitude and ſmall reſpect at his hand, they were reacquited. At length falling from words to threatnings, Michele could no longer endure ſuch arrogancy. But remembring more the place hee occupied, then the baſeneſſe of his late eſtate, thought meete by extraordinary meane, to bridle an extraordinary inſolency; and drawing forth the ſword he ware, hurt one of theſe meſſengers and after cauſed him to be bound and impriſoned. This being knowne, greatly offended the multitude, and hoping to winne that by force, which vnarmed they could not, preſently tooke armes with great furie, and marched towards the Senators, with intent to compell them. Michele on the other ſide, doubting that which followed, determined to preuent them, and imagining it more for his glorie to aſſault others, then tarry within and be aſſaulted, and ſo like to his predeceſſors be forced with ſhame of the Pallace to flie away: did aſſemble a great number of Cittizens, who (hauing well aduiſed themſelues of their errours) mounted on horſebacke, and being followed by many armed men, went to Santa Maria Nouella, to fight with the enemy. The people hauing (as wee before declared) made the like determination, almoſte

at the ſame time marched to the Marketplace: but it happened that the one paſſed by one ſtreete, and the other by an other, ſo as by the way they met not. Michele being returned backe, founde the Market place taken, and the Pallace aſſaulted:Michele Lando victorious. hee therefore ſuddeinly charged the enemies and ouerthrew them. Some were forced to flie, others caſt downe their weapons, and others hid themſelues. This victorie gotten, the tumult was appeaſed, onely through the vertue of the Gonfaloniere, who for courage, wiſdome, & integritie, excelled all the Citizens of that time, and is to be numbred among thoſe few that haue profitted their country. For had he bene of euil diſpoſition or ambitious, the common weale had vtterly loſt the libertie therof, & ſhould haue fallen into a greater tyrannie then that of the Duke of Athene: but the bountie of Lando was ſuch, as ſuffred no thoght to enter his mind that might be preiudiciall to the vniuerſall quiet. His wiſedom directed all things, ſo as many of his fellowſhip gaue him place, & his aduerſaries by force of armes were oppreſſed. Which maner of proceeding, cauſed the multitude to ſtand diſmaied, and the better ſort of Artificers to looke about them, & thinke how great their ſhame was, hauing oppreſſed the great mens pride, to endure the populer dregs. At ſuch time as Michele obteined this victorie againſt the multitude, a new Senate was choſen, wherin were two men of ſo vile and vnworthie condition, as euery man deſired to be acquit of that great infamie. When theſe officers were created (which was the firſt day of September) the Market place was full of armed men. So ſoone as the olde Senators came out of the Pallace, there was a brute giuen out among the armed men, that they would not, that any of the baſe people ſhould be of the number of Senators. Whereupon the Senate for their ſatisfaction depriued two, the one called Tira, the other Baroccio, in whoſe roomes, they placed Georgio Scali, and Franceſco di Michele. They alſo depoſed the myſteries of the baſe people, and all officers, excepting Michele-Lando, Lorenzo di Puccio, and a fewe others of the better ſort. They diuided the honours into two parts, allotting the one, to the greater myſteries, the other to the leſſe. Of the Senate, they willed there ſhould be euer fiue of the leſſe myſteries, and foure of the great. And the Gonfaloniere to be choſen ſometimes of the one, and ſometimes of the other. The ſtate thus ordeined for the preſent, appeaſed the citie. And albeit the gouernment was taken away from the baſe people, yet the Artificers of meaneſt condition, remained more mightie then the populer Nobilitie, who were forced to giue place, to winne from the baſe people the fauoure of the myſteries, and content them: which was alſo fauoured, by ſuch as deſired that thoſe ſhould be oppreſſed, who vnder the name of Guelfi, had with great inſolencie iniured many Cittizens. Among others that allowed this manner of gouernment, Georgio Scali, Benedetto Alberti, Saluestro di Medici, and Tomazo Strozzi were made as Princes of the citie. Theſe matters thus proceeding and handled, the diuiſion alreadie begunne betwixt the populer Nobilitie, and the meane Artificers, through ambition of Ricci and Albizi, became confirmed. Whereof (becauſe afterwardes followed greeuous effects, and of them we ſhall be often occaſioned to ſpeake) we will call the one populer, the other plebeiall. The ſtate continued thus three yeares, full of baniſhments and murthers.New diuiſion in Florence. For they that gouerned, knowing there were both within and abroade, manie euill contented, did liue in great ſuſpition. The Cittizens within diſcontented, either they continually attempted ſome newe practiſe, or deuiſed with themſelues how they might do it. And thoſe that liued without, hauing no bridle, by meane of ſome Prince or ſome Common weale, here and there, ſowed ſedition. At this time Giannozzo di Salerno, Lieutenant to Durazzo, deſcended of the Kings of Napoli, hapned to be at Bologna, intending to aſſault the kingdom, & take the ſame frō
               
Queene Giouanna. At the ſame time alſo were in Bologna many baniſhed Florentines, who with the Pope and with Carlo, practiſed diuerſe things: which was the cauſe, that they who gouerned in Florence did liue in great ſuſpition, and gaue credit eaſily to the ſlaunders of thoſe Citizens that were ſuſpected. During this doubtfull time, it was reuealed to the Magiſtrates, that Giannozzo of Salerno, ſhould with the baniſhed men preſent himſelfe before Florence, and that many within would take armes and deliuer the citie to his hand.Diuers great Cittizens accuſed. Vpon this report many were accuſed, the chiefe of whom, were Piero delli Albizi, and Carlo Strozzi: and next to them the Cipriani Giaccomo Sacchetti, Donati Barbadori, Filippo Strozzi, and Giouanni Anſelini: who were all taken, ſauing Carlo Strozzi, that fled. And the Senate, to the end none ſhould take armes in their fauour, appointed Tomazo Strozzi, and Benedetto Alberti, with many armed men to guard the citie. Theſe Citizens were apprehended and examined, but the accuſation and their anſwere conferred togither, no fault was in them found: Inſomuch that the Captaine not willing to condemne them, their enemies in the meane ſpace moued the people to mutinie, and by force they were iudged to death. Neither was Piero degli Albizi any whit fauoured, either for the greatneſſe of his houſe, or for that long time he had in the citie more reputation then any other, and had bene there more honoured and feared. During his proſperitie, ſome friend of his, either to perſwade him to curteſie in his greatneſſe, or elſe ſome enemie to threaten him with the inconſtancie of fortune: at ſuch time as hee made a ſolemne banquet to diuerſe Citizens, ſent him a ſiluer diſh full of Comfits, and in thoſe Comfits was hidden a naile; which being founde and ſeene of diuerſe his gueſtes, it was imagined, that thereby he ſhould remember to ſtaie the wheele: becauſe fortune hauing ſet him on the height thereof (the wheele keeping courſe) muſt needes caſt him downe. Which interpretation, was firſt by his decaie, and after by his death verified. After this execution, the citie remained full of confuſion, becauſe both the victored, and the victorious ſtood in feare: but the worſt of all was, that the gouernours themſelues liued in continuall ſuſpition. For euerie accident were it neuer ſo litle, made them to do new iniuries to the factions, condemning, admoniſhing, and ſending the Citizens into exile. Whereunto they ioyned new lawes, and new orders, many times made, onely to fortifie their authoritie. All which was done to the iniurie of them who were to their faction ſuſpected. And they created fortie ſixe men, who with the Senate ſhould diſcouer men ſuſpected to the ſtate. Theſe officers admoniſhed thirtie nine Citizens, making many populer perſons great men, & many great men, populer. Alſo, the rather to withſtand all external forces, they enterteined Iohn Aguto, an Engliſh Captain, who, in thoſe daies, was accounted of great experience in the war, & had long ſerued the Pope & others in Italy. The ſuſpition abroad proceeded of intelligence giuen, how certain companies of men at armes belonging to Carlo Durazzo, were put in readineſſe, to aſſault the kingdome. Among whom, (as was reported) were many baniſhed Florentines. For the meeting with thoſe perils, beſides the ordinarie forces, a ſumme of mony was prouided. Carlo arriued in Arezzo, receiued of the Florentines fortie thouſand Duckets, promiſing not to moleſt them. After that time, he atchiued his enterpriſe, and happily ſurprized the kingdome of Napoli,
               The Queene of Napoli taken priſoner. tooke the Queen Giouanna, & ſent her priſoner into Hungary. Which victorie encreaſed a new ſuſpition of thoſe that in Florence feared the ſtate. Becauſe they could not beleeue that their money ſhould do more with the King, then the auncient friendſhip, which that houſe had with the Guelfi, who with manifold iniury, had bene by him oppreſſed. Theſe ſuſpitions encreaſing, encreaſed alſo the iniuries, which did not decreaſe, but multiply them. By meanes whereof, the greater number of them liued much diſcontented, which diſcontent grew the greater by

the inſolency of Georgio Scali, and Tomazo Strozzi; whoſe authoritie preuailed more then the Magiſtrates: and euerie man feared, leaſt they beeing followed with the people, would oppreſſe them. In ſo much as, that, not onely the good men, but alſo the ſeditious ſort, accounted that gouernment tyrannicall & violent. But to the end, that the inſolencie of Georgio ſhould at length take end) it fortuned that hee became accuſed of one Giouanii Cambio, his companion: hauing (as he ſaid) practiſed diuerſe waies againſt the ſtate: yet vpon examination, was found guiltleſſe by the Captaine. So as thē, the Iudge went about to puniſh the accuſer with that puniſhment, which the partie accuſed ſhould haue ſuffered, had he bene found faultie. And Georgio, neither with ſute nor authoritie, able to ſaue him, went with Tomazo Strozzi, and the multitude armed to deliuer him by force. At which time, they ſacked the Captaines Pallace, and forced him (for ſafetie of his perſon) to hide himſelfe, which action filled the citie with ſo much hatred towards him, that thereby his enemies hoped to ouerthrow him, and take the citie both from him, & the plebeyall people alſo: who through preſumption, had vſurped the ſame three yeares. Thereof alſo the Captaine gaue great occaſion; for he (the tumult ceaſed) went to the Senate, & ſaid, that as he had willingly taken vpon him, that, whereto their Lordſhips had elected him, becauſe therein he hoped to ſerue iuſt men, readie to take armes, in the fauoure, not in the preiudice of iuſtice: ſo ſeeing he had ſeene and knew the gouernment of the citie, and the maner of life therein; that office which he willingly tooke in hand for his profit and honour, as willingly there he would yeeld the ſame vp to ſhunne the perill, and loſſe that might thereof follow. The Captaine was by the Senators comforted, and promiſed reparation of former loſſes and future ſecuritie. Then certaine of them, togither with ſome Cittizens, who were holden louers of the Common weale, and men leaſt ſuſpected, concluded that a good opportunitie was offered to take the citie from Georgio, and the multitude. By reaſon, that through that his late inſolencie, the Citizens were greatly alienated from him: and was therefore good to execute that intent, before the offended mindes of the multitude were reconciled. For well they knew, that the fauoure of the multitude vpon euery trifling accident is gotten and loſt. Iudging moreouer, that for the bringing this enterpriſe to effect, it behoued them to winne the good will of Benedetto Alberti, without whoſe conſent the action ſeemed dangerous. This Benedetto was a man exceeding rich,Benedetto Alberti. curteous, graue, a louer of the libertie of his country, and ſuch a one, as much miſliked the tyrannous proceedings of the time. By meane whereof, it was eaſie both to appeaſe him, and alſo perſwade him to the deſtruction of Georgio. For, the occaſions, which made him enemy to the populer Nobilitie and Guelfi, and friend to the multitude, was their inſolencie, and their tyrannous maner of gouernment. And, ſeeing that the heads of the multitude, were become of like inſolencie, he would likewiſe leaue them, as one that would not conſent to the iniuries by them done to many Citizens. So in concluſion, thoſe reaſons which induced him to take part with the people, did alſo perſwade him to leaue them. Benedetto and the heads of the Arts thus drawne to fauoure the populer Nobilitie, tooke armes, apprehended Georgio, & Tomazo fled away. The next day after, Georgio was beheaded, to ſo great terror of his partie, as no man moued in his fauour, though euery man went to behold his ruine.Georgio Scali beheaded. He being brought to die, complained of thoſe people, that lately had adored him, and lamented his own hard fortune, and the malignitie of the Citizens, who hauing wrongfully iniured him, were forced to fauoure, and honour the multitude, wherin was neither truſt nor grautuitie. And knowing Benedetto Alberti among the reſt, of the armed men, ſaid vnto him; And thou Benedetto doeſt conſent to ſee me here ſo iniured, as if I were where thou art, I would not ſuffer thee: but I do prognoſticate,

that as this day is the end of my miſerie, ſo is the ſame the beginning of thy deſtruction. He complained moreouer of himſelfe, for hauing too much truſted to the people, whom euerie voice, euerie action, and euerie ſupition moueth and corrupteth. With theſe lamentations he ended his life, amidſt his enemies armed, and reioycing at his death. Shortly after, certaine other his neareſt friends were ſlaine, and drawne in the ſtreetes by the people. The death of this Citizen troubled all the citie; for at the execution thereof, many tooke armes in fauoure of the Senate and Captaine of the people. Many other, either for their owne ambition, or ſuſpition, did the like. Alſo the citie being full of diuerſe humors, euerie man had his diuerſe intent: which hee deſired to execute before armes were layd downe. The olde Nobilitie (called great men) could not endure to ſee themſelues depriued of the publique honours: and therefore with all ſtudie laboured to recouer them, liking well that authoritie ſhould be reſtored to the Captaines of factions. To the populer Nobilitie, and the greater myſteries it was offenſiue, that the ſtate was participated with the leſſe myſteries, and baſe people. On the other ſide, the leſſe myſteries deſired rather to encreaſe then diminiſh their dignities. And the poore people, feared to forgo their Colledges. Which diuerſitie of mindes, made continually in Florence tumults to ariſe, for the ſpace of one yeare. Sometimes the great men, ſometimes the chiefe myſteries, ſometimes the leſſe, togither with the multitude, and ſometimes altogithers, at one inſtant in diuerſe places were armed. Whereof enſued among themſelues, and with the ſouldiers of the Pallace, diuerſe conflicts. The Senate, ſometimes by giuing place, and ſometimes by fighting, ſought all they could to remedie that miſchiefe. Inſomuch as, in the end, and after two conſultations, and two Balie, for reformation of the citie, and after many harmes, many trauels, and many great perils, a gouernment was ſetled:New reformation in Florence. whereby were reuoked, all thoſe that before, and ſith Saluestro de Medici was Gonfaloniere, had bene confined. All priuiledges and prouiſions, were taken away from thoſe to whome they had bene giuen by the Balia of 78. All honours were reſtored to the Guelfi. The two new myſteries were diſcorporated, and euerie of thoſe remitted vnder the auncient myſteries. The Gonfaloniere di Guistitia, was taken away from the leſſe myſteries, and they reduced to be partakers of halfe the third part of the honours, and of thoſe the beſt were taken from them. So that, the faction of populer Nobilitie & Guelfi, recouered the gouernment, & the multitude loſt their authoritie, which they had holden from the yeare 1378. til 81. at which time, this alteration happened: neither was this gouernment leſſe iniurious towards the Citizens, nor more mild, then was that of the multitude. For ſo many of the populer Nobilitie were confined, as had bene noted to be defenders thereof, togither with a great number of the principall men of the multitude. And among them,Michele Lando confined. 
               Michele Lando; whoſe former authoritie and good deſerts, could not in this time of populer furie, ſaue him. His country therfore, for many good merits, was to him vnthankfull. Into which errour, becauſe many Princes and Common weales do fall, is the cauſe, that men vppon like examples terrified, before they feele the ſmart of their gournours ingratitude, do firſt offend them. Theſe exilements & theſe ſlaughters did diſpleaſe, and euer had diſpleaſed Benedetto Alberti, and he both publiquely, and priuately, blamed them. For which cauſe, the Lords of the ſtate feared him, as chiefe friend to the multitude, and thought him conſenting to the death of Georgio Scali: not becauſe his doings did offend him, but to be alone in the gouernment. Beſides that, his words and workes did encreaſe the ſuſpition, which made that ſide which gouerned, to keepe eye vpon him, and watch opportunitie to oppreſſe him. The citie liuing in theſe tearmes, the actions abroad were of no great importance. For if any thing were done, it proceeded of feare, by reaſon that Lodouico

di Angio came then into Italy,
               Carlo di Angio, come into Italy. to reſtore the kingdome of Napoli to the Quene Giouanna, and remooue Carlo Durazzo. The paſſage of this Prince, greatly amazed the Florentines; for Carlo (according to the cuſtome of old friends) demaunded of them aide, & Lodouico (like vnto him that ſeeketh new friends) deſired them to ſtand neutrall. Whereupon the Florentines to ſeeme willing to content Lodouico, and aide Carlo, diſcharged Giouanni Aguto, and procured Pope Vrbano to entertaine him: which ſubtiltie was eaſily by Lodouico diſcouered, and for the ſame held himſelfe much iniured by the Florentines. During the warre betwixt Lodouico and Carlo in Puglia, new forces came from France in the fauoure of Lodouico, who arriued in Toſcana, were by the baniſhed men of Arezzo brought into that citie: where they remoued the faction, which gouerned for Carlo: intending alſo to haue chaunged the ſtate of Florence, as they had altered Arezzo. Then died Lodouico, wherby the affaires of Puglia & Toſcana varied Fortune. For Carlo aſſured himſelfe on the kingdome, which was well neare loſt. And the Florentines miſtruſting the defence of Florence, recouered Arezzo and bought it, of thoſe ſouldiers which kept it, for Lodouico. Carlo then being aſſured of Puglia, went to take poſſeſsion of Hungheria, which was by inheritance deſcended vnto him, leauing his wife in Puglia, with Ladiſlao and Giouanna his children, being but babes, as hereafter ſhall be declared. Carlo poſſeſſed Hungheria, but ſhortly after there died. For this conqueſt, much tryumph was made in Florence,
               The death of Carlo di Angio. and the magnificence thereof was no leſſe both for publique and priuate expence, then if the occaſion therof had bene their owne. For many families kept open feaſts: and the houſe of Alberti for pompe and magnificence exceeded the reſt. The expences & charge of Armour that the Alberti vſed, were not onely fit for priuate perſons of the beſt degree, but for the greateſt Princes: which gained them no ſmall enuie. Whereto adding the ſuſpition which the ſtate had of Benedetto, was the cauſe of his ruine;Benedetto Alberti ſuſpected and enuied. becauſe thoſe that gouerned, could not endure him: fearing euerie houre it might come to paſſe, that through fauoure of his faction, hee might recouer reputation, and driue them from the citie. Theſe doubts remaining, it happened, that he being Gonfaloniere of companies, Philippo Malagotti his ſonne in lawe, was choſen Gonfaloniere di Giustitia: which doubled the miſtruſt of the Gouernours, imagining that Benedetto encreaſed ouer faſt in force, and the ſtate thereby in much perill. For preuention of which inconueniences without tumult, they encouraged Beſe Magalotti, his companion, to ſignifie to the Senate, that Philippo hauing paſſed his turne, could not, nor ought not, exerciſe that office. The cauſe was by the Senate examined, ſome of them for hate, ſome to take away occaſion of ſlander, iudged Philippo not capable of that dignitie, and elected in his place Bardo Mancini, a man to the plebeyan faction contrarie, and mortall enemie to Benedetto. In ſo much as, hee beeing placed in office, called a Balia for reformation of the ſtate, and therein confined Benedetto Alberti, and admoniſhed the reſt of that family, onely Antonio Alberti, excepted. Benedetto being readie to depart, called vnto him all his friendes, and ſeeing them ſad,The ſpeech of Benedetto Alberti, at his baniſhment. ſaid; you ſee (my good fathers and Lords) in what ſort Fortune hath oppreſſed me, and threatned you: whereof I maruell not, neither ought you to maruell. Becauſe it euer commeth to paſſe, that who ſo euer will be good among many euil, or doth ſeek to hold vp that which many labour to pull downe, muſt of force periſh. The loue of my Countrey made me to ioyne with Saluestro di Medici, and after to depart from Georgio Scali. The ſame did likewiſe perſwade me, to hate the maners of thoſe that now gouerne: who as they haue not had any to puniſh them, ſo do they deſire, that none ſhould finde fault with them. For my part I am content with my baniſhment to acquite them of that feare which they had, not of me onely, but of euerie other man, that knoweth their tyrannous and wicked dealings. My puniſhment therefore

doth threaten others; of my ſelfe I take no pitie: for thoſe honors which my country being free hath giuen me, now brought vnto ſeruitude, cannot take from mee. And the memorie of my paſſed life ſhall alwaies more comfort mee, then mine hard fortune which brought mine exile, ſhall diſcourage me. It greeueth me much, that my country ſhould become a ſpoile for a fewe, and be ſubiect to their pride and couetouſneſſe. I am alſo right ſorie to thinke, that thoſe euils which now ende in me, will begin in you. And I feare, leaſt thoſe miſeries wil perſecute you with more hinderance, then they haue perſecuted me. I would therefore counſell you, to prepare your mindes againſt all misfortunes, and beare your ſelues ſo, as what aduerſitie ſo euer happen (for many will happen) euery man may know you are faultleſſe, & that without your guilt they be hapned. After this leaue taken, to giue as great a teſtimonie of his bountie abroad,The death of Benedetto Alberti. as hee had done in Florence: he trauelled to the Sepulchre of Chriſt, from whence returning, in the Ile of Roda hee died. His boanes were brought to Florence, and therewith great honour buried, by thoſe, who in his life, with all ſlaunder and iniurie did moleſt him. During theſe troubles, the houſe of Alberti was not onely oppreſſed, but many other Citizens alſo admoniſhed and confined. Among whom, were Piero Benini, Mattheo Alderotti, Giouanni, and Franceſco del Bene, Giouanni Benci, Andrea Adimari, and with them, a great number of the leſſe myſteries. Among the admoniſhed were the Couoni, the Benini, the Rinucci, the Formiconi, the Corbozi, the Manegli, and the Alderotti. It was the cuſtome to create the Balia for time certaine, but thoſe Citizens hauing it in their hands, being placed by honeſt meane, notwithſtanding their time were not expired, did yeelde vp their offices: which being knowne, many ranne armed to the Pallace, deſiring that before the officers departed, more Citizens might be confined, and admoniſhed. Which requeſt greatly offēded the Senat, who with faire promiſes enterteined them, til forces were made readie, & then wrought ſo, as feare enforced them to laie downe thoſe armes, which furie cauſed them to take in hand. Yet ſomewhat to feed ſo fierce an humor, and notwithſtanding take away more authoritie from the plebeyall Artizans: it was ordered, that where they had the third of the offices, they ſhould now haue onely the fourth part. Alſo, to the ende that two of the moſt truſtie Citizens might be alwaies of the Senate, they gaue authoritie to the Gonfaloniere di Giustitia, and foure other Citizens, to make a Borza of choſen men: out of which number at euerie Senate ſhould be elected two. The ſtate thus ſetled after ſix yeares (which was in the yeare 1381.G
                     •
                  ouan Galiazzo becom prince of Lombardy. 1393.) the citie liued quiet within, till the yeare 1393. In which time, Giouan Galiazza Viſconti, called Conte di Vertu, tooke priſoner his vncle Barnabo, & by that mean, became Prince of all Lombardy. This Giouan Galiazzo hoped by force to be made king of Italy, as by craft he was atteined to be Lord of Milan. And in the yeare 1390. hee began a braue warre againſt the Florentines: wherein Fortune became ſo variable, as many times the Duke was in no leſſe daunger to loſe all then the Florentines, who indeed had loſt all, if the Duke had longer liued. Yet the reſiſtance by them made, was ſo couragious and maruellous, as might be by any Common weale; and the end no leſſe perillous, then the warre had bene terrible. For when the Duke had taken Bologna, Piſa, Perugia, and Siena, and prepared a Crowne to be ſet on his head in Florence, as king of Italy,
               The death of Galiazzo. he died. Which death ſuffered him not to taſte the ſweete of his paſſed victories, nor the Florentines to feele the perils at hand. While this warre with the Duke continued, Maſſo de gli Albizi was made Confaloniere di Giustitia, whom the death of Piero had made enemie to the Alberti. And for that the humour of the factions continued, Maſo notwithſtanding that Benedetto was dead in exile) did hope before that Senate ended, to be reuenged vpon the reſt of that family: and tooke occaſion, by one that was vpon certaine practiſes with the Rebelles examined, who

named Alberto and Andrea delli Alberti. Whereupon, both they were apprehended, and the citie wholly chaunged. In ſo much as the Senate tooke armes, aſſembled the people, created a new Balia, and by vertue thereof, many Cittizens were confined, and new Imborſations of officers made. Among thoſe that were confined, were almoſt all the Alberti, many Citizens alſo admoniſhed, and ſome put to death. Vpon occaſion of ſo great iniuries, the myſteries and the baſe people tooke armes, thinking their honour and liues were in hazard. One part of them came into the Market place, an other ranne to the houſe of Veri di Medici:
               Veri di Medici. who after the death of Salueſtro remained as chiefe of that family. To deceiue thoſe that came into the Market place, the Senate appointed Captaines, and gaue the Enſigne of the faction Guelfa, deliuering the ſame into the hands of Rinaldo Gianfigliazzi, and Donato Acciaiuioli, as men of the populer number, more then any other acceptable to the multitude. Thoſe that went to the houſe of Veri, deſired him to take the gouernment, and deliuer them from ſuch as were enemies to good men, and good orders. All ſuch writers as haue left memorie of the proceedings of that time, do affirme, that if Veri had not bene more honeſt, then ambitious, hee might without any let, haue aſpired to the principallitie of that citie. Becauſe the exceeding great iniuries done to the myſteries, ſome iuſtly and ſome vniuſtly, had ſo kindled their mindes to reuenge, as nothing wanted for the performance of their deſires, but a Captaine to lead them. Neither wanted thoſe, that would put Veri in remembrance what he might do. For Antonio di Medici (who had before time bene long for priuate reſpects, his enemy) did perſwade him to take in hand the gouernment of the ſtate. To whom he anſwered, as thy threatnings (being mine enemie) made me not to feare thee; ſo thy Councell being my friend, ſhall not abuſe me. Hauing vttered theſe words, he turned himſelfe to the multitude, and perſwading them to be of good courage, promiſed to be their defender, ſo that they would be content to be by him directed.The ſpeech of Veri di Medici to the Senat of Florence. Then in the midſt of them he went to the Market place, and from thence vp to the Pallace, and being come to the preſence of the Senate, ſaid. That he was not ſorie to haue ſo liued, that the people of Florence did loue him: but yet ſorie hee was, that they had not ſuch opinion of him, as his paſſed life did deſerue. For ſith he had not ſhewed any ſigne of ſeditiō or ambition, he could not conceiue why he was thought a mainteiner of ſedition (or as ambitious) a man that ſtudied to vſurpe his country. Therefore hee humbly beſought their Lordſhips, that the ignorance of the multitude might not be imputed his fault: becauſe ſo much as in him was, hee ſubmitted himſelfe vnto them. He moreouer put them in minde to vſe their fortune modeſtly, and be content to take rather halfe a victorie with ſauing the citie, then a whole conqueſt with the ruine thereof. The Senators greatly commended Veri, and required him to perſuade, that armes might be laide downe, and then they would not faile to do that, which he and other Citizens ſhould counſell them. After theſe ſpeeches, Veri returned to the Market place, and ioyning his followers, to thoſe that were conducted by Rinaldo and Donato, ſaid vnto them all, that hee had found in the Senators a verie good diſpoſition towards them, to whom he had alſo ſaid much, albeit by means of the ſhort time, and abſence of the officers, nothing was concluded. Wherfore he praied them to laie their weapons downe, and obey the Senate: thereby to declare that curteſie, rather then pride, entreatie, more then threatning, might moue them: and that they ſhould not lacke meanes and ſecuritie, ſo long as they were by him gouerned. Thus vpon his word euery man was content to return to his owne houſe. The multitude hauing vpon this perſwaſion diſarmed themſelues, the Senate firſt cauſed a guard to be ſet in the Market place: then they muſtered two thouſand Cittizens, men aſſured to the ſtate, equally diuiding them vnder Gonfaloni, whom they commaunded to be

readie whenſoeuer that they were called. Alſo commandement was giuen, that no man whoſe name was not taken nor warned, ſhould for anie cauſe be armed. This preparation made, they confined & ſlew many of thoſe Artificers which had in the late tumult ſhewed themſelues moſt ſeditious and violent. And to the end that the Gonfaloniere de Giustitia, might haue more reputation & dignitie: it was ordered and thought neceſſary, that whoſoeuer did exerciſe that office, ſhuld be of 45. yeres. For confirmation of the ſtate, many other prouiſions were deuiſed. Theſe ordinances made, the Senators were inſupportable, and to the good Citizens (euen of their own faction) they became odious. For they could not iudge any ſtate good or ſecure, which had need with ſo great violence to be defended. So that this maner of proceeding, did not onely offend thoſe of the familie of Alberti, which yet remained in the citie: and the Medici, who thought them to haue abuſed the people, but many others alſo were with ſo great violence diſpleaſed. But the firſt that oppoſed himſelfe was Donato ſonne to Giacopo Acciaiuoli.
               Donati Acciaiuoli. He being in the citie great, and rather ſuperiour, then equall, to Maſſo degli Alberti (who for the great ſeruice done, when he gouerned as Gonfaloniere was accounted as head of the Commonaltie) could not among ſo many diſcontentations liue contented: nor (as the moſt men do) preferre priuate profit, before common commoditie. And therefore, thought he would aſſaie to reſtore thoſe that had bene baniſhed, or at the leaſt, ſet the admoniſhed into their offices. For compaſsing whereof, he whiſpered h
                  ••
                intent in the eare of this and that Citizen, ſhewing that otherwiſe he could not pleaſe the people, nor ſtaie their offence. And concluding ſaid, hee onely ſtaied to be of the Senate, and then to put the matter in execution. Yet becauſe in the actions of men, delaie bringeth wearineſſe, and haſte is accompanied with perill: to ſhunne wearineſſe, hee reſolued to aduenture with perill. Amongſt the Senators, Michele Acciaiuoli his companion, and Nicholo Riconori his friend, were elected: whereby Donato imagined a fit opportunitie to be offered, and deſired them to propound a lawe to the Councels, wherein ſhould be conteined the reſtoration of the Cittizens. They being by him perſwaded, commoned with their fellows, who anſwered, that they would attempt no new matters, ſith the obteining of them was doubtfull, and the perill certaine. Then Donato hauing in vaine made proofe of euerie mean, in great choller let them vnderſtand, that ſeeing vpon good occaſion offered, they did not reforme the citie, he would with force of armes do it. Which words being greatly offenſiue, and the matter debated among the chiefe Gouernours, Donato was cited, and appearing, was by witneſſe of him to whom he committed the meſſage,Donati Acciaiuoli with others confined. conuinced: and in the end confined to Barletta. Alſo Antonio de Medici with all the reſt deſcended of Alamanno, togither with many baſe Artizans (yet ſuch as had credit with the people) were baniſhed: which things happened after two yeares, that Maſſo had taken in hand the gouernment. The citie thus ſtanding, many were diſcontented within, and many without baniſhed. Of which number remained at Bologna, Picchio, Cauicciulli, Tomazo de Ricci, Antonio de Medici, Benedetto degli Spini, Antonio Girolami, Chriſtofano di Carlone, with two others of vile condition: but all yoong men aduenturours, and diſpoſed to hazard any fortune for their country. To theſe men, ſecret intelligence was giuen by Piggiello, and Baroccio Cauicciulli (who as men admoniſhed liued in Florence) that if they did come to the citie diſguiſed, they wold receiue them into their houſes. From whence they might go and kill Maſſo degli Albizi, and call the people to armes,Conſpiracie in Florence againſt Maſſo Deili Albizi and others. who (being diſcontent) would eaſily moue, and the rather, becauſe they ſhould be followed by the Ricci, Adimari, Medici, Manegli, and many other families. They then encouraged with this hope, the fourth of Auguſt 1397. came to Florence, and entring ſecretly as they were appointed, ſent to know where Maſſo
               
was, intending with his death to raiſe the tumult. At that time, Maſſo was come from his houſe, & ſtaied in an Appothecaries ſhop, neare San Pietro Maggiore. The meſſenger ſent to await him, ran to tell the conſpirators therof; who taking armes and comming to the place found him gone: yet not diſmaid that this appointmēt ſped not, returned towards the old Market, & there killed one of the cōtrary factiō. Then the larum began, & the people cried armes, libertie, & kill theſe tyrants: which done, they returned towards the new Market, & at the end of Calimara, they ſlew an other. And with like ſhowte, following their way, & no man taking armes, at the Loggia Nighitioſa, they ſtaied. Then they climed vp to a high place, and a great multitude drew neare, rather to behold them then helpe them, and with a loud voice they perſwaded men to take armes, & acquite themſelues of that ſeruitude which they ſo greatly hated; alledging, that the lamentation of the euill contented perſons in the cittie, more then their owne iniuries moued them to ſeeke meane to be deliuered. And that they knew, many did pray God to grant them occaſion to be reuenged: which they wold performe, whenſoeuer they might find a head to lead them. And now occaſion being come, & Captains ready to lead them, euery man looked one vpon an other, and ſtood as men amazed. So that, their reſolution was in vaine, and the Citizens ſtil with bondage burthened. Alſo they much maruelled, that they (who for euery ſmall iniurie were wont to take armes) would not now be moued, but ſuffer ſo many their Citizens to be baniſhed and admoniſhed: yet was it in their power to reſtore the baniſhed to their countrey, and the admoniſhed to their offices. Which words (though true) moued not the multitude at all, either for feare, or els becauſe the death of thoſe two had made the murtherers odious. So that the mouers of the tumult, ſeeing that neither words nor deeds had force to encourage any man, (too late aware how dangerous a thing it is to labour the libertie of a people, that will in any wiſe be ſubiect) diſpairing of the enterpriſe, into the temple of Santa Reparata, retired themſelues: and there not to ſaue their liues, but delaie their death, they ſhut themſelues vp. The Senators at the beginning of the tumult were armed and ſhut the Pallace gate, till after the caſe was vnderſtood, & the men knowne that moued the rumour, being before locked vp, tooke courage, & commanded the Captaine to call his ſouldiers to apprehend the offenders. In ſo much that with ſmall force the doores of the Temple were broken: part of them within were ſlain, in defence of the place, & the reſt take. They being examined, confeſſed none to be culpable but Barocco and Piggiello Cauicciulli, with others that were ſlaine. After this accident, there happened one other of more importance. At this time (as hath bene beforeſaid) the cittie had warre with the Duke of Milan, who finding that to oppreſſe it, his forces ſufficed not, determined to worke with wiles, and by aid of the baniſhed Florentines (of whom Lombardy was full) practiſed that enterpriſe, whereto alſo many within the towne were made priuie. Concluding that vpon a certain day, many of thoſe baniſhed men, apt for armes,Conſpiracy by the Duke of Milan againſt Florence. ſhould go to places neare Florence, & by the riuer Arno paſſe into the citie, and there with friends enter the houſes of the chiefe gouernors, and ſleying them, reform the gouernment as themſelues thought good. Among the conſpirators within, was one of the houſe of Ricci named Samminiato, but (as in conſpiracies for the moſt part it happeneth) that a fewe are not of force inough, and many will not keepe counſell: Samminiato ſeeking companions, found an accuſer. This man imparted the matter to Saluestro Cauicciulli, whome the iniuries done to his kinsfolke and himſelfe, ought haue made truſtie. But he regarding more the feare at hand, then the future hope, ſuddeinly bewrayed the practiſe to the Senators, and they apprehending Samminiato, conſtrained him to confeſſe all the conſpirators: yet was there no man apprehended, ſauing Tomazo Duuiſi, who comming from Bologna, and not hearing

what happened in Florence, was by the way intercepted. All the reſt after the apprehenſion of Samminiato for feare, fled. Then Samminiato and Tomazo, being according to their merits puniſhed: authoritie was giuen to diuerſe Cittizens to finde out more offenders, and aſſure the ſtate. They then diſcouered for Rebels, ſixe of the family of Ricci, ſixe of the Alberti, three of the Medici, three of the Scali, two of the Strozzi, Bindo Altouiti, Barnardo Adimari, with many of the meaner ſort. They admoniſhed all the family of Alberti, Ricci, and Medici, for tenne yeares (a fewe of them excepted). Among the Alberti was one called Antonio, who being accounted a quiet and peaceable man, was in that reſpect not admoniſhed. It chanced after the ſuſpition of the conſpiracie not quenched, there was a Monke taken, who had bene ſeene diuerſe times during the conſpiracie, to goe from Bologna to Florence. This Monke confeſſed that he had brought diuerſe letters to Antonio, who denied the matter, yet being auowed by the Monke,The famely of Alberti confined. An. 1402. he was condemned in mony, and confined 300. miles diſtant from the citie. Alſo to the end, that the Alberti might not daily put the ſtate in daunger, all that family aboue fifteene yeares of age, were baniſhed. This accident happened in the yeare 1402. The next yeare died Giouan Galiazzo, Duke of Milan: whoſe death (as is beforeſaid) ended the warre which had continued twelue yeares. In this meane ſpace, the gouernment became of more authoritie: and hauing fewe enemies both within and without, the Florentines attempted the enterpriſe of Piſa, and gloriouſly conquered that citie. They continued then quiet within, from the yeare 1400. till 33. ſauing that in the yeare 1412. the Alberti, hauing broken their confines, a Balia was choſen, wherby new ordinances were made to aſſure the ſtate, and impoſe greater paiments vpon them.The death of Ladiſlao king of Naples. In that time alſo, the Florentines made war to Ladiſlao King of Napoli, which was ended by the death of the King: in the yeare 1414. In execution whereof, the King finding himſelfe the weaker, yeelded to the Florentines the citie of Cortona, where he was Lord. Yet ſhortly after he reuiued the warre, which proued more dangerous then the former. And had the ſame not bene, as the other, ended by the Duke of Milans death, he had alſo brought the libertie of our citie into that daunger, that by the Duke it had bene. Neither did this war of the Kings end, with leſſer aduenture then the other. For when he had ſurprized Rome, Siena, La Marca, and Romagna, and that he wanted nothing, but Florence to paſſe with a mightie force into Lombardy, hee died. So as, death was euer more friendly to the Florentines, then any other friend: and of more power to defend them, then any other vertue. After the death of this King, the citie continued quiet without & within eight yeares. In the end of which time, with the warres of Philippo Duke of Milan, the factions were reuiued: and continued til the ruine of that ſtate, which from 1380. had bene gouerned, and with much glorie, enterpriſed many warres, and brought vnder the Empire thereof, Arezzo, Piſo, Cortona, Liuorno, and Monte Pulciano. And would haue done greater things, had the citie continued vnited, and the old humors not bene reuiued. As in the next booke ſhall particulerly be declared.
            The ende of the third Booke.
         
         
            
            
               
                  royal blazon or coat of arms
               
            
            THE FOVRTH BOOKE.
            
               ALL Cities (and chiefly they which be well gouerned vnder the name of Common-weales) doo often alter their ſtate and gouernment: not by meanes of libertie and ſubiection (as many imagine) but by meane of ſeruitude and lycentiouſneſſe. For onely the name of libertie is honoured of the people, who are the miniſters of lycentiouſneſſe, and ſeruitude ſtill ſought for by the Nobilitie: ſo as either of them do ſtudie not to ſubiect themſelues, either to lawes or men. True it is, that when it happeneth (as ſildome it doth) that by good fortune of ſome Citie, there riſeth vp therein, a wiſe, good, and mightie Citizen, of whome ſuch lawes be made, as theſe humours of the Nobilitie, and of the people, be kept quiet (or at the leaſt ſo reſtrained as they cannot doo euill) then may that Cittie be called free, and that ſtate firme and ſtable. For being builded vpon good lawes, and good orders, it needeth not afterwardes the vertue of anie man to vphold it. Of ſuch lawes and orders, manie auncient Common-weales (whoſe eſtates continued long) were endowed. Such orders and lawes, thoſe ſtates wanted, and doo want, which haue oft times chaunged their gouernment from ſtates tyrannicall, to licentious, and from licentious, to tyrannicall. And in them by meane of their mightie enemies, there is not, nor cannot be anie ſtabilitie at all: becauſe the one pleaſeth not the good men, and the other offendeth the wiſe men. The one may do euill with facilitie, the other can do good with difficultie. In the one inſolent men, in the other, fooles haue too much authoritie. And therefore, it behoueth, that both the one and the other, by the vertue and fortune of ſome excellent man be mainteined: who either by death may be taken away, or by aduerſitie proue vnprofitable. I ſay therefore, that gouernment which had the beginning in Florence by the death of Georgio Scali, in the yeare 1381. proceeded firſt from the vertue of Maſſo delli Albizi, and after was by Nicholo di Vzano continued. The Cittie liued quiet from the yeare 1314. till the 22. At which time, the King Ladiſlao was dead, and the ſtate of Lombardy into partes diuided. So that neither without nor within, there was any thing that could breede diffidence or miſtruſt. Next to Nicholo di Vzano, the Citizens of moſt authoritie, were Bartolomeo Valori, Nerome di Nigi, Rinaldo de gli Albizi, Neridi Guio, and Lapo Nicolini. The factions which grew, by the diſcord of the Albizi & Ricci, and after with great troubles by Saluestro di Medici reuiued, were neuer quenched. And albeit the partie moſt fauoured of the multitude, raigned not aboue 3. yeares, and in the yere 1381. the ſame was oppreſſed: yet that humor hauing infected the greater number of the people, could not be vtterly quenched. True it is, that the often contentions, & perſecutions of the chief captains frō the 1381. til the 1400. brought the factions wel near to nothing. The families moſt perſecuted were

the Albizi, Ricci, and Medici. Thoſe houſes were diuerſe times ſpoyled, both of their men and ſubſtance, and if any of them remained in the citie, their honours and offices were taken from them. Which oppreſsion made that part baſe minded, and (as it were) vtterly trodden downe. Notwithſtanding, there remained in many men, a certaine memorie of iniuries receiued, and a deſire to reuenge them. Yet wanting power to performe their will, they kept that deſire within their breaſts, ſecretly hidden. Thoſe of the populer Nobilitie, who peaceably gouerned the citie, committed two errors,Error committed by the populer nobilitie. which were the cauſes of their ruine. The one through their inſolency, which grew by continuall authoritie and being in office. The other, through enuie among themſelues, & the long holding the ſtate in their hands, they did not preuent thoſe that might offend them: but daily renuing the vniuerſall hatred by their ſiniſter proceedings, not remoouing the matter that might hurt and was to be feared, were the cauſes that the houſe of Medici recouered authoritie. The firſt of them that begun to ſtand vp, was Giouanni, the ſonne of Bicci. He, become exceeding rich, and being of nature curteous, & affable, was with the allowance of thoſe that gouerned, aſcended to the higheſt office. Whereat the multitude ſo greatly reioyced (ſuppoſing to haue gotten a protector) that the wiſer ſort conceiued ſome iuſt cauſe of ſuſpition:Aduice of Nicolo Vzano againſt the Medici. becauſe thereby they found all the old humors begun to ariſe. And Nicholo di Vſano failed not to aduertiſe the other Citizens, how daungerous a thing it was to aduance one, who had among the multitude, ſo much reputation: ſaying, it was eaſie to oppreſſe any inconuenience at the firſt, but letting it growe, the remedie was hardly found. For hee knew well, that in Giouanni, there were many more excellent partes, then in Saluestro. Nicholo could not be heard of his companions: becauſe they enuied his reputation, and ſought for aſsiſtance to oppreſſe him. Men thus liuing in Florence, beſet with contrary humours, (which ſecretly began to boyle within their breaſts) Philippo Viſconti ſecond ſonne of Giouan Galiazzo, being by the death of his brother, become Lord of all Lombardy, and deuiſing vpon ſome enterpriſe, deſired greatly to be againe owner of Genoua, which at that preſent vnder Tomazo Frogolo liued in libertie. Yet feared he could neither compaſſe that nor any other thing, vnleſſe firſt hee publiſhed a new accord with the Florentines: the reputation whereof, (as hee thought) might bring him to ſatiſfaction. For which purpoſe, hee ſent Embaſſadours to Florence: who beeing there, and perſwading the league, it was by many Cittizens thought vnfit to ioyne with him, and yet they wiſhed that the peace which had many yeares continued, ſhould ſtill endure. For they knewe what fauoure and reputation the league would doo him, and how ſmall profit the citie ſhould receiue thereof. To others it was thought good, that the league ſhould be made, thereby to procure the Duke to enter conditions and bondes, which if he paſſed, euery man might diſcouer his euill intent, and ſhould (if he brake the peace) the more iuſtly make warre vpon him.Leage betwixt the Florentins and the Duke of Milan. Thus (the matter being throughly debated) the peace was concluded. Wherein Philippo promiſed, that hee would not entermedle with anie thing on this ſide the Riuers of Magra and Panaro. After this concluſion Philippo ſurprized Breſcia, and ſhortly after Genoua, contrary to the opinion of thoſe that had perſwaded the peace. For they beleeued that Breſcia had bene defended by the Venetians, and Genoua could haue defended it ſelfe. And becauſe in the league which Philippo had made with the Doge of Genoua, he had reſerued Serezana, and other Townes on this ſides Magra, with condition that if he ſolde them, hee then to ſell them to the Genoueſi, the league was broken. Beſides this, hee made peace with the Legate of Bologna. Which things, altered the mindes of our Citizens, and made them (doubting newe miſchiefes) to looke for newe remedies. Theſe

ſuſpitions come to the eare of Filippo, either to gratifie, or feele the diſpoſition of the Florentines, or elſe to abuſe them, ſent Ambaſſadours vnto Florence, and by them ſignified, how he maruelled much at the ſuſpition conceiued, and therewith offered to renounce euerie thing by him done, whereof anie miſtruſt might grow: which Ambaſſadours wrought none other effect, then diuiſion of the citie. For the one part, (and thoſe that were moſt reputed in the gouernment) thought good to arme, and preuent the enemie. Notwithſtanding if Filippo ſtood quiet, there ſhould be no war at all, and in the meane time, that prouiſion was an occaſion of peace. Many others, either enuying thoſe that gouerned, or fearing the warre, iudged that it was no wiſedome, lightly to become ſuſpitious: neither were things by Philippo done, worthie to be ſuſpected. But they knew wel, that to elect the Ten, and to hire ſouldiers, promiſed warre: which being taken in hand againſt ſo great a Prince, ſhould be the ruine of the citie, without hope of any profit. For of his victories (hauing Romagna in the midſt) we could not receiue good, nor become Princes of that country. And of Romagna it ſelf (by reaſon of the neerneſſe of the church) they could not think to become owners. Notwithſtanding, the authoritie of thoſe that would make preparation for war, preuailed before the other, that deſired peace. And therefore they created the Ten, hired ſouldiers, & impoſed Subſidies. Which proceedings (becauſe they burthened more the leſſe, then greater Cittizens) filled the cittie with ſorrow, and euery man blamed the ambition & authoritie of the great men, accuſing them; that to fulfill their appetites, and oppreſſe the people, they would make a warre not neceſſary. Yet was not the Duke come to manifeſt breach, but euery thing was full of ſuſpition. For Philippo, at the requeſt of the Legate of Bologna (who feared Antonio Bentiuogli baniſhed, and remaining at the Caſtle Bologneſe) had ſent men to that citie: which beeing neare the dominion of Florence, held the ſtate in miſtruſt. But that which moſt amazed euerie man, and gaue much cauſe to diſcouer the warre, was the enterpriſe of the Duke at Furli. Georgio Ordilaffi, was Lord of Furli, who dying, left Tibaldo his ſonne, vnder protection of Philippo. And albeit the mother ſuppoſing the Duke to be a Tutor vnfit, and therefore ſent her childe to Lodouico Alidoſsi her father, Lord of Imola) yet was ſhe forced by the people to obſerue her husbands teſtament, and commit him to the Dukes hands. Then Philippo to make himſelfe the leſſe ſuſpected, and the rather alſo to couer his intent, deuiſed that the Marqueſſe of Farrara ſhould ſend Guido Torello with ſome forces, to be his deputie, and take the gouernment of Furli. Thus came that towne into the poſſeſsion of Philippo, which being knowne in Florence, togither with the newes of the ſouldiers come to Bologna, made the reſolutiō for the war the more ſpeedie, notwithſtanding it had before great contradiction, & Giouan de Medici publikely ſpake againſt it, ſaying,Conſultation in Florence. that although he were certaine of the Dukes euil diſpoſition, yet were it better that hee ſhould march firſt, thē they go towards him: for ſo the war ſhuld be iuſtifiable, in the iudgement of other princes: neither could we ſo boldly aske aid, as we might after that his ambitiō was diſcouered. Alſo, mē wold with an other mind defend their own, thē aſſault the goods of others. To the cōtrary, was ſaid, it were not good to tarry for the enemy at home, but rather go ſeeke him. And fortune was more friend to him that aſſaulteth, thē to him that defendeth. Moreouer with leſſe loſſe (though with more charge) the war is made far frō home, then neare at hand. In the end, this opiniō preuailed. And reſolutiō was ſet down, that the Ten ſhould deuiſe ſome means how the city of Furli might be recouered frō the Duke. Philippo ſeeing that the Florentines went about to ſurprize thoſe things which he had taken in hand to defend, ſet reſpects apart, & ſent Agnolodella Pargola with great forces to Imola, to the end, that prince, hauing occaſion to defend his own, ſhould not think vpō his grandchild. Agnolo arriued neare Imola,
               
(the forces of the Florentines being alſo at Magdigliana) the weather froſtie, and the towne diches frozen, in the night, by ſtealth, ſurprized the towne, and ſent Lodouico priſoner to Milan. The Florentines ſeeing Imola loſt, and the warre diſcouered, commaunded their men to go vnto Furli, and on euerie ſide beſieged that citie. Alſo to the end that all the Dukes forces ſhould not come to reſcue it, they hired the Earle Alberigo, who from his towne Zagonara iſſued out, ſpoyling the country euen to the gates of Imola. Agnola della Pergola, finding he could not with ſecuritie ſuccour Furli, by reaſon of the ſtrength where our Campe laie, thought good to beſiege Zagonara, thinking that the Florentines would not loſe that place, and if they did relieue it, then of force they muſt abandon Furli, and fight with diſaduantage. The Dukes forces then enforced Alberigo to demaund compoſition, which was graunted; he promiſing to yeeld the towne at any time, if within fifteene daies, it were not reſcued by the Florentines. This diſorder knowne in the Florentines Campe and in the Citie, and euerie man deſirous to preuent the enemie of that victorie, occaſioned them to haue a greater.The Florentines ouerthrowne. For their Campe being departed from Furli to ſuccour Zagonara, and entercountring the enemie was ouerthrowne: not ſo much through vertue of the aduerſarie, as the vnhappineſſe of the weather. For, our men hauing diuerſe houres marched in the deepe myre and raine, found the enemies freſh, and for that reaſon by them were vanquiſhed. Notwithſtanding, in ſo great an ouerthrow publiſhed through all Italy, there died no more then Lodouico degli Obizi, with two others, who fallen from their horſe were myred to death. All the citie of Florence at this ouerthrow, became ſad: and chiefly the great Citizens who had counſelled the warre. For they ſawe the enemie braue, their ſelues diſarmed, without friends, and the people againſt them: who murmured, and with iniurious words, complained of the great Impoſitions and Subſidies, they had paide to the maintenance of the warre taken in hand, without any cauſe or occaſion. Saying moreouer, now they hauing created the Ten, to terrifie the enemie, haue ſuccoured Furli, and taken it from the Duke. Thus do they bewraie their Councels to what end they are: not to defend the libertie, but encreaſe their own power, which God iuſtly hath diminiſhed. Neither haue they only burthened the citie with this enterpriſe, but with many others: for like to this, was that againſt King Ladiſlao. To whome will they now reſort for aide? To Pope Martine? who hath bene in their ſight trodden vpon by Braccio? To the Queene Giouanna? ſhe was by them abandoned, and forced to put her ſelfe vpon the King of Aragon. Beſides theſe contumelies, they repeated all ſuch iniurious reproues, as a people offended, could imagine. It was therefore thought good to the Senators, to aſſemble a good number of Citizens, and with curteous ſpeech appeaſe the humours mooued in the multitude. Then Rinaldo degli Albizi, eldeſt ſonne of Maſſo,
               The ſpeech of Rinaldo de Albizi to appeaze the people. (who with his owne vertue, & the memorie of his father, aſpired to the chief honour of the citie) declared at large: that it was no wiſedome to iudge enterpriſes by their ſucceſſe. Becauſe many things well deuiſed, haue had no good end, & others euil deuiſed, haue good. Alſo, if euil counſels hauing good ſucceſſe, ſhould be commended, the ſame wold encourage men to commit errors, which would proue to great diſaduantage of the Common weale: for it euer falleth out, that euill counſels be vnfortunate. In like maner they erred, to blame a wiſe counſell, that hath no deſired end: for thereby they diſcouradge the Citizens to counſell the citie, & ſaie frankly, what they knew or vnderſtood. Then he ſhewed the neceſsitie of that war, and how if it had not bene begun in Romagna, it ſhould haue bene in Toſcana. But ſith it pleaſed God that their forces be ouerthrowne, the loſſe ſhould be the leſſe, if the enterpriſe were not abandoned. For if they would ſtill ſhewe their faces to Fortune, and endeuour themſelues to recouer that was loſt, neither ſhould they finde

any loſſe, nor the Duke any victorie. They ought alſo not to repine at the charge or Impoſitions that ſhould be laid vpon them, becauſe thoſe paiments which they had made, were reaſonable, and the reſt that ſhould after be impoſed would not bee ſo great. For leſſe preparation is required for them that defend, then thoſe that will offend. In the end, he perſwaded them to imitate their aunceſtors, who by being in euerie aduerſitie couragious, did defend themſelues againſt all Princes whatſoeuer. The Citizens encouraged with the authoritie of this man,Bracc
                     •
                  o. Piccinino. enterteined the Earle Oddo ſonne of Braccio, with whom they ioyned Nicholo Piccinino, brought vp vnder Braccio; a man moſt eſteemed of all thoſe that ſerued vnder his Enſigne, and vnder them they appointed other leaders. Alſo of their owne forces lately broken, ſome Captaines of horſe men remained. Moreouer they elected twentie Citizens to impoſe new Subſidies, who being encouraged with ſeeing the greateſt Citizens oppreſſed by the late ouerthrow, impoſed vpon them without reſpect. This impoſition much greeued the great Cittizens, yet not to declare themſelues vnwilling, at the firſt, ſhewed no priuate offence: but generally blamed the matter, giuing their aduiſe, that the Impoſitions might ceaſe; which being knowne to many, tooke no effect in the Councels: and thereupon to occaſion theſe repiners feele the ſmart of their counſell, and make the matter more odious, they ordered, that the Impoſers ſhould proceed with all ſeueritie, and haue authoritie to kill any man that ſhould withſtand the publique officers. Whereof followed many foule accidents, by murthering and hurting of the Citizens. In ſo much, as the factions came to bloud: and euerie wiſe man feared future miſchiefes. Becauſe, the great men (who were vſed to reſpect) could not endure to be laide hand vppon: and others were not content that euerie man ſhould equally be burthened. Many of the chiefe Citizens therefore aſſembled themſelues, and concluded, that it behoued them to take the gouernment into their hands: becauſe their ſmall diligence had giuen head, and ſuffered the publique proceedings to be reproued: allowing ouermuch boldneſſe in thoſe that were wont to be heads of the multitude. Hauing to this effect conſulted, they determined manie times to meete all togither; and in the church of S. Steffano aſſembled more then 70. Citizens, with the lycence and allowance of Lorenzo Ridolfi, and Franceſco Gianfi gliazzi, who at that time were of the Senate. To this conuention, Giouanni de Medici came not, either becauſe he was as a ſuſpect, vncalled, or that hee would not (being of contrary opinion) appeare. But Rinaldo delli Albizi, as mouth of that companie,Rinaldo di Albizi. diſcourſed the eſtate of the citie, & how by their negligence it was come to the hand of the multitude, from whome in the yeare 1381. by their aunceſtors it was taken: putting them in minde of the iniquitie that raigned in that ſtate, from the yeare 77. till 81. And how ſith that time, till this preſent, ſome had their fathers ſlaine, ſome their grandfathers, & now were returned to the ſelfeſame perils, & the citie fallen to the like diſorders; becauſe the multitude had alreadie at their pleaſure impoſed Subſidies: & wold ere lōg, (if the ſame were not by a greater force or better order withſtood) appoint the Magiſtrates. Which being brought to paſſe, the multitude would vſurpe their places, and ruine that ſtate, which had bene with much glorie of the cittie fortie and two yeares continued: and Florence ſhould be gouerned either caſually, vnder the will of the multitude (ſo as one part ſhould liue lycentiouſly, the other daungerouſly) or vnder the commandement of ſome one that ſhall make him ſelfe Prince of all. Wherefore he aſſured them, that euerie man that loued his country, and his owne honour, was conſtrained to beware: and put them in minde of the vertue of Bardo Mancini, who with the ruine of the Alberti: ſaued the citie from thoſe perils wherein it then was: and that occaſion of boldneſſe in the multitude, proceeded of the large Squittini, which were by their negligence made: which was the

cauſe alſo that the Pallace was filled with new men and people of baſe condition. He therefore concluded that the only remedie was, to yeeld the gouernment to the great Citizens, and remoue the leſſe Artificers from their authoritie: reducing them from 14. to 7. companies. Which ſhould be a meane that the multitude could haue in the Councels leſſe authoritie: as well in reſpect, that the number of them were diminiſhed, as that the great men ſhould haue moſt power, who for the old enmity did diſfauour the multitude, affirming likewiſe that to know how to imploy men, according to the time was great wiſedom. For as their anceſtors vſed the multitude to oppreſſe the inſolency of the great men (who thereby became humble and the multitude inſolent) ſo it were now fit to bridle the inſolencie thereof, with the aide of the great men. And for compaſſing of theſe matters they might reſort either to ſubtiltie or force. For ſome of them beeing of the Tenne, by that colour might bring men ſecretly into the citie. This counſell giuen by Rinaldo, was by euery man allowed. And Nicholo of Vzano among other, ſaid; that all things alledged by Rinaldo were true, and the remedies good and certaine, if the ſame might be done without manifeſt diuiſion of the citie: which would come to paſſe if Giouan de Medici, were not perſwaded from them. For hee being on our ſide, the multitude without head and force, could not offend. But if he wold not conſent, without armes it could not be. And with armes it were daungerous, for either they ſhould not preuaile, or not enioy the victory. Alſo, modeſtly he reduced to their memories, his former admonitions, & how they refuſed to preuent theſe difficulties, when they might. But now the time ſerued not to do it, without hazarding a greater miſchiefe, and therefore, as the vttermoſt refuge, it behoued to gaine his fauour. Commiſsiō therfore was granted for Rinaldo, to goe vnto Giouanni, and perſwade him to be of their minde. This Gentleman performed his Commiſsion, and with the beſt reaſons he was able, perſwaded him to enter with them into this action, and that he would not for the loue of the multitude become inſolent, to the ruine of the ſtate, & citie. Wherto Giouanni anſwered,The anſwere of Giouanni di Medicito Rinaldo. that he thought it the office of a wiſe and good Citizen, not to alter the accuſtomed orders of the citie, becauſe there was nothing that ſo much offended men, as alteration, ſith thereby many be offended, & where many liue diſcontented, ſome euill accident is daily to be looked for. Alſo hee thought, that this their reſolution might worke two effects verie dangerous. The one by giuing the honours to thoſe, who neuer before hauing them, would not much eſteeme them, and ſhould haue the leſſe occaſion to complaine, if they neuer had them. The other by taking the honours from thoſe that were vſed to haue them, ſhould make them vnquiet till they were reſtored. And ſo ſhall the iniurie done to the one part, be greater, then the benefit, which the other part could thereby receiue. Thus ſhall the authour of this change, win few friends, & many enemies: and theſe will be more ready to offend him, thē the others to defend him. For mē are more naturally inclined to reuēge an iniury, thē be thankful for a good turne: becauſe this bringeth loſſe, but that promiſeth profit and pleaſure. Then turning his face towards Rinaldo, ſaide. And you ſir, if you remember matters paſſed & with what ſubtilties men walk within this citie, your ſelf would be more lowe in theſe reſolutions. For the giuer of that counſell, ſo ſoone as with your forces he hath taken away the authoritie of the people, would againe take the ſame from you, by the aide of thoſe, who by this meane of iniurie, will become your foes. And it will befall to you as it did to Benedetto Alberti, who (through the perſwaſions of him that loued him not) cōſented to the ruine of Georgio Scali and Tomazo Strozzi: and ſhortly after, by the ſelfeſame men that perſwaded him, was ſent into exile. Hee therefore wiſhed him more naturally to thinke vpon matters, & be willing to follow his father, who hauing loue of the multitude, cared

not to offend a fewe men euill diſpoſed. It was then ordained that whoſoeuer had to paie halfe a Florine for Subſidie, ſhould paie it, or not: as himſelfe pleaſed. And beſides all men indebted, ſhould for the day of the councell goe free, with out moleſtation of his creditors. In the end he concluded, that for his owne part, he would leaue the cittie in that order and eſtate, it preſently remained. Theſe matters thus handled, were vnderſtood abroad, and the ſame gaue great reputation to Giouanni and hatred to the other cittizens. Neuertheleſſe hee diſcontinued all affaires, the rather to diſcourage thoſe, that vnder his fauour intended new practiſes. Alſo, in all his comunication, hee let euerie man to vnderſtand that hee would not nouriſh, but extinguiſh factions. And for himſelfe, he deſired nothing but the vnion of the citie: yet were manie that followed him, therewith diſcontented. For diuers of them did perſwade him to be in thoſe matters more quick: of which number was Alamanno de medici, who being fierce of nature, ceaſed not to ſollicite him to perſecute their enemies, & fauour friends, blaming his coldneſſe, & ſlow maner of proceding. Which was (as he alledged) occaſion that their foes without reſpect, practiſed againſt him. Which one daie would take effect, with the ruine of his houſe and friends. To the ſame effect, was hee encouraged, by Coſimo his ſonne. Yet notwithſtanding all theſe reaſons to him reuealed or prognoſticated, hee ſtood firme in his intent, and by that meanes the faction became diſcouered, and the cittie in manifeſt diuiſion. At that time were in the Pallace two Chauncellors, one called Ser Martino, and the other Ser Pagolo. This fauoured the parte of Vzano, that of Medici. Rinaldo ſeeing that Giouanni refuſed to concurre with them, thought fit to depriue Ser Martino of his office, hoping afterwards to finde the Pallace more fuourable. That practiſe foreſeene by the aduerſaries, Martino was defended; and Pagalo with ſorrow and iniury of his friends remooued: which had preſently wrought bad effects, if the preſent warre had not bene, & the citie by the ouerthrow receiued at Zagonara, terrified. During the time that theſe matters were managed in Florence, Agnola della Pergola had with the Dukes forces taken all the townes which the Florentines poſſeſſed in Romagna (Castaro and Modigliana excepted) ſome of them beeing loſt by the weakeneſſe of the place, and others by the default of thoſe, that had them in guarde. In the ſurprizing of theſe townes, two notable things appeared. The firſt, how much the vertue of men euen to their enemies, is acceptable. The other, how greatly cowardice and fainte heart, is contemned. Biagio of Milan, was Captaine of the fortreſſe called Montepetroſo.
               Biagio of Milan. He being enuironed with fire and enemies, not finding any meanes how to defend his charge, or eſcape with life, caſt ouer the wall (where no fire yet burned) certaine cloathes and ſtrawe, and vpon the ſame his owne two children, and ſaid to his enemies; Take you here thoſe goods which fortune hath giuen me, and you haue power to bereaue me of, but my riches of minde wherein glorie and my honour lieth, neither will I giue them, nor you can take them from me. The enemies ran to ſaue the poore children, and offered him roapes and ladders to conuey himſelfe downe ſafe. But he refuſed all ſuccours, chuſing rather to die in fire, then receiue a life from the enemies of his country. An example truly like to thoſe, of the auncient time ſo highly commended. And is the more notable, that ſuch reſolutions are but rare. The children were by the enemies reſtored to all thinges that were theirs, and could be found: and with great care conueyed to their friends, to whom their countrey alſo was no leſſe kinde. For (during their liues) they were publikely releeued and mainteined. The contrary happened in Galeata, where Zanobi di Pino was Podesta.
               Zanobi Pino. For he without any defence, yeelded his charge to the enemie: and beſides perſwaded Agnolo to abandon the Alpes of Romagna, and come into the hilles of Toſcana, where he might make warre with leſſe perill, and more profit. But Agnolo could not endure

the cowardice and baſe mind of that man, and therfore gaue him priſoner to his ſeruants, who in contempt, and diſdaine allowed him no more foode, but painted cards, ſaying, by that means they would make him of a Guelfo to become a Ghibellino. But within a fewe daies, Pino pined to death. In this meane time the Earle Oddo togither with Nicholo Piccinino was entred into the vale of Lamona, to reduce the Lord of Faenza to the friendſhip of the Florentines, or at the leaſt to empeach Agnola della Pergola in the ſpoile of Romagna. Yet by reaſon that vale is ſtrong, and the country people warlike, it chaunced that Oddo was ſlaine, and Nicholo Piccinino ledde priſoner to Faenza. But fortune would, that the Florentines obteined that by this loſſe, which if they had woon the victorie ſhould percaſe neuer haue bene compaſſed. For Nicholo being priſoner, wrought ſo with the Lord of Faenza & his mother, that they by his perſwaſion became friendes to the Florentines. By this league Nicholo Piccinino was deliuered, but folowed not that councel he gaue to others. For whiles he cōmoned with the cities that enterteined him, either for that the conditions he had made ſeemed ouer meane, or that he hoped of better elſewhere, ſuddeinly without leaue taking, departed from Arezzo where hee lodged, and went into Lombardy, and there tooke paie of the Duke.Piccinino reuolted from the league. The Florentines by this accident became fearefull: and being diſmayd with their charges loſt, thought they could not alone maintaine the warre, and therfore ſent Embaſſadours to the Venetians, deſiring them while the enterpriſe was eaſie, to ioyne againſt one, who being ſuffered to grow, might become as dangerous to them as to the Florentines. To the ſame enterpriſe alſo Franceſco Carmignuola did perſwade them, who was in thoſe dayes accounted a man of warre moſt excellent, and had bene ſometimes a ſouldier vnder the Duke, yet at that time, rebelled againſt him. The Venetians ſtood doubtfull, not knowing how much they might truſt Carmignuola, fearing that the enmitie betwixt the Duke & him was but fained. They thus ſtanding doubtfull, it happened that the Duke procured one of the ſeruants of Carmignuola to poyſon his maiſter: which poyſon not being ſtrong inough, killed him not, but brought him to extremitie. This being knowne to the Venetians, cleared all ſuſpition: and the Florentines following their requeſt, the league was made betwixt them, either partie binding himſelfe to make warre at their common charge: and that whatſoeuer were gotten in Lombardy ſhould be the Venetians, and whatſoeuer were poſſeſſed in Romagna, ſhould be the Florentines, and Carmignuola to continue General of the league.Carmignuola generall for the league. Then was the war by mean of this league brought into Lombardy, and by Carmignuola gouerned with ſo great vertue, that in fewe moneths he had taken many townes from the Duke: togither with the Citie of Breſcia, the winning whereof (in thoſe dayes, and in thoſe warres) was accounted maruellous. This warre was continued fiue yeares and the Citizens become wearie of the Impoſitions alreadie paſt, agreed to renew them, and prouided the ſame might be impoſed according to the value of euerie mans wealth. In this Impoſition, it fell out, that many mightie Cittizens were ſore charged. And therefore, before the lawe paſſed, it became of them miſliked. Onely Giouanni di Medici openly did commend it, by which commendation, the lawe paſſed. And becauſe in the excution thereof, euery mans goods were charged (which the Florentines called Accastare) the Impoſition was called Cataſto. This law partly bridled the tirannie of the mightier Citizens, being thereby reſtrained from oppreſſion of their inferiours, and their threatnings and counſels could not hold them ſilent, as before they might. That Impoſition therfore was by the multitude willingly, but by the mighty citizens, verie vnwillingly, receiued. Notwithſtanding (as it euer happeneth) that men be neuer ſatiſfied; but hauing the thing they wiſh for, deſire an other: ſo this people not content with this equalitie of Impoſition by lawe, required that no reſpect ſhould be

had to time paſt, but deſired to examine how much the great men (according to the Cataſto) had paide too little, becauſe they would haue them to be charged as themſelues had before bene; who paying more then they ought, were forced to ſell their poſſeſsions. This demaund, did more terrifie the great men, then the Cataſto,
               Cataſto. therfore they ceaſed not to find fault, affirming it was moſt iniuſt, that the impoſition ſhould extend to their moueables, which many times were one day poſſeſſed, and the next day loſt. And moreouer many men had money ſo ſecretly kept, that the Cataſto could not find it. Adding thereto, that for ſeruice of the ſtate, they omitted their priuate buſines, and therfore ought be the leſſe charged. For trauelling in their perſons, it was no reaſon that the citie ſhould imploy both their goods and their induſtry, and of other men take onely their goods. The others (to whom the Cataſto contented) did anſwere that if the goods moueable did varie, the Impoſitions might alſo varie, and ſo that inconuenience was remedied. And for goods concealed or hidden, therof it was not needfull to make accompt, for of ſuch monies as are not occupied to profit, no reaſon would they ſhould pay. And if they would imploy them, then ſhould they thereby diſcouer them. Moreouer, if they liked no longer to vſe their induſtrie for the Common weale, they might at their pleaſures leaue thoſe paines, & that trauell. For the ſtate ſhould find other good Citizens willing to helpe and ſerue, both with their counſell and ſubſtaunce. Alſo the gouernment carried therewith ſo many commodities & honors, as the ſame might ſuffice them that gouerned, without deteining their impoſitions. But the griefe lay not where they alledged. For it greeued them that they could not make warre without their owne loſſe, being to contribute to the charge as others did. As if this way had bene before found, the warre with King Ladiſlao ſhould not haue bene then, nor this warre with the Duke now. Both which warres were made to enrich the Citizens, and not for neceſsitie. Theſe humors ſtirred, were appeaſed by Giouan de Medici, declaring that it was not well done, to call againe matters paſſed, but rather to foreſee future euents. And if the Impoſitions before time were iniuſt, then ought they to thanke God for that warre, whereby they were made iuſt, and that this order might ſerue to reunite, not to deuide the citie: as it would, if paſſed Impoſitions were called in queſtion, to make the preſent ſeaſement: becauſe whoſoeuer is content with a reaſonable victorie, doth beſt, ſeeing they that be enforced to pay for many pardons, do therby become deſperate. With theſe or like wordes, hee appeaſed the humours, and the comparing of the old Impoſitions, with the new. The warre with the Duke yet continued, but ſhortly after a peace was made at Ferrara, by mediation of the Popes Legate. The conditions wherof, were by the Duke at the beginning broken. So that they of the league tooke armes againe, and ioyning battle with the Duke at Maclouio, they ouerthrew him. After which ouerthrow, the Duke mooued new communication of peace, whereto the Venetians and Florentines conſented. Theſe becauſe they ſuſpected the Venetians, and thought they ſpent much to make others mightie. The other, for that, ſince the ouerthrow, they perceiued Carmignuola to proceede ſlowly, and therfore feared to repoſe any truſt in him. The peace therfore was concluded the yeare 1428 whereby the Florentines reouered the townes loſt in Romagna,
               Peace betwixt the League & the Duke. and Breſcia remained in the hands of the Venetians. Beſides theſe, the Duke gaue them Bergamo with the country thereto belonging. In this warre the Florentines ſpent three millions and fiue thouſand duckats. But the Venetians gained land and force: and they pouertie and diuiſion. The peace thus made abroad, the warre at home began. And the great Citizens not enduring the Cataſto, nor knowing by what meane to be free from it, deuiſed to make the lawe to haue more enimies, thereby to haue companions to repreſſe it. Then they declared to the officers of the Impoſition, that the

lawe commaunded them alſo to ſeaze the Townes ſubiect, to ſee, if among them remained any Florentines goods. Thereupon all ſubiects were commaunded within a certaine time to bring in bils of their goods. Then the inhabitants of Volterra ſent vnto the Senate to complayne of that matter, inſomuch that the officers put xviii. of them in priſon. This made the Volterrani much offended, yet for the reſpect they had to their priſoners, they rebelled not. At this time Giouanni de Medici fell ſicke, and knowing his diſeaſe mortall, called vnto him his ſonnes Coſimo and Lorenzo, and ſayd vnto them:The ſpeech of coſimo de Medici at his death. I thinke now to haue liued ſo long, as at my birth God and nature had appoynted. I dye content, becauſe I leaue you rich, healthie, and in eſtate (if you follow my footeſteps) to liue in Florence honorablie, and fauoured of all men: For, there is nothing that maketh me dye ſo contented, as to remember, that I haue neuer offended any man, but rather (ſo farre as I could) pleaſured all men. So do I perſwade you (if you will liue ſecurely) to take of the State no more then by the lawes, and by men is giuen you, which ſhall neuer bring with it, either enuie or perill. For that which is woon by violence, not that which is giuen freely, doth make men hated. And you ſhall find many coueting an other mans, to loſe their owne, and before that loſſe, liue in continuall diſquiet of mind. With theſe rules among ſo manie enemyes, and contrarieties of opinions, I haue not onely maynteyned, but alſo encreaſed my reputation in this cittie. Euen ſo, if you follow my courſe, you ſhall in like ſort maynteyne and augment your credit. But when you do otherwiſe, looke that your end ſhall be no more fortunate then theirs, who haue ruyned themſelues, and vndone their houſes. Shortly after theſe words pronounced, he tooke leaue of life, and was much lamented by the greateſt number of Citizens, for ſo his excellent vertues deſerued. This Giouanni was charitable, and accuſtomed to giue almes not onely to them that asked, but alſo many times vnasked. He beſtowed reliefe on the poore, where need required. He loued euery man, prayſing the good, and pittying the euill. He neuer deſired offices, yet had he them all, he went not at any time to the Pallace vncalled, he loued peace, and ſhunned warre, he relieued men in aduerſitie, and furthered them in proſperitie. He medled not with publique extortion, but encreaſed the common profit. He was in office curteous, of no great eloquence, but ſinguler wiſe. His complexion ſeemed melancholy, yet was he in cōuerſation pleaſant and merrie. He died rich in treaſure, but more rich of loue, and good report: which inheritance aſwell in goods of fortune as of mind, was by Coſimo not only preſerued, but alſo enlarged. The Volterani being wearie of impriſonment, promiſed to condiſcend to that which was demaunded. They then being deliuered, and returned to Volterra, found the time come for the election of new Priori. Among whom was choſen one iuſt man, a baſe fellow, yet of credit among the multitude, and was in the number of thoſe that had ben priſoners in Florence.
               Volterra rebelled. He being moued with the iniurie offred both in publique and priuate by the Florentines, was encouraged by one Giouanni a noble man (who alſo ſate in office with him) to ſtirre the people with the authority of the Priori and his owne credit, to take the towne from the Florentines, and make himſelfe Prince thereof. By whoſe perſwaſion this Giusto (for ſo he was called) tooke armes, ranſacked the towne,Giuſto vſurped Volterra. impriſoned the Captayne of the Florentines, and made him ſelfe by conſent of the people, Lord thereof. This new matter happened in Volterra, greatly diſpleaſed the Florentines. Yet hauing lately made peace with the Duke, they imagined a time was come to recouer it. And not omitting oportunitie, they ſodeinly ſent thither Rinaldo de gli Albizi, and Palla Strozzi, as their Comiſſaries. Giusto in the meane ſpace, ſuppoſing the Florentines would aſſault him, prayed ayd of the Saneſi and Luccheſi. The Saneſi denyed him, ſaying they were in league with the Florentines.
               
And Pagolo Guinigi Lord of Lucca,
               Pagolo Guinigi Lord of Lucca. to recouer the fauoure of the Florentine people (which in the Dukes warres he feared to haue loſt) did not onely refuſe to ayde Giusto, but alſo ſent his meſſenger priſoner to Florence. Theſe commiſſaries in the meane ſpace, to come vnlooked for of the Volterani, aſſembled all their men of Armes, and in the neather Valderno, and the Prouince of Piſa, leauyed many footemen, from whence they marched to Volterra. Neyther did Giusto for being abandoned of his neighbours, nor the aſſault of the Florentines, abandon himſelfe: but truſting to the ſtrength of the Scite, and the greatnes of the Towne, prepared for defence. There was at that time in Volterra, one called Arcolano, brother to Giouanni, who had perſwaded Giusto to take the gouernment, a man among the Nobilitie of good reputation. He, aſſembling his friends, declared how God by this accident had ſupplied the neceſsitie of their Cittie. For now if they were pleaſed to take armes, remoue Giusto from the Senate, and reſtore the Cittie to the Florentines, they ſhould thereby become chiefe of their Cittie, and continue their auncient priuiledges. Theſe men conſenting to the enterpriſe, went to the Pallace where this Lord Giusto remayned: ſome of them alſo being left belowe, Arcolano with three others went vp, and finding him with ſome other Cittizens, drew him aſide, as though he had to ſpeake with him in ſome earneſt matter, ſo enterteyning him from chamber to chamber, till he came to the place where the reſt of the companie remayned. Yet were they not ſo ſuddein, but that Giusto drew his ſword, and before himſelfe was ſlayne, hurt two of them. Notwithſtanding,Giuſto ſlaine. in the end vnable to reſiſt ſo manie, was murthered, and caſt out of the Pallace. Then all the reſt of the conſpiracie with Arcolano tooke Armes, and gaue the Towne to the Commiſſaries for the Florentines, who were with Souldiers neere at hand. They, without other capitulation, entered the Towne, whereby the Volterani made their condition worſe then before. For among other things,Volterra recouered by the Florentines. they diſmembred the greater part of the Countrey, and was reduced to Vicariato. Thus Volterra, as it were at one inſtant loſt, and recouered, no occaſion of new warre remayned, had not the ambition of men bene cauſe thereof. There ſerued long time the Florentines in their warres againſt the Duke of Milan, one called Nicholo Fortibraccio, ſonne to one of the ſiſters of Braccio di Perugia. He after the peace made, was by the Florentines diſcharged, and at ſuch time as this chance happened at Volterra was lodged at Fucecchio, whereby the Commiſſaries in that enterpriſe employed him and his Souldiers. It was ſuppoſed that at ſuch time as Rinaldo trauelled with him in that warre, he perſwaded Nicholo vnder ſome fayned quarrell to aſſault the Luccheſi, ſaying, that if he would goe againſt Lucca, he ſhould be made Generall of the iourney. Volterra thus ſurprized, and Nicholo returned home to Fucecchio, either by perſwaſion of Rinaldo, or of his owne will, in Nouember, the yeare 1429. with 300. horſe, and 300. footemen, ſurprized Ruoti and Compito, Caſtles belonging to the Luccheſi, and after came into the Countrey, and there made great ſpoyle. The newes of this enterpriſe publiſhed at Florence, many people aſſembled in diuers places of the Cittie, and the greater number wiſhed that Lucca might be aſſaulted. The great Cittizens that fauoured the enterpriſe were thoſe of the faction of Medici, and with them ioyned Rinaldo, thereto perſwaded, either becauſe he thought the enterpriſe profitable to the common-weale, or elſe for his owne ambition, hoping to haue the honor of the victorie. Thoſe that diſfauoured the attempt, were Nicholo de Vzano, and his followers. And it ſeemeth a thing incredible, that ſo great contrarietie ſhould be in one Cittie, touching the making of a warre. For thoſe Cittizens, and that people, who after tenne yeeres of peace blamed the warre againſt the Duke Philippo, for defence

of their libertie: now after ſo great expences, and ſo much affliction of the Cittie, withall earneſtly deſired to make a new warre againſt Lucca, and to vſurpe the libertie of others. On the other ſide, thoſe that deſired the firſt warre, found fault with this motion, ſo greatly did the opinions of men alter with time; for the multitude ſeemeth more readie to take from others, then keepe their owne. Alſo, men are more moued with hope of winning, then feare of loſing: For this feare is not beleeued, till it be neere at hand, but that hope, is hoped for, although farre off. The people of Florence was full of hope, both by the victories they had obteyned, and by letters ſent vnto Fortebraccio from the Rettori neere to Lucca. For the Deputies of Peſcia and of Vico did write, that if they might haue leaue to receiue thoſe Caſtles, they would be deliuered to them, and by that meanes all the Countrey of Lucca ſhould be gayned. Beſides theſe good newes, the Lord of Lucca ſent his Embaſſador to Florence, to complayne of the ſpoyles committed by Nicholo, deſiring the Senate, not to moue warre againſt their neighbours, and a Citie that had euer been friend to the Florentines. This Embaſſador was called Iacopo Viuiani. He not long before had been kept priſoner with Pagolo for a conſpiracie againſt him: whereof although he were guiltie, yet was his life ſaued. And Pagolo ſuppoſing that Iacopo had likewiſe forgotten the iniurie, put him in truſt. But Iacopo remembring more the perill he had paſſed, then the benefite he receiued, being arriued in Florence, ſecretly encouraged the Cittizens to proceed in the enterpriſe: which encouragement, ioyned to other hope, was the cauſe that the Senate aſſembled a Councell, wherein were foure hundred ninetie eight Cittizens, before whome, by the principall men of the Cittie, the matter was debated. Among the chiefe that perſwaded the iourney (as is before ſayd) was Rinaldo,
               A warre againſt Lucca perſwaded by Ri. de All
                     ••
                  zi. who alleadged the profite that might enſue of victorie. Hee alſo declared the occaſion of the enterpriſe, and how the Luccheſi were abandoned by the Venetians and the Duke. And that the Pope (being buſied in the affayres of the Kingdome) could not ſuccour them. Thereto he remembred how eaſie it was to winne the Cittie, being in ſubiection to one Cittizen, whereby it had loſt that naturall ſtrength and auntient care to defend the libertie. So that, either by meane of the people, who ſtudied to driue out the Tyrant, or the Tyrants feare of them, the ſucceſſe was not to be doubted. Hee likewiſe layd before them the iniuries which that Lord had done to our Common-wealth, and his euill diſpoſition towards the ſame; And how dangerous a thing it were if the Pope or the Duke ſhould make warre, concluding, that no enterpriſe attempted by the people of Florence, was euer more eaſie or more iuſt.The perſwation of Ni. de Vzano to the contrary. Againſt this perſwaſion, Nicholo de Vzano ſayde, that Florence did neuer take in hand any thing more vniuſt, nor more perilous, nor whereof more daunger might followe. Firſt, they ſhould goe about to offend a Cittie affectionate to the Guelfi, and ſuch a one as had euer bene friend to the people of Florence, and had with perill to it ſelfe many times receiued the Guelfi, when they durſt not abide in their owne Countrey. And by the memoriall of our proceedings, it cannot be found, that Lucca being free, did euer offend Florence: but the offence at any time done, was committed by thoſe that vſurped, as heretofore by Castruccio, and now by this man, which defaults cannot be imputed to the Cittie, but the Tyrants. And therefore if the warre might be made vppon the Tyrant, and not the Cittie, the diſpleaſure ſhould be the leſſe. But becauſe that could not be, he might not conſent that a Cittie, beforetime a friend, ſhould be ſpoyled of her ſubſtance. Yet ſith at this day, men liue as though of right

or wrong none account is to be made, hee would leaue to ſpeake thereof, and thinke onely vpon the profit of the Cittie. His opinion therefore was, that thoſe things might be called profitable, which would not lightlie procure loſſe. Wherefore he knewe not how any man could call that enterpriſe profitable, where the loſſe was certaine, and the gayne doubtfull. The certeine loſſes were the charges it carried with it, which ſeemed ſo great, as would terrifie any peaceable Cittie, much more ours, hauing bene by long warres wearied. The profit of the enterpriſe, was the poſſeſsion of Lucca, which hee confeſſed to be great; Yet were they to conſider the lets thereof: and they ſeemed to him ſo great, as hee thought the ſucceſſe impoſsible. Neither could hee beleeue that the Venetians and Philippo were therewith pleaſed: Becauſe the Venetians conſent, was onely to ſeeme thankefull, hauing lately with the Florentines woon a great Dominion. The other would be glad, that in a new warre wee ſhoulde ſpende more treaſure: ſo as worne, and wearyed on euerie ſide, wee might after be the more eaſily annoyed. Alſo, there would not want meanes for him, euen in the beſt hope of victorie, to ſuccour the Luccheſi, eyther couertly with money, or with caſsing of bands, and ſending ſouldiers as aduenturers to ayde them. Hee therefore perſwaded that the enterpriſe might ſtay, and ſuffer them liue with the Tyrant, whereby they ſhoulde haue the more enemyes. For there was no way ſo apt to ſubdue the Cittie, as to ſuffer it continue vnder a Tyrant, and be by him aſſaulted or weakened. This matter wiſely handled, the Cittie would be brought in termes, that the Tyrant not able to hold it, nor knowing how to gouerne it ſelfe, ſhould of force fall in our bozome. Neuertheleſſe, ſeeing his words were not heard, hee would prognoſticate that they would make a warre, wherein much ſhould be ſpent, many hazards made, and in ſtead of ſurprizing Lucca, deliuer it from the Tyrant, and procure that Cittie which before was ſubiect and weake, to become a towne free, and full of diſpleaſure: yea with time, an obſtacle to the honour of the Florentine common-weale. This enterpriſe thus perſwaded, and diſſwaded, they begun (as the cuſtome is) to practiſe with men ſecretly for the winning of their good wills, ſo as onely 98. perſons did ſpeake againſt it. Then the reſolution ſet downe, and the Tenne elected for gouernment of the warre,The warre of Lucca reſolued. they enterteyned ſouldiers both on horſebacke and foote. Astore Gianni, and Rinaldo de gli Albizi were appointed Generalls, and they agreed, that Nicholo Fortibraccio ſhould haue the gouernment of the Townes, if the enterpriſe tooke ſucceſſe. The Generalls with the Armyes beeing arriued within the territorie of Lucca, diuided their forces. Astore went into the playne, towards Ca Maggiore and Pietraſanta: And Rinaldo, towardes the Mountaynes, thinking, that the Countrey being ſpoyled, the Cittie would be eaſily taken. The attempt of theſe men prooued vnfortunate, not becauſe they ſurprized no Townes, but for the diſhonor committed by one of them in the ſeruice: For true it is, that Astore Gianni gaue great occaſions of his owne diſhonour. Neere vnto Pietraſanta, there is a Vale called Serauezeza, rich, and full of inhabitants, who hearing the Generall was come, preſented them ſelues: deſiring him to receiue them for faithfull ſeruants to the people of Florence. Astore ſeemed to accept the offer, and after cauſed his Souldiers to poſſeſſe all the paſſages, and ſtrong places of the Vale: then commaunding all the inhabitants to aſſemble in the principall Church, and there willed his men to take them priſoners, ſack them,Cruelty of the Florentine Generall. and ſpoyle all the Countrey moſt cruelly: not ſparing the ſacred places, but without reſpecte, abuſing aſwell Virgins, as married women. The manner of

theſe proceedings being knowne in Florence, offended not onely the Magiſtrates, but the whole Cittie alſo. Some fewe of the Sarauezeſi, who eſcaped the hands of the Generall, ran to Florence, telling in euery ſtreete, and to euery man their miſeries, and were by many Citizens encouraged, either becauſe they deſired to haue the Generall puniſhed, thinking him indeed an euill man, or elſe for that they knewe him not to fauour their faction.The complaint of the Sarauezeſi. So that the Sarauezeſi were brought before the tenne, where one of them ſtepped foorth, and ſpake to this effect. Sure we are (my good Lords) that our words ſhould find beliefe, and compaſsion, if your Lordſhips did know in what ſort your Generall hath vſed our Countrey, and how we haue bene by him handled. Our Vale (as we hope your memorials do make mention) did alwayes loue the faction Guelfa, and hath bene many times a faithfull receptacle for your Citizens, when flying perſecution of the Ghibilini, they came thither. Our aunceſtors, and we alſo, haue euer adored the name of this noble common weale, being the head and chiefe of that ſecte. So long as the Luccheſi were Guelfi, we willingly obeyed their gouernment, but ſince they ſubmitted themſelues to a Tyrant, (who hath abandoned his old friends, and followed the Ghibilini) rather by compulſion, then voluntarily, we haue obeyed him. And God knoweth, how often we haue prayed for occaſion, whereby to ſhewe our zeale to the auncient faction. But alas how blind are men in their deſires? that which we wiſhed for our helpe, is now become our harme. For ſo ſoone as we heard your Generall marched towards vs, we went, not as enemyes to encounter him, but (as our aunceſtors were wont) to yeeld into his hand our Countrey and fortunes: hoping that in him, although there were not the mind of a Florentine, yet ſhould we find him a man. We beſeech your Lordſhips to pardon vs, for our extremitie is ſo much, as more may not be indured, which is the cauſe we make bold to ſpeake thus plainely. This your Generall hath not of a man more then his preſence, nor of a Florentine any thing ſaue the name: but may be called a mortall plague, a cruell beaſt, and as horrible a monſter, as by any wrighter can be deſcribed. For he hauing aſſembled vs in our Temple, vnder pretence to talke with vs, hath made vs his priſoners: ſpoyling the whole countrey, burning the houſes, robbing the inhabitants, ſacking their goods, beating and murthering the men, forcing the Virgins, yea, pulling them from the hands of their Mothers, made them the pleaſures of his ſouldiers. If for any iniury done to the people of Florence or him, we had deſerued ſo great a puniſhment, or if we had armed our ſelues againſt him, and bene taken, then ſhould we haue had leſſe cauſe to complayne, yea, we would rather haue accuſed our ſelues, confeſsing, that eyther for iniurie or pride, we had ſo merited to be handled. But being diſarmed, and freely offering ourſelues, then to rob vs, and with ſo great deſpight and ignomie to ſpoyle vs, we thinke it ſtrange, and are inforced before your Lordſhips to lay downe our griefe. And albeit we might fill all Lombardy with offence, and with reproch of this Citie, publiſh our iniuries through all Italy, yet would we not, leſt thereby to blemiſh ſo honeſt, ſo honorable, and ſo compaſsionate a common weale, with the diſhoneſtie and crueltie of one wicked Citizen, whoſe auarice before our ruine, was partly knowne vnto vs. And wee intended to ſtrayne our ſelues to ſatisfie his greedie mind, which hath neither meaſure nor bottom. But ſith our gifts come too late, we thinke good to reſort to your Lordſhips, beſeeching the ſame to relieue the misfortune of your ſubiects, to the end, that other men may not be afraid to yeeld them ſelues to your deuotion. If our infinite miſeries cannot moue you, yet let the feare of Gods ire perſwade you, who hath ſeene the Churches ſacked and

burnt, and our people betrayed in them. Theſe words pronounced, they preſently fell downe proſtrate vpon the ground, weeping, and deſiring their Lordſhips, that their goods and countrey might be reſtored, and that (though the womens honors could not be recouered) yet the Wiues might be deliuered to their Husbands, and the Children to their Fathers. This heauie caſe being before reported, and now by the liuely voyce of thoſe afflicted men confirmed, did much moue the Magiſtrates: and without delay, they reuoked Astore,
               Aſtore condemned and Riſlandred. who after was condemned, and admoniſhed. Then was there Inquiſition made for the goods of the Serauezeſi, and ſo much as could be found, was reſtored. For the reſt, they were in time diuers wayes ſatisfied. Rinaldo de gli Albizi, was likewiſe defamed, for hauing made the warre, not for the profit of the people of Florence, but his owne. Hee was alſo charged that ſo ſoone as hee became Generall, the deſire of ſurprizing Lucca was forgotten, becauſe hee ſought no further then to ſpoyle the countrey, fill his paſtures with cattle, and furniſh his houſes with the goods of others. Moreouer, that his owne ſhare of the bootie contented him not, but hee alſo bought the priuate ſpoyles of his ſouldiers. So that of a Generall, hee was become a Merchaunt. Theſe ſlaunders come to his owne hearing, moued his honeſt and honorable mind more, then they ought to haue done. In ſo much, as hee became therewith ſo amazed, that taking offence againſt the Magiſtrates and Citizens, without delay or leaue taken, hee returned to Florence, and preſenting himſelfe to the Tenne, ſayd:The ſpeech of Ri. in his purgation. He knew well, how great difficultie and perill there was in ſeruing a looſe people, and a Cittie diuided. For the one is credulous of euery rumor, the other, puniſheth no euill doings, rewardeth not the good, and blameth the indifferent; ſo that no man commendeth him that is victorious: For as much, as his fellowes for enuie, and his foes for hatred, will perſecute him. Notwithſtanding, himſelfe had neuer for feare of vndeſerued blame, omitted to performe an action that promiſed a certaine good to his countrey. But true it was, that the diſhoneſtie of the preſent ſlaunders had oppreſſed his patience, and made him chaunge nature. Wherefore hee beſought the Magiſtrates, to be from thence-foorth more readie to defend their Citizens, to the end, they might be likewiſe more readie to labour for their countrey. And although that in Florence no triumph was graunted, yet might they, at the leaſte defende them from ignominious reproche, and remember that they them ſelues were alſo Citizens of the ſame towne, and that to them ſelues euerie houre the like might happen: whereby they ſhoulde vnderſtand howe great griefe falſe ſlaunders might breede in the mindes of men of integritie. The Tenne as time would ſerue, laboured to appeaſe him, and committed the care thereof to Neri di Gino, and to Alamanno Saluiati: who leauing to ſpoyle the countrey of Lucca, with their Campe, approched the Towne. And becauſe the ſeaſon was colde, they ſtayed at Campanuole. Where it ſeemed to the Generall that time was loſt: and deſirous to beſiege the Towne, by reaſon of the euill weather, the Souldiers woulde not thereto conſent. Notwithſtanding, that the Tenne did ſollicite them to the ſiege, and would accept none excuſe at all. At that time,Filippo Brunelſco. there was in Florence an Architector, called Filippo Brunelleſco, of whoſe handie-worke our Cittie is full: In ſo much, that after death, hee deſerued to haue his Image of Marble, erected in the chiefe Church of Florence, with Letters, to teſtifie hys greate vertue. This man declared, howe Lucca conſidering the ſcite of the Cittie, and the paſſage of the Riuer Serchio, mighte bee drowned.

And perſwaded them (ſo farre as the tenne gaue commiſsion) that this experiment ſhould be tried, yet thereof followed nothing, but diſorder to our camp, and ſuretie of the Luccheſi: for the Luccheſi aduaunced their land, and then in the night brake the ſluice of that ditch whereby the water was conducted: ſo that the ground towards Lucca being mounted, the water could not enter, and the ditch whereby the water ſhould paſſe being broken, cauſed the riuer to reuert towards the plaine, by meane whereof the Campe was forced to remoue, and could not approch the towne. This enterpriſe, by meanes aforeſaid preuented, the tenne newly elected, ſent Giouanni Guicciardini for their Generall. He, with all ſpeede poſsible, beſieged the Cittie. The Lord thereof, finding himſelfe enuironed with enemies, and encouraged by Anthonio del Roſſo (who there remained as Embaſſador for the Saneſi) ſent vnto the Duke of Milan Saluestro Trenta, and Lodouico Bonuiſi. They in the behalfe of their Lord,The Luccheſi pray aide of the Duke of Milan. deſired the Dukes aide, but finding him cold, ſecretly deſired him to graunt them ſouldiers, and in recompence thereof, they promiſed to deliuer into his hands their Lord, with the poſſeſsion of their Cittie: Aſſuring him, that if hee did not accept this offer, their Lord would giue the Towne to the Florentines, who with great promiſes, required to haue it at his hand.Franceſco Sforſa ſent to relieue Lucca. The feare which the Duke conceaued thereof, cauſed him to lay aſide all reſpects: and gaue order, that the Earle Franceſco Sforza, his chiefe Captaine, ſhould openly aske him leaue to make a iourney to the Kingdome of Napoli. Which being obteined, he with his forces, went vnto Lucca, although that he knewe the practiſe was miſtruſted, and that the Florentines had ſent to the Earle Boccacino Alamanni their friend, to preuent it. The Earle Franceſco being arriued at Lucca, the Florentines retired their Campe to Librafatta, and the Earle preſently beſieged Peſcia, where Pagolo da Diacetto was Gouernor: who being rather counſelled by feare, then any other paſsion, fled vnto Pistoia. And if that towne had not bene by Giouanni Malauolti defended, it had bene preſently loſt. The Earle then after one aſſault retired thence, and ſurprized Borgo a Buggiano, and burned Stiliano, a Caſtell neere thereunto. The Florentines ſeeing theſe ruines, reſorted vnto thoſe helpes which oftentimes had before ſaued them: well knowing, that againſt mercinarie ſouldiers, when force preuaileth not, corruption may: and therefore proffered vnto the Earle certaine money, to the end he ſhould not onely depart, but alſo deliuer the towne into their hands. The Earle ſuppoſing that more money could not be had of the Luccheſi, was contented to take of thoſe that could giue it. Wherefore he concluded with the Florentines, not to deliuer them Lucca, (becauſe with his honeſtie he could not ſo do) but ſo ſoone as he ſhould receiue fiftie thouſand duckets, he would abandon the enterprice. This bargaine being made, to the end the people of Lucca might excuſe him to the Duke, he practiſed with them to driue out their Lord. At that time (as is before ſaid) Antonio Roſſo Embaſſador of Siena was at Lucca.
               Pagolo Lord of Lucca depoſed. He with the authoritie of the Earle, practiſed with the Citizens the deſtruction of Pagolo. The chiefe of this conſpiracie were Piero Cennanni, and Giouanni da Chiuizano. The Earle was lodged without the towne by the Riuer Scirchio, and with him Lanzilao the ſonne of Pagolo. The conſpirators being in number fortie, all armed, went vnto Pagolo, who ſeeing them, demaunded the cauſe of their comming. To whome Piero Cennanni anſwered, that they had bene gouerned by him till their enemies beſieged them with ſword and famine, and therefore they were now determined from that time forward, to gouerne themſelues. Therewith they required the keyes of the Citie, and the treaſure. Pagolo anſwered, that the treaſure was conſumed, but the keyes and himſelfe alſo were at their deuotion. Then he deſired thē, that as his gouernmēt was begun and

continued without bloud, ſo without bloud, by their fauours, it might be ended. Pagolo and his ſonne, were by the Earle Franceſco brought to the Duke, and died in priſon. The departure of the Earle, deliuered Lucca from the tyrant, & the Florentines frō feare of his ſouldiers. So as then, the one prepared to defend, & the other returned to offend, electing the Earle of Vrbino to be their Generall: who againe ſtraightly beſieging the citie, enforced the Luccheſi to reſort anew vnto the Duke, who (vnder the ſame colour that hee had ſent the Earle) did now imploy in their aide Nicholo Piccinino. He, being readie to enter into Lucca, was encountred vppon the Riuer of Serchio, and in the paſſage thereof, our men receiued the ouerthrow,The Florentines defeated and the Generall with a fewe of our ſouldiers ſaued themſelues at Piſa. This misfortune greeued the whole citie, yet becauſe the enterpriſe was taken in hand by generall conſent, the people not knowing whom to blame, ſlaundered onely them that were officers of the warre, ſith they could not accuſe thoſe that were the deuiſers therof. Then they reuiued the former fault laid vpon Rinaldo, but aboue al others, they charged Giouanni Guicciardini, accuſing him for not hauing ended the warre after the departure of the Earle Franceſco: ſaying that he had bene corrupted with mony, whereof he had ſent part to his own houſe, and the reſt he had carried with him & conſumed. Theſe rumours, and theſe accuſations, proceeded ſo farre, that the Captaine of the people moued with publike voices, and alſo by the contrary partie prouoked, ſent for him. Giouanni full of offence, appeared: wherupon his kinsfolkes for their owne honour, laboured the matter ſo earneſtly, that the Captain did not proceed. The Luccheſi after the victorie, did not onelie recouer their owne townes, but alſo ſurprized all others belonging to Piſa, except Bientia, Calcinaua, Liuorno, & Librafatta. And had not a conſpiracie bene diſcouered in Piſa, the citie it ſelfe ſhould haue bene loſt. The Florentines repairing their forces, made Michelletto their Generall, who had bene trained vp by Sforza. On the contrarie ſide, the Duke followed the victorie (and the rather to moleſt the Florentines) procured that the Genoueſi, Saneſi, and the Lord of Piombino, ioyned in league for the defence of Lucca, and that Nicholo Piccinino ſhould be enterteined for their General, which was the cauſe that the practiſe was laid open. Therupon the Venetians and Florentines renewed their league, and the warre began to be openly made both in Lombardy and Toſcana. In either of which Countries, with diuerſe fortune, diuerſe conflicts followed. So that either ſide wearie,Peace betweene the Florentines, and Luccheſi. a peace was cō
               cluded, in the yeare 1343. whereby the Florentines, Luccheſi, and Saneſi, who had ſurprized the Caſtles one of the others in the warre, left them all, and euerie man repoſſeſſed his owne. During the time that this warre continued, the euill diſpoſition of factious men within the citie, beganne to worke, and Coſimo de Medici, after the death of Giouanni his father, gouerned all things concerning the Common wealth, with more care of the publike profit, and more liberalitie towards his friends, then was by his father vſed. In ſo much, as thoſe that reioyced at the death of Giouanni, ſeeing the vertue of Coſimo, became ſorie. This Coſimo was a man of excellent wiſdom, of preſence graue and gratious, greatly liberall, curteous, and ſuch a one as neuer attempted any thing either againſt any faction or the ſtate, but ſought by all meanes to pleaſure euerie man, and with his liberalitie to gaine the good wil of many Citizens. So that his good deſerts defaced thoſe that gouerned, & brought himſelf to beleeue; that he might by that meanes liue at Florence, in ſufficient ſtrength and ſecuritie. And if the ambition of his aduerſaries ſhould moue any extraordinarie occaſion to the contrarie, hee hoped both by armes and fauoure of friendes to oppreſſe them. The greateſt inſtruments to worke his greatneſſe, were Auerardo de Medici, & Puccio Pucci. Of them Auerardo with courage, and Puccio with wiſedome, procured him great reputation. For the counſell and wiſedome of Puccio, was ſo well knowne to euerie

man, that the faction of Coſimo was called not by his owne name, but by the name of Puccio. The citie notwithſtanding thus diuided, the enterpriſe of Lucca proceeded, whereby the humours of the factions, were rather encreaſed then extinguiſhed. And although the faction of Coſimo chiefly counfelled the warre, yet many of the contrarie part were appointed officers therein; as mē moſt reputed in the ſtate: which Auerardo and others not being able to remedie, ſought by all induſtrie and practiſe to ſlaunder them: and if any loſſe happened (as many did) they imputed the ſame not to fortune or force of the enemie, but want of wiſedome in the officers. This was the cauſe that the offences of Astor Gianni were eſteemed ſo great. This made Rinaldo delli Albizi offended, and without lycence to depart from his charge. This was the occaſion that the deliuerie of Giouanni Guicciardini was required at the hand of the Captaine of the people. And heereof proceeded all blames that had bene imputed to the Magiſtrates and miniſters of the warre. For the true ſlaunders were encreaſed, and the vntrue were inuented: and both the true, and not true, were of the people that loued them, not beleeued. Theſe matters and manner of proceeding extraordinarie, was well knowne to Nicholo di Vzano, and others of his faction, who had many times thought vpon remedie, but found no meanes how to deale therein: Becauſe it ſeemed to them, that the ſuffering thereof was dangerous, and forcibly to helpe it, was not eaſie. Nicholo di Vzano, was the firſt vnto whom this extraordinary way diſpleaſed. Thus the warres continuing without the citie, and theſe diſorders within:Perſwaſion of Barbadori to Nicholo Vzano againſt Coſimo di Medici. Anſwere of Nicholo Vzano to Barbadori. 
               Nicholo Barbadori, deſirous to bring Nicholo di Vzano to conſent to the oppreſsion of Coſimo, went vnto his houſe, where he found him ſadly ſet in his Cloſet, and there with the beſt reaſons he could, perſwaded him to ioyne with Rinaldo to driue Coſimo out of the Citie. Vnto whome Nicholo di Vzano anſwered, as followeth. I thinke it were better for thy houſe and our Commonweale, that all the reſt, whoſe opiniō thou herein followeſt, had their beards (as men ſaie) rather of ſiluer, then gold, as thou haſt. For then, their counſels proceeding from heads graie, groūded in experiēce, would be more aduiſed, & more profitable. It ſeemeth to me, that thoſe which deſire to baniſh Coſimo frō 
               Florence, had neede firſt of all to meaſure their forces, with his. This our ſide, you haue called by the name of Nobilitie: and the contrarie part, you haue termed the plebeial partie. If the truth anſwered to theſe names, in euerie accident, the victorie would proue doubtfull, and we haue more cauſe to feare then to hope, moued with the example of the auncient Nobilitie of this citie, which hath ben by this plebeiall ſort heretofore oppreſſed. But the greateſt cauſe of our feare is, that our ſide is diſmembred, & our aduerſaries continue whole and entyre. Firſt you muſt conſider, that Neri di Gino and Nerone de Nigi (two of our principall Citizens) be not, as you know, more friends to vs, then to them. There be alſo many families, among themſelues diuided. For diuerſe through enuie of their brethrē or their kinſmen, do disfauor vs, & fauor thē. I wil reſite vnto you the names of ſome few, the reſt you may the more eaſily remember with your ſelf. Of the houſe of Guicciardini, and amōg the ſonnes of Luigi, Piero is enemy to Giouanni, & fauoureth our aduerſaries. Tomazo & Nicholo Soderini, for the hate they haue to Franceſco their vncle, are openly proteſted our enimies. So that, if we conſider well what they are, & what we our ſelues be, I know not for what reaſō we ſhuld cal our or their partie more noble. And if it be, that we cal their part plebeial, bicauſe they are by the multitude moſt followed, their ſtate therin is the better, & ours the worſe. For whēſoeuer we ſhal come to arms, we cānot reſiſt thē. Alſo if we ſtād on our dignities, they haue bin giuē to vs by the ſtate, & by vertue therof, we haue cōtinued thē theſe 50. veres. Yet whēſoeuer we ſhal come to proofe, our weaknes wil appear, & we ſhal loſe our authority. If you haply ſay, that the iuſt occaſiō which moueth vs to this enterpriſe,

ſhall encreaſe our credit, and diminiſh theirs? Thereto I anſwere, that it behooueth this iuſt quarrel of ours to be knowne, & beleeued of others, as wel as of our ſelues: which falleth out cleane contrarie, for the occaſion alledged, is altogither builded vpon the ſuſpition we haue, that he goeth about to make himſelfe Prince of this cittie. This is the miſtruſt we haue, which others haue not, but they rather accuſe vs of that, we accuſe him. The matters which make Coſimo ſuſpected, are that he imployeth his mony to ſerue euerie occaſion, not onely to priuate vſes, but alſo to the publike affaires: and that as well to the Florentines, as the Captaines and Leaders. The cauſe why he doth fauoure this, and that Cittizen, hauing need of authoritie, is for that his credit with the multitude, hath aduaunced this and that friend, to great honours. Therefore it behoueth you to alledge the reaſons why hee ſhould be expulſed. Becauſe he is charitable, friendly, liberall, and loued of all men? And now tel me I pray you, what lawe inhibiteth, blameth, or condemneth men for their charitie, their liberalitie, and their loue? And albeit theſe be meanes for him to aſpire, yet are they not ſo taken, neither are wee of credite inough to make them ſo to bee thought. For our proceedings haue wrought our diſcredit, and our cittie (naturally diſpoſed to diuiſion, and liuing alwaies in corruption) cannot giue eare to ſuch accuſations. But admit you could expulſe him, which (hauing a Senate for the purpoſe may eaſily come to paſſe): yet how can ye deuiſe, that he hauing in the citie ſo many friends ſtudying for his reurne, ſhould not be reuoked? This I think impoſsible, becauſe his friends being many, and he (hauing loue vniuerſal) you cannot aſſure him. The more of his chiefe friends you labour to baniſh, the more enemies you winne to your ſelues. So that within ſhort ſpace he ſhall be returned, and you haue gained thus much, that a good man he was baniſhed, and returned an euil man: becauſe his nature ſhall be corrupted by thoſe, that will labour his reuocation. To whom being made beholding, he may not oppoſe himſelfe, and if you would put him to death, by order of Magiſtrates, you could neuer procure it: becauſe his riches, and our corruptible nature, would aſſuredly ſaue him. Yet admit he were dead, or baniſhed neuer to returne? I ſee not what is gotten to our Common weale: for though it be thereby deliuered of Coſimo, it becommeth ſubiect to Rinaldo, and I am one of thoſe, who wiſh, that no Citizen ſhould ſurpaſſe an other in power and authoritie. But if any of theſe two ſhould preuaile, I know not for what cauſe I ought to loue Rinaldo more then Coſimo. Neither will I ſay more, then I pray God to defend, that any Citizen ſhould aſpire to be Prince of this citie. And though our ſinnes haue merited ſuch a plague, yet God forbid we ſhould obey him. Do not therefore perſwade an enterpriſe, which in euerie reſpect is dangerous, nor thinke that you (accompanied with a fewe) can withſtand the will of many. For all theſe Citizens partly through ignorance, and partly of their lewdneſſe, be prepared to make ſale of the Common weale: and fortune is ſo friendly vnto them, as they haue alreadie founde a chapman. Be therefore pleaſed to follow my counſell: liue modeſtly, and ſo ſhall you find cauſe, as well to ſuſpect ſome of our ſide for enemies to the libertie, as thoſe of the contrarie: and when any troubles happen being neutrall, you ſhall be to both acceptable. So ſhall you helpe your ſelfe, and not hinder your country. Theſe words did ſomewhat appeaſe the minde of Barbadoro: and the citie continued quiet, during the war of Lucca. But the peace made, and Nicholo da Vzano dead, the cittie remained both without warre and order. By meane whereof, euill humours grew, and Rinaldo thinking himſelfe to be onely Prince, ceaſed not to entreate, and perſwade all thoſe Citizens (whom he thought likely to be Genfalonieri) to arme themſelues for the defence of their country, againſt that man, who through the lewdneſſe of a few, & the ignorance of many, ſhould of neceſsitie bring the ſame to ſeruitude. This courſe holden

by Rinaldo, and the contrarie laboured by the aduerſe part, filled the citie with ſuſpition: and at the election of euerie Magiſtrate, the one againſt the other partie, publikely murmured, & at the election of the Senators, all the citie was in open vproare. Euerie matter brought before the Magiſtrates (how litle ſoeuer it were) occaſioned a mutinie. All ſecret matters were laide open; good and euill, were fauoured & diſfauoured: good men, and euill men, equally moleſted; and no Magiſtrate could execute his office. Florence remaining in this confuſion, and Rinaldo labouring to oppreſſe the greatneſſe of Coſimo: knowing that Barnardo Guadagni, was likely to be elected Gonfaloniere, paide his debts, to the end, that ſuch mony as he owed to the ſtate, ſhould not be a meane, to keepe him from that dignitie. The Senators being choſen, (and fortune fauouring our diſcords:) it came to paſſe, that Barnardo was choſen Gonfaloniere, to ſit in that office, during the two moneths of September and October. Him preſently Rinaldo viſited, and told him how greatly the Nobilitie reioyced for his being aſpired to that honour, which for his vertue he deſerued: and therfore required him, ſo to behaue himſelfe in the office, that their reioycing ſhould not be in vaine. Then he laid before him, the perils which proceeded of faction, & that there was no other remedie to vnite the citie, but the oppreſsion of Coſimo: becauſe hee, with the loue which his exceeding riches had gained him, held others downe, and aſpired to make himſelfe Prince. It were therfore conuenient, for remedie of ſo great a miſchiefe, that the people ſhould be aſſembled in the Market place: And by vertue of the Gonfaloniere the citie reſtored to libertie. He moreouer declared, how Salueſtro de Medici, could without iuſtice bridle the greatneſſe of the Guelfi, vnto whome by the bloud of their aunceſtors loſt in that quarrell, the gouernment to them apperteined. And if he iniuſtly could do that againſt ſo many, then might Barnardo with iuſtice do the ſame, againſt one alone. Then he perſwaded him not to feare any man, becauſe his friends would be readie armed to aſsiſt him. Of the multitude which ſo greatly honoured Coſimo, none account was to be made, for Coſimo ſhould haue by their fauours none other good, then had Georgio Scali. Neither ſhould he feare his riches, for they being come to the hands of the Senators, ſhould be theirs. And in concluſion ſaid, that this action ſhould make the ſtate vnited, and him famous. To theſe perſwaſions, Barnardo briefly anſwered; how he thought neceſſary to do according to that counſel. And bicauſe the time was to be imploied rather in actiō, then words, he would preſently prepare forces, to be readie, ſo ſoone as his companions could be perſwaded to the enterpriſe. Barnardo being placed in office, and hauing woon his companions, & counſelled with Rinaldo, ſent for Coſimo: who, albeit he were otherwiſe aduiſed, did appeare, truſting rather to his owne innocencie, then the mercie of the Senators. So ſoone as Coſimo was entered the Pallace, Rinaldo with many others armed, came to the Market place, and there met with the reſt of that faction. Then the Senators cauſed the people to be called, and made a Balia of two hundreth men, to reforme the ſtate of the citie: which Balia, with ſuch ſpeed as poſsibly they could, conſulted vpon the reformation, and alſo of the life and death of Coſimo. Many perſwaded he ſhould be baniſhed,Coſimo di Medici cited & committed. others would haue him put to death, and many alſo ſaid nothing, either for the compaſsion they tooke of the man, or for the fear of them ſelues. This diuerſitie of opinions, did procure that nothing was cōcluded. In a Tower of the Pallace called Albergettino, Coſimo was kept priſoner vnder the guard of Federigo Malauolti. From which place, Coſimo hearing them talke, and perceiuing the noyſe of armed men in the Market place, togither with the often ringing of the Bell to the Balia, he ſtood in great ſuſpition of his life: and feared alſo, leaſt his particuler enemies would extraordinaly murther him. For theſe reſpects, during the ſpace of foure dayes, he would eate nothing, but one litle peece of bread: which Federigo
               
perceiuing, ſaide vnto him. Coſimo, I ſee thou feareſt to be poyſoned, and therefore would firſt famiſh thy ſelfe. But thou doeſt me great diſhonor, to thinke that I wold put my hand to ſo wicked a deede. I ſurely beleeue, that thou art not to die for this matter, hauing ſo good friends both within & without the Pallace. But if it be ment, that thy life ſhall be taken from thee, be ſure, they ſhould finde other miniſters then me, to performe that deed. For I will not imbrew my hands in the bloud of any man, and chiefly in thine, who neuer offended me. Be therefore of good cheare, eate thy meate, and preſerue thy life to the comfort of thy friends and country, and becauſe thou ſhalt miſtruſt the leſſe, I my ſelfe will eate part of thoſe meates which be ſet before thee. Theſe words comforted Coſimo exceedingly, and with teares in his eyes, he embraced and kiſſed Federigo; thanking him moſt heartily for his friendly and pitious dealing: offering to be thankfull whenſoeuer occaſion ſhould be preſented. Thus Coſimo ſomewhat comforted, and his cauſe diſputed among the Citizens: It happened, that Federigo brought with him to ſupper a friend of the Gonfalonieries, called Farganaccio, a man verie wittie, and pleaſantly diſpoſed. The ſupper being almoſt ended, Coſimo hoping to helpe himſelfe by this mans preſence (for he was with him well acquainted) made ſignes to Federigo to go aſide: who knowing the occaſion, fained to go for ſomething that wanted. And leauing them alone, Coſimo after a fewe friendly words ſpoken to Farganaccio, gaue him a token, and ſent him to the Hoſpital of Santa Maria Nuoua, for a thouſand and one hundreth crownes: wherof one hundreth to be kept to his owne vſe, the other to beliuered to the Gonfaloniere. Farganaccio performed his Commiſsion, the mony was paide: and by vertue thereof,Coſimo di Medici baniſhed. 
               Barnardo became more fauourable. So as, then it was ordered, that Coſimo ſhould be onely confined to Padoa, contrary to the expectation of Rinaldo, that deſired his life. Auerardo & many others of the houſe of Medici were alſo baniſhed; and with them Puccio, and Giouanni Pucci. Alſo to terrifie others that were offended with the exile of Coſimo, they gaue Commiſsion of Balia, to the Eight of the Guard, and the Captaine of the people. After which order taken, Coſimo vpon the third of October, in the yeare 1433. came before the Senators, who pronounced his baniſhment, and perſwaded him to obey the ſame: Or if he would refuſe, more ſeueritie would be vſed, both vnto his perſon and goods. Coſimo with chearfull countenance receiued his confinement, proteſting that whither ſo euer the Senate ſhould pleaſe to ſend him, hee was moſt willing to obey. Humbly deſiring, that as they had preſerued his life, ſo it might pleaſe them to defend him: for he was giuen to vnderſtand of many, that watched in the Market place to haue his bloud. He ſaid moreouer, that himſelfe and his ſubſtance ſhould be euer at the commandement of the citie, the people, and their Lordſhips. The Gonfaloniere did comfort him, and kept him in the Pallace till night was come. There he ſupped, & after brought him to his houſe: which done, cauſed him to be accompanied with many armed men, & by them was cōducted to the cōfines. Whereſoeuer Coſimo paſſed, he was honourably receiued, and by the Venetians publikely viſited, not as baniſhed, but as a man in great authoritie. Florence thus depriued of ſo worthie a Citizen, ſo vniuerſally loued, euerie man was diſmaid, and as wel they that had the victorie, as thoſe that were victored, did feare. Rinaldo miſtruſting future miſaduenture, to ſerue his owne turne and his friends, aſſembled many Citizens, and ſaid to them, that he now ſaw their ruine at hand, becauſe they were with faire words, teares, & the enemies mony vanquiſhed: forgetting that ſhortly themſelues ſhould be forced to entreate and weepe, when their ſutes ſhall not be heard, and of their teares no man would take compaſsion. Alſo touching the monies receiued, the ſame muſt be repaid, with torments, death, & exile, inſtead of vſurie. Moreouer, that it had bin better for themſelues to be dead, then ſuffer Coſimo to paſſe with

life; and leaue his friends in Florence. Becauſe great perſonages ſhould either not be touched, or being, muſt be made ſure from taking reuenge. No other remedie therefore remained, but to fortifie themſelues within the citie: to the end, that the enemies taking knowledge thereof (as eaſily they will) we may reſiſt them with armes, ſith by order and lawe we could not auoyd them. The remedie of all this was (that which long before had bene remembred); to recouer the great men, reſtoring & giuing to them all the honors of the citie, making our ſelues ſtrong with that faction: becauſe the aduerſaries were ſtrengthned by the multitude. By this means their partie ſhould be knowne of how great force, vertue, courage, and credite it were. Alledging alſo, that if this laſt and trueſt refuge were not put in proofe, he ſawe not by what other meane, the ſtate might be among ſo many enemies preſerued. And therefore he beheld at hand, a deſtruction of them and their Citie. To anſwer this ſpeech, Mariotto Baldouineti one of the company oppoſed himſelfe, and ſaid; that the pride and inſupportable nature of the Nobilitie was ſuch, that it were no wiſedome to ſubmit themſelues to a tyrannie certain, to eſchue the doubtfull perils of the multitude. Rinaldo ſeeing his counſell not heard, lamented the misfortune of himſelfe and his friends, imputing euerie thing rather to the heauens that ſo would haue it, then to the ignorance and blindneſſe of men. The matter thus depending, without any neceſſarie prouiſion made, a letter was found, written by Agnolo Acciaiuoli to Coſimo, wherein he aduertiſed the diſpoſition of the citie towards him, and wiſhed him to moue ſome warre, making Nero di Gino his friend. For hee thought the Cittie had much need of mony, and no way knowne that would ſupplie that want. By occaſion wherof, the deſire of his return, would be greatly reuiued in the Citizens minds. And if Neri ſhould fall from Rinaldo, then that ſide would become ſo weak, as could not defend it ſelfe. This letter come to the handes of the Magiſtrates, was the cauſe that Agnolo was taken, and ſent to exile. By this example, ſome part of that humour which fauoured Coſimo, was cooled. The yeare of Coſimo his baniſhment expired, & the end of Auguſt at hand, in the yere 1430. Nicholo di Cocco was choſen Gonfaloniere for the two moneths next following, and with him eight Senators, all friends to Coſimo. So as, that Senate terrified Rinaldo, & all his followers. Alſo becauſe the cuſtome was, that the Senators elected, ſhould three dayes before they enter their office, remaine as priuate men at home: within that time, Rinaldo conferred with the chiefe of his faction, and ſhewed them their certaine, and approching perill: the remedie whereof was, to take armes, and by force procure that Donato Velluti (who was yet Gonfaloniere) ſhould aſſemble the people in the Market place, call a new Balia, depriue the new Senators of their office, creating a new Senate for their purpoſe, & exchaunging the old Squittini, put in new, with the names of their friends. This deuiſe was by many thought ſecure and neceſſarie. Of others, it was holden ouer violent, and dangerous. Among thoſe that diſallowed thereof, was Palla Strozzi, who being a man indeed quietly diſpoſed, gentle, curteous, & inclined rather to learning, then apt to encounter a faction, or oppoſe himſelfe to ciuill diſorder: ſaid, that enterpriſes hauing in them either craft or courage, do ſeeme at the beginning eaſie, but afterwards they prooue hard in their proceeding, and in the end daungerous. Hee alſo beleeued, that the feare of new warres abroad, begun by the Duke in Romagna, neare to our confines, ſhould be a meane, that the Senators would be more mindfull of them, then of theſe diſcords at home. But if it were ſeene, that they would change the gouernment, the ſame could not be with ſuch ſpeed, but armes might be taken, and all things done neceſſarie for defence of the publike ſtate. And this being performed vpon neceſsitie, and not ſooner, ſhould be the leſſe maruelled at of the people, and with leſſe reproach to themſelues. For theſe reaſons it was concluded, that the

new Senators ſhould be ſuffered to enter, and heede be taken to their proceedings; to the end that if any thing were attempted contrarie to the faction, that then euerie man ſhould take Armes and reſort to S. Pulinare, (a place neare to the Pallace) from whence they might go to performe whatſoeuer ſhould be thought neceſſary. This concluſion made, euerie man returned home. The new Senators entered their offices, and the Gonfaloniere (to giue himſelfe reputation, and terrifie the contrarie partie) condemned to priſon Donato Velluti, his predeceſſor, for hauing imploied the publike treaſure. After theſe things were done, he ſounded the minds of his companions, touching the returne of Coſimo: & finding them well diſpoſed, conſulted with all thoſe whom he thought to be chiefe heads of the faction of Medici. By them he was greatly incouraged: And thereupon commanded that Rinaldo (as principall man of the contrary faction) ſhould be ſent for. After this commandement giuen, Rinaldo thought good no longer to protract time, but came from his houſe followed with many armed men, & with him ioyned preſently Ridolpho Peruzzi,
               Rinaldo and his friends armed againſt the Medici. & Nicholo Barbadori. Amongſt them were alſo diuerſe other Citizens, and many ſouldiers, who at that time hapned to be in Florence without pay. All which company, according to the order takē, reſorted to S. Pulinare, & there ſtaied. Palla Strozzi had alſo aſſembled much company, but came not out: the like did alſo Giouanni Guicciardini. For which ſo doing, Rinaldo ſent to ſollicite them, & reproue them of their delaie. Giouanni anſwered, that hee made warre inough to the enemie, if by his tarrying at home, he could holde Piero his brother from going out, to reſcue the Pallace. Palla after manie meſſages ſent vnto him, came on horſe backe to S. Pulinare, with two onely foote men, and himſelfe, vnarmed. And Rinaldo ſeeing him, went towards him, and reproued him greatly of negligence, ſaying that hee ſhewed himſelfe thereby a man either of ſmall troth, or little courage. Both which reproachfull faultes, a man of that ſort, whereof he was holden, ought to eſchue. And if happily he beleeued, for not performing his promiſe, that the enemie (hauing victorie) would pardon either his life or his exile, therein he was deceiued. As for himſelfe, if any miſfortune happened, yet this content of minde ſhould remaine, that before the perill, hee was not diſmaid, and the perill being come, hee was not afraid. But he (and ſuch others as he was) ſhould double their owne diſcontentments, knowing they had three times betraied their Countrey. Firſt when they ſaued Coſimo, next when they refuſed his counſell, and laſt for not comming in Armes, according to appointment. To theſe ſpeeches, Palla anſwered not any thing that was heard of thoſe that were there, but murmuring, turned his horſe, and went home. The Senators hearing that Rinaldo and his followers were in Armes, and ſeeing themſelues abandoned, ſhut the Pallace gates, and as amazed, knew not what to doo. But Rinaldo delaying his going thither, attending for forces which came not, loſt the occaſion of victorie, and gaue courage to the Senators to make prouiſion, and to other Cittizens to goe vnto them, and aduiſe them how matters might bee appeaſed. Then ſome friendes to the Senators leaſt ſuſpected, went vnto Rinaldo, and ſaide, that the Senate knew no cauſe of theſe motions, and that they had no intent to offend him, or if it were for Coſimo, there was no meaning of his reuocation. If therefore theſe were the occaſions of their ſuſpition, they might aſſure themſelues, come to their Pallace, be welcome, and haue their demaunds graunted. Theſe words could not alter the reſolution of Rinaldo, but ſaid that hee would make the Senators priuate men, and by that meanes bee aſſured: which done, reforme the Cittie to the benefite of all men. But it euer commeth to paſſe, that amongſt thoſe whoſe authoritie is equall, and their opinions diuerſe, for the moſte parte, nothing is well reſolued. Ridolpho

Peruzzi moued with the words of thoſe Citizens, ſaid, that for his owne part, hee ſought not further, then that Coſimo might no more return, which being granted, he thought the victorie ſufficient. Neither deſired he in hope of more, to fill the Citie with bloud, and therefore he would obey the Senate. Then went he to the Pallace, where he was ioyfully receiued. Thus the ſtaie of Rinaldo at S. Pullinare, the fainte heart of Palla, and the departure of Ridolpho, had vtterly ouerthrowne the enterpriſe: and the mindes of thoſe Cittizens that followed Rinaldo, beganne to faile of their wonted courage, whereunto the authoritie of the Pope was ioyned. For at this time, Pope Eugenio being expulſed Rome, happened to be in Florence, where he heard of theſe tumults, and thought it his office to be a meane to pacifie the Cittie.Pope Eugenio laboureth a Pacificat
                     •
                  on in Florence. And therefore ſent Giouanni Vittelleſchi, Patriarke and friend to Rinaldo, to deſire, that hee would come vnto him, for hee intended to imploy all his credite and authoritie to the Senate, to make him contented and aſſured, without bloud or daunger to the Cittie. Rinaldo perſwaded by the meſſage of his friend, went to Santa Maria Nouella, where the Pope laie, and was followed with all thoſe whome hee had armed. To him the Pope declared, what credite the Senate had giuen him, which was, to determine all controuerſies, and order all matters as ſhould by him bee thought good. Rinaldo hauing made proofe of the coldneſſe of Palla, and the inconſtancie of Ridolpho Peruzzi, and wanting a better ſhift, yeelded himſelfe into the Popes hands, hoping his authoritie ſhould haue continued. Thereuppon the Pope cauſed knowledge to be giuen to Nicholo Barbadori, and the reſt, who attended without, that they ſhould laie downe their Armes: becauſe Rinaldo remained with him, for the concluding a peace with the Senatours. Which wordes reſolued euerie man, and they diſarmed themſelues. The Senators ſeeing their aduerſaries diſarmed, practiſed a peace by mediation of the Pope, and in the meane time ſent ſecretly to Pistoia, for certaine bandes of foote men, whome (accompanied with all their men at Armes) they ſuffered in the night to enter the Cittie: and poſſeſsing the ſtrongeſt places, and calling the people to the Market place, created there a new Balia, which at the firſt aſſembly,Coſimo reuoked, and Rinaldo with others, confined. determined the reuocation of Coſimo, with all others that were baniſhed. And of the contrary faction, they confined Rinaldo delli Albizi, Ridolfo Peruzzi, Nicholo Barbadori, Palla Strozzi, and many other Cittizens, that the number of them was ſuch, as that fewe Townes of Italy (and many other places alſo) but were full of them. By this accident the Citie of Florence became depriued, not onely of honeſt men, but alſo of riches and induſtry. The Pope ſeeing the ruine of thoſe men, who at his requeſt had laide downe Armes, became greatly diſcōtented, lamenting with Rinaldo for the iniury to him done vnder his credit, perſwading him to patience,The words of Rinaldo at his baniſhment. and hope of better fortune. To whome Rinaldo anſwered; the ſmall credit which they gaue me, who ought to haue beleeued me, and the ouermuch credite which I haue giuen to you, hath vtterly vndone me, and my Countrey. But I complaine more of my ſelfe then anie others, for beleeuing, that you being baniſhed your Countrey, could maintaine mee, in mine. Of Fortunes dalliances I haue had experience inough, and ſith I little truſted to proſperitie, mine aduerſitie ſhall the leſſe offend mee, for I knowe well, that (Fortune beeing ſo pleaſed) can againe fauoure mee. But if ſhee neuer ſo do, I ſhall euer care little, to liue in that Cittie, where the lawes are of leſſe authoritie, then men. Becauſe that Countrey is to be defired, where the wealth and friends of men may be with ſecuritie enioyed, and not that, where mens goods may bee taken from them, and their friendes (for feare to looſe theyr owne) in greateſt neceſsitie forſake them. It was alſo euer leſſe greeuous to good

and wiſe men, to heare the miſeries of their Countrey, then with their owne eyes to ſee them. And it is alſo thought a thing more glorious, to be reputed an honourable Rebel, then a ſlauiſh Citizen. After this ſpeech made, being much troubled in mind, he tooke leaue of the Pope, finding great fault with his Councels, and the coldneſſe of his friends, and ſo went towards his exile. Coſimo on the other ſide, hauing receiued knowledge of his reſtitution, returned to Florence, and was there receiued, with no leſſe pompe, then is vſed to other Citizens, who after victorie, came home in tryumph. So great was the Concourſe of people; ſo great the demonſtration of their beneuolence towards him, at this his returne from baniſhment, as the Cittizens willingly ſaluted him by name of the peoples Benefactor, and Father of the Country.
            The ende of the fourth Booke.
         
         
            
               
                  royal blazon or coat of arms
               
            
            THE FIFT BOOKE.
            
               ALL Countries in their alterations, doo moſt commonly chaunge from order to diſorder, and from diſorder to order againe. For nature hauing made all worldly thinges variable, ſo ſoone as they haue atteined their vttermoſt perfection and height, doo of force deſcend: and being come downe ſo low, as lower they cannot, of neceſsitie muſt aſcend. So that from good they deſcended to euill, and from euill aſcend to good. Warre begetteth quiet, quiet occaſioneth idleneſſe, Idleneſſe breedeth diſorder, Diſorder maketh ruine: Likewiſe of ruine groweth order, of order vertue, and of vertue, glorie with good fortune. It hath bene therefore by wiſe men obſerued, that learning followeth Armes, and in all Cities and Countries, Captaines were before Philoſophers. For good and well gouerned Armes, hauing wonne victorie, of that victorie followeth quiet. And ſurely the courage of warlike mindes cannot with a more honeſt idleneſſe, then the ſtudie of Letters, be corrupted; nor idleneſſe by anie greater or more perillous craft enter Cities well gouerned: which Cato (at ſuch time as Diogenes and Carneades Philoſophers, were ſent Embaſſadours from Athens to the Senate) did well obſerue. For hee ſeeing with what admiration the youth beganne to follow them, and knowing the inconueniences which might of that honeſt idleneſſe enſue, prouided that no Philoſopher, might after be receiued into Rome. Euery country therefore by theſe meanes doth come to decaie. Wherewith men being beaten and weary of troubles, returne (as is beforeſaid) to order, if by extraordinarie force

they be not vtterly ruined. Theſe occaſions, by vertue of the auncient Toſcani and Romanes did make Italy, ſometimes happie, and ſometimes miſerable. And albeit ſince that time, nothing hath bene builded vppon the Romane ruines comparable to the olde, (as might with great glorie haue bene vnder the gouernment of a vertuous Prince). Yet in ſome newe Citties ſo much vertue is growne vp (among the Romane ſpoyles) that although no one hath atteined ſuch power as to commaund the reſt, yet became they ſo well ordered and lincked togither, as they deliuered and defended themſelues from the barbarous people. Of this number was the Florentines gouernment, (although of leſſe Empire) yet in authoritie and power not inferiour to anie, but rather by inhabiting the middeſt of Italy, being rich and readie to offend, either happily they anſwered the warres made againſt them, or elſe gaue the victorie to thoſe in whoſe fauoure they imployed their forces. By the vertue of theſe principallities, although no times of quiet, and long peace were, yet were they not by terrour of warre much perillous. For we cannot account that peace, where one ſtate oftentimes with Armes aſſayleth the other. Neither can that be called warre, where men be not ſlaine, Citties not ſacked, nor principallities deſtroyed. For the warres of that time became ſo cold, as they were begunne without feare, continued without perill, and ended without loſſe. Inſomuch, as that vertue which in other Countries was wont by long peace to be extinguiſhed, was in Italy by their owne cowardice quenched, as will plainly appeare, by that we will hereafter declare from the 1434. till the 94. Whereby we may ſee, how at length a way was againe opened for the entrie of ſtraungers, and Italy became to them ſubiect. And albeit the actions of our Princes both abroad and at home, are not (as thoſe of auncient time were) to be read and maruelled at for their vertue and greatneſſe: yet for ſome other quallities, to be with no leſſe admiration conſidered, ſeeing ſo many Noble people, were by ſo fewe and euill trained ſouldiers kept in awe. And if in declaration of things happened in this badde world, we ſhall not ſet downe the courage of anie ſouldier, the vertue of anie Captaine, or the loue of anie Cittizen towards his Countrey: yet ſhall you finde, what cunning and Art, the Princes, the Souldiers, and chiefe Gouernours in Common weales (to maintaine the reputation they did not deſerue) haue vſed: which percaſe will prooue not leſſe worthie, and profitable to be knowne, then thoſe of moſt auncient time. For as thoſe do ſtirre vp Noble mindes to follow them: So theſe, to eſchue their lewdneſſe and lacke of vertue, wil prouoke vs. In thoſe dayes Italy was brought to ſuch condition, by them that there commaunded: that whenſoeuer through reconciliation of the Princes a peace was made; ſhortly after, (by ſuch as had weapons in hand) it was againe diſturbed. So that neither by the warres ended, was gotten glorie, nor by the peace, quiet. The peace being concluded betweene the Duke of Milan, and thoſe of the League, in the yeare 1433. the ſouldiers deſiring ſtill to exerciſe the warre, made an enterpriſe againſt the Church. There were at that time in Italy, two ſorts of ſouldiers, the one trained vnder Braccio,
               Two ſorts of ſouldiers in Italy. 1433. the other vnder Sforza. Of theſe, the chiefe Captain was the Earle Franceſco ſonne of Sforza. Of the other, Nicholo Piccinino, and Nicholo Fortibraccio were the Leaders. To theſe two Sects, all the other Italian ſouldiers ioyned themſelues. Yet were the followers of Sforza of moſt reputation, as well for the vertue of the Earle, as the promiſe to him made by the Duke,The Duke of Milās daughter offered to Fran. Sforza. of Bianca his naturall daughter: which alliance, gained him exceeding eſtimation. Both theſe Sects of ſouldiers, after the peace of Lombardy (for diuerſe occaſions) aſſaulted the Pope Eugenio. Nicholo Fortibraccio was thereto moued by the old diſpleaſure borne to the Church, by Braccio. And the Earle, by his own ambitiō. Inſomuch as Nicholo aſſaulted Rome: & the Earle poſſeſſed

himſelfe, of La Marca. The Romanes to eſchue the warres, baniſhed Eugenio from Rome, who (with perill and difficultie eſcaped) came vnto Florence. Where conſidering of the danger wherin he was, and ſeeing himſelfe by thoſe Princes abandoned, and that they refuſed to take armes in hand for him, by whoſe meane at their owne deſire, they had bene lately diſarmed, compounded with the Earle, and granted him the principallitie of La Marca:
               The Pope aſſaulted by Fran. Sforza. notwithſtanding that hee had not onely before taken that countrey from him, but alſo vſed contempt in the letters which hee wrote to his Agents for the diuiſion of the land, writing thus; Girifalco nostro Firmiano, Inuito Petro & Paulo. Neither was he contented with the graunt of theſe townes, but hee would be alſo Gonfaloniere of the Church. All which was graunted: So much did Pope Eugenio, feare more a daungerous warre, then a diſhonourable peace. Thus the Earle become friend to the Pope, did perſecute Nicholo Fortibraccio, and between them in the territorie of the Church, in diuers moneths, many accidents happened, more to the preiudice of the Pope, and his ſubiects, then of them that made the war. In ſo much as by the Duke of Milan, his mediation, it was concluded, that the one, and the other of them, ſhould remaine Princes in the Townes belonging to the Church. This warre quenched at Rome, was kindled in Romagna by Babtista Canneto, who in Bologna had ſlaine certaine of the houſe of Grifoni, & driuen from thence the Popes Gouernour, with ſome other enemies. Then to hold that ſtate by force, hee deſired aide of Philippo. And the Pope to be reuenged of this iniurie, required helpe of the Venetians and Florentines.
               VVarre betweene the Pope and the Duke of Milan. The one and the other of them were ayded. So that within ſhort ſpace, two great Armies were come into Romagna. The Generall for Philippo, was Nicholo Piccinino. The Venetian Forces, and the Florentines, were ledde by Gatamelata, and Nicholo de Tolentino. Neare vnto Imola, they ioyned battaile, wherein the Venetians and Florentines were ouerthrowne: and Nicholo de Tolentino ſent priſoner vnto the Duke, where either by poyſon, or his owne ſorrow for the loſſe receiued, within fewe dayes hee died. The Duke after this victorie, either becauſe hee was weake; or beleeued that the league after this ouerthr
                  •
               w would ſtande quiet, followed no further his fortune; but gaue the Pope and his confederates time to vnite themſelues anew:Fran. S
                     •
                  o
                     •
                  za, Generall of the League. who elected for their Captaine the Earle Franceſco; with determination to remoue Nicholo Fortibraccio from the Townes belonging to the Church; and by that meanes, and the warres which in fauoure of the Pope they had begunne. The Romanes ſeeing the Pope ſtrong in the field, ſought his friendſhip, and receiued a Gouernour from him. Nicholo Fortibraccio among other townes, poſſeſſed Tibali, Montifiaſconi the Cittie of Castello and Aſceſi. Into this towne Nicholo (not being able to keepe the field) fled. There the Earle beſieged him, and the ſiege continuing long (for Nicholo manfully defended himſelfe) the Duke thought neceſſarie either to impeach the League of that victorie, or elſe after the ſame, to take order for the defence of his owne. He therefore, to remoue the Earle from the ſiege, commaunded Nicholo Piccinino to goe into Toſcana, by the way of Romagna. Whereupon the League iudging it more neceſſarie to defend Toſcana, then ſurprize Aſceſi, gaue order to the Earle, not to ſuffer the paſſage of Nicholo, who was alreadie with his Armie arriued at Furli. The Earle on the other ſide ma
                  •
               ched with his ſouldiers, and came to Secena, recommending vnto Lione his brother, the warre of La Marca, and his other lands, during the time that Piccinino ſhould paſſe. And while Piccinino laboured to paſſe, and the Earle impeached him, Nicholo Fortibraccio aſſaulted Lione, with great honour tooke him, and ſpoyled his ſouldiers. Alſo following this victorie, he ſurprized many townes in La Marca. This proceeding greatly greeued the Earle, and ſuppoſing all his Countries to be loſt, hee left

part of his armie to make warre vpon Piccinino: with the reſt he marched towardes Fortibraccio, whom he aſſaulted and vanquiſhed. In that ouerthrow, Fortibraccio remained a priſoner, and was ſo ſore hurt, that thereof he died. This victorie reſtored vnto the Pope all thoſe townes, which by Fortibraccio had bene taken from him, and brought the Duke of Milan to demaund peace,Peace betweene the League and the Duke. which by the mediation of Nicholo de Este Marqueſſe of Farrara, was concluded. Whereby the townes ſurprized by the Duke in Romagna, were reſtored to the church: and the ſouldiers belonging to the Duke, returned to Lombardy. Alſo Baptista de Canneto (as it happeneth to all others, who by force or vertue of other men poſſeſſe any ſtate) ſo ſoone as the Dukes ſouldiers were departed from Romagna, (his own power and vertue not being able to defend him in Bologna) fled away. Whither Antonio Benteuogli, chiefe of the contrarie faction, preſently returned. All theſe things chanced during the exile of Coſimo: after whoſe returne, theſe who had ſought his reuocation, with diuerſe other Cittizens before iniured, thought without reſpect, to aſſure themſelues of the gouernment. And the Senate which ſucceeded, in the moneths of Nouember and December, not contented with that which their predeceſſours had done in fauour of their faction, prolonged & changed the time and places of thoſe that were baniſhed, and confined many others anew. Alſo diuerſe Citizens were in that time hindered, not only by the humour of faction, but alſo in reſpect of their riches, their parentage, and priuate friendſhip. And if this proſcription of bloud had bene continued, it would haue bin like vnto that of Octauiano, or Silla, being partly alſo imbrued in bloud. For Antonio ſonne of Barnardo Guadagni was beheaded, and foure other Citizens (among whome was Zanoby Belfrategli, and Coſimo Barbadori. Theſe two Cittizens for hauing paſſed their confines, and remaining at Venegia, were by the Venetians (who eſteemed more the loue of Coſimo then their own honor) ſent home priſoners, & were moſt cruelly put to death. Which thing gaue great reputation to the faction of Coſimo, and much terror to the enemy, that ſo mightie a Common weale refuſed not to ſell their libertie to the Florentines. Which was thought to be done, not ſo much to gratifie Coſimo, as to exaſperate the factions in Florence, & make, by meanes of bloud, the diuiſion of our citie the more daungerous: Becauſe the Venetians found that there was nothing that ſo much hindred their greatnes, as the vniting thereof. Thus the citie being acquite both of the enemies & perſons ſuſpected to the ſtate, the gouernours ſtudying to pleaſure other people,New ordinances in Florēce. & make their own part the ſtronger, reſtored the houſe of Alberti with all other Rebels. All the great Citizens (a few except) were brought into the order of the people, & the poſſeſsions of the rebels at ſmal prices, among them ſold. Moreouer with new lawes, and orders, they ſtrengthened themſelues, making new Squittini, taking out the names of their enemies, & putting in the names of their friends. Alſo being warned by the ruine of their enemies, and iudging that it ſufficed not for the holding of the ſtate, to haue the Squittini full of their friends: they alſo thought good, that the Magiſtrates of life and death, ſhould be choſen of the chiefe of their faction. It was therfore required, that the makers of the new Squittini, togither with the old Senate, ſhould haue authoritie to create the new. They gaue vnto the Eight authoritie ouer life and death, and prouided that thoſe that were baniſhed, ſhould not (though their time were expired) return, vnleſſe of the Senat and the Colledges being in number 37.) were thereunto conſenting, or at the leaſt, thirtie foure of them. To write vnto thoſe that were confined, or receiue any letters from them, was forbidden. Alſo euery word, euery ſigne, & euery action that offended the Gouernours, was greeuouſly puniſhed. And if in Florence remained any ſuſpitiō, it was the Impoſitions lately impoſed: & ſo hauing driuē out their aduerſaries, or brought thē to great pouerty, aſſured themſelues of the ſtate. Alſo not to want forrein aid, but

preuent ſuch as thereby determined to offend them, they did confederate, and make league with the Pope, the Venetians, and the Duke of Milan. The ſtate of Florence reſting in theſe tearmes, Giouanna Queene of Naples dyed, making by her teſtament Rinieri de Angio, heyre of her Kingdome. At that time Alfonſo King of Aragon happened to be in Sicilia, and hauing the friendſhip of many Barrons there,VVarre between Rinieri de Angio, and King Alfonſo of Aragon. prepared himſelfe to poſſeſſe that Kingdome. The Napolitanes, and many of the Lords fauoured Rinieri. The Pope on the other ſide, would neither that Rinieri, nor Alfonſo might poſſeſſe it: but deſired that himſelfe ſhould gouerne it, by a Deputy of his owne. Yet Alfonſo being arriued in the Kingdome, was by the Duke of Seſſa receiued, and there enterteined ſome other Princes, hoping to ſurprize Capoua (which the Prince of Tarranto in the name of Alfonſo poſſeſſed) and by that meane to conſtraine the Napolitanes to yeeld to his will. For that purpoſe he ſent his Nauie to aſſault Gaietta, which was holden for the Neapolitanes. The Napolitanes then prayed ayde of Philippo, who perſwaded the Genoueſi to take that enterpriſe in hand. They not onely to ſatisfie the Duke their Prince, but alſo to ſaue the merchandize they had in Naples and Gaietta, armed a mightie Nauie. Alfonſo on the contrary ſide, vnderſtanding thereof, encreaſed his forces, and went in perſon to encounter the Genoueſi, with whom he fought neere vnto the Iſland of Pontio,
               King Alfonſo taken by the Genoueſi. and there his Nauie was vanquiſhed, himſelfe with diuerſe other Princes taken and ſent by the Genoueſi to Philippo. This victorie diſmayd all the Princes of Italy, becauſe thereby they thought he might become owner of all. But he (ſo diuerſe are the opinions of men) tooke a courſe, cleane contrary to expectation. This Alfonſo, being a man verie wiſe, ſo ſoone as he could come to the ſpeech of Philippo, tolde how greatly he deceiued himſelfe to fauour Rinieri, and diſfauour him: becauſe if Rinieri were King of Naples, he would labour with all his force to bring the Dukedome of Milan to the hands of the French King, by reaſon his ayde was at hand, his furniture of all things neceſſarie, and the way open for his reliefe. Neither could he looke for better then his owne ruine, if he made that ſtate to become French. But the contrarie would follow, if himſelfe might be Prince. For he not fearing any other enemy then the French, ſhould be enforced to loue, honour and obey him, who had the onely power to open the way to his enemies. So that although the Kingdome ſhould reſt with Alfonſo, yet the authoritie and power thereof would remaine in the hands of Philippo. Wherefore it would much more import him then himſelfe, to conſider the perill of the one, and the profit of the other, vnleſſe he deſired more to ſatisfie his fanteſie, then aſſure the ſtate. Becauſe in doing the one, he ſhould be Prince, and free, by the other (in the middeſt of two mightie enemies) either ſure to loſe the ſtate vtterly, liue alwayes in ſuſpition, or, as a ſubiect, obey them.King Alfonſo deliuered. Theſe words wrought ſo deepe in the Dukes mind, that (changing his intent) he deliuered Alfonſo, honorably returned him to Genoua, and from thence to the Kingdome. There he imbarked againe, and being arriued at Gaietta, his deliuery was knowne, and that Countrey ſodeinly ſurprized by certaine Lords his followers. The Genoueſi ſeeing, that without reſpect to them, the Duke had deliuered the King, and that he, whome they with their charge and perill had honoured, did not make them aſwell partakers of the honor in the Kings inlargement, as of the iniurie to him done, and his ouerthrow, grew greatly offended. In the Cittie of Genoua (when it liueth in libertie) there is created one head, whome they call Doge, not to be a Prince abſolute, nor to determine alone, but as chiefe to propound thoſe matters, whereof the Magiſtrates and Councels ſhould conſult. Within that Towne be many noble Families, which are ſo mightie, that with difficultie, they yeeld to the authoritie of Magiſtrates. And of them the houſes of Fregoſa and Adorna be of greateſt force.Fregoſi and Adorni.
               
From theſe, the diuiſions of that Cittie, and the cauſes of ciuill diſorders did proceed. For they many times contending for gouernment, not onely ciuilly, but alſo by armes, it falleth out, that euer the one faction is afflicted, and the other gouerneth. It alſo happeneth many times, that thoſe who are depoſed from authoritie, do pray ayde of forreine armes, and yeeld that gouernment to others, which they themſelues could not enioy. Hereof it proceedeth, that thoſe who gouerned in Lombardy, do for the moſt part commaund in Genoua, as it happened at ſuch time as Alfonſo was taken. Among the chiefe of the Genoueſi that cauſed the Cittie to be giuen into the hands of Philippo,
               Franceſco Spinola. was Franceſco Spinola, who not long after he had brought his countrey in bondage (as in like caſes it euer happeneth) became ſuſpected to the Duke. Wherewith he being diſcontent, voluntarily exiled himſelfe to Gaietta, and there chanced to be, at ſuch time as the fight by ſea was performed againſt Alfonſo. In which exploit he ſerued ſo valiantly, that he perſwaded himſelfe to haue deſerued ſo well of the Duke, as in reſpect of his ſeruice, he might (at the leaſt) liue in Genoua with ſecuritie. Yet perceiuing the Duke to continue in his ſuſpition, and fearing leaſt he beleeued, that a man who had not loued the liberty of his countrey, could not loue him, determined to try a new fortune, and at one inſtant both to deliuer his countrey, and win himſelfe fame with ſecuritie; Being perſwaded, that by no meanes he might recouer the good will of the Cittizens better, then to performe ſuch an acte with his owne hand: So as, the ſame hand which had offended, and hurt his countrey, ſhould alſo miniſter the medicine, and heale it. Then knowing the vniuerſall hatred borne to the Duke by the deliuerie of the King, thought the time to ſerue well for the execution of his intent. Wherefore he imparted his mind to ſome, whome he knew of his owne opinion: Them he perſwaded and prepared to followe him. The feaſt of S. Iohn Baptiſt being come, Ariſmino (the new Gouernor ſent by the Duke) entred into Genoua, accompanied with Opicino the old Gouernor, and many other Cittizens. Franceſco Spinola thought then good no longer to deferre the matter, but came out of his houſe with diuerſe others, all armed, and priuie to his determination. So ſoone as hee came to the market place, where himſelfe dwelled, he proclaymed the name of libertie. And it was a thing very maruellous to ſee, with how great ſpeed the people and Cittizens to that name aſſembled: So as no man that loued the Duke either for his owne profit, or other occaſion, had leiſure to take armes, or thinke how to ſaue himſelfe. Ariſmino with ſome other Genoueſi, fled into the Caſtle which he kept for the Duke. Opicino preſuming that (if he fled to the Pallace) hauing there two thouſand Souldiers at his commaundement, he ſhould either ſaue himſelfe, or giue courage to his friends to defend him, went thitherwards, but before he came to the market place, was ſlaine, cut in pieces, and drawne through euery ſtreete of the Cittie. The Genoueſi hauing thus reduced the Cittie vnder their owne Magiſtrates and libertie, within few dayes alſo ſurprized the Caſtle, with the other places of ſtrength poſſeſſed by the Duke,The libertie of Genoua recouered. and ſo clearely caſt off the yoke of Philippo. Theſe matters thus handled, as at the beginning, the Princes of Italy was diſmayd, fearing that the Duke ſhould become ouermightie, ſo this gaue them hope (ſeeing what end they had) to be able to bridle him. And notwithſtanding the league lately made, the Florentines and the Venetians made peace with the Genoueſi: whereupon, Rinaldo delli Albizi, and other leaders of the Florentines baniſhed, ſeeing things out of order, and the world changed, did hope to perſwade the Duke to make open warre againſt the Florentines.
               The Oration of Ri. de Albizi to the Duke of Milan. For which purpoſe they went to Milan, and Rinaldo being come to the Dukes preſence, ſpake as followeth. If we ſometimes your enemies, do now confidently deſire ayde of you for the recouerie of our countrey, neither you,

nor any other (that conſider worldly matters, how they proceed, and how variable fortune is) ought to meruaile, albeit neither of our paſſed or preſent actions, nor of that we haue long ſince done either to you, or to our countrey, or that which now is in doing, we can render a good and reaſonable excuſe. There is no good man reprooueth another for defending his Countrey, in what ſort ſoeuer the ſame is defended. Neither was it euer our meaning, to iniure you, but to defend our owne frō being iniured; which was ſufficiētly proued in the greateſt victories of our league. For ſo ſoone as we knew you inclined to a true peace, we were thereof more deſirous, then you your ſelfe, ſo that we need not feare to obteine any fauour at your hands. Neither can our Countrey find fault, although we now perſwade you to take armes againſt it, whome with ſo great reſolution we haue withſtood. For that countrey deſerueth to be loued of all men, which indifferētly loueth them; and not that countrey, which diſdaining the greateſt number, aduanceth a few. There is no man alſo that ought to condemne men, although for ſome cauſes they take armes aagainſt their countrey. For albeit the Cities be bodies mixed, yet haue they of bodies ſimple, ſome reſemblance. And as in theſe, many infirmities grow, which without fire & force cannot be cured: ſo in the other, many miſchiefes ariſe, which a godly and good Citizen ſhould offend to leaue vncured: notwithſtanding that in the cure he doth (as it behoueth him) apply both fire & force. What ſicknes in the bodie of a common-weale can be greater, then ſeruitude? And what medicine is more needfull then this in the cure of that diſeaſe? Thoſe warres be only iuſt, which be neceſſarie, and thoſe armes moſt mercifull, where other hope cannot be had, then by thē. I know not what neceſsitie is greater then ours, or what compaſsion can be more, then to deliuer a Countrey frō ſeruitude? Moſt certainly we know our cauſe is to be pittied and iuſt, which ought to be both by vs and you cōſidered. For your part, faile not to affoord this iuſtice, ſith the Florentines haue not bene aſhamed, after a peace with ſo great ſolemnitie concluded, to make league with the Genoueſi your rebels: ſo that though our cauſe moue you not to cōpaſsion, yet this diſhonor offered vnto your ſelfe, ought to perſwade you, and the rather that you ſee the enterpriſe eaſie. Let not exampls paſſed diſcourage you, hauing ſeen the power of that people, and their obſtinate defence of themſelues. Which two things, might yet reaſonably be feared, were they of the ſame vertue, which in thoſe daies they haue bene. But now you ſhall finde all contrarie. For what force can you looke for in any Cittie, which hath ſpoiled the greateſt part of the riches, and induſtrie thereof. What reſolution can be hoped of in a people, by ſo diuers and new quarrels diſunited? Which diſunion, is cauſe, that thoſe riches there remaining in ſuch ſort as they were wont, be imploied, becauſe mē do willingly ſpend their patrimony, whē they ſee the ſame for their owne glory, their owne honor, and their owne Countrey imployed; euer hoping to recouer that in peace, which the warre hath conſumed: and not whē they ſee themſelues both in war & peace oppreſſed; hauing in the one to ſuſpect the iniurie of enemies, and in the other, the inſolencie of them that command. Alſo, the people are more harmed by couetouſnes of our own Citizens, then the ſpoile of our enemies, for of this ſome end may be hoped of, but of that none at all. In the warres paſſed, you made warre to the whole Citie, but now you are only to contend with a few. Then you came to take the ſtate from many, and thoſe good Citizens, but now you are to aſſault a fewe, and thoſe but bace companions. Then you came to take the libertie from the Cittie, but now you come to reſtore it. It is not therefore like, that in ſo great a contrarietie of occaſions, the effect that will follow ſhall be like. Yea, you are rather to hope of victorie certaine, which how greatlie it fortifieth your State, your ſelfe may eaſilie iudge, hauing thereby

greatly bound Toſcana to be your friend. And though at ſome other time, this victorie would be accounted ambitious & violent, yet vpō this occaſion, is eſteemed iuſt and reaſonable. Omit not therefore the preſent opportunitie, and thinke that although your other enterpriſes againſt the Cittie, did with their difficultie breed your expences and infamie, yet this with great facilitie ſhall bring you foorth exceeding profit, with moſt honourable report. There needed not many words to perſwade the Duke to moue warre againſt the Florentines, becauſe he was thereunto diſpoſed by hate hereditarie, and blind ambition, which humors did leade and commaund him: and the rather, being ſpurred forward by new iniuries, and offence for the league made with the Genoueſi. Notwithſtanding, his former charges, with the freſh memory of perils, and loſſes paſſed, togither with the vaine hope of the baniſhed men,Genoua reuolted from the Duke. did diſcourage him. This Duke, ſo ſoone as he vnderſtood the rebellion of Genoua, had ſent Nicholo Piccinino with all his men of armes, and thoſe footemen he could hire in his iourney, to recouer the Cittie, before the Cittizens had ſetled their minds and planted a new gouernment, greatly truſting vnto the Caſtle of Genoua which was holden for him. And albeit that Nicholo had forced the Genoueſi to flee vnto the mountaines, and taken from them the Vale of Pozeueri, where they fortified themſelues, and alſo conſtrained them to retire within the walles of their Cittie: yet found he ſo great difficultie in going forward, by reaſon of the Cittizens reſolute defending themſelues, that he was enforced to remoue from thence. Whereupon the Duke at the perſwaſion of the baniſhed Florentines, commaunded that the Riuer on the Eaſt ſide ſhould be aſſaulted, approching the confines of Piſa, and there make the greateſt warre to Genoua, that poſsibly they could, ſuppoſing, that reſolution would from time to time enforme, what courſe were beſt to be followed. Then Nicholo aſſaulted and ſurprized Serezana, and after many diſpleaſures done, to make the Florentines more ſuſpitious, he came to Lucca, and cauſed a report to be made, that he intended a iourney to Naples in ayde of the King of Aragon. Pope Eugenio vpon theſe new accidents, went from Florence to Bologna, where he practiſed new compoſition betweene the Duke and the League, perſwading the Duke, that if he would not conſent to the peace, he ſhould be enforced to deliuer the Earle Franceſco his confederate, at that preſent remayning in his pay. But notwithſtanding the Pope his great indeuour, all his deſignes prooued vayne, becauſe the Duke, without poſſeſsion of Genoua, would not conſent, and the League would refuſe, vnleſſe Genoua continued free. Euery man then diſpairing of peace, prepared for the warre. Nicholo Piccinino being come to Lucca, the Florentines miſtruſted no new matter, but cauſed Neri of Gino to goe with their Souldiers to the countrey of Piſa, obteining of the Pope, that the Earle Franceſco ſhould ioyne with him, and ſo with both their armies togither, make head at S. Gonda. Piccinino arriued at Lucca, deſired paſſage to march towards the Kingdome, and being denied, threatned to paſſe by force. Theſe two armies, were in force and vertue of the Captaines equall, for which reſpect, neither of them prooued their fortune, being alſo hindered with the cold weather, for then the moneth of December was begun. In which reſpects many daies, without one offending the other, they ſtaied. The firſt of them which marched, was Nicholo Piccinino, who was informed, that if he would in the night aſſault Vico Piſano, he might eaſily ſurprize it. Nicholo tooke the matter in hand, but not preuailing, ſpoiled and burned the countrey thereabouts, togither with the Towne of S. Giouanni alla Vena. This enterpriſe, albeit for the moſt part thereof to no purpoſe, yet did the ſame encourage Nicholo to goe forwards, ſeeing the Earle and Neri moued not. Therefore he aſſaulted and poſſeſſed Santa Maria in Castello, and Filetto. Yet for all this, the Florentine forces remoued not: not becauſe

the Earle ſtood in feare, but becauſe the warre (for the reuerence borne to the Pope, who intreated for peace) was not by the Magiſtrates in Florence determined. And that, which the Florentines by their owne wiſedome were counſailed to do, was thought of the enemy to be done for feare. Which conceite gaue them courage, to take new enterpriſes in hand, ſo that they determined to beſiege Borgo, and before it preſented all their forces. This new aſſault, cauſed the Florentines to ſet aſide all reſpects, and not only to reſcue Borgo, but alſo to aſſault the countrey of Lucca. Then the Earle marching towards Nicholo, and fighting with him neere vnto Borgo, vanquiſhed his forces, and leuied the ſiege. The Venetians in the meane while, thinking that the Duke had broken the peace, ſent Giouan Franceſco da Gonzaga their Generall, into Ghiriadada, who ſpoiling greatly the Dukes countrey, conſtrained him to reuoke Nicholo Piccinino from the enterprize of Toſcana. Which reuocation, togither with the victorie had againſt Nicholo, gaue the Florentines courage to aſſault Lucca, with hope to poſſeſſe it; Wherein they had neither feare, nor reſpect at all, ſeeing the Duke, whome they onely feared, to be aſſailed by the Venetians: And that the Luccheſi, hauing receiued enemies at home, were content to be aſſaulted, in reſpect whereof they could not at all complaine. In the moneth of Aprill, the yeare 1437. the Earle marched with his army, but before the Florentines would aſſault others, deſired to recouer their owne, and therefore recouered againe Santa Maria in Castello, with all other places ſurprized by Piccinino. That done, directed a courſe to the countrey of Lucca, aſſailing Ca-Maggiore. The inhabitants whereof, though faithfull to their Lord, yet becauſe feare of the enemy neere at hand, had greater force in them, then the dutie toward their friend farre off, they yeelded themſelues. And with like reputation was Maſſa, and Serezana ſurprized. Which things being done about the end of the moneth of May, the army returned towards Lucca, ſpoiling the Corne, burning the Villages,Lucca diſtreſſed. cutting the Vines and trees, driuing away the Cattle, and not fearing to performe euery outrage that ſouldiers were wont to do vnto their enemies. The Luccheſi on the other ſide, ſeeing themſelues by the Duke abandoned, and diſpairing to defend their countrey, intrenched and fortified the Cittie by all meanes they poſsible could. And hauing men ſufficient, hoped they might for a time defend the ſame, as in former aſſaults of the Florentines they had done. They only feared the mutable minds of the common people, leaſt they being beſieged, would grow wearie, eſteeming more their owne priuate perill, then the libertie of others, and ſo enforce ſome diſhonorable and dangerous compoſition. Wherefore to perſwade them to take courage, and be reſolute in defence of the Cittie, one of the moſt auntient and wiſeſt Cittizens aſſembled the people in the market place, and ſaid vnto them as followeth. You ought alwaies to remember, that things done by neceſsitie,The Oration of the Luccheſe to the other Cittizens. deſerue neither commendation nor blame. If therefore you haue found fault with theſe warres which the Florentines do make vpon you, and that we haue gained in receiuing ſouldiers from the Duke, and ſuffered them to aſſault vs, you greatl
                  •
                iniure your ſelues. Alſo, the auncient enimitie of the Florentines towards you is well knowne: whereof, neither your iniuries, nor their owne feare, but our weakeneſſe, and their ambition, hath bene the cauſe; for that, the one giueth them hope to oppreſſe you, and the other incouragement to performe the oppreſsion. Do not beleeue that any merit of yours can remoue that deſire in them, neither any iniurie by you done, can more increaſe the deſire they haue to offend you. Wherefore, as they do ſtudie to take your libertie from you, ſo muſt you labour to defend the ſame. And, for thoſe things which both they and we do to that end, euery man may be ſorie, but no man can meruaile. Let vs then be ſorie that we are aſſaulted, that our townes are beſieged,

our houſes burned, and our countrey ſpoiled. Notwithſtanding, which of vs is ſo vnwiſe, as to meruaile thereat? For if we were able, we ourſelues would do the like, or worſe to them. If they haue moued this warre by the comming of Nicholo, had he not come, they would haue done the like vpon ſome other occaſion. If this miſchiefe had bene deferred, the ſame perhaps would haue prooued greater, ſo that, this his comming, ought not ſo much to be blamed, as our euill fortune, and their ambitious nature. For ſith we could not refuſe to receiue the Dukes ſouldiers, they being come, could not refraine to make the warre. You know well, that without the aide of ſome mightie Prince, we could not be defended: neither was there any of power ſufficient, nor more likely to defend vs both with fidelitie and force, then the Duke. Hee hath reſtored our libertie, and therefore reaſon would, hee ſhould defend it. He hath bene alſo enemy to all thoſe that were our auntient enemies. If then by not offending the Florentines, we had incurred the Dukes diſpleaſure, we ſhould thereby haue loſt our friend, and made the enemy more mightie, and more apt to offend vs. So as it is much better to haue this warre with the Dukes loue, then peace with his diſpleaſure. And we may hope well he will deliuer vs from thoſe dangers, whereunto he hath drawne vs, ſo that we do not forſake him. You know with how great furie the Florentines haue diuerſe times aſſailed vs, and with how great glorie we haue often defended our ſelues againſt them, euen when we had none other hope, but of God and time, the one and the other of them preſerued vs. And therefore why ſhould we now diſpaire to defend our ſelues? At that time all Italy had abandoned vs, but now, the Duke is on our ſide, and we may alſo hope that the Venetians will not be haſtie to offend vs, as men that deſire not to increaſe the Florentines greatnes. Heretofore the Florentines haue bene more free, they had alſo more hope to be aided, of themſelues, they were more mightie, and we in euery reſpect weaker then we now are. For at that time we defended a Tyrant, but now we defend our ſelues. Then the honour of our defence was an other mans, now it is our owne. At that time when they aſſaulted vs, they were vnited, but now they aſſaile vs diſunited, all Italy being full of their Rebels. But if all theſe hopes were not, yet extreame neceſsitie ought to make vs reſolute in our owne defence. Euery enemy ought to be by vs iuſtly feared, for euery of them do ſeeke their owne glorie and our deſtruction. But of all others, we ought moſt to abhorre the Florentines, becauſe our obedience, our tribute, and the ſubiection of this Cittie do not ſuffice to content them, but they would alſo haue our bodies and wealth, to the end they might feed their crueltie with our bloud, and fill their couetous deſire with our riches. Euery man therefore of what ſort ſoeuer, ought to deteſt them. Be not therefore diſmayed to behold the fields ſpoiled, the Villages burned, and the Townes ſacked. Yet if this Cittie be ſaued, of neceſsitie they will be recouered; But if this Cittie be loſt, without any our profit they ſhould be ſaued: Becauſe we continuing our libertie, the enemy ſhall with difficultie poſſeſſe them, but loſing our libertie, in vaine we ſhall poſſeſſe them. Take your weapons therefore in hand, and when you fight, beleeue that the renowne of your victorie ſhall be not onely the ſafetie of our common countrey, but alſo of your priuate houſes and children. The laſt wordes of his ſpeech were with ſo great comfort of the people receiued, that with one voyce they promiſed to dye, rather then yeeld or conſent to any compoſition in preiudice of their libertie: and therefore prepared all things neceſſarie for defence of the Cittie. In the meane ſpace, the Florentine army loſt no time, but after much hurt done to the Countrey, by treatie tooke Monte Carlo, and after remoued to Vzano, to the end that the Luccheſi enuironed on euery ſide, ſhould looke for no reſcue, and ſo by famine force that Cittie to yeeld. The Caſtle was verie

ſtrong, and fully manned, whereby the winning thereof, was not ſo eaſie as the others. The Luccheſi ſeeing their Cittie on euery ſide beſieged, did (as reaſon would) reſort to the Duke: To whome, by all manner of perſwaſions,The Luccheſi pray 
                     •
                  ide of the Duke. both ſweete and ſowre, they recommended themſelues. And in their ſpeech, ſometimes they made mention of their owne merits, and ſometimes they laied before him the iniurie done by the Florentines, and what incouragement other his friends would take, if they were defended; or not, what feare might be conceiued thereby. But if they ſhould loſe their libertie and liues, he ſhould thereby loſe his friends and honour, togither with the loue of all thoſe, that would at euery daunger aduenture for him. Theſe words were accompanied with teares, to the end, that if his owne obligation moued him not, yet the compaſsion of their miſerie might perſwade him. So that the Duke adding to his auntient hate towards the Florentines the new deſert of the Luccheſi, and aboue all, deſiring that the Florentines ſhould not grow great by this victorie, reſolued, to ſend mightie forces into Toſcana, or elſe with much furie aſſault the Venetians, ſo as, the Florentines ſhould be forced to leaue their enterpriſe and ſuccour them. This reſolution made, was ſpeedely aduertiſed to Florence, that the Duke intended to ſend men into Toſcana, which moued the Florentines to hope the leſſe of victorie. And to the end the Duke might be holden occupied in Lombardy, they did ſollicite the Venetians to ſet vpon him with all their forces. But they were greatly daunted with the departure of the Marqueſſe of Mantoua, who had abandoned them, and was ioyned with the Duke. And therefore being (as it were) diſarmed, did anſwere, they were not only vnable to make themſelues ſtronger, but alſo vnfit to continue the warre, vnleſſe the Earle Franceſco were ſent vnto them, with condition that he ſhould in perſon paſſe the Riuer Po. For they would not in any wiſe allow of the old Capitulations, whereby he ſtood bound not to paſſe the Riuer Po. And moreouer they alleaged, that without a Captaine they could not make warre, and of other then the Earle, they had no hope. Neither could they imploy him, vnleſſe he were bound to make warre in all places. It ſeemed to the Florentines neceſſarie, that the warre ſhould be made in Lombardy with great force: yet on the other ſide, if the Earle were remoued from the ſiege of Lucca, that enterpriſe were to no purpoſe. And well they knewe this requeſt made of the Venetians, was not ſo much of any neede they had of the Earle, as to hinder them of that victorie. Contrary to that allegation was alleaged, that the Earle was prepared to goe into Lombardy, whenſoeuer they of the League ſhould commaund him, yet would he not alter his bond, leaſt thereby he might hinder himſelfe in the marriage, promiſed by the Duke. Thus were the Florentines poſſeſſed with two contrarie paſsions, the deſire to winne Lucca, and the feare of the Dukes warre. But (as for the moſt part it happeneth) feare preuailed, and they content that the Earle hauing wonne Vzano, ſhould goe into Lombardy. One other difficultie alſo there was, which not being in the power of the Florentines to diſpoſe, perplexed them more then the former. Which was, that the Earle would not paſſe the Po, and the Venetians otherwiſe would not enterteine him. So no meane being to accord them, but that the one muſt yeeld to the other, the Florentines perſwaded the Earle to write a letter, and thereby promiſe the Senate of Florence to paſſe the Riuer, which he might do without diſhonor, becauſe that priuate promiſe ſhould not be any breach of his publike obligation: and notwithſtanding he might after make warre without paſsing the Riuer, yet thereof this commoditie would followe, that the warre being kindled, the Venetians ſhould be forced to followe it, and ſo the humor which they feared, would be turned another way. But the Venetians on the other ſide affirmed, that his priuate Letter did ſuffice

to binde him, and they were therewith ſatisfied. And if the Earle might ſtill vſe reſpects to his Father in law, they would allow thereof: for it was neither profitable to himſelfe, or them, without great neceſsitie to diſcouer him. By this meanes, the paſſage of the Earle into Lombardy was determined. Who hauing ſurprized Vzano, and made ſome Bulwarks about Lucca, to keepe the Cittizens from iſſuing out, and recommending the warre to his Deputies, paſſed the Alps, and went vnto Reggio. Then the Venetians grew ſuſpitious of his proceedings. And firſt of all to prooue his diſpoſition, required him to paſſe the Riuer Po, and ioyne with their other forces. Which the Earle vtterly denied, and many iniurious words paſſed betwixt him and Andrea Mauroceno,
               Diffidence betweene the Venetians and the Earle Franceſco. ſent thither by the Venetians; the one of theſe accuſing the other of much pride, and little fidelitie. The Earle affirming he was not bound to the ſeruice, and the other proteſting that no paiment ſhould be made. So in the end, the Earle returned into Toſcana, and Mauroceno to Venice. The Earle, was by the Florentines lodged in the countrey of Piſa, hoping to perſwade him to renew the warre againſt the Luccheſi. But thereunto they found him not diſpoſed. The Duke then vnderſtanding, that for reſpect and reuerence borne to him, the Earle would not paſſe the Riuer, he hoped alſo that by this meanes he might ſaue the Luccheſi; And therefore prayed him to make peace betwixt the Luccheſi and the Florentines, and (if he would) to include him alſo: Giuing him hope, that hee ſhould, whenſoeuer he pleaſed, be married vnto his daughter. This alliaunce greatly moued the Earle, becauſe thereby hee hoped, (the Duke not hauing any ſonnes) to become owner of Milan. For which cauſe, he euer refuſed to proceed in the warres as the Florentines did require him, alleaging hee would not marche vnleſſe the Venetians did performe their payment and promiſes. Neither was their paie ſufficient: for he, being deſirous to liue ſecure in his owne Countrey, it behoued him to haue other friends then the Florentines. Wherefore, if by the Venetians hee were abandoned, then ſhould it behoue him to take heed vnto his owne doings, and (ſo ſeemed) a little to threaten an agreement with the Duke. Theſe cauillations, and theſe ſubtilties, highlie offended the Florentines. For thereby they thought the enterpriſe of Lucca to be loſt, and doubted alſo of their owne eſtate, if the Duke and the Earle ſhould ioyne togither.The Venetians and Florentines of diuers opinions touching the pay of the Earle their Generall. Then to perſwade the Venetians to performe the paie promiſed vnto the Earle, Coſimo de Medici went vnto Venice, hoping with his credit to perſwade them. Being there arriued, he diſputed of this matter at large with the Senate, and laide before them the ſtate of Italy, and the daunger thereof. Declaring alſo, of how great forces and reputation in Armes the Duke was, concluding, that if the Duke did ioyne with the Earle, the Venetians ſhould bee forced to retire to the Sea, and the Florentines be in perill of their libertie. Whereunto the Venetians aunſwered, that they knewe their owne ſtrength, and the Italian forces, and beleeued they were able ynough to defend themſelues. Affirming alſo, they were not woont to paie Souldiers that ſerued other men. Wherefore it behoued the Florentines, themſelues ſhould paie the Earle, ſith by him they were ſerued: and that for the ſafe enioying their eſtate, it was more neceſſarie to keepe downe the Earles inſolencie, then to paie him, becauſe men had no boundes wherein to ſtaie their ambition. Alſo, if hee were nowe paide without any ſeruice done, hee would ſhortly after make ſome other diſhoneſt and more perillous requeſt. They therefore thought neceſſarie to bridle his pride, and not ſuffer the ſame to increaſe till it were incorrigible. If then they, either for feare, or for any other intent would continue him a friend, it ſtood then vppon to paie him themſelues. Thus Coſimo returned without

other concluſion. The Florentines notwithſtanding laboured, that the Earle ſhould not fall from the League, and indeed very vnwilling he was to depart. Yet the deſire he had to conclude his marriage, did hold him doubtfull, ſo that the leaſt occaſion (as after it came to paſſe) might loſe him. The Earle had appointed his Townes in La Marca to be guarded by a Captaine called Furlano, one of his principall Leaders. Hee hauing beene long ſollicited by the Duke, diſcharged himſelfe of the Earles entertainement, and went vnto him: which was the cauſe, that the Earle, (ſetting aſide all reſpectes) for feare of himſelfe,The Earle Franceſco abandoneth the Venetians and Florentines. made peace with the Duke. And among other conditions it was agreed, that in the matters of Romagna, and Toſcana, the Earle ſhoulde not intermeddle further. After this peace made, the Earle inſtantlie perſwaded the Florentines to agree with the Luccheſi, and in a ſort conſtrayned them. They therefore ſeeing none other remedie, yeelded to compoſition in the moneth of Aprill, 1438. In which agreement, the Luccheſi remayned in their libertie, and Monte Carlo, with ſome other Caſtles, continued in poſſeſsion of the Florentines. Afterwards they lamented throughout all Italy, that the Luccheſi could not be brought vnder their gouernment. And ſeldome it happeneth that any man hath bene ſo greatly greeued with loſing his owne, as the Florentines were, for not hauing gotten that which belonged to others. Although then the Florentines were occupied in ſo great an enterpriſe, yet were they not forgetfull of their neighbours, nor fayled to furniſh their owne Cittie. At that time (as is before ſayd) Nicholo Fortibraccio (who had married the daughter of the Earle of Poppi) was dead. The Earle at the death of Nicholo,
               The Earle of Poppi. had in his poſſeſsion Borgo A ſan Sepulcro, with the fortreſſe of that Towne, which in the name of his ſonne in lawe, during his life hee gouerned. After his death, as the dowrie of his daughter hee held the ſame, and refuſed to yeeld that Caſtle vnto the Pope, who claymed it, as lande belonging to the Church. In ſo much, as the Pope ſente the Patriarke thither with Souldiers to recouer it. The Earle finding himſelfe vnable to reſiſt that force, offered the Towne to the Florentines, and they refuſed it. Yet ſo ſoone as the Pope returned to Florence, they trauelled betwixt him, and the Earle, to make an agreement. Wherein, finding ſome difficultie, the Patriarke aſſaulted Caſentino, and ſurprized Prato Vecchio, and Ramena, offering the ſame likewiſe to the Florentines. But they would not accept it, vnleſſe the Pope did firſte conſent, that they might reſtore it to the Earle: Wherewith the Pope after much diſputation, was contented. Yet ſo, that the Florentines ſhould promiſe to perſwade, that the Earle of Poppi, ſhould reſtore vnto him Borgo. The Popes minde by this meanes ſatisfied, the Florentines thought good the Cathedrall Church of their Cittie called Santa Reparata, (being long before begun, and now come to ſuch perfection, as diuine Ceremonies might therein be celebrate) to deſire his holineſſe, that perſonally he would conſecrate the ſame. Whereunto the Pope willingly conſented, and for more magnificence of the Cittie, the Temple, and the Pope, a Tarrace was made, from Santa Maria Nouella, where the Pope lay, vnto the Church which he ſhould conſecrate, the ſame being inbredth foure yards, and in height three, and of both ſides it was couered with exceeding rich cloth. Vpon this Tarrace, only the Pope with his Court, and the Cittizens eſpecially appointed to attend him did go. All the reſt of the Cittizens and people ſtood in the ſtreets, in their houſes, and in the Temple, to behold the ſame. When all ceremonies belonging to ſo great a conſecration, were finiſhed, the Pope, in token of more loue, honored Guiliano de Auanzati with Knighthood, being at that preſent Gonfaloniere de Iuſtitia, and in al times accounted a noble &

notable Cittizen, whereunto the Senate, to ſeeme no leſſe deſirous then the Pope of his aduancement, gaue vnto him the Captaineſhip of Piſa for one yeare. About this time, ſome difference grew betwixt the Churches of Rome and Greece, touching the diuine Seruice. And foraſmuch as in the laſt Councell holden at Baſile, much had bene ſayd in that matter by the Prelates of the Weſt Church, it was determined by the Emperours, that great diligence ſhould be vſed to vnite them, and was concluded in the Councell of Baſile, that proofe ſhould be made whether the Gretian Church might be brought to concurre with that of Rome. Albeit this reſolution was contrarie to the maieſtie of the Gretian Emperour, and the pride of his Prelates to yeeld vnto the Biſhop of Rome, yet the Emperour being oppreſſed by the Turkes, and fearing that the Gretians could not be defended by themſelues, the rather alſo to liue in ſecuritie, and be ayded of others, determined to giue place. Then the Emperour accompanied with the Patriarke, the Prelates and Barons of Greece, according to the order taken by the Councell of Baſile, came vnto Venice. Which Cittie being infected with the plague, it was determined, that the matter ſhould be tried in the Cittie of Florence. After many dayes of diſputation,The Gretian Church ſubmitteth to the Church of Rome. betwixt the Prelates of the Romane and Gretian Churches, the Gretians ſubmitted themſelues to the Biſhop of Rome. Then was the peace concluded betwixt the Luccheſi and the Florentines. And was alſo hoped, that the warres betwixt the Duke and the Earle (chiefely in Lombardy and Toſcana) might eaſily be pacified, becauſe that warre which was begunne in the Kingdome of Naples, betwixt Rinato de Angio, and Alfonſo of Arragon, ſhould of force take end by the ruine of thoſe two. And although the Pope was euill contented for the loſſe of many his Townes, and that therewithall, the great ambition of the Duke and the Venetians was apparant, yet euery man ſuppoſed, that the Pope for neceſsitie, and the others for wearineſſe, would lay downe their armes. But the matter came otherwiſe to paſſe, for neither the Duke, nor the Venetians, would be quiet. By reaſon whereof, it fell out that they tooke Armes anew,New troubles in Lombardy and Toſcana. and made warre in the moſt places of Lombardy and Toſcana. The great minde of the Duke, could not endure that the Venetians ſhould poſſeſſe Bergamo and Breſcia: And the rather, ſeeing them prepared for the warres, and euery day moleſting and diſquieting his Countrey. He therefore thought, that if they might be abandoned by the Florentines, and the Earle, he ſhould not onely bridle them, but alſo recouer his owne. To compaſſe that conceipt, he intended to take Romagna from the Church, iudging that afterwards the Pope could not offend him. And the Florentines, ſeeing the fire at hand, either they would not ſtirre for feare, or if they did, they could not conueniently aſſault him. The Duke alſo knewe the diſpleaſure betwixt the Florentines and the Venetians, for the matters of Lucca, and for that cauſe, ſuppoſed the Florentines were the leſſe willing to take Armes for them. As for the Earle Franceſco, he thought that the newe friendſhip, and hope of the marriage, ſhould ſuffice to hold him aſſured. Alſo, to flie all offence, and giue the leſſe occaſion to all others to take Armes, and chiefely, for that he was bound by the Capitulations with the Earle, not to aſſault Romagna, he cauſed Nicholo Piccinino (as thereto moued by his owne ambition) to take that enterpriſe in hand. At ſuch time as the recōciliation was cōcluded betwixt the Duke and the Earle, Nicholo remained in Romagna, and ſeemed much diſcontent with that new friendſhip made between the ſayd Duke and the Earle his perpetuall enemy. He therefore with his ſouldiers retired to Camurata (a place betwixt Furli and Rauenna) where he fortified himſelfe to remaine, till ſuch time as ſome other reſolution were taken. The fame of his anger being blowne about euery where,

               Nicholo gaue the Pope to vnderſtand of his well deſeruing of the Duke, and with what ingratitude he was requited. He alſo alleaged, that the Duke through the helpe of principall Captaines, had wonne all the ſouldiers of Italy to be at his commaundement. Notwithſtanding, if his holineſſe were ſo pleaſed, he could procure, that of theſe two Captaines, the one ſhould prooue enemy to the Duke, and the other improfitable. For accompliſhment whereof, if money were prepared, and the warres continued, he would ſo aſſault the Earle, who had ſurprized the townes belonging to the Church, as he ſhould haue ynough to defend his owne, and not be able to follow the ambition of Philippo. The Pope gaue credit to theſe words, ſeeming to him reaſonable, and ſent vnto Nicholo fiue thouſand Duckets, with many faire promiſes, offering to giue lands to him, and his ſonnes. And although the Pope were diuerſe wayes aduertiſed of this deceipt, yet he beleeued well, and was not content to heare any thing to the contrarie. The Cittie of Rauenna was then gouerned for the Pope by Octacio de Polenta. Nicholo thinking good, not to deferre his enterpriſe (becauſe his ſonne had alreadie with the ignomie of the Pope ſacked Spoletto) determined to aſſault Rauenna: (either becauſe he iudged the enterpriſe eaſie, or that he had ſome ſecret intelligence with Octacio) within few dayes he tooke the Towne by compoſition, and ſhortly after Bologna, Imola, and Furli, were by him ſurprized.The Popes countrey ſpoyled by Ni. Piccinino. Alſo (as a thing more meruailous) of twentie Caſtles which were in thoſe countries holden for the Pope, there was not one that refuſed to yeeld vnto Nicholo. Neither did it ſuffice him with this iniurie to offend the Pope, but he would alſo to theſe deeds mock and deride him in words: Writing vnto the Pope, that vpon iuſt cauſe his Townes were ſurprized, becauſe he had broken the friendſhip betwixt the Duke and him: and written letters to many places of Italy, ſignifying, that he (the Earle) had abandoned the Duke, and ioyned with the Venetians. Nicholo thus poſſeſsing Romagna, left the ſame in charge to his ſonne Franceſco, and himſelfe with the greater part of his army went into Lombardy. Where ioyning with the remaine of the Dukes forces, he aſſayled the Countrey of Breſcia, which in ſhort ſpace he tooke, and beſieged the Cittie. The Duke, who deſired that the Venetians ſhould be left for him as a pray, excuſed himſelfe to the Pope, to the Florentines, and to the Earle: declaring, that thoſe things which had bene done in Romagna by Nicholo, if they were contrarie to the Capitulations, they were likewiſe contrarie to his will. Moreouer, by ſecret meſſengers he gaue them to vnderſtand, that for his diſobedience (as occaſion and time ſhould ſuffer) he would finde meanes to haue him puniſhed. The Florentines and the Earle gaue no credit thereunto, but beleeued (as in deede the truth was) that theſe warres were made to hold them occupied, till ſuch time as he might oppreſſe the Venetians: who, being full of pride, and beleeuing they could by themſelues reſiſt the Dukes forces, did not vouchſafe to demaund aid of any man,Gatamelata Generall for the Venetiās. but with Gatamelata their Captaine, made warre alone. The Earle Franceſco with the fauour of the Florentines, intended to haue gone to the aide of King Rinato, if the accidents of Romagna and Lombardy had not withholden him. And the Florentines would alſo willingly haue fauoured that enterpriſe, for the auncient friendſhip betweene them, and the houſe of Fraunce. But the one and the other of thoſe, being occupied in the warres neere at hand, refrained to attempt any enterpriſe further off. The Florentines then ſeeing Romagna ſurprized by the Dukes forces, and the Venetians aſſaulted (as thoſe that by the ruine of others did feare their owne) deſired the Earle to come into Toſcana, there to conſider what was to be done to encounter the forces of the Duke, which were greater then euer they had bene. Affirming, that if his inſolencie were not by ſome meanes bridled, euery man that gouerned any part of Italy,
               
ſhould within ſhort ſpace be oppreſſed. The Earle knew well that the Florentines had reaſon to feare. Notwithſtanding, the deſire he had to proceed in the marriage with the Dukes daughter, did make him ſuſpected. And the Duke knowing his deſire, gaue him great hope thereof, if he would refuſe to take armes againſt him. And becauſe the Dukes daughter was alreadie marriageable, the matter was brought to this ripeneſſe, that all things for the purpoſe were prepared. Notwithſtanding, with diuerſe cauillations, the marriage day was delayed, yet by words to hold the Earle in hope, ſome deeds were performed: and to that end thirtie thouſand Florins (according to the Articles agreed vpon for the marriage) were ſent vnto him, notwithſtanding the warre of Lombardy increaſed, and the Venetians euery day loſt ſome Towne or other. Alſo, all the veſſels for the warres, which they ſent into the Riuers, were by the Dukes Souldiers taken. The Countries of Verona, and Breſcia, were all ſpoiled: and both thoſe Citties ſo ſtraightly beſieged, as in the common opinion, it was hard for them to be many dayes defended. The Marqueſſe of Mantoua, who had bene many yeares Generall for that State, beyond all expectation had abandoned them, and was ioyned with the Duke, ſo as that which in the beginning of the warres their pride ſuffered not, afterwards feare inforced them to do. For knowing none other remedie but the friendſhip of the Florentines, and the Earle, they began to ſpeake them faire, though ſhamefully, and with ſuſpition, bicauſe they feared leaſt the Florentines would make them the ſame anſwere, which they at the enterpriſe of Lucca, and in the Earles cauſe had receiued at their hands. Neuertheleſſe, they found the Florentines more eaſily intreated, then either they hoped, or their deſerts did merit. For greater was the Florentines hate to a friend become a foe, then the diſpleaſure they bare to an old and auncient enemy.Perſwaſions of the Venetians and Florentines to the Earle not to abandon them. They hauing long before knowne the neceſsitie whereunto the Venetians would fall, declared to the Earle, that their ruine woulde be alſo his: and that hee deceiued himſelfe, if hee beleeued the Duke Philippo woulde eſteeme him ſo much in his good, as his euill fortune. For the occaſion why the Duke offered his daughter vnto him, was the feare wherein he ſtood: and ſith things promiſed by neceſſitie, are neuer performed without neceſsitie, it behoued him ſtill to hold the Duke diſtreſſed, which without the greatneſſe of the Venetians, could not be done. Therefore, hee ought to thinke, that if the Venetians were forced to abandon their Countrey vppon the firme land, he ſhould not onely want thoſe commodities which he receiued by them, but alſo all others, which of other men for feare of them he might attaine vnto. And if hee conſidered well the other ſtates of Italy, he ſhould finde ſome of them poore, and ſome others his enemies. Neither were the Florentines alone (as hee had often ſayd) of force ſufficient to mainteine him. So as, on euery ſide it appeared, that for him it was neceſſarie, to mainteine the Venetians mightie vppon the land. Theſe perſwaſions ioyned with the hate which the Earle had conceiued of the Duke, for being mocked in the marriage, cauſed him conſent to the compoſition, yet would hee not at that time be bound to paſſe the Riuer of Po. Theſe compoſitions were made in the moneth of February, the yeare 1438. Wherein, the Venetians did couenaunt to defraie two thirds, and the Florentines one third of the charge. And both of them togither at their common charge, entred obligation to defend the lands which the Earle had woon in La Marca. Neither was this League contented with theſe forces, but vnto them they ioyned the Lord of Faenza, the ſonnes of Pandolfo Malatesta of Rimini, and Pietro Giampagolo Orſino. And although with great promiſes they had perſwaded the Marqueſſe of Mantoua,
               
yet could they not remoue him from the friendſhip and paie of the Duke. Alſo the Lord of Faenza, after that the League was ſetled, finding a better bargaine, reuolted to the Duke, which depriued the League of hope, to be able to performe the enterpriſes entended in Romagna. In theſe dayes, Lombardy remained thus troubled, Breſcia was beſieged with the Dukes forces, ſo ſtraightly as euerie day was feared that for famine it ſhould be forced to yeeld. And Verona became ſo inuironed with enemies, that it doubted the like end, and if any of theſe two Cities were loſt, euery man iudged all the other preparation for the wars would be to no effect, and the charges till that time made, vtterly loſt. Neither was there found any other certaine remedy, then to procure, that the Earle Franceſco might paſſe into Lombardy: Wherein were three difficulties, the one in perſwading the Earle to paſſe the Riuer of Po, and make warre in all places. The ſecond, that the Florentines ſeemed to be at the diſcretion of the Duke, if the Earle ſhould goe from them. The third was, what way the Earle with his forces ſhould take, to conuey himſelfe into the country of Padoa, where the reſt of the Venetians forces remained. Of theſe three difficulties, the ſecond which apperteined to the Florentines, was moſt to be doubted. Notwithſtanding they knowing the neceſſitie, and being weary of the Venetians, who with all importunitie deſired the Earle, (ſaying that without him, they ſhould be abandoned) they preferred the neceſſitie of others before the ſuſpition of themſelues. There remained alſo one other doubt, which way they ſhould go, and how the ſame might be made aſſured by the Venetians. Moreouer, becauſe the handling of this contract with the Earle, and the perſwading him to paſſe the Riuer Po, was appointed to Neri, the ſonne of Gino Capponi, the Senate thought good to ſend him expreſly to Venice, to make that fauoure the more acceptable there, and to take order for the way, and ſafe paſſage of the Earle. Then was Neri diſpatched from Ceſena, and in a Boate conueyed to Venice: where, by the Senate hee was receiued with more honour, then euer any Prince before that time had bene. For vpon his comming, and that which by him ſhould be determined, they thought the welfare of their dominion depended. Neri then being brought to preſence of the Senate, ſpake as followeth. Moſt Noble Prince,The Oration of Neri Capponi, to the Senate of Venice. my Lords who haue ſent mee, were hitherto euer of opinion, that the greatneſſe of the Duke, would be the ruine both of this ſtate and of their own Common-weale. So that, the well doing of theſe ſtates, muſt be your greatneſſe, and ours alſo. If this had bene by your Lordſhips beleeued, we ſhould be now in better condition, and your ſtate aſſured from thoſe perils, which preſently do threaten it. But becauſe that in time conuenient, you haue neither giuen vs ayd, nor countenance, we could not readily procure remedie for your harmes, nor you, ſpeedily demaund it: as men which both in aduerſitie and proſperitie knew not how to behaue your ſelues; forgetting that we are of ſuch diſpoſition, as whom we once loue, we will loue euer; and whom we hate, we will hate euer. The good will which we haue euer borne to this moſt Noble Senate, your ſelues do know, and haue oftentimes ſeene, by the aide we haue giuen you both in mony and men. The diſpleaſure which we haue borne to Philippo, is ſuch, as we will alwaies beare towards his houſe, and ſo the world knoweth. Neither is it poſsible that auncient hatred, can be either by new deſertes or new diſpleaſures cancelled. We were and are aſſured, that in this war, we might with great honour haue ſtood indifferent to the Duke, and with no great daunger to our ſelues. For though he had bene by your ruine become Lord of Lombardy, yet had there remained ſo much force in Italy, as we need not to haue diſpaired of our well doing, becauſe he encreaſing in ſtate and power, the enmitie, & enuie towards him would haue alſo encreaſed. Of which two things, warre and diſpleaſure be engendred. We knew alſo how great charges by eſchuing this war, we ſhould haue auoyded, how

eminent perils we ſhould haue eſcaped: and how this warre, by our meanes might be remoued from Lombardy into Toſcana. Notwithſtanding all theſe ſuſpitions haue bene, by our auncient affection borne to your ſtate, cancelled: and we haue determined to aide you, with the ſame readie good will, wherewith we will defend our own, if the ſame ſhould be aſſaulted. Wherfore my Lords, iudging it before all other things moſt neceſſarie, to ſuccour Verona and Breſcia, and thinking alſo that without the Earle the ſame could not be, they haue ſent me hither, firſt to perſwade him to come into Lombardy, and make war in all places: he being heretofore (as you know) bound not to paſſe the Riuer of Po. Therefore I vſed with him thoſe reaſons, wherwith we our ſelues be moued. And he, (as he ſeemeth) by Armes inuincible, wil not be ouercome with curteſie. And that liberallitie which he ſawe vs vſe towards you, he hath bene pleaſed to ſurpaſſe the ſame. For knowing well in how great perils, after his departure, Toſcana remained, and ſeeing that we haue more regarded your perill, then our owne well doing; is alſo content to preferre the ſame, before his owne. I am therfore now come here, to offer you the Earle with ſeuen thouſand horſe, and two thouſand foote men; readie to aſſault the enemie in what place ſoeuer he may finde him. I beſeech you then, (and my Lords alſo do intreate you) that as the number of his ſouldiers is greater then his obligation, wherby he bound himſelf to ſerue, ſo it may pleaſe you, that your liberallitie towards him may be likewiſe enlarged. To the end, that neither he ſhall repent his comming to your ſeruice, nor we be ſorie to haue perſwaded him thereunto. This ſpeech pronounced by Neri, was with no leſſe attention heard of the Senate, then if from the mouth of ſome Oracle, the ſame had proceeded. For by his words all the audience was ſo mooued, that they would not ſuffer the Prince (as is the cuſtome) to make any anſwere: But euerie man ſtood vp, and many of them weeping for ioy, held vp their hands, thanking the Florentines for ſo friendly an offer, and him, for hauing with ſo great diligence and ſpeede performed the ſame. Promiſing moreouer, neuer to forget that fauoure, nor that any time, either in themſelues or in their poſterie, ſhould cancell the memorie of this merite. And that their Common-weale, ſhould be as much at the Florentines commandement, as their owne. Theſe curteſies and congratulations ended, they conſulted what way the Earle might martch, to the end, that the bridges and paſſages ſhould be prepared. Foure waies were then thought vpon whereby he might paſſe. The one from Rauenna, by the ſea ſide: which being narrow and full of mariſhes, was not liked. An other was by the direct way, which being impeached by a Fortreſſe called Vccellino, kept for the Duke, the ſame ought to be ſurprized before the Armie ſhould march further; which was heard to do in ſo ſhort a time, vnleſſe the occaſion of the enterpriſe were omitted, the ſame requiring great diligence and ſpeede. The third was by the wood of Lago, where becauſe the Riuer of Po was ouerflowed, to paſſe that way, ſeemed not onely hard, but alſo impoſsible. The fourth was by the Champion of Bologna, from thence to Ponte Pulidrano, to Cento, through Finale, and Bondeno, and ſo to Farrara: From whence by water and land, they might be conueyed into Padouana, there to ioyne with the Venetian forces. In this way, albeit there was manie difficulties, and might by the enemie, in ſome places be impeached: yet was it thought the beſt of all others. Whereof the Earle aduertiſed, with great ſpeed began his iourney, and on the twentith of Iune, arriued in Padouana. The comming of this Captaine into Lombardy, made Venice, and all the countrie thereto belonging, in great hope. For as they ſeemed before to diſpaire, now they began to hope, not onely to hold their owne, but alſo to win from others. The Earle firſt of all went to the reſcue of Verona, and the rather to meete with Nicholo, and his Armie he marched to Soaue, a Caſtle builded betwixt Vicentino & Veroneſi, and inuironed by a diche: which

reached from Soaue to the mariſh of Adice. The Earle ſeeing his paſſage by the plaine ſtopped, thought to paſſe by the mountaines, and by that way to come neare to Verona; Suppoſing Nicholo did not thinke, that he would take that way being vnpleaſant & mountanous: or if he did, he could not in time come thither to impeach him. Wherefore being prouided of victuals for eight daies, hee and his men paſſed the mountaine and arriued vnder Soaue, in the plaine. Where, albeit ſome bulwarks had bene made by Nicholo, yet were they not ſuch as ſtaied his paſſage. Nicholo then ſeeing the enemie aboue his expectation come thither, fearing to fight vpon diſaduantage, retired himſelfe on the other ſide of Adice: and the Earle without anie obſtacle, entred into Verona. Thus the Earle hauing performed the firſt enterpriſe, which was to remoue the ſiege, the ſecond yet remained, to reſcue Breſcia. This Citie is ſo ſeated vpon the riuer of Garda, the ſcite wherof is ſuch, that though it be beſieged by land, yet may it be victualled by water: which was the cauſe, why the Duke put ſo great forces vpon that Lage, and in the beginning of his victories, had ſurprized all thoſe townes which by the Lage could relieue Breſcia. The Venetians had alſo Gallies vppon the Lage, but they were not of power inough to fight with the Dukes forces. The Earle therefore thought fit with ſome more ſouldiers to ſtrengthen the Nauie, and win thoſe townes which with held the vittails from Breſcia. He therfore brought his Campe before Bandolino, a Caſtle vpon the Lage, hoping if that were wonne, the reſt would preſently yeeld. In that enterpriſe fortune disfauoured the Earle, for the greateſt number of his men fell ſicke: ſo as, leauing the enterpriſe, hee went vnto Zeno, a caſtle belonging to Verona, where the country is plentiful, & the aire wholeſome. Nicholo ſeeing the Earle retired: not to omit occaſion to poſſeſſe himſelfe of the Lage, left his Campe at Vegatio, and with ſome choiſe men went vnto the Lage. There, with great furie, he aſſaulted the Venetian Armie, & tooke welneare all their Gallies. After this victory, almoſt al the Caſtles vpon the Lage, yeelded vnto Nicholo. The Venetians diſmaid at this his loſſe, and fearing therby, that they of Breſcia would yeeld alſo, ſollicited the Earle, both by Letters and Meſſengers, to make ſpeed to ſuccour it. But the Earle ſeeing that by the Lage there was no hope to relieue it, & by land it was impoſsible, by reaſon of ditches, bulwarkes, and trenches, made by Nicholo, ſo as, whoſoeuer ſhould enter, muſt go to preſent deſtruction; determined to proue the way of the mountains: wherby, as he had before ſaued Verona, ſo he hoped perhaps to reſcue Breſcia. The Earle for the atchiuing thereof, departed from Zeno, and by the Vale of Acrine, marched to the Lage of S. Andrea, and came to Torboli, and Penda, vpon the Lage of Garda. From thence he went to Tenna, and there pitched his Campe: becauſe, to paſſe from thence to Breſcia, it behooued him to ſurpriſe that Caſtle. Nicholo vnderſtanding the intent of the Earle, brought his Armie to Piſchiera: and after with the Marqueſſe of Mantoua, and ſome of his owne choiſe ſouldiers, marched towards the Earle, and fighting togither, Nicholo was ouerthrowne.The Campe of Nicholo Piccinino defeated. Some part of his men were taken priſoners, an other part, retired to the Armie, & the third part, fled to the Nauie. Nicholo then, retired himſelfe into Tenna, and the night being come, imagined he could not eſcape from thence, if he tarried til the next day. Wherfore to eſchue that perill certaine, he aduentured a daunger doubtfull. Nicholo had amongſt many his ſeruants one Almaine, a man of great ſtrength, and to him aboue others, euer moſt faithfull. Nicholo perſwaded this man, that if hee would put him into a ſacke, he might vpon his ſhoulders (as though he were ſome other thing) carry him to ſome place, from whence he might eſcape. At this time the Campe yet remained about Tenna. Neuertheleſſe, by meanes of the victorie the day before, no great order or watch was taken, ſo that this Almaine, the more eaſily might conuey his maiſter. Wherefore taking him vpon his ſhoulders, (as though he were ſome

other burthen, himſelfe being apparelled like a Porter) he paſſed through the Camp without any let, and ſo ſaued his maiſter. This victorie, if it had bene well vſed, as it was happily wonne, had much better releeued Breſcia: and the Venetians thereby ſhould haue proued more happie. But the ſame being euill vſed, the ioy thereof was the leſſe; and Breſcia remained in the ſame diſtreſſe that it was before. For Nicholo hauing recouered ſouldiers,Nicholo Piccinino, deſirous to recouer his honor. determined with them ſome new victorie, to blot out the diſhonour of the late loſſe, and take from the Venetians the meane whereby they ſhould reſcue Breſcia. He hauing intelligence from ſome priſoners taken in that war, that the Cittadell of Verona was weakely manned and guarded; ſo as, eaſily it might be ſurprized: thought that Fortune thereby had offered an occaſion to recouer his honour; and that the new ioy of his enemie, for the late victorie, ſhould now for a later loſſe, be conuerted into ſorrow. The Citie of Verona is in Lombardy, ſeated at the foote of thoſe mountaines which diuide Italy from Germany: and is ſo builded, as it partaketh both of the mountaines and the plaine. The Riuer of Adice ſpringeth out of the Vale of Trento, and in the courſe thereof to Italy, it deſcendeth not ſtraight into the plaine, but turneth on the left hand, and paſſeth by the midſt of that Cittie. Yet the one part of the Citie towards the plaine, is greater then the other part towardes the mountaines. Vpon theſe be built two Fortreſſes, the one called S. Piero, and the other S. Felice; which ſeeme more ſtrong by nature of the ſeate, then the thickneſſe of the wall. For being ſet high, they commaund the whole Citie. In the plain on this ſide the Adice, are ioyning to the wall of the towne, two other Fortreſſes, the one diſtant from the other a thouſand paces, one of them is named the newe Cittadella, and the other the old Cittadella. From the one of theſe within, there paſſeth a wall to the other, and is in reſpect of the compaſſe, as it were a ſtring to a bowe. All this ſpace betwixt the one wall and the other is inhabited, and called Borgo di San Zeno. Theſe Fortreſſes, and this Borgo, Nicholo Piccinino intended to ſurprize, thinking the ſame eaſie, as well for the negligence of the guard therin, as the ſmall care had thereof, by meanes of the late victory. For he knew well, that in the warre there is no enterpriſe ſo eaſily performed, as is that, which the enemie feareth not. Hee therefore making choyſe of his men, being acquainted with the Marqueſſe of Mantoua, in the night marched to Verona, and not being there looked for, ſcaled the walles, and wanne the new Cittadell. From thence he ſent his men into the towne, who brake the gate of S. Antonio
               ▪ and thereby all his horſemen entred. Thoſe that for the Venetians kept the old Cittadell, hearing firſt a noyſe when the guard of the firſt Cittadell was ſlaine, and after when the gates were broken open: knew well that enemies were come, made Alarum, rung Belles, and ſtirred vp the people. Whereof the Citizens taking knowledge, came out in a confuſed ſort: thoſe that were of moſt courage, tooke Armes and went vnto the Pallace of the Rettore. In the meane while, Nicholo had ſacked Borgo of S. Zeno. Then going forward, the Citizens knowing that the Dukes ſouldiers were within the towne, and ſeeing no way to reſiſt them, perſwaded the Venetians Rettore to flee to the Fortreſſe, thereby to ſaue their perſons, and the towne: ſaying it was better to preſerue their liues, and the riches of the citie, till a time more fortunate; then for the encountring of the preſent furie, to die themſelues, and vtterly impoueriſh the citie.Verona ſurprized by Nicholo Piccinino. Then the Rettore, and all other Venetians whatſoeuer, fled into the Fortreſſe of S. Felice. Which done, many of the chiefe Citizens came to Nicholo and to the Marqueſſe of Mantoua, beſeeching, that it would pleaſe them, to take that citie with honour, as it was rich, rather then with their ſhame, to ſuffer it to be made poore and ſpoyled. And the rather, becauſe they had neither deſerued well of their chiefe Lords, nor in defence of the town merited any mallice of Nicholo or the Marqueſſe. Then were they, both by Nicholo & the Marqueſſe comforted, and (as much

as in furie of the warre might poſsibly be) defended from the ſpoyle. Nicholo thinking aſſuredly, that the Earle would come to recouer the Towne, laboured by euerie meane to get into his hands all the ſtrong places; and thoſe which hee could not get, with trenches and ditches were diuided from the Towne: to the end, that the enemie ſhould paſſe in with more difficultie. The Earle Franceſco was with his men at Tenna, and hearing thoſe newes, at the firſt thought the ſame vntrue, but after being better aduertiſed of the troth, thought good by ſpeedie proceeding, to amend his former negligence. And albeit his chiefe Captaines of the Campe, did counſell him to leaue the enterpriſe of Verona and Breſcia, and go to Vicenza, for not being beſieged of the enemie during his aboad there; yet would hee not be perſwaded by them, but in any wiſe trie his fortune to recouer that cittie: and in the midſt of theſe doubtfull imaginations, promiſed the Proueditore of Venice, and Barnardo de Medici, the Florentine Generall, certeinly to recouer the citie, if any of the Fortreſſes did remaine vntaken till he came thither. Then giuing order for his iourney, he with his ſouldiers in great haſte marched towards Verona. Whom, Nicholo ſeeing, thought good, as he had bene counſelled by his Captaines, to go to Vicenza. Yet finding that the enemies marched towards the Towne, directing their courſe to S. Felice, he determined to defend that Fort: but all too late, becauſe the trenches about the Caſtle were not finiſhed, and the ſouldiers (for couetouſneſſe of the ſpoyle) were diuided among themſelues, ſo that he could not come thither ſoone inough. For the Earles ſouldiers had before approached the Fortreſſe,Verona recouered by the Earle Franceſco. and from thence with good ſucceſſe and diſhonour of Nicholo, recouered the citie. Who togither with the Marqueſſe of Mantoua fled firſt to the Cittadell, and from thence, to Mantoua. Where aſſembling the remaine of their ſaued ſouldiers, they ioyned with the others, that beſieged Breſcia. Thus was Verona in foure daies by the Dukes Army, both wonne and loſt. The Earle after this victorie (being at that time winter, and the cold great) had with much difficultie victualled Breſcia, and went to remain in Verona: giuing order, that certaine Gallies ſhould tarry that winter at Torbali, to the end, that at the ſpring of the next yeare, he might be ſtrong both by ſea and land for the reſcue of Breſcia. The Duke ſeeing the warre for that time ſtaied, and his hope to ſurpriſe Verona & Breſcia remooued, wherof the Councell, and the money of the Florentines was the occaſion, and that they could not be altered from the loue of the Venetians, for any iniurie they had receiued of them, nor for any promiſe he could make them; determined (to the end they ſhould ſhortly reape fruite of thoſe ſeedes they had ſowne) to aſſault Toſcana: being therto encouraged by the baniſhed men of Florence, and by Nicholo. Nicholo was thereto moued with the deſire he had to winne the poſſeſsions of Braccio, and driue the Earle out of La Marca.
               The Duke perſwaded by Nicholo and the baniſhed Florentines▪ to aſſault Toſcana. And the Florentines deſired to returne to their Country. So either of theſe, with reaſons according to their owne deſire, perſwaded the Duke. Nicholo tolde him, that himſelfe might be ſent into Toſcana, and Breſcia might neuertheleſſe be ſtill beſieged; for the Duke was Lorde of the Lage, and had the ſtrong places belonging to the Towne well furniſhed: the Captaines there remaining, and men inough to encounter the Earle whenſoeuer he ſhould attempt any other enterpriſe; which without the reſcue of Breſcia hee could not, and to reſcue it, was impoſsible. So that he might make war in Toſcana, and yet not leaue the enterpriſe in Lombardy. Hee told him moreouer, that the Florentines were enforced ſo ſoone as he came into Toſcana, to reuoke the Earle, or elſe loſe it: ſo that if any of theſe two things came to paſſe, the victorie would follow. The baniſhed men alledged, that if Nicholo with his Army did drawe neare to Florence, it was impoſsible but that the people (being wearie of charges, and the inſolency of the great men) would take Armes againſt the Gouernours. They ſhewed alſo how eaſie it was to

approach Florence, promiſing to make the way open through Caſentino, by meanes of the friendſhip which Rinaldo had with that Earle. Thus the Duke, firſt diſpoſed of himſelfe, and after confirmed by perſwaſions of theſe men, reſolued vpon this enterpriſe. The Venetians on the other part, notwithſtanding the bitterneſſe of the winter, failed not to call vpon the Earle with all his forces to ſuccor Breſcia. Which the Earle anſwered could not be in that time done, but of force it muſt tarrie the ſpring of the yeare: and in the mean time prepare an Army by water, ſo as both by water and land it might at time conuenient be releeued. Hereupon the Venetians became ſorie and ſlow in all their prouiſions, which was the cauſe that in their Army many people died. Of all theſe things the Florentines being aduertiſed, began to miſtruſt: ſeeing the warre at hand, and no great good done in Lombardy. The ſuſpition alſo which they had of the Popes ſouldiers, did greatly perplex them: not becauſe the Pope was their enemie, but for that they ſawe thoſe ſouldiers more obedient to the Patriarke, their mortall foe, more then to the Pope himſelfe. Giouanni Vittelleſchi Cornetano, was firſt Notarie Apoſtolicall,The Patriarke of Aleſſandria Generall for the Pope. after Biſhop of Ricanati, then Patriark of Aleſſandria, and at length after all theſe dignities, become Cardinall, & was called the Cardinall of Florence. This Cardinall being a man both couragious and craftie, & ſuch a one, as was by the Pope ſo greatly beloued, as thereby he became Generall of all the forces belonging to the Church: and was Captaine in all enterpriſes that the Pope tooke in hand, either in Toſcana, Romagna, the Kingdome, or the Citie of Rome. Whereby he wonne ſuch reputation among the people, and ſo great authoritie vnder the Pope, that the Pope himſelfe ſtood in doubt how to commaund him, and the people did onely obey him, and no other. At ſuch time as the newes came, that Nicholo would paſſe into Toſcana, this Cardinall with his company happened to be at Rome: whereby the Florentines feare was doubled, becauſe that Cardinall after the baniſhment of Rinaldo, had euer bene enemie to Florence: for that the pacification among the factions of Florence made by his meanes, were not obſerued, but all things done to the preiudice of Rinaldo,
               The Pa. friend to Rinaldo de Albizi. who had bene the occaſion that Armes were laid down, which gaue his enemies good means to baniſh him. Then the Gouernors of the ſtate, imagined the time come to reſtore Rinaldo of his loſſes, if with Nicholo (being come into Toſcana) they ioyned their forces: but therof they doubted the more by the vntimely departure of Nicholo from Lombardy, who left there an enterpriſe halfe wonne, to begin an other more doubtfull: which he would not do, without ſome new intelligence, and ſecret ſubtiltie. Of this their miſtruſt they had enformed the Pope, who knew his owne errour in giuing to an other ouermuch authoritie. But when the Florentines ſtood thus doubtfull what to do, Fortune found then a meane, whereby to aſſure the Patriarke. That ſtate, in thoſe times mainteined diligent eſpials, to diſcouer what Letters were brought too and fro, and thereby conceiued, if any thing were practiſed to the preiudice thereof. It happened that at Monte Pulliciano, ſome Letters were taken, which the Patriarke without conſent of the Pope, wrote vnto Nicholo Piccinino. Thoſe Letters by the Generall of the warre, were preſently ſent vnto the Pope; And although they were written in Carects vnuſed, ſo as no certaine ſence could be made of them: yet this obſcuritie, togither with the practiſe of the enemie,The pope ſeeketh to depoſe the Patriarke. bred ſo great ſuſpition in the Pope, as he determined to aſſure himſelfe. The charge of this action he committed to Antonio Rido of Padoua, being then Captaine of the Caſtle in Rome. Rido hauing receiued this Commiſsion, was readie to obey the Popes commandement, aſpecting an opportunitie to performe the ſame. The Patriarke being determined to goe into Toſcana, and minding the next day to depart from Rome, deſired the Captaine Rido to attend for him in the morning vpon the Caſtle Bridge, at ſuch time as hee ſhould paſſe that way. Antonio Rido thought then a

good occaſion was preſented: and gaue order to his men what to do, tarrying for the comming of the Patriarke, vppon the Bridge, which way of neceſsitie he muſt paſſe, hard by the Caſtle. So ſoone as hee was arriued vppon that part, which vſed to be drawne vp, Rido gaue his men a ſigne to drawe the Bridge and ſhut the Patriarke into the Caſtle, which was performed. So as of a Generall to the Armie, the Patriarke was become a priſoner in the Caſtle. The people that followed him, at the firſt murmured, but vnderſtanding the Popes pleaſure,The Patriarke made priſoner pacified themſelues. The Captaine did comfort him with curteous wordes, and perſwaded him to hope well. To whome the Patriarke aunſwered, that great perſonages were not wont firſt to be apprehended, and after ſet at libertie. For thoſe that deſerue impriſonment, did not merite to bee enlarged, and ſo ſhortly after died in priſon. After his death, the Pope appointed Generall of his Armie, Lodouico Patriarke of Aquilea. Who albeit before that time would not intermeddle with the warre, betwixt the League and the Duke; yet was then content to take the ſame in hande: promiſing to be readie to defende Toſcana with foure thouſande Horſe, and two thouſande footemen. The Florentines deliuered of this feare, ſtood yet in doubt of Nicholo, and miſtruſted the confuſion of matters in Lombardy, by reaſon of the diuerſitie of opinions betwixt the Venetians and the Earle. Wherefore, to bee more fullie aduertiſed, of their mindes, they ſent Neri the ſonne of Gino Capponi, and Guiliano de Auanzati, to Venice. Whom they gaue in Commiſsion, to determine in what ſorte the Warre ſhoulde bee made the next yeare following. Commaunding Neri, that ſo ſoone as hee vnderſtoode the mindes and opinions of the Venetians, hee ſhoulde goe vnto the Earle, to knowe his; and perſwade him to thoſe thinges, which for the welfare of the League ſhoulde bee thought meete and neceſſarie. Theſe Embaſſadours beeing in their iourney not ſo farre as Farrara, had intelligence, that Nicholo Piccinino with ſixe thouſande horſe was paſſed the Po. Which newes moued them to make the more ſpeede. Being arriued at Venice, they found the Senate fully determined, that Breſcia without any delaie ſhould be reſcued, becauſe, that Cittie, could neither tarry vnreleeued till the next Spring, nor till the Nauie by water were prepared; but ſhould be inforced for want of aide, to yeelde vnto the enemie: which would make the Duke victorious, and occaſion the loſſe of all their ſtate, vpon the firme land. Neri therefore went from thence to Verona, to heare what the Earle could alledge to the contrary. Who by many reaſons declared, that for the preſent, it were no furtherance, but rather an impeachment of the enterpriſe to march towards Breſcia. For, conſidering the ſeaſon of the yeare, and the ſeate of the Cittie, no good could be done, but great diſorder, and to the ſouldiers great trouble would follow thereof. So that, when the Spring ſhould be come, and the ſeaſon fit for the action, the Army muſt be enforced to returne to Verona, for prouiſion of thoſe things, which the winter had conſumed. By reaſon whereof, all the time fit for warre, ſhould be ſpent in going and returning. There was ſent to Verona with the Earle for the conſultation of theſe matters, Orſato Giustiniani, and Giouan Piſani. With theſe Commiſsioners after much diſputation, it was concluded,Reſolution of the League, againſt the Duke. that the Venetians ſhould giue vnto the Earle for the next yeare to come, foureſcore thouſand Duckettes, and to euerie one of his ſouldiers, fortie. And that they ſhould ſollicite the Earle to march with his whole Armie, and aſſault the Duke. To the ende, that hee, for feare of his owne countrey ſhould be forced to reuoke Nicholo into Lombardy. After which concluſion, the Embaſſadours returned to Venice. Nicholo Piccinino in this meane ſpace proceeded in his iourney, & was arriued at Romagna: where he perſwaded ſo far with the ſonnes of Pandolpho Malatesta, that they

abandoned the Venetians, and ioyned with the Duke. Theſe newes were diſpleaſant to the Venetians, and much more diſpleaſant to the Florentines, becauſe they hoped by that way to haue reſiſted Nicholo. But ſeeing the Malatesti rebelled, they were thereat amazed, and the more, for the feare they had that Giampagolo Orſino, their Captaine, (who at that time was in the countrey of Malatesti) ſhould be defeated, and they ſo diſarmed. Theſe occurrents alſo diſmayed the Earle, fearing to loſe La Marca,
               The ſpeech of the Earle Frā
                  ceſco to the Senate of Venice. if Nicholo paſſed into Toſcana. And intending to goe vnto the reſcue of his owne, came firſt to Venice, where he declared vnto the Prince, that his comming into Toſcana, was improfitable for the League. Becauſe the warre was euer to be made, where the Armie and Generall of the enemie is, and not where their Townes are, or their priuate Garriſons. For if the Armie bee ouerthrowne the warre is ended: but though the Townes be wonne, and the Armie be left whole, the warres for the moſt part becommeth more liuely. Then hee enformed him, that La Marca and Toſcana were loſt, if good reſiſtaunce were not made againſt Nicholo. Of which loſſe, Lombardy had no remedie. Or if it had, hee meaned not to abandon his owne ſubiects and friendes. For, being come a Lorde into Lombardy, hee would not depart thence, as a priuate Captaine.The Venetians anſwer to the Earle. Heereunto the Prince aunſwered, it was a thing moſt manifeſt, that if he did goe from Lombardy, and with his Armie repaſſe the Po, that all their ſtate vppon the firme land, ſhould be loſt, and that they would not ſpend any more vpon the defence therof. For it were follie, to defend a thing, which by no meane could be holden. And leſſe diſhonour it were to loſe the countries onely, then to loſe the country and their money alſo. But if it ſhould ſo fall out, that theſe things were loſt, it ſhould thereby appeare how greatly it ſtood the Venetians vppon, to defende Toſcana and Romagna. They were therefore altogither contrarie to his opinion, for they beleeued that whoſoeuer were victorious in Lombardy, could alſo haue victorie in all other places. And it was eaſie to haue the victorie, becauſe the Duke and his country was become weake by the departure of Nicholo: ſo as hee might be oppreſſed, before that either hee could reuoke Nicholo, or be prouided of other remedie. Moreouer, who ſo wiſely conſidereth all things, ſhould ſee, that the Duke had ſent Nicholo into Toſcana, to no other end, then to remooue the Earle from thoſe enterpriſes, & make that war in other places, which hee now had at home. So that in purſuing him (if before hee found no extreame neceſsitie) hee ſhould execute that which he had in hand, and be owner of his intent. But if the men of warre were ſtill imployed both in Lombardy and in Toſcana, howſoeuer it came to paſſe, hee ſhould ouerlate finde his ouerſight, and in time ſee that without remedie hee had loſte Lombardy, and gained nothing in Toſcana. Thus euerie one hauing ſaid and replied according to his opinion,Reſolution of the Venetians with the Earle Franceſco. it was concluded, that a ſtaie for a fewe dayes ſhould be made, to ſee what effect the agreement betwixt the Malatesti and Nicholo would bring foorth: and whether the Florentines could imploy Giampagolo: and whether the Pope did faithfully deale with the League, as hee had promiſed. This concluſion made, ſhortly after they were aduertiſed, that the Malatesti had condeſcended to the agreement, rather for feare, then any euill intent: and that Pietro Giampagolo with his ſouldiers, were marched towardes Toſcana, and the Pope was more willing to aide the League, then before time hee had bene. Theſe aduertiſements ſatisfied the Earles minde. So as he became contented that himſelfe might remaine in Lombardy: and Nery Capponi ſhoulde returne to Florence, with a thouſande of his Horſe, and fiue hundreth others And if it did ſo fall out in Toſcana, that the preſence of the Earle were there needfull and neceſſarie, that then hee ſhoulde wryte vnto him, and the Earle (without anie

reſpect) be diſpatched thither. Neri with his forces arriued at Florence, in the moneth of Aprill. And the ſame day, Giampagolo came thither. In the meane time Nicholo Piccinino hauing ſetled all things in Romagna, determined to come into Toſcana, and deſiring to paſſe by the Alpes of S. Benedetto, and the Vale of Montone, found thoſe places by the vertue of Nicholo de Piſa, ſo well defended, that hee thought all his power too little. Moreouer, becauſe the Florentines were not well furniſhed either of Captaines or ſouldiers, for this ſuddeine aſſault, they had ſent diuerſe Citizens to the paſſages of thoſe Alpes, with footemen leuied in haſte, for that purpoſe. Amongſt whome was Bartholomeo Orlandini: and to him was appointed the keeping of the Caſtle of Marradi, with the paſſage of thoſe Alpes. Nicholo Piccinino ſuppoſing hee could not goe by S. Benedetto for the vertue of him that defended that way, yet thought hee it eaſie to paſſe by the other which Bartholomeo kept: perſwaded thereto by the cowardice of that Captaine. Marradi is a Caſtle built at the foote of thoſe Alpes, which diuide Toſcana from Romagna. But on that ſide which is towardes Romagna, in the beginning of the Vale of Lamona, although it bee without walles, yet the Riuer, the Mountaine, and the inhabitaunts of the countrey doo make it ſtrong. For the men be warlike and faithfull. The Riuer hath alſo worne into the lande, and made ſo deepe caues and places, as it is impoſsible to approach it by that Vale, ſo long as one little Bridge bee defended. And on that ſide towardes the Mountaines, the ſhoare is ſo ſteepe as maketh it moſt aſſured. Notwithſtanding, the cowardice of Bartholomeo was ſuch, as made thoſe people become baſe minded, and the ſeate to ſeeme of no force at all. For ſo ſoone as the noyſe of the enemie was heard, hee abandoned his charge, and with his ſouldiers fledde away, neuer ſtaying till hee came to Borgo S. Lorenzo. Nicholo entered into the places abandoned, much maruelling that they were not better defended. And being glad of that hee had gotten, came downe into Mugello, where hee ſurprized ſome Caſtles; and at Puliciano hee lodged his Campe. From thence hee ſpoyled all the Countrey, to the Mountaines of Fieſole. Hee was alſo ſo bolde, as hee doubted not to paſſe the Riuer of Arno, forraging and ſpoyling euerie place within three myles of the Cittie of Florence. The Florentines on the other ſide were not diſmayed, but before all other thinges ſetled the gouernment. Whereof they could not much doubt, as well for the good will the people bare vnto Coſimo; as becauſe the chiefe Offices, were reduced into the handes of a fewe mightie Cittizens, who with their ſeueritie handled the matter ſo, that they aſſured themſelues of euerie man, that ſhewed themſelues diſcontented, or deſirous of Innouaſion. They knewe alſo by the contract made in Lombardy, with what Forces Neri returned, and they looked alſo for other ſouldiers, to come from the Pope, which till the comming of Neri, made them hope well. But Neri finding the Cittie in theſe diſorders, and feares, determined to goe into the field, ſomewhat to bridle the furie of Nicholo, that hee ſhould not ſo much at his pleaſure ſpoyle the countrey. Then making a band of certaine footemen, the people with all the horſes they had went out, and recouered Remole, which the enemies had taken. There they encamped themſelues, empeaching Nicholo to proceed in his ſpoyle, and gaue hope to the Cittizens to vanquiſh the enemie. Nicholo ſeeing that the enemies hauing loſt their ſouldiers, mooued not: and vnderſtanding alſo, with what ſecuritie they liued in that citie, determined not to loſe time, but enterpriſe ſome other thinges. To the ende that the Florentines might haue occaſion to ſende out their Forces and fight with him. And if the victorie prooued his, then hee hoped that all other matters ſhould proſperouſly follow. In the Campe of Nicholo, Franceſco Earle of Poppi happened

to be. He in that time (that the enemies were in Mugello) rebelled from the Florentines,
               The Earle of Poppi rebelled from the Florentines. with whom he had bene before in League. And albeit the Florentines before miſtruſted that hee would ſo doo, yet thought they to haue bounde him with benefites, and to that ende encreaſed his entertainment, and made him Gouernour ouer all their Townes neare vnto him. All which notwithſtanding (ſo great ſtrength had the loue which hee bare to the contrarie faction) that no benefite nor no feare, could force him to forget, the affection hee bare to Rinaldo, and the others that gouerned in times paſt. In ſo much, as when hee vnderſtood that Nicholo drewe neare, ſuddeinly hee ioyned with him, and perſwaded him with all earneſtie to goe from the Cittie, and paſſe into Caſentino: ſhewing him the ſtrength of that countrey, and with what ſecuritie, he might from thence diſtreſſe the enemie. Nicholo was well content to be aduiſed by his counſell, and come into Caſentino, ſurprized Romana and Bibiena, and after lodged his Campe at the Caſtle S. Nicholo. This Caſtle is ſeated at the foote of thoſe mountaines which diuide Caſentino from the Vale of Arno, and by reaſon the ſeate thereof is high, and the place well manned, the taking thereof prooued hard: notwithſtanding that Nicholo did with his Artillarie continually make the batterie. This ſiege had continued more then twentie dayes. In which time, the Florentines aſſembled their Forces at Figghini, to the number of foure thouſande horſe; vnder the conduct of Pietro Giampagolo, the Generall, Neri Caponi, and Barnardo de Medici Commiſſaries. To them foure Meſſengers were ſent from the Caſtle of Saint Nicholo to deſire their aide. Thoſe Commiſſaries hauing conſidered the ſeate of that place, founde they could not reſcue it anie other way, then by the Alpes, which come from the Vale of Arno, and the tops of them might be poſſeſſed by the enemie, before they could come thither, as well for that they were nearer, as that they could not goe vnknowne. So as, they ſhould attempt a thing to no purpoſe, and hazard the ruine of their ſouldiers. Thereuppon the Captaines commending their fidelitie, commaunded them, that if they were not able anie longer to defende themſelues, that then they ſhould yeelde. Thus Nicholo preuailed in that enterpriſe, and poſſeſſed this Caſtle in the ende of thirtie two dayes, after hee and his Campe had beſieged it. And for ſo great a loſſe of time, obteyned this ſmall victorie, which was the greateſt occaſion whereby a greater enterpriſe was not performed. For if hee had ſtill continued with his Campe before Florence, he had forced thoſe that gouerned, to leuie money amongſt the Cittizens, prepare Forces, and make euerie other prouiſion, with more difficultie, the enemie being ſo neare at hand, manie of the Cittizens would alſo haue bene deſirous of peace, to aſſure themſelues from Nicholo,
               Nicholo euill counſelled by the Earle of Poppi. ſeeing the warre likely to continue. But the deſire which the Earle of Poppi had to bee reuenged of ſome Captaines of Caſtles, who had beene long his enemies, did leade him to giue that counſaile: And Nicholo for his ſatisfaction, followed the ſame; which was the deſtruction both of the one and the other. Whereof may be conceiued, that for the moſte part, the particuler paſsions of men, doo hinder the publique commoditie. Nicholo following the victorie, ſurprized Raſsina and Chiuſi. In theſe places, the Earle of Poppi, perſwaded him to tarrie, declaring that hee might diſperſe his Forces into Chiuſi, Capreſe, & Pieue: by that meanes to become Lord of the mountaines, and at his pleaſure deſcende from thence, into Caſentino, into the Vale of Arno, to the Vale of Chiana, and the Vale of Teueri, and bee alſo readie, ſo aunſwere to anye motion whatſoeuer, that the Enemie coulde make. But Nicholo conſidering the barreinneſſe of thoſe places, aunſwered, that his Horſes,

did not eate ſtones, and ſo went to the Borgo of S. Sepulchro, where he was friendly receiued. From thence hee practiſed to winne the fauoure of the inhabitants, of the Cittie called Castello: who being friendes to the Florentines, refuſed him. Alſo deſiring to haue the Perugini at his deuotion, hee went with fortie horſe vnto Perugia: and was receiued (being there a Cittizen borne) verie louingly, yet within fewe dayes after hee became ſuſpected. For albeit both with the Gouernour and the Cittizens, hee practiſed manie things, yet nothing was brought to paſſe. But receiuing of them eight thouſand Duckets he returned to the Camp. Then hee deuiſed how to take Cortona from the Florentines,
               Practiſe to ſurpriſe Cortona. which beeing diſcouered before the time of execution, that deuiſe came not to effect. Among the chiefe Cittizens of that Towne, was Bartholomeo di Senſo, who one euening going by commaundement of the Captaine to take the Guard of one of the gates, was by a Countrey man his friende, aduiſed not to goe thither, vnleſſe hee were content there to be ſlaine. Bartholomeo deſirous to vnderſtand the bottome of that matter, founde there were ſome practiſe made with Nicholo: which Bartholomeo by authoritie of the Captaine reuealed, and made ſure the chiefe of the conſpiracie. Then doubling the Guarde of the Gate, tarried there till Nicholo did come. Who at his arriuall, vnderſtanding the matter was diſcouered, returned to his Camp. During that thinges were in Toſcana thus handled, and that the Dukes ſouldiers had gained little: Lombardy grewe vnquiet, with loſſe and diſaduanntage of the Duke. Becauſe the Earle Franceſco, ſo ſoone as the ſeaſon of the yeare ſuffered, came foorth with his Armie to the field, and for that the Venetians had ſupplied their Forces vppon the Lake, the Earle thought good firſt to make himſelfe Lorde of the Water, and then driue the Duke from the Lake: (which done) all other thinges would be eaſily brought to paſſe. Then with the Nauie of the Venetians, he aſſaulted the Dukes Gallies, and had the victorie. Hee alſo tooke thoſe Caſtles which were holden of the Duke. In ſo much, as the Dukes other ſouldiers who beſieged Breſcia by lande, vnderſtanding this ouerthrowe, retyred. In this ſorte was Breſcia after three yeares ſiege deliuered. This victorie had, the Earle marched towardes his enemies,The ſiere of Breſcia remoued. who were come to Soncino, a Caſtle vppon the Riuer of Ogglio, where hee diſlodged them, and forced them remooue to Cremona. There the Duke made head, and on that ſide defended his Countries. But the Earle day by day drawing nearer, and the Duke fearing to loſe either all or part of his Countrey, founde how vnaduiſedly hee had done to ſende Nicholo into Toſcana. And to amende that errour hee wrote vnto Nicholo in what tearmes hee ſtood: praying him, with what ſpeed he poſsiblie might, to leaue Toſcana, and returne into Lombardy. The Florentines in this meane ſpace, by order of their Generalles, had ioyned their ſouldiers with the Popes Forces, and made head at Anghiari, a Caſtle at the foote of the mountains, which diuided the Vale of Teuere, from the Vale of Chiana, foure myles from S. Sepulchro, where the fieldes be large to receiue Horſe men, and fit for all actions of warre. And becauſe they had intelligence of the Earles victorie, and the reuocation of Nicholo, they thought that without the ſword, or more labour, the warre was ended. Therefore wrote vnto their Generals not to fight, for that Nicholo could not manie dayes remaine in Toſcana. This Commiſsion became knowne to Nicholo, who ſeeing that of neceſsitie hee muſt depart: to leaue nothing vnattempted, hee determined to fight, ſuppoſing to finde the enemie altogither vnprouided, and not looking for anye Battayle at all. Whereunto hee was alſo animated and encouraged by Rinaldo, the Earle of Poppi, and diuerſe other baniſhed men of Florence, who knewe theyr

owne deſtruction to be certaine, if Nicholo did remoue thence: but by fighting they hoped either to winne the victorie, or loſe it with honor. This reſolution made, the Army marched from the place where it was, till it came betweene the Cities of Castello and Borgo, and being come to Borgo, before that the enemies knew thereof, leuied from the Towne two thouſand men, who truſting to the vertue of the Captaine and his promiſes, being deſirous of ſpoyle, followed him. Then Nicholo with his Army, marched in Battle-wiſe towards Anghiari, & was within two miles of the enemie or leſſe, when by Micheletto Attendulo was ſeene a great duſt, who knowing the enemies to be there, warned euerie man to prepare himſelfe. The noyſe in the Florentine Campe was great; becauſe that Army encamped for the moſt part without Diſcipline, and ſuppoſed the enemie to be far off, ſo all the Florentines were more readie to flie then fight. For euery man was far from his own lodging, and diſarmed, either to refreſh himſelfe in that hotte ſeaſon, or to take ſome other delight. Yet ſo great was the diligence of the Gouernours and the Captaine, that before the enemies approached,The battle of Anghiari. they were on horſebacke, and prepared to reſiſt the charge. And as Micheletto was the firſt to diſcouer the enemies, ſo was he alſo the firſt that charged them, and with his ſouldiers made ſpeede to winne the Bridge which croſſeth the way not farre from Anghiari. And becauſe before the comming of the enemie, Pietro Giampagolo had cauſed the ditches to be caſt downe, which are on either ſide the waie: Micheletto ſtanding againſt the Bridge, Simoncino the Popes Coronell, togither with the Legate, ſtaied on the right hand, and on the left hand ſtood the Commiſſaries for Florence, and the foote men placed along the Riuer. Then had the enemie no other way open whereby hee might charge, but by the Bridge. Neither had the Florentines to fight but onely vppon the Bridge, ſauing that they commaunded their footemen, that if the footemen of the enemie did goe towardes the men of Armes; that then they with their Croſſebowes ſhould charge them: to the ende that the Florentine horſemen in paſsing the Bridge, ſhould not bee hurt on the ſide. So that they that gaue the firſt charge were by Micheletto brauely reſiſted: but afterwardes Astore and Franceſco Piccinino with their choyſe bandes, ſo furiouſly charged Micheletto, as they tooke from him the Bridge, and draue him to the foote of the hill, which leadeth vp to Anghiari. After that they were put backe by him, and forced to retyre beyonde the Bridge, and hee alſo charged them vppon the ſide. This fight continued two houres, for ſometime Nicholo, and ſometimes the Florentines, were Lordes of the Bridge. And although vppon the Bridge they were of equall force, yet both on that, and this ſide of the Bridge, Nicholo fought with great diſaduantage. Becauſe when the ſouldiers of Nicholo had paſſed the Bridge, they founde the enemies ſtrong vppon that ſtraight, and could not with like aduantage be charged: and thoſe that were wearie, might eaſily be, by freſh men ſupplied. But when the Florentines happened to paſſe, Nicholo could not ſo commodiouſly releeue his wearied men, beeing ſtraightned and holden in, with ditches and trenches: So as, though manie times Nicholo had wonne the Bridge, yet by the ſupplie of freſh enemies, hee was euer driuen backe. But when the Bridge was by the Florentines aſſuredly wonne, and that their forces were entered into the waie, Nicholo wanted time, through the furie of the enemie, and the incommoditie of the place, to ſupplie his ſouldiers. For they of the Vangarde were forced to mixt themſelues, with the Rearewarde: and ſo the one diſordering the other, all the whole Armye was forced to flie, and euerie man without anie reſpect ranne towardes the Towne.Nicholo Piccintino defeated. Then the Florentine ſouldiers beganne to ſpoyle: which ſpoyle of priſoners, armour, and horſes,

was great. For with Nicholo there was not ſaued aboue one thouſand horſes. They of the Borgo, who in hope of ſpoyle had followed Nicholo, were of ſpoilers, become a ſpoyle, bicauſe they were all taken and put to ranſome. Their enſignes and carriages were loſt, and the victorie was much more profitable for Toſcana, then preiudiciall for the Duke. For if the Florentines had loſt the battell, Toſcana had bene his, but he loſing the battell, loſt no other thing but the armour and horſes of his Army, which with plentie of money might be recouered. Neither could any warre be made in the countrey of another leſſe dangerous, then was the warre of thoſe dayes. For in ſo great an ouerthrow, and ſo long a fight (which continued from twentie to foure and twentie of the clock) more were not ſlaine then one man, and he alſo not hurt by the vertue of any other, but being falne from his horſe, was trodden vpon with horſes, and ſo died: with ſo great ſecuritie men fought in that age. The reaſon thereof is, that for the moſt part the ſouldiers fought on horſeback, and couered with armour, they were defended from death till they yeelded. And therefore finding thēſelues able to fight, they ſo did, and being not longer able, they yeelded. This conflict (for matters which happened both in and after the fight) was a ſigne of the great vnhappines of thoſe warres, bicauſe the enemies being vanquiſhed, and Nicholo returned into Borgo, the Gouernours of the Florentines would haue followed, and beſieged him there to haue the victorie ſullie. But ſome ſouldiers, and ſome Captaines alſo, refuſed to obey them, ſaying they would firſt carrie away the ſpoile, and cure the hurt men. Alſo (a thing more notable) the next day at high noone,VVant of diſcipline in the Florentines Campe. without leaue or reſpect either of the Gouernours or of the Generall, the ſouldiers went vnto Arezzo, and there beſtowed their ſpoile (which done) they returned to Anghiari. A thing ſo much againſt all order Militarie and Diſcipline of warre, that the remaine of any Army well ordered, might and would eaſily and deſeruingly haue recouered that victorie, which the Florentines vndeſeruedly had gotten. Beſides this, the Gouernours commaunding that all ſouldiers taken, ſhould be ſtayed, to the end, that the enemy might not grow and ſodeinly recouer ſtrength, yet were they preſently deliuered. All which things are greatly to be meruailed at. Firſt, how in ſuch an Army, there ſhould be vertue ſufficient to win victorie: And then, how there could be in any enemy ſo little value, as would be of ſo diſordered a people oppreſſed. But while the Florentines went, and returned from Arezzo, Nicholo gained time to go with his ſouldiers from Borgo, and marched towards Romagna, with whome alſo fled the Florentine Rebels, who ſeeing all hope failed for their returne to Florence, they deuided themſelues, and euery man tooke his owne way, ſome remaining in Italy, and ſome without, as they could find meane to beſtow themſelues. Of which number was Rinaldo, who made his habitation at Ancona: from whence (the rather to gaine himſelfe a celeſtiall countrey) hauing loſt his dwelling vpon earth, he went vnto the Sepulchre of Chriſt, and being returned home, at the marriage of one of his daughters ſitting at the table,The death of Rinaldo de A
                     •
                  b
                     •
                  zi. ſodeinly died: wherein fortune did fauour him, that in the day of his laſt ſorrow ſhe called him away. A man in euery fortune honourable, and would haue bene much more honourable, had he bene borne in a Cittie vndeuided. Bicauſe many times thoſe his vertues which in a factious Cittie did hinder him, in a Cittie vnited would haue aduanced him. The Commiſſaries then ſeeing the ſouldiers returned from Arezzo, and Nicholo departed, preſented themſelues before Borgo. The Borgheſi offered to yeeld to the Florentines, but they refuſed to receiue them. And in compounding this agreement, the Popes Legat grew ſuſpitious of the Commiſſaries, fearing they intended to take that Towne from the Church: in ſo much, as they grew to words of offence, and ſome diſorder would haue followed betwixt the Florentine and the

Popes ſouldiers, if the matter had bene more ſpoken of. But bicauſe euery thing paſſed according to the Legats deſire, all anger was pacified. While this aſſault of Borgo continued, aduertiſements were giuen, that Nicholo Piccinino was gone towards Rome, and (as others ſaid) towards La Marca. Whereupon the Legat, and the reſt thought good to marche towards Perugia, to ſuccour La Marca or Rome, if Nicholo directed his courſe to any of them. Barnardo de Medici followed, and Neri with the Florentines marched to ſurprize Caſentino. This reſolution made, Neri incamped before Ruſsina, and ſurprized it with the like furie, that he had taken Bihiena, Prato, Vecchio,
               Poppi beſieged. and Romena. From thence, he went to Poppi, and there lodged the Army, deuiding it into two parts, the one vpon the plaine of Certomondo, the other vpon the hill that reacheth to Fronzoli. The Earle ſeeing himſelfe both of God and men abandoned, ſhut himſelfe vp in Poppi, not hoping of any aide, but the rather to procure a compoſition leaſt to his diſaduantage. Neri there beſieging him, was deſired to accept compoſition. The conditions whereof were ſuch, as thereby he might hope to ſaue himſelfe, his children and goods portable, yeelding the Towne and his ſtate to the Florentines. When theſe capitulations were in making, the Earle came downe to the bridge of Arno, which paſſeth by the towne, and there with great ſorrow ſpake thus.The ſpeech of the Earle of Poppi to the Florentines commiſſaries. If I had well meaſured my fortune with your power, I ſhould now haue come as a friend to reioyce at your victorie, and not as an enemy, intreate you, that my miſerie might be pittied. This preſent chance, as it is to you honorable, and pleaſant, ſo is the ſame to me lamentable and grieuous. I was owner of weapon, horſes, ſubiects and riches, who can therefore meruaile though with griefe of mind I leaue them? If you will, and can command all Toſcana, of neceſsitie we muſt all obey you: and if I had not committed this errour, neither ſhould my fortune haue bene knowne, nor your liberalitie appeared. For if at this time you fauour me, you ſhall thereby giue to the world a teſtimonie of your mercie. Let therefore the vertue of your compaſsion, exceed the greatnes of mine offence: and be pleaſed that at the leaſt this onely houſe may deſcend to thoſe, of whome your aunceſtors haue receiued benefits.The Earle anſwered by N. Capponi. To whome Neri anſwered, that as he had hoped ouermuch in thoſe that could do little, ſo had he thereby in ſuch ſort offended the ſtate of Florence, as his fault ioyned with the conditions of the preſent time, muſt of neceſsitie take from him all his wealth, and be inforced to abandon that countrey, as enemy to the Florentines, which as their friend he would not poſſeſſe. For he had made ſo euill a triall of himſelfe, as he might not in any wiſe be ſuffered to remaine there, where at euery change of fortune he might be readie to offend the Florentine common wealth, for it was not him, but his countrey whome they feared. But if he were pleaſed to repaire into Germany, he might there remaine a Prince, ſith thoſe Citties did deſire him, and the Florentines for the loue of thoſe his aunceſtors whom he alledged, would be alſo therewith contented. Hereto the Earle in great collor replied, ſaying, that he would ſee the Florentines a great way further from him. So leauing all friendly communication, the poore Earle deſpairing of other remedie, yeelded his Towne to the Florentines. That done, taking his goods, his wife, and children, departed, weeping and lamenting for the loſſe of that Countrey, which his aunceſtors by the ſpace of 900. yeares had poſſeſſed. Theſe victories being known in Florence, were by the Gouernours of that State and the people with meruailous ioy receiued, and bicauſe that Barnardo de Medici knewe that Nicholo was to no purpoſe marched towards La Marca or Rome, he and his ſouldiers returned to Neri, and frō thence they went togither to Florence, where they were welcomed with all the greateſt honors that by order of that Cittie might be giuen to victorious Cittizens. And were in triumphant wiſe ſaluted by the Senators, the Captaines, and the whole Cittie.
            The end of the fift Booke.
         
         
            
            
               
                  royal blazon or coat of arms
               
            
            THE SIXT BOOKE.
            
               IT hath bene, and by good reaſon ought to be the intent of all thoſe that make warre, to inrich themſelues, and impoueriſh their enemie. Neither is victorie for other occaſion ſought, nor the poſſeſſions of the enemy to other end deſired, then thereby to make thy ſelfe mightie, and thy aduerſarie weake. It followeth therefore, that ſo oft as thy victorie doth impoueriſh thee, or thy gaines do weaken thee, either thou paſſe or come ſhort of the marke, whereunto the warre is directed. That Prince, and that State, is by the victories of warre inriched, which extirpeth the enemies, and becommeth Lord of the ſpoiles, and ranſomes. And that Prince or Common-weale is impoueriſhed, who cannot (though he be victorious) extirpate the enemy, or hath not to his owne vſe, the ſpoiles and ranſomes, but leaueth them to his ſouldiers. Such a Prince in his loſſes is vnhappie, and in his victories moſt infortunate, bicauſe in loſing he ſuffereth all iniuries which the enemy can do him, and in winning, muſt abide the offences of friends: which as they are leſſe reaſonable, ſo are they alſo leſſe tollerable, ſeeing that by impoſitions, and new exactions, he is againe to burden his owne ſubiects. That Prince then, in whome is any generoſitie of minde, cannot reioyce at ſuch a victorie whereat all his ſubiects be conſtrained to lament. The auncient and well ordered Common weales were wont by conqueſts to fill their Treaſuries with gold and ſiluer, to giue rewards to the people, to forgiue tributes, and to make triumphs and publique feaſtings. But the States of whome we write, firſt emptied their treaſure houſes, and after impoueriſhed the people, without aſſuring themſelues of their enemies. All which grew by their diſorderly proceeding in the warres. For when they tooke any priſoners, not holding them nor ſlaying them, the reuenge was no longer deferred, then the leaders of the enemy were furniſhed anew with horſe and weapon. Beſides that, the ſpoyles and raunſoms being giuen to the ſouldiers, the Princes victorious could not imploy the ſame in the next warre, but were forced to draw their prouiſion from the bowels of their owne people. Neither did that victorie bring foorth other benefite, then make the Prince greedie, and with leſſe reſpect to burthen them. For the ſouldiers had brought the warre to ſuch a paſſe (as both the victorious and the victored, if they would commaund their owne men) had like need of money, bicauſe the one was to arme them a new, the other to reward them. And as they vnmounted could not fight, ſo theſe without new rewards, would not. Whereby it followed, that the one inioyed not much of the victorie, the other felt little of the loſſe, ſeeing the victored was ſpeedily repaired, and the victorious could not in time purſue the victorie. This diſorder, and this peruerſe proceeding in warre, cauſed that Nicholo Piccinino was

againe ſet on horſeback, before his ouerthrow was knowne through all Italy, and made after greater warre then before he had done. This was the cauſe, that after the diſcomfit at Tenna, he could ſurprize Verona. This was the cauſe, that after the ſlaughter of his ſouldiers at Verona, he could recouer a greater Army, and come into Toſcana. This was the cauſe, that being ouerthrowne at Anghiari, before he arriued in Romagna, he was more mightie in the field, then before he had bene: and might thereby put the Duke of Milan in hope to defend Lombardy, which by his abſence was ſuppoſed to be welneare loſt. For when Nicholo had filled Lombardy with troubles, the Duke was brought to ſuch paſſe, as he began to doubt of his owne eſtate. And fearing his ruine might follow before the comming of Nicholo, (for whome he had ſent) to bridle the Earles furie, and with induſtrie to temper fortune, (which with force he could not) he reſorted to thoſe remedies which in like caſes had before time helped him.The Duke deſireth peace. He therefore ſent Nicholo da Este Prince of Farrara vnto Piſchiera (where the Earle was) to practice a peace, and perſwade that warre not to be for his aduantage. Bicauſe, if the Duke were brought to that weakeneſſe, that he could not mainteine his owne reputation, he ſhould be the rather eſteemed. And for more aſſurance that indeed he deſired peace, he offered him concluſion of the marriage, and would ſend his daughter to Farrara, ſhe promiſing (the peace made) to yeeld her ſelfe into his hands. The Earle anſwered, that if the Duke did faithfullie deſire peace, with eaſe he might finde it; as a thing both by the Florentines and Venetians wiſhed for. Yet did he miſtruſt the ſame much, knowing that before time, he had neuer made peace, but for neceſsitie, which being paſſed, he would alwaies returne to his old minde, and make warre. Neither could he beleeue, that the Duke intended the marriage, hauing bene before at his hand ſo many times mocked: Notwithſtanding, if the peace were concluded, he would after deale in the marriage as by friends he ſhould be aduiſed. The Venetians who without reaſon were ſuſpitious of their owne ſouldiers,The Venetiās miſtruſt the Earle Franceſco their Generall. of thoſe entertainements reaſonablie conceiued miſtruſt. Which the Earle being carefull to remoue, followed the warre with greater furie. Notwithſtanding, his mind was ſtil ſo tempered with ambition, and the Venetians were ſo infected with ſuſpition, as the reſt of that ſommer was paſſed without any enterpriſe of importance. In ſo much as Nicholo Piccinino being returned into Lombardy, and the winter begun, all the ſouldiers repaired to their lodgings: the Earle to Verona, the Duke to Cremona, the Florentines to Toſcana, and the Popes forces to Romagna. After the victorie at Anghiari, they aſſaulted Furli, and Bologna, with intent to take them from Franceſco Piccinino, who in the name of his father kept them. But that enterpriſe tooke none effect, yet their comming thither did ſo much terrifie the people of Rauenna, that with the conſent of Ostacio di Polenta, they abandoned the Pope, and yeelded their obedience to the Venetians, who in recompence of the towne (and to the end that Ostacio ſhould neuer recouer that from them by force,Ingratitude of the Venetians. which for want of wit he had giuen them) ſent him and his ſonne to die in Candia. In which enterpriſes, notwithſtanding the victorie of Anghiari, the Pope wanting money, ſould the Caſtell of Borgo Saint Sepulcro for twentie fiue thouſand Florins. In this eſtate all things being, in reſpect of the winter, euery man ſuppoſed himſelfe in ſafetie, and therefore of peace thought not at all: chiefely the Duke, held himſelfe by Nicholo, and the winter ſeaſon aſſured. For that conſideration, the parle of peace with the Earle was broken, and Nicholo with all diligence was ſet on horſeback, with euery other furniture for a future warre neceſſarie. Hereof the Earle being aduertiſed, went vnto Venice, to conſult with the Senators what was to be done the yeare following. Nicholo on the other ſide was readie, and ſeeing the enemy vnprepared, tarried not for the Spring, but in

the depth of winter paſſed Adda, and entred Breſciano, poſſeſsing himſelfe of all that Countrey (Adula and Acri excepted) and there ſpoyling and taking priſoners two thouſand of the Dukes horſes, who vnwares were there aſſaulted. But that which more diſpleaſed the Earle and Venetians, was, the reuolt of Ciarpellone, one of his chiefe Captaines. The Earle receiuing theſe newes, went ſodeinly from Venice, and being arriued at Breſcia, found that Nicholo had done thoſe diſpleaſures, and was returned to his lodging, ſo as he thought not good to kindle the warre againe, being in that ſort quenched. And ſith the enemy and time did giue opportunitie, thought good to prepare himſelfe, hoping the rather with the new yeare to be reuenged of old iniuries. He therefore procured that the Venetians ſhould call back their forces, which ſerued the Florentines in Toſcana: and commaunded, that the place of Gattamelata being dead, ſhould by Micheletto be ſupplied. The Spring being come,Micheletto Generall for the League. 
               Nicholo Piccinino was the firſt that marched to the field, and beſieged Cignano, a Caſtle diſtant from Breſcia twelue miles. To the reſcue whereof came the Earle, and betwixt theſe two Captaines, according to their cuſtome the warre was made. The Earle ſtanding in doubt of Bergamo, beſieged Martinengo, which Caſtle being eaſily wonne, the ſuccour of Bergamo could not be hard. That Cittie being by Nicholo greatly diſtreſſed, and hauing prouided ſo, as it could not receiue harme, but by the way of Martinengo, they manned it ſo fully, as behoued the Earle to goe vnto the ſiege thereof with all forces. Whereupon Nicholo with his whole Army placed himſelfe where he might impeach the Earle of his victuall, and was with trenches and bulwarks ſo fortified, as the Earle without his apparant danger could not aſſault him, and brought the matter to that paſſe, that the beſieger was in more perill then the people of Martinengo who were beſieged; in ſo much as the Earle for want of victuall, could neither continue the ſiege, nor for the peril he was in, depart thence. Thus the Dukes victorie was thought aſſured, and the Venetians and Earles ouerthrow ſeemed apparant. But fortune, (who neuer faileth of meane, to fauour her friends, and diſfauour her foes) made Nicholo Piccinino with hope of this victorie to become ſo ambitious and inſolent, as without reſpect to the Duke (and himſelfe alſo) by a meſſenger ſignified vnto him,A proude requeſt of Nicholo. that he had long time ſerued vnder his enſigne, and yet had not gained ſo much land as he could therein burie himſelfe: and was therefore deſirous to know wherewith his ſeruice ſhould be rewarded, ſith now it was in his power to make him Lord of Lombardy, and oppreſſe all his enemies. And to the end that of certaine victorie he might aſpect a certaine recompence, deſired to haue of his gift the Cittie of Piacenza, where being wearie of long trauell, he might ſometimes repoſe himſelfe: and in concluſion ſomewhat threatned to abandon the enterpriſe, if the Duke refuſed to ſatisfie his demaund. This preſumptuous and inſolent ſute, ſo highly offended the Duke, as he made choiſe rather to loſe the victorie, then conſent thereunto. And that which ſo many dangers and threatnings of enemies could not compaſſe, the inſolent behauiour of friends brought to paſſe, and the Duke reſolued to make a peace with the Earle.Peace betweene the League and Duke, and his daughter married to the Harle Franceſco. To whome he ſent Antonio Guidobuono of Tortona, and by him offered his daughter with the conditions of peace: which offer, was by the Earle, and all his Collegats greedily accepted, and the particularities betwixt them ſecretly concluded. The Duke then ſent vnto Nicholo, willing him to take a truce with the Earle for one yeare, alleaging he had bene ſo ſore burthened with charges, as he could not refuſe a certaine peace for a doubtfull victorie. Nicholo meruailed much at this reſolution, as one that knew not what might moue the Duke to ſhunne a victorie ſo certaine: and could not beleeue that for want of good will to reward friends, he would ſaue his enemies. Wherefore in the beſt manner he could, oppoſed himſelfe to this determination.

In ſo much as the Duke was conſtrained to threaten him, that if he were not conformable, he would giue him either as a priſoner to the enemy, or as a ſpoile to his owne ſouldiers. Then Nicholo obeied, but with no other minde, then he that by force abandoneth his friends and countrey: complaining his hap to be hard, ſith ſometimes fortune, and ſometimes the Duke, had taken from him the victorie ouer his enemies. This peace made, the marriage betwixt the Ladie Bianca and the Earle, was ſolemnized, and to her was allotted for dowrie the Cittie of Cremona. Which done, the peace was ratified in Nouember, the yeare 1441. where, for the Venetians, Franceſco Barbarigo, and Pagolo Trono, and for the Florentines, Agnolo Acciaiuolo, were Commiſsioners. In this contract, the Venetians gained Peſchiera, Aſola, and Lonato, a Caſtle belonging to the Marqueſſe of Mantoua. The warre thus ſtayed in Lombardy, it remained to take order for the troubles in the kingdome, which not being pacified, would be an occaſion to renew the warres in Lombardy. The King Rinato during the warres in Lombardy, had bene ſpoiled by Alfonſo of Arragon of all his Kingdome, ſaue only the Cittie of Naples, ſo that Alfonſo thinking to haue victorie in his owne hand, determined during the ſiege of Naples, to take from the Earle Beneuento; and other his Countreys thereabouts: for he thought the ſame without perill might be done by the Earles abſence, and his imployment in the warres of Lombardy.
               The warre betweene King Rinato and Alfonſo reuiued. This enterpriſe was by Alfonſo eaſily performed, and with ſmall trauell he ſurprized all thoſe Townes. But the newes of the peace in Lombardy being come, Alfonſo feared that the Earle, the rather for that his townes were taken from him, would ioyne with Rinato, and Rinato hoped for the ſame occaſion that he would ſo do. Rinato then ſent vnto the Earle, deſiring him to come to the aide of his friend, and the reuenge of his enemy. On the other ſide, Alfonſo intreated Philippo, that for the good will betwixt them, he would cauſe the Earle to be ſo much ſet a worke, as to attend greater matters, he might be inforded to let this alone. Philippo graunted this requeſt, not thinking what diſturbed that peace, which he, not long ſince, had made to his diſaduantage. Then he gaue the Pope Eugenio to vnderſtand, that the time was now come, to recouer thoſe Townes which the Earle had taken from the Church. And for performance of that enterpriſe, he offered him Nicholo Piccinino paid, ſo long as the warres continued. For (the peace now made) he remained with his ſouldiers in Romagna. Eugenio greedily entertained this counſell, aſwell for the diſpleaſure he bare to the Earle, as the deſire he had to recouer his owne. And though before time, he had bene with the ſame hope by Nicholo deceiued, yet now the Duke vndertaking the action, he miſtruſted no more deceipt, but preſently ioyned his forces with Nicholo, and aſſaulted La Marca. The Earle being ſo ſodeinly ſet vpon, ordered his ſouldiers, and marched towards the enemy. In this meane while, the King Alfonſo wonne Naples,
               The Cittie of Naples wonne by Alfonſo. whereby all that Kingdome (excepting Caſtle Nuouo) was at his deuotion. Then Rinato leauing that Caſtle well guarded, went from thence to Florence, where he was moſt honourably receiued, and there remaining a few dayes, finding he could not make warre any longer, went vnto Marſilia. Alfonſo in the meane while had taken the Caſtle Nuouo, and the Earle remained in La Marca, in ſtrength inferiour to the Pope and Nicholo, and therefore prayed the Venetians and Florentines to aide him with men and money. Letting them to vnderſtand, it was neceſſarie to bridle the Pope and the King, during the time he was able: for otherwiſe they were to looke for little good, ſeeing the Pope and King would ioyne themſelues with Philippo, and diuide all Italy betwixt them. The Florentines and Venetians for a time ſtood doubtfull what to do, aſwell bicauſe they knew not whether it were their beſt to be enemies to the Pope and King, as for that they were occupied with the matters of Bologna. Anibale Bentiuogli had driuen out

of that Cittie Franceſco Piccinino. And the rather to defend the ſame from the Duke, (who fauoured Franceſco) he ſent for aide to the Florentines and Venetians, and they did not denie him: ſo as being occupied in theſe matters, they could not reſolue to aſsiſt the Earle. But Annibale hauing ouerthrowne Franceſco Piccinino, and thoſe matters ſetled, the Florentines determined to aide the Earle: yet firſt to be aſſured of the Duke, they renewed the league with him, which the Duke refuſed not, hauing conſented that the warre ſhould be made vpon the Earle, ſo long as the King Rinato was in Armes. But ſeeing him vanquiſhed, and vtterly depriued of his Kingdome, he was not pleaſed that the Earle ſhould then be bereft of his Countrey. And therefore he not onely conſented to aide the Earle, but alſo wrote vnto Alfonſo, deſiring him to be pleaſed to returne to the Kingdome, and make no longer warre. Whereunto, albeit Alfonſo was vnwilling, yet being beholding to the Duke, determined to content him, and retired himſelfe with his Army to the other ſide of Tronto. While matters were thus handled in Romagna, the Florentines within themſelues became diſquiet. Among the Cittizens of moſt reputation and authoritie in Florence, was Neri, the ſonne of Gino Capponi, whoſe greatneſſe,Neri Capponi. Coſimo de Medici. 
               Coſimo de Medici aboue all others feared. For beſides his great credit in the Cittie, he was alſo greatly honored of the ſouldiers, hauing bene many times Generall of the Florentine Armies, and with his victorie, vertue, and well deſeruing, had gained their loue. Beſides that, the memorie of victories wonne by him and Gino his father, the one hauing ſurprized Piſa, and the other ouerthrowne Nicholo Piccinino at Anghiari, made him beloued of many, and feared of thoſe who deſired no companie in the gouernment. Among many other of the chiefe Captaines in the Florentine Army,Baldaccio Generall of the Florentine footmen. was Baldaccio of Anghiari, a man of warre moſt excellēt. For in thoſe daies, there was not any in Italy, that for vertue, perſon, & courage, could excell him, and had among the footemen (for of thoſe he was euer a leader) ſo much reputation, as all that ſort of ſouldiers in euery enterpriſe, and whenſoeuer he pleaſed, would willingly follow him. This Baldaccio loued Neri exceeding much, as a man whoſe vertue (wherof he was a witneſſe) ſo deſerued, which bred in the other Cittizens great ſuſpition. And they iudging to ſuffer him, was perillous, & to reſtraine him was moſt danger of all: determined to diſpatch him vtterly, which intent fortune greatly fauoured. Bartholomeo Orlandini was Gonfaloniere de Giuſlitia. He being (as is before ſaid) Captaine of Marradi, at ſuch time as Ni. Piccinino paſſed into Toſcana, cowardly fled & abādoned that paſſage, which by nature almoſt defended it ſelfe. This cowardice at that time greatly offended Baldaccio, who with words of reproofe & letters, made the ſame euerywhere knowne. Whereat Bartholomeo aſhamed & offended, did greatly ſtudy to be reuenged, hoping by the death of the accuſor, to cancell the fame of his infamie. This deſire of Bartholomeo being known to other cittizens, with ſmall labour he perſwaded them to the oppreſsion of Baldaccio, whereby in one act he might reuenge his priuat iniurie, and deliuer the ſtate frō that man, whom they muſt of force enterteine with peril, or diſcharge with diſaduantage. Therefore Bartholomeo being fully determined to kil him, conueied into his chamber many yong men armed. Then the Gonfalone ſeeing Baldaccio come into the market place (whither he reſorted daily to confer with the Magiſtrates of his charge) ſent for him, and he obeied. Being come, the Gonfaloniere met him, enterteining him with ſpeech touching his buſineſſe from chamber to chamber, till he came neare to that place where the armed men were hidden, and when he thought good, called them foorth. Baldaccio being diſarmed,Baldaccio murd
                     •
                  red by B
                     •
                  rtholomeo Orlandini. was preſently ſlaine, and throwne out of the windowe. From thence, hee was carried to the market place, had his head cut off, and made a ſpectacle for the people all that day. Of him there remained one ſonne by his wife called Annalena,
               
who within fewe yeares after died. This Annalena hauing buried hir ſonne and huſband, determined no more to marrie, but making hir houſe a Monaſterie, ſhut hir ſelfe vp therein▪ with many other noble women, where they verie holily liued and died. Her houſe in memorie of her, was after made a Monaſterie, by the name of S. Annalena (as at this preſent it is) and euer ſhall be. This action ſomewhat decreaſed the power of Neri, and tooke from him reputation and friends. Neither did that onely content the Cittizens in authoritie. For the tenne yeares of their office being paſſed, and their authoritie in the Balia ended, diuerſe men both by word and deedes tooke courage to complaine againſt the continuance of thoſe officers: and therfore the Gouernors thought for the holding of their authoritie, it was neceſſarie to haue their offices prolonged, giuing new commiſsion to friends, & oppreſsing their foes. For which conſideration,Florence reformed. in the yeare 1444. by their councels a new Balia was created, which reeſtabliſhed officers, giuing authoritie to a few, to create the Senate, reuiuing the Chancelorſhip of reformation: remouing Ser. Philippo Peruzzi, and in his place appointing one other to gouerne, according to the pleaſure of the great men: putting in priſon Giouan the ſonne of Simone Veſpucci. The gouernment thus ſetled, & the offices of ſtate taken anew, they turned their minds to matters abroad. Nicholo Piccinino being (as hath bene beforeſaid) abandoned by the King Alfonſo, and the Earle, with the helpe he had of the Florētines, became ſtrong, aſſailed Nicholo neare vnto Fermo, and there gaue him ſo great an ouerthrow, that Nicholo loſt wel-neare all his ſouldiers,Ni. Piccinino diſcomfited. and with a fewe fled into Montecchio. Nicholo tarried there all the winter to increaſe his army, and therein was helped by the Pope, & king Alfonſo. In ſo much as the ſpring time being come, and the other Captaines returned to the field, Nicholo was the ſtrōger, and the Earle brought to extreame neceſsitie, and had bene vtterly defeated, if the intent of Nicholo had not bene by the Duke altered. Philippo ſent for Nicholo, pretēding to haue occaſion by mouth to impart vnto him matters of great importance. Which Nicholo being deſirous to heare, abandoned a certaine victorie, for an incertaine pleaſure, and leauing Franceſco his ſonne to gouerne the army, went vnto Milan. The Earle vnderſtāding of his departure frō the Camp, would not loſe the opportunitie to fight in the abſence of Nicholo: and aſſaulting the army of Nicholo neare vnto the Caſtle of Monte Loro, ouerthrew it, and tooke Franceſco priſoner. Nicholo at his arriuall in Milan, ſeeing himſelf abuſed by Philippo, & vnderſtāding his camp to be brokē, & his ſon priſoner, with ſorow died, the yere 1445. being of the age of 64. yeares,Death of Ni. Piccinino. hauing bene a Captaine more vertuous then happie. Of him there remained two ſonnes, Franceſco, and Giacopo, who as they were of leſſe vertue then the father, ſo had they worſe fortune. By which meane, the ſouldiers bred by Braccio, were almoſt worne out, and the diſcipline of Sforza (alwaies holpen by fortune) became more glorious. The Pope ſeeing the army of Nicholo ſuppreſſed, and him dead, nor much hoping in the aide of Arragon, ſought to make peace with the Earle, which by mediation of the Florentines was concluded. The peace made in La Marca, all Italy had liued in quiet, if the Bologneſi had not diſturbed the ſame.Trouble in Bologna. There was in Bologna two mightie Families, Channeſchi, and Bentiuogli, of the one Annibale, and of the other Battista was chiefe. Theſe (to be the rather aſſured one of the others friendſhip) contracted a marriage. But betweene men which aſpire to one greatneſſe, though alliance may eaſily be made, yet friendſhip cannot. Bolognia was in league with the Florentines and Venetians, which league had bene concluded by meane of Annibale Bentiuogli, after they had driuen out Franceſco Piccinino. Battiſta knowing that the Duke deſired greatly to haue the fauour of that Cittie, practiſed with him to kill Annibale, and bring that Cittie vnder his enſigne. The order of this murther agreed vpon, the 24▪ of Iune 1445. Battiſta
               
with his men aſſaulted Annibale & ſlew him: which done, he proclaimed the Dukes name throughout the towne. At that time, the Commiſſaries for the Venetians and the Florentines, were in Bologna; and at the firſt rumor retired vnto their houſes, but afterwards perceiuing that the murtherers were not fauoured by the people (who were in great numbers armed, and aſſembled, lamenting the death of Annibale) they tooke courage, went towards them, & aſſailed the Canneſchi, whom in leſſe then one houre they ouerthrew; ſlaying ſome, and forcing the reſt to flie the Cittie. Battiſta not fleeing in time nor ſlaine, remained at his houſe and hid himſelf in a veſſell made for the keeping of corne. His enemies hauing all the day ſought him, and aſſured he was not gone out of the towne, threatned his ſeruants ſo much, as one of them at length diſcouered where he was. From thence he was taken out▪ and ſlaine, then drawne through the ſtreets, and at laſt burned: ſo as the victorie of the Duke, was of force ſufficient to perſwade Annibale to the enterpriſe, but not of power ynough to ſaue him from death. Thus by the death of Battiſta, and the fleeing of the Canneſchi, theſe tumuls were appeaſed. The Bologneſi remained in great confuſion, bicauſe there was not left of the houſe of Bentiuogli any man fit for gouernmēt. And for that there remained one ſonne onely of Annibale but ſix yeares old (who was called Giouanni) the Bologneſi feared leaſt among the friends of the Bentiuogli ſome diuiſion would grow, which might perhaps occaſion the returne of the Canneſchi, with the ruine of their countrey and faction. While the Bologneſi continued in this doubtfull imagination, Franceſco late Earle of Poppi being in Bologna, informed the chiefe Cittizens, that if they had deſire to be gouerned by one deſcended of the bloud of Annibale, he could informe them of ſuch a one. Declaring that about 20. yeares paſt, Hercole the Coſen of Annibale happened to be at Poppi, and had there carnall knowledge of a yong woman in that Caſtle, who was after deliuered of a ſonne called Santi,
               Santi Bentiuogli. whom Hercole diuerſe times affirmed to be his. And it ſeemed to be a thing likely, for that the child ſo much reſembled Hercole, as liker it could not be. His words were belieued by thoſe Cittizens, and they deſerred no time to ſend vnto Florence, to find out the yong man, and perſwade with Coſimo di Medici, and Neri Capponi, that they might haue him. The ſuppoſed father of this Santi was dead, and the yong man liued vnder the tuition of an Vncle of his called Antonio Caſceſe. This Antonio was rich, without children, and friend to Neri. The matter being vnderſtood, Neri thought fit, neither to reiect the motion, nor imbrace it, but commaunded that Santi in the preſence of Coſimo, and thoſe that were ſent frō 
               Bologna, ſhould ſpeake with him. Then order being taken for their meeting, Santi was by the Bologneſi not only honored, but alſo (as it were) adored. Then Coſimo calling Santi aſide, ſaid vnto him, there is none that in this matter can better counſell thee, then thy ſelfe, for thou art to take that choiſe whereto thine own mind is inclined. If thou be the ſonne of Hercole Bentiuogli, thou wilt diſpoſe thy ſelfe to ſuch actions as be worthie of thy father and his houſe, but if thou art the ſonne of Agnolo Caſceſe, thou ſhalt remaine in Florence, and imploy thy life baſely in the art of clothmaking. Theſe words much incouraged the yong man, for where he had before refuſed to take the matter vpō him, he ſaid now that he would be directed in all by Coſimo and Neri. Then they reſolued with the meſſengers of Bologna to apparrell him, horſe him, and man him, and ſo in honorable wiſe conuey him to the Cittie, there to take the gouernment: where he after gouerned with ſo great wiſedome, that notwithſtāding the greater part of his predeceſſors had ben by their enemies ſlaine, yet he peaceably and honorably liued & died. After the death of Nicholo Piccinino, & the peace made in La Marca, Philippo deſired to entertaine a Captaine to gouerne his Army, and ſecretly practiſed with Ciarpellone, one of the Earles chiefe Leaders, and grew with him to compoſition. Ciarpellone prayed

leaue of the Earle to goe to Milan, to take poſſeſsion of certaine Caſtles, which in the late warre were by Philippo giuen him. The Earle miſtruſting that which was, (and to the end the Duke ſhould not be ſerued to his diſaduantage) firſt ſtayed him, and ſhortly after put him to death, alleaging he had bene by him abuſed. Therewith Philippo was exceedingly angrie, and the Florentines and Venetians much pleaſed, as they that feared leaſt the Earles forces and the Dukes power ioyned in friendſhip. This anger was occaſion to reſuſcitate new warre in La Marca. In Rimini, Giſmondo Malateſti was Lord, who being ſon in law to the Earle, hoped to haue poſſeſsion of Peſaro: notwithſtanding the Earle hauing ſurprized it, gaue it to Aleſſandro his brother. Wherewith Giſmondo grew greatly offended, and the more bicauſe Federigo di Montefeltro his enemy, by the Earles fauour, had vſurped Vrbino. This was the cauſe that Giſmondo ioyned with the Duke, and ſollicited the Pope & King to make warre vpon the Earle. Who to the end Giſmondo ſhould feele the firſt fruits of that warre which he deſired, thought to preuent him, and ſodeinly aſſailed him. Whereupon Rome & La Marca were on the ſoden brought into tumult, bicauſe Philippo, the king, and the Pope, ſent great aide to Giſmondo: and the Venetians and Florentines furniſhed the Earle, though with no men, yet with plentie of money. Neither was Philippo content to make warre in Romagna, but he alſo determined to take from the Earle Cremona and Pontremoli: yet was Pontremoli by the Florentines, and Cremona by the Venetians defended.New warres in Lombardy. So that by theſe meanes the warre in Lombardy was renewed, and therein ſomewhat done in Cremoneſe. Franceſco Piccinino Generall for the Duke, was by Micheletto, and the Venetian forces at Caſale defeated. By which victorie, the Venetians hoped to take the Dukes ſtate from him, and ſent their Commiſſarie to Cremona, aſſailing Ghiraadada, and poſſeſſed all ſauing Cremona. Afterwards they paſſed Adda, ſpoiling the countrey hard to the gates of Milan. Thereupon the Duke deſired aide of Alfonſo, declaring what perill would enſue to the kingdome, if Lombardy were in the Venetians hand. Alfonſo promiſed to ſend him ſouldiers, who without conſent of the Earle could with difficultie paſſe. Then Philippo intreated the Earle not to abandon his father in law being aged and blind. The Earle ſound himſelf offended with the Duke for hauing moued the warre againſt him. On the other ſide he miſliked the greatneſſe of the Venetians,
               The Earle his friendſhip deſired both by the Duke and Venetians. his money grew low, and the ſame was ſcarcely ſupplied by the Lords of the League. For the Florentines feared no more the Duke, which was the cauſe they eſteemed the Earle, and the Venetians deſired his ruine, iudging that the ſtate of Lombardy could not be taken from them but by the Earle. Notwithſtanding, while Philippo ſought to draw him into his pay, offering him the commaundement of all his ſouldiers, ſo that he would forſake the Venetians and reſtore La Marca to the Pope. They alſo ſent Embaſſadors vnto him, promiſing him the poſſeſsion of Milan, if they could win it, and the perpetuitie in the gouernment of their men of warre, if he would ſtill follow the warre in La Marca, and impeach the comming of aide from Alfonſo into Lombardy. Thus were the promiſes of the Venetians great, and their deſerts of him greater, hauing begun that warre, to ſaue Cremona for the Earle. On the other part, the iniuries done by the Duke were freſh, his promiſes not faithfull nor great. Yet did the Earle much doubt what reſolution to make. For of the one ſide, the obligation of the league, their well deſeruing of him, and their promiſes of pleaſures to come, did moue him. On the other, the intreatie of his Father in lawe, and chiefely the poiſon which hee feared to be hidden vnder the great promiſes of the Venetians, did ſtay him; ſuſpecting leaſt their promiſe of that ſtate, if hee ſhould hap to win it, might not be performed: hauing none other hold, but their bare promiſe, whereunto no wiſe Prince, vnleſſe it were for great neceſsitie, had euer truſted. Theſe difficulties of the

Earles reſolution, were remoued by the ambition of the Venetians, who hoping to ſurprize Cremona by meanes of ſome intelligence they had within the Cittie, vnder another pretence cauſed their ſouldiers to marche neere vnto it. But that enterpriſe was diſcouered by thoſe that guarded the towne for the Earle, whereby the treaſon tooke no effect, and they thereby wan not Cremona, but vtterly loſt the loue of the Earle, who preſently thereupon laying all reſpects apart, ioyned himſelfe with the Duke. Now was Pope Eugenio dead, and in his place ſucceeded Nicholao quinto. The Earle had his whole Army at Cotigniola, readie to paſſe into Lombardy. Thither came newes, aduertiſing the death of Philippo, which was the laſt of Auguſt,Death of Duke Philippo of Milan. in the yeare 1447. Theſe newes grieued the Earle exceedingly, bicauſe he thought his army not fully paid, would be vnreadie, & feared leaſt the Venetians being in armes, would become his enemies. For hauing abandoned them & ioyned with the Duke, he feared Alfonſo his continuall enemy, not truſting either the Pope, or the Florentines. Theſe, bicauſe they were in league with the Venetians, and the other, for that he did poſſeſſe ſome townes belonging to the Church. Notwithſtanding, he determined to ſhew his face to fortune, and according to the chances therof to proceed. For many times by doing ſomewhat, ſecrets are diſcouered, which by ſtanding ſtil could not be knowne. Great hope he conceiued in thinking, that if the Milaneſi would be defended frō the ambition of the Venetians, that of force they muſt imploy him and his ſouldiers. Therof taking courage, he marched into the countrey of Bologna, and from thence to Modena and Regio, ſtaying with his forces at Lenza, from whence he ſent vnto Milan to offer his ſeruice. Some of the Milaneſi hauing buried their Duke, deſired to liue in libertie, and ſome others were contented to receiue a Prince. Of thoſe which deſired a Prince, ſome would haue the Earle, and ſome the King Alfonſo, whereby thoſe that loued libertie, being more vnited, became the ſtronger part, and framed after their faction a ſtate and gouernment, which was neuertheleſſe diſobeyed by many Citties of the Dukedome, imagining that they might alſo (as Milan did) enioy their libertie. And others alſo, which aſpired not thereunto, did likewiſe refuſe to yeeld vnto the Milaneſi. The Citties of Lodi & Piacenza gaue themſelues to the Venetians. Pauia & Parma would be free. The Earle vnderſtanding theſe confuſions, went vnto Cremona, whither his Embaſſadors and the Embaſſadors of Milan came with this cōcluſiō, that he ſhould remain Captain general of the Milaneſi,
               The Earle made Generall for the Milaneſi. with thoſe conditions laſt ſet down by the Duke Philippo, adding thereunto that the Earle ſhould haue Breſcia, till he ſurpriſed Verona. And being poſſeſſed therof, to yeeld vp Breſcia. Before the death of this Duke, Pope Nicholo at his aſſumptiō ſought to make peace amongſt all the Italian Princes. For the compaſsing whereof, by Embaſſadors he practiſed, that the Florentines ſhould ſend vnto him at the time of his creation, deſiring him to appoint a Parliament at Farrara, to procure therein either a long truce, or a perfect peace. Vpon which occaſion in that Cittie aſſembled the Popes Legat, the Embaſſadors for the Venetians, Embaſſadors for the Duke, & Embaſſadors for the Florentines. But thoſe which were looked for from King Alfonſo, appeared not. This King was then at Tiboli, accompanied with many men of warre, both on foote and horſeback. From thence he gaue countenance to the Duke, and it was thought that ſo ſoone as they had drawne the Earle to their ſide, they would openly aſſault the Venetians and Florentines. In the meane time, the Earles ſouldiers ſhould remaine in Lombardy, & the peace to be enterteined at Farrara, whither the King ſent not, ſaying he would ratifie all things the Duke would aſſent vnto. This peace was many dayes conſulted vpō, and after much diſputation cōcluded, that either it ſhould be perpetuall peace, or a truce for 5. yeares, at the election of the Duke, whoſe Embaſſadors being returned to Milan to vnderſtād his pleaſure, at their cōming thither found him

dead. The Milaneſi notwithſtanding his death, would needs haue the concluſion of peace allowed. But the Venetians did not conſent, hoping greatly to vſurpe that ſtate. And the rather, bicauſe Lodi and Piacenza ſodeinly after the Dukes death were yeelded vnto them:The Venetians aſpire to vſurpe the Duchie of Milan. whereby they hoped, either by force or compoſition within ſhort ſpace to become Lords of all the territorie of Milan, and in the end ſo diſtreſſe the Cittie, as it ſhould alſo be forced to yeeld before any man could reſcue it. And the rather they thus perſwaded themſelues, for that they ſawe the Florentines buſied in warre with King Alfonſo. That King being at Tiboli, and intending to follow the enterpriſe of Toſcana, as he had determined with Philippo, thinking therewith that the warre alreadie begun in Lombardy, would giue him time and commoditie deſired, to haue one foote into the ſtate of Florence, before ſuch time as he would openly make the warre,King Alfonſo aſſaulteth the Florentines. and for that purpoſe practiſed to win the Caſtle Cennina in the vpper vale of Arno, and wan it. The Florentines ſtriken with this vnlooked for accidēt, and ſeeing the King readie to march to their offence, hired ſouldiers, created the ten Magiſtrates, and according to their cuſtome, prepared all things for the warre. By this time the King with his Army was come to the countrey of Siena, labouring by all meanes to bring that Cittie to fauour him. Notwithſtanding, the Cittizens there ſtood firme in their friendſhip to the Florentines, and refuſed to receiue the King, either into Siena, or any other of their townes: yet did they prouide him victuall, whereof the importunitie of the King, and the force of the enemy might excuſe them. The King then thought not good to enter by the way of the vale of Arno, as he firſt determined, aſwell for that he had ſpoiled Cennina, as bicauſe the Florentines were partly furniſhed with ſouldiers, and therefore marched towards Volterra, ſurprized many Caſtles in the countrey thereto belonging. From thence, he marched into the countrey of Piſa, where, by the fauour of Arrigo and Fatio, Earles of Chirardeſca, he tooke ſome Caſtles, and aſſaulted Campilia, which being defended by the Florentines and the cold winter, he could not ſurprize. Then the King leauing certaine of his owne ſouldiers to guard the townes by him taken, and to defend the countrey, retired with the reſt of his Army to his lodgings in the countrey of Siena. The Florentines fauoured by that ſeaſon of the yeare, carefully laboured to prouide ſouldiers. Their chiefe leaders were Federigo Lord of Vrbino, and Giſmondo Malateſta of Rimino. And albeit there was betwixt them two ſome diſagreement, yet by the wiſedome of Neri, and Barnardetto di Medici, (Commiſſaries for the Florentines) they agreed ſo well, that notwithſtanding the hard winter continuing, they marched, and recouered thoſe townes which were loſt in the countrey of Piſa, and the Ripomerancie in the territorie of Volterra. They alſo bridled the Kings ſouldiers, who before had ſpoyled the ſea coaſt, ſo as with difficultie they might defend the townes committed to their guard. But the Spring time being come, the Commiſſaries drew forth all their ſouldiers, to the number of 5000. horſe, and 2000. footmen. And the King came with his, to the number of welneare fifteene thouſand, beſides 3000. at Campiglia. And when he intended to returne to the ſiege of that towne, he went to Piombino, hoping eaſily to win it, bicauſe the towne was not well furniſhed, he thought the hauing thereof profitable for him, and diſaduantagious for the Florentines; bicauſe, from thence he might protract the warres, and conſume them, hauing meane to victuall himſelfe by ſea, and diſturbe the whole countrey of Piſa. This aſſault greatly diſpleaſed the Florentines, and cōſulting vpō the matter, thought that if they might with their Army remaine in the bounds of Campiglia, that the King ſhould therby be inforced to depart either broken or diſhonoured. For which purpoſe they armed foure ſmall Gallies at Liuorno, and with them put into the towne of Piombino three hundred footemen, placing them at the Galdani, a place where

with difficultie they might be aſſaulted. For if they were lodged in the plaine vpon the Confines, the ſame was thought dangerous. The Florentines receiued their victuals from the Townes thereabouts, which being but fewe and not much inhabited, did ſcarcely furniſh them. So as the Armie ſuffered penurie, and moſt chiefly of wine: Becauſe none being there made, nor brought thither from other places, it was impoſsible for euerie man to haue ſo much as ſhould ſuffice him. But the King, notwithſtanding he were by the Florentines ſtraightly holden in, yet had he abundance almoſt of euerie prouiſion, by reaſon hee receiued it from the ſea. The Florentines therefore thought good; likewiſe to make proofe, if they might be by ſea releeued: and for that purpoſe loaded their Gallies with victuall, and ſent them thither. But in their paſſage they were encountred with ſeuen of the Kings Gallies, which tooke two of them, and ſuncke the others. This loſſe bereft the Florentine ſouldiers, of hope to be reuictualled. Thereupon two hundreth or more Pyoners for want of drinke fled vnto the Kings Campe: the reſt of the ſouldiers mutined, complayning that in thoſe hote places they could not remaine without wine, becauſe water was there moſt vnwholeſome. So that the Commiſſaries determined to abandon that place, and imploy their forces to recouer certaine Caſtles which remained in the Kings hand. Who on the other ſide, although he wanted not victual, being in force the ſtronger, yet was his Camp afflicted with ſickneſſe, bred there, by the infection of the aire, nere vnto the ſea: by mean wherof, almoſt euerie man was infected, and many of them alſo died. Theſe occaſions miniſtred communication of peace, wherin the King demaunded fiftie thouſand Florins, and Piombino to be left at his diſcretion. The matter being debated at Florence, by many deſirous of peace, the demands were thought reaſonable. For they were perſwaded a war ſo chargeable as that was, could not without great expence be mainteined. Notwithſtanding Neri Capponi went vnto Florence, and there with ſuch reaſons as he made, altered their minds. Diſſwading them vtterly to accept thoſe conditions: and the Florentines receiued the Lord of Piombino as recommended; promiſing both intime of warre and peace to defend him, if he would, (as hitherto he had) fight couragiouſly in defence of his owne Citie. The King vnderſtanding this reſolution, and ſeeing his owne Campe afflicted with ſickneſſe, brake vp, and retired with the reſt into the country of Siena; leauing behinde him two thouſand dead bodies. From thence he marched towards the kingdome, and being exceedingly offended with the Florentines, threatned the next Spring to make vppon them a new warre. While matters were thus handled in Toſcana, the Earle Franceſco became Generall of the Milaneſi, and before anie thing done, obteined the friendſhip of Franceſco Piccinino, who had likewiſe ſerued them, which he did, to the end that his enterpriſes might be the more fauoured, and by Piccinino the leſſe impeached. Then marched he with his Armie to the field, wherby the Citizens of Pauia, fearing they could not defend themſelues, and being on the other ſide, vnwilling to obey the Milaneſi, offered him the Towne, with condition that he ſhould not deliuer it to them. The Earle greatly deſired the poſſeſsion of that Citie, thinking that the hauing thereof would be a good beginning to colour his intent, being neither deteined with feare, nor abaſhed to breake his faith. For great men do call loſſe, a thing diſhonourable, but to compaſſe their deſire by craft, is accounted no ſhame at all. Notwithſtanding he doubted, leaſt his taking of the Towne in this ſort, would ſo offend the Milaneſi, as for that cauſe, they woulde yeeld themſelues to the Venetians: and if it were not taken by him, then he feared the Duke of Sauoia, to whom many of the Citizens were willing to giue it. So as by euerie of thoſe meanes, hee thought himſelfe bereft of the dominion of Lombardy: yet ſuppoſing it leſſe perill, to take the Citie for himſelfe then leaue it to an other, determined

to accept it, being perſwaded it was notwithſtanding poſsible to content the Milaneſi: whom he enformed of thoſe perils wherunto they ſhould fall, if he accepted not the Citie of Pauia. For that Citie (if it were by him refuſed) would yeelde to the Venetians or the Duke of Sauoia, in either of which caſes, their countrey ſhould be loſt, and therefore thought rather be contented to haue him their neighbour and friend,The Milaneſi iealious of the Earle. then any other that were more mightie, and their enemie. The Milaneſi were much troubled with this matter, imagining that the Earle had thereby diſcouered his ambition, and the end whereunto he tended. Yet thought they not good, to take knowledge thereof, becauſe leauing the Earle, they ſawe not whither to addreſſe themſelues, vnleſſe it were to the Venetians, whoſe pride and hard dealing they miſtruſted. Wherefore they reſolued, not to ſhake off the Earle, but for the preſent, by him to be be deliuered of thoſe inconueniences, hoping after to be alſo deliuered of himſelfe. For they were not onely aſſaulted by the Venetians, but alſo by the Genoueſi and the Duke of Sauoia, who made warre in the name of Carlo of Orliens, ſonne to the ſiſter of Philippo. But the Earle eaſily withſtood their mallice. Then were the Venetians his only enemies, who with a mightie Armie determined to ſurprize that ſtate, and had alreadie poſſeſſed Lodi, and Piacenza, wherunto the Earle brought his camp: and after a long ſiege ſacked that Citie. Which done, (becauſe the winter was alreadie come) he retired his men to their lodgings, and went himſelfe to Cremona; where with his wife he reſted all that winter. But the ſpring being come, the Armies of the Venetians and Milaneſi, returned to the field. The Milaneſi deſired to ſurprize Lodi, and after make peace with the Venetians. Becauſe the charges of warre did burthen them, and the fidelitie of their General was ſuſpected. For theſe reaſons they wiſhed a peace, as well to repoſe themſelues, as to be aſſured of the Earle. Then they reſolued, their Army ſhould beſiege Carrauaggio, hoping that Lodi would yeeld, ſo ſoone as the Caſtle could be taken from the enemie. The Earle obeyed the Milaneſi, although his intent was to haue paſſed Adda, and aſſault the country of Breſcia. The ſiege being laid to the Caſtle of Carrauaggio, hee trenched and fortified his Campe, leaſt happily the Venetians would aſſaile him. The Venetians on the other ſide, conducted by Micheletto their Generall, marched within two bowes ſhot off the Earles Campe, where diuerſe dayes both the Armies remained, the one many times offending the other. Notwithſtanding, the Earle ſtil beſieged the caſtle, & did ſo ſtraightly diſtreſſe it, as it was readie to yeeld: which greatly diſpleaſed the Venetians; fearing that the loſſe thereof would be the ruine of all the enterpriſe. Great diſputation aroſe among their Captaines, by what meanes it might be ſuccoured. But no other way could be deuiſed, then to aſſault the enemies in their trenches, which was exceeding daungerous. Notwithſtanding ſo greatly they eſteemed the loſſe of that Caſtle, as the Senate of Venice (beeing naturally fearefull to meddle with any matter either doubtful or dangerous) did chuſe rather to hazard all, then with the loſſe of that, to loſe the enterpriſe. They reſolued therfore by all meanes to aſſault the Earle, & one morning earely charged him on that ſide where they thought he was weakeſt. At the firſt charge (as it happeneth in thoſe aſſaults which be not looked for) all the Armie was diſmaid. Notwithſtanding, the Earle ſodeinly repaired the diſorders, & had handled the matter ſo, that notwithſtanding many aſſaults, the enemies were forced in the end,The Venetians defeated by the Earle Francefco. not onely to retire, but alſo were ſo purſued: that of their Camp (which was twelue thouſand horſe) not one thouſand was ſaued. All their goods were ſpoyled, and their carriages taken. So as neuer before that time the Venetians receiued any ouerthrow greater, or more terrible. Among the ſpoyles and priſoners taken in this conflict, was the Venetian Proueditor, who before that skirmiſh, and after during the wars, had vſed diuerſe opprobrious words of the Earle, calling him Baſtard and

Coward. But being become priſoner, remembring what hee had deſerued, and brought to the Earles preſence: according to the nature of proud & cowardly men (which is to be in proſperitie inſolent, and in aduerſitie abiect & vile) kneeled down before him, weeping, & deſiring pardon of his offences. The Earle tooke him vp by the arme, comforted him, and willed him to be of good cheare. And afterwards ſaid, that he maruelled much how a man of his wiſdom & grauitie, could commit ſo great an error, as to ſpeake euill of them that had not ſo deſerued. And touching the matter of ſlaunder, he knew not in what ſort Sforza his father, had vſed his mother Maddonna Lucia, becauſe he was not there preſent. So as of that which was done by them he could receiue neither blame nor commendation. But for his owne doings, he knew well, that nothing was by any man to be reprooued: and thereof both he and his Senate could fully and truly witneſſe with him. Whereof hee wiſhed him afterwards to be more modeſt in ſpeech, and in his proceedings more diſcreet. After this victorie, the Earle with his tryumphant Campe, marched to the territorie of Breſcia, and poſſeſsing all that country, ſetled his Campe within two myles of the Citie. The Venetians on the other ſide, hauing receiued this ouerthrow, feared, (as it came to paſſe) that Breſcia would be firſt aſſaulted, ſpeedily as they might, made prouiſion, and with all diligence, leuied forces, ioyning them to thoſe that remained of the old Campe. Therewith alſo by vertue of the League, deſired aid of the Florentines. Who being free from the warre of King Alfonſo, ſent vnto them one thouſand footemen, and two thouſand horſe. The Venetians by hauing theſe ſouldiers, gained time to entreate of peace. It hath bene long time a thing fatall to the Venetian ſtate,The Venetians fortunate. to loſe by warre, and recouer the loſſe by compoſition. And thoſe things which by the warres are taken from them, by the peace many times be reſtored double. The Venetians knew well, that the Milaneſi miſtruſted the Earle, and that he deſired not to be their Captaine, but aſpired to the principallitie of Milan. Alſo that it was in their choiſe to make peace with either of them: the one deſiring it for ambitiō, the other for feare. Then they choſe to make peace with the Earle,
               Peace betweene the Earle and Venetian
                     •
                  , without conſent of the Milaneſi. and deferred their aide for that enterpriſe: being perſwaded, that if the Milaneſi found themſelues deceiued by the Earle, they might grow ſo offended, as they would giue themſelues rather to anie other, then to him. Being then brought to this paſſe that they could not defende themſelues, nor would truſt vnto the Earle, they ſhould be enforced, (not hauing other refuge) to truſt vnto the Venetians. This reſolution made, they ſounded the diſpoſition of the Earle, and found him greatly diſpoſed to the peace: as deſirous that the victorie of Carrauaggio might be his, and not the Milanieſes. Then was there a compoſition concluded, wherein the Venetians bound themſelues to paie vnto the Earle, ſo long as he deferred the taking of Milan, thirteene thouſand Florines for euerie moneth: and during the reſt of the warre, to aide him with foure thouſand horſe, and two thouſand footemen. And the Earle for his part did binde himſelfe to reſtore to the Venetians, all Townes, priſoners, and euerie other thing by him taken, and reſt contented with thoſe Townes onely, which the Duke Philippo at his death poſſeſſed. This agreement being knowne in Milan, did bring much more ſorrow to that Citie, then the victorie of Carrauaggio had giuen gladneſſe. The chiefe Magiſtrates lamented, the people were ſorrowfull, the women and children wept, and all with one voyce, called the Earle diſloyall and traytour. For although they beleeued not, either by intreatie or promiſes, to diuert him from his vnthankful intent, yet ſent they Embaſſadors to ſee with what face, and with what words, hee would maintaine his wickedneſſe. Who being come to the preſence of the Earle,The Oration of the Milaneſi to the Earle. one of them ſpake to this effect. Thoſe that deſire to obtaine any thing of others, were wont by entreatie, gifts, or threatnings, to perſwade them. So that, either by compaſsion,

by profit, or feare, they might compaſſe the thing which they deſired. But of cruell men, & couetous, being in their owne opinion mightie (thoſe three means not preuailing) nothing is obteined: ſo as whoſoeuer doth truſt by entreatie to make them pittifull, or by gifts to winne them, or by threatnings to feare them, deceiueth himſelfe. We therefore now knowing (though all too late) thy crueltie, thy ambition, and thy pride, are come vnto thee, not requiring any thing, nor hoping (though we had ſuch deſire) to obteine it, but to put thee in remembrance what benefites thou haſt receiued of the Milaneſi, and laie before thee, with what ingratitude thou doeſt requite them. To the end, that among ſo many iniuries by vs endured, wee may take this only pleaſure, to reproue thee. Thou oughtſt to remember wel, what thy ſtate and condition was, after the death of Duke Philippo. Thou wert enemie to the Pope and the King. Thou wert abandoned by the Florentines and Venetians, who either iuſtly offended with thee, or hauing no more neede of thee, wert become as their enemy. Thou wert weary of the war which thou hadſt made with the church; Thou hadſt fewe men, fewe friends, litle money, and bereft of all hope to be able to hold thine owne countrey, and thy auncient reputation: which ſhould eaſily haue bene taken from thee, had not our ſimplicitie helped. For we onely receiued thee, perſwaded with the reuerence we bare to the happie memorie of our Duke, vnto whom thou (being allied) didſt make vs belieue, that his loue would haue continued in his heires. And ſith to his benefits, we ioyned ours, that fauour and friendſhip ought to haue bene, not onely firme, but alſo inſeparable. In reſpect whereof, to the auncient compoſition, we ioyned Verona & Breſcia. What could we more giue thee or promiſe thee? And what couldſt thou either of vs or any others, in thoſe dayes either haue or deſire more? Thou haſt receiued of vs a pleaſure vnlooked for, and we for recompence, haue receiued of thee, a diſpleaſure not deſerued. Neither haſt thou deferred thus long to ſhew thy pride. For thou wert no ſooner General of our Armie, but contrary to iuſtice thou didſt receiue Pauia: which ought to haue warned vs, to what end thy friendſhip tended. Which iniurie we bare, ſuppoſing that victorie with the greatneſſe thereof, would haue ſatisfied thy ambition. But (alaſſe) thoſe who deſire all, cannot with inough be contented. Thou didſt promiſe that we ſhould enioy all things after that time by thee wonne. For thou kneweſt well, that which thou gaueſt at many times, thou mighteſt reſume at once: as it came to paſſe after the victorie of Carrauaggio; which being begun with bloud & mony, was after followed with our deſtruction. O how vnhappie are thoſe Cities which be conſtrained to defend their liberties: againſt the ambition of all thoſe that wold oppreſſe them: but much more vnhappy be they that are inforced to imploy in their defence, mercinarie and diſloyall ſouldiers, ſuch as thou art. God graunt that this our example may be a warning to others hereafter: ſith that of Thebe and Philip of Macidon, hath not warned vs. Who hauing wonne victorie of their enemies, became of their owne Captaine, firſt their enemie, and after their Prince. We may not therefore be blamed of other fault, then to haue truſted too much in thee, whom we ought not to haue truſted at all. For thy former life, & thy inſatiable mind, not contented with any honour or eſtate, might haue forewarned vs. Neither ought we to haue repoſed any truſt in thee, who had betraied the Lord of Lucca, fleeſed the Florentines and Venetians, litle eſteemed the Duke, nor regarded the King, and aboue all, with many iniuries offended God and his Church. Neither ought we euer to haue beleeued, that ſo many Princes had leſſe power of Franceſco Sforza, then the Milaneſi; or that he would keep his faith to vs, which to ſo many others he had broken. But this our ſmall wiſdom which we do blame in our ſelues, doth not excuſe thy breach of faith, nor purge thee of thoſe infamies, which our iuſt complaints ſhall diſperſe throughout

the world. Neither can it be, but that the pricke of thine owne conſcience will perſecute thee. For thoſe Armes which were prepared by vs, to aſſault others, muſt now by thy meanes offend our ſelues: ſo as thou wilt iudge thy ſelfe worthie of that puniſhment which murtherers haue deſerued. If ambition hath blinded thee, all the world being witneſſe of thy wickedneſſe, will force thee to open thine eyes. God alſo will cauſe thee to behold thy periuries, thy faith broken, & thy treaſons. Which things ſo greatly diſpleaſe him, that although hitherto, for ſome hidden good, hee hath not puniſhed, yet will he neuer fauour men ſo impiouſly diſpoſed. Do not therfore promiſe thy ſelfe a victorie certaine, ſith the iuſt ire of God will impeach it, and we are determined with loſſe of libertie to loſe our liues. Which if we be not able to defend, then haue we rather to ſubmit our ſelues to anie other Prince then to thy ſelfe. For if our ſinnes be ſuch, as againſt our willes we muſt fall into thy hands, be aſſured, a dominion begunne with craft and infamie, ſhall either in thee or thy children, ende with diſhonour and ſhame. The Earle notwithſtanding he felt himſelfe by the Milaneſi many waies touched, yet ſhewed he no extraordinarie chaunge, either by word or Ieſture: but anſwered hee was content to beare their chollor,The Earles anſwere. and the great iniurie of their vnwiſe words. Whereunto he would anſwere particulerly, if they were before a Iudge indifferent to determine the cōtrouerſie. For it ſhould appeare that he had not offended the Milaneſi, but prouided that they ſhould not iniurie him. And well he knew, after the victorie of Carrauaggio what they had done: when in ſtead of rewarding him with Verona or Breſcia, they ſought to make peace with the Venetians. To the end, that vpon him onely the diſpleaſure ſhould be laide: and they to enioy the profit of the victorie, with the honor of the peace, and all the commoditie reaped by the warre. So as they had no cauſe to complaine, though he had made that compoſition which they practiſed to bring to paſſe. Which reſolution being deferred, they were as much to blame their owne ingratitude, as find fault with him: and whether this were true or not, that God (whom they had called to reuenge their iniuries) would by the end of the war ſhew whom he moſt fauoured, or which partie did fight with moſt iuſtice. The Embaſſadours being departed, the Earle prepared to aſſaile the Milaneſi, and they made readie for defence. Then with the vertue of Franceſco and Giacopo Piccinino (who for the auncient hatred the Braccheſchi bare to the Sforzeſchi, had bene to the Milaneſi faithfull) they hoped to defend their libertie: at the leaſt, till ſuch time as they might diſunite the Venetians and the Earle, who they thought would not be long his friends nor faithfull. On the other ſide, the Earle knowing thereof, ſuppoſed it was wiſedome, to binde the Venetians by reward, which would holde ſure, though the bond of friendſhip were too weake. And therfore in giuing order for the war, he was content that they ſhould aſſault Crema, and hee with other forces would ſet vppon the reſt of that countrey. This compoſition laide before the Venetians, was the occaſion that they continued ſo long in the Earles friendſhip, till he had ſurprized all the dominion of the Milaneſi, and diſtreſſed the Towne ſo neare, as the dwellers therein could not make prouiſion of things neceſſarie. In ſo much, as diſpairing of all other aide, they ſent Embaſſadors to Venice, deſiring the Senate to haue compaſsion of their eſtate,Expoſtulation of the Florentines, to the Senate of Venice. and be pleaſed, (according to the cuſtome of Common-weales) to fauour libertie, and disfauor a Tyrant. Who preuailing and become Lord of Milan, could not be by the Venetians eaſily brideled. For they beleeued not, that he was content with the auncient conditions of the ſtate, but aſpired further. The Venetians not hauing yet the poſſeſsion of Crema (which before they chaunged countenance, they determined to haue) anſwered publikely, that in reſpect of the contract made with the Earle, they might not helpe the Milaneſi, yet priuately they enterteined the Embaſſadors with hope,

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
that a compoſition was likely to be made, and then, they ſhould aſſure their Senate to truſt vnto them. The Earle with his men was alreadie ſo near Milan, as they aſſaulted the ſuburbes, and the Venetians hauing taken Crema, thought good no longer to deferre the aiding of the Milaneſi with whom they compounded. Among the firſt Articles, they promiſed by all meanes to defend their libertie. This new contract made,The Venetians deſirous to abandon the Earle. they commaunded that all their ſouldiers ſeruing vnder the Earle, ſhould depart from him, and retire themſelues to the Venetians Campe. They alſo ſignified vnto the Earle, the peace concluded with the Milaneſi, to whom they had giuen twentie daies ſpace to accept it. The Earle maruelled not at this reſolution taken by the Venetians, becauſe that long before he had foreſeene it, and looked the ſame ſhould euerie day come to paſſe. Yet could he not but be ſorie, and feele the ſame offence, which the Milaneſi did, when he abandoned them. For anſwering of the Embaſſadors ſent from Venice to declare the League, he tooke the leiſure of two daies. During which time, he determined to enterteine the Venetians, and not abandon the enterpriſe. And therefore publikely ſaid, he would allow the peace, and ſent Embaſſadors to Venice, with a large Commiſsion to ratifie the ſame: yet ſecretly he commanded them, not to conclude, but with delaies and cauillations, to deferre the concluſion. And to make the Venetians the rather beleeue, that which hee ſpake, hee made truce with the Milaneſi for one moneth: retyring his Campe farre from the Citie, and diuiding his forces into other places neare hand, which he had lately wonne. This practiſe was occaſion of his victorie, for the Venetians truſting to the peace, were more ſlow in preparation to the warre, and the Milaneſi ſeeing the truce made, the enemie farre off, and the Venetians their friends, beleeued aſſuredly that the Earle would abandon the enterpriſe. Which determination, by two means hindred them. The firſt was, becauſe they neglected to prepare for their own defence. The other, for that they laid the countrey open to the enemie. For the time then being fit to till the earth, they ſowed great ſtore of corne: by meane whereof, the Earle might the more eaſily famiſh them. To the Earle on the other ſide, all thoſe thinges helped, which hindered the enemie: and beſides the delaie gaue him commoditie to take breath, and prouide for aide. In all this warre of Lombardy, the Florentines were not diſcouered to be of any ſide, nor to haue fauoured the Earle, either when he defended the Milaneſi, nor after. For the Earle hauing had no need, did not verie earneſtlie ſeeke it. Onely after the ouerthrow of Carrauaggio, by vertue of their Obligation in the League, they ſent aide to the Venetians. But the Earle Franceſco being alone, and wanting other refuge, was enforced inſtantly to praie aide of the Florentines,
               Coſimo de Medici, friend to the Earle Franceſco. both of the ſtate publikely, & of his friends priuately: chiefly of Coſimo de Medici, with whom he had euer bene in great familiaritie, and was by him in all his actions faithfully counſelled, and liberally ſupplied. Neither did Coſimo in this ſo great a neceſsitie forſake him: for as a priuate man he bountifully releeued him, and to follow the enterpriſe encouraged him. Hee alſo entreated the Cittie publikely to aſsiſt him where need required. At that time liued in Florence, Neri the ſonne of Gino Capponi, a Citizen of great power, who thought it not good for the Citie, that the Earle ſhould poſſeſſe Milan, ſuppoſing it more profitable for Italy, that hee ſhould ratifie the peace,Neri Capponi againſt the Earle. then proſecute the warre. Firſt he doubted leaſt the Milaneſi for the diſpleaſure they bare to the Earle, would yeeld wholly to the Venetians, which would be the ruine of euerie man. Then he iudged if the Earle ſhould happen to ſurprize Milan, that ſo great forces and countries ioyned togither, were to be feared. And if he were inſupportable, being an Earle, aſpired to the title of Duke, no man ſhould endure his pride. Wherefore, he thought better both for the Common-weale of Florence, and all Italy, that the Earle ſhould continue with his reputation in Armes,

and Lombardy to be diuided into two common-weales, which would neuer ioyne in the offence of an other, and one of them alone, could not offend: and for bringing this to paſſe, he ſaw no better meane, then not to aide the Earle, and maintain the old league with the Venetians. Theſe reaſons were not of the friends of Coſimo accepted: becauſe they thought that Neri did make them, not becauſe he thought them good for the common-weale, but for that he would not, that the Earle being friend to Coſimo, ſhould aſpire to be Duke. Fearing leaſt by that means, Coſimo ſhould become ouer mighty: & Coſimo contrariwiſe proued, that aiding of the Earle, was both for Italy & that common-weale moſt profitable. And that it was no wiſe conceit, to thinke that the Milaneſi could cōtinue free, becauſe the qualitie of their citie, their maner of life, & the factions inueterated there, were contrary to the forme of all ciuil gouernment: ſo as, it behoued that the Earle ſhould become Duke, or els the Venetians wold poſſeſſe it. And in that choyſe, there was no man ſo witleſſe, that knew not whether it were better to haue at hand a mightie neighbour, or a more mightie enemie. Neither could he thinke it to be doubted, that the Milaneſi (for hauing warre with the Earle) would yeeld their obedience to the Venetians. For the Earle hauing a factiō in Milan, & not they, whēſoeuer they could not defend themſelues as free, they wold rather yeeld to the Earle, then to the Venetians. Theſe diuerſities of opinions held the citie doubtful what to determine. Neuertheleſſe in the end was cōcluded: that Embaſſadors ſhould be ſent to the Earle to entertein a peace, & if they found him ſtrong or likely to haue the victory, then to conclude: or not, to vſe cauillations & delaies. Theſe Embaſſadours were at Reggio, before they vnderſtood that the Earle was become Lord of Milā. For the Earle ſo ſoone as the time of truce was ended, enuironed the citie with ſouldiers, hoping within ſhort ſpace, in deſpight of the Venetiās, to ſurprize it: becauſe they were not able to ſuccour it, ſauing on that ſide towards Adda: which paſſage, might eaſily be impeached, and it was not feared, (the winter being come) that the Venetians would encamp there. Alſo the Earle hoped, before the winter ſhould paſſe, to haue the victory, and the rather by the death of Franceſco Piccinino, who had only left Giacopo his brother to gouerne the Milaneſi. The Venetians had ſent an Embaſſador to Milan, to encourage thoſe Citizens to ſtand to their own defence, promiſing them great and ſpeedie ſupplie. During that winter, ſome light skirmiſhes happened betwixt the Venetians and the Earle. But ſo ſoone as the ſeaſon ſuffered, the Venetians vnder the conduct of Pandolfo Malatesta, brought their Army to Adda: where they conſulted, whether it was beſt to aſſault the Earle,The Venetians aide the M
                     •
                  laneſi againſt the Earle. and thereby trie their fortune. Pandolfo their Capteine, thought not good to make that triall, in reſpect of the Earles vertue, and the ſufficiencie of his armie: but hoped it was poſsible without fighting more ſafely to oppreſſe him: becauſe the Earle at that preſent, was with the lacke of corne greatly diſtreſſed. His aduiſe therefore was, that the campe ſhould not diſlodge, wherby the Milaneſi might ſtil hope of ayd, and not by diſpair yeeld them to the Earle. This opiniō was by the Venetians allowed, as wel in reſpect of ſecuritie, as that they thought the Milaneſi, being in ſo great neceſsitie, ſhould be enforced to yeeld to their dominion, perſuaded that they wold neuer giue thēſelues to the Earle, by whō they had bin many waies iniured. In this meane ſpace the Milaneſi were broght almoſt into extreme miſery, & in that citie (naturally aboū
               ding with poore people) many died of famin, wherat the inhabitants murmured and cōplained. The magiſtrats therby grew afraid, & carefully prouided that the people ſhuld not gather togither. For although the multitude doth not haſtily diſpoſe it ſelf to miſchief, yet whē it happē to be fully bēt, euery litle accidēt doth moue it. It hapned that 2. men of mean cōditiō, were near to the new gate, talking of the calamities of the city, & their miſery, deuiſing what means might be wroght for redres therof.

Others drew vnto them, till they were a good number. Therby a brute was blowne through Milan, that the inhabitants neare to the new gate were alreadie in Armes. Then all the multitude (which aſpected onely occaſion) tooke Armes and created Gaſparo da Vicomercato their Captain, & went to the place where the magiſtrates were aſſembled: whom they ſo terrified, that ſo many as could, did flee, the reſt were ſlain. Among whom Leonardo Veniero, the Venetian Embaſſador was murthered: who had before that time reioyced at their miſerie, and was thought to haue bene the occaſion of the miſchiefe and famine. Thus the multitude (as Lords of the Citie) among themſelues conſulted, what was to be done, to deliuer them from ſo manifold ſorrowes, wherinto they were entred. And euery man thought good to yeeld the citie (ſith the libertie could not be preſerued) to ſome Prince that were able to defend it. Some ſaid to the king Alfonſo, ſome to the Duke of Sauóia, & ſome to the French king. Of the Earle no mā made mentiō, ſo great was yet the offence of the people towards him.Gaſparo Vicomercato his counſell. Notwithſtanding ſeeing they could not reſolue vpon any, Gaſparo Vicomercato was the firſt that named the Earle: declaring at large, that if they would be diſcharged of the warre, there was no other way but to chuſe him; becauſe the people of Milan had neceſsitie of certain & preſent peace, & could not tarry long in hope of future relief. Moreouer he excuſed the actions of the Earle, accuſing the Venetians, and all the other Princes of Italy, becauſe they would not, ſome for ambition, & ſome for couetiſe, that Milan ſhould continue free. And therfore being forced to depart with libertie, it was beſt to yeeld to ſuch a one, as could & would defend it. So as by that ſeruitude, they might at the leaſt gain peace without further loſſe, or war more dangerous. This ſpeech was with great attentiō hearkned vnto, & euery man with one voice cōſented that the Earle ſhould be choſen, and Gaſparo was made Embaſſador to call him: who by commandement of the people, went vnto the Earle to preſent him this pleaſant & happie newes. The Earle willingly accepted the ſame & entered into Milan as Prince,The Earle Franceſco become Duke of Milan. 1450. the 26. of February, in the yere 1450. And was there with exceeding gladnes receiued, euē by thoſe who not lōg before had hated & defamed him. The newes of this victory being brought to Florence, order was taken with the Embaſſadors ſent frō thence (and were already vpon the way towards the Earle) that in ſtead of entreaty of peace with him as Earle, they ſhuld cōgratulate the victory as Duke. Theſe Embaſſadors were by the Duke honorably receiued, & bountifully enterteined. For he knew wel that againſt the power of the Venetians, he could not find in all Italy, more faithful nor more mighty friends, then the Florentins. Who hauing remoued feare of the Viſconti, thought they ſhould be forced to fight with Aragon & Venice. Becauſe the houſe of Aragon then Kings of Naples, was their enemie in reſpect of the friendſhip by them borne to the houſe of France: and the Venetians knew that the auncient feare of the Viſconti, was freſh, and that carefully they had perſecuted them; wherefore doubting the like perſecution, ſought their ruine. Theſe matters were the occaſion that the new Duke was eaſily induced to friend the Florentines, and that the Venetians and the King Alfonſo,
               League betwixt King Alfonſo and the Venetians. agreed to ioyne againſt their common enemie: binding themſelues at one ſelfe time, to take armes; & that the King ſhould aſſault the Florentines, and the Venetians ſet vpon the Duke. Who being new in the ſtate, was not (as they thought) neither able with his owne forces to withſtand them, nor with the aide of others could be defended. Yet becauſe the league betwixt the Florentines and Venetians continued, and that the King after the warres of Piombino had made peace with them, they thought not good to breake that peace,Embaſſadors from Venice to Florence. till ſuch time as they had ſome colour to make warre. Wherefore both the one & the other, ſent Embaſſadors to Florēce, to ſignifie in the behalf of their Lords, that the league was made not to offend any man, but to defend their Countries.

And moreouer the Venetians complained, that the Florentines had giuen paſſage to Aliſandro, brother to the Duke of Lunigiana, whereby he with his forces paſſed into Lombardy: and that they were alſo the Authors and Councellours, to make the agreement betwixt the Duke and the Marqueſſe of Mantoua. All which things (they ſaid) were preiudiciall to their ſtate, and the friendſhip betwixt them. Whereſore friendly wiſhed thē to remember, that who ſo offendeth an other wrongfully, doth giue occaſion to him that is offended, iuſtly to ſeek reuenge: and he that breaketh the peace, muſt euer looke to find war.The Embaſſador anſwered. The anſwer of this Embaſſage was by the Senate committed to Coſimo: who in a long and wiſe Oration, laid before them all the benifits which his citie had beſtowed vpon the Venetian common-weale. Declaring how great dominion they had wonne by means of the mony, the men, & counſel, of the Florentines. And aſſured them, that ſith the Florentines did occaſion the friendſhip, no cauſe of warre ſhould euer proceed from them. For they hauing bene euer louers of peace, commended greatly the agreement betwixt them, ſo as for peace, and not for war the ſame were made. But he maruelled much of the Venetian complaints, & that of ſo ſmall & vain matters, ſo great a common-weale wold make account. But if they had bene worthie conſideration, yet was it knowne to the world, that the Florentine country was free, and open to all men, and the Duke was ſuch a one as to win friendſhip with Mantoua, had no need, either of counſel or fauour. Wherfore he doubted, that theſe complaints, had vnder them hidden, ſome ſecret poiſon not yet perceiued. Which ſo being, euery man ſhould eaſily vnderſtand, that as the Florentines friendſhip did profit them, ſo their diſpleaſure could hinder them. Thus for that time the matter was lightly paſſed ouer, & the Embaſſadors ſeemed to depart wel inough cō
               tented. Notwithſtanding, the league being made, the maner of the Venetians and the Kings proceedings, did occaſiō the Florentines & the Duke, rather to looke for ſome new war, then hope of firme peace.League betweene the Florentines and Duke. Therefore the Florentines ioyned in league with the Duke, & in the mean while, the euil diſpoſition of the Venetians was diſcouered: becauſe they made league with the Saneſi, & baniſhed all the Florentines, with euery other perſon ſubiect to the ſtate of Florēce. Shortly after, the king Alfonſo did the like, without any reſpect to the peace made the yeare before, & without iuſt cauſe or coloured occaſion. The Venetians laboured to gain the poſſeſsion of Bologna & for that purpoſe aided the baniſhed men of that Citie, who with many others, found means in the night to enter the towne. They were no ſooner within the walles, but themſelues made an Alarum. Whereat Santi Bentiuogli ſuddeinly ſtart vp, and knowing that the Citie was ſurprized by Rebels: (although hee were by many friendes counſelled, by fleeing to ſaue his life) yet would he in any wiſe ſhew his face to Fortune, take armes, and encourage others to do the like. He therefore with ſome others, made head & aſſaulted part of the Rebels, and brake them, ſleying many, and forcing the reſt to flee the Citie. Whereuppon euery man iudged, that hee had made good proofe to be of the right race of Bentiuogli. Theſe actions,Preparation for warre in Florence. brought vnto Florence a firme beliefe of the future warre. Therefore the Florentines reſorting to their auncient orders, created the ten Magiſtrates for the war, entertained new Captaines, ſent Embaſſadors to Rome, to Naples, to Venice, and to Siena, procure aid of their friends, diſcouer ſuſpects, gaine the good will of thoſe that were neutrall, and ſounde the determination of enemies. Of the Pope they could get nothing but general words, curteſie, and perſwaſion to peace. Of the King they vnderſtood only his vaine excuſes for diſcharging the Florentines, and offered to giue ſafe conduct to euerie man that deſired it. And albeit he went about by all meanes, to conceale the intention of the new warre, yet the Embaſſadours knewe well his euill meaning, and detected manie dealinges of his, to the diſaduauntage of their Common-weale.

With the Duke they renewed the League, fortifying the ſame with ſundrie Obligations: and by his meanes gained the good will of the Genoueſi: cancelling all former quarrels. Notwithſtanding that the Venetians had laboured manie wayes, to impeach that compoſition, and intreated the Emperour of Constantinople to baniſh from his countries all the Florentine Nation. So greatly they grew into hate by this war, and ſo great force had their deſire of gouernment, as without reſpect, they ſought to oppreſſe thoſe who were the cauſe of their greatneſſe. Neuertheleſſe by that Emperour they were not hearkened vnto. The Embaſſadours for the Florentines, were by the Venetian Senate forbidden to enter into their Countrey: alleaging that they being in league with the King, might not (without his priuitie) giue them audience. The Saneſi enterteined the Embaſſadours with curteous words, fearing to be ſurprized before the league could defende them: and therefore thought good not to ſtirre thoſe Armes, which they were not able to reſiſt. The Venetians and the King (as was then coniectured) would haue ſent Embaſſadors to Florence, to iuſtifie the warre. But the Embaſſadour for the Venetians, would not enter into the Florentines dominion, and the Kings Embaſſador durſt not alone execute that meſſage. Whereby the Embaſſage was not performed. And the Venetians by meanes thereof, knew that they were litle eſteemed of the Florentines, they (a few months paſt) eſteemed not much. During the feare of theſe motiōs, whō the Emperour Federigo the third,The Emperour Federigo in Florence. came into Italy to be crowned, the thirtie day of Ianuary, in the yeare 1451. And entring into Florence with a thouſand fiue hundred horſes, was by that Cittie, moſt honourably receiued and enterteined, till the ſixt of February. At which time hee tooke his iourney from thence towards his Coronation at Rome, where he was ſolemnely Crowned and married to the Empreſſe, being come thither by ſea. Theſe ceremonies performed, the Emperour returned towards Germany, and came againe to Florence in the moneth of May: where he was vſed with the ſame honours he had there before receiued. Alſo in his returne, hauing bene pleaſured by the Marqueſſe of Farrara, for recompence the Emperour granted vnto him the Cities of Modina & Reggio. During all theſe doings, the Florentines omitted not their preparation for the war, giuing themſelues reputation, and the enemie terror. They and the Duke ioyned league with the French King, for defence of all their countries in generall. Which league with great magnificence and reioycing, they publiſhed throughout all Italy. By this time was come the yere 1452. when in May, the Venetians thought good no longer to deferre the warre againſt the Duke.The Duke of Milan aſſaulted. Wherefore with ſixteene thouſand horſe, and ſixe thouſand footemen, they aſſaulted him towards Lodi: and at the ſame time the Marqueſſe of Monferato, either prouoked by his owne ambition, or by the Venetians requeſt, aſſaulted him on the other ſide, towards Aleſſandria. The Duke on the contrary part, had aſſembled eighteene thouſand horſe, and three thouſand footemen. And hauing furniſhed Aleſſandria and Lodi, he likewiſe fortified all thoſe places which the enemie might offend. Then with his ſouldiers he aſſaulted the country of Breſcia, where he greatly damaged the Venetians, ſpoiling that countrey, and ſacking thoſe townes which were not ſtrong. But the Marqueſſe of Monferato being broken by the Dukes forces at Aleſſandria, the Duke might with the more ſtrength encounter the Venetians, & aſſault their country. Thus the war of Lombardy proceeding, & therin ſundry accidents (not worthie memorie) hapning: it came to paſſe, that the like war begun in Toſcana betwixt the King Alfonſo, & the Florentines: which was performed with no more vertue, nor more peril,Foiano aſſaulted by Ferrando. thē that of Lōbardy. Ferrādo the baſtard ſon of Alfonſo, came into Italy, wth 12000. ſouldiers, conducted by Federigo Lord of Vrbino. Their firſt enterpriſe was to aſſault Foiano in the vale of Chiana: for hauing frendſhip of the Saneſi, they might that

way enter into the territorie of Florence. That Caſtle was weakly walled, and of ſmal receipt, therefore with no great number defended, yet thoſe few in the Caſtle were accounted at that time valiant and loyall ſouldiers. The number ſent by the Senate to guard that Caſtle, were 200. This Caſtle in that ſort prepared, was by Ferrando beſieged: and the vertue of thoſe within ſo great, and ſo litle the value of them without, that till the end of 36. dayes it was not wonne. The protract of which time, gaue the Cittie commoditie to prouide to defend other places of more moment, to aſſemble their forces, & put them in readineſſe. The enemy hauing takē this Caſtle, paſſed into Chianti, where they ſet vpon two ſmall towns belonging to priuate men, & could not win them; but marched from thence, and beſieged Castellina, a fortreſſe ſeated vpon the confines of Chianti, within ten myles of Siena; which place both by Art and Nature is exceeding weake: notwithſtanding (ſo baſe was the courage of this Campe) as it could not conquere that Caſtle of no force at all. For after they had beſieged it 44. dayes, they departed thence with ſhame. So ſmal terror was in thoſe armies, and ſo litle peril in thoſe wars, as thoſe townes which at this day are abandoned as impoſsible to be kept, at that time, as places impregnable, were defended. During that Ferrando remained with his Camp in Chianti, he made many roades into the Florentines country, ſpoiling that Prouince within ſixe miles of the Cittie, to the great loſſe and terror of the Florentine ſubiects. Who hauing by that time prepared forces to the number of eight thouſand, vnder the conduct of Aſtore di Faenza, and Giſmondo Malatesti, held the enemie aloofe towards the Caſtle of Colle, fearing alwaies they ſhould be forced to fight, and thought, that if they loſt not that day, they could not loſe the warre. Becauſe the ſmall Caſtles being loſt, might be recouered by peace, and the great townes were aſſured, by reaſon the enemie was not able to aſſaile them. The King had alſo vpon the ſea neare to Piſa, twentie ſaile of Gallies and Foyſts. And while La Castellina was aſſaulted, that Nauie battered the fortreſſe of Vade, which through the ſmall diligence of the Captaine was taken. By meane whereof, the enemie afterwards moleſted the country thereabouts. Which moleſtation was eaſilie remoued of certaine ſouldiers, aduenturers, ſent by the Florentines: who conſtrained the enemie not to retire far from the ſea ſide. The Pope during theſe warres, intermedled not, but where he hoped to make peace betweene the parties. For he refrained the warres abroad, fearing greater troubles at home.Steffano Porcari. In thoſe dayes liued Steffano Porcari, a Citizen of Rome, both for birth and learning (but much more for courage and magnanimitie of minde) to be honoured. This Steffano (according to the cuſtome of men, deſirous of glorie) thought to do, or at the leaſt to attempt ſome thing worthie memorie. Then imagining he could not take in hand any thing more worthie, then to deliuer his country from the ſubiection of the prieſts, & reduce it to the ancient libertie, reſolued to enterpriſe that action, hoping therby (if it were brought to paſſe) to be called a new founder and father of Rome.
               Some do ſuppoſe this Canto to be written, not vnto S. Porcari, but to Nicholo di Renzo, a gentleman Romane, by Petrarche, who therin ſerueth to diuine, that in Rome ſhuld ariſe a Knight famous thorowout all Italy. Thoſe things which gaue him hope of happie ſucceſſe, were the wicked conuerſation of the Prelates, with the diſcontentment of the Barrons and people. But aboue all other, he was moſt encouraged with certaine verſes written by the Poet Franceſco Petrarcha, in his ſong, which beginneth thus.

                  Spirto gentil, che quelle membra reggi:
                &c.

                  Sopra il monte Tarpeo, Canzon Vedrai
                  Vn Cauallier, che Italia tutta honora
                  Penſoſo Piu d'altrui, che di ſe ſteſſo.
               
This Steffano was perſwaded, that Poettes many times were inſpired with the diuine ſpirite of propheſie: Whereof hee conceiued, that fortune would aſſuredly

happen vnto him, which Petrarcha had in his verſes prophecied, and that himſelfe was the man, that ſhould be the executor of ſo glorious an enterpriſe: imagining that for eloquence, for learning, for fauour, and friends, there was no Romane to him comparable. This conceipt poſſeſsing him, he reſolued to execute the ſame; yet could he not ſo ſecretly practiſe, but by words, by conuerſation, and his manner of life, ſomewhat was diſcouered, and by that mean became ſuſpected to the Pope: who (to remooue him from the commoditie of doing harme) confined him to Bologna, and commaunded the Gouernor of that Citie euerie day to ſee him. Notwithſtanding, Steffano for this firſt diſgrace, diſmaied not; but with the more endeuour followed his enterpriſe: and by all ſecret & ſubtill meanes practiſed with his friends, going to Rome, and returning with ſuch ſpeed, as he might at times neceſſarie preſent himſelfe to the Gouernour. And ſo ſoone as hee had drawne a ſufficient number of men to be of his minde, determined without further delaie to attempt the enterpriſe: giuing order to his friends in Rome, that at a time prefixed, they ſhould prepare a ſolemne ſupper, where all the conſpirators ſhould meete, and euerie man bring with him his aſſured friends, and hee himſelfe before the ſupper were ended, would be there alſo. All things were done according to appointment, and Steffano arriued at the feaſt. After ſupper, apparrelled himſelfe in cloath of gold, and other ornaments, which gaue him Maieſtie and reputation. In that ſort, he came forth to the conſpirators, embracing them, & perſwading them with long ſpeech to be reſolute, and readie to performe ſo glorious an attempt. Then he deuiſed the order therof, appointing part of them, the next morning to ſurprize the Popes Pallace, & the reſt to call the people to armes. The ſame night (as ſome ſay) through infidelitie of the conſpirators, the matter was reuealed to the Pope. Others affirme, that it came to knowledge by thoſe that ſawe Steffano come into Rome. But howſoeuer it were, the ſame night after ſupper, the Pope cauſed Steffano, with the moſt part of his companions to be apprehended,Steffano put to death. and according to their merits put to death. Such was the end of this his enterpriſe. It may be, that ſome wil commend his intention, yet wil his iudgment of all men be reproued. Becauſe this and ſuch like enterpriſes, although they carry with them a ſhadow of glorie, yet in executiō they bring (almoſt euer) aſſured miſaduenture. The war had now continued in Toſcana almoſt one whole yeare, and the armies were returned to the field, in the yeare 1454. At which time, Aliſandro Sforza was come to the Florentines, with ſupply of two thouſand horſe. Wherby the Florentine army was wel encreaſed, and the Kings Camp diminiſhed. The Florentines thought good to recouer ſome things by them loſt, & ſo with ſmall labor gained the poſſeſsion of certaine Townes. Afterwardes they incamped before Foiano, which through negligence of the Commiſſaries, was ſacked: and the inhabitans being diſperſed, wold not willingly return thither, til ſuch time as by priuiledges & rewards they were allured. The fortreſſe of Vada, was alſo recouered: For the enemies ſeeing they could not defend it, did preſently abandon & burn it. During the time that theſe things were done by the Florentine army, the Kings ſouldiers fearing to come neare their enemies, retired themſelues towards Siena, many times ſpoiling the Florentines country, committing robberies, tumults, and exceeding great diſpleaſures. Neuertheleſſe that King omitted not to deuiſe ſome other way to aſſault the enemies, to cut off their forces, or by new troubles & aſſaults to keep them occupied. Gherardo Gambacorti was Lord in the vale of Bagno. He and his aunceſtors either by friendſhip or by obligation, had alwaies in times paſt, either as hired, or as recommended, ſerued the Florentines. With him the King Alfonſo practiſed to haue that countrey, and offred in recompence therof, an other in the kingdome. This practiſe was diſcouered at Florence, yet to ſound the diſpoſitiō of Gherardo, they ſent an Embaſſador to remēber him

of the obligation of his anceſtors, and his owne alſo, and therewith to perſuade him to continue his fidelitie towards that Commonweale. Gherardo ſeemed to meruaile much at this meſſage, & with great othes proteſted, that neuer any diſloiall thought had entred his minde; and that he would come vnto Florence, and make his owne perſon a pledge of his fidelitie: neuertheleſſe, being at that preſent ſick, he could not goe thither, but with the Embaſſador would needs ſend his ſonne to remaine in Florence as an hoſtage. Theſe words, & this demōſtration brought the Florentines to beleeue, that Gherardo had ſaid troth, and his accuſer being accounted a lier, was not regarded, nor the accuſation any more thought vpon. Notwithſtanding, Gherardo being ſtill ſollicited by the King, at length conſented to the practiſe. And hauing concluded the ſame, the King ſent to the Vale of Bagno a Knight of Ieruſalem called Puccio, and with him diuerſe bands of ſouldiers, to take poſſeſsion of the Caſtles and Townes belonging to Gherardo.
               The Vale of Bagno reuolted from the Florentines. But thoſe people of Bagno being affectionate to the Florentines, verie vnwillinglie promiſed their obedience to the Kings Commiſſaries. Puccio hauing taken poſſeſsion of all that ſtate, wanted onely to poſſeſſe himſelfe of the fortreſſe of Corzano. When Gherardo deliuered this poſſeſsion, there was preſent among many others, one called Antonio Gualandi of Piſa, a yong man verie valiant, and ſuch a one, as was with the treaſon of Gherardo greatly diſcontented. He conſidering the ſcite of the fortreſſes, and finding by the countenance of thoſe ſouldiers who guarded it, that they were likewiſe diſpleaſed. While Gherardo ſtood at the gate to let in the Kings ſouldiers, Antonio came betwixt him and the Caſtle, and with both his hands forcibly thruſt him out, commaunding the Guard to ſhut the gates againſt ſo wicked a Traytor, and keepe the ſame to the vſe of the Florentines. This rumor being heard in the Vale of Bagno, and other places neare vnto it, all the people tooke armes againſt the King, and followed the Florentines enſigne. This matter aduertiſed to Florence, the Florentines cauſed the ſonne of Gherardo (remaining with them in hoſtage) to be put in priſon: and ſent ſouldiers to Bagno to defend the countrey for them, changing that gouernment from a principalitie into a Vicariato. But Gherardo, hauing thus betraied both his Lords and his owne ſonne, with great difficultie fled, leauing his wife, his daughter, and his ſubſtance, at the diſcretion of the enemy. This accident ſtood the Florentines greatly in ſtead: For if the King had poſſeſſed that Countrey, he might with ſmall charge, and eaſily haue gotten the Vale of Teueri, and ſpoiled Caſentino, whereby he ſhould haue ſo much troubled the ſtate, that the Florentines could not haue bene able to encounter the forces of Arragon which remained at Siena. The Florentines beſides their owne preparation in Italy, the rather to oppreſſe their enemies,Rinato de Angio called into Italy by the Florentines. had ſent Agnolo Acciaiuoili Embaſſador to the French King, to perſwade him to licence Rinato de Angio, to come in the aide of the Duke and them. By which meanes he ſhould defend his friends, and afterwards being in Italy, attend the ſurprizing of the Kingdome: whereunto they offered him aide both of men and money. During the warres in Lombardy and in Toſcana (as is before ſaid) the Embaſſador concluded with King Rinato of Angio, that before the end of Iune, he ſhould come into Italy with two thouſand and foure hundred horſe: and that at his arriuall in Aleſſandria, the League ſhould giue him thirtie thouſand Florins readie paiment: and euery moneth after, during the warres, tenne thouſand. The King then by vertue of this league, comming into Italy, was by the Duke of Sauoia, and the Marqueſſe of Monferato impeached: for they being friends to the Venetians, would not permit him to paſſe. Whereupon the King was perſwaded by the Embaſſador of Florence, to returne to Prouenza with certaine of his army, and from thence to paſſe into Italy by ſea. And on the other ſide, to perſwade with the French King to procure ſo much fauour of that Duke, that the reſt of his ſouldiers

might come through Sauoia. According to this counſell the matter was handled, and the King Rinato went by Sea into Italy, conueying the reſt of his Army through Sauoia by the French Kings mediation. The King Rinato was by the Duke Franceſco moſt honorably receiued, and hauing ioyned the Italian forces with the Kings, they aſſaulted the Venetians with ſo great furie, that within ſhort ſpace they recouered all thoſe Townes in Cremoneſi which they had before loſt: and not ſo content, they ſurprized almoſt all the countrey of Breſcia. The Venetian army fearing to tarry in the field, retired to the walles of Breſcia. But the winter being come, the Duke thought good to withdraw his ſouldiers to their lodgings, appointing for the Kings aboad, the Cittie of Piacenza, where he remained all that winter, in the yeare 1453. without any other action performed. So ſoone as the time of yeare ſerued, and that the Duke was going to the field, in hope to diſpoſſeſſe the Venetians, of the reſt of their Countries vpon the firme land, the King Rinato ſignified vnto him, that of neceſsitie he was to returne into Fraunce. This intention of the Kings, ſeemed to the Duke not onely ſtrange, but alſo vnlooked for, and therefore greatly offended him: and albeit he went in perſon preſently to diſſwade him, yet neither his intreatie nor promiſes could take effect; but onely promiſed to leaue behinde him part of his forces, and to ſend his ſonne Giouanni to ſupplie his place in ſeruice of the League. This reſolution grieued not the Florentines, for they hauing recouered their Caſtles, feared not the King any longer. And on the other ſide, they deſired that the Duke ſhould not recouer more, then the townes in Lombrdy to him belonging. The King Rinato being gone, ſent according to promiſe his ſonne into Italy, who ſtayed not in Lombardy, but went preſently vnto Florence, where he was very honorably receiued. The matter thus handled by the King, did occaſion the Duke to be content with peace, and the Venetians, Alfonſo, and the Florentines, being likewiſe wearied, deſired the ſame. The Pope alſo by all meanes laboured to bring it to paſſe, bicauſe the ſame yeare Mahumetto the great Turk had taken Conſtantinople, and made himſelfe Lord of all Greece: which victorie terrified greatly all Chriſtians, but chiefely the Venetians and the Pope, who thought Italy was thereby in great danger. The Pope therefore deſired the Potentates of Italy to ſend Embaſſadors vnto him, with authoritie to eſtabliſh an vniuerſall peace; which commiſsion was performed: and notwithſtanding that altogither they ioyned, and ſeemed all to allow of the motion, they found neuertheleſſe therein great difficultie. The King required that the Florentines ſhould pay his charges in the warre paſt, and the Florentines would be paid themſelues. The Venetians demaunded Cremona of the Duke, and the Duke asked of them Bergamo, Breſcia, and Crema; ſo that theſe difficulties ſeemed impoſsible to be remoued: notwithſtanding, that which at Rome ſeemed hard to be concluded, at Milan and Venice prooued eaſie. For when at Rome the peace vniuerſall was practiſed,Peace betweene the Venetians and the Duke. the Duke and the Venetians betwixt themſelues made an agreement on the ninth of Aprill, in the yeare 1451. By vertue whereof, euery of them ſhould repoſſeſſe thoſe townes which were theirs before the warre. And it was graunted to the Duke, that he might recouer his townes taken from him by the Lords of Monferato and Sauoia. And to the other Princes of Italy, one moneth was allowed to ratifie the ſame. The Pope, the Florētines, the Saneſi, and the leſſer Potentates, within the time appointed, made their ratification. Moreouer, betwixt the Florentines, the Duke, and the Venetians, a peace was concluded for fifteene yeares. Onely the King Alfonſo among all the Italian Princes ſeemed therewith diſcontented, bicauſe he thought it was contrary to his reputation to be named in the contract of peace, not as a principall, but as an adherent. For which conſideration, he pawſed long, before he would lay downe his reſolution. But being ſollicited by ſundrie

ſolemne Embaſſages of other Princes, he was at length content (and chiefely by the Pope) to be perſwaded, and with his ſonne entred this league for thirtie yeares: confirming the ſame with alliances and croſſe marriages betwixt the Duke and the King, their ſonnes marrying one the others daughters. Notwithſtanding, to the end that ſome ſeeds of the warre might remaine in Italy, he conſented not to make the peace, before ſuch time as thoſe of the League would giue him leaue without their iniurie, to make warres vpon the Genoueſi, Giſmondo, Malateſti, and Aſtor Prince of Faenza. This concluſion made, Ferrando his ſonne then being at Siena, returned to the Kingdome, hauing ſithence his arriuall in Toſcana not gained any dominion, but loſt great numbers of ſouldiers. This vniuerſall peace being concluded, it was onely feared, leaſt King Alfonſo for the diſpleaſure he bare to the Genoueſi, would diſturbe the common quiet: but the matter came otherwiſe to paſſe, for the King did not openly moue any diſturbance, but (as it hath alwaies happened by the ambition of mercinarie ſouldiers) the peace was by them interrupted. The Venetians had (as their manner is) the warres being ended, diſcharged their Generall Giacopo Piccinino, who taking vnto him certaine other Captaines (likewiſe diſcharged) went into Romagna, and from thence to the countrey of Siena: where Giacopo ſtaying, begun the warre, and ſurprized certaine Townes belonging to the Saneſi.
               Troubles moued by Giacopo Piccinino, and ſupported by King Alfonſo. At the beginning of theſe troubles in the yeare 1455. died Pope Nicholo, and to him ſucceeded Caliſto tertio. This Pope, to repreſſe the new warre, aſſembled all the forces he was able, making Giouanni Ventimiglia his Generall; who with certaine Florentines, and other ſouldiers ſent from the Duke for that purpoſe, went againſt Giacopo, and fought with him neare vnto Bolcena: where notwithſtanding that Ventimiglia was taken priſoner, yet Giacopo had the worſt, and was forced to retire to Caſtalione della Piſcaia, and had he not bene by Alfonſo relieued with money, he ſhould then vtterly haue bene ouerthrowne; which reliefe, diſcouered that Giacopo had taken that enterpriſe in hand, with the priuitie and direction of that King. Alfonſo finding himſelfe diſcouered, to be reconciled to the other Princes conſenting to the peace, (whoſe fauour by meanes of this weake warre he had almoſt loſt) procured that Giacopo ſhould reſtore to the Saneſi all the townes he had taken from them, and they to giue him twentie thouſand Florins. And this agreement made, the King receiued Giacopo with his ſouldiers into the Kingdome. In thoſe dayes, notwithſtanding that the Pope intended to bridle Giacopo Piccinino, yet was he mindfull alſo of the defence of Chriſtendome, likely to be oppreſſed by the Turks. For which purpoſe, he ſent into all Chriſtian Countries Embaſſadors and Preachers, to perſwade with Princes and people, to arme themſelues for the aide of Religion,Pope Caliſto perſwadeth a generall war againſt the Turks. and to giue money and perſonall ſeruice to this enterpriſe, againſt the common enemy. He cauſed alſo ſolemne proceſsions to be made, declaring both publiquely and priuately, that he himſelfe would be among the firſt of the Chriſtians that ſhould aſsiſt that action, with counſell, money, and men. But the heate of this Crociata was cooled, with aduertiſements that the Turke and his army being at Bellgrado (a Caſtle of Hungary vpon the riuer of Danubio) was by the Hungarians hurt in his perſon, and his Camp broken, ſo that the Popes and Chriſtians feare, conceiued by the loſſe of Conſtantinople, was thereby ceaſed, and the preparation they made for the warre proceeded coldly. In Hungary likewiſe by the death of Giouanni Vaiuoda, Captaine of that victorie, the warre was diſcontinued. But returning to the matters of Italy, I ſay, that in the yeare 1456. the tumults moued by Giacopo Piccinino were ended: ſo that euery man hauing laid aſide armes, it ſeemed as though God had taken them in hand. For there happened in Toſcana moſt tempeſtuous windes,A meruailous rempeſt in Toſcana. ſuch as neuer before had bene heard of, nor ſhall be, which wrought moſt meruailous and memorable

effects. Vpon the 24. of Auguſt, one houre before day, there aroſe from the Sea towards Ancona a great and darke clowd, croſsing Italy, and entering the Sea towards Piſa, ſtretching two miles in compaſſe. This ſtorme was furiouſly carried, (and whither by naturall or ſupernaturall force) diuided into many parts, as it were fighting amongſt themſelues. And of thoſe broken clowds, ſome were hoiſed vp towards heauen, ſome violently caſt downe, and ſome with wonderfull ſpeed were turned round; but alwaies before them came a winde, with lightnings and flaſhing of fire, ſo terrible, as cannot be expreſſed. Of theſe broken and confuſed clowds, and of thoſe furious winds, and great flames, there grew ſo ſtrange a noiſe, as moued the people to greater feare, then any Earthquake or thunder euer had done: in ſo much as euery man thought the world was ended, and that the earth, the water, and the heauen, ſhould haue returned to the old Chaos. This fearefull ſtorme, whereſoeuer it paſſed, wrought meruailous and wonderfull effects. But the moſt notable of all, happened about the Caſtle of S. Caſsiano. This Caſtle is builded vpon the hill which parteth the Vales of Piſa and Grieue, eight miles diſtant from Florence. Betwixt that ſaid Caſtle, and the towne of S. Andrea, builded vpon the ſame hill, this furious tempeſt paſſed, not comming to S. Andrea, but at S. Caſsiano threw downe certaine turrets and chimneys: and neare thereunto ſubuerted whole houſes euen to the ground, and carried away whole roofes of the Churches of S. Martino a Bagnolo, and S. Maria della pace; bearing them from thence vnbroken, the ſpace of more then one mile. One man alſo a Carrier, was taken vp, and in the valley next vnto the way, both he and his Moyles found dead. Moreouer, all the greateſt okes and ſtrongeſt trees which would not bend at the furie of the tempeſt, were not onely broken, but alſo with violence borne farre from the place where they grew. Whereat, the next day, when the tempeſt was ceaſed, and men returned to thoſe places, they were greatly aſtonied, for they found the Countrey deſolate and ſpoiled, the houſes and the temples ouerthrowne, the people lamenting and beholding their houſes caſt downe, and vnder them their goods, their cattle, and their parents ſlaine: Which thing, both in the beholders and hearers thereof, moued a maruellous compaſsion. By this meane, it pleaſed God rather to threaten, then puniſh Toſcana. For if ſo great a tempeſt had fallen vpon any Citie full of houſes and inhabitants, as it fell vpon theſe oakes, trees, and ſmall houſes, one farre from the other, without all doubt, the deſtruction would haue bene greater, then the mind of man could haue conceiued. But it pleaſed God, by that ſmall example to reuiue in mens mindes, the memory of his power. But now to returne to our matter. The King Alfonſo (as is before ſaid) diſcontented with the peace, and ſeeing that the warre which he cauſed Giacopo Piccinino to make vpon the Saneſi without any reaſonable occaſion, had wrought no effect, he thought to moue an other with the allowance of the league.The Genoueſi aſſaulted by King Alfonſo. And in the yeare 1456. he aſſaulted the Genoueſi both by ſea and land, as deſirous to giue that ſtate to the Adorni, and depriue the Frigoſi who then gouerned. Beſides that, he cauſed Giacopo Piccinino to paſſe Tronto, and aſſault Giſmondo Malateſti, who hauing well manned his townes, regarded not much the aſſault of Giacopo, ſo as the enterpriſe of the King on this ſide tooke no effect at all. But that warre of Genoua occaſioned more warre to him and his Kingdome, then himſelfe looked for. At that time Pietro Fregoſo was Duke of Genoua; he fearing himſelfe to be of force vnable to withſtand the Kings aſſault, determined to giue that to an other which himſelfe could not hold: and yeeld it into the hands of ſuch a one that would (at the leaſt in that reſpect) defend him; ſo might he alſo hope in time to come, to be reacquited. Then ſent he Embaſſadors to Carlo the ſeauenth, King of France, and offered him the dominion of Genoua. Carlo accepted this offer, and to take poſſeſsion

of that Cittie, ſent thither Giouanni de Angio ſonne to King Rinato, who not long before was departed from Florence, and returned into Fraunce. For Carlo was perſwaded, that Giouanni hauing bene before imployed in Italy, knew how to gouerne that Cittie better then any other: hoping alſo, that being there, he might deuiſe vpon the enterpriſe of Naples, of which Kingdome, Alfonſo had diſpoſſeſſed his father Rinato. Then went Giouanni to Genoua, and being there, was receiued as Prince.Genoua in the poſſeſsion of the French King. All the fortreſſes belonging to the Cittie, with the whole gouernment, were deliuered to his hand. This accident diſpleaſed Alfonſo, thinking he had drawne in an enemy ouer mightie: yet not diſmayed therewith, couragiouſly followed his enterpriſe, and ſayled on with his Nauie, till he came vnder Villa Marina, at Ponto Fino,
               The death of King Alfonſo. where taken with a ſodeine diſeaſe, he died. By death of this King, Giouanni and the Genoueſi were deliuered of the warre, and Ferrando (who ſucceeded his father Alfonſo in the Kingdome) grew ſuſpitious, leaſt an enemy of ſo great reputation in Italy, might happily win the fauour of many his Barons, whoſe fidelitie he doubted, and whoſe mindes he knew deſirous of Innouation: for which reſpects, they might percaſe be perſwaded to ioyne with the French. He alſo inſtructed the Pope, whoſe ambitious mind (as he thought) aſpired to take from him this new Kingdome. His onely truſt was in the Duke of Milan, he being indeed no leſſe carefull of the Kingdome, then was Ferrando: for he miſtruſted, that if the French did preuaile, they would alſo labour to ſurprize his ſtate, which they had ſome colour to claime, as to them apperteining. That Duke therfore, preſently vpon the death of Alfonſo, determined to giue that Kingdome vnto Pietro Lodouico Borgia his nephew. Alſo (to make that enterpriſe ſeeme more honeſt and acceptable to the reſt of the Italian Princes) he publiſhed, that his intent was, to reduce that Kingdom vnder the Church of Rome: perſwading the Duke in that reſpect, not to fauour Ferrando, offering him thoſe townes which of auncient time he poſſeſſed in the Kingdome. But in the middeſt of theſe imaginations and new troubles, Pope Caliſto died,The death of Pope Caliſto and in his place was created Pio ſecundo, borne in Siena, and of the family of Piccolhuomini. This Pope minding onely to benefite the Chriſtians, and honor the Church, ſetting aſide all priuate paſsion, at the Duke of Milans requeſt, crowned the King Ferrando: thinking he ſhould better appeaſe the warres by mainteining of him in poſſeſsion, then by fauouring the French, to giue them the Kingdome; or if he ſhould (as Caliſto did) challenge it for himſelfe. For this benefite, Ferrando gaue vnto Antonio the Popes nephew, the principallitie of Malfi: and married him vnto his owne baſe daughter. He reſtored alſo Beneuento and Terracina to the Church. Then all men ſuppoſing that the armes of Italy were laid downe, the Pope tooke order to mooue the Chriſtians to make warre vpon the Turks, as it was before deuiſed by Pope Caliſto. At which time, there roſe great diſſention betwixt the Fregoſi and Giouanni de Angio Lord of Genoua: which diſſention, reuiued a warre of more importance, then was the other alreadie paſſed. At that time,The Genoueſi reuolted frō the french. 
               Pietrino Fregoſo happened to be at a Caſtle of his in Riuiera. He not holding himſelfe according to his merits rewarded, by Giouanni de Angio, (who by help of him and others of his houſe was made Prince) became open enemy to Giouanni. This diſcord pleaſed Ferrando, as that, which might onely be the meanes of his good ſpeed. Then ſent he men and money to Pietrino, hoping by his aide to driue Giouanni from that ſtate. Which he knowing, ſent into Fraunce to encounter Pietrino. There finding much fauour, he receiued a great ſupply, and went againſt Pietrino, who was become ſtrong alſo: ſo as Giouanni retired into the Cittie, where alſo in the night Pietrino entred, and poſſeſſed ſome places thereof: but the next morning was by the ſouldiers of Giouanni aſſaulted and ſlaine, and all his men likewiſe either ſlaine or taken. This victorie encouraged

               Giouanni to ſet vpon the Kingdome: and in October 1459. with a mightie nauie he departed from Genoua.
               The kingdome of Naples aſſaulted by Giouanni de A
                     •
                  gio. And landing at Baia, marched from thence to Seſſa, where he was by the Duke of that countrey receiued. Then came vnto Giouanni the Prince of Tarranto, the Cittizens of Aquila, with many other townes and Princes, in ſo much as that Kingdome was almoſt ruined. Ferrando ſeeing that, deſired aide of the Pope and the Duke. Alſo to haue the fewer foes, made peace with Giſmondo Malateſti, wherewith Giacopo Piccinino (being naturall enemy to Giſmondo) became ſo much diſpleaſed, as he diſcharged himſelfe from the ſeruice of Ferrando, and ioyned with Giouanni. Ferrando alſo ſent money to enterteine Federigo Lord of Vrbino, and within ſhort ſpace he aſſembled (according vnto that time) a great army. Then marched he to the riuer of Sarni, where he found the enemy, and fought with him: in which conflict,King Ferrando defeated. the forces of King Ferrando were ouerthrowne, and many of his principall Captaines taken. But notwithſtanding this ouerthrow, the Cittie of Naples, with a fewe other townes, and ſome Princes, continued faithfull to Ferrando, though all the reſt of the Realme, and Nobilitie, yeelded their obedience to Giouanni. Giacopo Piccinino perſwaded Giouanni to follow the victorie, and preſently to marche to Naples, thereby to poſſeſſe himſelfe of the chiefe Cittie of the Kingdome; which Giouanni refuſed to do, ſaying he would firſt ſpoile all the countrey, and then it would be more eaſie to ſurprize the Cittie, which was the cauſe, he failed to performe that enterpriſe: for he knew not, that the parts do more willingly follow the head, then the head doth follow them. After this ouerthrow, the King Ferrando being fled into Naples, thither reſorted vnto him diuerſe of his ſubiects, who were driuen from their countreys: then by all curteous meanes he leuied men and money to make a new Camp, ſending againe for aide to the Pope and Duke. From the one and the other of whome he was aided more ſpeedily and abundantly then before time he had bene, bicauſe they greatly feared, he ſhould otherwiſe loſe his Kingdome. King Ferrando in this ſort growne ſtrong, marched out of Naples, and hauing gotten ſome reputation, recouered alſo part of his loſt townes. During theſe warres in the Kingdome, a chance happened, that vtterly depriued Giouanni de Angio of reputation and meane to haue victorie in that enterpriſe. The Genoueſi being wearie of the French inſolent and couetous gouernment, tooke armes againſt the Kings Gouernour there, and forced him to flee to the little Caſtle of Genoua. The Fregoſi and the Adorni were content to ioyne in that action, and by the Duke of Milan they became furniſhed of money and men, both for the winning, and keeping the Cittie. So that the King Rinato with his nauie came to the ſuccour of his ſonne, and hoping to recouer Genoua, by meane of the ſmall Caſtle, in landing his ſouldiers, was ouerthrowne; and forced with ſhame to returne vnto Prouenza. Theſe newes being carried to the Kingdome of Naples, greatly diſmaied Giouanni de Angio: notwithſtanding, he ſtill followed his enterpriſe, and continued the warre, being ſerued by thoſe Barons who were rebelled, and could not looke for fauour of Ferrando. In the end, after many accidents, thoſe two royall armies ioyned battell,Giouanni de Angio vanquiſhed in battell. wherein, neare vnto the Cittie of Troia, Giouanni was vanquiſhed, the yeare 1463. This ouerthrow did not ſo much hinder the ſucceſſe of the King Giouanni, as did the reuolt of Giacopo Piccinino, who left him, and ioyned with King Ferrando: whereby being ſpoiled of his forces, he retired into Hiſtria, and from thence to Fraunce. This warre continued foure yeares, and was in the end loſt by his owne negligence, for it was many times in good way of victorie by the vertue of his ſouldiers. Therein the Florentines intermedled not apparantly, yet were they deſired by Embaſſadors of the King Giouanni of Arragon (newly come to that Kingdome by the death of Alfonſo) to aſsiſt the enterpriſe of Ferrando his nephew, as they had

bound themſelues by the league lately made with Alfonſo his father. To whome by the Florentines it was anſwered, that they were not by any obligation bound to aide the ſonne in that warre, which was begun by the father: for as the ſame had bene without their counſell or knowledge taken in hand, ſo without their aſsiſtance it ſhould be performed and ended. The Embaſſadors being thus to the requeſt of their King anſwered, proteſted the execution of their band, and the Kings preiudice, ſo in great diſpleaſure with that Cittie, departed. The Florentines during theſe warres, continued in peace abroad, but within they reſted not, as in the next Booke ſhall be particulerly declared.
            The ende of the ſixt Booke.
         
         
            
               
                  royal blazon or coat of arms
               
            
            THE SEVENTH BOOKE.
            
               TO thoſe that haue read the former Booke, it may ſeeme in writing of Florence, and the proceedings of the Florentines, we haue ouermuch ſpoken of ſuch accidents as hapned in Lombardy and the Kingdome. Neuertheleſſe, as heretofore I haue, ſo am I hereafter to continue with the like diſcourſes. For albeit I did not promiſe to write of matters concerning Italy, yet haue I thought good to ſpeake of thoſe, that were in that countrey moſt notable. For if I ſhould not make mention of them, our hiſtorie would be with more difficultie vnderſtood, and to the Readers leſſe pleaſing. Chiefely, bicauſe the actions of other people and Princes of Italy, did occaſion the warres, wherein the Florentines were forced to intermeddle, as of the warre of Giouanni de Angio, and King Ferrando great enimitie grew, which was after betwixt Ferrando and the Florentines, and particulerly with the houſe of Medici continued. For the King complained, that the Florentines did not onely leaue him in that warre vnaided, but alſo that his enemies were by them fauoured: which anger, was the occaſion of exceeding many inconuenients, as ſhall be hereafter declared. And for as much as I haue written at large thoſe matters which happened without the Cittie, till the yeare 1463. it behoueth me for the declaration of ſuch troubles as happened in thoſe daies within, to looke back many yeares paſſed. Yet firſt by way of diſcourſe (as is my cuſtome) I ſay, that whoſoeuer doth thinke, that any Common-weale can continue vnited, he greatlie deceiueth himſelfe. But true it is, that ſome diuiſions be preiudiciall to Common-weales, and ſome others be profitable. Thoſe be preiudiciall, which are with factions and followers accompanied. And thoſe are profitable, which without factions and followers bee mainteined. Seeing then, it is a thing impoſsible, for that man who frameth a Common-weale, to prouide that no enimitie ſhall therein ariſe, he ought (at the leaſt) foreſee, that no

factions be permitted. It is then to be conſidered, that the Citizens in euerie ſtate do win reputation, either by publike or priuate meanes. Publike reputation is gotten by victorie in the field, by ſurprizing of townes, by wiſe and diſcreet performing of Embaſſages, or by counſailing the State grauely and fortunately. By priuate meanes men attain to reputatiō, by pleaſuring particuler citizēs, by ſauing them frō puniſhments, by relieuing them with money, by aduancing thē vnworthily to honors and offices, and by enterteining the common people with ſports & publike gifts. From theſe cauſes, faction, following, and partaking do proceed. And as reputation thus gotten is hurtful, ſo the other not being intermedled with faction, is the occaſion of great good, bicauſe it is grounded vpon no priuate, but common commoditie. And albeit among ſuch Citizens, ſo great diſpleaſures wil grow, as the wiſdome of man is not able to preuēt, yet wāting partakers to follow thē for proper profit, they cannot by any way hinder the common-weale, but ſhal rather help it: for in aſpiring to that they would come vnto, it behoueth them to indeuor the aduancement of the ſtate, and particularly one to reſpect the other, ſo much, as the lawes & ciuil orders be not infringed. The enimities of Florēce were alwaies followed with factions, and therfore hurtfull to the ſtate, neither was any victorious faction longer vnited, then the contrary part continued in force: for ſo ſoone as the enemies were extinguiſhed, the faction remaining no more in awe of the enemy, nor hauing order to bridle it ſelfe, became diuided. The faction of Coſimo de Medici in the yeare 1434. remained with victorie. Neuertheleſſe, bicauſe the partie oppreſſed was ſtil great, and full of mightie men, it continued vnited and tollerable, ſo long, as among thoſe of the factiō, no error was cōmitted, and the people for no euill deſert did hate thē: and whenſoeuer that gouernment had need of the people to reeſtabliſh their authoritie, they found them readie to giue vnto the chiefe of the faction the Balia, and whatſoeuer elſe they deſired. Thus frō the 1434. till the 55. being 21. yeares, they were cōfirmed in office 6. times,Coſimo de Medici. Neri Capponi. ordinarily elected by the Councels. There were in Florence (as we haue diuerſe times ſaid) two moſt mightie Citizens, Coſimo de Medici, and Neri Capponi, of whome, Neri had gained his reputation by publike meanes: by ſeaſon whereof, he had many friends, but few followers. Coſimo on the other ſide being aſpired both by publike and priuate waies, had not onely many friends, but alſo many followers. Theſe two men continuing vnited, during their liues, eaſily obteined of the people whatſoeuer they deſired, bicauſe they had loue mixed with authoritie. But the yere 1455. being come, Neri dead, & the aduerſe part extinguiſhed, Coſimo found no ſmall difficultie to be cōfirmed, and his own friends being moſt mightie in the ſtate, were cauſe therof: bicauſe they feared no more the cōtrary faction put downe, & deſired to decreaſe the power of Coſimo; which was the beginning of thoſe diuiſions which followed after in the yeare 1466. So as they vnto whome the offices apperteined, in their councels, where the publike gouernment of that ſtate was debated, did alleage it was not conueniēt that the authoritie of Balia ſhould be reſumed, but that the order of election ought proceed, as it was wont, by lots, and not according to the former Squittini. Coſimo, to quallifie this humor, had to determine vpon one of theſe two remedies, either by force with the aide of his friends and followers to poſſeſſe himſelfe of the State, and therewith to compell the contrarie faction, or elſe to ſuffer the matter proceed, and in time let his friends know, that not his honor, but their reputation was by the enemy taken away. Of theſe two remedies, he made choiſe of the laſt: for hee knew well, that the Squittini being fulleſt of his friends, himſelfe could not incurre any perill, and might alſo at his pleaſure reſume the State. The Cittie then determined to create the Magiſtrates by lot: the greateſt number thought the libertie recouered, and that the offices ſhould not after be allotted,

according to the will of the moſt mightie men, but as ſeemed beſt to themſelues. Whereupon, the followers of the great Cittizens began to be diſeſteemed, and by the people were in ſundrie places beaten downe and oppreſſed. So as they who were wont to haue their houſes full of ſuters and preſents, were now become emptie, and without any reſort at all. They alſo ſawe themſelues made equall with thoſe who were before time farre vnder them, and their equals were become their ſuperiors. They were not regarded nor honored, but rather many times mocked and derided. Alſo in the ſtreets, the people without reſpect, ſpake their pleaſures both of them, and of the Common-weale. Whereof was conceiued, that they, and not Coſimo, had loſt the gouernment. All which things Coſimo diſsimuled, and whenſoeuer any thing plauſible to the people was propounded, he was euer the firſt that allowed thereof. But that which moſt terrified the great men, and made Coſimo to looke about him, was the reuiuing of the Cataſto the yeare 1427. Whereby was ordeined, the Impoſition ſhould proceed by the order of lawe, and not the pleaſure of men. This lawe made, and Magiſtrates for execution thereof choſen, occaſioned the great Citizens to aſſemble, goe vnto Coſimo, and deſire him be pleaſed to concurre with them in their, and his owne deliuery from the people: whereby he ſhould recouer reputation to the State, make himſelfe mightie, and them honored. Thereunto Coſimo anſwered, he was content, ſo that the lawe were made orderly with conſent of the people, and without force; otherwiſe no ſpeech to be thereof. Then went they about in the Councels to make a new Balia, whereby they might create new Officers, but that intention preuailed not: then the great Cittizens returned to Coſimo, deſiring him moſt humblie to conſent to the Parliament, which Coſimo vtterly refuſed to do: meaning thereby to bring to paſſe, that they ſhould finde the error they committed. And bicauſe Donato Cochi, being Gonfaloniere di Giustitia, would in any wiſe without his conſent call the Parliament, Coſimo procured him by the reſt of the Senators, (who ſate with him in office) to be ſo mocked and diſdeined, as thereby he became mad, and was as a man ſenceleſſe, ſent home to his houſe. Notwithſtanding, bicauſe he thought it not fit to ſuffer matters to runne further out of order, then that they might be at his pleaſure reformed:Lucca Pitti. 
               Lucca Pitti become Gonfaloniere di Giustitia (a ſtout and ſelfe-willed man) Coſimo thought good to leaue the gouernment to his diſcretion, to the end, that if any thing were miſdone, the fault might be to Lucca and not to himſelfe imputed. Lucca then in the beginning of his Magiſtracie, propounded many things to the people, touching reſtauration of the Balia, but not obteining his deſire, with iniurious words full of pride, he threatned thoſe of the councels: Which threatnings, ſhortly after he performed indeed. For in Auguſt vpon the eue of S. Lorenzo, the yeare 1458. he aſſembled ſecretly within the Pallace many armed men, called the people thither, and forced thē to conſent to that, which voluntarily they had before denied. By this means being againe in poſſeſsion of the State, the Balia was created, and the chiefe Magiſtrates according to the pleaſure of a fewe, were appointed. Then to begin that gouernment with terror, which was gotten by force,Girolamo Machiauelli. they confined Girolamo Machiauelli, with ſome others, and depriued many from their offices, which Girolamo hauing afterwards paſſed the bounds of preſcription, was proclaimed a Rebell. Then went he from place to place in Italy, to perſwade the Princes againſt his countrey, till at length in Lunigiana, through the treaſon of one of that Senate, he was taken, brought to Florence, and there in priſon died. This forme of gouernmēt continuing eight yeares, was violent and inſupportable. For Coſimo being old, weake, vnhealthie, and vnable to be preſent as he was wont, at the affaires of the Common-weale, a fewe Cittizens at their pleaſures did rob and ſpoyle the Cittie. Lucca Pitti for his

good ſeruice was made Knight, and he to declare himſelfe no leſſe thankfull to the State, then the State had bene to him, cauſed that the Officers called Priori delli Arti, hauing paſſed their authoritie, ſhould be called Priori della Liberta. He ordeined alſo, that whereas the Gonfaloniere was woont to ſit on the right hand of the Rettori, that after he ſhould be placed in the middeſt of them. Moreouer, to the end that God might ſeeme partaker of this action, they made publique proceſsions and prayers, thanking him for the reſtauration of their honors. Lucca was by the Senate, and by Coſimo richly preſented. To him alſo euerie other Cittizen reſorted, and gaue ſomewhat, ſo that it was ſuppoſed that the ſumme of his preſents amounted vnto twentie thouſand duckets. In concluſion, he aſpired to ſuch greatneſſe of reputation, as Lucca,
               Ordinances by Lucca 
                     ••
                  tti. and not Coſimo, ſeemed to gouerne the Cittie. Thereupon he conceiued ſo great confidence, that he began to build two houſes, the one in Florence, the other in Rucciano, a mile diſtant from the Cittie, both ſtately and kingly buildings. But that in Florence was much larger then by any priuate Cittizen had euer bene builded. For performance thereof, he ſpared not to vſe all extraordinarie meanes. For not onely priuate Cittizens and particuler men did preſent him, and help him with things neceſſarie for his building, but the whole comminaltie and people did put their hands to his works. Moreouer, all baniſhed men, and euerie other perſon hauing committed murther, theft, or other offence, whereof he feared publique puniſhment (if he were abled to his ſeruice any way) might without all danger reſort thither. The other Cittizens, although they builded not like vnto him, yet were they no leſſe violent, and inclined to oppreſsion: ſo as, albeit Florence had no warre abroad to hinder it, yet was it by the Cittizens within oppreſſed. In thoſe dayes (as is before ſayd) happened the warre in the Kingdome: and ſome warres were alſo made againſt the houſe of Malateſti, by the Pope, being deſirous to take from them Rimino and Ceſena: ſo that in this enterpriſe, and his ſtudie to moue the warre againſt the Turke, Pope Pio conſumed his Papacie. But Florence continued ſtill in diuiſions and troubles. For then began the faction of Coſimo to be diuided within it ſelfe, the yeare 1455. which happened by the occaſions before ſaid. Yet were they (for that time) by his wiſedome appeaſed. But the yeare 64. being come, Coſimo fell againe ſick,The death of Coſimo di Medici. and dyed. At his death, both friends and foes lamented: for they, who in reſpect of the State loued him not, ſeeing what extortion was vſed by the Cittizens in his life, doubted (leaſt Coſimo being dead whome all men reuerenced) they ſhould be vtterly ruined, and of his ſonne Piero they hoped not much. For albeit he were of diſpoſition a good man, yet being ſickly, and new in the gouernmēt, they thought he ſhould be forced to reſpect others, who without any bridle, would become ſtrong and incorrigible. Euerie man therefore feared to find great want of Coſimo. This Coſimo was the moſt eſteemed, and moſt famous Cittizen (being no man of warre) that euer had bene in the memorie of man, either in Florence, or any other Cittie, bicauſe he did not onely excell all others (of his time) in authoritie and riches, but alſo in liberalitie and wiſedome. For amongſt other qualities which aduanced him to be chiefe of his Countrey, he was more then other men, liberall and magnificent. Which liberalitie appeared much more after his death then before. For his ſonne Piero found by his fathers Records, that there was not any Cittizen of eſtimation, to whome Coſimo had not lent great ſummes of money: and many times alſo vnrequired he did lend to thoſe Gentlemen, whome he knewe to haue need. His magnificence likewiſe appeared by diuerſe his buildings. For within Florence, he builded the Abbaies and Temples of S. Marco, S. Lorenzo, and the Monaſterie of S. Verdiana. And in the Mountaines of Fieſole, S. Gerolano, with the Abbey thereunto belonging. Alſo in Mugello, he did not onely

repaire the Church for the Friers, but tooke it downe, and builded it a new. Beſides thoſe magnificent buildings in S. Croce, in S. Agnoli, and S. Miniato, he made Altars, and ſumptuous Chappels. All which Temples and Chappels, beſides the buildings of them, were by him paued, and throughlie furniſhed with all things neceſſarie. With theſe publique buildings, we may number his priuate houſes, whereof one within the Cittie meete for ſo great a perſonage, and foure other without at Carriaggi, at Fieſole, at Cafaggiuolo, and at Trebio, all Pallaces fitter for Princes then priuate perſons. And bicauſe his magnificent houſes in Italy did not in his opinion make him famous ynough, he builded in Ieruſalem an Hoſpitall to reciue poore and diſeaſed Pilgrims. In which worke, he conſumed great ſummes of money. And albeit theſe buildings, and euery other his actions were princely, and that in Florence he liued like a Prince, yet ſo gouerned by wiſedome, as he neuer exceeded the bounds of ciuill modeſtie. For in his conuerſation, in riding, in marrying his children and kinſfolks, he was like vnto all other diſcreet and modeſt Citizens: bicauſe he well knew, that extraordinarie things which are of all men with admiration beholded, do win more enuie, then thoſe which without oſtentatiō be honeſtlie couered. Whenſoeuer therefore he married his ſonnes, he neuer ſought to match them with the daughters of Princes, but wedded his ſonne Giouanni, to Cornelia Aleſſandri, and Piero, to Lucretia Tornabuoni. Alſo of his graund children begotten of Piero, he married Bianca to Guglielmo de Pazi, and Nannina to Barnardo Ruſſellai. Theſe his proceedings cauſed, that in ſo great change of fortune, and in ſo variable a Cittie, among ſo inconſtant Cittizens, he continued a Magiſtrate 31. yeares. For being a wiſe man, he diſcouered all inconuenients a farre, and therefore might in time preuent them, or if they did grow, be ſo prepared, as they could not offend him. Whereby he did not onely ſuppreſſe all domeſticall and ciuill ambition, but alſo bridled the inſolencie of many Princes with ſo great happineſſe and wiſedome, that whoſoeuer ioyned in league with him and his countrey, became either equall or ſuperior to his enemies. And whoſoeuer oppoſed themſelues againſt them, either they loſt time, money, or ſtate. Whereof the Venetians can beare witneſſe, who being ioyned with him againſt the Duke Philippo, were alwayes victorious: and being diſioyned, were firſt by Philippo, and after by Franceſco victored and oppreſſed. Alſo when they ioyned with Alfonſo againſt the ſtate of Florence, Coſimo with his credit, made both Naples and Venice ſo ſcarce of money, as they were conſtrayned to take what peace himſelfe was pleaſed with. Whatſoeuer difficultie or contradiction was moued againſt Coſimo, either within or without the Cittie, the end thereof was to his glorie, and the diſaduantage of his enemies. Therefore all ciuill diſcords increaſed his authoritie in Florence, and forraine warres augmented his power abroad. He annexed to the dominion of his Countrey Borgo at S. Sepolcro, Monteuoglio, Caſentino, and the Vale of Bagno. Thus his vertue and fortune, oppreſſed all enemies, and aduanced his friends. He was borne in the yeare 1389. on the feaſt day of S. Coſimo and Damiano. The firſt part of his life was full of troubles, as appeareth by his exile, his impriſonment, and his dangers of death. Alſo at the Councell of Conſtanza (whither he went with the Pope Giouanni) after the Popes oppreſsion, he was forced to diſguiſe himſelfe, and flee. But hauing paſſed the fortie yeare of his age, hee liued moſt happily: in ſo much, as not onely they which ioyned with him in publique actions, but all other men alſo that maneged his treaſure in euerie place of Europe, did perticipate of his felicitie. Alſo many exceſsiue rich houſes in Florence had their beginning from him, as Tornabuoni, Benchi, Portinari, and Saſſetti. Beſides all theſe, euerie man depending vppon his counſell, and fortune, became wealthie. And albeit that his building of Temples, and giuing

of almes, was knowne throughout the world, yet would he to his friends many times lament, that he had not ſpent and beſtowed ſo much to the honor of God, but that he found himſelfe ſtill in his booke a debtor. He was of meane ſtature, in complexion browne,The deſcription of Coſimo his perſon, and his wit. and of preſence venerable: vnlearned, yet eloquent, and full of naturall wiſedome; friendlie to his friends, and pittifull to the poore. In conuerſation he was frugall, in counſell aduiſed, in execution ſpeedie, in ſpeech and anſwering, wittie, and graue. Rinaldo de gli Albizi in the beginning of his exile ſent him a meſſage, ſaying that the hen did ſit: whereunto Coſimo anſwered, that ſhe could neuer hatch, being farre from her neſt. To other Rebels who ſent him word they ſlept not: he anſwered, that he beleeued the ſame, bicauſe there, ſleepe was taken from them. Vnto the Pope Pio, perſwading Princes to take Armes againſt the Turke, Coſimo ſaid, An old man taketh in hand a yong enterpriſe. To the Embaſſadors of Venice, who came with the meſſengers of Alfonſo, to complaine of the Florentines, he ſhewed his head bare, and asked of what colour it was? they anſwered white. Then he replying, ſaid, that ere it belong, your Senators will alſo haue white heads like vnto mine. His wife, a few houres before his death, ſeeing him ſhut his eyes, asked him for what cauſe he ſo did? He anſwered, to bring them in vſe. Some Citizens ſaying vnto him after his returne from exile, that he hindered the Cittie, and offended God, in baniſhing ſo many honeſt men? To them hee anſwered, It was better to haue a Cittie hindered, then loſt; and that the State was not defended with beades in mens hands. Which words, gaue his enemyes matter to ſpeake euill of him, as a man that loued himſelfe more then his Countrey, and that eſteemed more this world, then the world to come. Many other ſayings, as things not neceſſarie, I, omit. Coſimo was alſo a louer and preferrer of learned men, for he brought vnto Florence Argiropolo, a Grecian borne, and in that time of ſinguler learning, to the end that the youth of Florence might be by him inſtructed in the Greeke toong, and other his good learnings. He enterteyned in his houſe Marſilio Ficino, a ſecond father of the Philoſophie of Plato, and him he entirely loued. Alſo, to the end he might with commoditie exerciſe the ſtudie of learning, and more aptly vſe his help therein, he gaue him certaine land neare vnto his houſe of Careggi. This his wiſedome, theſe his riches, this manner of life, and this fortune, were the cauſes, that in Florence he was both feared and loued, and of the Princes not onely of Italy, but alſo of all Europe eſteemed: ſo as he left vnto his poſteritie ſuch a foundation, as they might with vertue equall him, and in fortune farre excell him. Whatſoeuer authoritie Coſimo had either in Florence, or elſewhere in Chriſtendome, he deſerued the ſame: notwithſtanding, in the end of his life, he had great ſorrowes. For of two onely ſonnes, Pietro, and Giouanni, the one (of whome he had moſt hope) dyed: the other was continually ſick, and therefore vnable either for publique or priuate function. In ſo much as his ſonne being dead, he cauſed him to be carried about the houſe, and he following the Coarſe, ſighed, and ſaide, this houſe is ouer great for ſo ſmall a familie. It alſo offended the greatneſſe of his minde, that he had not (in his owne opinion) inlarged the Florentine dominion with ſome honorable conqueſt. And it grieued him the more, knowing that Franceſco Sforza had deceiued him, who being but Earle, promiſed, that ſo ſoone as hee was poſſeſſed of Milan, hee would winne the Cittie of Lucca for the Florentines. Which was not performed, bicauſe the Earle with his fortune changed his minde, and being become Duke, determined to enioy that ſtate with peace, which he had gotten by warre. Therefore he would neither keepe touch with Coſimo nor any other, neither would he after he was Duke, make anie more warres then thoſe that for his owne defence hee

was enforced vnto. Which grieued Coſimo greatly, finding that he had endured great paines, and ſpent much, to aduance a man vnthankfull and perfidious. Moreouer by the weakneſſe of his bodie, he found himſelfe vnfit to follow either priuate or publique affaires, whereby the one, and the other, miſcarried. Becauſe the Citie was deſtroyed by the Citizens, and his owne ſubſtance by his confidents and children conſumed. All theſe things in the later end of his age, did greatly diſquiet his minde: Notwithſtanding he died with glorie. And all the principall Citizens, and all the Chriſtian Princes did condole his death with Pietro his ſonne, and accompanied his coarſe to the Temple of S. Lorenzo, where with great pompe it was buried: and by publique conſent was written vpon his Tombe, Pater Patriae. If in this diſcourſe of Coſimo, I haue imitated thoſe, which haue written the liues of Princes, and not thoſe which write vniuerſall hiſtories: let no man marueile thereat. For hee being a rare man in our Citie, deſerued I ſhould affoard him extraordinary commendation. In thoſe dayes, that Florence and Italy ſtood in the conditions aforeſaide, Lewes King of France, was with greeuous warres aſſaulted. For the Lords of his owne Countrey, aſsiſted by the Dukes of Bretagne and Burgogne, made the war ſo great vpon the King, that he had no meane to aide the Duke Giouanni de Angio, in his enterpriſe of Genoua and the kingdome. But iudging that he had neede of ayd whatſoeuer, he gaue the Citie of Sauona (then in his hand and kept by French men) to Franceſco Duke of Milan: letting him vnderſtand, that (if he ſo pleaſed) he might alſo with his fauour, aſſault Genoua. Which offer was accepted by Franceſco, and either through the reputation of the Kings friendſhip, or the fauour of the Adorni, he became Lord of Genoua.
               The Duke of Milan, Lord of Genoua. Then to declare himſelfe thankfull for the benefit receiued of the King, he ſent into France to the Kings aide, a thouſand fiue hundreth horſe, conducted by Galiazzo his eldeſt ſonne. Thus Ferrando of Aragon, and Franceſco Sforza, were become, the one Duke of Lombardy and Prince of Genoua: the other, King of all the kingdome of Naples. And hauing married their children, the one, to the other, they deuiſed by what meanes they might, during their liues, maintaine their countries with ſecuritie: and after their deaths, ſo leaue the ſame to their heires. For which purpoſe, they thought it neceſſarie, that the King ſhould aſſure himſelfe of thoſe Barons, which in the war of Giouanni de Angio, had diſobeyed him: and that the Duke ſhould endeuour himſelfe to extinguiſh thoſe that had bene brought vp in the warres by the Bracci, naturall enemies to his houſe, and growne vp in great reputation vnder Giacopo Piccinino, who was the chiefeſt Captaine in all Italy; and ſuch a one as euerie Prince ought to beware of: chiefly the Duke who could not account his dominion aſſured, nor leaue the ſame to his ſonnes, if Giacopo did ſtill liue. The King therfore by all meanes ſought to make peace with his Barons, handling the matter cunningly to aſſure him ſelfe of them, which fell out very happily. Becauſe the Barons did thinke, that in continuing the warre againſt their King, the ſame would be in the end their vndoubted ruine: and yeelding to the peace, they ſhould ſtand at the kings diſcretion. But becauſe men do moſt willingly eſchue that euill which is moſt certaine, it commeth to paſſe, that Princes may eaſily deceiue others of leſſe power: and ſo theſe Lords gaue credit to the King. For they ſeeing the manifeſt danger of the warre, yeelded themſelues into his hands, and were vppon ſundrie occaſions by him oppreſſed: which greatly diſmaied Giacopo Piccinino, at that time remaining with his forces at Salmona. And to remoue occaſion whereby the King might oppreſſe him, he practiſed by his friends, to be reconciled to the Duke Franceſco, who hauing made him great and honourable offers, Giacopo reſolued to put himſelfe into his hands: and being accompanied with one hundreth horſe went to Milan to preſent himſelfe vnto the Duke. Giacapo had long ſerued his father, and with his brother; firſt for the Duke

               Philippo, and after for the people of Milan. Whereby he gained great acquaintance in that Citie,Giacopo Piccinino, ſupected to the Duke. and the good will of the multitude, which was encreaſed by the preſent condition of the Citie. For the good fortune, and great power of the houſe of Sforza, had kindled great enuie: And Giacopo for his aduerſitie and long abſence, was greatly by the people pitied, who deſired much to ſee him. All which things appeared at his comming. For welneare all the Nobilitie went to meet him, and the ſtreets were full of thoſe which deſired to ſee him. Beſides that, great honour was ſpoken of him and his ſouldiers. All which things, did haſten his deſtruction, becauſe they encreaſed ſuſpition, and the Dukes deſire to oppreſſe him. For the more couert performance thereof, the Duke deuiſed, that the marriage with his daughter Druſiana, who had bene long before contracted vnto him, ſhould now be ſolemnized. Then he practiſed with Ferrando, to entertaine him, for Generall of his Army, and promiſed him a hundreth thouſand Florins in preſt. After this concluſion, Giacopo, accompanied with the Dukes Embaſſador, and Druſiana his wife, went vnto Naples, where he was ioyfully and honourably receiued: and for diuerſe dayes enterteined with all ſorts of triumph and feaſting. But at length deſiring to go vnto his Campe (which he left at Salmona) he was by the King conuited to dinner in the Caſtle. The dinner being ended,Giacopo Piccinino, murthered. both he and his ſonne were impriſoned, and ſhortly after put to death. Whereby may be perceiued, that our Italian Princes haue feared that vertue in others, which was not to be found in themſelues: and did ſmother the ſame ſo long, as no vertue at all being left, our country became ſhortly after, afflicted and ruined. In theſe dayes the Pope Pio hauing ſetled all things in Romagna, thought the time ſerued well, in reſpect of the vniuerſall peace, to moue the Chriſtians to make warre againſt the Turke: according to the plot ſet downe by his predeceſſors. To the performance of this exployt, all Princes did contribute mony or men. And in particuler Mathia King of Hungary, and Carlo Duke of Borgogna, promiſing to go in perſon, were by the Pope made Captaines generall of that iourney. The Pope had ſo great hope of proceeding in this enterpriſe, that he went from Rome to Ancona, where all the Armie were appointed to aſſemble: and the Venetians did promiſe to ſend veſſels to paſſe the ſouldiers into Schiauonia. After the Popes arriual in that Citie, the concourſe of people there was ſo great, that within fewe dayes all the victuall of that citie, and that could be brought thither from other places thereabouts, did not ſuffice. In ſo much as euerie man began to taſte of famine. Moreouer, there wanted mony to furniſh the ſouldiers of things needfull, and arme thoſe that were diſarmed. Mathia and Carlo appeared not, and the Venetians ſent thither one onely Captaine with a fewe Gallies, rather to ſhewe their pompe, and ſeeme to haue kept promiſe, then to paſſe the Armie. So as the Pope being old and ſicke, in the middeſt of theſe buſineſſes and diſorders, died. After whoſe death, euerie man returned home. This Pope being dead, the yeare 1465. Paulo ſecundo, borne in the Cittie of Venice, aſpired to the Papacie. About that time, many other ſtates of Italy chaunged their gouernment.The death of the Duke Frā
                  ceſco. For the ſame yeare following, died Franceſco Sforza, Duke of Milan, hauing vſurped that Dukedome ſixteene yeares. And Galiazzo his ſonne, was proclaimed Duke. The death of this Prince, was the occaſion that the diuiſions of Florence,
               Piero di Medici. became of more force, and wrought their effects with the more ſpeed. After the death of Coſimo di Medici, Piero his ſonne being left in poſſeſsion of the goods and lands of his father, called vnto him, Diotiſalui Neroni, a man of great authoritie, amōg the other citizens of moſt reputation: and one in whom Coſimo repoſed ſo great truſt, as at his death he willed Piero both in his ſubſtance & ſtate, to be by his counſel gouerned. Piero accordingly declared vnto Diotiſalui the truſt which Coſimo had in him: And becauſe he would ſhewe himſelfe as obedient to his father after death, as

he was in his life: he deſired Diotiſalui to aſsiſt him with his counſell, both for the order of his patrimonie, and the gouernment of the Citie; and to begin with his own priuate buſineſſe, he commaunded all his Officers to reſort vnto him with their accounts, and leaue the ſame with Diotiſalui, to the end that he might finde out the order and diſorder of their doings, and ſo counſell him what was beſt afterwards to be done. Diotiſalui promiſed to vſe diligence, and performe the truſt in him repoſed. The Officers being come and examined, were found to haue committed many diſorders. And thereupon (as a man that more reſpected his owne ambition, then the loue he bare to Piero, or the benefits he had receiued of Coſimo) imagined it was eaſie to deceiue Piero of the reputation, and liuings left him by his father.Diſsimulation of Diotiſalui Neroni. 
               Diotiſalui came vnto Piero offering him counſaile, which ſeemed verie honeſt and reaſonable, yet vnder the ſame laie hidden the deſtruction of Piero. Hee told him what diſorder he found in his affaires, and how it behoued him to prouide great ſummes of mony for the holding of his credit, and reputation in the ſtate; and therfore ſaid, he could not more honeſtly repaire his diſorders and loſſes, then by calling in thoſe debtes which many ſtraungers and Citizens did owe vnto his father. For Coſimo to gaine himſelfe followers in Florence, and friends abroad, was exceeding liberall of his ſubſtance; and had for that occaſion lent out ſummes of great importance. This counſaile to Piero ſeemed good, and honeſt, ſuppoſing he ſhould by execution thereof, without perill, repaire himſelfe with his owne. Notwithſtanding ſo ſoone as hee called for theſe debts, the Citizens grew no leſſe offended, then if hee ſhould haue deſired their owne goods, and without reſpect they ſpake euill of him, ſlaundering him to be a man vnthankfull and couetous. Diotiſalui ſeeing this common and populer diſgrace, which Piero had gotten by his counſaile,A practiſe againſt Piero di Medici. ioyned himſelfe with Lucca Pitti, Agnolo Acciaiuoli, and Nicholo Soderini, determining to take from Piero, reputation and gouernment. Theſe men were moued thereunto for diuerſe reſpects. Lucca deſired to ſucceed in the place of Coſimo, for hee was aſpired to ſuch greatneſſe, as he diſdained to await vpon Piero. Diotiſalui, knowing that Lucca was not fit to be chiefe of the gouernment, thought if Piero had loſt his reputation, it would in ſhort time fall vpon himſelfe. Nicholo Soderini, deſired that the Cittie might liue more at libertie, and that the Magiſtrates might gouerne at their diſcretion. Alſo betwixt Agnolo and the houſe of Medici, remained particuler diſpleaſures. The occaſion whereof was this. Rafaello his ſonne, had long before,Offence between the Acciaiuoli and the Medici. taken to wife Aleſſandra de Bardi, and receiued with her a great dowrie. She, either through her owne default, or the mallice of others, was by her father in lawe and her huſband, euill handled. Whereupon Brenzo de Illarione her kinſman, being moued with compaſſion, went in the night accompanied with many armed men, and tooke her out of the houſe of Agnolo. Agnolo and the reſt of the Acciaiuoli, complained of this iniurie done them, by the Bardi. The matter was committed to the hearing of Coſimo, who iudged that the Acciaiuoli ſhould reſtore the marriage money receiued with Aleſſandra, and ſhee after to return to her huſband, or not, as her ſelfe was diſpoſed. Agnolo thought himſelfe in this iudgement not friendly handled by Coſimo, of whom, becauſe hee could not be reuenged, he thought to execute the reuenge vpon his ſonne. Theſe conſpirators notwithſtanding the diuerſitie of their humors, pretended all one occaſion, ſaying they would haue the Citie gouerned by the magiſtrates, and not by the counſaile of a fewe. The diſpleaſure towards Piero, and the euill ſpeech of him was encreaſed by many marchants, who at that time became bankerout, and laide the fault thereof vpon Piero, for that he calling home his money haſtily, had hindered their credit, and forced them with the preiudice of the Citie to be vndone. Beſides that, they did ſurmiſe, that he practiſed to marry his ſonne with Clariſe Orſini. Whereof

the Citizens conceiued that he did diſdaine to make alliance with any Citizen: therfore prepared to vſurpe the ſtate, and make himſelfe Prince. For whoſoeuer diſdaineth his owne Citizens to be of his kindred, deſireth to haue them his ſubiects. In theſe reſpects they had no reaſon to be his friends. The leaders of this ſedition, perſuaded themſelues to haue the victorie in their own hands, becauſe the greater number of the Citizens (deceiued with the name of libertie, whereby they vſed to make their enterpriſes, ſeeme more honeſt) followed them. Theſe humours then boyling in the breaſts of the Cittizens, it was thought good to them, whome ciuill diſorder diſpleaſed, to aſſaie, if by ſome new found mirth or feaſt, the mindes of men might be ſetled. For moſt commonly the idle people be inſtruments for thoſe that deſire alteration. Then to remoue this idleneſſe, and giue ſome occaſion to alienate the minds of men from conſideration of the ſtate, the yeare of Cosimo his death being paſſed, they tooke occaſion to make the Citie ſome mirth, ordeining two tryumphs more ſolemne then was the cuſtome. The one made repreſentation how the three Magi came from the Eaſt, following the ſtarre that ledde them to the place where Chriſt was borne: which was performed with ſo great ſolemnitie, as enterteined the Citie diuerſe moneths. The other was a torniament, wherein the principall yoong Gentlemen of the Citie exerciſed Armes againſt all the chiefe men of Armes in Italy. And of the Florentine youth, Lorenzo the eldeſt ſonne of Piero gained moſt honor: for not by fauour, but in deed by his owne valour, he wanne the beſt prize. Theſe triumphs being ended, the Citizens returned to thinke of the ſtate, and euerie man with more care then before, ſtudied to maintaine his owne opinion, whereof great diuerſitie of conceits, and troubles enſued. The one was, that the authoritie of Balia tooke no effect.League betweene the Duke Galiiazzo and the Florentines. The other, by the death of Franceſco Duke of Milan. Whereuppon the newe Duke Galiazzo ſent Embaſſadors to Florence, to confirme the capitulations made by Franceſco his father: wherein among other things it was concluded, that yearely the Duke ſhould receiue from them certaine ſummes of money. Vpon this Article, the Gouernours of the ſtate, tooke occaſion to hold opinion contrarie to the Houſe of Medici, publiquely in theſe Councels, inueying againſt that payment, alleaging that pencion to be promiſed, not to Galiazzo, but vnto Franceſco. For Franceſco being dead, there was no cauſe to cōtinue it. Becauſe in Galiazzo there was not that vertue, which was in Franceſco: and ſo conſequently, that good was not, nor could not be looked for at his hand, which was found at his fathers. And although of Franceſco they receiued not much, yet were they to looke for leſſe of Galiazzo: and if any Cititzen would entertaine him, to mainteine his owne priuate power, that were a thing contrarie to ciuill life, and the libertie of the Citie. Piero on the contrary, alleaged, that it were not well done, through couetouſneſſe, to loſe a friendſhip ſo neceſſarie: and that there was nothing ſo meete, for the Common-weale, and all Italy, as to continue in league with the Duke. To the ende that the Venetians ſeeing them vnited, might not hope either by fained friendſhip or by open warre, to oppreſſe the Dukedome. For if they ſhould perceiue, the Florentines to haue forſaken the Duke, they would preſently take Armes, and the rather, knowing he was yoong, newly come to the gouernment, and without friends. Wherof they might hope either by fraud or force to win his countrey, which would be alſo the vtter ruine of the Florentine Common-weale. Theſe reaſons were not allowed, and ſecret hatred began openly to ſhewe it ſelfe. For the ſame night, either partie, in diuerſe companies aſſembled. The friends of the Medici, met at Crocetta, and their aduerſaries in La Pieta, who ſtudying to oppreſſe Piero, had gotten their enterpriſe ſubſcribed with the hands of many Citizens.Conſultation to oppreſſe the Medici. Alſo, being among many other times, one night aſſembled, they held a particuler Councell for the maner of their proceeding; when euerie man conſented

to diminiſh the power of the Medici: yet in the order how to bring the matter to paſſe, they concurred not. Some, that were of moſt modeſt nature, thought that the authoritie of the Balia being ended, it were beſt to finde meanes, that the ſame might not be reuiued: for if the Councels and Magiſtrates did gouerne the Cittie, the authoritie of Piero would be in ſhort ſpace extinguiſhed; and with loſſe of his reputation in the ſtate, he ſhould alſo loſe his credit in merchandize. For being no more in place, where he might imploy the publique treaſure, he ſhould of neceſsitie grow weake; which being brought to paſſe, there would not be after any cauſe to feare him: and all this practiſe might bee performed without baniſhment of anie man, and the libertie without bloud recouered, which euery good Cittizen ought to deſire. But if they proceeded by force, many perils might be incurred: for whoſoeuer is readie to fall alone, if he be forced by others, will labour to ſtaie himſelf vp. Moreouer, when nothing is done extraordinarily againſt him, he ſhall not haue any occaſion to Arme himſelfe, or ſeeke friends; or if he ſhould, the ſame would turne to his great reproach, and breede ſuſpition in euerie man: ſo as his ouerthrow ſhall be the more eaſie, and others take occaſion the rather to oppreſſe him. Many others of that aſſembly liked not this delaie: affirming the time fauoured him, & not them. For if they were contented with ordinary proceedings, Piero was in no danger at all, and they in great perill: Becauſe the Magiſtrates (notwithſtanding they were his enemies,) would ſuffer him in the Citie, and his friends, with their ruine (as it happened in the yeare 58.) would make him Prince; and as the former counſell proceeded from good men, ſo this was the opinion of wiſe men. It was therefore neceſſary, that while men be diſpleaſed, to make him ſure. The meane to bring the ſame to effect, was to be armed both within and without, and alſo to enterteine the Marqueſſe of Farrara, to be the better defended. Which done, when a Senate happened to be for the purpoſe, then to make all aſſured. In this reſolution they ſtaied till the next Senate, and proceeded according to the quallitie thereof. Among the conſpirators, was Nicholo Fedini, whom they imployed as Chauncellor, he perſwaded with a hope more certaine, reuealed to Piero, all the practiſe agreed vpon by his enemies, and deliuered him a note of all their names; which Piero peruſed, and ſeeing the number and quallitie of the Citizens who had conſpired againſt him, tooke counſell of his friends, and made a note likewiſe of them. Then he committed this rolle of friends to be made by one whom he moſt truſted, who conſidering therof, found ſo great varietie, and inſtabilitie, in the mindes of the Citizens, that many who had bene written for his enemies, were alſo inrolled among the reſt, who were accounted his friends. During the ſpace that theſe matters, with theſe alteratiōs were handled, the time was come to chuſe two ſupreame Officers, and Nicholo Soderini was elected Gonfaloniere de Giustitia. It was a maruellous thing to ſee, with what concourſe not onely of honourable Citizens, but of all ſorts of people, he was accompanied to the Pallace, and paſsing vppon the waie, they ſet on his head a garland of Oliffe, to ſhewe that of him depended the welfare and libertie of the Countrey. By this and many like experiences, it is proued, that men ſhould not take vppon them any Office or principallitie with extraordinarie opinion. For not being able to performe ſuch expectation (men deſiring more then can be) doth in time breed his own diſhonour and infamie. Thomaſo and Nicholo Soderini were brethren: Nicholo was the bolder and more couragious, but Thomaſo, the wiſer, and friend to Piero. Who knowing his brothers humour, that he deſired onely the libertie of the Cittie, and that the ſtate might be ſetled without harme of any, perſwaded Nicholo to make new Squittini, whereby the Borſi might be filled with ſuch Cittizens as loued to liue in libertie. By doing whereof, the ſtate ſhould be at his will ſetled without tumult or

iniury to anie. Nicholo gaue credit to the counſell of his brother, and in theſe vaine imaginations conſumed the time of his office, till by the chiefe of the conſpirators his friends, he was ſuffered to ſincke: as they that would not for enuie, that the gouernment ſhould be with the authoritie of Nicholo renued, and hoping euer they might in time, vnder ſome other Gonfaloniere worke the ſame effect. The end of the magiſtracie of Nicholo come, and many things by him begun, but nothing ended, he yeelded vp his authoritie with more diſhonour, then with honour, he had entered the ſame. This matter made the faction of Piero glad, and confirmed his friendes in the hope they had of his good ſucceſſe. And thoſe that before ſtood neutrall, ioyned with Piero, and matters being thus in a readineſſe, for diuerſe months without other tumult, they temporized. Notwithſtāding the part of Piero ſtil encreaſed in ſtrength, wherof the enemies tooke knowledge and ioyned themſelues togither, to performe that by force, which by meane of the Magiſtrates they might eaſily haue done before; and ſo concluded to kill Piero lying ſicke at Careggi: for which purpoſe, they ſent to the Marqueſſe of Farrara, to come vnto the Citie with his forces, and Piero being ſlaine, they determined to march armed into the Market place, and cauſe the Senate to ſettle the gouernment according to their will. For albeit all the Citizens were not their friends, yet they that were their enemies would for feare giue place. Diotiſalui (the rather to cloake his intent) oftentimes viſited Piero, and reaſoned with him of the vniting of the Citie. All theſe practiſes had bene reuealed to Piero, and Domenico Martegli alſo gaue him intelligence, that Franceſco Neroni, brother to Diotiſalui, had perſwaded him, to be of his conſpiracie: alleaging the victorie was certain, and aſſured. Thereupon Piero determined to be the firſt that ſhould take armes, and fained an occaſion vppon the practiſes of his enemies, with the Marqueſſe of Farrara. He pretended therefore to haue receiued a Letter from Giouanni Bentiuogli, Prince in Bologna, whereby he was aduertiſed, that the Marqueſſe of Farrara was with his forces marched to the Riuer of Albo, and (as was commonly thought) intended to come to Florence. Vpon theſe aduertiſements Piero tooke armes, and with a great multitude of men armed, came to Florence, where all others that followed him armed themſelues. The contrary partie did the like: but Piero his followers were the better prepared, becauſe the others had not ſo great warning therof. Diotiſalui dwelling neare vnto Piero, thought not himſelfe aſſured at home, but ſometimes he went to the Pallace, to perſwade the Senate to cauſe Piero to laie downe his armes, & ſometimes he reſorted to Lucca, to intreate him to ſtand firme to his faction. But of all others, Nicholo Soderini ſhewed himſelf of moſt courage; for he preſently tooke arms, and being followed of all the common people of his quarter, went vnto the houſe of Lucca,
               Perſwaſions of Nicholo Soderini againſt the Medici. deſiring him to mount on horſebacke, and come to the Market place in fauour of the Senate, which fauoured them, and therefore might hope of victorie certaine. But if he remained in his houſe, hee ſhould be either by the armed men oppreſſed, or by thoſe that were diſarmed ſhamefully deceiued. Or if he ſhould after repent that he did not take armes, that repentance were too late. But if he wold with the warre oppreſſe Piero, he might eaſily do it: and after if he liked to make peace, it was better for him to giue, then to receiue the conditions therof. Theſe words moued not Lucca, hauing alreadie ſetled his mind, and promiſed to Piero new alliances, and new conditions. For he had alreadie married vnto Giouanni Tornabuoni, one of his neeces, and therefore perſwaded Nicholo to laie downe armes, and returne to his houſe. For it ought to ſuffice him, that the Cittie ſhould be gouerned by the Magiſtrates, and it would come to paſſe, that euerie man would laie downe armes: and the Senators being the ſtronger partie, ſhould be Iudge of the controuerſie. Nicholo then ſeeing he could not otherwiſe perſwade him, returned home. But firſt ſaid vnto

               Lucca, I cannot alone worke the well doing of our Citie, but I alone can prognoſticate the euil whereinto it is falling. This reſolution you haue made, will breed loſſe of libertie to our country, your depriuation of gouernment and wealth, and my baniſhment. The Senate in this tumult ſhut vp the Pallace, and the Magiſtrates kept themſelues therin, not ſeeming to ſauour any part. The Citizens (and chiefly thoſe who had followed Lucca) ſeeing Piero armed, and his aduerſaries diſarmed, began to deuiſe, not how to offend Piero, but how to become his frends. Wherupon the chief citizens & leaders of the factions, went to the Pallace, & in the preſence of the Senate, debated many things touching the ſtate of the Cittie, and pacification thereof. And for that, Piero by reaſon of his infirmitie could not come thither, they determined by conſent to go all vnto him, (Nicholo Soderini except) who hauing firſt recommended his children & familie to Tomaſo, went to his owne houſe in the country, aſpecting there the euent of theſe matters, accounting himſelfe vnhappie, and for his countrey infortunate. The other Cittizens being come to the preſence of Piero,
               The ſpeech of the Citizens to Piero di Medici. one of them appointed to ſpeake, complained of the tumults in the Cittie, declaring that they, who firſt tooke armes were moſt too blame: they not knowing what Piero, (who indeed did firſt take armes) would doo. They were come therefore to vnderſtand what was his intent, which (being for good of the Cittie) they would follow the ſame. Whereunto Piero anſwered, that hee who taketh armes firſt,The anſwer
                     •
                   of Piero. is not euer the cauſe of diſorder, but he that giueth firſt occaſion: and if they would conſider what their behauiours had bene towards him, they ſhould maruaile leſſe at that he had done for his own ſafetie. For therby they ſhould ſee, that their aſſemblies in the night, their ſubſcriptions, & their practiſes to take from him his gouernment & life, were the occaſions why he tooke armes: which not vſed but in the defence of his owne houſe, and not the offence of them, ſufficiently proued his intent was to defend himſelfe, and not to harme others. Neither would he any thing, or deſired more then his own ſecuritie & quiet, nor had giuē cauſe, that they ſhuld think he ſought for other. For the authoritie of Balia diſcontinued, he neuer laboured by extraordinarie meane to reuiue it; and was well content that the Magiſtrates ſhould gouern the citie if they ſo pleaſed: aſſuring them, that Coſimo and his children could liue in Florence honorably both with and without the Balia; and that the yeare 58. the ſame had bene, not by his houſe, but by them renued; and if now they wold not haue it more, he ſhould alſo be ſo contented. But this ſufficed not for them: for he found that his aduerſaries beleeued, they could not dwell in Florence, if he alſo there dwelled. A thing which he neuer thought that the friends of his father & him wold feare to liue in Florence with him, hauing euer born himſelfe among them, as a quiet and peaceable man. Then (turning his ſpeech to Diotiſalui & his brethren there preſent) he reproued them with words of much grauitie & offence: putting thē in mind what benifits they had receiued of Coſimo, how much he had truſted thē, & how vnthankfully they had vſed him. Which words wrought ſuch effect in ſome that were preſent, that if Piero had not ſtaied them, they ſodenly wold haue ſtriken Diotiſalui. In concluſion, Piero ſaid he wold maintein euery thing, that they & the Senat had determined. And that he deſired nothing, but to liue quiet & aſſured. After this ſpeech was ended, many matters were cōmoned of, yet nothing don: but in general was cōcluded, that it was neceſſary to reunite the citie & reform the ſtate. At that time Barnardo Lotti was Gonfaloniere d'Giustitia, a man not truſted by Piero, wherefore thought not good to attempt any thing during his Magiſtracy: but the end of his authority drawing neare, election was made by the Senators of a Gonfaloniere to ſit in September and October 1466. And they elected Roberto Lioni: who was no ſooner in office, (all other thinges beeing prepared) but hee aſſembled the people in

the Market place, and made a new Balia, all of the faction of Piero; which ſhortly created the Magiſtrates,The enemies of the Medici vanquiſhed. according to the will of the new gouernment, which terrified the heads of the enemies, and Agnolo Acciaiuoli fled to Naples, Diotiſalui Neroni, and Nicholo Soderini to Venice, and Lucca Pitti remained in Florence: truſting to the promiſes of Piero, and the newe alliance with his houſe. All the fugitiues were proclaimed Rebels, and all the familie of Neroni diſperſed. Alſo Giouanni Neroni then Biſhop of Florence, to auoide a worſe miſchiefe, voluntarily confined himſelfe to Rome. Many other likewiſe baniſhed themſelues to diuers places, neither did this ſuffice: but a publike proceſsion was ordeined to giue God thanks for the preſeruation, and vniting the ſtate. In the ſolemnization wherof, ſome citizens were apprehended & tormented. Afterwards part of them put to death, & the reſt confined. In this variation of fortune,The fall of Lucca Pitti. there was nothing ſo notable, as the example of Lucca Pitti: who ſodeinly ſaw the difference of victorie, and loſſe of honor, and diſhonor. For his houſe, whereunto was wont be great repaire, became vnfrequented; himſelf that had bin accuſtomed to paſſe the ſtreets folowed with many friends & kinsfolks, could neither be accompanied, nor ſcarcely ſaluted: becauſe ſome of them had loſt their offices, ſome their goods, & al the reſt threatned. His ſtately houſes in building, were by the workmen abandoned. Thoſe that were wont to preſent him, did now offer him iniury & deſpite. Some who had giuē him preſents of great value, did now demand them again as things lent. Others that were wont with praiſes to extoll him to the skies, did as a perſon vngratefull and violent, blame him. So that ouerlate he repented his not giuing credit to Nicholo Soderini, and that he did not with ſword in hand rather die honourably, then among his victorious enemies, liue diſhonored. Theſe that were baniſhed, ſought by ſundrie meanes to recouer the Citie, they had loſt. Yet Agnolo Acciaiuoli being at Naples, before hee attempted any thing, thought good to feele the diſpoſition of Piero, and what hope remained of reconciliation: writing vnto him,The letter of Agnolo Acciaiuoli, to Piero di Medici. as followeth. I ſmile to ſee, what ſports fortune doth make her ſelf, and how at her pleaſure ſhe frameth of foes friends, and of friends foes. You can remember that at the baniſhment of your father (eſteeming more his iniury then mine own danger) I loſt my country, & was like to haue alſo loſt my life. Neither (in al his time) did I euer omit, to honor and fauour your houſe, nor after his death haue had any intent to offend you. True it is, that your own vnhealthie diſpoſition, & the tender yeares of your children, brought me into ſuch feare, as I thought it behoued me to take order, that after your death, our countrey ſhould not be ruined. For which cōſideratiō I haue done diuers things, not againſt you, but for the good of my country. Wherein, if I haue committed error, the ſame ought be, for my good intent, and paſſed ſeruice, pardoned. Neither can I beleeue other, but that (in reſpect of ancient loue to your houſe) I ſhal at this occaſiō find mercy, & my manifold merits, ſhal not be, by one onely fault cancelled. Piero hauing peruſed this letter, aunſwered thus. Your laughing there you are,The anſwere of Piero. is the occaſion that I weep not here where I am: for if you had laughed at Florence, I ſhould haue wept at Naples. I denie not your well deſeruing of my father, ſith your ſelf wil confeſſe to haue taſted his liberalitie: and by how much that deedes be eſteemed aboue words, by ſo much your obligation is more thē ours. You then recompenced for your good, may not maruell, though for your euil, you receiue deſerued puniſhmēt. Let not the loue of your country excuſe you: ſith there is no man beleeueth, that this citie hath bin leſſe loued & profitted by the Medici, thē the Acciaiuoli. I do therfore wiſh you with diſhonor to remain there, ſith here in honor you knew not how to lead your life. Agnolo thus diſpairing of pardon, went to Rome, & there conferred with the Archbiſhop, & other baniſhed men, of the mean wherby they might take reputation frō the houſe of Medici: which Piero
               
with difficultie (notwithſtanding the aide of his friendes) could preuent. Diotiſalui and Nicholo Soderini; likewiſe practiſed to make the Senate of Venice enemie to their countrey: thinking thereby, that if with anie new warre the Florentines were aſſailed, the gouernment being new and hated, they ſhould not be able to defend themſelues. In thoſe daies Giouan Franceſco the ſonne of Palla Strozzi liued in Farrara, and had bene togither with his father, baniſhed in the alteration of the ſtate, the yeare 34. This Giouanni had great credit, and was holden amongſt other merchants a man of great riches. The newe Rebelles declared vnto him, the great facilitie they found to recouer their countrey, if the Venetians would take the enterpriſe in hand: which he thought they would be eaſily perſwaded vnto, if part of their charges might be borne. Giouan Franceſco, who deſired to reuenge himſelfe of the iniuries receiued, eaſily gaue credite to their counſaile: and promiſed with all his wealth, to furniſh the enterpriſe. Then went they all togither vnto the Duke,Complaint of the baniſhed Florentines to the Senate of Venice. complaining of the exile whereinto they ſaide themſelues were fallen, not for anie other fault, but becauſe they deſired that their countrey might be gouerned with the lawes thereof: and that the Magiſtrates and not a fewe others ſhould be honoured. For Piero de Medici with others his followers, accuſtomed to liue tyrannically, had by deceit taken armes, and by deceit cauſed them to diſarme themſelues, and afterwards by deceit expulſed them out of their Citie. Neither were they ſo content, but they would alſo therein pretend deuotion to God, and by that colour oppreſſe others. For at the aſſemblie of the Citizens, and at publike and ſacred ceremonies (to the intent God ſhould be partaker of their treaſons) they apprehended, impriſoned, and ſlewe manie Cittizens: which was an example of great impietie and wickedneſſe. For reuenge wherof, they knew not whither to reſort with more hope, then to that Senate which hauing euer liued free, could not but take compaſsion of thoſe, who had loſt their liberties. Then they perſwaded all men that loued libertie to deteſt tirants: & thoſe that were godly, to abhorre impious people. Putting them in mind, that the houſe of Medici had taken from them, the dominiō of Lombardy, at ſuch time as Coſimo (without conſent of the other citizens, & the Senate) fauoured & aided Franceſco. So that though they had no compaſsion of the Florentines, yet the reuēge of the iniuries done to the Venetiās, ought to moue thē.The Florentines aſſaulted by the Venetians & Marqueſſe of Farrara. Theſe laſt words moued all the Senat to determine that Bartolomeo Coglione their General, ſhuld aſſault the dominiō of Florence. He with all ſpeed poſsible aſſembled the army, & with him ioyned Hercole Eſte, ſent by Borſo Marqueſſe of Farrara. They at the firſt entrie (the Florentines not being prepared) burnt the Towne of Dauadola, and ſpoyled ſome other places in the countrey thereabout. But the Florentines (hauing driuen out all the enemies to Piero) made league with Galiazzo Duke of Milan, and with the King Ferrando. Then they enterteined Federigo Earle of Vrbino, for their Generall; and founde themſelues ſo friended, as they feared little the force of their enemies. For Ferrando ſent thither Alfonſo his eldeſt ſonne, and Duke Galiazzo came in perſon: either of them leading a conuenient number, and they altogither made head at Caſtracaro, a Caſtle belonging to the Florentines: builded at the foot of thoſe Alpes, wherby men paſſe from Toſcana to Romagna. In the meane time the enemies were retired towards Imola, and ſo between the one and the other army (according to the cuſtome of thoſe daies,) ſome light skirmiſhes happened, but no townes by either of them beſieged, nor any diſpoſition in either of them to fight with their enemie, but euerie man remaining within his Tent, continued the wars with great cowardice. This maner of proceedings, greatly offended the Gouernors in Florence, finding themſelues charged by a warre, wherein they ſpent much, and could hope for litle. And the Magiſtrates complained of thoſe Cittizens who were made

Commiſſaries in that enterpriſe. They anſwered, that Duke Galiazzo was occaſion thereof, for hee hauing moſt authoritie and leaſt experience, knewe not what was profitable, nor would not beleeue others of more skill: and that it was impoſsible, ſo long as hee remained in the armie, that anie thing ſhould be done with honour and commoditie. Wherefore the Florentines ſaide vnto the Duke, albeit for their profit it was beſt he ſhould be perſonally in their aide, becauſe the reputation of his preſence was the fitteſt meane to terrifie the enemie; notwithſtanding for that they eſteemed more his ſafetie, then their ſtate, or proper commoditie, they thought not fit he ſhould remaine long from Milan, being newly come to his gouernment, and hauing there diuerſe ſtrong enemies to be ſuſpected: ſo that, if any of them ſhould practiſe againſt him, they might eaſily in his abſence, do it. For which reſpects they perſwaded him to returne home, and leaue part of his forces for their defence. This counſell contented Galiazzo, and without further conſideration, returned to Milan. The Florentine Captaines disburthened of this let, to declare the ſame was the true occaſion of their ſlow proceeding, drew ſo neare to the enemie, that they ioyned battle: which continued one half day, neither partie yeelding to other. Notwithſtanding there was not anie man therein ſlaine, but ſome horſes hurt, and a fewe priſoners on either part taken. The winter now being come, and the ſeaſon of the yeare no longer ſeruing for the fielde, they retired to their lodgings. Bartolomeo went to Rauenna, the Florentines into Toſcana: the Kings ſouldiers and the Dukes, reſorted home to their maiſters Countries. But ſo ſoone as this aſſault beganne to be forgotten, and no diſorder made in Florence, as the Florentine Rebels promiſed, and the other ſouldiers wanting paie, were content to entreate of peace,Peace betweene the Florentines and Venetians. which with ſmall difficultie was concluded. The Rebels then diſpairing of all hope, to diuerſe places diſperſed themſelues. Diotiſalui went to Farrara, where he was by the Marqueſſe Borſo, receiued, and relieued. Nicholo Soderini fledde to Rauenna, where liuing long vppon a poore pencion giuen him by the Venetians, in the ende there died. This Nicholo was accounted a man iuſt and couragious, yet vncertaine and ſlowe of his reſolution: which was the cauſe that the Gonfaloniere loſt that opportunitie, which being out of office, hee would haue taken, but could not. The peace concluded, the Citizens who remained in Florence with victorie, thinking themſelues not aſſured, vnleſſe they did as well oppreſſe thoſe they ſuſpected, as their apparant enemies, perſwaded Bardo Altouiti, then Gonfaloniere d'Giustitia, to remoue more Cittizens from their offices, and to baniſh many others. Which thing greatly encreaſed the power of that faction, and terrified the contrarie part: which power they vſed without reſpect, and proceeded ſo much at their pleaſure, as it ſeemed, that God and fortune had conſented to giue that Cittie into their hands. Of which doings, Piero knew little, and that litle, he could not (being afflicted with ſickneſſe) remedie. For his diſeaſes were ſo great) as he could not vſe any member ſaue only his tongue: wherwith he exhorted them, and praied them to liue ciuilly, and enioy their natiue country, rather entire thē broken. And for the comfort of the Citie, he determined with magnificence to celebrate the marriage of Lorenzo his ſonne, who was alreadie contracted to Clarice, diſcended of the houſe of Orſini: which marriage was performed with great pompe, as to ſo magnificent a feaſt apperteined. For performance of theſe triumphs, diuers daies were conſumed in feaſting, dancing, & publike ſhews. Wherunto was alſo ioined (for more apparāce of greatnes of the Medici) 2. marſhal exerciſes; the one repreſented a battle fought in the field; the other, of a towne beſieged: which things were deuiſed in good order, & performed with ſo much vertue as might be. While theſe matters were doing in Florēce, the reſt of Italy liued quiet, but yet in great ſuſpitiō
               
of the Turke, who proceeded ſtill in his enterpriſe againſt the Chriſtians, and had wonne Negroponti, to the great infamie and diſhonour of the Chriſtian name. Then died Borſo Marqueſſe of Farrara, to whom ſucceeded his brother Hercule. Euen then died alſo Giſmondo da Rimino, a perpetuall enemie to the Church: who left to inherit that ſtate, Roberto his naturall ſonne; afterwards accounted the moſt excellent Captaine of Italy. Then likewiſe died the Pope Pagolo:
               Pope Siſto. in whoſe place was created Sisto quarto, called before his creation Franceſco da Sauona, a man of baſe and vile condition: yet for his vertue made Generall of the order of S. Franceſco, and afterwardes Cardinall. This Pope was the firſt that beganne to ſhewe of what great force the Papacie was, and that manie things before time accounted faults, might be by Papall authoritie, couered. This Pope had amongſt many others in his houſe, two men, the one called Piero, and the other Gerolamo: who (as euerie man thought) were his vnlawfull ſonnes: notwithſtanding men called them by other names more honeſt. Piero being made a Frier, was preferred to the dignitie of Cardinall, and called Cardinall of S. Siſto. To Gerolamo he gaue the Cittie of Furli, and tooke it by force from Antonio Ordelaffi, whoſe aunceſtors had bene long time Princes there. This ambitious manner of proceeding, made him the more eſteemed by the Princes of Italy, and euery of them ſought which way to be accounted his friend. The Duke of Milan gaue his daughter Catterina in marriage to Gerolamo, and with her the Citie of Imola, which by force he had taken frō 
               Taddeo Alidoſsi. Betwixt this Duke, and the King Ferrando, was alſo made new alliance. For Elizabella daughter to Alfonſo, eldeſt ſonne of the King, was married to Giouan Galiazzo, eldeſt ſonne to the Duke. Thus Italy continued quiet, and the greateſt care of the Princes was, one to honor the other: and with new alliances, friendſhips, & leagues, one to aſſure himſelfe of the other. But notwithſtanding ſo great a peace, Florence was by the Citizens thereof greatly afflicted. And Piero being troubled with ambition of the Citizens, and his own diſeaſes, could not procure remedie: yet to diſcharge his conſcience, and laie before them their miſdemeanor, he called to his preſence the chiefe Florentines, and ſaid vnto them as followeth.The Oration of P. di Medici to the Florentines. I neuer thought that anie time could come, when the maner & behauior of friends would proue ſuch, as to make me loue & deſire my enemies: or that I might wiſh victory to be conuerted to loſſe. Becauſe I thought my ſelfe accompanied with men, whoſe appetites were confined to meaſure; & that it ſufficed them to liue in their country aſſured & honoured, and (that which is more) vpon their enemies reuenged. But now I know my ſelf far deceiued, as he that knew little the ambition of men, and leaſt of all yours. For it contenteth you not to be Princes of ſo great a Cittie, and among you a few to haue the honors, offices, and commodities, wherewith many Citizens were wont to be honored. It contented you not to haue the goods of your enemies among you diuided. It contenteth you not, to burthen others with publike charges, & you free from all paiments, to take the publike profit: but you wil alſo with euery kind of iniury moleſt them. You ceaſe not to rob your neighbors; you feare not to ſell iuſtice; you flie ciuill iudgement; you oppreſſe peaceable men, and aduance thoſe that be inſolent. Neither do I beleeue that there is in all Italy, ſo many examples of violence & couetouſnes, as be in this cittie. But ſith it hath giuen you life, why do you take life from it? If it hath made you victorious, why ſhould we deſtroy it? If it hath honored vs, why haue we diſdained it? I promiſe you by that faith, which ought to be giuē and receiued amōg good mē, that if you behaue your ſelues ſo, as I ſhal repent me of my victory, I wil ſo do, as you ſhal alſo repēt that you haue abuſed it. Thoſe citizens according to the time anſwered reſonably. Notwitſtāding they continued ſtill in their inſolēt doings. Inſo much as Piero ſent ſecretly to Agnolo Acciaiuoli (who came vnto

him at Cafaggiuolo) and there they reaſoned at length touching the eſtate of the Cittie. And ſurely had he not bene by death preuented, he would haue called home all the baniſhed men, to bridle the inſolencie and oppreſsion of thoſe that liued in the Citie. But death ſuffered him not to performe ſo honeſt an intent: for diſeaſes of bodie and trouble of minde,Death of Piero di Medici. ſo greeuouſly handled him, that hee died the fiftie and three yeare of his age. His vertue and bountie, could not be to his Countrey ſo well knowne, as they deſerued: partly becauſe his father liued (welneare as long) and partly, for that thoſe fewe yeares hee ouerliued him, were in ciuill contentions and ſickneſſe conſumed. This Piero was buried in the Church of S. Lorenzo, neare vnto his father: and his funerall performed with honour and pompe, worthie ſo great a Cittizen. Of him there remained two ſonnes, Lorenzo and Giuliano, of whome there was good hope, that they would prooue men fit for the ſtate: yet their youth was ſuch as made all men doubt thereof. Amongſt other chiefe Cittizens in the gouernment of Florence, there was one farre excelling the reſt,Tomaſo Soderini. called Tomaſo Soderini: whoſe wiſedome and authoritie, not onely to Florence, but alſo to all the Princes in Italy was knowne. Hee, after the death of Piero, was of all the Cittie reuerenced: and manie Cittizens did dailie viſite him, as chiefe man of the ſtate. Alſo diuerſe Princes did write vnto him. Neuertheleſſe being wiſe, and knowing what fortune followed him and his houſe, hee would neuer anſwere the Princes Letters: and perſwaded the Citizens they ſhould not reſort to his houſe, but to the houſes of the Medici. Alſo to ſhewe in deedes, that which by words was by him perſwaded, hee aſſembled all the chiefe Gentlemen of euerie family, at the Monaſtery of S. Antonio; whither hee procured that Lorenzo and Giuliano di Medici ſhould come: and there after a long and graue Oration by him made, they diſputed the eſtate both of that Cittie, of all Italy, and of the humours of the Princes. Therein concluding, that to continue Florence vnited in peace, aſſured from diuiſion within, and from warre without, it behooued them to honor thoſe two yoong men, and mainteine the reputation of their houſe: Becauſe men do not repine to do ſuch things as they haue bene accuſtomed vnto, but new houſes, as they are eaſily honored, ſo are they quickly abandoned. For it hath bene euer more eaſie to maintaine that reputation, where length of time hath extingniſhed enuy, then to raiſe a new eſtimation, which by many occaſiōs may be oppreſſed. After him ſpake Lorenzo, who notwithſtanding his youth, vttered words with ſo great grauitie & modeſtie, as gaue euery man hope he would become ſuch a one, as indeed afterwards he proued. And before they departed that place, the Citizens praied the brethren, to receiue them as children, they offring to honor them as fathers.Giuliano and Lorenzo di Medici. This concluſion ſet downe, Giuliano and Lorenzo were honoured as Princes of the Citie, and thoſe that were of counſell with Tomaſo, did not intermeddle. Thus the Florentines liued both within & without ſo peaceably, as nothing diſturbed the Common quiet, till a trouble not looked for aroſe, which did prognoſticate future miſchiefe. Among other families (which Lucca Pitti ruined) was that of Nardi. For Saluestro and his brethren being heads of that houſe, were firſt ſent into exile, and after by the warre which Bartolomeo Coglione moued, made Rebels. Of theſe Barnardo brother of Saluestro, was a yoong man of great ſpirit and courage.Conſpiracy of the Nardi. Hee being poore could not endure baniſhment: and finding that the peace made had not prouided for his returne, determined to make proofe of ſomewhat, whereby might grow occaſion of warre. For many times of a ſmall beginning, great effects doe followe. Becauſe men bee more willing to proſecute, then beginne anie enterpriſe. This Barnardo had much acquaintance in Prato, and muche more in the Countrey about Pistoia: chiefely with the

the houſe of Palandra: who albeit they were but countrey people, yet was their number great, and the men (according to the manner of that countrey) practiſed in armes, and much vſed to bloud. He knew likewiſe they liued diſcontented, and by reaſon that ſome of their enemies were Magiſtrates in Florence, they had bene euill handled. He knew moreouer the humor of the Prateſi, who accounted themſelues proudly and hardly gouerned, and had particuler knowledge of the euill diſpoſition of ſome towards the State. All which things brought him in hope to kindle fire in Toſcana, by making Prato to rebell, whereto ſo many would put hands, as they that would quench it, ſhould not be able. Then he imparted this matter to Diotiſalui Neroni, and asked of him, what aide might be by his meanes procured among the Princes, if he ſhould happen to ſurprize Prato. Diotiſalui thought the enterpriſe dangerous, and as impoſsible to take effect: notwithſtanding, conſidering he might thereby with the perill of others make new proofe of fortune, perſwaded him to proceed, and promiſed to bring him aſſured aide from Bologna, and Farrara, ſo that he were able to defend Prato at the leaſt fifteene dayes. Barnardo then incouraged with this promiſe, and conceiuing great hope of happie proceeding, went to Prato, and there communicating the matter to diuerſe, found them verie willing. The like diſpoſition he perceiued in the familie of Palandra, and hauing agreed togithers of the time and manner of the enterpriſe, Barnardo imparted all to Diotiſalui. At that time, was Ceſare Petrucci, Podeſta of Prato, for the Florentines. The cuſtome was, that the Podeſta ſhould haue the keies of the towne brought vnto him: And whenſoeuer any of the towne (chiefely in times of no ſuſpition) deſired to goe out or come in by night, that fauour was graunted. Barnardo knowing this cuſtome, being accompanied with thoſe of the houſe of Palandra, and 100. others armed men, in the morning when the gate towards Piſtoia ſhould open, preſented himſelfe: and thoſe whome he had made priuie within, did likewiſe arme. One of them went to the Podeſta, ſaying, a friend of his deſired to come into the towne. The Podeſta not doubting any ſuch accident, ſent with him a ſeruant of his to carrie the keies: from whome, (being a little on the way) the keies were taken, the gates opened, and Barnardo with his followers came in. Then they diuided themſelues in two parts. The one led by Salueſtro of Prato, tooke poſſeſsion of the Cittadell. The other following Barnardo, ſurprized the Pallace, and committed the Podeſta with all his familie, to the cuſtodie of one of his companie. Which done, they walked the ſtreets, proclaiming the name of libertie. By that time it was day, and many people by meane of the noiſe, came to the market place, where vnderſtanding that the Cittadell and Pallace were taken, the Gouernor alſo with his familie impriſoned, they meruailed much. The eight Cittizens (chiefe Officers of the towne) aſſembled in their Pallace, to conſult what was to be done. But Barnardo and his men, hauing awhile walked the towne, and finding himſelfe not well followed, hearing where the eight were, went vnto them, declaring that the occaſion of his enterpriſe was to deliuer them and their countrey from bondage: and that they ſhould gaine great glorie to take armes, and accompanie him in that glorious action, whereby they ſhould win perpetuall quiet, and eternall fame. He alſo laid before them the memorie of their auncient libertie, comparing it with their preſent condition. He likewiſe told them what aide they ſhould be aſſured to haue of others, if they would but for a fewe daies defend themſelues from the Florentine forces. He informed them moreouer, that he had intelligence in Florence, whereby he was aduertiſed that Cittie would wholie follow him. The eight not moued with theſe perſwaſions, anſwered, that they knew not whether Florence liued in libertie or bondage, as a thing they deſired not to vnderſtand. But well they knew their owne deſire

was not to enioy other libertie, then to obey thoſe Magiſtrates that gouerned in Florence: of whome, they had not receiued any ſuch iniurie, as might moue to take armes againſt them. Wherefore they perſwaded him to reſtore the Podeſta to his libertie, ſend his men out of the towne, and ſaue himſelfe ſpeedily from that danger, whereinto he was vnaduiſedly fallen. Theſe ſpeeches diſmaied not Barnardo, for he intēded to ſee if feare might moue the Prateſi, to that which with intreaty could not. Therefore to terrifie the Cittizens, and determining to put the Podeſta to death, he tooke him out of priſon, and commanded him to be hanged at the Pallace window. The Podeſta being brought to the window, the halter vpon his neck, and ſeeing Barnardo to ſollicit his death, turned himſelfe towards him, and ſaid. Barnardo, thou putteſt me to death, hoping the rather to be followed of the Prateſi, but the contrarie will come to paſſe. For the reuerence which this people doth beare to the Gouernors ſent by the Florentines is ſo great, that ſo ſoone as they ſhall ſee this iniurie done to me, they will hate thee, ſo much, as the ſame will prooue thy ruine: wherefore not my death, but my life, may be the occaſion of thy victorie. For if I commaund them that which thou wouldſt haue done, they will more willinglie obey me, then thee. Thus I following thy direction, thou mayſt become owner of thy deſire. This counſell ſeemed to Barnardo (being a man irreſolute) verie reaſonable, and therefore willed him at a window to commaund the people to yeeld their obedience to Barnardo. Which being done, the Podeſta was lead back to priſon. By this time, the weakeneſſe of the conſpirators was diſcouered, and many Florentines inhabiting that towne, were aſſembled: among whome, was Georgio Ginori, a Knight of Ieruſalem. He being the firſt that tooke armes againſt the Rebels, aſſaulted Barnardo in the ſtreets, ſometimes intreating, and ſometimes threatning the people to follow him,The enterpriſe of Barnardo defeated. till at length by Georgio, and many others (who tooke armes) Barnardo was hurt and taken. Which done, it was no hard matter to deliuer the Podeſta, and vanquiſh the reſt. For they being fewe, and diuided into ſundrie parts of the towne, were welneare all taken or ſlaine. In the meane ſpace, the fame of this accident was come to Florence, and reported to be much greater then it was. For the aduertiſements were, that Prato was ſurprized, the Podeſta with his houſhold put to death, Piſtoia in armes, and many of the Cittizens of the conſpiracie, in ſo much as many Cittizens ſodeinly came to the Pallace to conſult with the Senate. At that time, Roberto Sanſeuerino happened to be in Florence, who being a man of great experience in warre, was ſent with certaine forces to Prato, commaunded, that he ſhould approach the towne, and ſend back particuler aduertiſements in what ſtate the ſame ſtood; and do there, what by his wiſedome ſhould be thought good. Roberto marching on his way, and paſsing the Caſtle of Campi, a meſſenger came vnto him from Ceſare Petrucci, declaring, that Barnardo was taken, his companions fled, or ſlaine, and all the tumult pacified. Whereupon Roberto returned to Florence, and ſhortly after Barnardo being brought thither a priſoner, and demaunded why he tooke that enterpriſe in hand, aunſwered, bicauſe he determined rather to die in Florence, then liue in exile: and thought good to accompanie his death with ſome memorable action. This tumult begun and ended (as it were in one inſtant) the Cittizens of Florence returned to their wonted order of life, thinking to enioy that ſtate without ſuſpition, which they had lately eſtabliſhed, and ſetled: whereof inſued thoſe inconueniences, which many times be ingendred by peace, for the youth became more prodigall then they were wont, ſpending their money in apparrell, feaſting, and other like vanities, and (being idle) conſumed their ſubſtance in play, and women. Their whole ſtudie was to be brauely apparrelled, and to ſeeme wittie, or ſubtile; for he that could moſt cunninglie mock and deride others, was holden the

wiſeſt and moſt eſteemed. Theſe and ſuch like diſorders, were by the Courtiers of Milan increaſed. For at that time, thither came the Duke, with his wife, and Court,The Duke of Milan in Florence. to performe (as he ſaid) a certaine vowe, and was there receiued with pompe, meete for ſo great a Prince, and friend to the Florentines. In that time alſo, was ſeene a thing in Florence, neuer before vſed, which was, that the Courtiers of Milan, notwithſtanding the time of Lent, did without reſpect of the Eccleſiaſticall order, eate almoſt none other meate, but fleſh. Albeit the Duke found the Cittie of Florence full of courtlie delicacie, and cuſtomes contrarie to all well ordered ciuilitie, yet his comming increaſed the ſame. Wherefore the good Cittizens thought fit and neceſſarie to bridle the exceſſe with new lawes, for apparrell, for funerals, and feaſtings. In the midſt of this great peace, there happened in Toſcana a new and vnlooked for tumult. In the Prouince of Volterra,
               Tumults in Volterra. certaine Cittizens happened to finde a Mine of Allum, whereof, knowing the commoditie, to be helped with money, and defended with authoritie, they ioyned with them ſome Cittizens of Florence, making them partakers of ſuch profit as ſhould thereof ariſe. This matter at the beginning (as it happeneth for the moſt part in all new actions) was by the people of Volterra little eſteemed. But the commoditie thereof afterwards knowne, they deſired too late, and without effect, that which at the firſt they might eaſilie haue obteined. Then began they to propound the matter in their councels, ſaying, it was not conuenient that a commoditie found in the common lands, ſhould be conuerted to a priuate vſe. Thereupon, they ſent vnto Florence certaine Embaſſadors. The cauſe was committed to a few Cittizens, who either bicauſe they were corrupted, or for that they ſo thought beſt, gaue ſentence, that the requeſt of the people of Volterra was not reaſonable, bicauſe they deſired to depriue the Cittizens of their labour and induſtrie, and therefore iudged, that thoſe Alums apperteined to priuate men, and not to the Citie. Yet was it conuenient, that thoſe priuate perſons ſhould giue yearly vnto the people certaine money, in ſigne they acknowledged them for ſuperiors. This anſwere did nothing diminiſh, but augment the tumults and diſpleaſures in Volterra, ſo that nothing was ſpoken of ſo much in their councels, and in euerie other place in the Cittie, as the requeſt of the multitude, which was, to recouer that which they thought loſt. The priuate men on the other ſide, ſtill laboured to continue that which they had gotten, and had bene confirmed by iudgement of the Florentines. This matter remained ſo long in diſputation, that one Cittizen, a man of eſtimation in that Cittie, called Pecorino, with diuerſe others that tooke part with him, was ſlaine, their houſes ſpoiled and burnt. In that furie alſo, the Rettori for the Florentines with difficultie eſcaped. This firſt tumult being paſſed, they determined in all haſte to ſend Embaſſadors to Florence, who informed the Senators, that if they would obſerue their auncient conditions, they would alſo continue in their auncient obedience. The anſwere of theſe meſſengers was long diſputed. Tomaſo Soderini was of opinion, that it behoued to receiue the Volterani with what condition ſo euer, thinking the time ſerued not, to kindle a fire ſo neare hand, that might burne their owne houſe: for he feared the diſpoſition of the Pope, the power of the King, and miſtruſted the Venetians friendſhip and the Dukes, not knowing what fidelitie was in the one, nor what vertue in the other, alleaging that prouerb which ſaith, Better a leane peace, then a fat victorie. Of a contrarie minde was Lorenzo de Medici, thinking he had now occaſion to make ſhew of his wiſedome and counſell, and the rather being thereto perſwaded by thoſe that enuied the authoritie of Tomaſo. And therefore determined by armes to puniſh the inſolencie of the Volterani, affirming, that if they were not corrected, as a memorable example, all others (vpon euerie light occaſion) without reuerence or reſpect, would dare to do the like. This reſolution

made, the Volterani were anſwered, that they could not require the keeping of thoſe conditions, which they themſelues had broken, and therefore either they ſhould referre themſelues to the diſcretion of the Senate, or preſently looke for warre. The Volterani returned with this anſwere, prepared for the defence of their towne, and ſent to all Princes of Italy for aide, but were aided by fewe: for onely the Saneſi, and the Lord of Piombino did promiſe to helpe them. The Florentines on the other ſide, iudging that the victorie would be gotten by making of ſpeed, aſſembled tenne thouſand footemen, and two thouſand horſe, whome vnder the conduct of Federigo, Lord of Vrbino, they ſent into the countrey of Volterra: all which, they eaſily poſſeſſed. Then they brought their Camp before the Cittie, which being builded vpon an hill, could not be aſſaulted, but on that ſide, where the Church of S. Aliſandro ſtandeth. The Volterani had for their defence enterteined a thouſand ſouldiers, or thereabouts, who ſeeing how brauely the Florentines aſſailed them, fearing they could not defend the towne, were in the ſeruice ſlowe, but in doing iniurie to the Volterani readie ynough: ſo that thoſe poore Cittizens were by the enemies aſſaulted without, and by friends oppreſſed within. In ſo much as (diſpairing to be ſaued) thought good to make peace, and forwant of better meane, yeelded themſelues to the Florentines Commiſſaries: who cauſed them to open the gates, and the greater part of the armie being entred, they went vnto the Pallace where the Priori were, whome they commanded to returne to their houſes, and by the way, one of them was by a ſouldier reuiled and robbed. Of this beginning (for men be more readie to euill then good) grew the deſtruction and ſack of this Cittie, which continued one whole day. The houſes were robbed, and the people ſpoiled, neither did the women and Churches eſcape, but all ſouldiers, aſwell they that had cowardlie defended the towne,Volterra ſacked. as the others that fought, were partakers of the ſpoiles. The newes of this victorie, was with much reioycing receiued at Florence, for the ſame was wholie the enterpriſe of Lorenzo, who thereby gained great reputation. And thereupon one of his deareſt friends reprooued Tomaſo Soderini for his counſell, ſaying vnto him, What ſay you now, that Volterra is taken? To whome, Tomaſo anſwered, me thinks it is loſt: for if you had taken it by compoſition, you might haue made profit and ſuretie thereof; but hauing it by force, in time of warre it will weaken and trouble you, and in time of peace, charge and hinder you. In thoſe dayes, the Pope deſiring to hold in obedience the townes belonging to the Church, cauſed Spoleto to be ſacked: which by meane of inward faction, had rebelled.Caſtello beſieged by Pope Siſto. After, for the like offence, he beſieged the Cittie of Caſtello. In that towne, Nicholo Vitelli was Prince. He being in great friendſhip with Lorenzo de Medici, refuſed not in that neceſsitie to aide him: yet was that aide not ſufficient to defend Nicholo, but ynough to ſowe the firſt ſeeds of enimitie betwixt Siſto and the Medici, which afterwards brought forth fruite of much miſchiefe: and the ſame ſhould quickly haue ſhewed it ſelfe, had not the death of Frier Piero, Cardinall of Siſto, happened. For this Cardinall, hauing trauelled about all Italy, went alſo to Venice and Milan (pretending to honor the marriage of Hercole, Marqueſſe of Farrara) to practiſe with the Princes, and ſound their diſpoſition towards the Florentines. But being returned to Rome, he died: not without ſuſpition to haue bene poiſoned by the Venetians, who feared the greatneſſe of Siſto, ſo long as he might be counſelled and incouraged by Frier Piero. For albeit nature had made this Frier of baſe bloud, and was alſo bred vp baſely in a Monaſterie, yet ſo ſoone as he had aſpired to be Cardinall, there appeared in him ſo great pride and ambition, as might not onely become a Cardinall, but alſo ſeeme fit ynough for any Pope. For he feared not to make a feaſt in Rome with ſo great charge, as ſeemed ſuperfluous for any King: for therein

he ſpent more then twentie thouſand Florins. Pope Siſto bereft of this agent, proſecuted his enterpriſes more coldly. Notwithſtanding, the league being renewed betweene the Florentines, the Duke, and Venetians, and place left for Pope Siſto, and the King, who made an other contract; therein alſo, leauing places for other Princes to enter, if they would. By this meane, Italy became diuided in two factions:Italy diuided into ſactions. for daily betwixt theſe two leagues, there grew diſpleaſure, as it happened, touching the Ile of Cipres, which the King Ferrando challenged, and the Venetians vſurped, whereupon, the Pope and the King became more willing one of the others friendſhip. In thoſe daies, Federigo Prince of Vrbino, was accounted the moſt excellent Captaine of Italy, and had long ſerued for the Florentines. The King and the Pope (to the end our league ſhould not haue the ſeruice of ſuch a leader) determined to win the good will of Federigo. To that end both the Pope and the King deſired him to come vnto Naples. Federigo performed their deſire, to the great admiration and diſpleaſure of the Florentines, beleeuing it would become of him, as it did to Giacopo Piccinino. Yet the contrarie came to paſſe: for Federigo returned from Naples and Romagna with great honor, and ſtill Generall for their league. Neuertheleſſe, the King and Pope ceaſed not, to ſound the diſpoſition of the Lords in Romagna, and the Saneſi, hoping to make them his friends, and by their meanes, be able to offend the Florentines, whome they perceiued by all conuenient waies armed, to incounter their ambition: and hauing loſt Federigo of Vrbino, they enterteined Roberto of Rimini. They alſo renewed the league with the Perugini, and drew thereunto the Lord of Faenza. The Pope and King alleaged, that their diſpleaſure to the Florentines was, bicauſe they ſought to drawe the Venetians from them: and the Pope thought that the Church could not mainteine the reputation thereof, nor the Earle Girolamo his ſtate in Romagna, if the Florentines and Venetians were vnited. On the other ſide, the Florentines feared they would be enemies to the Venetians, not to win their friendſhip, but the rather thereby to iniurie them: ſo as Italy liued two yeares in theſe ſuſpitions, and diuerſities of humors, before any tumults were moued. But the firſt (although but ſmall) happened in Toſcana. Braccio of Perugia,
               Trouble in Toſcana. a man (as hath heretofore bene often ſaid) of great reputation in the warre, had two ſonnes, called Oddo, and Carlo. This Carlo was a child, and Oddo was by the inhabitants of the Vale of Lamona ſlaine, as hath bene declared. Carlo being atteined to age, and able for armes, was for the memorie of his father, and the good hope of himſelfe enterteined by the Venetians, and made among others, a leader for that ſtate. The time of his conduct ended, he refuſed to ſerue longer, determining to make proofe, if with his owne fame, and the reputation of his father, he could recouer his owne countrey of Perugia. Whereto the Venetians eaſily conſented, as they that were wont in alterations to increaſe their dominion. Carlo then came into Toſcana, and found the enterpriſe of Perugia hard, by reaſon that the Perugini were in league with the Florentines, yet deſirous that this motion might take ſome effect worthie memorie, he aſſaulted the Saneſi, alleaging they were debtors of money, due to his father, for ſeruice done to that ſtate, whereof he required ſatisfaction: and vpon that demaund, aſſaulted them with ſo great furie, as that dominion became diſordered. The Cittizens of Siena, ſeeing themſelues ſo furiouſly charged (being readie to ſuſpect the worſt of the Florentines) thought all was done by their conſent. They alſo complained much to the Pope and the King; and ſent Embaſſadors vnto Florence, to expoſtulate the iniurie, and couertlie alleaged, that without aſsiſtance, Carlo could not with ſo great ſecuritie haue offended them. The Florentines excuſed themſelues, promiſing in what ſort the Embaſſadors thought good, they would commaund Carlo, no more to offend the Saneſi. Whereof Carlo complained,

that they by not aiding him, ſhould loſe a great conqueſt, and he miſſe the meane, to aſpire to much glorie. For in ſhort ſpace he promiſed them poſſeſsion of that Cittie, where he found ſo great cowardice and diſorder, as with poſsibilitie it could not be defended. Then Carlo departed from thence, and returned to his old enterteinement of the Venetians. Albeit the Saneſi were by the Florentines deliuered from ſo great danger, yet remained they towards them offended, and iudged their obligacion not to be any thing, hauing ſaued them from an euill, whereof they had bene the occaſion. During that theſe matters betwixt the King and Pope were handled in Toſcana,
               Conſpiracie againſt the Duke of Milan. there happened in Lombardy an accident of much more moment, and did prognoſticate greater euils. There was in Milan a Scholemaiſter, called Cola of Mantoua, a man well learned, but ambitious, and ſuch a one, as inſtructed the chiefe children of the Cittie. This Cola, either bicauſe he hated the life and manners of the Duke, or for ſome other occaſion, in all his ſpeeches ſeemed to diſdaine thoſe men that liued vnder an euill prince, calling others glorious and happie, whome nature and fortune graunted to be borne, and liue in common-weales. Declaring how all famous men had bene brought vp in common-weales, and not vnder Princes. For the common-weales (ſaid he) did nouriſh vertuous men, but Princes did oppreſſe them: for the one doth cheriſh vertue, the other doth feare it. The yong men with whome he had gained moſt familiaritie, were Giouandrea Lampugnano, Carlo Viſconti, and Girolamo Olgeato, with them he oftentimes reaſoned of the euill nature of the Duke, and their owne misfortune, being gouerned vnder ſuch a one: and at length hee began to be in ſo great confidence of theſe yong men, that hee brought them to ſweare, that ſo ſoone as they atteined to mans eſtate, they would deliuer their countrey from the tirannie of that Prince. Theſe youths perſwaded to performe what they had promiſed, waying therewith all the Dukes behauiour, and the particuler iniuries he had done, did haſten their intent to put the matter in execution. The Duke Galiazzo was in his diſpoſition laſciuious and cruell, which two things had made him odious: for it ſufficed him not to entice Ladies to diſhonor, but he would alſo take pleaſure in publiſhing the ſame. Neither was he content to put men to death, but he would alſo execute them with ſome cruell manner of torment. He was moreouer ſlandered, or truely ſuſpected, to haue murthered his owne mother for hee perſwading himſelfe not to be Prince (ſhe being preſent) found meanes to remoue her to Cremona, which was the place of her dowrie, and in that iourney ſhe became ſodeinly ſick, and died: and many men iudged her ſonne was cauſe of her death. This Duke, had in matter touching women, diſhonored Carlo, and Gerolamo, and denied Giouandrea to haue the poſſeſsion of the Abbey of Miramondo, being graunted vnto him of the Pope, vpon reſignation of a kinſman of his. Theſe priuate iniuries increaſed the deſire of the yong men, by reuenge to deliuer their countrey of ſo great miſchiefes: hoping, that if they might murther the Duke, they ſhould be not onely eſteemed of the nobilitie, but alſo of the people followed. Thus determined of the enterpriſe, they oftentimes met together, and by reaſon of their auncient familiaritie, no meruaile made of their meeting. Being togithers (to make their minds more prepared for that action) they alwaies talked thereof, and with the ſheathes of daggers made for that purpoſe, one of them in the breaſt and belly ſtrake the other. Then they deuiſed of the time and place. In the Caſtle they thought it not fit to be performed. In hunting they feared it would proue incerteine & perilous. When the Duke walked in the ſtreets for pleaſure, they imagined it would be hard, and vnlikely to be done. And at feaſts, they doubted the places would not ſerue. Wherefore they reſolued, at ſome publique pompe and triumph, where they were certaine of his being, to kill him, for thither they might

vnder diuerſe coulours aſſemble their friends. They concluded alſo, that if any of them vpon occaſion were by the officers apprehended, the reſt ſhould with their ſwords in the middeſt of his enemies ſley him. This happened in the yeare 1476. The feaſt of Chriſtmas then being at hand (at which time, on S. Stephens day, the Duke was woont with great pomp to viſit the Church of that holie Martir) they reſolued that place and time would beſt ſerue for the execution of their intent. The morning of S. Stephens day being come, they cauſed certaine of their moſt aſſured friends and ſeruants to arme themſelues, ſaying, they would go to aide Giouandrea, who contrarie to the mind of ſome his euill willers, would make a conduct for water in a certaine ground of his. They being thus armed, went to the Church, pretending, that they would before their departure, take leaue of the Prince. They procured alſo diuerſe other their friends and kinsfolks, for ſundrie conſiderations to come thither, hoping, that the deed being done, euery one would follow them to performe the reſt of the enterpriſe. And their intent was, (the Duke being ſlaine) to ioyne with thoſe armed, and goe to that place of the Cittie, where they might more eaſily raiſe the people, and perſwade them to arme themſelues againſt the Ducheſſe, and Princes of the State; ſuppoſing the people by meanes of the famine wherewith they were then grieued, would eaſily fauour the enterpriſe: and vnto the people they determined to giue leaue to ſpoile the houſes of Ceco Simonetta, Giouanni Botti, and Franceſco Lucani, all Magiſtrates of the gouernment, whereby they ſhould be aſſured of them, and gaue the people libertie. This reſolution was ſet downe, and the execution thereof firmely agreed vpon in their minds. Giouandrea with the reſt met earely in the Church, and there altogithers heard Maſſe; which being ended, Giouandrea turning towards the image of S. Ambroſe, ſayd, O Ambroſe, Lord of our Cittie, thou knoweſt our intention, and the end wherefore we will aduenture our ſelues to ſo many perils: Be fauourable to this our enterpriſe, and by fauouring of iuſtice, ſhew how greatly iniuſtice doth diſpleaſe thee. To the Duke on the other ſide, before he came to the Church, many ſignes happened, to prognoſticate his death at hand. For the day being come, he put on his priuie armour (as euerie other day for the moſt part he did) yet ſodeinly before he went from his houſe, either bicauſe he thought it not ſightly, or that it did hurt his bodie, he tooke it off. Then thought he to haue heard Maſſe in the Caſtle, but his Chapleine was gone to S. Steffano. Then commaunded hee that the Biſhop of Como ſhould ſay the Maſſe, but he alleaged certaine reaſonable lets, ſo the Duke was (as it were by neceſsitie) occaſioned to goe to the Church. But firſt, he called for his two ſonnes, Giouangaliazzo, and Hermes, whome he embraced, and kiſſed often, as though he had no power to depart from them: yet in the end, he determined to goe; and comming out of the Caſtle, betwixt the Embaſſadors of Farrara and Mantoua, rode to the Temple. The conſpirators in the meane while, to giue the leſſe ſuſpition, and keepe them from the cold, were retired into a chamber belonging to the chiefe Prieſt of the Church, their friend, and vnderſtanding that the Duke did come, they came from the chamber into the Church. Giouandrea and Girolamo placed themſelues on the right hand of the Church doore, and Carlo on the left hand. Then thoſe that went before the Duke, entered the Churche doore, and after the Duke himſelfe, inuironed with a greate multitude of people, as it alwaies happeneth, in time of ſuch a princelie pompe. The firſte of the Conſpirators that went towardes him, were Lampugnano, and Girolamo. They pretending to make place and roome for the Prince, came hard vnto his perſon, and aſſaulted him with ſhort and ſharpe daggers, which they had hidden in their ſleeues. Lampugnano gaue him two woundes, the

one in the bellie, the other in the throate. Girolamo likewiſe in the throate, and in the breſt ſtrake him. Carlo Viſconti ſtanding neare vnto the doore, and the Duke paſt him, at ſuch time as his companions gaue the aſſault, could not hurt him before, but gaue him two other wounds, one on the ſhoulder, the other in the back: and theſe ſixe wounds were all ſo ſodeinly and ſpeedily giuen,The Duke murdered. that the Duke was fallen to the ground before any man knewe what the matter meaned. Neither could he do, or ſay any thing that was knowne, but in falling, one onely time he cried, O Ladie helpe me. The Duke thus laid on the ground, the rumor grew great, many ſwords were drawne out, and (as it hapned in like caſes vnlooked for) ſome fled out of the Church, and ſome ranne thither, without any certaine knowledge, or occaſion of the matter. But thoſe who were next vnto the Duke, ſeeing him ſlaine, and knowing the murtherers, purſued them. Of the conſpirators, Giouandrea intending to get out of the Church, went amongſt the women, who being many, and according to their cuſtome ſet on the ground, was ſo troubled and ſtaied with their garments, that he was by a Moore (one of the Dukes footmen) ouertaken, and ſlaine. Carlo was likewiſe by thoſe that were preſent, killed. But Girolamo Olgiato eſcaped out of the Church, ſeeing his companions ſlaine, and not knowing whither to flee, went home, where he could be neither by his father nor brothers receiued. But his mother onely, hauing compaſsion of her ſonne, did recommend him to a Prieſt, an auncient friend of that houſe, who put him in Prieſtlike garments, and remooued him to his houſe, where he remained two daies, hoping that ſome tumult in Milan would ariſe, and thereby he might be ſaued. But that not comming to paſſe, and fearing to be found there, he aſſaied to flee diſguiſed; yet being knowne, was brought before the Magiſtrates, and there he confeſſed all the order of the conſpiracie. This Girolamo was twentie three yeares of age, and died with no leſſe courage, then he had executed the enterpriſe. For being brought to his death, ſtript naked, and prepared for the hangman, who with his knife in hand, ſtood readie to cut him in pieces, he ſpake theſe Laten words, Mors acerba, fama perpetua, ſtabit vetus memoria facti. This enterpriſe was by theſe vnhappie yoong men ſecretly practiſed, and reſolutely executed. The cauſe of their deſtruction was, that they were not followed and defended of them, to whome they truſted. Let Princes therefore learne to make themſelues ſo much honored and loued, as no man can hope to hurt them, and ſaue himſelfe. And let all priuate perſons know, how vaine it is to thinke, that the multitude (notwithſtanding it be diſcontented) will in their perils follow or accompanie them. This accident amazed all Italy, but much more trouble proceeded of other chances, that ſhortly after happened in Florence. For thereby the peace which had continued in Italy the ſpace of twelue yeares, was broken, as in the Booke following ſhall be declared. Which Booke, as it beginneth with bloud and terror, ſo doth it end with ſorrow and miſerie.
            The ende of the ſeuenth Booke.
         
         
            
            
               
                  royal blazon or coat of arms
               
            
            THE EIGHT BOOKE.
            
               THE beginning of this Booke, placed amidſt two conſpiracies, the one in Milan alreadie declared, the other happened in Florence, and to be ſpoken of; it may be thought fit, that (according to my cuſtome) I ſhould ſomewhat ſaie, touching the quallitie of conſpiracies, and of what importance they are. Which willingly I would do, had I not in other places diſcourſed thereof, or that ſuch a matter might be briefelie paſſed ouer. But ſeeing it requireth great conſideration, and is alreadie ſpoken of, we will proceed, and tell how the Medici, hauing ouercome all enemies, that openly oppoſed themſelues, being deſirous their houſe alone might haue authoritie in the Cittie, it behoued them to oppreſſe all others that ſecretly practiſed againſt them. For ſo long as they contended againſt other families but with equall authoritie, the Cittizens enuying their greatneſſe, might openly and without feare affront them. Bicauſe, the Magiſtrates being free, neither partie before loſſe of victorie, had any occaſion to feare it ſelfe. But after the victorie, in the yeare 66. the State became ſo much in the hand and power of the Medici, as all men diſcontented, were inforced, either patiētly to abide the condition wherein they liued, or elſe by way of conſpiracie, and ſecret practiſe, to amend their fortune. But ſith cōſpiracies are with difficultie performed, for the moſt part, they procure the ruine of the conſpirators, and the greatnes of him againſt whome they be conſpired. So that, a Prince by conſpiracie aſſaulted, if he be not therein ſlaine, as was the Duke of Milan (which ſeldome hapneth) becommeth thereby the ſtronger, and being before good, becommeth euill. Bicauſe conſpiracies do giue him occaſion to feare, feare counſaileth him to ſeeke aſſurance, and in ſeeking aſſurance, he doth iniure others, whereby he gaineth hatred, and many times procureth his own deſtruction. So as in cōcluſion, treaſons do ſodeinly ouerthrow thoſe who attempt them, and trouble him many times againſt whome they be attempted. Italy was (as hath bene before declared) diuided into two factions, the Pope and the King on the one ſide, and the Venetians, the Duke, and Florentines on the other ſide. And albeit there was not betwixt them any warre moued, yet was there dailie occaſion giuen thereof, and the Pope chiefelie in all his actions ſtudied to offend the ſtate of Florence. Philippo de Medici Archbiſhop of Piſa, then dying, the Pope, (contrarie to the will of the Senate of Florence) gaue that Biſhopprick to Franceſco Saluiati, whome hee knewe to bee enemie to the houſe of Medici.
               Diſpleaſure betweene the Pope and the Medici. But the Senate denying to deliuer poſſeſsion thereof, there followed great diſpleaſure betwixt the Pope and the Medici. Beſides that, the Pope did great fauours in Rome to the familie of Pazzi, and in euerie

acte, disfauoured the houſe of Medici. In thoſe daies, the houſe of Pazzi liued aboue other the Florentine families, in moſt riches and glorie. The chiefe of them was called Giacopo, who for his riches and Nobilitie, was made Knight. He hauing no children but one onely daughter, had for heires diuerſe nephews, ſonnes of Piero and Antonio his brethren. The chiefe of whom were Guglielmo, Franceſco, Rinato, and Giouanni. After them, Andrea, Nicholo, and Galeotto. Coſimo de Medici ſeeing their riches and nobilitie, gaue his neece Biancha in marriage to Guglielmo, hoping that alliance would make thoſe houſes more vnited, and remoue all occaſion of diſpleaſures and ſuſpitions, which many times hapned betwixt them. Notwithſtāding (ſo incertaine and fallible are the expectatiōs of men) the matter came otherwiſe to paſſe, for thoſe that counſelled Lorenzo, told him, it was perilous, and contrary to his authoritie, to ſuffer the Citizens to increaſe their riches and ſtate: which was the cauſe that thoſe degrees of honor were not graunted to Giacopo and his nephews, which (as other Citizens thought) they deſerued. Hereof grew the firſt diſpleaſure of the Pazzi, and the firſt feare of the Medici.
               Enimitie betweene the Pazzi, and Medici. The increaſing of the one, was cauſe that the other alſo increaſed: in ſo much as the Pazzi in all actions, whereat other Citizens did meete, were not to the Magiſtrates welcome. Alſo the officers of eight men, vpon a like occaſion (without ſuch reſpect, as was wont to be borne towards the great Citizens) conſtrained Franceſco de Pazzi being at Rome, to returne to Florence. Whereupon the Pazzi in all places with iniurious words, and full of offence complained: which doings, cauſed others to ſuſpect, & think thēſelues to be iniured. Giouanni de Pazzi, had married the daughter of Giouanni Barromei a man of great riches, which riches after his death for want of ſonnes, ſhould come vnto her. Neuertheles, Carlo his nephew toke poſſeſsion of part of thoſe goods, and therby the matter being brought to triall and ſute, an order was made, by vertue wherof, the wife of Giouanni de Pazzi was diſinherited, and the poſſeſsions giuen to Carlo: which iniurie, the Pazzi did altogither impute to the Medici. Of this matter, Giuliano de Medici did many times lament, and complaine to his brother Lorenzo, ſaying, he feared leaſt they deſiring too much, ſhould loſe all. But Lorenzo being full of youth and authoritie, would needs take all vpon him, and make euery man know, that all things were done by him. The Pazzi being noble and rich, could not indure ſo great iniuries, but deuiſed by what means they might procure reuenge. The firſt that moued ſpeech againſt the Medici, was Franceſco. He being of more courage and life then the others, determined to get that which he wanted, or loſe that which he had. And bicauſe the gouernment of Florence was hatefull vnto him, he liued for the moſt part in Rome, and there (according to the cuſtome of Florentine Merchants) occupied great ſummes of money. Being alſo of familier acquaintance with the Earle Girolamo, one of them often complained to the other of the Medici. In ſo much as after many conſultations, they concluded, that to make the one of them aſſured of his lands, and the other of his Cittie, it was neceſſarie to alter the gouernment of Florence, which they thought could not be done,Conſpiracie againſt Giuliano, and Lorenzo di Medici. without the death of Giuliano, and Lorenzo. They alſo ſuppoſed, that the Pope and the King, would eaſily thereto conſent, if the facilitie of the enterpriſe were laid before them. They then thus minded, imparted all their intent to Franceſco Saluiati, Archbiſhop of Piſa, who being ambitious, and lately iniured by the Medici, willinglie condiſcended. And examining among themſelues what was to be done, they agreed (for the more ſpeedie performing of the action) to drawe thereinto Giacopo de Pazzi, without whome, they thought nothing could be performed. It was then ſuppoſed good, that for this purpoſe Franceſco de Pazzi ſhould goe to Florence, and the Archbiſhop and the Earle remaine at Rome, to ſollicite the Pope when need required. Franceſco being come to Giacopo,
               
found him more reſpectiue, and hard to be perſwaded, then they would haue him, and aduertiſing the ſame to Rome, it was thought fit to draw him with more authoritie. Whereupon the Archbiſhop and the Earle opened all the matter to Giouanbattiſta da Monteſecco, one of the Popes Captaines. He being a man of warre well eſteemed, was alſo beholding to the Pope and the King. Neuertheleſſe, he iudged the matter hard, full of danger and difficulties, which the Archbiſhop laboured to remoue, by telling him what aide the Pope and King would giue to the enterpriſe. Alſo he alleaged, that the Citizens of Florence did hate the Medici, and the Saluiati and Pazzi would help to kill them, which was the more eaſie to do, by reaſon they walked in the Cittie vnaccompanied, and without ſuſpect. Therefore if Giuliano and Lorenzo were dead, the State might eaſily be changed. All which reaſons, Giouanbattiſta beleeued not, hearing many Florentines affirme the contrarie. While theſe matters were in conſideration, it happened Carlo of Faenza fell ſo ſick, as euerie man feared his death. It was then thought good to the Archbiſhop and the Earle, to take occaſion to ſend Giouanbattiſta to Florence, and from thence to Romagna, vnder pretence to recouer certaine Townes, which the Lord of Faenza had taken from them. The Earle therfore commaunded Giouanbattiſta to ſpeake with Lorenzo, and in his name deſire counſell how the matters of Romagna might be handled: after to deale with Franceſco de Pazzi, and then they togither, to perſwade Giacopo di Pazzi to be of their mind. And bicauſe he ſhould carrie with him the authoritie of the Pope, they procured him to ſpeake with his holineſſe, who offered to further the enterpriſe with all his power. Giouanbattiſta arriued at Florence, went vnto Lorenzo, of whome he was curteouſly receiued, and in all his demaunds wiſely and friendly counſelled. Whereof Giouanbattiſta meruailed, finding him an other man, then he was reported to be: for he perceiued him to be curteous, wiſe, and a friend to the Earle: notwithſtanding he thought fit to talke with Franceſco, but (he being gone to Lucca) communed with Giacopo, whome at the firſt he found farre from the matter, yet before they parted, with the authoritie of the Pope ſomewhat moued; and ſaid to Giouanbattiſta, that he ſhould goe into Romagna, and in the meane ſpace Franceſco would become home: and then more particulerly they would reaſon how all things ſhould be handled. Giouanbattiſta went and returned, and ſtill cōtinued to enterteine Lorenzo with his diſsimuled buſines for the Earle: and after conferred with Giacopo and Franceſco de Pazzi, with whom he perſwaded ſo farre, that they conſented to the enterpriſe. Then they reaſoned of the manner how to performe it, and Giacopo thought it vnpoſsible, both the brethren being in Florence, and therfore thought beſt to tarry til Lorenzo went to Rome, which was thought he would, and then to execute the matter. Franceſco liked well that Lorenzo ſhould goe to Rome, but if he did not go thither, yet either at ſome wedding in the Church, or at the time of ſome ſport, they might be both ſlaine. And touching forreine aide, he thought the Pope might aſſemble forces, pretending the enterpriſe of the Caſtle of Montone, hauing iuſt occaſion to take it frō 
               Carlo, bicauſe he had moued rebellion in the countries belonging to Siena and Perugia. Yet was nothing fully concluded, but that Franceſco de Pazzi, and Giouanbattiſta ſhould go to Rome, and there with the Earle and the Pope determine all things. This matter was againe practiſed in Rome, and in the end a reſolution ſet downe (the enterpriſe of Montone being determined) that Ciouan Franceſco da Tolentino the Popes ſouldier, ſhould goe to Romagna, and Lorenzo di Caſtello to his countrey, and either of them with their men be readie to do, whatſoeuer by the Archbiſhop Saluiati, & Franceſco de Pazzi ſhould be cōmaunded: who, with Giouanbattiſta de Monteſecco ſhould go to Florēce, and make prouiſiō of all things for the execution of the enterpriſe; whereunto the king Ferrando by his Embaſſador promiſed

ſome aide. The Archbiſhop, and Franceſco de Pazzi arriued at Florence, perſwaded vnto the conſpiracie Giacopo di Poggio, a yong man well learned, but ambitious, & delighting in change. They perſwaded alſo the two Giacopi Saluiati, one was brother, the other nephew to the Archbiſhop. They perſwaded likewiſe Barnardo Bandini, and Napolione (two valiant yong men borne in Fraunce) yet affectionat to the family of Pazzi. Of ſtrangers (beſides thoſe we haue named) they perſwaded Antonio di Volterra, and one other called Steffano, a Prieſt, who taught the latin toong to the daughter of Giacopo. Rinato de Pazzi, being a wiſe and graue man (and ſuch a one as knew the inconuenients that followed like enterpriſes) would not conſent to the conſpiracie, but by all honeſt meanes he could, impeached the ſame. The Pope had in the Vniuerſitie of Piſa, mainteined Raffaello de Riario (nephew to the Earle Girolamo) to learne the Cannon lawes, where he continued till the Pope aduanced him to the dignitie of Cardinall. The conſpirators thought fit to bring this Cardinall to Florence, whoſe cōming, ſhould couer the conſpiracie, hoping to harbour in his houſe thoſe conſpirators, whom they had need of, and thereby take occaſion to performe their intēt. The Cardinall being deſired, came, and was by Giacopo de Pazzi receiued at Montughi his towne, neare vnto Florēce. The conſpirators deſired by his occaſion to aſſemble Lorenzo and Giuliano, and ſo to kill them. They found meanes then that they ſhould feaſt the Cardinall at their towne of Fieſole, whither Giuliano either by hap or purpoſe came not, ſo as that appointment failed. Then determined they to conuite them in Florence, whither of neceſsitie they muſt come, and ſo they tooke order to make the feaſt on Sund
                  •
               y the 26. of Aprill 1478. The conſpirators thus determined to murther them at the feaſt, on Saterday night they met togither, to take order for the execution of the murther the next day. The day being come, Franceſco was aduertiſed, that Giuliano would not be there. For which conſideration, the conſpirators met againe, and concluded, that it ſtood them vpon to bring the matter to execution, bicauſe it was impoſsible (being knowne to ſo many) but it would be reuealed, wherefore they determined to kill him in the Cathedrall Church of S. Reparata, where the Cardinall being, both the bretheren (according to their cuſtome) would not faile to be. They ordered, that Giouanbattiſta ſhould take in hand to kill Lorenzo, and Franceſco de Pazzi, with Barnardo Bandini, ſhould ſley Giuliano. Giouanbattiſta, refuſed to performe his charge, either bicauſe the curteous vſage of Lorenzo had mollified his mind, or elſe for ſome other occaſion which moued him, ſaid, he durſt not commit ſo great a ſinne in the Church, as to execute treaſon with ſacrilege. Which conceit of Giouanbattiſta, was the firſt ruine of their enterpriſe; for the time drawing on, they were forced to commit that charge to Antonio of Volterra, and Steffano the Prieſt: two men, both for experiēce and nature, farre vnfit for that purpoſe, bicauſe there is no action which requireth more reſolution and conſtancie of mind, then this. And it behoueth him that ſhould take ſuch a matter in hand, to be a man accuſtomed to be preſent at the death of others. For it hath oft bene ſeene, that ſome men, vſed to armes and bloud, haue notwithſtanding in like caſes, let fall their courage. This determination ſet downe, they agreed that the time of the execution ſhould be at the ſacring time of Maſſe, and in the ſame inſtant, the Archbiſhop Saluiati, with Giacopo, ſhould take poſſeſsion of the publique Pallace, to the end that the Senators either by conſent or force (ſo ſoone as the yong men were ſlaine) ſhould fauour the conſpirators. This courſe being agreed of, they went to the Temple, where they found the Cardinall, and Lorenzo de Medici. The Church was full of people, and the ſeruice begun, but Giuliano not come. Wherfore Franceſco de Pazzi, with Barnardo (who had the charge of his death) went vnto his houſe, and there by intreatie and cunning, perſwaded him to come to the Church. And truly it is a thing

worthy memorie, to know how ſo great hatred would be ſo couertly kept ſecret in the minds of Franceſco & Barnardo. For both by the way going to the Church, and in the church, they enterteined Giuliano with pleaſant ſpeech and youthful daliance. Alſo Franceſco vnder colour of familier and friendly curteſie, tooke Giuliano in his armes, to feele whether he had on anie armour or garment of defence. Giuliano and Lorenzo knew well inough they were not beloued of the Pazzi, and that they deſired to remoue them from their authoritie in the ſtate: yet feared they not their own liues, ſuppoſing that whenſoeuer the Pazzi would attempt anie enterpriſe againſt them, they would do it ciuilly and not by violence. Therefore not miſtruſting anie ſuch meaſure, they likewiſe feined themſelues to be their friends. The murtherers thus prepared, thoſe that were appointed for ſlaughter of Lorenzo, thruſt in among the multitude: where they might ſtand without ſuſpition. The others, togithers with Giuliano, being come to the Church, at the time appointed, Barnardo Bandini with a ſhort dagger made for the purpoſe, ſtabbed Giuliano to the heart, who moouing a ſtep or two, fell to the ground: and vpon him went Franceſco de Pazzi wounding his bodie in many places ſo furiouſly, that he ſtrake himſelfe alſo a great wound in one of his owne legs. Antonio and Steffano aſſaulted Lorenzo, at whom they ſtrake diuerſe times, but hurt him onely a litle in the throate. For either their negligence, his reſiſtance, or the helpe of thoſe that ſtood by, ſaued him from further harme. So that the conſpirators fled, and hid themſelues. But being afterwards founde, they were ſhamefully put to death, and their bodies drawne through all the ſtreetes of the Citie. Lorenzo ioyning with thoſe friends he had about him, retired himſelfe into the veſterie of the Temple, and there ſhut vp the doores. Barnardo Bandini ſeeing Giuliano dead, ſlew alſo Franceſco Nori a great friend to the Medici, either becauſe hee hated him before, or becauſe Franceſco had gone about to ſaue Giuliano. Alſo not content with theſe two murthers, he went towards Lorenzo, hoping by his courage and quickneſſe to ſupplie that, which others for their ſloth and cowardice had left vndone. But Lorenzo being in the veſtry, he could not performe his intent. In the midſt of this great and terrible accident (which was ſuch as made all men to feare, that the Church would haue fallen downe) the Cardinall retired to the altar, where he was with great difficultie by the Prieſts ſaued, till ſuch time (as the tumult ceaſed) the Senate could conuey him to his Pallace, and there till his deliuerie, with great feare he remained. At that time there were in Florence, certaine Citizens of Perugia, who by the factions, (enemies to their houſes,) had bene baniſhed. Theſe Perugini being promiſed by the Pazzi to be reſtored to their country, were alſo of this conſpiracie. Whereupon the Archbiſhop Saluiati, (who was gone to ſurpriſe the Pallace accompanied with Giacopo, the two other Saluiati, and other his friends and followers) being come thither, left certaine of them below, charging them, that ſo ſoone as they ſhould heare anie noyſe, to take poſſeſsion of the gate, and he with the greater part of the Perugini went vp, where he found the Senate at dinner, and was preſently let in by Ceſare Petrucci Gonfaloniere di Giustitia. The Archbiſhop thus entred with a fewe, leauing the reſt without, they of their owne accord went into the Chancery, where they ſhut themſelues in. For the locke of that doore was by ſuch deuiſe made, as neither within, nor without, could be but with the key opened. The Archbiſhop in the meane ſpace being with the Gonfaloniere, pretending to ſpeake with him of matters by the Popes commandement, began to vtter ſome ſpeech fearefully, and as though he were amazed. In ſo much as the alteration of his countenance & words, wrought ſo great ſuſpition in the Gonfaloniere, that ſodeinly he thruſt him out of the chamber: and ſeeing Giacopo there alſo, tooke him by the haire of the head, and deliuered him to the hands of the Serieants. The reſt of the Senators perceiuing theſe

tumults: with thoſe weapons which were next hand, aſſaulted the others which were come vp with the Archbiſhop. Part of them being ſhut vp, the reſt were diſmaid, all whom they ſodeinly ſlew, or cauſed aliue to be caſt out of the Pallace window. Of this number, the Archbiſhop with the other two, Saluiati and Giacopo de Poggio were hanged. The other conſpirators which were left below, had wonne the gate from the guard, and gotten poſſeſsion of all the lower roomes, ſo that the Citizens who reſorted vnto the Pallace vpon this rumor, could neither with their counſell nor their force aſsiſt the Senators. In the meane ſpace, Franceſco de Pazzi, and Barnardo Bandini ſeeing Lorenzo eſcaped, and one of them in whom the chiefe hope of the enterpriſe depended, to be ſore hurt, were therewith diſmaied. Wherupon Barnardo hoping with that courage to eſcape, wherewith he had iniured the Medici, ſeeing the enterpriſe failed, fled away and ſaued himſelfe. Franceſco being come home to his houſe hurt, offered to mount on horſebacke (for the order was, that certaine armed men ſhould be placed about the towne, and the people called to libertie and armes) but he could not: So deep was the wound, and ſo much bloud had he loſt. Wherefore he put off all his cloathes, and laide himſelfe naked in bed; deſiring Giacopo that he would performe that which himſelfe could not: albeit Giacopo were old, and vnpractiſed in ſuch tumults, yet to make the laſt proofe of fortune, mounted on horſebacke, followed with a hundreth horſemen or thereabouts (who were laid readie for the like enterpriſe) and with thoſe he went to the Market place of the Pallace, calling the people to aide him, and recouer their libertie. But the people by the fortune and liberallitie of the Medici made deaffe, gaue no eare to helpe him, and the Florentines had ſo much forgotten their libertie, as he receiued no aunſwere at all. Onely the Senators (who commaunded the higheſt place in the Pallace) ſaluted them with throwing downe of ſtones, and with threatenings by all wayes they could deuiſe, terrified them. Giacopo ſtanding then doubtfull what to doo, was met by Giouanni Saristori his brother in lawe, who firſt reprooued him and the reſt, for the troubles they had begun, and then perſwaded him to returne to his houſe, ſaying that the welfare of the people, and the libertie, touched other Citizens aſwel as him. Thus Giacopo voyd of all hope, ſeeing the Senators his enemies, Lorenzo aliue, Franceſco hurt, and himſelfe not followed of anie, determined to flee and ſaue his life, if poſsibly he could. For which purpoſe, with that companie which was with him in the Market place,The euent of this conſpiracie. he went out of Florence towards Romagna. In the meane time all the Citie were in armes, and Lorenzo di Medici accompanied with many armed men, returned home to his houſe. The Pallace was recouered by the people, and all the conſpirators taken and ſlaine. Alſo throughout the Citie, the name of Medici was proclaimed, and the members of the dead men, either carried vppon the pointes of ſwordes and launces, or drawne through the ſtreets: moreouer euerie man, both by wordes and deeds, irefully and cruelly perſecuted the Pazzi. Their houſes were by the people taken, and Franceſco (naked as he laie in bed) drawne out and brought to the Pallace, where he was hanged faſt by the Archbiſhop and others his companions. But he would not in any wiſe, for any iniurie done vnto him by the way, or after, ſpeak any word at all: but looked euery man earneſtly in the face, and ſo without other lamentation tooke leaue of life. Guglielmo di Pazzi, brother in lawe to Lorenzo) by his owne innocencie and the help of his wife Bianca, ſaued himſelfe in his houſe. There was no Citizen either armed or diſarmed, but in that neceſsitie went vnto Lorenzo, offering him their ſeruice and ſubſtance. So great was the fortune and fauour, which that houſe, by his wiſedom and liberallitie had gained. Rinato de Pazzi, when this chaunce happened, retired to his houſe in the countrey: where vnderſtanding therof, he diſguiſed himſelfe and fled. Notwithſtanding, being knowne by the way,

hee was taken and brought to Florence. Giacopo in paſsing the Alpes was alſo taken. For thoſe mountaine people hearing what had happened in Florence, and ſeeing him fleeing, ſtaied him, and brought him back to Florence. Neither could he intreat them to kill him by the way, although he earneſtly deſired them ſo to do. Giacopo and Rinato were brought to their death, foure daies after this accident happened: & among ſo many murthers and executions done all thoſe foure daies, by meanes whereof the ſtreets were filled with dead men; yet was there no compaſsion taken of any, but onely of this Rinato; becauſe he was accounted a wiſe man, honeſt, and free from that pride, whereof the reſt of that houſe were noted. And to the end that this action might proceed for an extraordinarie example, Giacopo being buried among his aunceſtors, was (as a man excommunicate) taken vp, and by the haulter wherewith he was hanged, drawne naked throughout the Citie: and thoſe that drew him, not voucthſauing him a graue, threw his bodie into the riuer of Arno. A rare example of fortune, to ſee a man of ſo great riches, and happie eſtate, to fall into ſo great infelicitie, and be ruined with ſo much crueltie. Some haue reported him, to be delighted in vices, and that he tooke great pleaſure in gaiming and ſwearing, as one that was careleſſe and deſperate. Theſe vices he couered with liberallitie and almes: for he largely releeued many poore men, and gaue mony to places of deuotion. This good alſo may be ſaid of him, that the night before the Sunday appointed for the murther (to the end no friend ſhould be partaker of his misfortune) hee paide all his debts, and deliuered all the merchandiſe he had of other mens to the propper owners, with marueilous care and diligence. Giouanbattista de Monteſecco, after many examinations, was beheaded. Nappolione the Frenchman, ſcaped away, and by that meanes ſaued himſelfe. Guglielmo de Pazzi, was baniſhed, and his brother in lawes left aliue, were put in priſon in the bottome of the Caſtle at Volterra. The tumults thus pacified, and the conſpirators puniſhed, the funerall of Giuliano was celebrated with much lamentation of all Citizens: becauſe there was in him ſo great liberallitie and curteſie, as might be wiſhed in any man borne to like fortune. Of Giuliano there remained one ſonne, who was borne a fewe moneths after his death, and was called Giulio: who became of that vertue and fortune, which at this preſent all the world knoweth, and I will (when occaſion ſhall be offered if God graunt me life) ſpeake of him at large. Thoſe ſouldiers which were conducted by Lorenzo da Castella in the vale of Teuere, and thoſe which ſerued vnder Giouanfranceſco da Tolentino in Romagna, were ioyned togither to aide the Pazzi: and were comming towards Florence. But hearing the enterpriſe was miſcarried, they returned backe. And the alteration of the ſtate not being brought to paſſe (as the Pope and King deſired) they determined to do that by open warre, which by ſecret conſpiracie they could not.The Pope and King moue warre againſt the Florenti
                     •
                  es Then both the one and the other of them, with all poſsible ſpeede, aſſembled their forces to aſſault the ſtate of Florence: publiſhing that they required nothing of that Citie, but that it would remoue Lorenzo de Medici, whom among all the Florentines, they accounted their onely enemie. The King his ſouldiers, were alreadie paſſed Tronto, and the Popes forces, arriued in the countrey of Perugia. The Pope alſo intending to make the Florentines to taſte of ſpirituall affliction, did excommunicate and curſe them. The Florentines ſeeing ſo great forces comming againſt them, with great care prepared for defence. And Lorenzo de Medici (becauſe the warre was ſaid to be made onely againſt him) deſired before all other things, to aſſemble in the Pallace with the Senate all the principall Cittizens, to the number of three hundreth or more: vnto whom he ſpake as followeth.The ſpe
                     •
                  ch of Lorenzo de Medici to the Florentines. I know not (right noble Lords and magnificent Cittizens) whether I ought lament or reioyce with you, for theſe matters lately happened. For when I conſider with what fraud and deſpight I was aſſaulted, and my brother

ſlaine; I cannot but bee ſorrie, and with all my heart and ſoule lament. Yet when I remember with what readineſſe, what loue and vniuerſall conſent of all this Citie, my brothers death was reuenged and I defended, I muſt of force be glad, and greatly eſteeme my ſelfe. For as experience hath now taught me to know, that I haue more enemies in the Cittie then I thought, ſo hath it enformed mee, that I had alſo more earneſt and affectionate friends then I looked for. I am then to condole with you for the iniurie of others, and reioyce with you, for your owne merits: yet muſt my ſorrow be the more, becauſe the iniuries were rare, neuer ſeene, and not of vs deſerued. Conſider (right noble Cittizens) to what point frowarde fortune had brought our houſe, that among our friends, our kinsfolks, and in the Church, it was not aſſured. Such as ſtand in feare of their liues, were wont to reſort to their friends for aide, and flee to their kinsfolk for ſuccour: both whom we found readie armed to our deſtruction. Such as either miſtruſted priuate or publique perſecution, haue found refuge in Churches: but the ſame hauing ſaued others, hath bin made a place for our murder. For where murderers & theeues haue found refuge, the Medici haue met with miniſters of their death. But God (who hitherto did neuer abandon our houſe) hath ſaued vs, and taken vpon him the defence of our iuſt cauſe. For what iniurie haue we done, that might of any man merit ſo great deſire of reuenge? Truly we neuer offended priuately any of theſe, who haue prooued themſelues ſo much our enemies. For if we had offended them, they ſhould not haue had ſo great meane to offend vs. Or if they attribute to vs the publique iniuries (whereof I am not priuie) they offend rather you then vs; rather this Pallace, and maieſtie of gouernment then our houſe: ſeeming that for our cauſe you do vndeſeruedly iniure them, and the reſt of your Citizens, which is farre from all troth. For we, though we could, and you (though we would) did neuer conſent they ſhould be done. Whoſoeuer doth looke well into the truth, ſhall finde, that our houſe hath bene by you, with ſo vniuerſall conſent, aduaunced for nothing more, then for that it hath ſtudied to excell others in curteſie, liberallitie, and well dooing. If then we haue honoured ſtraungers, how haue we iniured our kinsfolke? If this motion proceeded of deſire to gouerne (as it ſeemeth to do, by taking the Pallace and leading armed men to the Market place) thereby appeareth, how euill, ambitious, and reprooueable it is. If it be done, for the mallice and enuie they beare to our authoritie, therein they offend you, not vs to whom you haue giuen it. For ſurely thoſe authorities deſerue hate, which men vſurpe, not thoſe which with curteſie, liberallitie, and magnificence be gained. You know alſo that our houſe neuer aſcended to any degree of greatneſſe, but by order of this Pallace, and your vniuerſall graunt. Coſimo my graundfather, returned not from exile by force of armes or violence, but by your allowance and conſent. My father being aged and ſicke, could not defend his authoritie againſt ſo many enemies, but you with your authoritie did it. I my ſelfe after my fathers death (being as it were a childe) haue not mainteined the eſtimation of my houſe, but by your counſels and fauour. Neither could our houſe haue gouerned this common-weale, had you not ioyned, and doo ioyne in the gouernment thereof. I cannot therefore imagine, what cauſe of mallice they haue againſt vs, or what iuſt occaſion to enuie vs. For ſith their owne aunceſtors with their pride and couetiſe, haue loſt thoſe honours, why ſhould they enuie vs, if by contrarie deſert we haue gained them? But admit the iniuries done them by vs be great, and that they iuſtly deſired our ruine, yet why ſhould they offend this Pallace? Why make they league with the Pope and King againſt the libertie of this ſtate? Or why do they diſturbe the long peace of Italy? Hereof they haue no excuſe at all, for they ought to offend thoſe, who offended them; and not mixe priuate diſpleaſures, with publique iniuries: which is the

reaſon that they being extirped, our miſerie is the more. For by their meanes the Pope and King are comming towardes vs in armes: and that warre (they ſay) to be made onely againſt me and my houſe. Which would God were true, becauſe then the remedie is readie and certain. For I am not ſo bad a Citizen, as to preferre my priuate welfare, before your publique weldooing: but would willingly quench your fire, with my own deſtruction. Yet ſith the iniuries which great men do, be alwaies couered with ſome pretence leſſe diſhoneſt, they haue choſen this quarell, to cloake their ſhamefull enterpriſe. But if it ſo be, that you beleeue the contrarie, I am in your hands to be holden, or let looſe, as your ſelues ſhall thinke beſt. You are my fathers, you are my defenders, whatſoeuer you commaund, I obey and will performe. Neither will I euer refuſe (if it ſhall pleaſe you) to end this warre with my bloud, which by the bloud of my brother hath bene begun. While Lorenzo thus ſpake, the Cittizens could not refraine weeping: and with ſuch compaſsion as they heard him, he was by one of them, anſwered, ſaying; The Cittie did acknowledge to haue receiued ſo much good of him and his, as hee might aſſure himſelfe they would be no leſſe readie to preſerue his reputation and authoritie, then they had bene willing to reuenge his brothers death, and ſaue his life. And before he ſhould loſe either the one or the other, they would hazard the loſſe of their countrey. And to the end their deeds might be anſwerable to thoſe words, they appointed a certain number of men to guard his perſon from domeſticall treaſons: and after tooke order for the warre, leuying both men and money by all meanes conuenient. Then by vertue of the league, they ſent for aide to the Duke of Milan and the Venetians. And ſith the Pope had ſhewed himſelfe a wolfe and no ſhepheard, fearing to be deuoured, by all poſſible meanes they iuſtified their cauſe, letting all Italy know the treaſon practiſed againſt their ſtate: declaring the wickedneſſe of the Pope, and his iniuſtice; who being by indirect meanes aſpired to the Papacie, would alſo with mallice exerciſe the ſame. For he had not onely firſt ſent a Prelate of his to accompanie traytors, and cut-throates to commit murther in the Temple, euen in the time of diuine ſeruice, and at the inſtant of celebration of the Sacrament, (and ſo by the death of the Citizens to chaunge the gouernment, and ſacke the Cittie at his pleaſure) but had alſo excommunicated them, and with his papall curſes threatned and offended them. Notwithſtanding if God were iuſt, and that the iniuries of men were to him offenſiue, it could not be, but that the actions of this Pope were to him diſpleaſing, and would be content that men iniured (not hauing any other refuge) might reſort vnto him. Wherefore the Florentines did not onely refuſe to obey this excommunication,The Florentines careleſſe of the Popes curſe. but alſo the ſame notwithſtanding, inforce their Prieſts to celebrate diuine ſeruice. They alſo aſſembled a Councell in Florence, wherunto all the Prelates of Toſcana repaired, and appealed from the Pope to the next Councell. On the other ſide, the Pope wanted not reaſons to iuſtifie his cauſe: and therefore alleaged it was the office of a chief Biſhop, to remoue tyrants, oppreſſe the wicked, and aduaunce the good. All which things, it behoued him by all waies to procure. For it was not the office of ſeculer Princes to impriſon Cardinals, hang vp Biſhops, to kill, cut in peeces, and drawe the Prieſts through the ſtreets, murthering both guiltie and vnguiltie people, without reſpect. Notwithſtanding all theſe quarrels and accuſations, the Cardinall (whom the Florentines kept priſoner) was releaſed, and ſent home to the Pope: which was the cauſe that the Pope without reſpect, with all his and the Kings forces,The Pope and King aſſault the Florentines. aſſailed them. And thoſe two armies conducted by Alfonſo, eldeſt ſonne of Ferrando Duke of Calauria, and by Federigo Earle of Vrbino) entred Chianti, by leaue of the Saneſi (who fauoured the enemie) and ſurprized Radda with diuerſe other Caſtles, and ſpoyled the countrey: which done, they encamped at Castellina. The Florentines ſeeing theſe

aſſaults, were much afraid, being without men, and ſlowly aided by friends. For albeit the Duke had ſent a ſupplie, yet the Venetians denied they were bound to helpe them in priuate cauſes. And the warre being againſt priuate men they were not to aide them; becauſe priuate quarrels are not publiquely to be defended. Wherefore the Florentines thought good by Embaſſadors to perſwade the Venetians to a better opinion: and ſent Tomaſo Soderini vnto the Senate. In the meane ſpace ſouldiers were enterteined, and Hercole Marqueſſe of Farrara appointed Generall. While this preparation was in making, the enemy diſtreſſed Castellina, and the people there diſpairing of reſcue, after fortie daies defence, yeelded. From thence the enemie marched towards Arezzo, and laid ſiege to Monte S. Souino. By this time the Florentine armie was readie, and being come within three miles, the enemie ſeemed therewith perplexed. For Federigo de Vrbino deſired truce for a fewe daies: which was graunted with ſo great diſaduauntage to the Florentines, that they who deſired it, did much meruaile. For if that requeſt had not bene obteined, they had bene forced to depart with ſhame. But hauing thoſe daies to repaire them, in the ende of the truce, they tooke that Caſtle, before the faces of our men. Yet the winter at hand, the enemy to lodge himſelfe with more commoditie, retired into the countrey of Siena. The Florentines likewiſe beſtowed themſelues, where with moſt commoditie they could. And the Marqueſſe of Farrara hauing litle profitted himſelfe, and done leſſe good to others,Genoua rebelled from the Duke of Milan. returned to his owne. In thoſe daies Genoua rebelled from the Duke vppon theſe conſiderations. After the death Galeazzo (hauing left his ſonne yoong and vnfit to gouerne) their grew diſcention betwixt Lodouico, Octauiano, and Aſcanio his vncles, and the Ladie Bona his mother: for euerie of them, deſired the tuition of the litle Duke. In which contentions the Ladie Bona Ducheſſe (by counſell of Tomaſo Soderini Embaſſador there for the Florentines, and Cecco Simonetti (who had bene Secretarie to Galeazzo) gat the vpper hand. Whereupon the Sforzi fled from Milan. Octauiano flying, was drowned in the Riuer Adda: and the others, togither with Roberto of Sanſeuerino
               ▪ were to ſundrie places confined; for Roberto in thoſe troubles had abandoned the Duches, and ioyned with them. After happened ſome tumults in Toſcana, by which new accidents, thoſe Princes hoping of new fortune, euerie of them attempted ſomewhat, whereby to returne to his country. The King Ferrando, who ſaw that the Florentines were in their neceſsitie, ſuccoured onely by the ſtate of Milan, to take alſo from them that aide, found meanes that the Ducheſſe ſhould ſo be ſet a worke in her country, as of her, they could not be aided. And by Proſpero Adorno, and the Lord Roberto (who were rebelled) found meanes to make Genoua reuolt from the Duke. Neuertheleſſe the ſmall Caſtle ſtood firme; wherunto the Ducheſſe ſent great forces to recouer the Citie: but they were ouerthrowne. Then ſhe ſeeing the daunger of her ſonne and her ſelfe, by the continuance of that warre, Toſcana diſordered, and the Florentines (in whom ſhe onely hoped) afflicted, determined that ſith ſhe could not hold Genoua as ſubiect, ſhe would recouer it as a friend. And agreed with Battistino Fregoſo (enemie to Proſpero Adorno,) to giue him the little Caſtle, and make him Prince of Genoua, vpon condition, that he would driue out Proſpero, and disfauour the Sforzi. According to this agreement, Battistino with the helpe of the Caſtle, and his faction, ſurprized Genoua, and according to the cuſtome made himſelfe Doge. The Sforzi then, and the Lord Roberto, being driuen out of Genoua, went with their followers to Lunigiana. Thereupon the Pope and King ſeeing the troubles of Lombardy pacified, tooke occaſion by thoſe that were driuen from Genoua, to diſturbe that part of Toſcana which is towards Piſa. To the ende that the Florentines diuiding their forces ſhould become weake: and tooke order that the winter now paſt, Roberto ſhould goe with his forces from Lunigiana to aſſault the

countrey of Piſa. This Roberto then moued exceeding great tumult, ſurprizing and ſacking many caſtles in that country, & ſpoiling hard to the wals of Piſa. At that time arriued in Florence Embaſſadors from the Emperor, the French King, and the King of Hungary: ſent by thoſe Princes to the Pope. They perſwaded the Florentines alſo to ſend vnto him, promiſing to make ſome end of the war, and procure a good peace. The Florentines refuſed not to make this trial, and the rather that therby they ſhould let the world know, they were deſirous of peace. Theſe Embaſſadors diſpatched, returned again without any thing done. Wherupō the Florētines, to honor themſelues by the reputation of the French King (being by the Italians partly offended, & partly abandoned) ſent vnto him Donato Acciaiuoli, a man well learned in the Greek & Latin toongs, & one whoſe anceſtors had alwaies born office in the citie: but being on his way, at Milan he died. Then the ſtate to reward his heires,The Florentines gratefull to their ſeruants. and honor the memory of him being dead, with publike expence honorably buried his bodie, aduancing his ſons, and giuing portions of mony to his daughters marriages. In his place, they ſent Embaſſador to the King, Guidantonio Veſpucci, a man alſo learned in the Emperial and Papall lawes. The aſſault of Roberto vpon the country of Piſa, troubled much the Florentines, for being alreadie occupied in a great war towards Siena, they ſaw not how to make prouiſiō for Piſa. But to hold the Luccheſi faithfull, and that they ſhould not releeue the enemie with mony or victual, ſent Embaſſador vnto them Piero Capponi: who was (by reaſon of the auncient hate which that citie beareth to the Florentines) receiued with ſo great ſuſpition, as hee feared many times to haue bene populerly ſlaine. Inſomuch as this iourney did rather breede occaſion of new diſpleaſure, then new friendſhip. The Florentines then reuoked the Marqueſſe of Farrara, enterteined the Marqueſſe of Mantoua, and with great ſute, required of the Venetians to haue the Earle Carlo, ſonne of Braccio, and Deifebo, ſonne of the Earle Giacopo. Which requeſt, after many cauillations, was by the Venetians graunted. For they hauing made truce with the Turke, had no colour to deny them, and were aſhamed to break their promiſe made to the League. The Earles Carlo & Deifebo, came with a good number of men at armes, & ioyning to them all other the men of armes they could ſpare, frō the army which ſerued vnder the Marques of Farrara, againſt the Duke of Calauria, went towards Piſa to encounter Roberto: who with his men was neare to the riuer of Serchio. And albeit he made ſhew to tarry for our mē, yet did he not, but retired into Lunigiana, to thoſe lodgings from whence he came, when he entred into the country of Piſa. After his departure, all thoſe towns were recouered by the Earle Carlo, which the enimies had before taken in the country of Piſa. The Florentines deliuered of the enemy towards Piſa, cauſed all their forces to be brought betwixt Colle & S. Gimiano. But by reaſon of the Earle Carlo his cōming, there were in that camp both the folowers, Sforza & Braccio: which was the occaſiō that (moued with old enuy) they begā to mutiny: & was feared, that if they had bin long togither they would haue come to blows. It was therfore thought fit for eſchuing a worſe miſchief, to diuide the ſoldiers, & ſend one part of thē into the country of Perugia, vnder the Earle Carlo: the other to ſtay at Piggibonzi, there to entrench themſelues ſtrong, & procure that the enimy ſhuld not enter the Florentines land. By this actiō they alſo hoped to cōſtrain the enimies to diuide their forces: for they thought either that the Earle Carlo ſhuld ſurprize Perugia, where they ſuppoſed he had many partakers, or that the Pope ſhuld be inforced to ſend great forces to defēd it. They practiſed moreouer (to bring the pope in more neceſsity) that Nicolo Vitelli (being come frō the city of Caſtello, where Lorē
                  zo his enimy was chief) ſhuld with his mē approch the town, remoue his aduerſary, & take it frō the pope. At the beginning it ſeemed as thogh fortune wold haue fauored the Florētine attempts: bicauſe Earle Carlo proceded wel in the coūtry of Perugia.

Nicholo Vitelli alſo, although he entred into Castello, yet he and his were ſtrongeſt in the field, and without any reſiſtance, ſpoiled about the Citie at his pleaſure. Likewiſe the forces left at Poggibonzi, went euery day to the walles of Siena. Notwithſtanding all theſe hopes became vaine. Firſt died the Earle Carlo in the chiefe hope of his victorie: whoſe death had bettered the eſtate of the Florentines, if the victorie which grew thereof, had bene well vſed. For ſo ſoone as the Earles death was knowne, ſodeinly the Popes ſouldiers (who were altogither at Perugia) hoped to ouerthrow the Florentines: and comming forth into the field, lodged themſelues vpon the lage, diſtant three miles from the enemie. On the other ſide, Giacopo Guicciardini (who was Commiſſary of that camp) with the counſel of Roberto da Rimino (Chieftain after the death of the Earle Carlo) knowing the occaſion of the enemies pride, determined to ſtaie for them. So as, ioyning battle vppon that lage (where in old time Anniball gaue that memorable ouerthrow to the Romanes) the Popes forces were broken.The Popes forces diſcomfired by the Florentines. Which victory was in Florence receiued with commendation of the captaines, & comfort of all others. And the ſame had proued the honor & profit of the enterpriſe, if the diſorders which grew in the army at Poggibonzi had not vndone all. And thus the good ſucceſſe of the one camp was vtterly marred by the other. For the ſouldiers of that army hauing gottē a bootie in the country of Siena, in the diuiſiō therof, the Marques of Farrara & Mantoua fell in debate. Inſomuch as they came to armes, either iniuring the other by all meanes they could. Whereby the Florentines finding they could no more imploy them togither, were pleaſed that the Marques of Farrara with his men ſhould be diſcharged. That army thus weakned & left without a gouernor, proceeding in euery thing diſorderly: the Duke of Calauria (who was with his camp near to Siena) tooke courage to approach, & ſo did. The Florentins ſeeing thēſelues likely to be aſſailed, neither truſted to their force, nor their number, which was greater then the enemies, nor in their place where they were, being of great force: but without reſpect, euē at ſight of the enemy, & the duſt, fled; leauing the munitiō, the cariages & artillary. So beaſtly & cowardly were thoſe camps, whē the charge or retire of one horſe, might make the loſſe, or winning of an enterpriſe. This diſcōfit filled the kings ſouldiers with ſpoile, & the Florentines with feare. For their citie was not onely afflicted with war, but alſo with peſtilence: which was ſo great, that all the Cittizens to ſhun death, were retired to their country houſes. This ouerthrow was the more terrible, becauſe thoſe Cittizens who had land in the vales of Piſa & Delſa, being come thither, (the ouerthrow performed) with all poſsible ſpeed returned to Florence, leading with them not only their children & goods, but alſo their labourers. For euerie houre it was feared, the enemy would preſent himſelf before the citie. The officers for the war, ſeeing this diſorder, commanded thoſe forces which were victorious in the country of Perugia, to ſurceaſe their enterpriſe againſt the Perugini, & come to the vale of Delſa, to encounter the enemy there: who after the victory, did without reſiſtance ſpoile the country. And albeit they had ſo greatly diſtreſſed the citie of Perugia, as they might euerie houre looke for victorie, yet the Florentines reſolued rather to defend their own, thē take from others. Thus that army remoued from the place of happy ſucceſſe, was brought to S. Caſsiano, a Caſtle diſtant frō 
               Florence 8. miles: thinking they could not ſtaie in any other place, till ſuch time as the broken Camp were ſupplied. The enemies on the other ſide at Perugia being free by the departure of the Florentine ſouldiers, become audacious, did daily take great booties in the countries of Arezzo & Cortona: and the others who had victory vnder Alfonſo Duke of Calauria at Poggibonzi, got the poſſeſsiō firſt of Poggibonzi, & then of Vico, & ſacked Certaldo. Hauing won theſe towns, & cōmitted theſe ſpoils, they incamped before the caſtle of Colle, which in thoſe daies was accounted a place of great ſtrength, and the people

of that country, being faithfull to the Florentines, were of force ſufficient to hold the enemie off, till the armie was aſſembled. The Florentines then hauing gathered all their forces at S. Caſsiano, and the enemies furiouſly beſieging Colle, determined to draw neare vnto them, to encourage their friendes to defend themſelues: ſuppoſing alſo that the enimy wold offend with more reſpect, for hauing his aduerſary at hād. This reſolution ſet downe, they remoued the Campe from S. Caſciano, and brought it to S. Giminiano, within fiue myles of Colle: from whence with light horſes and other ſuddeine meanes, they daily moleſted the Dukes Camp. Notwithſtanding, this ſupplie ſufficed not thoſe of Colle: for wanting neceſſarie prouiſion, on the thirteenth day of Nouember they yeelded, to the great griefe of the Florentines, and the ioy of the enemies: and chiefly of the Saneſi, who beſides their hate to the Florentines, beare alſo priuate grudge to the Collegiani. By this time the winter was great, and the ſeaſon vnfit for warre, ſo that the Pope and King (either becauſe they would giue hope of peace, or that they deſired to enioy the paſſed victorie quietly) offered to the Florentines truce for three moneths, and gaue them ten dayes reſpite to make anſwere: which was preſently accepted. But as a wounde when the bloud therein groweth colde, grieueth the bodie more, then when it was receiued, ſo this ſmall reſt, cauſed the Florentines to knowe the trauailes they had endured: and the Cittizens without reſpect accuſed one an other, of the errors committed in the laſt warre, for the charges in vaine ſpent, and the Impoſitions vniuſtly put vppon them. Which matters were not only ſpoken of among priuate men, but the ſame was alſo boldly propounded in the Councels. And one of them tooke courage, turning his face towards Lorenzo de Medici, ſayd vnto him. This Citie is wearied, and refuſeth to haue longer warre. It behoueth therefore that we deuiſe which way to make peace. Then Lorenzo knowing the neceſsitie, conſulted with thoſe friends whom he knew moſt faithfull and wiſe, and concluded (firſt perceiuing the Venetians coldneſſe and inconſtancie, the Dukes infancy and trouble of ciuill warres) that it was neceſſarie with new friends to ſeeke new fortune. Yet ſtood they doubtfull whether they were beſt truſt vnto the Pope, or the King. The matter being well examined, they preferred the Kings friendſhip as moſt ſtable and ſure. Becauſe the ſhortneſſe of the Popes liues, the chaunge of their ſucceſsion, the ſmall feare which the Church hath of Pinces, and the fewe reſpects which it vſeth in reſolution, are the cauſes why a ſeculer Prince cannot aſſuredly truſt vnto a Pope, nor ſafely paſſe one fortune with him. For whoſoeuer is friend vnto the Pope in warres and daungers, ſhall be by him accompanied in the victorie, but in aduerſities left alone: becauſe the Pope is by ſpirituall power and reputation,The Florentines ſeeke the King Ferrando his fauour. ſupported and defended. This reſolution made, that to gaine the Kings friendſhip was beſt: they thought the ſame by no meane better procured, nor with more aſſurance, then by the preſence of Lorenzo. For the more liberallitie were vſed to him, the more they thought he would forget former diſpleaſures. Lorenzo determined vppon this iourney, reaccommended the Citie and ſtate vnto Tomaſo Soderini, then Gonfaloniere di Giustitia, and in the beginning of December he departed from Florence: and being arriued at Piſa, wrote vnto the Senate the occaſion of his departure; and the Senate to honor him, and that he might with more reputation conclude the peace with the King, made him Embaſſador for the people of Florence,
               Lorenzo de Medici, Embaſſador for the Florentines. with full authoritie to proceed, as by his diſcretion ſhould be thought good. In the meane time Roberto da San Seuerino, togither with Lodouico and Aſcanio (for their third brother Octaniano Sforza was dead) aſſaulted againe the State of Milan, deſirous to winne the gouernment thereof. And hauing ſurprized Tortona, Milan alſo with the whole countrey was in armes. Then the Ducheſſe Bona was counſelled to

admit the Sforzi into the State, and by that meane appeaſe the ciuill diſcention. The chief of thoſe Counſellors,Antonio Taſſino. was Antonio Taſsino of Farrara: who being bacely born, came to Milan, and was by the Duke Gale
                     〈…〉
                  o and the Ducheſſe receiued to ſerue in their chamber. He either for the bewtie of his perſon, or for ſome other ſecret vertue, after the death of the Duke, aſpired to ſo great fauour with the Ducheſſe, as almoſt alone hee gouerned the ſtate: which greatly diſpleaſed Cecco, being a man both for learning and long experience excellent. So as he both to the Ducheſſe and others, laboured to decreaſe the credit of Taſsino. Wherof Taſsino being aware, to be reuenged, & haue ayd at hand to defend him from Cecco, perſwaded the Ducheſſe to receiue home the Sforzi: which ſhe did without making Cecco priuie. But Cecco after knowing thereof, ſaide vnto her; Madame, you haue made a reſolution which will take my life from mee, and the ſtate from you: As ſhortly after came to paſſe. For Cecco was by the Lodouico put to death: and Taſsino, within a ſhort ſpace (being driuen out of the Duchie) the Ducheſſe tooke therat ſo great offence, that ſhe went from Milan,
               Lodouico Sforza, Gouernor of the Duke of Milan. and renounced the gouernment of her ſonne vnto Lodouico. Thus Lodouico become onely gouernour of Milan, was (as ſhall be declared) the occaſion of the ruine of Italy. Lorenzo de Medici was now on his way towardes Naples, and the peace betwixt the enemies in communication: when beyond all expectation Lodouico Fregoſo hauing practiſed with ſome Serezanaeſi, by ſtealth entered with armed men into Serezana, taking poſſeſsion of that Towne, and impriſoned thoſe that gouerned then for the Florentines. This accident greatly offended the princes of the Florentine ſtate, who thought the matter was brought to paſſe by direction of the king Ferrando. And complained to the Duke of Calauria (who was at the Campe before Siena) ſaying they were notwithſtanding the truce, aſſaulted with newe warre. He both by Letters, Embaſſages, and euerie other way, declared the ſame was done without the conſent of his father. The Florentines neuenheleſſe thought themſelues in hard eſtate, wanting money; the chiefe of their Common-weale in the Kings hand: A new warre mooued by the Genoueſi, and without friendes. For in the Venetians they truſted not: and feared leaſte the gouernement of Milan was vnaſſured. Their onely hope was vppon that which Lorenzo de Medici was to conclude with the King. Lorenzo arriued at Naples by ſea,Lorenzo de Medici, arriued at Naples was there both by the King and all that Cittie, honourablie and with great expectation receiued. Becauſe ſo great a warre being made onely to oppreſſe him, his enemies thereby did make him more great. For being come to the Kings preſence, hee debated with him the eſtate of Italy, the humors of princes and people thereof, and what might be hoped of the peace, and feared by the warre. Which the King hearing, grew into more admiration, to finde in him ſo noble a minde, ſo readie a wit, and ſo great a iudgement, then that he could endure ſo long a warre. In ſo much as the King doubled the honours before done vnto him, and beganne to deuiſe rather how hee might winne him for a friend, then continue him an enemie. Notwithſtanding for diuerſe cauſes hee enterteined him from December till Marche, not onelie to make the more triall of him, but alſo of his Cittie. For Lorenzo wanted not enemies in Florence, who deſired that the King would haue holden him, and enterteined Giacopo Piccinino: and vnder colour of lamenting, they ſpeake their mindes. Alſo in publique Councelles, they oppoſed their opinions againſt Lorenzo. By theſe deuiſes; It was bruted, that if the King woulde keepe Lorenzo long at Naples, the gouernment in Florence ſhould be chaunged. Whiche was the onely cauſe that the King deferred his diſpatch ſo long, hoping there might ſome tumult ariſe in Florence. But ſeeing that all thinges paſſed quietly, on the ſixt day of March, in

the yeare 1479. he had leaue to depart, and before his departure was by the King ſo bountifully preſented, & louingly vſed, that betwixt Lorenzo & the King their grew a perpetual amity, & preſeruation of both their ſtates. Thus Lorenzo returned to Florence with greater reputation & honor then he went thence, & was with ſo great ioy of the citie receiued, as his great vertues & new merits deſerued: hauing put his own life in hazard to recouer peace to his country. For within two daies after his arriuall,Peace and league betweene the King & the Florentines. the treaty betwixt the common weale of Florence & the King was proclaimed, wherby they were both both bound to defend one the others country: & that the townes taken frō the Florentines in the war, ſhuld be by the King reſtored. And that the Pazzi impriſoned in the town of Volterra, ſhuld be deliuered. And that mony ſhould be for a certaine time paide vnto the Duke of Calauria. This peace being publiſhed, did much offend the Pope & the Venetians, becauſe the Pope thought he was litle eſteemed of the King, & the Venetians as litle regarded of the Florentines: who being their companions in the war, thought themſelues il vſed, not to be partakers of the peace. This indignation vnderſtood and beleeued at Florence, did ſodeinly breed ſuſpition in euerie man, that of the peace wold ariſe a greater war. Wherupon the Magiſtrates of the ſtate, determined to reſtraine the gouernment, and that the affaires of moſt importance ſhould be reduced into the hands of a leſſe number: and ſo ordeined a Councell of 70. Citizens, with authoritie that they might proceed in matters of moſt importance. This new ordinance ſtaied the minds of thoſe that deſired innouation, and to giue thereto countenance, firſt of all they accepted the peace, which Lorenzo had made with the King, and ſent vnto the Pope Antonio Ridolphi, and Piero Naſi. Neuertheles Alfonſo Duke of Calauria, did not remoue his army from Siena, ſaying he was ſtaied by the diſcord of the citizens there, which was ſo great, that he being lodged without the citie was called in and made iudge of their differents. The Duke taking theſe occaſions, puniſhed many of thoſe citizens in mony, impriſoning & baniſhing others, and ſome alſo were iudged to death. In ſo much as by this meanes he became ſuſpected not only to the Saneſi, but the Florentines alſo miſtruſted he would make himſelf Prince of that citie. Wherof they knew no remedy, cōſidering the new friendſhip of Florence with the King, & the enmitie of the Pope & King. Which ſuſpition, not only in the people of Florence generally (who miſtruſtfully cōſider of all things) but in the chief gouernors of the ſtate, appeared: euery man imagining, that our citie had neuer bin in ſo great danger to loſe the liberty therof. But God who had euer a particuler care therof, cauſed an accident to happē vnlooked for, which made the King, the Pope, & the Venetians, to think of greater matters thē theſe of Toſcana.
               The Iſle of Rodi aſſaulted by the Turkes. 
               Mahumetto great Turk, was with a mighty army gone to the Iſle of Rodi, & had many months aſſaulted it. But notwithſtanding his forces were great, and his reſolution to win the town greater, yet was the vertue of thoſe that defended the ſame, greateſt of all. For Mahumetto notwithſtanding his furious aſſaults, was forced to depart with ſhame. Thus the Turk being departed frō 
               Rodi, part of his army cōducted by Saccometto Baſcia, went towards Velona, & by the way, either for that he ſaw the enterpriſe eaſie, or becauſe the Turk had ſo commanded, paſſed by the coaſt of Italy, & ſodeinly ſet 4000. men on land, who aſſaulted the citie of Ottranto, tooke it, ſacked it,The Turks landed in Italy. & ſlew all the inhabitants therof: which done, by all the beſt means he could; fortified both the citie, & the hauen. Thē ſent he for horſmen, & with them he forraged, & ſpoiled the coūtry round about. The king ſeeing this aſſault, & knowing how great a prince had takē that enterpriſe in hād, ſent vnto al places to ſignify the ſame, & deſired aid of thē al, againſt the cōmon enimy. Alſo ſpeedily reuoked the Duke of Calauria with his forces frō 
               Siena. This aſſault, thogh it grieued the duke & the reſt of Italy, yet did the ſame cōfort Florēce & Siena. One hoping therby to recouer liberty, th'other truſting

the rather to ſhun thoſe perils, which made them to feare the loſſe of their libertie. Which opinion was encreaſed by the vnwilling departure, and lamentation of the Duke, at his going from Siena, accuſing fortune, that ſhe by an vnlooked for and vnreaſonable accident, had taken frō him the dominion of Toſcana. The ſelfſame chance did alter the Popes mind: for where before, he refuſed to giue audience to all Florentines, he was now become ſo curteous, as he refuſed not to hear any that wold ſpeak vnto him of the vniuerſal peace. Whereupon the Florentines were aduertiſed, that if they would deſire pardon of the Pope, they might obteine it. It was then thought good, not to omit this occaſion: and 12. Embaſſadors were ſent to the Pope, who being arriued at Rome, were by his holineſſe before they had audience, enterteined with diuers practiſes. In the end it was betweene the parties concluded, how either of them ſhould afterwards liue, & in what ſort either of them both in peace and war, were to make contribution. After this concluſion, the Embaſſadors were admitted to preſent themſelues at the Popes feete: and he ſitting in the midſt of his Cardinals, with exceeding great pomp,The ſpeech of the Florētine Embaſſadors to the Pope. receiued them. Theſe Embaſſadors excuſed all matters paſſed, ſometimes blaming neceſsitie, ſometimes the euil diſpoſition of others, ſometimes the populer furie, and the iuſt offence thereof, ſaying they were moſt vnhappie, being forced either to fight, or die. And becauſe all things are endured to eſchue death, they had ſuffred war, excommunicatiōs, & all other troubles, which the matters paſſed had brought with thē. And all to the end, that their common weale might auoyd bondage, which is the death of all free Cities. Neuertheles if any error or enforced fault were committed, they were ready to make ſatisfaction: euer hoping in his goodnes, (who following the examples of the almightie Redeemer) he would receiue them,The Popes anſwere. rather for his mercie, then their merits. To which excuſes, the Pope anſwered with great pride and anger; reprouing them of all things done againſt the church; notwithſtāding for Gods ſake, he was pleaſed to grant them the pardō they deſired: yet therwith affirming they were to obey him, & if they ſhal faile of obedience, their libertie which now ſhould haue bin loſt, ſhall then be iuſtly taken from thē. For they deſerue libertie, who take in hand good actions, & not they that in euil enterpriſes employ themſelues. Becauſe libertie abuſed, offendeth it ſelf and others. Alſo to eſteem God litle, & the church leſſe, is not the office of good mē, but of vain perſons, enclined to euil. The correction of whō apperteineth not onely to Princes, but to euery chriſtian: ſo as they were for matters paſſed to blame their own euil doings, which was the firſt occaſion of war, & by their worſe doings it was noriſhed. But all anger was now extinguiſhed, rather by the goodnes of others, thē their own deſerts. After publication of the peace, the Popes bleſsing was read. Whereunto his holineſſe by word of mouth added, that if they would enioy the benifit of his benediction, they ſhould during the Turks war in the kingdom, maintein at their charge 15. gallies wel paid. The Embaſſadors complained much of this burdē impoſed ouer and aboue the contract. Yet by no meanes they could make, or by any lamentation they vſed, the Pope would diminiſh any part of that penance. But the Embaſſadors being returned to Florence, the Senate for confirmation of this peace, ſent Embaſſador to the Pope, Guidantonio Veſpucci, who was lately ariued frō 
               France. He by his wiſdom brought all matters vnto reaſonable termes, & obteined many fauours of the Pope, which was a token of greater reconciliatiō. The Florentines hauing ended their buſines with the Pope, and Siena with themſelues being deliuered from feare of the King by the departure of the Duke of Calauria, and the Turkes warre continuing, conſtrained the King to reſtore all the Caſtles which the Duke of Calauria at his departure left in the handes of the Saneſi. Wherby that King hoped, that the Florentines in ſo great neceſsitie would not ſhrincke from him, or by moouing of warre

againſt the Saneſi, impeach the aide which hee hoped of from the Pope and other Italian Princes. And therefore was content that the Caſtles ſhould bee reſtored, and bound the Florentines by a new obligation. So as thereby we ſee, that force and neceſsitie, but not writings or obligations, do make Princes to obſerue their faith. The Caſtles thus receiued, and the new confederacie made, Lorenzo di Medici recouered that reputation, which the warre firſt and after the peace (when the King was feared) had taken from him. For there wanted not thoſe that openly ſlaundered him, and ſaid, that for ſauing himſelfe, he had ſould his countrey, and that by the warre they loſt their townes, and by the peace they ſhould loſe their libertie. But the townes recouered an honorable peace made with the King, and the Cittie returned to the auncient reputation. For in Florence (a Cittie free of ſpeech, and therein matters iudged by their ſucceſſe, and not by counſell) the caſe was altered, and Lorenzo commended to the skies, euerie man ſaying, that he with his wiſedome had found meanes to recouer that by peace, which euill fortune had taken from them in warre: and that his counſell and iudgement, had preuailed more then the enemies armes, or their money. The aſſault of the Turks had deferred that warre, which by offence of the Pope and Venetians would haue bene moued. But as the beginning of that aſſault was vnlooked for, and occaſion of much good, ſo was the end thereof vnlooked for, and the cauſe of much euill: for Mahumetto great Turke, beyond all expectation died, and diſcord growing betwixt his ſonnes, thoſe Turks that were in Puglia, being abandoned of their Lord, by compoſition yeelded Ottranto to the King. This feare remoued, which held the Pope and Venetians firme, euery man doubted new tumults. On the one ſide, the Pope and the Venetians were in league, and with them the Genoueſi, Saneſi,
               New leagues in Italy. and other leſſe Potentates. On the other, were the Florentines, the King, and the Duke, with whome, the Bologneſi, and many other Lords ioyned. The Venetians deſired to become Lords of Farrara, ſuppoſing they had reaſonable occaſion to begin that enterpriſe, and certaine hope to performe it. The occaſion was, bicauſe the Marqueſſe affirmed, he was no longer bound to receiue the Viſdomine and their ſalte, bicauſe the contract was, that after ſeauentie yeares, the Cittie ſhould be disburthened of thoſe charges. The Venetians to the contrarie anſwered, that ſo long as he did hold the Poleſine, ſo long he ought to receiue the Viſdomine and the ſalte. But the Marqueſſe not conſenting thereto, the Venetians thought they had iuſt occaſion to take armes, and time fit for the ſame, ſeeing the Pope much offended with the Florentines and the King, whoſe fauour they hoped the rather to haue, bicauſe the Earle Girolamo being at Venice, was there receiued moſt honorablie: and the Venetians beſtowed on him the title of a Gentleman of that ſtate, which is the greateſt token of honor, which they will, or can giue. They had alſo for preparation of the warres, impoſed a new Subſidie, and choſen Roberto de Sanſeuerino for their Generall: who being offended with Lodouico, Gouernour of Milan, was fled to Tortona, and there hauing made ſome tumults, went to Genoua; from thence he was called by the Venetians, and made Chiefetaine of their armie. Theſe preparations and new motions being knowne to thoſe of the contrarie league, was the cauſe that they alſo prepared for the warre. The Duke of Milan made Federigo Lord of Vrbino, his Generall, and the Florentines Coſtanzo de Peſaro. Alſo, to ſound the diſpoſition of the Pope, and to diſcouer whether the Venetians with his conſent did make the warre againſt Farrara, the King Ferrando ſent Alfonſo Duke of Calauria, with his armie to the riuer of Tronto, and there deſired leaue of the Pope to paſſe into Lombardy to aide the Marqueſſe, which was by the Pope vtterly denied. Whereupon, the King, and the Florentines, being reſolued, thought to conſtraine him by force, ſo as thereby he

ſhould either become their friend, or at the leaſt, they would ſo trouble him, as he could not be able to aide the Venetians: for they were in the field, and had alreadie begun the warre with the Marqueſſe, ſpoyled his countreys, and beſieged Figarolo, a Caſtle of much importance, for the countrey of that Prince. Thus the King and the Florentines determined to aſſaile the Pope. Alfonſo Duke of Calauria ſpoiled the countrey towards Rome, and with aide of the Colonni, who were on his ſide (bicauſe the Orſini were ioyned with the Pope) did great dammage to that countrey on the other ſide of Rome. The Florentines on the other ſide vnder Nicholo Vitelli, aſſaulted the Cittie of Caſtello, ſurprized it, and draue out Lorenzo, who kept that Caſtle for the Pope, and Nicholo remained a Prince thereof. By theſe actions, the Pope was greatlie diſtreſſed, bicauſe Rome within the Cittie was troubled with factions, and the countrey without ſpoiled by enemies. Notwithſtanding, as a man of courage, he would not giue place to the enemie, but enterteined Roberto da Rimino, and calling him to Rome, where all his men of warre were aſſembled, told him, how great honor he might win, if he could againſt the force of a King, deliuer the Church from thoſe troubles wherewith it was occupied: and how great obligation he ſhould thereby haue not onely of him, but alſo of all other Popes his ſucceſſors, and that both God and men would reacquite the ſame. Roberto firſt viewing the Popes men of armes, and other his preparations, perſwaded him to make all the footmen he was able, which with all ſpeed and diligence was performed. By this time the Duke of Calauria was neare vnto Rome, and ſpoiled the countrey euen to the walls of the Cittie, which offended the people ſo much, as many of them voluntarily offered themſelues to ſerue with Roberto, and recouer the libertie of Rome: who were all by that Lord thanked and receiued. The Duke hearing of theſe preparations, retired a little from the Cittie, thinking, that if he were further off, Roberto would not ſeeke him: and he alſo looked, that Federigo his brother, ſhould come with freſh men, ſent from the King their father. Roberto ſeeing himſelfe equall with the Duke for men of armes, and in footmen aboue him, marched out of Rome without order, and lodged his Camp within two miles of the enemie. The Duke ſeeing his enemies at hand, not looking for them, thought it ſtood him vpon, either to fight or flee. Wherefore as conſtrained, and for not doing a thing vnworthie the ſonne of a King, determined to fight, and turning his face to the enemy, either camp put their men in order, and brought them to battell, which continued from the morning till noone: and the ſame was performed with more vertue, then any had bene in Italy fiftie yeares before; for therein were ſlaine on both ſides more then a thouſand men,The Duke of Calauria diſcomfited by the Pope. and the end was glorious to the Church. For the great multitude of the Popes footmen, ſo much offended the Dukes horſemen, as they were forced to turne their backs: and the Dukes perſon had bene taken priſoner, had he not bene ſaued by many Turks, who were left at Ottranto, and ſerued vnder him. Roberto hauing this victorie, returned to Rome with triumph: which he enioyed not long, for that by drinking of much water at the day of battell, he fell into a flixe, which within fewe dayes brought him to death. His bodie was by the Pope, with great honor buried. The Pope hauing this victorie, ſent the Earle preſently towards the Cittie of Caſtello, to ſee that towne reſtored vnto Lorenzo; and beſides to prooue, how the Cittie of Rimino was enclined. For after the death of Roberto, (who had onely one yong ſonne, and the Cittie left to the gouernment of his mother) the Pope imagined it was eaſie for him to ſurprize it. And in deed it would haue ſo come to paſſe, had not that woman bene by the Florentines defended, who tooke her part with ſuch forces, as the enemie could not worke his will, either againſt Caſtello, or Rimino. While theſe matters were a doing in Romagna and Rome, the Venetians had ſurprized

               Figarolo, and with their men had paſſed the Riuer of Po, and in the Duke of Milan his campe, and the Marqueſſe alſo, there was diſorder, bicauſe Federigo, Earle of Vrbino, being ſick, cauſed himſelfe to be carried to take phiſick at Bologna, and there died: whereby the affaires of the Marqueſſe proceeded ſlowlie, and the Venetians hoped dailie more and more to ſurprize Farrara. On the other ſide, the King and the Florentines laboured to make the Pope of their ſide, which not brought to paſſe by armes, they threatned by a Generall Councell to make him yeeld, which Councell, was by the Emperours commaundement, appointed at Baſelia: whereupon, by perſwaſion of the Emperours Embaſſador at Rome, and the chiefe Cardinals, who deſired peace, the Pope was perſwaded and conſtrained to allow of peace, and the vniting of Italy. Then the Pope for feare, and alſo for that he found the greatneſſe of the Venetians to be the ruine of the Church and all Italy, reſolued to come into the league, and ſent his Nuncii to Naples,
               New leagues in Italy. where a league was concluded for fiue yeares, betwixt the Pope, the King, the Duke of Milan, and the Florentines, reſeruing a place for the Venetians, if they were pleaſed to enter. This done, the Pope commaunded the Venetians to ſurceaſe the warre of Farrara, which they not onely refuſed to do, but alſo made the preparation greater: and hauing alreadie broken the Dukes and Marqueſſe forces at Argenta, they at Farrara were ſo neare diſtreſſed, as the Dukes forces were lodged in the Marqueſſe Park. Then the League thought good no longer to deferre the aiding of that Prince, and cauſed the Duke of Calauria with his and the Popes men to goe to Farrara. The Florentines likewiſe ſent all their forces thither, and for the better ordering of the warre, the League appointed a Councell to be holden at Cremona, where the Popes Legat, the Earle Girolamo, the Duke of Calauria, the Lord Lodouico, Lorenzo de Medici, with many other Princes of Italy met. In this Councell, the Princes deuiſed the order of the future warre. And bicauſe they iudged that Farrara could not be better relieued any way, then by ſome braue aſſault, they ordered that Lodouico ſhould begin a warre vpon the Venetians, for the countreys belonging to the Duke of Milan. But thereunto that Lord would not conſent, fearing to begin a warre which he could not end at his pleaſure. Wherefore it was determined they ſhould go with all their footmen to Farrara, and with foure thouſand men of armes, and eight thouſand footmen, aſſault the Venetians, who had two thouſand and two hundred men of armes, and ſixe thouſand footmen. And the League thought good firſt to aſſaile the nauie which the Venetians had lying vpon the riuer of Po, and the ſame being aſſaulted, was broken at Bondeno, with the loſſe of two hundred veſſels, and Antonio Iuſtiniano, the Proueditor of the nauie was taken. Then the Venetians, ſeeing all Italy vnited againſt them, to win ſome reputation, enterteined the Duke of the Rhene with two thouſand men of armes. But hauing receiued this ouerthrow of their nauie, they ſent this Duke with part of their armie to frunt the enemie, and commaunded Roberto de Sanſeuerino, with the reſt of their camp, to paſſe the riuer of Adda, and approching to Milan, to proclaime the name of the Duke, and of the Ladie Bona his mother: for by that meanes, they hoped to make ſome Innouation in the Cittie, ſuppoſing that the Lord Lodouico and his gouernment was hated. This aſſault at the beginning brought therewith ſome terror, and moued all the Cittie to take armes: but in the end, it wrought an effect contrarie to the Venetians expectation. Bicauſe Lodouico in reſpect of this iniurie, was content to allow of that which before he would not. And therefore, leauing the Marqueſſe of Farrara to the defence of his owne countrey, he with foure thouſand horſe, and two thouſand footmen, and the Duke of Calauria with twelue thouſand horſe, and fiue thouſand footmen, entred the countrey of Pergamo, Breſcia, and Verona, ſpoiling almoſt all the countrey belonging to thoſe

three Citties, before the Venetians knew thereof, for the Lord Roberto with his ſouldiers, could ſcarcely defend that Cittie. On the other ſide, the Marqueſſe of Farrara had recouered a great part of his poſſeſsions, by meane whereof, the Duke of the Rhene who came againſt him, was not able to make head, hauing onely two thouſand horſe, and one thouſand footemen. Thus all that ſummer, in the yeare 1483. the League proceeded in their warres moſt proſperouſlie. The next Spring being come (for in all the winter was nothing done) the armies were againe brought to the field, and the League, (to the end it might the more ſpeedily oppreſſe the Venetians) had ioined all the whole army togither: but if they had proceeded as they did the yeare before, they ſhould aſſuredly haue taken from the Venetians, all the lands in Lombardy to them belonging: for they had not left vnto them, more then ſixe thouſand horſe, and fiue thouſand footmen. And on the other ſide, were twelue thouſand horſe, and ſixe thouſand footmen. Alſo the Duke of the Rhene hauing ended the yeare of his enterteinement, was returned home. Notwithſtanding (as it often happeneth) where diuerſe Gouernours be of equall authoritie, there groweth diuiſion, and the enemie winneth victorie, ſo Federigo Gonzaga, Marqueſſe of Mantoua, being dead (who with his authoritie continued the Duke of Calauria, and the Lord Lodouico vnited) betwixt them grew diuerſitie of opinions, and ielouſie. For Giouangaliazzo Duke of Milan being atteined to age, and abilitie to gouerne his owne ſtate, and hauing alſo married the daughter of the Duke of Calauria, the Duke deſired, that his ſonne in lawe, and not Lodouico, might gouerne the ſtate. This ſuſpition of Lodouico being knowne to the Venetians, was made by them an occaſion, ſuppoſing they might as they had euer done, recouer by peace, that which they had loſt by warre: and ſecretly they practiſed a pacification betwixt them and Lodouico, which was concluded in Auguſt, the yeare 1484. That being knowne to the other confederates, diſpleaſed them much, chiefely when they knew, that all the townes taken from the Venetians ſhould be reſtored, and they ſtill to inioy alſo Rouigo, and Policene, which townes they had taken from the Marqueſſe of Farrara. And moreouer, that they ſhould haue againe all thoſe prerogatiues which in times paſſed they had. Euerie man then thought, they had made a warre with great charge, and as therein they had gained ſmall honor, ſo in the end it was compounded with ſhame: bicauſe the townes taken, were reſtored, and the townes loſt, were not recouered. Yet were the confederates forced to accept the peace, being wearie of charges, and fearing the ambition and defects of others, would make no more triall of their fortune. While in Lombardy matters were in this manner handled,Caſtello beſieged by the Pope. the Pope by meane of Lorenzo beſieged the Cittie of Caſtello, to driue from thence Nicholo Vitelli, (who, to drawe the Pope into the league) had forſaken him. In this ſiege, thoſe that within the towne were partarkers with Nicholo, came forth to fight with the enemies, and did vanquiſh them; whereupon, the Pope reuoked the Earle Girolamo from Lombardy, to repaire his force at Rome: that done, to returne to his enterpriſe. But afterwards, thinking it better to gaine the good will of Nicholo by peace, then to aſſaile him with a new warre, grew to agreement with him, and by all meanes reconciled him to Lorenzo his aduerſarie: whereupon, he was allured rather by ſuſpition of new tumults, then by the loue he bare his countrey. For betwixt the Colonneſi and Orſini, there appeared much diſpleaſure: bicauſe the King of Naples in the warre betwixt him and the Pope, had taken from Orſini the Earledome of Tagliacozzo, and giuen it to the Colonneſi his followers. Afterwards, the peace being made betwixt the King and the Pope, the Orſini by vertue thereof demaunded reſtitution. The Pope often ſignified to the Colonneſi, that they ought to make reſtitution, but they, neither at the intreatie of the Orſini, nor for the threatning of

the Pope, would agree thereunto, but ſtill with iniuries, and ſpoiling of the Orſini, did diſpleaſure them, which the Pope could not indure: and therefore aſſembled all his forces, and ioyning with them the Orſini, ſacked all the houſes of the Colonni in Rome, ſlaying and taking all thoſe that made reſiſtance,The Co
                     •
                  onn
                     ••
                  i opp
                     •
                  eſſed by the Pope. and razing the moſt part of all their Caſtles: ſo that thoſe tumults were ended not by peace, but by oppreſſing one of the parties. Alſo Genoua and Toſcana were ſomewhat diſquieted, for the Florentines did keepe the Earle Antonio de Marciano with his ſouldiers, vpon the confines of Serezana, who during the warre of Lombardy, with foraging, and ſmall skirmiſhes, moleſted the Serezaneſi. And in Genoua, Battiſtino Fregoſo Duke of that Cittie, truſting vnto Pagolo Frigoſo Archbiſhop, was by him taken, with his wife and children, and the Archbiſhop made Duke. Likewiſe, the Venetian nauie had aſſaulted the Kingdome, ſurprized Galipoli, and moleſted other places thereabouts. But the peace of Lombardy concluded, all tumults did ceaſe, ſaue onely in Toſcana and Rome: for the Pope within fiue daies after the peace was proclaimed, died: either bicauſe the end of his life was come, or for ſorrow that a peace was made to his diſaduantage. This Pope at his death left Italy in peace, though during his life he had alwaies therein made warre: and the Romanes preſentlie after his departure tooke armes. The Earle Girolamo with his ſouldiers retired vnder the Caſtle, and the Orſini did feare, leaſt the Colonneſi would be reuenged of the freſh iniuries done them. Then the Colonneſi demaunded againe their houſes and Caſtles. Vpon theſe occaſions, within few daies there followed many murthers, robberies, and burnings in diuerſe parts of the Cittie. But the Cardinals hauing perſwaded the Earle to yeeld that Caſtle vnto the College, and returne home to his owne land, and alſo remoue his ſouldiers out of Rome, he being deſirous to gratifie the next Pope, gaue vp the Caſtle to the College, and went himſelfe vnto Imola. Whereupon the Cardinals deliuered of this feare, and the Barons out of hope to be aided by the Earle in their quarrels, went to the creation of a new Pope. After ſome diſputation, and diuerſitie of opinions, Giouanbattiſta Cibo, borne in Genoua, and Cardinall of Malfetta, was choſen Pope, by the name of Innocentio octauo. He through the curteſie of his nature (being a quiet and peaceable man) procured all armes to be laid downe, and for the preſent, pacified Rome. The Florentines after the peace, could not content themſelues with reſt, being perſwaded it was ſhame, and diſhonor, that a priuate Gentleman had taken from them the Caſtle of Serezana. And bicauſe the capitulations were, that it was lawfull to demaund all things taken, and if they were not reſtored, to make warre againſt the withholder, they reſolued ſpeedily to prepare money and men to performe that enterpriſe. Then Agoſtino Fregoſo, who had ſurprized Serezana, being perſwaded that at his priuate charge he could not mainteine ſo great a warre, gaue that towne to S. George. And ſithens we are to make mention diuerſe times of S. George, and the Genoueſi,
               The firſt erection of S. George in Genoua. it ſeemeth not amiſſe to declare the orders and cuſtomes of that Cittie, being one of the principall ſtates of Italy. The peace made betwixt the Genoueſi and Venetians (after the greateſt warre, that was ſeene in many yeares paſt) the State not being able to pay thoſe Cittizens who had lent great ſummes of money, appointed their reuenues of the Dogana, to be paid vnto them, till ſuch time as the principall debts were diſcharged. And for their meeting togithers, they appointed the Pallace ouer the Dogana. Theſe creditors among themſelues ordeined a forme of gouernment, appointing a Councell of a hundred, and a Senate of eight Citizens, which officers as heads of the Cittie, might diſpatch all affaires. The debts were diuided into parts, which they called Luoghi, and intituled the whole corporation of S. Georgeo. This gouernment thus eſtabliſhed, euer hapned new neceſsities, whereupon they reſorted to S. George for new aide: who being

riche and well ordered, could eaſily ſerue their turnes. And the communaltie on the other ſide, hauing graūted the Dogana, began for pawne of the moneys, to giue their lands: yea, the matter went ſo farre (by reaſon of the common neceſsities and ſeruices of S. George) that vnder gouernment thereof, the greater part of the Townes, Citties, and Lands of Genoua, doe now belong to S. George, who doth gouerne and defend them. Alſo euery yeare by publique ſuffrage, officers be appointed without any intermedling of the Communaltie. Hereof it proceedeth, that thoſe Citizens haue no regard of the common profit, as a thing tirannized, and ſet their whole care vpon S. George, as well and equally gouerned: whereof do ariſe the eaſie and often alterations of the State, and that the people do otherwhiles yeeld their obedience to ſome of their owne Citizens, and ſometimes to a Stranger: for not S. George, but the Communaltie doth alter in gouernment: which was the cauſe that whē the Adorni & Fregoſi contending for the principallitie did fight, the communaltie only, and the greater part of the citizēs ſtood neutrall, and yeelded to the victorious. Neither doth the office of S. George other, then whenſoeuer any man hath taken the gouernment, it ſweareth him to obſerue the lawes thereof, which to this day are not changed. For S. George hauing in poſſeſsion the armes, the money, and the gouernment, cannot without the danger of a certaine rebellion, be altered. A rare order ſurely, and not found by the Philoſophers amōg their imagined or viſible Cōmon-weales, to ſee within one circle, and among one number of Citizens, libertie, and tirannie, ciuill life, and corruption, iuſtice and licentiouſnes: which order onely mainteineth that towne full of auncient and venerable cuſtomes. And if it ſhould happen (which in time will aſſuredly come to paſſe) that S. George ſhall be owner of all the Citie, that State will be more notable, then the Venetian Common-weale. To this S. George, Agoſtino Fregoſo gaue Serezana, who receiued it willingly, and taking in hand the defence thereof, preſently prepared a nauie by ſea, and ſent certaine forces to Pietraſanta, to impeach all thoſe that reſorted to the Florentine Camp, then neare vnto Serezana. On the other ſide, the Florentines deſired to take Pietraſanta, as a towne needfull to be had for the winning of Serezana: for being betwixt it and Piſa, they could not beſiege it ſo long as by the Pietraſanteſi, or others therein, they were impeached in the ſiege of Serezana. To bring this enterpriſe to paſſe, they ſent from Piſa to the Camp, a great quantitie of munition and victuall, ſlenderly garded: to the end that they of Pietraſanta ſhould feare the leſſe, and in hope of a good bootie, to aſſault them. The matter was then followed according to expectation: For the ſouldiers in Pietraſanta,
               Warre betweene the Genou
                     •
                  ſi and the F
                     •
                  orentines. ſeeing before their eyes ſo great a bootie, tooke it, which gaue the Florentines iuſt occaſion to execute the enterpriſe: wherefore leauing Serezana, they beſieged Pietraſanta, which was well manned, and brauely defended. The Florentines hauing their artillerie in the plaine, made a bulwarke vpon the mountaine, hoping from thence to batter it. Giacopo Guicciardino was Commiſſarie of the Florentine forces. And while they beſieged Pietraſanta, the nauie of Genoua tooke and burnt the fortreſſe of Vada: and ſetting ſome of their ſouldiers a land, ſpoiled the countrey thereabout. Againſt whome, Buongianni Gianfiliazzi, was ſent with certaine footmen, who partly ſtayed their pride, ſo as they durſt no longer ſpoile at their pleaſures. Yet the nauie continuing to moleſt the Florentines, went vnto Liuorno, and with certaine inſtruments, approched Torre Nuoua, battering it diuerſe dayes with artillerie, but ſeeing nothing done to their aduantage, returned back with ſhame. In the meane ſpace, Pietraſanta was coldly aſſaulted: whereupon, the enemies tooke hart, aſſaulted the Bulwarke, and tooke it: which was ſo greatly to their reputation, and the Florentines feare, as they were readie to breake vp the Campe. In ſo much as they retired foure miles from the towne, and the officers of the Camp

thought good, that the moneth of October being come, it was time to lodge the army, and deferre that ſiege till the next Spring. This diſorder being knowne in Florence, made the Magiſtrates much offended, and therefore to repaire the Camp in force and reputation, made choiſe of new Commiſſaries, Antonio Pucci, and Bernardo del Nero, who with great ſummes of money went vnto the Camp, and declared to the Captaines the indignation of the Senate and the people, and how great a ſhame it ſhould be, vnleſſe the army did againe returne to the ſiege: for it were an infamie, ſo great a Camp, to be repulſed by ſo ſmall a guard, and ſo weake a towne. They alſo ſhewed the preſent and future commoditie that would inſue of that victorie. Which perſwaſion, moued the ſouldiers to returne to the walls, and firſt of all to recouer the Bulwarke. For the performance whereof, they knowing how much curteſie, affabilitie, and good vſage might do to incourage the minds of men, Antonio Pucci, by comforting, promiſing, and imbracing the ſouldiers, procured the Bulwarke to be aſſaulted ſo furiouſly, as euen in a ſodeine it was taken,Pietraſanta taken. yet not without loſſe: for in that aſſault, the Earle Antonio de Marciano with a peece of artillerie, was ſlaine. This victorie terrified thoſe of the towne ſo much, as they began to offer compoſition: whereupon, to the end the concluſion might be made with the more reputation, Lorenzo di Medici thought good to come to the Camp, and within a few daies after his arriuall, the Caſtle was yeelded. The winter now come, the Captaines liked not to proceed further in the warre, but attend the Spring: and the rather, bicauſe the Autumne paſt, by meanes of euill aires, ſicknes was brought into the Camp, wherewith many of the Captaines and leaders were diſeaſed. Among whome, Antonio Pucci, and Bongianni Gianfigliazzi, were not onely ſick, but alſo dead, to the great griefe of all the army: ſo great was the honor and loue that Pucci had wonne in the exploite of Pietraſanta. After the taking of Pietraſanta, the Luccheſi ſent Embaſſadors to Florence, to demaund that towne, as a thing belonging to their common-weale. For they alleaged, that among other things it was contracted betwixt them, that the towne firſt wonne by any of them, ſhould be reſtored to the auncient owner. The Florentines directlie denied not that couenant, but anſwered, that they doubted whether in the peace made betwixt them and the Genoueſi, it was meant the towne to be deliuered, and therefore they could not till then determine: and if it were reſtored, then the Luccheſi ought of neceſsitie to pay the charge, and make ſatisfaction, for the loſſe of ſo many great Citizens: which if they would do, they might hope to haue it againe. All that winter was ſpent, in the communication of this peace betwixt the Genoueſi, and the Florentines. And by reaſon the Pope was a doer therein, the matter was handled at Rome: but not being concluded, the Florentines would the next Spring haue aſſaulted Serezana, had they not bene by the ſickneſſe of Lorenzo di Medici, and the warre which grew betwixt the Pope, and the King Ferrando, impeached. For Lorenzo was not onely diſeaſed of the gowt, which infirmitie, ſeemed to diſcend from his father, but was alſo ſo grieuouſlie tormented with griefe of the ſtomack, that he went vnto the Bathes to be cured: but the warre was the chiefe occaſion of his ſickneſſe, and the originall thereof. The Citie of Aquila was ſubiect to the King of Naples, yet the people therein liued as free. In this Citie, the Earle Montorio had great reputation.Aquila rebelled from the K. of Naples. The Duke of Calauria with his men of armes being neare vnto Tronto, pretending to pacifie certaine tumults among the people of that countrey, and intending to reduce Aquila wholie vnder the Kings obedience, ſent for the Earle Montorio, as though he would imploy him in thoſe matters he made ſhew of. The Earle without ſuſpition came, and was preſently by the Duke ſent to Naples priſoner. Theſe newes being aduertiſed to Aquila, altered the minde of the Cittie, and the people populerly

tooke armes, and ſlewe Antonio Concinello, Commiſſarie for the King, and with him certaine other Citizens, who were knowne affectionate to the King. Alſo, to the end the Aquilani, might haue ſome friend to defend them in their rebellion, they diſplaied the Enſigne of the Church, and ſent Embaſſadors to giue the Cittie to the Pope: deſiring him, as his owne ſubiects, to defend them from the tyrannie of the King.The Pope defendeth the rebels of Aquila. The Pope manfully tooke in hand their defence, as one that both for priuate and publique occaſion hated the King. And Roberto da Sanſeuerino, enemy to the State of Milan, hapning to be out of pay, the Pope enterteined him for Generall, and cauſed him with great expedition to come vnto Rome: and beſides that, ſollicited all the friends and kinſmen of the Earle Montorio, to become Rebels to the King; in ſo much as the Princes of Altemura, Salerno, & Biſignano, tooke armes againſt him. The King ſeeing himſelfe by ſo ſodeine a warre aſſaulted, prayed aide of the Florentines, and the Duke of Milan. The Florentines ſtood doubtfull what to do, bicauſe it ſeemed hard to leaue their owne enterpriſe for others: and to take armes againſt the Church, was perilous. Notwithſtanding, being in league, they preferred fidelitie, before commoditie or perill, and enterteined the Orſini, and ſent all their owne men towards Rome to the aide of the King, vnder conduct of the Earle of Pitigliano. Then the King made two camps, and ſent the one towards Rome, vnder the Duke of Calauria, who with the Florentines ſhould incounter the Popes army. The other camp himſelfe did leade, and marched toward the Barons that rebelled. This warre with variable fortune was mannaged, and at the end, the King in all places hauing aduantage,Peace betweene the K. of Naples, and the Pope. 1486. by mediation of the Embaſſadors of Spayne, a peace was concluded in the moneth of Auguſt 1486. whereunto the Pope (being beaten with euill fortune, and loth to aduenture more) conſented. Alſo, all the Potentates of Italy were included (onely the Genoueſi, as rebels to the State of Milan, and vſurpers of the Florentines lands) were left out. Roberto da Sanſeuerino, the peace made, hauing bene in this warre no faithfull friend to the Pope, and nothing terrible to the enemy, departed from Rome, as driuen out by the Pope: and being followed by the Dukes and Florentines ſouldiers, ſo ſoone as he had paſſed Ceſena, ſeeing himſelfe not followed, fled away, and with leſſe then one hundred horſe, came to Rauenna. Of the reſt of his men, ſome were receiued by the Duke, and ſome by the countrey people, were cut in pieces. The King hauing made peace, and reconciled his Barons, put to death Giouanni Coppola, and Antonello de Anuerſa, with his ſonnes, and thoſe which had in the warre reuealed his ſecrets vnto the Pope. By meanes of this warre, the Pope knew what readineſſe and care the Florentines had to keepe friendſhip: and therefore, albeit that for the loue of the Genoueſi, and the aiding of the King, he before hated them, yet now he began to loue them, and ſhew more fauour vnto their Embaſſadors then he was wont. Which diſpoſition knowne to Lorenzo de Medici, was by all honorable meanes increaſed: for he thought it much for his reputation, if to the fauour which the King bare him, he might alſo ioyne the Popes friendſhip. This Pope had one ſonne called Franceſco, and being deſirous to honor him with lands and friends, wherewith he might after his death, mainteine himſelfe, he knewe not any in Italy with whome he could more ſafely be matched, then with Lorenzo:
               Lorenzo di Medici his daughter, married vnto the Popes ſonne. and therefore ſo handled the matter, that Lorenzo married a daughter of his vnto Franceſco. This marriage being made, the Pope deſired that the Genoueſi might by compoſition deliuer Serezana to the Florentines: perſwading them, that they ſhould not hold that which Agoſtino had ſold, nor Agoſtino could giue vnto S. George that, which was not his. Notwithſtanding, this perſwaſion tooke no effect. But the Genoueſi while theſe matters were practiſing at Rome, armed certaine of their Ships, and before the Florentines knew any thing thereof, ſet three thouſand

footmen a land, and aſſaulted the Caſtle of Serezanello, neare vnto Serezana,
               The Genoueſi aſſaulted by the Florentines. belonging to the Florentines, ſpoyling and burning the Towne: which done, they planted their Artillarie againſt the Caſtle, and with all diligence battered the ſame. This new aſſault was vnlooked for of the Florentines, neuertheleſſe preſently they aſſaulted their forces at Piſa, vnder Virginio Orſino. They alſo complained vnto the Pope, that whileſt he practiſed the peace, the Genoueſi had begunne this warre. They ſent likewiſe Piero Corcini to Lucca, to continue the amitie with that Citie: and Pagolantonio Soderini, was ſent vnto Venice, to feele the diſpoſition of that ſtate. They praied aide alſo of the King, and of the Lord Lodouico Sforza: but failed thereof at both their handes. For the King ſaide hee feared the Turkes Nauie, and Lodouico vnder other cauillations deferred to ſend anie. Thus the Florentines (being for the moſt part left alone in their warres) did not finde anie ſo readie to helpe them, as they were readie to aide others. Neither were they diſmaied being now abandoned by their confederates (which was no new thing) but aſſembling a great armie vnder Giacopo Guicciardini, and Piero Vittori, ſent them againſt the enemie, who lodged one night vppon the Riuer Magra. In the meane time, Serezanello was ſtraightly diſtreſſed by the enemie, who by vndermining and euerie other meanes, beſieged it. In ſo much as our Commiſſaries marched towardes the reliefe thereof. Yet the enemie refuſed not to fight, but ioyning battle with the Commiſſaries, the Genoueſi were ouerthrowne: and Lodouico Fieſco, with many other Captaines of the enemies were taken priſoners. This victory diſcouraged not ſo much the Serezaneſi,
               The Genoueſi diſcomfited. that they would therefore yeeld, but with more obſtinacie they prepared for defence: and the Florentine Commiſſaries ſtill continued to offend them. In ſo much as that towne was both manfully aſſaulted, and ſtoutly defended. This ſiege continuing long, cauſed Lorenzo di Medici to go himſelfe into the field. He being come thither, greatly encouraged our ſouldiers, and diſcouraged the Serezaneſi. For they ſeeing the reſolution of the Florentines to diſtreſſe them, and the coldneſſe of the Genoueſi to relieue them, freely, and without conditions, yeelded themſelues to the Florentines hands. And were all receiued to mercie, excepting a fewe who had bin the authors of the rebellion. Lodouico during this ſiege, had ſent his men of armes to Pontremoli, ſeeming to haue aided vs. But hauing intelligence with ſome in Genoua, that faction tooke armes againſt thoſe that gouerned, and with the aide of theſe forces, deliuered that Cittie to the Duke of Milan. At that time the Almanes had mooued a war againſt the Venetians, and Boccolino de Oſimo in La Marca, cauſed the towne of Oſimo to rebell againſt the Pope, and made himſelfe Prince thereof. He, after many accidents, at the perſwaſion of Lorenzo di Medici, was contented to deliuer that Citie againe vnto the Pope, and went himſelfe to Florence, where vnder the protection of Lorenzo, he liued long in great honour. After he went from thence to Milan, where not finding the like fidelitie, was by Lodouico put to death.The Venetians broken, and their Generall ſlaine. The Venetians aſſaulted by the Almanes, were neare vnto the Citie of Trento broken, and Roberto da Sanſeuerino their Generall, ſlaine. After which loſſe, the Venetians (according to the order of their fortune) made peace with the Almanes, not as victored, but as victorious) ſo honourable was the concluſion for their ſtate.Tumults in Romagna. In thoſe dayes alſo there happened in Romagna, tumults of great importance. Franceſco de Orſo of Furli, was a man of great authoritie in that Citie. He being ſuſpected to the Earle Girolamo, was many times by the Earle threatned. Whereupon Franceſco liuing in great feare, was perſwaded by his friends and kinſmen, to preuent the miſchief. And ſith he feared to be ſlaine by the Earle, was aduiſed to ſley him firſt: and ſo by the death of an other, eſcape his owne daunger. This reſolution made, hee appointed the time for performing the enterpriſe, the Market day at Furli: for many of his country friends

comming then thither, he thought to haue their aide without ſending for them. This conſpiracie hapned in the moneth of May, in which time (and all the ſommer) the Italians do vſe to ſup by day-light. The conſpirators thought the fitteſt inſtant to commit this murther, ſhould be immediatly after ſupper, when all his familie were at meate, and he left almoſt alone in his chamber. Thus determined, and that houre appointed, Franceſco went vnto the Earles houſe, and leauing his companions in the Hall, himſelfe went vp to the Chamber, where the Earle was, and ſaid to one of his men,The Earle Girolamo murdered. that he deſired to ſpeake with the Earle. Franceſco being called in, enterteined the Earle awhile with ſome feined ſpeech, and ſo ſodeinly ſlew him. Then he called vnto him his companions, and ſlew alſo the Earles man. By chance the Captaine of the towne alſo came in the meane time to ſpeake with the Earle, and being arriued in the Hall, followed with a fewe, was likewiſe ſlaine by thoſe that came to murther the Earle. Theſe murthers executed, the Earles bodie was caſt out of the window: and the murtherers proclayming the Church and libertie, cauſed all the people to arme, who hated greatly the couetiſe and crueltie of the Earle. The conſpirators hauing ſacked the Earles houſes, tooke the Counteſſe Caterina his wife, with all her children. Then remained onely the Caſtle (which being ſurprized) ſhould happilie finiſh the enterpriſe. But thereunto the Captaine would not conſent: Neuertheleſſe, this Counteſſe promiſed to deliuer it, if ſhe were let looſe to goe into the Caſtle, and for hoſtages of her promiſe, ſhe left with the enemyes her children. The conſpirators belieued her words, and gaue her leaue to depart. But ſo ſoone as ſhe was within the Caſtle, ſhe looked ouer the walls, and threatned the enemyes to be reuenged of her husbands death. Then they threatning to ſley all her children, anſwered, that ſhe had meane to beget others. The conſpirators diſmaied, ſeeing they were not aided by the Pope, and hearing that the Lord Lodouico, Vnkle to the Counteſſe, did ſend men in her aide, taking vp all the goods they could carrie awaie, went vnto the Cittie of Caſtello, whereby the Counteſſe recouered her ſtate, and reuenged her husbands death by all manner of cruelties.The Earles wife reuenged. The Florentines vnderſtanding the Earles death, tooke occaſion to repoſſeſſe the fortreſſe of Piancaldoli, which the Earle had before taken from them: for ſending thither their forces, they ſurprized it, and ſlew therein Ciecco, the famous Architetture. To this tumult of Romagna, followed one other of no leſſe moment. Galeotto Lord of Faenza, tooke to wife the daughter of Giouan Bentiuogli, Prince of Bologna. She either for ielouſie, or bicauſe her husband vſed her not well, either elſe through her owne euil nature, hated him ſo much, as ſhe determined to take from him his principallitie and life. Then diſſembling a ſickneſſe, laid her ſelfe in bed, and when Galeotto ſhould come to viſit her, ſhe determined he ſhould be by certaine men hidden in the Chamber, ſlaine. Of this intent, ſhe had made her father priuie, who hoped by the death of his ſonne in lawe, to become Lord of Faenza. The time deſtined for this murther being come, Galeotto repaired to his wiues Chamber, as he was woont, and hauing a little talked with her, the murtherers came foorth, and without anie mercie,Galeotto, Lord of Faenza murdered. there preſentlie ſlew him. So ſoone as the murther was knowne, great tumults aroſe. His wife, with one little ſonne, called Astore, fled to the Caſtle. The people tooke armes, and Giouan Bentiuogli, togither with a Captaine of Milan, called Bergamino, prepared for the purpoſe, with many armed men entred into Faenza, where was alſo Antonio Baſcoli, a Florentine Commiſſarie. All theſe leaders aſſembled, and reaſoning of the gouernment of that towne. The men of the Vale of Lamona (who were come populerly to the rumor) aſſaulted Giouanni, and Bergamino, ſleying the one, and taking the other priſoner. Then they proclaymed the name of Aſtore, and the Florentines, reacommending the Cittie to the

               Florentine Commiſaries. This chance knowne at Florence, grieued euery man much: notwithſtanding they cauſed Giouanni and his daughter to be ſet at libertie, and the tuition of Astore, by conſent of the people was giuen vnto them. Beſides theſe diuerſe other tumults happened in Romagna, la Marca, and Siena: after the warres were compounded betwixt the greater Princes; which being of leſſe importance, I iudge ſuperfluous to report. True it is, that the troubles of Siena (after the departure of the Duke of Calauria in the yeare 88.) were more in number: and after many alterations, ſometimes the people gouerned, and ſometimes the nobilitie, but in the end, the nobilitie was victorious. Among whom, Pandolfo and Giacopo Petruccio, were of moſt authoritie. The one for his wiſedom, the other for courage, became as Lords of that Citie. But the Florentines after the warre of Serezana, till the yeare 1492. (at which time Lorenzo de Medici died) did liue in great felicitie.Lorenzo de Medici. For Lorenzo hauing by his wiſdome appeaſed the armes of Italy, endeuoured to make himſelfe and his Citie great; and married his eldeſt ſonne Piero to Alfonſina, the daughter of Cauallier Orſino: and Giouanni his ſecond ſonne, was aduanced to the dignitie of Cardinall. Which honor was the more notable, becauſe at the time of his calling to that honour, he paſſed not the age of foureteene yeares: which was the way to make his houſe (as after it came to paſſe) to be exalted to the skies. For Giuliano his third ſonne, by reaſon of his yong age, and the ſmall time Lorenzo liued, he could not prouide anie extraordinarie fortune. Of his daughters he married one to Giacopo Saluiati, an other to Franceſco Cibo; the third, to Piero Ridolfi: the fourth (whom he beſtowed to hold his houſe vnited) was wedded to Giouan di Medici, but ſhe died. In his other priuate affaires, and chiefly in marchandize he was verie infortunate.Lorenzo in marchandize infortunato. For by the diſorder of his miniſters (who liued liker Princes, then priuate men) a great part of his ſubſtance in ſundrie places was conſumed: enforced thereby to borrow great ſummes of his countrey. Afterwards, not to runne in daunger of like fortune, leauing marchandize, he employed himſelfe in the purchaſe of lands: as riches of more aſſurance. In the countries of Piſa, Prato, and in the vale of Peſa, he compaſſed poſſeſsions both for profit and magnificence of houſes, more fit for a King then a priuate perſon. After that time, he enlarged and bewtified his owne Cittie, to the end he might liue therein with the more quiet, and ſecuritie. And therefore in many voide places hee built newe houſes and ſtreetes: whereby the Citie became more bewtifull and large. Alſo to the end hee might reſt the more aſſured at home, and encounter his enemies farre of: towards Bologna in the midſts of the Alpes, he fortified the Caſtle of Firenzuola.
               Lorēzo magnificent. Towards Siena, he began to reedifie Poggio Imperiale, and make it exceeding ſtrong. Towardes Genoua by winning of Pietraſanta and Serezana, hee ſhut that paſſage vp againſt the enemies. Moreouer, by giuing pentions, and prouiſions, he made friends, the Baglioni in Perugia, the Vitelli in the Citie of Castello, and in Faenza, he had particuler gouernment. All which things were as Bulwarkes to defend Florence. In times of peace, he feaſted the Citie, making many times triumphs, Iuſts, and publike ſhewes. For his intent was to keepe the Citie plentifull, the people vnited, and the nobilitie in honour. He greatly eſteemed men that excelled in any Art. He alſo fauoured learned men, as Agnolo da Montepulciano, Christofero Landini, and Demetrio Greco,
               Lorenzo a louer of learning. can beare witneſſe. Inſomuch as the Earle Giouanni de Mirandola (a man accounted almoſt diuine) forſaking all other parts of Europe, which hee had traueiled, moued by the magnificence of Lorenzo, ſetled his habitation in Florence. He maruellouſly delighted in Muſick, Architecture and Poetry, as many of his owne verſes, and Commentaries yet extant do teſtifie. Alſo to the end that the Florentine youth might be exerciſed in learning, he erected an Vniuerſitie in Piſa, whither he brought the moſt excellent men of all Italy. He likewiſe builded a Monaſtery neare vnto Florence, chiefly for

Friar Mariano da Chinazano, of the order of S. Austen, being accounted an excellent Preacher.Lorenzo vniuerſally loued. He was greatly loued both of God and fortune. All his enterpriſes had good ſucceſſe, and his enemies miſaduenture: for beſides the Pazzi, Battista Freſcobaldi, and Baldinotto practized to ſley him: but either of them with others guiltie of the treaſon, were rewarded with the paines of their merit. This his manner of life, this his wiſedome and fortune, cauſed the Princes not onely of Italy, but others further of to know him: and with admiration to eſteeme him. Mathia King of Hungary made many teſtimonies of the loue he bare him. The Soldan by his Embaſſadors and preſents, did viſit him. The great Turke deliuered to his hand Barnardo Bandini, that murthered his brother.Lorenzo honored of princes. Which things made him highly honoured in Italy. And that reputation was daily by his owne wiſedome encreaſed. For in diſcourſe, he was eloquent, in councell wiſe, in execution quicke and couragious: neither was there in him any vices to blemiſh thoſe vertues, although he were greatly delighted with loue of women, and tooke pleaſure in ieſting and taunting: and would alſo plaie at childrens games, vnſeemly in ſo great a perſonage. For ſo much he pleaſured in children, that he was often ſeene to plaie with his ſonnes, and litle daughters. But whoſoeuer would conſider his lightneſſe with his grauitie, ſhould thinke there were in him two perſons of diuerſe compoſition, (as it were) by impoſsible coniunction coupled. In the laſt end of his life, he liued ful of ſorrow, cauſed by extreme ſicknes: for he was troubled with intollerable paines of the ſtomacke,The death of Lorenzo di Medici. and died in Aprill the yeare 1492. and the three and fortie yeare of his age: neither was there anie man that died either in Florence, or elſewhere in Italy, ſo famous for his wiſedome, or ſo much lamented of his countrey. In ſo much as the heauens made euident ſignes of great miſaduentures that ſhould follow. Amongſt others, the Temple of Santa Reparata, was with ſo much furie ſtriken by thunder, that the greater part of the ſteeple was throwne downe, to the admiration and terrour of all men. All the inhabitants of Florence, and all the Princes of Italy lamented his death, and made manifeſt ſhewe thereof. For there was not any of them, that ſent not Embaſſadors to condole the death of Lorenzo. And for triall that they had iuſt cauſe to lament, the effect following prooued. For Italy being depriued of his counſell, had not any man left therein, whoſe wiſedome could preuent or bridle the ambition of Lodouico Sforza, Gouernour of the yoong Duke of Milan. Wherefore, Lorenzo being dead, thoſe euill ſeedes beganne to grow, which ſhortly after (wanting ſuch a one to roote them out) did ruine, and yet doth ruine all Italy.
            
         
         FINIS.
      
      
         
            LONDON Printed by Thomas Creede, for William Ponſonby. 1595.
            
         
      
   