
      
         
            
            
               
Dauids Harpe ful of moost delectable armony, newely strynged and set in tune by Theodore Basille.
            
               
                  Psal. 97.
               ¶ Prayse the Lorde vpon the Harpe, and syng to the Harpe wyth a Psalme of thankes giuynge. Wyth Trompectes also & Shawmes, oh shewe your selues ioyeful before the Lord the Kynge.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The principall contentes of this boke.
            
               i. Of faythe. Of the confession of fayth, & of good workes.
               ii Of the crosse, persecucion & trouble for the truethes sake.
               iii Of the vanite, falsehode & vnrighteousnes of man.
               iiii Of the benefites and great gyftes of God.
               v Of bearynge the Crosse, & callynge on the name of the LORDE.
               
               vi Of vowes to be payde, & what they
               vii Of ye death of sayntes, & howe (are precious it is in the syghte of God.
               viii Of the Chyrch of Christ, and y• Sy nagoge of Antechrist.
               ix Of the free delyueraunce from the bondes of Satan thorowe Christ.
               x Of the Sacrifice of prayse.
            
            Read and thou shalte reioyse
            For hearyng this heuēly voyce.
         
         
            
            ¶ To the ryghte honorable Syr George Broke, Lord Cob ham, Theodore Basille wys sheth long lyfe, cōtinu al helth & prosperoꝰ felicite.
            
               ALthoughe in the whole psalmody of Da uid, there canne not be fo
                  •…
               e one Psalme, whi che is not able to replenysh the spirituall & true Christen man wyth suche & so great ioye, as is ineffable & can by no meanes be expressed, yet in my iudgement and opiniō this Psalme, which I haue nowe from all the other selected to declare, beynge in nomber the hun The excellency of the Psalme, whych here after shalbe expounded. dred & fyftene after the cōmon Laten translaciō, farre excellethe and chalengethe the preeminence, as I may so speake For verely so oft as I rede
                  •…
               t me thik I am in a ioyfuland

delectable Paradyse, wher al kynd of pleasures do abound, & so ofte as I taste of it, it semeth vnto me lyke a goldē floude, which floweth forth wyth moost goodly and pleasaunte stremes, to conclude, this Psalme, so ofte as I heare the wordes of it, beteth & replenyssheth myne eares wt suche swete and delectable armony, as none maye iustely be compared vnto it, so that neyther Mercurius, 
               Dauid excelleth all musicions. 
               Apollo, nor his sonne Orpheus, nor yet any other, whome the auncient Poetes do so greatly cōmend & exalte wyth incomparable encomies & prayses in theyr moost eloquente lucubracions and ornate monumē
               tes, are able to compare wyth thys our Mynstrell Dauid, beynge not only an excellent Musicion, but also a puyssaunt kynge and a diuine Prophet Although they shame not to wryte that wyth theyr musicall instrumentes they ware able (theyr

melody beyng of so great efficacye, The fanta sies of y• old Poetes con cernīg their musiciōs. vertue, strength, myghte & power) to make the greate Okes to shake theyr toppes, to cause whole flockes of shepe, goates, oxen. &c. to followe them daunsyng pleasauntly, to moue mountaynes, to make the swyfte streames of the runnynge floudes to stonde styl, yea & to fetch oute soules euen out of hell. For all these thynges dothe this our mynstrell Dauid also much more truely thā they fayne of theyr old Musicions. What other thyng, I pray you, dreamed they by the shakynge of the greate and harde Okes toppes, What the shakyng of the Okes toppes signifye. but only to shewe, yt the worde of God is of so great strength, that the Princes and rulers, yea euen y• myghtye Tyrauntes of the worlde can none otherwyse then shake, trē ble, bowe & do reuerence vnto it, & graunte that it is the almyghtye worde of trueth, lyfe, health & salua

ciō, wherto they must nedes obey & submyt thē selues, seyng yt agenst it they can neuer preuayle neyther by act, coūcell, wysdōe assēbly, synode, congregacion, or ony other humayne polecy, as Salomon testifiethe, ther is no wysdōe there is no forcast Pro. rri. Esa. viii. there is no coūsayle y• cā preuayle agenst y• 
               LORD, or els y• what so euer they go in hand with all, shall come to noughte & shall not prosper, yea that they them selues also shall be destroyed, as Christ saythe: Who so falleth on this stone, shall be brokē 
               Matth. xxi on peces, & loke vpon whome it falleth, it shall grynd hym to poulder.
            Agayne what ment they by the followynge and daunsynge of the What the daun
                     •…
                  ynge of the beastes signify shape, gotes, oxes. &c. but only to de clare, that at y• preachynge of God des word all people rei
                  •…
               se & are mery, as we maye se in the moost blyssed virgin Mary, which replete wt y• great ioy of this worde, songe on

this māner: My soule magnifyeth Luke. i. the LORDE, & my spirite hath reioy sed in God my sauioure. S. Elizabethe also wyfe to the moost vertuous preste 
                  •…
               acharias & mother to the holye man S. Iohn̄ Baptiste, sayd vnto Mary her Cosyn, whan she came & had saluted her: Behold when I hearde the voyce of thy salutaciō, the babe dyd skyppe in my wombe for ioye. The Aungels also sayd to the Sheppardes: Beholde I shew to you great ioye. For there Luke. ii. is borne to you this daye a Sauyour, whiche is Christ the LORDE in y• Cytie of Dauid. What can make vs soner to be merye, to daunse, to A christen mans ioy, & what it is. skyppe & to leape for ioye, than to heare that by Christ the alone sauiour of the worlde we are delyuered from our spiritual enemy Pharao the dyuell, and that by hym we are Oz
                     •…
                  , 
                     〈◊〉
                   i. Cor. xv. Heb 
                     〈◊〉
                  . i. Ioan. v. made safe frō synne, death, hell, desperacion. &c. to whome all thorowe

the synne of oure father Adam, we ware made seruile, captiue bonde & thraull, & that we are nowe replenysshed wyth lyfe, ioye, pleasure, felicite, wealth, rest, peace, trāquilite quietnes of conscience, and al kynd of gladnes.
            Moreouer what is signified What the mouyng of the mountaynes signifye. by the mouynge of mountaynes, but the cōuersion of men of power from infidelite vnto fayth, frō ydolatry vnto the true worshyppynge of God from supersticion vnto god ly religion, frō the dedes of the flesh vnto the fruytes of the spirite, frō affiaūce reposed in theyr owne carnal & politike workes, vnto ye trust in the true and lyuynge God.
            Furthermore what other thyng What the stondynge styll of the swyft floudes signyfye dyd they figure & shadowe by ye stō
               dyng styl of the swyfte floudes, but only the great admyracion, merue lynge, stupoure & wonderynge of ye Gentyles, whan they heard a newe

kynde of religion taughte them, as we maye se in the Actes of the Apo stles? To be shorte, as towchynge y• fetchyng of soules out of hel, what other thynge mente they, thē that What the fetchyng of Soules out of hel mene by the preachynge of Christes Gospel the very dead in synne shall reuiue & be made alyue agen, as Dauid sayth, the lawe of the LORDE is pure, it turnethe soules. The wytnes of the LORDE is faythfull, and gyuethe wisdome vnto babes. The statutes of the LORDE are ryght & Psal. xviii. reioyse the harte, the cōmaūdemēt of the Lorde is pure & gyueth light to the eyes. Christ also sayth, I am ye resurreccion & lyfe, he yt beleueth in me, although he be dead, yet shal Ioan. xi. he liue, & euery one that liueth and beleueth in me, shall neuer dye. Is not the Gospell of Christ called the Phil. ii. word of lyfe in dyuers places of the holy Scripture bycause it quickeneth & gyueth lyfe to them, that be

fore were dead & laye buryed in the stynckynge donge hyll of synne?
            Thus se we, that what so euer the olde Poetes haue wrytten in ti mes past cōcernyng ye excellency of ye musike of theyr Minstrelles, it is altogither nothīg elles than a very type, figure, cloud & shadow of this our Mynstrell Dauid, which doth y• very same thynge in dede, which they fayned in wordes. So that al the glory & prayse of true Musyke ought of ryght only to redowne vn to oure moost excellente Musicion Dauid. And althoughe he sheweth hymselfe a very perfecte Musicion & connynge Mynstrell in all his other sōges & Psalmes, yet me thīke in this our Psalme he farre excelleth & almoste ouercōmeth himself, his Harpe soundeth so pleasauntly & his songe is so ful of moost swete & delectable armony. Neither doth he entreate of vayne, childish, lyght

& tryflynge thiges, but of serious, Note howe many godly & goodly thynges are entreated of in thys Psalme. graue, earnest & weyghty matters. For he syngeth of fayth, of the confession of his fayth, of good workes of the crosse, trouble & affliccion, of the vanitie & noughtynes of man, of the benefites of God, of the inuo cacion & callynge on the name of y• 
               LORDE, of the vowes to be performed vnto the LORDE before his peo ple, of the deathe of Saynctes and howe precious it is in the syght of God, of the free delyueraunce from Satan, synne, death, hell, desperacion. &c. thorowe Christ, of the Sacrifice of prayse, and, as I maye at the last make an ende, of the ryghte institucion of a Christen mans life in this worlde. What songe may be cōpared vnto this our song? What Harpe maketh so goodly & plesaūte melodye, as this Harpe of Dauid doth? Let all mynstrels gyue place to this our Mynstrel. Let all Harpes

& other musicall instrumentes be silente & holde theyr peace, whan Dauids harpe entreth & cōmeth in place. Let all songes be banysshed, whan Dauids Psalmes be songe. For what so euer Dauid syngethe, it is excellent & incōparable. He wt 
               Beholde what Dauid doth. his songes exciteth, prouoketh & en flameth ye myndes of the faythefull & diligent hearers vnto the loue & desyre not of trāsitory but of heauē ly thynges. He conforteth the conforteles. He exhorteth the synnner vnto amendmēt of lyfe. He lyfteth vp the desperate vnto the hoope of Goddes mercy. He corroborateth & maketh stronge the weake. He healeth the diseased. He rayseth vp the dead vnto lyfe. He makethe the sad mery. He exhilarateth & reioycethe y• merely disposed. To cōclude, he is a Mynstrell fytte for all kynde of parsons, so y• they be bent vnto god lynes. Ah woulde God y• all Mynstrels

in the world, yea & all sorte of parsons both olde & yonge, woulde ones leaue theyr lasciuious, wantō & vnclene balades, & syng such god ly & vertuous songes, as Dauid te cheth them, wherby they myght be auocated & called away from synne & excited & stored vp vnto vertue & goodnes. For it is not vncomly for Not
                     •…
                  . Christen men to synge Christē songes, yea & that in all places, so that it be done reuerently, & wtoute ony iestynge, scoffynge, raylynge, or reproche of other persons.
            Moreouer who can deny y• there The greate vertue of Dauids harpe. is much & great vertue in Dauids Harpe, seynge that the sounde ther of dyd chase & dryue awaye the vncleane & wycked spirite out of king Saul, wherwith at other tymes he i. Reg. xvi. was miserably afflicted & troubled? Agayne must not Dauids songes be of great excellency, seyng that y• sonne of god came downe from the

glorious throne of his heauenly fa The excellē cy of Dauids songes Luke, xxiiii Ephe. v. ther to accōplish & fulfyl thē? Doth not. Paule also saye, be ye fylled wt the spirite, speakynge among your selues in Psalmes, Hymnes, & spirituall songes, syngyng & makyng melody in your hartes to ye 
               LORDE euer gyuyng thanckes for all thinges in the name of our LORDE Iesu Christ? Certes the Psalmody of Dauid maye well be called y• Trea The Psalmody of Dauid is 
                     〈◊〉
                   tresure house of the holy Scripture. sure house of the holye Scripture. For it contayne the what so euer is necessary for a christē mā to know: There is nothynge in the lawe, no thynge in the Prophetes, nothyng in ye prechyng of Christ & of his apo stles, yt this noble Mynstrell, Kyng & Prophet doth not decantate and synge wt moost goodly & manifeste wordes. He syngeth all the workes & wōderous miracles of God from the begynnynge of the worlde, vntyll the redēpcion of mankynde by

Christ. He syngeth Christes incarnacion, preachinge, workyng of miracles, passion, death, resurreccion ascencion, glory, the blessynge of all nacions, the conuersion of the Gē
               tiles withe all other misteries that pertayne to our helth. He syngethe the iudgement & mercy of God. He syngeth the discōmendacion of vice & auauncement of vertue. He syngeth the vanite & vnryghteousnes of mens strēgthes without ye helpe of God. To be short, he sigeth what so euer is expidiente for a Christen mās knowledge. So that euē this one boke alone of Dauids songes had ben sufficiēt truly to instructe a man in the ryghteousnes of God but yt the goodnes of God would, y• our fragilite, weakenes & ignorancy shoulde be holpen wt mo scriptures. O the wonderful & meruelous strength of Dauids Harpe. O the great & excedyng vertu of Dauids

songes. Happy is that man that de lyghteth & hath a pleasure in them for he shal neuer be vexed wtan euel spirite. He shall alwaye abhore vice & enbrase vertue. He shall neuer be sadde, but euer reioyce wt a godly & Agood lessō for all men of honoure. spiritual myrth. Would God that all men of honoure woulde noryshe such Mynstrelles in theyr houses, as Dauid is, & that might syng vn to thē bothe at dyner & supper, yea and at all other tymes these moost swete & delectable songes of Dauid So should both they & all theyr family be desposed to lyue more vertuously, than many be nowe a dayes, & be prouoked to leaue theyr pō
               pous, galāt, wycked, venereal, fleshly, beastlyke & vncleane manner of lyuynge. Would God also that all Beholde & followe. fathers & mothers, al masters and mastresses, would brynge vp theyr chyldren and seruaūtes in the syngynge of these moost godly songes.

Agayne, woulde God y• all Scholemasters & teachers of youth, would in stede of Uirgile, Ouide, Horas, Catullus, Tibullus, Propertiꝰ. &c teach these verses of Dauid. For so shoulde they not only obtayne eloquence, but also diuine erudicion, godlye knoweledge, spirituall wisdome, & encrease in all kynde of ver tue, vnto the great glory of God, y• saluacion of theyr owne soules, the ryght instituciō of theyr owne lyfe the great ioye of theyr parentes, y• good reporte of theyr techers, and to the hygh cōmodite of the Christē publique weale. God grafit that it maye once thus come to passe. But I wyll returne vnto our Psalme, which I haue entiteled ī the forhed of my boke, Dauids Harpe.
            Some man wyll meruayle peraduēture whye I call this Psalme Dauids Harpe▪ rather than on y other. The reason is this. There are

contayned in this Psalme, besydes Why thys Psalme is called Dauids Harpe other, ten speciall thynges, mooste worthy to be entreted of. The fyrst is, fayth. The seconde, confession of fay the, wherbye are vnderstandde all good workes. The thyrd, persecucion. The fourthe, the vanite of man. The fyfte, y• benefites of God The syxte, bearinge of the Crosse, ye inuocacion & callynge on the name of the LORDE. The seuenth, vowes to be performed vnto the LORDE be fore all his people. The eyghte, the death of sayntes, & how precious it is in the sighte of God. The nynte, fre delyueraunce from the bondes of Satā thorow Christ. The tente y• sacrifice of prayse. These ten are equal in nomber wt the strynges of Dauids Harpe, which also ware tē as it appereth by his owne wordes wher he sayth, prayse the LORDE wt Harpe, & with a psaltry of ten strin Psa. xxxii. ges synge ye vnto him. Agayne, O

God, I wyl syng to the a new sōge, Psal. cxii
                     •…
                  
                yea wc a psaltry of ten stringes wyl I make melody to the. What kynd of musicall instrumēt this psaltry was, which the Grekes call Nablō, of the Hebrewe worde Neball, it is vncertayne to the wryters. But y• it was an instrument of ten strynges, moche lyke vnto an Harpe, it is euident ynough. Wher of it came to passe that it is nowe commonly called Dauids Harpe. But for as 
                  •…
               nuche as it is no matter of weyghty importauuce, & only signifyethe the true & spirituall gladnes of the mynde, wher wt a Christē man is re plenished of ye spirite, I wyl omitte & let it passe, & after y• cōmon vsage call it Dauids Harpe, yea & so enti tle this our psalme, desyryng all mē diligētly to marke not the name of Dauids Harpe, but the swete soūd & delectable melody that it maketh yea & the goodly & cōfortable songe,

that he syngethe vnto it. So shall they acquire & gette to them selues much spirituall ioye, great knowelege, godly wisdom, & be very much edified in the doctrine of Christes religion.
            Now for as muche as I am not only credibly ēformed of other, but also perfectly perswaded that your ryght honorable Lordeshyp delyghteth in nothynge so greatly as in y• holy scripture, whiche is the word Phil. ii. Ioan. viii. Psal. xviii. Iacob. i. of lyfe, the lyght of the worlde, the only treasure of christianite and is abundantly able to saue the soules of so many as heare it▪ beleue it, & worke therafter: I thoughte it not vnfyttyng, nor vnworthy your honour to dedicate this my labour to your name trustīg y• by this menes many other shalbe allured to y• hearynge of Dauids armonye, & be so enflamed wt the feruent loue & perpetual desyre therof, that they shal

wysh like paynes to be taken in the declaraciō of y• other Psalmes, that they myghte be red withe the more fruyte. And woulde God that this my laboure mighte excite store vp Sette hand to it, o ye y• be lerned. & moue other that farre excel me in all kynde of diuine knowledge, and that can hādle the scriptures more learnedly thā I, to trauayle in the busines of Gods word, & so to sette forth the sincer intelleccion and the right vnderstandynge therof, that the vayle myght be taken away frō the eies of all men, & the true lyght shyne vniuersally wtout ony impediment ii. Cor. iiii. or lette. There is much har Math. ix. Luke. x. ueste, but fewe workemen. We had nede therfore to praye vnto ye Lord of y• haruest, to send oute labourers into his reape.
            But me thynke, I se your Lord shyp verye desyrous to heare some of Dauids melody. I make an end desyrynge you moost intierlye, fauourablye

to accepte this my lytle gyfte, if not for my sake, yet for the loue y• ye haue euer borne vnto Da uid, being not only an excellēt Mu siciō & cōnyng Mynstrel, but also a puyssaūt Kyng & diuine Prophet. God, whose holy worde you moost feruentely loue, and mooste earnestly practyse in your dayely conuersacion, moughte vouchesaufe to preserue your righte honorable Lordshyp & that ver tuous Lady your wyfe, wyth all your moste swete chil dren and family in perpetuall helth and prosperous felicite.
            Amē.
         
      
      
         
            
            Dauids Harpe, The hundred & fyftene Psalme, cal led in Latin, 
                  •…
               redidi propter, wyth a fruytfull exposiciō and godly declaracion of the same.
            
               ¶ The fyrste verse.
               
                  I beleued / & therfore haue I spoken / but I was very sore troubled.
               
               THis fyrst verse cōtayneth thre striges of dauids harpe, which are theyse, faythe, confession of the faythe, wherby are vnderstande al good workes, and persecucion. These thre therfore wyll I nowe, thorowe the healpe of Goddes spirite, set in tune by ryght order.
               
                  
                  ¶ The fyrst strynge.
                  
                     I Beleued. Our fyrste 
                        
                           •…
                        ayth is y• fyrst string of Dauids Harpe, and y• foundacion of y• chri sten religiō. yea and base strynge is fayth, & that not wyth oute an vrgente cause. For here se we, that as the base parte is the ground of the whole songe, so is fayth the founda cion of al the christen religion. And as without the base, the song is im perfecte, & nothynge worth, so lyke wyse without fayth all the workes that we do, are vnprofitable glister they neuer so pleasauntly before y• eies of carnall men, & what so euer we synge after that sorte, is cleane out of tune, as saynt Paule sayth, what so euer is not grounded on Rom. xiiii. faythe, is playne synne. Therfore sayth he in another place, it is not possible to please God wtout fayth. 
                        
                           •…
                        eb. x
                           •…
                        
                      For he that commethe vnto God, muste beleue that God is, & that he is a rewarder to thē that seke him.

In these aforesayde textes of saynt Thre thyn ges to be no ted. Paule thre thiges are to be noted. One is that he sayth, al that is not grounded on fayth, is synne. Wher of we learne, that fayth is the foun dacion of all goodnes, the mother & nourse of all good workes. Another is, that withoute faythe it is not possible to plese god. The third that who so euer cōmeth vnto god, muste beleue that God is, & that he is a rewarder to thē that seke hym. These thiges shew manifesteli how connyng & excellent Musicion our Mynstrel Dauid is, which fyrst set teth his base stryng in tune, before he medlethe wt ony of the other. He followeth not the manner of Antechrist, Antichrist turneth the rootes of trees vp ward. which turneth the rootes of trees vpwarde, neyther is he lyke to them, which begyn fyrst to bylde in the top of the house, & afterward layeth the foundacion, or y• woulde haue the fruytes good, before there

be any goodnesse in the tree, but he doth all thynges orderly. For he be ynge enspired with the holy Ghost & doyng al thynges by the instinct therof, begynneth orderly of fayth, seynge yt what so euer is not groun Rom. xiiii. Heb. xi. ded on fayth, is synne, seynge also yt wtout fayth no mā can please God, be he neuer so glysteryng an Hypocrite before ye world, & put he on neuer so glorioꝰ a viser of godlyke holynes. Faythe must nedes be ye base stringe & foundacion of the Christē religion, seyng that infidelite & vn faythfulnes is the destruccion and vtter decaye therof. For so long as fayth remayneth, so longe doth the Christen religion continew & prosper Mark wel well, but let faythe be exiled, & vnfaythfulnes once inuade the har tes of Christen men, & thē goeth all to hauocke, as we maye se in oure fyrst parentes Adam & Eua, which so longe as they beleued the worde G
                           •…
                        n. iii.
                     
of God & walked therafter, prospered & liued ryght wel, but wha they once gaue ouer yt, & fel vnto incred
                        •…
                      lite, beleuyng the wordes of ye crafty serpente, rather then the gentle admoniciōs of so boūteous a lorde, they became subiecte, bōde & thraul to all kynde of miserye & wretchednes, so that thorow theyr vnfaythfulnes cōioyned wt lyke disobediēce, Roma. v. not they them selues only fell into captiuite, but also all theyr posteri te. Nowe to be made free from this thrauldome, & to recouer the libertie, whiche before we loste thorowe disobedient vnfaythfulnes, ye next & moost redye waye is to beleue, as Dauid teachethe here, or els by no menes can we come vnto God, nor yet please hym. For he yt cōmeth to godsayth s. Paule, must beleue. So Heb. xi. yt if we wyll come agen to God, we must beleue. But what shall we beleue? certes not only ye god is which

thynge the dyuels also do, but that Iaco. ii. Marc. i. Ephe. ii. he is a rewarder & beneficial father to thē that seke hym, as the Apostle teachethe. For althoughe we were dead thorowe synne, & walked after the fashon of this world, euē as mē altogyther vngodly and whollye estraunged frō all goodnes, yet hath God, which is rytche in mercye, for his great charite, wherwithe he loued vs, quickened & made vs alyue agayne, yea & that thorowe Christ mat. iii. xvii Marc. i. xi. ii. Pet. i. Ioan. iii. Rom. viii. Heb. ix. x. Psal. cix. in whome he hath shewed the exce
                        •…
                      dynge abundance & rytches of hys grace, for whose sake also he is well pleased with man, so that he spared not his owne soune, but gaue hym euen vnto the very deathe for our sake, that by that one oblacion of his moost blyssed body, an omnisufficient & perpetuall sacrifice for euer to endure all alone sufficiente, shoulde be offred for them that are sāctified. These thynges to be true

the holy scriptures shew euidently Therfore yf we wyll be of God, and come vnto hym, we muste not only beleu
                        •…
                      ye God is, but yt al these thyn ges are true, & shall vndoubtedlye chaunse vnto vs, as God hath promysed. For the true & christē fayth cleaueth faste to the worde of God only, & doubteth nothynge therof, as S. Paule sayth, fayth cōmethe Rom. x. by hearynge, & hearyng by ye word of God. Nowe as we ware loste before by beleuynge Satans deceatfull promises, so the only way to be saued is to beleue the swete cōfort a ble and infallible promises of God, which he hath made to vs so plente ouslye in ye moost precious bloud of his derely beloued son o
                        •…
                     re Lorde & sauiour Iesu Christ. For this fayth maketh vs of the chyldren of the di uell, the sōnes of God, as S. Iohn̄ 
                     Ioan. i. testifie the, so many as receaued hī, he gaue thē power to be made ye son

nes of God, in as muche as they be letted on his name. Also S. Paule Gala. iii. ye are all ye sonnes of God, bycause ye haue beleuedi Christ Iesu. Now yf by fayth, we be ye sonnes, of God than are we also heyres. Yea verely we are ye heyres of god, & fellow hey res with Christ. Agayne by faythe, Rom. viii. Gala. iiii. Oze. ii. are we maried vnto god, as god hī
                     selfe witnesseth by his Prophet say enge, I wyll marye the vnto me in fayth. By fayth also are we iustified & made ryghteous, as S. Paule Roma. v. sayth, we brynge iustified by fayth haue peace with god thorowe oure Lorde Iesus Christ.
                  Thus se we what an excellēt tresure this true & christen fayth is, & howe by y• all good thynges chaūse vnto vs, & without yt, all that euer Roma. xiiii. we do, must nedes come to nought, & worke to vs damnacion. But seynge that I haue spoken muche of faythe in all my workes almooste,

which I haue hytherto set forth, I wyll nowe cease to speake ony more Searche the Christmas Ban
                           •…
                        ket in ye thyrd dysh the Pathewaye vnto Prayer in ye xvi. Chap. and ye Nosegaye in the Seconde floure. &c. of it at this presēt, & go forth with the residue of Dauids Harpe, only addynge this one thynge, that the fayth, which the scripture so hyghlyauaunceth, is no dead & vnfruit full fayth, but lyuysh & myghty in operacion, beyng alwaye bent and seakynge an occasion to do good, & whā tyme cōmeth, is no lesse ready to brynge forth good workes, than a womā bygge wt chylde is redy to brynge forth her chylde, whan her tyme of delyueraūce is once come, as it followeth.
               
               
                  ¶ The seconde strynge.
                  
                     And therfore haue I spoken.
                  
                  VUe heard before that fayth is the foundacion of the Christē 
                     Faith brin geth forth good Wor kes. religion, the mother & nourse of all godly workes. Which thynge to be

true, our Mynstrell prouethe here. For after he hath made mencion of faythe, he syngeth also of good workes. I beleued, sayth he, & therfore haue I spoken. Here se we, that the true & christen fayth worketh euer by charite, whiche extendeth bothe Gala. v. vnto god & our neyghboure. What was ye cause that Dauid did speke? Uerely his fayth. I beleued, saythe Fayth is ye cause of all goodnes. he, & therfore haue I spokē. Faythe goeth before, & workes followe. For fyrst he beleued al thīges to be true, which god promised hym in the holy scriptures or otherwyse, as by ye mouthe of his holy Prophetes, and therof afterwarde ensewed a verye earnest & feruent loue toward god, which made hym to loue god agen, & to speake those thynges, wherby the glory of god was set forth, & the health of his neyghbour sought, so y• by this menes he shewed hymselfe perfectely faythful both before god

and man. And this is it, that saynt Paule wryteth, it is beleued wyth Roma. x. Mark wel. the harte vnto ryghteousnes, but with the mouth is confession made vnto helth. A christen man setting before the eyes of his mynde the vn mesurable goodnes of God toward vs thorowe his sonne Christe, & gyuynge earnest fayth therunto, can none otherwise but loue God agen & seake all meanes possible to please hym, to worke his wyll, & to do that which he requireth of him. He is re dy at al tymes to bryng forth good workes after the exāple of Dauid, as to speke the misteries of God, to set forth ye glory of God, to publysh his moost holy worde, to brynge all men to the true knowledge of God & euen to engraffe thē in the bodye of Christ. All these thīges worketh y• quicke & lyuysh fayth in him thorowe the spirite of God. For fayth Behold the nature of true & christen fayth. wyl not suffer him to be idle, but al

though thorowe fayth he be deliue red out of captiuite, made the sōne of God, iustified alredy in the sight of God, before he bryngeth forth ony outward good workes, yet doth thys true & christen faythe kyndle such a loue in his hart toward god & the fulfyllynge of his commaundementes, that he hath a perpetual desyre in his mynde to worke that which is good, & whā occasion is gi uen, he falleth streytwayes to workynge, not his owne fantasy, but ye wyll of God. So that now he doth not only beleue in God, & loue God in his herte, but also brynge for the those workes, which God hath appoynted him, as Dauid sayth, I be leued, & therfore haue I spoken: As though he should say, for as muche as I am fully perswaded of ye boū
                     te & goodnes of God towarde me, & beleue that all thynges are true, & shall come to passe vndoubtedly according

to his promyse, I can none otherwyse do but worke, & speake those thynges that pertayne vnto his glorye, do what so euer shoulde make vnto the magnifienge of his moost blyssed name, & the edifienge of my neyghbour, though an hundred deathes were im
                        •…
                     inent & han gynge on my heade for so doynge. Euery tree is knowē, sayth Christ, Math. xi
                           •…
                        . Luke. vi. by his fruyte. For there is no good tree, that brīgeth forth euel fruite, neyther is ther any euell tree, that bryngeth forth good fruyt. A good man bryngethe for the good fruyte out of the good tresure of his hert, & an euell man out of the euell trea sure of his harte, bryngeth forth euell thynges. For of the abundāce of the harte, the mouthe speaketh.
                  We read in the Actes of the Apo stles, that whē Peter & Iohn̄ were cōmaunded of the Bysshops & prestes, yt they shoulde speake no more

to ony man, nor teache in the name of Iesus christ, they aūwered bold ly & sayd, whyther it be ryghteous in the syght of god to heare you ra ther than god, iudge ye. For we can Act. iiii. none otherwyse do but speke those thīges, that we haue sene or heard. Marke that they sayde, we can do none otherwyse but speake. Howe chaūsed it yt Peter (as I may speke nothyng of Iohn̄) was nowe bolde Math. x
                           •…
                        vi Mar. xiiii. Luke. xxii. Ioan. xviii. to speake, and confesse the name of Christ without feare before the hed prestes & magistrates of ye Temple whiche not many monethes paste, was not only afearde to cōfesse him before a poore mayde, but also forsware Christ, denyed hym vtterly, & sayde playnely he neuer knewe ye man? Howe commethe it to passe, yt Peter is now become another mā? Before he had no commaundemēte of the Byshoppes to speke no more of Christ, and yet he vtterly denyed

hym, & nowe whan he is cōmaūded Act. iiii. to holde his peace, he wyll not, but aunswereth boldly, we can none otherwyse do but speake those thynges, y• we haue sene & heard. Howe cōmeth this to passe? Uerely of the great efficacy, vertue, strength, and power of his fayth, which God had gyuen hym by his holy spirite. His Math. xvi. fayth was nowe so stedfast on God & his loue so feruēte, that the gates of hell coulde not preuayle ageynst hym, nor driue him frō doyng those thynges, that shoulde make vnto ye glory of God, and the healthe of his neyghbour, as we maye perceue by the History. For notwithstondyng the cōmaundement of the Bysshop 
                        •…
                     es, he went forthe & preached in y• name of Christe, & conuerted many vnto the christen fayth, & whan the head prestes sayd vnto hym & vnto y• other Apostles, dyd not we streightly cōmaund you, that ye should

not teach in this name? And behold ye haue fylled Ierusalē full of your doctrine, & ye wyll brynge ye bloud of this man vpon vs. Peter & the Act. v. Gene. xxvi. Exo. xv. Deu. xi. xxx Actum. v. other Apostles aunswered & sayde: We muste obey God rather thē mē. Afterwarde also when they were whypped, & so sent away, receauig a cōmaundement, that they should no more speke in ye name of Iesus, they went awaye from the syght of the councel, reioycynge and beyng glad, that they ware counted worthy to suffer rebuke for the name of Christ. And for al the cōmasidemēt of y• Bysshops they ceased not daye ly both in ye temple & in euery house to teach and to shewe Iesus Christ.
                  Here se we both by our Mistrell dauid, & the apostles of Christ, how Note. myghty in power the true & christē fayth is & that it is neuer without yt cōsent of doyng good workes, and whan occasiō is offered, it worketh

in dede, yea and that those workes, whiche are commaunded of God.
                  Let euery man nowe consither his owne faythe, & take hede he be An admoni cion for Fayth. not deceaned. Many in these oure dayes glorye muche of the name of fayth, & contende maynly, that we are iustified only & frely by faythe, yea & that without workes. Let no man deceaue him selfe. Fayth, I cō fesse, is an excellente treasure, & the gyfte of God, wythoute the whiche no man can be saued, nor obtayne onye parte of Christes merites, butte yette for all that, if it be not accompanyedde withe a continuall purpose of doige good workes, yea & also brynge thē forth, whan occasiō is gyuē, surely it is but a vayne & dead fayth, as S. Iames wryghteth, Ia
                           •…
                        ob. it Galla.. v. yea to saye the trueth, it is no fayth in dede, at the least no true, li uish & christen fayth, which is migh ty in operacion & worketh by chari

te. We se manifeste fruytes followe the fayth of Dauid & the Apostles. Let vs also bringe forth good workes, & so maye we be sure, that we haue in vs the true & christē fayth, which is so precious a thyng in the syght of God.
                  Arte thou a magistrate & gouer Rulare. noure of the common weale? If yu wylte shewe thy selfe to haue true fayth in god, bryng forth good wor kes, & such as become thy office and callynge. Exercyse iustice. Do no wronge. Be mercifull. Spoyle not the poore man. Helpe the conforteles. Ponyshe vice, mayntayne vertue. So shalte thou be assured to hau the true & christē fayth in the.
                  Arte thou a Bysshop or Preste? preache the worde of God purelye. Byshop or Preste. Set forthe the glory of God aboue all thynges. Seake the saluacion of Christes flocke. Be an exāple to thy parishners of honest & godly cō
                     
uersacion. Exhorte vnto vertue. Fraye awaye from vice. If yu doste this, than nedeste thou not doubte of thy fayth.
                  Arte thou a father or mother, Father or Mother. Master or Mastres master or mastres? Bryng than vp thy family in the nourtoure of the Lorde, & so arte yu truely faythfull.
                  Arte thou a maryed man? Loke Maryed man. thou cleaue only to thy wyfe, loue her as thyne owne flesh, & as christ loued the Congregacion. So shall thy fayth appeare to be vnfayned.
                  Arte thou a maried womā? Be obedient to thyne owne husbonde, Maryed wo man. & seake aboue all thynges to please hym, & so shalte thou shewe thy selfe to be truely faythfull.
                  Arte thou a subiecte or seruaūt? Subiecte or seruaunte. Obey than wythe a glad & humble harte thy superiours, rulers & masters. So shalte thou be found not vnfaythfull.
                  To be short, ī what so euer state

God hathe set the, lyue accordynge A general admonicion for al estates. therunto, & in thy office & callynge seake euermore the glory of God, & the health of thy neyghboure. If yu doste this, thā shalte thou shew thy selfe to be no vayne man, but faythfull & true in thy profession. But if thou doste the cōtrarye, crake thou neuer so muche of thy faythe, yet te doth it profyt the nothynge at all, but rather encreaseth thy damnacion, seynge thou arte an Hypocrite & dissembler both before God & mā. Certes if thou hast the true faythe in the, thou shalte be so enflamed wt 
                     Behold
                           •…
                         what. 
                           〈◊〉
                         true fay
                           •…
                         worketh
                           •…
                         Christ
                           •…
                        n 
                           •…
                        an. Rom viii. the loue of God, & disposed vnto all goodnes that thou wylte not feare to saye wt S. Paule, who shall seperate vs from the loue of God: shall trouble do it? or anguysh? or persecucion? or hunger? or nakednes? or perrell? or sword? as it is wrytten, for thy sake are we kylled all y• day longe, y
                        •…
                      we are counted as shepe

appoynted to be slayn. Neuertheles Psal. 
                           •…
                        iii. in all these thynges we ouercōe far re, for his sake yt loued vs For I am sure, yt neither deth nor life, nother Aungel, nor rule, nother power, no ther thynges present, nother thynges to come, nother height nor low eth, nor ony other creature shall be able to seperate vs from the loue of God, which is in Christe Iesu oure Lorde. Agayne he sayth, I am not Act. xxi. only redy to be bounde, but also to dye for ye name of the Lorde Iesus. So mighty a thyng is fayth, that it neyther feareth manacinge wordes, cruell threates, sharpe lookes, empresoning, fetters, chenes, fagot tes, fyre, nor what so euer tyranny all the tyrauntes of the worlde can inuent. It maketh ye parson, whose hert it occupieth, to be so
                        •…
                      flamed & set on fyre wt the loue of God, & the Persecuciō followeth y• confession of Gods worde. desyre of doynge his wyll. Wylte yu heare me? If thou beleue aright in

God & workeste accordynge to thy fayth, cōfessyng Christ & his worde boldely and vnfaynedly before the world, thou mayst be sure to fynde lytle fauour at the hādes of carnal & worldly men, as thou shalte easly perceaue by that which followeth.
               
               
                  ¶ The thyrde strynge.
                  
                     But I was very sore troubled.
                  
                  AFter that our Mynstrel hath made menciō of fayth & of spe kynge the worde of God (whereby are to be vnderstande all good workes that procede & come forth oute of faythe) he nowe syngethe of the Crosse, & sheweth that he was very sore troubled, greuously thretened, vncharitably blasphemed, euell reported, maliciously persecuted, cru elly handled, & suffered al kyndes of tormētes for vtteryng & declaring

ye word of God. I beleued, sayth he & therfore haue I spokē, but I was very sore troubled. Here se we that as good workes followe faythe, so doth persecucion follow the confession of Gods worde. For this cause doth S. Paule caull the gospell of i. Cor. i. Christe, the worde of the Crosse, bycause it bryngeth persecucion, trou ble, blasphemies, slaunders, euell re portes, empresonmēt, hōger, thirst, cold, nakednes, pouerte, losse of fren des, yea & at the last very death oftentimes to so many as cleaue vnto it valeauntly. Christes worde & the Crosse are cōpagnions insepera Note. ble. As the shadowe followethe the body, so doth the Crosse followe the worde of Christ. And as fyre & heat can not be seperated, so can not the Gospel of Christ & the crosse be pluc ked asunde
                        •…
                     . Let vs call to remembraunce so many as from the fyrste age of the world fauoured god and

his word, & howmanye shal we fid y• escaped wtoute the Crosse one waye or other? as I may leaue of to speke of all the other olde and aunciente Patriarches, & at this tyme onlye take ryghteous Abell for an example, whiche of all men shewed ye first example of pure innocencye and of a thankefull harte toward God for his benefites, was not he shortely Gene. iiii. slayne of his bloudy brother cruell Cain, yea & that onlye bycause his owne workes were noughte, & hys i. Ioan. iii. brothers good, as ye scripture testi fieth As fyre & water put togyther The good & the euell. can 
                           〈◊〉
                         agree. fighte, stryue & are euer at debate, tyl one hath swallowed vp another deuoured one another, ouercome one another, so lykewyse so long as good & euell dwell togyther in this worlde, there shall be a perpetuall discension betwene them. The euel wyll euer hate the good, & neuer be at reste tyl the innocent be had out

of the way, not that the good doth Note thys well. ony displeasures vnto the euel, but that the euell can not awaye with the good, no more thē the rauening wolfe canne awaye with the poore harmeles shepe, or the hōgry hauke wt the simple doue, as Christ sayth, The Prince of this worlde cōmeth, Ioan. xiiii & yet hath he nothyng agaynst me Howe lytell fauoure also dyd Moses & Aaron fynde amonge the diso bedient Iewes after they brought Exo. xvi. and. xvii. them out of captiuite from ye londe of Egipte? Were not they many ty mes in daunger of theyr lyues for all theyr labour & payne that they toke for theyr healthe & saluacion? How ware the Prophetes handled, Math. v. Luke. xiii. iiii. Esd. i. Mat. xxiii. Heb. xi. ii. P
                           •…
                         xxiiii whiche preached in the name of the Lord? Were not sōe stoned to deth? Sōe slayn wt swerd? Some sawne in peces? As I mayepasse ouer ma ny holy mē, Iacob, Ioseph, Dauid Helias, Ananias, Azarias, Misael

Tobias, Eleazarus, the mother among 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . Ma
                           •…
                        . vii. Exo xii. Ioan. i. i. Petre. ii. 
                           •…
                        say. liii. i. Ioan. iii. ii. Cor. v Math. xi. Luke. vii. Ioan. viii. x Mat. xvii. Marke. xv. Luke. 
                           •…
                        xii. Ioan. ix. Mat ix. xii Marc. i. the Machabites, & her seuen sonnes, wythe other innumerable, whiche ether suffered deathe, or els great trouble & persecucion for the glorye of God: Howe was Christe yt lambe of God wtout spot which dyd neuer no syn, in whose mouth there was neuer ony gyle & deceat found handled in this worlde? How was he rayled vpon so sone as he began to speake & preache the worde of his celestiall father? Was he not called a glotton? A wyne bybber? A frend to Publicās, harlottes & synners? A deceyuer of the people? A madde person? A Samaritan? A breaker of the Sabboth day? A Heretyke? A destroyer of the Temple? An ene my to our mother the holy chyrch? A Traytoure? A forbydder to paye tribute vnto Cesar? And such a one as woulde marre altogyther, yf he were suffred longe? Was he not reported

to worke his miracles & to cast out diuels by the helpe of Beel zebub prince of the dyuelles? Was not his doctrine counted new lear nynge? What dyd he at ony tyme, althoughe neuer so good & godly, yt the worlde dyd not discōmend and condempne? Dyd not theyr malice at the last growe vnto suche fury, that they neuer ceased, vntyll they Phil. ii. Mark. had put hym vnto deth, yea & that the moost spitefull deathe, yt coulde be inuented, euen the deathe of the crosse, hangynge hym betwene two theues, as ye principal malefactour & chefe captayne of all wickednes? Agayne howe were the Apostles of Christe entreated? Uerely euen as theyr mayster was before thē. How ofte were they slaūdered, layd watche Act. iiii v. xiii. xiiii. Act. xii. Act. vii. for thretened, beaten, whypped scourged, put in preson, caste out of cities, stonned, & dragged out of the townes for dead? Howe many also

of them were slayne? Some withe stones, some wt sweard, some other wyse? How were both they & theyr doctrine blaspemed & euell spoken of? Were not they reported & accused Ac. xvi. xvii. before the magistrates, princes & rulers, that they were suche pesti ferous fellowes, as troubled the cō
                     mon weale, yea al the worlde, made insurreccions, raysed vp sedicions, gathered togyther vnlawful assem blies, wrought cōtrary to the decre es of Cesar, makyng another kyng euen Christe? Were not they called vayne bablers? Tydynges bearers of newe dyuels? Sowers of straūg & newe doctrine? It is therfore no newe thyng for the prechers of god des worde & the earnest louers of ye holye Scripture to be thus rayled vpon, slaundered, euell spokē of, per secuted, & put to death euen for the glory of God & shewyng of ye trueth What nede I rehearse the innume

rable cōpanies of ye holy martyres, Martyrs. which syns the Apostles tyme for ye testimony & witnes of Gods worde haue suffered great persecuciō, and at the last cruell death? Read ye Hystories, who yt lysteth, & he shal sone perceaue, that persecuciō hath euer Persecuciō maketh Gods word & the chyrch of Christ to floryshe. followed the true preachyng of god des word, & that ye chyrche of Christ hath thā moost floryshed in all kind of vertue, & the christen fayth bene moost strong, whā there was moost extreme persecucion. For the bloud of the holye martyrs is the water, wherwith ye gospell of Christ is wa tered & made to grow. So that per secucion hyndreth not the glory of the gospell, as the Nerolyke Tyraū 
                     Beholde. tes iudge, but furdereth it greatly And where mooste persecucion is, there doth Gods worde moost of al florysh. Nothyng hyndreth ye fayth of Christ so much, as carnall securite & flesshly quietnes. For where all

thynges are accordyng to the appe ☞ tite & desyre of ye fleshe, ther raygne beastlyke māners, there is no care of God, no inuocacion of the LORDES name, no study of diuine religi on, no meditacion in the holy scriptures, no regarde of the poore people, no desyre of innocent lyfe. But whan persecucion once cōmeth for the worde of God, than is God called vpon with moost harty & feruē
                     prayers, than are the holy scriptures searched, than do men study for the amedment of lyfe, than do they seke ye accōplishment of gods moost holy wyll, than are they altogither desyrous of celestiall thynges, and vtterly contemne & set at noughte We ought to reiose in the tyme of persecution. what so euer pleseth the eies of carnall men in this worlde. Therfore whan persecucion cōmeth for righteousnes sake, let vs not despayre, but make oure selues conformable to the wyll of God, reioyce & be me

ry. Let vs set before our eies the ex amples of Christ & of all his chyrch, euen from the begynnynge of the worlde, Abel, Abraham, Isaac, Iacob, the people of Israel in Egipte, Dauid, Iosias, the Prophetes and apostles. We must, sayth S. Paule Rom. viii. be made lyke vnto the ymage of the sonne of God. If our elder brother Christ possessed not the eternall enheretaunce, but by the Crosse, shall we that are of a meaner sorte thike to enioye it after a more easy sorte? To whome is this sayenge vnknowē. By many tribulaciōs we must Act. xiiii. enter into the kyngdome of God. Christ bare the crosse, but he bare it not awaye wt hym, but lefte it here behynd hym to be borne of vs also, yf we wyll be hys Disciples, as he sayth, yf any man cōmeth vnto me, & hatethe not his father & mother, Luke. xiiii. wyfe, chyldren & systers, yea & hys owne lyfe, he cā not be my disciple.

And who so euer bearethe not hys Math. x. Luke. vi. Ioan. xiii. xv. crosse & comme the after me, he can not be me disciple. The disciple is not aboue the mayster, nor the seruaūt aboue his Lord. It is inough that the disciple be lyke his master, & the seruaunte lyke his Lorde. If they haue called ye father of ye house holde Beelzebu
                        •…
                     , howe much more shall they so call them, that be of his houshold? If the world hate you, ye knowe that it hated me before you. Because ye are not of ye worlde, but I haue chosen you out of ye worlde, therfore doth the worlde hate you. Remember the worde that I sayde vnto you, the seruaunt is not greater thē his Lorde. If they haue per secuted me, they shall also persecute you. If they haue kepte my worde, they shall also kepe yours. But all theise thynges shall they do to you for my names sake, bycause they haue not knowen hym, that hathe

sente me. Uerely verely I saye vnto you, ye shall wepe & lamente, but Ioan. xvi. the worlde shall reioyce. Ye shall be sad, but your sadnes shalbe turned into ioye. In the world ye shal haue affliccion and trouble, but be on a good cōforte, for I haue ouercome the world. Blessed are they yt suffer persecucion for righteousnes sake, for vnto them belongeth the kynge dome of heauē. Blyssed are ye, whē mē shal reuile you & persecute you, Math. v. & speake euery euell worde agaynst you, lyenge for my sake. Reioyce & be mery, for great is your rewarde in heauē. S. Peter also sayth, dere i. Pet. iiii. lye beloued meruayle not, whan ye be proued by fyre, whiche thynge is done to trye you, as thoughe some straunge & newe thynge chaunsed vnto you, but rather reioyse ī that ye are partakers of the passiōs and troubles of Christe, that whan his glory shall appeare, ye maye also be

mery & reioyse. If ye be reuyled for the name of Christe, blyssed are ye, for the spirite, whiche is the spirite of glory & of God, resteth vpon you Hereto pertaynethe the sayenge of ii. Tim. ii. S. Paule, this is a true fayenge, if we be dead with hym, we shall lyue with him also. If we suffer togither we shall also reygne withe hym. If we deny hym, he also shall deny vs. If we be vnfaythfull, yet abydethe he faythfull, he can not denye hym selfe.
                  Of all theise scriptures it is euident, Persecuciō is a token of Gods loue toward vs. that it is no sorowful, but ioy full thynge to suffer persecuciō for ryghteousnes sake, for the glorye of God, & the promocion of his moost blyssed worde. Neither is it a token of gods wrath, but rather of his sin gulare beneuolence and hygh good wyll towarde thē, whiche are troubled for his sake. For yf they be hap pye, to whome it is gyuen to beleue

in Christe, howe moche more happy & fortunate are they, to whom it is not onlye gyuen to beleue in hym, but also to suffer for him. S Paule Phil. i. reioyced greatly in the Philippiās because it was gyuen them, not on ly to beleue in Christ, but also to suf fer for his sake. For hereby are they assured to be Christes disciples, and are abundantly certified that God loueth them, carethe for them, and hathe prepared for them a glorious & celestiall mansion. Rede the. xii. chapter to the Heb. for thy cōforte.
                  Therfore as Dauid techethe vs here, let vs fyrst beleue stedfastly in God, & afterward cōfesse that open ly before the worlde, whiche we beleue Math. x. Marc. viii. Luke. ix. and. xii. in oure hartes, remembrynge these wordes of Christ, who so euer shall confesse me before men, I wyll confesse hym also before my father, which is in heauē. But who so euer shall deny me before men, I shall deny

him also before my father, which is in heauen. And if it be the wyl of oure heauenlye father, that we be persecuted, troubled, & greuouslye vexed for y• confession of his trueth, let vs not therfore feare to confesse the Lorde Christ, but as good souldiours ii. Tim. ii. of Iesus Christ, valeauntly suffer afflicciō, yea very deth, yf the glory of God so requirethe, beynge assuredlye perswaded, that by this meanes not only God shal be great ly glorified, & his holy gospell large ly promoted, but also yt we for thys shorte trouble shal receaue perpetu all reste, for this corruptible life, im mortall glory, for the vayne pleasu res of thys worlde eternall felicite and euerlastyng ioye worldes with oute ende. Amen.
                  But lette vs heare what Dauid spake, that he was so sore troubled.
               
            
            
               
               ¶ The seconde verse.
               
                  I sayde beynge as it ware in a traunse / euery man is a lyare.
               
               ¶ The fourth strynge.
               NO meruayle in dede thoughe our Mynstrell Dauid sayth, What the occasion was yt Dauid was so foretroubled that he was sore troubled for speakynge. For he syngethe a verye homely songe lytle pleasaunte and swete to the eares of beastlyke, carnall & flesshely men. Who can abyde to be called a liare, yea & that wtout ony reuerēce taken? yet he shameth not to speake vniuersally, & to saye that euery man is a lyer, withoute excepcion. Surely me thyncke that Dauid wanteth here ye chefe poynt The chefe poynte of a Mynstrel & of a syn gynge man is to lye & flatter. of a Mynstrell & of a syngyng mā, whiche is to lye & flatter, or at the leaste to fasshon his songe accordīg vnto the audience, & wt his singing to please so many as heare hym. Is

Dauid nowe become a man of so ly tle experience, that he thinketh the holy Pharisees, the wise Scribes, the learned Byshoppes, the deuout Prestes, the godly rulars of ye temple. &c. could be contented to be called liars, which would be noted tho rowe out all the world to be ye prīci pall teachers of all verite & trueth, & alone to haue ye key of knowledge Undoubtedly Dauid kept shepe to longe for to be a Mynstrell to such delycate & softe religious parsons. But Dauid was a good playne, sī
                  ple, & homely man brought vp in y• countre, & endewed wt that spirite, wherwith S. Paule was, whan he Gala, i. sayde, If I dyd please mē, I should not be the seruaunt of Christ
                     •…
                  . For euē as Iohn̄ Baptist, whan he saw many of ye Pharises & Saduces cō 
                  Math. iii. Luke. iii. myng vnto his baptisme, called thē the generaciō of vipers for al theyr glysteryng hypocrysy & fayned holynes,

& as Christ called y• Scribes Math. xxiii & Pharises blynd gydes, strayning oute a gnat but swalowing vp a ca mel, paynted sepulchres, outwarde ly in apperaunce righteous before mē, but īwardly ful of hypocrisy & iniquite, & as S. Paule called Ana Act. xxiii. nias ye hygh preste a paynted wall, bycause more lyke a bocher than a Bysshop, he cōmaunded them that stode aboute hym to smyte Paule on the mouth contrary to al equite & iustice, whan he should haue pour ged hymselfe before the councell of the Articles layd agaynst him, euē so Dauid can none otherwyse but call hym yt is a lyar, a lyare in dede. He can not beare fyre in one hande & water in the other. He canne not playe placebo. He is none of those, that saye all is well, when altogyther is starke nought. He is no dissembler, his harte & his tong goeth togither. He is as playne as a pack

staffe. For as the trueth is, so speaketh he, hauyng respecte neither to the parson nor to the tyme. He seakethe the glory of God, & not to satisfy the vayne fantasy of man. He hadde rather suffer greate rebuke, moche trouble, extreme persecuciō, yea very death, than that Goddes glory should in ony parte be obscured thorow his faynynge flattery. God sende vs fewer gnathos & mo AMEN. good Lorde Dauids. But lette vs retourne to oure songe.
               I sayde beynge as it were in a traunse, sayth he, euery man is a ly are. Before Dauid confesseth that enery man is a lyare, it is to be noted that he sayth, he was in a traūs that is to say, in a dāpe, a stupour, abasshement, & soden preuacion of sence or fealyng, as whan a man is so rapte into another kynd or state that he forgetteth hīselfe, or semeth to be in another world, as they vse

to saye. For all this doth the greke worde Ecstasis sound. A lyke thynge we read of S. Paule in the seconde Epistle to the Corinthians. ii. Cor. xii.
               
               It is necessary in dede, y• Dauid What Dauids tra
                        •…
                     s signyfye. shoulde be in this Ecstasy & traūce that is, that he should be transformed into another man, renewed by the holy ghoste, illumined wt diuine knowledge, lyfted vp to y• cōtēplac
                     •…
                   on of heuēly thīges, & haue his mīd wholly rapte & plucked frō carnali te vnto spirituall & ghostlye matters, or elles coulde he neuer haue cōfessed this infallible trueth, that euery man is a lyare. For a naturall man dothe not perceaue those thynges that pertayne vnto y• spirite of God. For they are folyshnes vnto hym, neyther cā he vnderstād thē, because they be spiritually iud i. Cor. ii. Math. xii. ged. Howe can a man speake good thynges, whā he hym selfe is euell? Can blessyng & cursyng come both

out of one mouth? Doth a foūtayn Lnke. vi. Iacob. iii. sende for the at one place swete water & bytter also? Can a fygge tree 
                     •…
                  eare Olyue berys, eyther a vyne beare figges? Of the aboundaunce of the hart, the mouth speaketh. He Ioan. iii.. that is of the earth, is earthly, and speaketh of the earth, but he whom god hath sent, speaketh the wordes of God. Euery man speaketh, as he is. The chyldren of truethe, speake trueth, & the sonnes of a lying seed speke lyes & falshode. Now is dauid no moresuch a manne, as of nature is a lyare, butte he is regenerate, & borne anewe of ye holy ghost, & is no moreof yt false & lying seed, which de ceyueth accordynge to the nature, Ioan. viii. ingeny & proper
                     •…
                  e of Satā, which is a lyare, & the father of all lyinge, & therfore confessethe he nowe another tale, than he would haue done before his regeneraciō & new byrth He woulde before haue glorified in The nature of flesh.
                  
hymselfe, in his flesh, in his bloude, in his strēgth, wisdome, polecy, ritches, holynes, good workes, and all that euer he dyd, (for that is the na ture of al flesh) and haue fought mā fully agaynst them that condemne the Hypocrisy, fayned holynes, iniquite & vnrighteousnes of the flesh but nowe beynge nourtered in the discipline of Gods trueth, he freely grauntethe euery man of his owne nature to be nothynge but a lyare which thynge S. Paule also affirmeth in his Epistle to the Romās. Rom. iii. What we are of ou
                        •…
                      selues.
               
               Hereof maye we learne what we are of our selues, howe blynde and vnapte of oure owne nature to aspire, breath, or come to ony poynte of true godlynes & godly trueth wt out the inspiraciō of Gods spirite. It is not wythout a cause sayde of Gen. vi. God, My spirite shall not dwell for euer in man, for he is flesh, If we be lefte vnto oure selues, than are we

nothynge but lyars, that is to saye Note. beastlyke, wicked, folyshe, vngodly, thynkynge all abhominacion, breathynge all noughtynes, speakynge all wickednes, doynge all mischefe, & euen suche without faynynge as we were leafte of oure fyrste father Adam after the trāsgressiō of Goddes Gene. iii. precepte, that is to saye, naked, voyd of all goodnes, replete with al euell. Therfore before we can sa Searche the Newes out of heauen. uour aright ony godlynes, & worke yt which is accceptable in the syght of God, & healthfull to oure soules, we must be in this traunce, into the which Dauid was cast, we must be trāsformed into another nature, & lyfted vp vnto the contemplacion of diuine & celestiall thynges. But Psal. 
                        •…
                     xv. Rom. iii. ii. Cor. iii this canne not come to passe of our owne strengthes, whiche are lyars of our selues, & not able to thyncke a good thought, but by the helpe of gods spirite, which workethe in vs

both the wyll & the dede. For Christ Phil. ii. Ioan. vi. Esay. 
                        •…
                     iii. iii Iere. xxxi. sayth, no mā can come vnto me, excepte my father drawethe hym, & I shall reyse hym vp at the last daye. It is writtē in the Prophettes, Al shall be taught of God. Euery one therfore that hath heard of the father, & hathe learned, cōmeth vnto Ioan. xv. me. I gayne, withoute me ye can do no thynge. Whan Peter confessed Christ to be the sonne of the lyuyng God, he sayd vnto him: Blyssed art Math. xvi. thou Simon the sonne of Ionas, for flesh & bloude hath not openned that vnto the, but my father which is in heauen.
               Here se we that flesshe & bloud, y• is, all that euer we haue of our selues, & of our forfather synful Adā, cā not: attayne vnto the intelligēce of the diuine misteries, & vnderstā
                  dynge of Gods truethe, excepte we Ioan. vi. be drawne of the father by his holy spirite. Nowe that we maye therfore

come vnto this true knowlege of God, & of his trueth, let vs pray with that spouse. Drawe me after y• so shal we ron in ye swete sauourof Cant. i. thyne oyntmētes. So shal we be su re not only to becōe new mē, but al so wt a free & wylling hart graūt wt Dauid that euery man is a lyare.
               Euery man is a lyare, saythe he. This is to be vnderstand before he Howe euery man is a ly
                        •…
                     e. be regenerate & borne anew by the seconde byrth, not in Adam, but in Christ. For so many as haue put of the olde man Adam, & put on y• new mā Christ, so many are no more mē if we haue respecte vnto theyr spiri tuall regeneracion, but Gods, as y• holy scripture saithe ye are gods & all of you are the sonnes of y• moost Psal. 
                        •…
                     xxxi Ioan. x hygheste. But all that haue not on the Lorde Iesus Christe, remayne styll lyars, & all that euer they do or speake wtoute Christ & his moost holy word, is nothynge but a very

lye, and mere fansy, a mad dotage, semeth it neuer so tru in ye iuge mēt of carnall reason. And this false & lyenge corrupcion commeth not of God (for God is not the Author of Psal. v. Iacob. i. sinne, nor one that wylony vnrigh teousnes, neyther tempteth he ony man vnto euell, as s. Iames sayth) but of Satan the mortal enemy of mankynde, which lying full craftely Gen. iii. vnto Eue, & sowyng this seed in her, & she in Adā, & Adam in all hys posterite, brought vs into this dā
                  nable & false lyinge state, so that by nature, as S. Paule sayth. We are all borne the sonnes of wrath, & all Ephe. ii. that euer we do of our selues wtout the spirite of God, is lyinge, false, Ioan. iii. wicked, vnfaythfull, & detestable be fore God, as Christ testifieth, That which is borne of flesh, is flesh. Also S. Paule, All that is not groūded on fayth, is synne. Rom. xiiii.
               
               Of this salse and lying seed was Gen. iiii.
                  
Cain, which s
                     •…
                  ewe his brother Ab
                     •…
                   
                  Lyars of ye old Te
                        •…
                     tament. with innumerable mo of ye olde Te stament, euen so many as attēpted ony thynge at all contrary to God des moost holy wyll, as banyshyng Goddes worde, sheddyng innocent bloud, kyllynge the true Prophettes of God, setting vp straung wor shyppynges of newe Idols, proclamynge other gods, thā the one and alone God of Israel. &c. In the new Testament also ther ware many li Lyars of y• new Test. ars, as Bishoppes, head prestes, pre stes, masters of the Tēple, Lawers Scribes, Pharises, Saduces with an innumerable cōpany of Iewes, which all resisted Christ, condēned his preachynge, obscured the glory of his miracles, hyndred y• honoure of God, belied the verite of Goddes worde, slaundered the gospell, blasphemed Christe & his Apostles, neuer ceasyng vntyl they had broght both hym and his vnto theyr finall

destruccion as they thought. After Lyars after the apostles tyme. thē dyd ther aryse a great swarme of pestilente lyars, as Heretykes, Schismatykes, & false Christians. Of this nomber was Ebion, Marcion, and Cherinthus, which denyed Christ to be God frō euerlastyng agenst whome S. Iohn̄ dyd write his Gospell: Catarus & Nouatus, whiche affirmed, that they whiche dyd fall after Baptisme ought not to be receaued agayne, neither can they obtayne remission of theyr sinnes: Eutiches, which denied Christ to be both God & man: Montanus Marcion, & Manicheus which condemned bothe mariages & meates, as thynges vnpure: Arrius, Pelagius, Artemō, Sabellius, Paulus Samosetanus, with other īnumerable, which dyd sowe much diuisiō in the chyrche of Christ, & brought in many pestilent & detestable heresis. All theyse ware lyars, bycause

they were wtout the spirite of god, and inuented sectes & opinions of theyr owne braynes without y• authorite of Goddes worde, so easye a thynge is it for men to erre, to deceaue & to be deceaued, whan they leane not to ye holy scriptures, but to theyr owne iudgemētes and fantasies.
               And would God that all lyinge were onlye founde in them, whome I haue rehersed hytherto, thā were it well with Christes chyrche. But who that euer lyued, Christe alone excepte, hathe not shewed hymselfe in some poynte to be a man, that is to say, a lyer? Peter confessed christ to be the sonne of the lyuyng God, Mat. xvi. & therfore was he called blissed, and promised that agaynst that cōfession of his faythe, hell gates shoulde not preuaile, yet whē he afterward Math. xxvi denied Christ and forsware hym, he shewed hymselfe to be a man, that

is, a very lyare, so feble and of no strength are we, if we be not endew ed with valeaunce, myght, & power from aboue. I here frely confesse, yt nexte vnto the holye scriptures, I The myud of ye autho
                        •…
                      concerning ye Doctors owe the chefe & principall honoure to the writynges of the Catholyke Doctors, to whome I cleaue as vn to an holy Ancker, whom I follow as great lyghtes to shewe me howe I maye walke in ye waye of trueth, whome I reuerence as my mooste faythefull teachers, yet dare I not approue & allowe them in all thynges, The Doc tors also are lyars in sōe poyntes bycause in some poyntes they haue shewed thēselues men, & haue manifestly erred agaynst the open trueth of Gods worde, as it is not vnknowen to them, that be diligēt ly exercised in the readyng of theyr workes. And for an example I wyl here reherse. ii. or. iii. not to their re proche, but to admonysshe all men, what we are of our selues & that no

man should be sworne & wholly addicte to the doctrine & teachynge of ony man, be he neuer so holy & learned, excepte it agreeth with the holy Scriptures.
               Origē was vndoubted a famoꝰ Doctor, & dyd write very excellent Origen. ly of diuers matters concernyng ye purite of christen religion, yet shewed he hymselfe to be a man & very lyare, whan he fayned that the pay nes of the dyuels & of the damned should cease in time to come, & that they should be saued.
               Tertullian was a man of great Tertullian learnyng, & dyd wryte many thynges very godly, yet did he erre, whē he cōdēned the second mariages in a christen mā. He maketh his argu ment on this māner: Thou mayste not mary the wyfe of thy brother beyng dead. He that maryeth a wy dowe lefte of a christen man, maryeth the wyfe of his brother beynge

dead. Ergo he doth not well. This & certayne other thynges he wryteth not very godly, shewynge him selfe to be a very mā, that is to say a lyare.
               Cypriane was an excellent clar ke, and died for the faythe of Christ Cyprian. leauynge many godly worckes behynd hym, yet dyd the auncient fathers of Christes chyrch condemne this his opinion, that they, whiche were baptised of Heretykes, ought to be baptised agayne.
               I passe ouer many other ecclesiasticall wryters, which wante not theyr errours, neyther haue they in all poyntes so circumspectely writ ten, but that theyr faultes may easly be perceaued of them, that haue whole, true, good & pure iudgemen tes in the holy scripture. For they haue declared thē selues not in few thinges to be men & lyars, therfore are they to be beleued no further, Marke.
                  
than the worde of God mayntayneth them. That whiche they haue written well, let vs receaue & gyue God thankes for it, confessing that it came to passe by the instincte of his mooste holy Spirite, & not by theyr owne polecy, wyt, reason, eloquence & learnynge. But y• wherin they haue erred, let vs charitably
                     •…
                   enterpret, take it into y• best parte, & couer theyr faultes, consythering that they were men, & both myght and dede erre, as S. Austen withe other dydboth confesse, graunt and wryte of them selues.
               And this I desyre all men that be ghostely learned, & walke after y• order of charite to vnderstond also The protestacion of the Author concernyng hys workes of all my workes, which I haue hy therto wrytten, or shall here after, if the wyll of God so be, & to beleue them no further thā the holy scripture testifye that they be true.
               For I am a manne and a lyarre of

my selfe, and therfore maye I erre so well as mannye learnedde and aunciēt Doctors haue done before me. Let God alone be true, & euery Rom. iii. man a lyare. Let the spirite of charite and not of cōtencion reygne amonge vs. If we erre, let vs charitably monysshe one another, beare one with another, instruct one ano ther, & not streightwayes furiously condemne what so euer at the fyrst blushe lyketh not our carnal iudge mentes, no nor yet at euery lytyll faulte be redy to caste the ignorant offenders into preson, chenes, stockes & fyre. If ony man doth not of 
                     •…
                  end wt his tonge, sayth S. Iames Iacob. iii. he is a perfecte man. Let vs follow the long sufferaunce of God, which 
                     •…
                  aciētly abydeth our amendment. Act. viii. If God had takē away Paule out of this lyfe, whan so tyraūtlyke he 
                     •…
                  ersecuted the Chyrche of Christe, 
                     •…
                  aule had neuer be made of a wolfe

a lambe, of a persecutoure an Apostle, of a blasphemer a true precher, of an Heretyke ketcher, a faythfull Euangelist. They that are stronge Rom. 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •…
                     ia. vi. ought to beare the weaknes of thē that be infirme & weake and not to stonde in theyr owne conceates. They ought so to order thē selues, that they should please theyr neygh bour vnto his wealthe & edifienge. For Christe pleased not hym selfe. Wherfore we ought to receaue one another, euen as Christ hath recea ued vs vnto the glory of God, and to beare one anothers burdē, seing that we be all mēbers of one body, & haue one heade, whiche is Iesus Christ.
               Besydes these aforsayd, the vngodly Lyars of out tyme. Byshop of Rome & al his wic ked kygedome are lyars, & all theyr decrees, actes, lawes, constituciōs, councelles. &c. that syght with god des worde, are lyes, & very mad 
                     •…
                  an

tafies, by no meanes to be beleued of ony faythfull harte.
               Agayne all Hypocrites, Sacramentaries, Anabaptistes, & all authors of false sectes, are lyars. To conclude, so many as dissente from God & his moost blyssed worde, are lyars, whither it be in doctrine, tea chyng, lyuynge, manners, conuersacion or otherwyse.
               Thus se we what we are of our selues, euē very lyars, & into what great captiuite we be throwen tho row Adā, & that we can not by our owne strengthes be deliuered from this bōdage, but only by the spirite of hym, which sayth. If ye sonne ma Ioan. viii keth you free, thā are ye fre in dede. For where the spirite of the LORDE 
                  ii. 
                        •…
                     or. iii. Ioan. 
                        •…
                     iiii. and 
                        •…
                     vi. 1. Ioan. ii. is, there is liberte. Therfore that we maye haue that vnccion & an noyntyng in vs, I meane the holy Ghost, y• maye teache vs all trueth, we muste with continuall prayers

resorte vnto oure heauenly father: Luke. xi. Math. vii. Rom. x. Ioan. iiii. whiche vndoubtedlye wyll gyue a good spirite, to so many as aske it of hym. For he is a beneficiall Lord sufficiētly rytch for so many as call on him in spirite, and trueth, as it followeth.
            
            
               ¶ The thyrde verse.
               
                  Uvhat shall I gyue agen vnto the Lord for al those thynges / that he hath gyuen me.
               
               ¶ The fyfte strynge.
               AFter that our Mynstrell Dauid hath diligently pondered with hiselfe, what he is of his owne nature, euen a very lyare, and one that is replete with all synne & iniquite, thynkyng, breathynge, speakynge and doynge all that euer is nought & vnthankefull in the sight of God, & whan on the othersyde he

hath agayne consydered howe that God of his mere marcy, fre bounte & vnspeakable goodnes hath deliue red hym frō all these greuo us enor mities without his merites or deser tes, he begynneth nowe to delighte no more in carnall & trāsitory thin ges, but in spirituall and heauenly thynges, & weyeth, pondreth, & con siderethe howe he maye shewe hym selfe thanckefull agayne vnto God for ye innumerable benefites, which he hath receaued at y• hand of God. What shall I gyue agen, saythe he, vnto the LORDE for all those thynges, that he hath gyuē me? O kynd & thanckefull harte, farre estraunged from al ingratitude & vnthāke fulnes. He knowethe full well, that to recōpence & make God amendes for y• kyndnes that he hathe shewed vnto him, it lieth not in his power, notwithstandyng he desyreth very greatly to do somewhat, wherby he

maye shewe hys thanckefull harte agayne toward God. For he confes seth that all that euer he hathe beyng good, he receyued it of God, as S. Paule sayth: What hast thou, y• 
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . Lor. iiii. thou hast not receued? If thou hast receaued it, why doste thou reioyce as though yu haddest not receued it? S. Iames also saythe: Euery good Iacob. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . & perfecte gyfte is from aboue, com mynge downe from the Father of lyghtes.
               On this manner oughte we to We ought
                        •…
                      
                     
                        •…
                     ut to set before oure 
                        〈◊〉
                      ye bene fytes of god pōder with our selues the inestima ble benefites & great giftes of God towarde vs. Fyrst that he made vs not lyke to brute beastes, but lyke vnto his owne ymage, neyther dyd he place vs in hell, or in some other dolorous & sorowefull place, but in ioyfull Paradise, where all kynd of pleasures dyd abound. He endewed Gen. 1. vs with wyt, reason, discrecion, pru dence, wisdome, knowledge & wyth

al other thynges, that should moue Gene. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . vs vnto godlynes & vertue, setting vs at oure owne liberte to do what so euer we woulde, only he gaue vs a cōmaundement to abstayne from the tree of lyfe, & told vs lyke a mer cifull father before, that whan so euer we did taste of yt, we should dye the death. Notwithstondynge this his moost gentle premonicion thorowe Gene. iii. y• subtilite of Satā, we brake his moost godly precepte, & throwe our selues into ye deathe, wherof he tolde vs before, so that no we of all earthly creatures we ware become moost miserable. Yet beholde agen the great goodnes of God towarde vs, whā we had worthely deserued to be damned for euermore, he dyd not, as he handled the Aungelles, Iob. iiii. ii. Petre. iii. streyghtwayes cast vs ito hell fyre, but marcyfully sente vs into thys world, that we myght here repent, deplore, lament, & bewayle our synfull

& abhominable offence, that by this meanes thorow the diuine pro uidence we myght afterward be re stored to our olde innocency & be sa ued. Neyther sent he vs hyther as into a salte, barrē, & desolate place, or wyld forest, but rather into such a kyngdome, as florysheth with all kyndes of rytches, treasures, pleasures, & moost goodly possessions, so that we can desyre nothynge, but yt we haue it here redy at hande. He hath garnysshed the earth wt grene grasse, swete herbes & moost plesant floures. He hath gyuen vs all kyndes of grayne to sowe in the earthe for our sustenaunce. He sendeth vs rayne & temperate heate in conuenient tyme for ye fortunate encrease therof. He hath planted vs trees, & garnysshed thē in tyme of the yeare withe moost goodly grene leaues & fruites to serue our necessary businesses, for diuers causes. And as he

hath replenyshed the earth with all kyndes of beastes, so hath he stuffed the sea & other waters with inumerable sortes of fysshes. And of all these thinges with many other mo Psal. viii. Heb. ii. hath he made vs Lordes, rulars, go uernours, owners. Neyther do the his kyndenes here cease concerning temporall thynges. For he hath also set ouer vs as a moost beautiful roofe & goodly seelynge, the firmamēt or ayer, which in the day tyme sheweth vs lyght thorow the clerenes therof, wherin for our great cō solacion & cōforte, he hath also set a goodly great lyght, whiche we call the sonne, by the vertue & operaciō wherof, ye erth brigeth forth her fru ites in due season, yeldyng them to vs bothe rype, apte & mete for oure vse, whan conuenient tyme requireth. For the nyghte tyme agayne, because we should not be dismayde thorowe the great darkenes, wher

with ye earth is than ouerwhelmed seynge it is a tyme appoynted not to laboure but vnto reste, not vnto trouble, but vnto quietnes, not vn to watchynge, but vnto slepynge, God hath moost gorgiously garnisshed the firmament withe a goodly great lyght, called the moone, & wt innumerable Starres mo for oure great ioye, pleasure & cōfort, so yt no gardē, be it neuer so plesaūtly refer ted & stuffed full of herbes moost amiable in aspecte, maye be cōpared vnto it. And al these thynges hath God wrought and done not for his owne sake, but for ours, not for his owne wealth & felicite, but for oure profyt and commodite.
               Hytherto haue I spoken of his tēporal gyftes, which though they seme to be muche precious, as they are in dede, yet are they nothynge to be compared vnto those that fol low. For looke howe muche the spirite

excelleth the body, so muche do these gyftes excell the other beynge incōparable, & not able by ony mea nes to be recōpēsed of ony creature neyther in heauen nor in earth.
               Fyrst what an excedynge gentle nes of God was this, whā we were worthely condemned for our offēce, & had no hope of health, to promise vs streightwayes, bicause we shuld despayre, yt his only begotten sonne the highest treasure that he hadde, Gen. iii. Esa. vii. Math. i. Luke. i. Colloss. i. Ephe. i. Esa. 
                        •…
                     iii. Ephe. v. i. Ioan. i. Math. i. shoulde come downe from his right hand, be conceaued by y• holy ghost, take very flesh & be borne of y• moost pure virgin Mary, yea and yt with oute the seed of ony man, reconcyle vs to his fauoure, make an attonemēt for vs, purchased grace, mercy, & remission of our synnes, offer his moost blissed body a swete smellyng sacrifice for our iniquite, sufferhis moost precious bloud to be shed for the purgacion & clensynge of oure

synnes, & become a perfecte & ful satisfaccion for all the synnes of hys people, that is, of so many as repēt, beleue in him, and lead a godly and innocent lyfe. This promised God the father oftentimes, & accordyng to his promyse at his tyme, predefined and tofore appoynted he moost faythfully performed it vnto y• perpetuall ioye & conforte of all true Christiās. But in the meane season howe great sees of kyndnes dyd he opē vnto vs? After that he had set vs in this world, howe dyd he prosper vs in all thynges, that we wēt about? How dyd he giue vs y• victory of our enemies? Howe wonderfully dyd he delyuer vs from oure Exo xiiii. cruell enemy Pharao? How maruelously preserued he vs whē he made the red see to gyue place vnto vs? How fauourably dealt he with vs, Ex. xvi. xvii when he gaue vs meate frō heauen and water out of the harde rocke?

What a londe dyd he gyue vs flowynge with mylke & honye. And bycause we should lyue an honest and godly lyfe before hym, dydde not he Exo. 
                        •…
                     x. 
                        •…
                     ere. xxxi. gyue vs his moost holy lawe, yea & that not only 
                     〈◊〉
                   tables of stone, but also wrytten in our hartes by ye holy Ghoste? What goodly ceremonies also receaued we of hym, whiche were mysteries, figures types, cloudes & shadowes of good thi ges to come, euen of Christe, of hys moost holy passion, glorious resurreccion. &c. All these thynges ware great consolacion to the true, spirituall, & christen men, in asmuche as they preched Christ vnto thē, which accordynge vnto theyr fayth whol ly fixed on ye promyse of God, came at the tyme appoynted ito this miserable world toke flesh of the moost glorious virginne Marye, became lyke to vs in all thynges, syn alone excepte, preached vnto vs the wyll

of his heauenly father, wrought mi racles, suffered & dyed for oure synnes, & on the thyrd day rose agayne for our iustificacion. Certayne day es after he ascended into Heauen, Mar
                        •…
                     . xvi. Luke. xxiiii. Act. i. H
                        •…
                     . ix. i. Tim. ii. i. Ioan. ii. Math. xxv. i. Cor. xv. i. Thes. iiii. where he nowe sytteth on ye ryghte hande of god the father almyghty, beynge there not ydle, for he incessauntly prayeth for vs, beynge our mediatoure & aduocate, apeasynge dayly the fathers wrath & purchasynge for vs all good thynges. And at the latter daye, he shall come agē to iudge bothe the quicke and the dead, both the faythfull & vnfaythfull, bothe the shepe & the goates, & than shal he take vs both body and soule enunied togyther withe hym into eternall glory, where we shall remayne wyth him for euermore.
               If ony man desyrethe to knowe more of the benefites of god, and of his vnmesurable kyndenes toward vs, let hī resorte vnto ye Pathwaye

of prayer, & read, where I entreate Search th
                        •…
                      Paythway vnto prayer of thanckes gyuyng from the xlii. Chap. vnto the xlix. & there shall he se this matter entreted of at large.
               If we dyd consyder on this wise the inestimable benefites of god to ward vs, vndoubtedly we woulde leaue our vnthanckefulnes, & saye wyth Dauid, what shall I gyue agayne vnto the Lorde, for all those thynges, that he hathe gyuen me? But let vs se what our Mynstrell entendeth to gyue agen vnto god, that we maye followe hym and do so lykewyse.
            
            
               ¶ The fourthe verse.
               
                  I wyll take the cuppe of healthe / & caull vpon the name of the Lorde.
               
               ¶ The syxte strynge.
               HEre Dauid expresseth two thī ges, yt he entendeth to do. One is to take the cuppe of health. The

other to caull on the name of the LORDE. These are two thynges, What the cup of helth signifye. wherin God very much delighteth. Fyrst he sayth, he wyll take ye cuppe of health, wherby is vnderstand af fliccion, trouble, persecucion, morti ficacion of olde Adam, kyllynge of carnall affectes, slayenge of fleshly lustes, bearyng of the crosse, and at the last death, as it appeareth by ye wordes of Christ to the sōnes of Ze bedeus: Can ye drynke, sayth he, of Math. xx the cuppe that I shall drynke? Also to his father, Let this cup departe Math. xxvi from me, wherby he vnderstandeth his passion & death. To recompense partely ye kyndenes of God, Dauid sayth, that he wyll mortifye the ra gīg lustes of his owne flesh, yt fyght agaynste the spirite, & neuer leaue vntyl he hath made ye body subiecte to the soule, that in all poyntes it maye be obediente to the lawe and wyll of God. For this is an hygh &

acceptable sacrifice to God as Dauid Psal. l. wytnesseth ī another place, a sacrifice to God is a troubled spirite, a contrite & humble harte God wyl not despyse. S. Paule also saythe, Rom. xii. I beseche you brothers by the tender mercyes of God, that you gyue your bodies a sacrifice, yt is quicke, holy & acceptable to God, whiche is youre resonable seruynge of God. And God himselfe sayth by ye Prophet, vnto whome shal I looke, but Esa. lxvi. vnto the hūble & broken in spirite, & vnto hym yt fearethe my wordes?
               Agayne he confessethe here that he wyl not only mortify his carnal lustes, that he maye be truely spirituall, but he wyll also paciently suf fer, what soeuer crosse, that is, trou ble, persecucion and affliccion God layeth vpon hym, yea thoughe it be very death. His harte is nowe so en flamed wt the loue of God for the be nefites that he hathe shewed vnto

hym, that he recositeth not only all that he hath, but also his very lyte to vile & of to small a price to gyue agayn for the glory of God, that he may at the least in some parte shew hymselfe thankefull vnto so bounteous & gētle a Lord, as S. Paule Act. 
                        •…
                     x. and. xxi. sayth, The holy Ghost wytnessethe & layth, y• bondes & troubles abyde me in euery Citie. But I care not for it, neyther is my lyfe dere vnto me, so that I may fynish my course with ioy, & the office that I haue re ceaued of the LORD Iesu to testify y• gospel of ye grace of God. For I am not only redy to be bound, but also to dye for ye name of ye 
                  LORDE Iesu.
               It is not withoute a cause, that he calleth affliccion, trouble, or per Why afflic 
                        •…
                     ion is called the cup of health. secucion, the cuppe of helth or salua cion, for it brigeth i dede helth & s
                     •…
                  l uaciō to a true Christen man. And though the crosse be bitter to ye flesh yet is it swete and healthfull to the

spirite. And y• more y• body be depres sed & made low, y• more is y• spirite ex alied & made hygh, as s. Paule saith though our outward mā be brokē, ii. Cor. iiii. yet y• iward is renewed day by day. Agen, we are not detters to y• flesh, y• we should lyue after y• flesh, For yf Rom. viii. ye lyue after the flesshe, ye shal dye. But yf ye mortifi y• dedes of ye body in y• spirite, ye shall lyue. For they that are lead with y• spirite of god, are the sonnes of GOD. Therfore Luke. ix. sayth Christ, If ony man wyl come after me, let hym deny & forsake hī self, & take his crosse dayly & follow Act. xiiii. me. For by many tribulaciōs must we enter into y• kyngedome of god. And all y• wyll lyue godly in Christ Iesu, muste suffer persecucion. It was necessary, sayth the scripture, ii. 
                        •…
                     im. iii. Luke. xxiiii. 
                        •…
                     b. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . that Christ shoulde fyrst suffer, and so ryse agayne, & enter into glorye.
               But for asmuch as it is an hard thing for a mā of his owne strēgth

paciētly to beare the Crosse, and to suffer rebuke, slaunder, ignominy, blasphemy, euel reportes, empresō
                  mēt losse of goodes, yea & percuaūse very death for Gods truethe and y• glory of his worde, seyng yt though the spirite be redye, yet the flesshe is Math. xxvi 
                        •…
                     arc. xiiii weake, therfore Dauid saythe, He wyll call on the name of the Lorde. Wherfore? Uerely for strēgth, that he maye be able to beare the crosse y• is layd vpon his backe, y• he swarue not whan persecucion cōmeth, and so slaunder y• trueth, which so bolde ly he professed before. For withoute the assistence of Goddes spirite no man is able to abyde in the tyme of persecucion, semeth he neuer so valeaunt a souldiour at other tymes, Math. xxvi. Matt. xiiii. Luke. xxii. Ioan. xiii. as we may se in y• Apostles of Christ whiche before theyr master was in onye daunger, promised that they woulde neuer forsake hi, but sticke vnto hym euen vnto the very deth,

yet whan they came to the bronte, wel was he that could ronne away fastest, in so much that he, which be fore craked moost, & shewed hīselfe boldest of al the other, I meane Pe ter, dyd not only fle away from his master, but also shamefully denyed hym vnto a poore mayde, & sware yt he neuer knewe hym, so impotente, weake, frayle, & ful of all imbecilite is man, if he be lefte vnto hymselfe, & not endewed with strength from aboue. Therfore our Mynstrel Da uid, kynge & Prophet, not crakyng of his owne strēgthes, nor boasting of his owne free wyll withoute the healpe of Gods spirite, saythe that he wyll call on the name of y• Lord for strength & valeaunce, yt he maye manfully abyde in the tyme of persecucion, confesse the trueth of God des worde, & publysshe his glory before all mē, yea though a thousand deathes should followe. It is very

profitable for adflicte & troubled cō sciences to caull on the name of the Lorde. For as Salomon sayth, the name of the LORDE is a myghtye Pro. xviii toure, & very strong Bulwarke, vn to that doth the ryghteous mā fly, & he shall be exalted & fynd socoure. Blissed is that man, which putteth Psal. xxxix his truste ī the name of the LORDE, & regardeth not vanities & false ymaginacions. Call on me, sayth God, in the day of thy trouble, and Psal. xiix. I wyll delyuer the, and thou shalte honoure me.
               Thus se we partely how Dauid goeth about to shewe hīselfe thāke full agayne vnto God for the inesti mable benefites, that he hath gyuē hym. He wyll mortify his carnall af fectes, & paciently suffer what so euer crosse, persecuciō, trouble or affliccion be layde vpon his backe for Gods truethes sake. And that he maye be the more able to do theyse

thynges, he wyll caull on the name of the LORDE. All these be very acceptable thynges in y• sight of god. And God thyncketh his benefites wel bestowed, where such gyftes be gyuē agayne vnto hym, procedyng from a gentle & thanckefull harte.
               Nowe we beynge no lesse bound vnto God for his gentlenes thā Da uid was, ought to shewe our selues no lesse thankefull agayne to hym, thē Dauid dyd, or els are we muche vnworthy this inestimable beneficence of God. We ought therfore to Rom. vi. Colos. iii. i. Cor. vi. prouyde y• no synne reygne in this oure mortal body, but that we mor tifye our earthly members, whoredome, fornicacion, vnclennes, wan tonnes, euell concupiscence & couetousnes, which is the worshypping of Idolles, for the which the wrath of God is wonte to come vpon the chyldren of vnbeleue. All wrath, indignacion, maiyce, cursed speaking

fylthy cōmunicacion, lying oughte Colos. iii. Ephe. ii. Rom. vi. Ephe iiii. Galla. v. Collos. iii. we to laye asyde, & put vpon vs ten der mercye, gentylnes, honest behauour, mekenes, softenes, goodnes, charite, peace, ioy, fayth, tēperaūce, with all the other fruytes of y• spirite. For they y• are of Christe, haue crucified the flesh, with the lustes & concupiscenses therof, yea they are dead to the world, and theyr lyfe is hyd wyth Christ in God.
               Moreouer we must be contēted to take the cuppe of helth at y• 
                  LORDES hande, & paciently suffer what soeuer crosse he layeth vpon vs, yea & prayse hym in the myddes of our trouble, recountynge our selues so moche the more blyssed, seynge that Phil. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Act. v. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Tim. ii Psa. xxxiii. it is gyuen vnto vs not only to beleue in hym, but also to suffer for y• glory of his name, beyng thorowly perswaded, that yf we suffer wyths Christe, we shall reygne with hym.

For many are the troubles of the ryghteous in this world, but from thē all shall the LORDE delyuer thē, yf none otherwyse, yet at y• least by death, which is the nexte waye vnto the very true lyfe.
               And because it is hard for ye fl
                     •…
                  sh to awaye with the crosse (which seketh glory, wealth, ease, rytches, ho nour, & not ignominy, scasenes, dis quietnes, pouertie, shame & opprobry) therfore must we flye with feruent and continuall prayers vnto God & vnto his moost holy name, y• we maye haue strength sent vs frō aboue, to do these thinges aforsayd that by no meanes we be found ingrate, vnthanckefull & vnworthy ye great & vnmeasurable kyndenesse, whiche God hath shewed vnto vs. So shall God not only not take away his giftes from vs, but also en Matt x
                        •…
                     . crease them dayly more & more, as the Scripture sayth, to euery one

that hath, it shall be gyuen, and he Make. iiii. Luae. viii. shall haue abundance. But who so hath not, from hym shall be taken a waye, euen that he hath also.
               But lette vs heare more of oure Mynstrelles songe.
            
            
               ¶ The fyfte verse.
               
                  I wyl pay my vowes vn to the Lord before al his people.
               
               
                  ¶ The seuenth stryng.
                  DAuid goethe forthe to declare what he wyll rēder vnto God for all those thynges that he hathe gyuen hym. Before he sayd, that he would take the cuppe of helth, and caull vpon the name of the LORDE. Nowe he addethe, that he wyll also paye his vowes vnto the LORDE, 
                     What the vowes are y• Dauid wyl fulfyl and performe yea and that before all his people. But what vowes are these? Uerely not vnfaythfull & folyshe vowes, which displease god, as y• scripture

say the, but y• earnest promises that Eccl. v. he made vnto God for to fulfyl his moost holy Commaundementes. These vowes wyll he paye. These promises wyl he performe. For they make vnto the glory of god, the edifienge of his Chyrch, & the health of his owne soule. Therfore wyll he stycke to them, euen vnto the very death.
                  God gyueth a commaundement Exo. xx. Deut. v. & sayth, heare Israel, thy God is y• one & alone God. Thou shalte haue no straunge Goddes in my syghte. Thou shalte make the no grauen Image. &c.
                  Dauid beynge one of the true The fyrste commande ment. israelites hath made a vow to kepe this moost holy precepte. And as he hathe this vowe, so wyll he laboure to pforme it. For it is not vnfaythfull nor folyshe, but agreable to the scripture, neyther dothe it prouoke the keper of it vnto muche inconue

niece & absurdite, but rather vnto great vertu & holynes. So that he is fully bent to performe his vowe Let the vnfaythful Idolaters wor shyp what Idoll or false God they lyste. Dauid wyll surely cleaue to this one & alone true God. For in his hart shall none syt but this one God alone, neyther wyll he admyt so moch as the shadow of ony other to be ioyned with hym, & to haue fe lowshyppe with his God. This his God alone wyll he worship, honour & lerue. This his God alone wyl he how & do reuerence vnto. This his God alone wyll he loue with all his harte, mynde, soule, & withe all hys powers. This his God alone wyll Deut. vi. Math. iiii. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . x. he magnify & prayse for euer & euer And bicause he may not once be mo ued by ony vayne spectacle, & seduced from the honour, worshyp and seruice of this god vnto ony image seruice & Idolatry, he hath made a

sure vowe & faythful promise, that he wyll make no grauen Image, ydoll, or mawmet, but he wyll onlye cleaue to this his one & alone God, & serue hym not in external ceremo Ioan. iiii. nies, but in spirite & trueth. For cō founded be all they, & shame lyghtē on them, sayth he, that worship gra Psal. xcvi. uen ymages, & glory in theyr mawe mettes and Idolles.
                  Agayne God cōmaundeth, sayeng. Thou shalt not take the name The second commaside ment. of thy Lord God in vayne. Dauid hath made a solemne vowe and ear nest promyse, that he wyl kepe this moost blyssed Commaundement of God also. He wyl not abuse ye name of his Lorde god by no meanes. He Math. v Iacob. v. wyll sweare by nothynge that euer god made, nother by heauen nor by earth, nor ony other oth. His communicaciō shall be, yea, yea, na, na. In his aduersite wyl he flye vnto ye 
                     Pro. xviii. name alone of his Lord god, as vnto

a stronge Castel & myghty Bulwarke, & caull on that for healpe & refuge. And ī his prosperite he wyll not forgette the name of his Lorde God, but celebrate, magnify, cōmēd & prayse it, yea & lyfte it vp wt perpetual encomies, laudes & prayses.
                  Moreouer god sayth, thou shalt The thyrde commaūdement. sanctify ye sabboth daye. This hath Dauid also vowed to obserue and kepe. He wyl not therfore spend the sabboth daye in ryotynge, bankettyng, playeng, dauncyng, syngyng & suche other vayne pastimes, but in the meditacion of Gods lawe, in readyng the holy scriptures, in hearyng godly sermons, in lyftyng vp his harte vnto god wt feruent prayers, in gyuyng thanckes to y• Lord for his benefites. &c. He wyll also expulse all synne out of his brest, & be at peace with God.
                  Furthermore god commaūdeth The forthe commaūdement. sayeng, Honour thy father and mother.

 Here agen hath Dauid made a vowe to fulfyl this precepte also. So that he wyl gyue honour, reue rence, & worship to so many as this lawe requireth, yea his inferiours wyll he not dishonour.
                  God gyueth a commaundement & sayth. Thou shalte not slay. Dauid The fyft cō maūdemēt. hathe earnestely vowed to kepe this. So that he wyll shed no innocent Math. v. bloud, hurte no man, seake no mans death, but fauoure and loue all men, yea euen his very enemies.
                  GOD saythe, Thou shalte com The firt cō maūd
                           •…
                        ment 
                     
                        •…
                     yt none adultry. Solemnly hath dauid vowed to obserue this moost godly precepte. So that he wyll be no vnclene fornicatour, nor fylthy i. Cor. vii adulterer, but to auoyd all vnclennes he wyll couple hymselfe wythe Heb. xiii. Phil. iiii. an honest wyfe, & faythfull yokefelowe in holy wedlocke, which is honorable amōg al men, & bed vndesy ed, to her alone wyl he cleaue, & for

her sake refuse all other woman, be Math. xix. Ephe. v. Colos. iii. they neuer so beautifull, fayre, proper, myuyon, tall, eloquent, rytche, worshypfull, honorable, noble. &c. louynge her as his owne fleshe, yea euen as Christ loued the congrega cion.
                  Moreouer God commaunded, sayeng, Thou shalt do no theft. As The seuēth cōmaundement. for this precepte, Dauid hath earnestly vowed to kepe it vnto the vt termoost. So that he wyl not only not steale, but also boūteously giue to so many as haue nede of his help
                  And where as God saythe, thou shalt speake no false wytnes agenst The eyghte cōmaundement. Prouer. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . 
                           〈◊〉
                        . P
                           •…
                        . iiii. Mat. xi. vi. 
                           〈◊〉
                         xviii. thy neyghbour: Dauid had vowed & made a faythful promyse, that he wyl rather, as charite requireth, co uer the multitude of synnes, forgyue them that offend hym, & seake to profyt all men no lesse then him selfe.
                  Finally where God sayth, thou

shalt not couytte thy neyghbours Mar. xi The nynth & x. Cōmaū dement. wyfe, nor house, nor feld, &c. Dauid is fullye at this poynte not once to couyt ony parte of his neyghbours goodes, but rather to helpe hym for warde & to do for hym, what soeuer lyeth in his power.
                  These be the commaundemētes of God, and these hath he vowed to kepe. These vowes therfore wyll he Mat. v. paye vnto the LORDE, yea & that be fore all his people, that men seynge the lyght of his good workes, maye glorify his father, which is in heuē
                  
                  And for as muche as Dauid is a kynge, & hathe vowed vnto God to The office of a kyng do the office of a true kynge, whiche is to mayntayne vertue and to expulse vice, he wyll not only prouide that he hym selfe kepe these cōmaū
                     demētes, but that all his subiectes also kepe them euen from the hyest to y• lowest. He wyll do his diligēce that there shall no God be worshyp

ped in his kyngdome amonge hys Wo
                           •…
                         god y• al kynges & rulars wold do thus. people, but the one and alone true God of Israel. Hym only shall they honour, worshyp, prayse, serue and loue. Nother shal ony grauē ymage be suffred to be made in his Realme for to obscure & blotte the glorye of this almighty god. On the name of this God alone shall all hys people caull, & flye vnto in theyr aduersite prayse & commende it for euer and euer, nether shall ony of them be so bold as once to swere vnistly by it.
                  The Sabboth daye shall all his subiectes sanctifye. They shall not spend it vaynely & ydelly, but vertuously & godly, in readynge y• holy scriptures, in hearyng Gods word sincerly preched, in prayeng feruētly vnto god, and in suche other god ly meditacions. Theyr superiours shall they honoure also with all humilite, submission and obedience. They shall kyll no man, but defend

euery man in his ryght, loue all mē wysshe well vnto them, do for them what so euer they are able.
                  As for fornicaciō, adultry, whor i. Cor. vii. dome or ony other vnclennes, they shall commyt none, but euery man shall freelye be suffered to haue hys owne wyfe, and euerye woman her owne husbonde, & so godly lyue togyther in chast & pure matrimony.
                  And as for stealinge, bearyng of false witnes, or couetynge of theyr neyghbours goodes, Dauid lyke a true kynge hath vowed & promised so to order & rule his subiectes that none of thē all shall faull into those vices & enormities If they do & wyl not amende, Dauid bearethe not ye sweard in vayne, he wyll surely pu Rom. xiii. nysh the trāsgressours. For Dauid hath made a vowe & he is earnestly bēte to kepe it, yt both he & his people shal vnfaynedly obserue the mooste holy cōmaūdemētes of God. Oh

that all kinges, Princes, Dukes, & rulers would follow this moost ho ly & vertuous kynge, & streyghtely looke vnto the obseruaunce & true kepynge of these vowes. For these are the vowes that are accepted be fore God These are the vowes that caste no mans soule into the daunger of euerlastyng damnacion, but rather healpeth forwarde vnto the enheritaunce of lyfe eternal. These are no popysh, monkysh, supersticious & pharisaicall vowes, inuented of the ydle braynes of mē, but pure godly, wholesome & christen vowes which so many as hope to be saued, ought streyghtly to obserue & kepe, yea to performe them vnto the vttermoost of theyr power.
                  Thus se we what the vowes are that Dauid wyll pay vnto ye Lord before all his people, for his benefytes, euen the fulfyllyng of Goddes commaundementes, & doynge hys

office, as it becōmeth a true kinge So lykewyse must we do, and paye our vowes, also to ye 
                     LORDE that is to saye, kepe his holy commaundemētes, forsake the world, the dyuell & the flessh with all theyr pompes & pleasures, as we professed at oure baptisme, & euery man lyue accordynge to his vocacion & callyng, as for an example.
                  Let thē that beare office, authorite, Rulars Rom. xiii. i. Pet. ii. Exo. xxiii. Deut. i. rule and power in the commō weale, punysh the euel, mayntayne the good, accept no parson in iudge mente, allowe no false accusacion, shed no innocente bloude, heare the small so well as the great, set forth gods glory, promote his holy word & in all thynges seake the profyt of of the common weale.
                  Let the subiectes be faythefull, Subiectes. Rom. xiii. true & obedient to theyr Prynces & hygher powers.
                  Lette the Bysshoppes & Prestes

that be called vnto the office of prechynge, 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . Petre. ii. Tit. ii Byshoppes 
                           〈◊〉
                         Prestes take hede to theyr selues, & to all the flocke, in the which ye holy Ghost hath appoynted thē ouerseers to fede the cōgregacion of God. Lette them fede Christes flocke so muche as lygheth in theyr power, & take the ouersighte of them, not as thoughe they were compelled, but wyllyngly, not for the desyre of fylthy lucre, but of a good mynde, not as Lordes ouer the Parysshes, but Act. xx. i. Pet. v. i. Tim. iiii. to be an example vnto the flocke.
                  Let them caste awaye vngodly and olde wyuysh fables, & be vnto them that beleue an example in ye worde, in conuersacion, in loue, in spirite, in fayth, in purenes. Let them giue ii. Tim. iiii attendaunce vnto readynge, to exhortacion, to doctrine. Let thē study to shew thē selues to God lauda ble, which nede not to be ashamed.
                  Let the husbōdes loue theyr wy ues, as theyr owne bodyes, and be Husbondes.
                     
not bytter, churlysh or vnkynd vnto them, but gyue honour vnto thē as vnto the weaker vesselles and as vnto them that are fellowe heyres wyth them of the grace of lyfe. Wyues. i. Cor. xi. Ephe. v. Collos. iii. i. Tim. ii. i. Pet. iii.
                  
                  Lykewyse let ye wyues be in sub iecciō to theyr husbondes, as vnto the LORDE in all thynges, & so behaue themselues as it becommethe women of an honest & godly conuer sacion. Let them aray them selues in comely apparell with shame fastnes & discrete behauour, not wythe brayded heere, or golde, or pearle, or costely araye, but withe suche as it becometh women that professe godlynes thorowe good workes. Lette ye inward mā of the hart be vncorrupte, withe a meke & quiet spirite, whiche before God is moche set by. For after this manner in the olde tyme, dyd the holy women, whiche trusted in God, tyer them selues, & were obedient to theyr husbondes:

euen as Sara obeyed Abraham & Gen. xvi. called hym Lord, whose doughters the wyues are, so longe as they do well, nor being afrayd for ony trou ble.
                  Let fathers not rate theyr chyldrē, Fathers. lest they be of a desperate mind but brynge thē vp in the nourtour and informacion of the LORDE.
                  
                  Let the chyldren also obey theyr pa rentes in all thynges, for ye is well Children. pleasynge vnto the LORDE.
                  
                  Let masters do vnto theyr seruauntes that which is iust & equal Masters. put tynge awaye threatenynges, & know that they also haue a master in heauen, with whome there is no respecte of parsons. Act. xx. Rom. ii. Seruaūtes.
                  
                  Let the seruauntes agayne be obediēt vnto theyr bodely masters in al thinges wt feare & tremblyng in siglenes of harte as vnto Christ, not wt seruice only in the eye syght Colos. iii. Ep
                           •…
                        . vi. as men pleasers, but as the seruaū
                     
tes of Christ, doyng the wyll of god Tit. ii. i. Pet. ii. from the harte wythe good wyll.
                  Let them thyncke, that they serue the LORDE and not men, & let them be sure, yt what so euer good a man doth, he shall receaue it agayne of ye 
                     LORDE, whether he be bond or free.
                  To cōclude, let euery one amōg vs do our dutye, & lyue accordyng to the vocacion, whereunto God hathe called vs. So shal it come to passe, yt we shall not walke vnworthy the kyndenes of God. So shall we truly paye our vowes vnto the LORDE. So shall we faythfully per forme yt, which we heretofore promt sed in baptisme. So shall we dayly more & more encrease in the loue of God, & taste more plēteously of his bounteous giftes.
                  But it is to be noted, that Dauid saythe, Before all his people.
                  This is none other thynge, but ye which Christ commaundeth in the

in as much as Christe hathe chosen them from the worlde, therfore the world hateth them. What is than to be sayd? Uerely whither we liue or dye, we are the LORDES, and precious is the death of Sayntes in y• syght of ye 
                     LORDE, as it followethe.
               
               
                  ¶ The eyght strynge. Precious in the syghte of the Lord is the death of his Sayntes.
                  This song of our Mynstrel Da uid must nedes be very plesaūt & delectable to the hearers, seyng yt he syngethe all thynges in suche a godly & goodly order, & setteth euery thynge in his ryght place. For after that he hath made mēcion of payenge his vowes vnto the Lord, whyche is to do all thynges accordynge to the cōmaūdemēt of God, & not after the fansy of carnall reason, nor the iugemente of the wyse

worldlynges; wherof is lyke to ensew, as we haue heard before, much trouble, yea very deth (for ye worlde can not abyde to be rebuked nor to haue his pompe, pryde, pleasures, glory, honour, hypocrisy, supersticion, fayned holynes, pharisaical iustice, glysteryng righteousnes, dotynge inuencion, fleshly imaginacions, good ententes. &c. to be reproued yea & condēned by y• worde of God) he nowe declarethe what a dere & precious a thyng the deathe of Sayntes, that is to saye, of the faythfull is in the syght of ye 
                     LORD, be it recounted before the worlde of neuer so great ignominy, despyte, reproche and shame. And this doth he to encourage men to paye theyr vowes vnto the Lorde, that is to say, to be earnest in ye word of God, to seake the promocion of his glory & to walke innocently before ye eies of his diuine maieste, though al the

world, yea very hell should be wood and ryse vp agaynst vs. Precious, sayth he, in the syghte of the Lorde is the death of his Sayntes.
                  It is to be noted, that he calleth not the death of the wycked, precious in the syght of the Lord, but y• death of Saynctes, yea & that not popysh but Gods Sayntes Precious, The wyc ked in thys worlde haue all thynges more at ther pleasure thā y• true Chri stians sayth he, in the sight of y• Lord is the deth of his Sayntes. As for the wicked, so longe as they lyue in this world, they lyue more at theyr hartes ease, & haue all thiges more plenteously at theyr owne pleasure concernyng tēporall matters, thā the true christen men and faythful Sayntes of God haue, in as much that as we read in diuers places of the holye scriptures, the godly many tymes complayne vnto God of the prosperous estate of y• wycked, & seme almoost to accuse God of vn righteousnes, seyng the enemies of

God prosper so wel, and haue good lucke in all thynges, & they agayne which moost intierly fauour Goddes word & seke his glory, are moost miserably oppressed, slaūdered, persecuted, Psal. x
                           •…
                        iii. Rom. viii. empresonned, & redye to be slayne at all houres. For as y• Psalmograph sayth: The vngodly hath the ouerhande, & the poore is brēt. The siner is praysed in followyng Psal. ix. the lustes of his harte, & the wicked is blyssed and made muche of. My feete were almoost gone, sayth Dauid, my treadynges had nygh slypt For I was sore greaued at the wic ked to se the vngodly in such prospe rite. For they are i no parel of deth, but stonde fast lyke a palace. They come in no misfortune lyke other folke, nother are they plaged lyke other men. And this is the cause yt they are so puffed in Pryde, & ouerwhelmed wyth cruelte & vnrighteousnes. Theyr eyes swel for fatnes

they do euen what they lyste. Corrupte are they & speake blasphemies maliciously, proud & presumpteous are theyr wordes They 
                        •…
                     retch forth theyr mouthe vnto heauen, & theyr tong goeth thorowe ye world. Therfore fall ye people vnto them, & therout suche they no small aua
                        •…
                      tage. Tush, say they, how shal God perceaue it. Is theyr knowledge in the moost hyghest? Lo these are the vngodly, these prosper in the world These haue rytches in possession. These haue sonnes ye growe vp as Psal. cxliii. yonge plantes. These haue mynyō & trymme doughters, garnysshed round about euen lyke vnto a gorgious tēple. These haue theyr garners full & plenteous wyth all mā
                     ner of stoar. These haue shepe that bryng forth thousandes & hondred thousandes in theyr pastures and feldes. These haue fatte oxen, y• are stronge to laboure. To be shorte,

these haue no mischaunse, no decay no trouble, no noyse, no complaynynge in theyr stretes that shoulde greue them. Ieremy also saythe, O Iere. xii. 
                     LORDE thou arte more ryghteous, than that I shoulde dispute wythe the, neuerthelesse let me talke with the in thynges reasonable. Howe happeneth it, that the waye of the vngodly is so prosperous, & that it goeth so well with them, which 
                        •…
                     
                     out ony shame offend & lyue in wickednes? Thou planteste them, they take roote, they growe, and brynge forthe fruyte. They boste moche of the, yet doste thou not ponyshe thē.
                  Thus se we howe the vngodlye lyke fat beastes wallowe & tomble thē selues in all kynde of pleasures, neyther wante they ony thynge in this worlde, that theyr hartes can desyre, yea they haue more prosperi Luke. xii. te, than they can awaye wythe all, yet are the godly and Sayntes of

the Lord oppressed with all misery leadynge a lyfe in great calamite & wretchednes, thā ony creatures in the world. But yet beholde ye ende of the wycked. For sodenly they do consume, perysh & come to nought. The Psalmographe sayth: ye death Psal. xxxiii of the wicked synners is very euel. Agayne, The vnrighteous mā shal receaue his plages & ponyshmētes whan he dyeth. But let vs beholde these thynges as i a pure myrrour by rehearsyng certayne Hystories. Howe triumphed the wycked kyng Pharao vpon the Israelites Gods people? Howe lysle regarded he the sermons spoken, and the myracles wroughte by the seruaūtes of God Moses & Aaron thorow the diuine spirite? Howe continued he to persecute the people of God euen vnto Exo. viii. ix x. xiiii. the very hour of his death. But be hold the ende. Whan he was moost puffed vp in his pryde, and mooste

bent to do mischefe, howe dyd God trap hym in his owne wylynesse, & euen broughte that vpon his owne head, that he entēded to brynge vp on other? Dyd not God meruaylously drowne hym with al his wic ked army, & preserue his people by that meanes? But what was that temporall deathe in comparison to the death eternall, & the moost greuous & intollerable paynes that he nowe suffreth in hell fyre without mercye.
                  Agen, how dyd Sennacherib y• 
                     iiii. Re. viii. and. ix. ii. Pa. xxxii Eccl. xiviii. Esa. xxxvi. and. xxxvii. proud king of the Assirians bost hī self not only agenst the good kyng Ezechias, but also y• lyuyng God, yea & blasphemed hym, sayng, as ye moost cruel & lyonlyke tyraunt the great Turke doth nowe a dayes, yt he woulde vtterly subdue both hī & his cōpany, yea & yt theyr God shuld 
                        •…
                     e no more able to deliuer thē, than 
                        〈◊〉
                      broken staffe of rede. He leaned

muche to his owne poletyke wytte & martiall valeaunce, thynkyng yt in asmuch as heretofore he had sub dued all kyngdoms, which he inua ded, he also should haue ouercome y• people of God. But God, which is the lyuynge & almyghtye God able in a twyncklyng of an eye to make frustrate & vayne all the fleshly ima ginacions of the worldly tyrauntes, yea & to brynge to noughte all theyr power, sent his Aungell the very same nyghte, that all the mischefe was entēded agaynst his peo ple, which smote in the hoost of the Assirians an hondred foure score & fyue thousand men. So that Sen iiii. Reg. xix ii. Pa. xxxii nacherib brake vp & departed, and was shortely after slayne wt swerde of his owne sonnes. An ende worthye suche a proude & blasphemous Tyraunte. But what is this vnto the infernall paynes, y• be endeles, which he nowe remediles suffreth?
                  
                     
What proud crakes also dyd y• ar rogant Tyrasite Holofernes make Iudit. xii
                           •…
                        . agaynst the people of Israel, thynkyng that there was no kyngdome so inuincible, stronge & fortressed, but that he with his martiall puissaunce & feates of warre was able easly to ouercome. So that he toke no thoughte, lyued all in pleasure, lyke a careles swyne, gyuyng hym selfe to all kynde of beastelyke pleasures. But howe valeauntly euen by one woman God dyd ouercome hym, and put all his army to flight, the Hystory maketh mencion.
                  What shal I speke of ye two Hero des, wherof the one in the myddes Math. ii. of his fury whē he was moost whot & fyry in sekyng the deth of Christ, & for his sake sleynge innumerable infantes, miserably dyed, bringing nothing lesse than his cruell & blou dy purpose to effecte, so valeaunt & myghty is our lord god to extiguish

and quenche the tyrannye of these bloudsowpers, whā it is his moost godly pleasure, & to preserue those, whome he wyll haue kept fre from theyr crudelite & furious madnes.
                  The other Herode euē in ye middes of his pompe, honoure & glory, Act. xii. beynge clad in his kyngly apparel, & set Luciferlike on his iudgement seate, after that he had moost Tyrauntelyke persecuted certayne of Christes chyrch, yea & slayne withe swerd Iames the brother of Iohn̄, was smote of the Aūgel of ye Lord, because he gaue not ye glory to god. So that he was eaten vp of wormes. But what nede I rehearse so many Histories oute of the diuine letters, seyng that this one, whiche I shal nowe recite, maye seme abū
                     dantly to satisfy for to shewe, howe precious in the syght of the Lorde, the deathe of his saynctes is, seme theyr lyfe in this world neuer so mi

serable, wretched, pitieful, poore, ne dy, beggerly, & full of all trouble, so row, dolour & camalite. Agen, how vile & detestable the death of ye wyc ked is in the Lordes syght, be theyr lyfe here neuer so pompous, galāt, easy, volupteous, ioyful, quiet, care les & popelyke.
                  S. Luke in his Gospell declareth, Luke. xvi. how there was a certen ritche man, which was apparelled wt pur ple & costely lynnen, & fared deliciouslye euery daye. In these wordes the Euangelist sheweth manifestly howe this rytche man lyued all in plesure, & had al thinges according to his hartes desyre. But beholde y• ende. He was cruell, merciles & vnpiteful to the poore. Therfore whē he dyed, the Scripture sayth, that he was caried downe ito hel, where he was tormented wyth suche greuous flames of fyre, & intollerable burnynges, that he desyred Abraham

to send downe Lazarus vnto hym, that he myght dyp the typpe of hys fynger in the water, & coole his tonge, for he was greuously tor mented in that flame. But Abrahā sayd, remember sonne, that yu haste receaued thy pleasures in thy lyfe, & cōtrary wyse Lazarus receaued paynes and troubles. Therfore is he nowe cōforted, and thou arte tor mented.
                  As for y• poore man, his lyfe was so wretched beggerly & miserable, y• no man woulde scasely wonchesafe once to cast theyr eye & to looke towarde hym, he was such an abiecte so vile, so rēt, so torne, so Lazarlyke & ful of greuous sores. Only ye dog ges lycked his sores. But beholde ye ende. This poore man dyed, & was caried of the Aūgels into Abrahās bosome.
                  This Hystory declareth playnely, howe precious the deathe of the

Saynctes, that is, of the faythfull is in the syght of the Lord, appeare theyr lyfe neuer so miserable before the deynty worldlynges. Agayne, howe vile & detestable the death of the wicked is in Gods syght, haue they spēt theyr lyfe ī neuer so much ioye, pleasure & felicite, & were they recounted before the worlde neuer so blyssed, happye & fortunate, and brought to the ground with neuer Amos. vi. Luke. vi. Math. v. Eccl. xxxi so great pompe and solemnite. And here se we that to be true, whiche is written, Wo be to you rytche men, which haue your
                        •…
                      consolacion. Wo be to you that are fylled, for ye shall honger. Wo be to you that laughe nowe, for ye shall lament and wepe Wo be to you, whan all menne shall prayse you, for accordynge to these thynges dyd theyr fathers to the false Prophetes. But blyssed are ye that honger now, for ye shall be fylled. Blyssed are ye y• wepe now, for

ye shall laugh. The deynte worldeliges Mark well. receaue payne after this life, but the faythful in ye Lorde, which be oppressed wt miserye & troubled for Gods trueth, shall receaue ioye & glory. So that as Dauid sayth, Precious in the syght of the Lorde is the death of his Sayntes. Hereto agreeth the sayenge of S. Iohn̄ in his reuelacion. Blyssed are the Apoc. xiiii. dead, whiche dye in the Lorde. The death of Saynctes muste nedes be precious in the syght of the Lorde, & they which dye in the Lorde must nedes be blyssed, seyng that bothe y• glory of God is sette forth by theyr death, & the Saynctes them selues set in a perpetual ioye & euerlastig Sap. iii. Deu. xxxiii quietnes without ony more care or trouble. For after yt they haue offered vp this theyr lyfe vnto god, the soules of the righteous are streight wayes in the hand of God, and the payne of deth shall not towche thē.

In the syght of the vnwyse they ap Sap. v. Heb. 
                           •…
                        i. Rom. viii. ii. Cor. v. i. Pet. i. peare to dye, & theyr ende is taken for very destruccion. The waye of y• righteous is iudged to be vtter destruccion, but they are in reste. And thogh they suffer payne before mē, yet is theyr hope full of immortalite. They are ponysshed but in fewe thynges, neuertheles in many thin ges shall they be wel rewarded. For God proueth them, & lyndeth them mete for himselfe, yea as golde in ye fornace doth he trye them, & receaueth them as a burnte offerynge, & whan the tyme commeth, they shall be looked vpon. They ryghteous shall shyne as the sparkes, that run Math. xiii. i. Cor. xv. Math. xix i. Cor. vi. thorowe the rede bushe. They shall iudge the nacions, and haue dominion ouer the people, & theyr Lord shall reygne for euer. They yt putte theyr trust in him, shal vnderstand the trueth, & suche as be faythefull wyll agre vnto hym in loue, for his

chosen shall haue gyftes and peace. But the vngodly shall be punyshed accordyng to theyr owne imaginacions, for they haue despised ye righ teous, and forsaken the Lorde.
                  Moreouer the ryghteous shall stonde in great stedfastnes agaynst Sap. v. Math. ix. suche, as haue dealte extremely wt them, & taken away theyr labours, Whan they se it, they shall be vexed with horrible feare, & shall wonder at the hastines of theyr soden helth gronyng for very distresse of mynd & shall saye within them selues, hauyng inward sorowe & mournyng for very anguyshe of mynde: These are they, whome we sometyme had in derision, & iested vpon. We fooles thought theyr lyues very madnes, Sap. iii. & theyr end to be wtout honour But 
                        •…
                     o, how they are coūted amōg the chyldren of God, & theyr porciō is amonge the Sayntes. Therfore haue we erred frō y• way of trueth.

The lyghte of ryghteousnes hathe not shyned vnto vs, & the sonne of vnderstondynge rose not vpon vs. we haue weryed our selues ī ye way of wickednes & destrucciō Tedious wayes haue we gone, but as for the waye of ye Lorde we haue not knowen it. What good hath our pryde Iacob. v. i. Pa. xxx. Sap. ii. done vnto vs? or what profyt hath the pompe of rytches brought vs? All these thynges are passed awaye as a shadowe. &c. These and suche other wordes, shall they that haue synned speake in hell. But ye ryghteoꝰ Pfal. xxxix shall lyue for euermore. Theyr reward also is wt ye Lord, & theyr re membraunce with the hyghest.
                  Therfore shall they receaue a glori ous kyngedome, and a beautyfull crowne of the Lordes hand. For wt his ryght hande shall he couer thē, & withe his owne arme shall he de fende them. &c.
                  Thus se we how dere & precious

in the syght of the Lorde the death of his Saynctesis. S. Paule hauyng Phil. i. experience of this thing, whē he was yet alyue, sayd on this man ner: I desyre to be dissolued & losoned oute of this mortall bodye, & to be with Christ. Also kynge Dauid: Wo is me, that I tary ī this world Psal. cxix. so longe.
                  Therfore howe so euer the wycked worldlynges recount the death of the Sayntes, whyther it chaun ceth to thē by famyn, hōger, swerde water, fyre halter or ony otherwise vndoubtedlye it is precious in the sight of the Lord, appeare it before the world of neuer so great ignomi ny, reproche, infamy, shame, and re buke. Happy therfore is he, that dy eth this death, how so euer it chaū
                     seth vnto hym. Blyssed is ye Crosse, which bryngeth this glory. But let vs se how it commeth to passe, that the deth of Sayntes is so precious

in the syght of the Lorde. It followeth.
               
            
            
               ¶ The syxte verse.
               
                  O Lord I am thy seruāt / yea thy seruaunt ī dede / & the son of thy handmayde thou hast broken my bon / des.
               
               ¶ The nynte strynge.
               BEcause no man, be he neuer so holy, good and perfecte, should thyncke that thorowe his owne holynes, goodnes & perfeccion, he had deserued that his deathe shoulde be dere, precious, and of great valour in the Lordes syght, or els because that he had suffred many great tor mentes for the glorye of God, yea & perchaunse very death, & so by that meanes recounte hymselfe worthy by hys owne desertes of the lyfe eternall: oure Mynstrell Dauid in this verse of his songe, not vnto the

derogacion of the sayntes honour, whiche are not to be defrauded of theyr prayse, but vnto the promocion & settynge forth of Gods glory, syngeth here, howe it commethe to passe, that the death of Saynctes, that is, of the faythfull, is so precious i the sight of ye Lord. The cause is this, sayth he, because God hath broken theyr bondes. For what is man, that he maye appeare righteous Iob. ix. in ye sight of God, before whom a chyld of one day olde is not pure, nor the starres in the Eliment, nor nor yet the Aungelles in heauen. Math. xix. Esa. ixiiii. Pro. xx. i. Ioan. i. Psal. cxiiii. There is no man good, but God alone. All our righteousnesses are as a clothe polluted wythe menstrue. Who is able to say, my hart is pure & I am cleane without synne? The moost ryghteous man in the world maye pray on this manner wythe Dauid, Lorde enter not into iudge ment with thy seruaunte, for none

y• lyueth, shallbe foūd ryghteous in ii. Cor. iii. Ioan. iii. Rom. viii. thy sight. Is it ony maruayle, whē of our selues we are not able to thike a good thoughte, moche lesse to worke ony good dede by our owne power, before we be regēerate, bor ne a newe, and made other men by Christes Spirite.
               And as towchyng the affliccion and trouble, that we suffer in this worlde, seme it to the flesh neuer so greate, paynefull and intollerable, yet can it not be compared to ye glo ry, that shalbe shewed to vs, as S. Paule sayth. Notwitstandynge yf Rom. viii. i. Cor. xii. ii. Tim. ii. Heb. iiii. Tit. i. Psal. cxiiiii we suffer with Christ, we shall also reygne with Christ, yea & be glorifi ed with hym, not that we of our selues haue deserued so great glorye, but because God hath so promised which can not lye, but is faythfull in al his wordes, & leaueth no good dede vnrewarded, that is done in Christ, yea and that for his promise

sake thorow his vnmesurable mercy Math. x. i. Pet. i. poured forthe plenteously in the moost precioꝰ bloud of Christ Iesu. Now seyng ye not we onlye but also Ioan. iii. Rom. xiiii. al ye euer we do of oure selues is vn pure & vnclene in the syght of god, vntyl both we & al our dedes be pu rified by the diuine spirite, therfore before we canne brynge forthe ony thinge that maye be approued and accepted before God, we must be de lyuered from that moost miserable Gen. iii. Rom. v. vi. vii. viii. captiuite, wherunto we ware caste of Satan thorowe the synne of Adam. Our bondes must be broken, we muste be set at liberte from the power of Satan, syn, death, hel. &c. This thynge once done, thā what Mark well. so euer we do in Christ and in oure newe regeneracion, muste nedes be allowed before God, & receaued as an acceptable Sacrifice. Yea whyther we lyue or dye, both our lyfe & oure death is right dere and precious

in y• syghte of the Lorde. But let vs returne vnto our songe.
               Although it be true, & nothynge more true, yt God of his owne mere The good nes of God toward vs. mercy & fre goodnes & vndeserued benignite saued vs whan we ware so vtterly loste, that by no meanes we could seke ony parte of our own saluacion, nor recouer by our owne strength & power ony thynge at all that we before had lost in Adam, so that both oure creācion, eleccion, re demcion, saluacion, iustificacion, & glorificacion commeth only of hym Rom. viii. thorow his moost entierly beloued sonne, our Lord & Sauiour Iesus Christe. Yet do these his benefites only belonge vnto thē, that are his faythfull seruauntes, & the sonnes of his handemayd, as Dauid sayth here: O Lord because I am thy ser uaunte, yea thy seruaunt in dede, & the sonne of thy handmayde, thou hast broken my bondes. We se here

that Dauid confessethe, that God Note to whome the benefytes of God in Christbelōg brake his bondes, but he addeth also, that he therfore is his seruaunt, yea his vnfayned seruaūte & y• sōne of his handmayd. Wherby we maye easly learne that the merciful bene fites of God the father, which lyghe poured out in Christes bloude, pertayne not vnto all persons vniuersallye, but only vnto those, that are his seruauntes, yea & that not fayned, but true, hartye, louynge and faythful, & the sonnes of his hande mayd. God hath performed ye othe, sayth y• good preste Zachary father to S. Iohn̄ baptist, which he sware Luke. i. Gene. xxii. vnto Abraham our father, to gyue vs, that we beyng without feare & delyuered frō the power of our enemies, shoulde serue hym wt holynes & ryghteousnesse before hym all the dayes of our lyfe. We are delyuered sayth this good preste, from the power of our enemiesnot y• we should

lyue wickedly & vngodly, but that we shoulde serue oure LORDE God, not in our owne fleshly ymaginacions & blynde good ententes, but in holynes & righteousnes, yea & that not a daye or two, but al the dayes of our lyfe. God hath not called vs, saythe S. Paule, vnto vnclennes, 1. Thes. i. Act. iii. but vnto sanctificacion. God hathe blyssed you, saythe the scripture, by his sonne Iesus, that euery one of you shoulde turne from his wicked nes. God hath broken our bondes, that we shoulde be his faythfull ser uauntes & the sonnes of his hande mayd, as Dauid sayth. Now what What it is to be the ser uaunte of God. is it to be the seruaunt of God? Ue rely to do those thynges that we be commaunded of God. In considera cion wherof S. Paule & the other Apostles ī al theyr Epistles call thē selues the seruauntes of God, bycause vnto the vttermoost of theyr power they euer fulfylled those thī
                  
ges that were enioyned thē of god. For it becommeth a seruaūt to fulfyll his masters cōmaundemente, & not to worke after his owne fansy, so maye he be bolde to appere in his masters syghte, whan so euer he be called, & to aske that which his master hath promised him. In lyke mā ner yf we wyll be counted & so proued the seruauntes of God vnfaynedlye, we muste earnestelye consider euery mā accordynge to his cal lynge, what God hathe commaunded vs in his holy law, and that we must laboure vnto the vttermoost of our power for to fulfyl, or els we are no true seruaūtes of God. For by no meanes may we leaue ye wyll of God vnfylled, & practise thynges of oure owne imaginacion. If ony Io. viii. xiiii. xv. man loueth me, sayth Christ, he wyl kepe my word & my father shal loue hym, & we wyl come vnto hym and dwell with him. He that hath my cō
                  
maundemētes & kepeth them, he it is that louethe me. For not euery Math. vi
                        •…
                     
                   one that sayth vnto me, Lord Lord shall enter into the kyngdome of he uē, but he that doth the wyll of my father, which is in heauen.
               But it is to be noted, that Dauid doth not only name hymselfe y• seruaunt of god, but he doubleth it & sayth, yea the seruaunt of God in dede. As though he should saye, god hath done moch for me, he hath bro ken my bondes, he hathe delyuered me oute of captiuite, & set me agen at liberte, therfore wyll I be his ser uaūt, yea & that not fayn
                     •…
                  dly, but his seruauut in dede, doynge what so euer he commaundethe me, yea though it shoulde coste me my lyfe. So it becometh vs not only to pro Math. vii. Rom. viii. Iacob. i. fesse our selues to be the seruaūtes of God and christen men by mouth, but also to expresse it in verye dede, seyng that not the hearers but the

doers of the law shall be iustified be fore God.
               O LORDE GOD be mercyfull to vs, howe many be ther nowe a dayes, that caull themselues ye ser Agenst the grosse Gospellers and vayne talkers of the scripture. uauntes of God & gospellers, & yet are nothynge lesse in theyr dedes? They crake moch of fayth, but they brynge not forth y• fruytes of fayth They talke moch of the gospel, but they lyue no part of ye gospel. They reade the holy scriptures, but they fashon theyr lyues nothyng theraf ter. They call Christ theyr sauiour, yet walke they nothynge worthye his kyndenes. They thynke thē selues the sonnes of lyghte, but they exercise the workes of darknes. Oh that they were Goddes seruaūtes in dede, feruent gospellers, earneste practisers of fayth, true followers of the holy Scriptures, to cōclude, both louers and lyuers of Christes gospell, than wel were it with Chri

stes chyrch. But alas theyr lyuing is so dissolute, & theyr manners so wycked and vngodly, that we may well saye, as S. Paule wrytethe: They professe that they know god, Tit. i. but they deny hi wyth theyr actes, seynge they are abhominable, disobedient and vnapte to al good wor kes.
               Moreouer Dauid callethe hym selfe here not only the true & fayth full seruaunte of God, but also the sonne of Gods handmayd. Who is this handmayd of God? Uerely the vniuersall congregacion of Christ, Who is the handmayde of God. whiche from the begynnyng of the worlde hathe serued God & beleued in hym, whose sonne euery one is, yt beleueth in God. For he is begottē of God, the sonne of god by fayth to that congregacion, whose member he is made, & that congregacion by preachynge begetteth hym to God, that beleueth the word of god. So

that as the congregacion is a mother by begettynge and wynnyng other to the fayth, so is he that beleueth, & is begottē vnto the fayth, the sonne of the congregacion, as s. Paule wryteth to the Galathians, Gala. iiii My lytle chyldren, of whome I tra uayle in byrth agayne, or wt whom I am agayne wythe chylde, vntyll Christe be fasshyoned in you.
               Also to the Corinthians, althoghe 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . Cor. iiii. ye haue many masters ī Christ, yet haue ye not many fathers. For I begat you in Christ Iesu by the gos pell. He also writyng to Timothe, 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . Tim. i. calleth hym his natural sonne in 
                     〈◊〉
                   fayth. Agayne Syon signifyeng y• Church of Christ, sayth by the Pro phet, who hath begottē me these? Al so ī another place: the desolate hath Esa. xlix. and. iiiii. mo chyldren, than y• maryed wyfe.
               Thus se we, that we must both be the true seruauntes of God, and also the sonnes of the handmayd of god, Christes chyrche, yf we wyl en

ioye the benefites, that ly bent out in Christ. And verely it is not with out a cause required of vs, not only that we shoulde be the faythful seruauntes of god, but also the sonnes of his handemayd For many in tymes past, nether want ther at this daye, haue bosted valeauntly that they were the seruauntes of God, yea & woulde seme of a feruent zele to dye for the glory of god, yet in as muche as they were not the sonnes also of gods handmayde, they were not the seruauntes of god in dede, but dissemblers & Hypocrites. Of this sorte were all the olde Heretikes, Scismatikes, & false Christiās in tymes past, which sowed dissensi on in Christes chyrche, and deuided them selues from the holy catholike chyrche, whiche is the fellowshyp of sayntes, by teachyng straunge doctrine, & mayntenynge erroneous opinions cōtrary to the doctrine of

the holy scripture, & the teachynge of the true godly fathers. Of this sorte also at this tyme are the An
                     •…
                   baptistes, Sacramētaries & other Phanaticall & frentyke Spirites which haue vayne visions inuēted Math. xiii Mar. iiii. Tit. iii. Heb. xiii. of theyr owne braynes, sowe cockel among the good wheat, in the Lordes felde, brynge in straunge sectes inuente newe opinions, make dissē
                  cion in Christes churche, allure mē from the olde & true christen fayth, corrupte the scriptures, teache doctrine contrary to the vayne of god des word, trouble the cōmon weale of Christendome. &c. All these in as much as they haue deuided & cutte of them selues from the chyrche of Christ, which is the hand mayde of god, pertayne not vnto god, nether haue they any parte of gods mercy though they boste & crake neuer so much, that they be the seruauntes of god, yea though they gyue theyr

bodies to be plucked asunder wyth Mark. wild horses for ye glory of god For wt out the chyrche of Christ, ther is no health nor saluaciō, but altogyther death & damnacion. But I woulde An ad
                        •…
                     oni cion for the true & fals chyrch. haue men wyse in knowynge thys chyrche of Christe, vnlesse they erre & mayntayne an whore in steade of a spouse, an vnchast harlotte for a true wyfe, a fylthy strompette for a faythfull yokefellow, a disobedient Synagoge for a christen congregacion. We haue in tymes past taken the Bysshop of Rome, & hys paynted carnall Idolles, I would haue Errours about the Chyrche. sayd, his sayncted Cardinalles, Pa triarches, Legates, Archbysshops, Bysshops, Prestes, Monckes, Fryars, Chanons, Heremites, Anacho rites, & other of the spiritualte, as they call thē, only to be the chyrche & haue thought that by no meanes we myght departe from them and theyr doctrine, excepte they would

be dāned, in what so euer case they O abhominacion. stode, were they on Goddes syde, or contrary, taught they accordynge to gods worde or otherwyse. For once to hyske agenst them, was co
                     •…
                   
                  Ioan. ix. ted to cut the cote of Christe y• had neuer a seme, to subuert and tople downe the chayre of Peter & Paul the chefe Apostles, to defyle, to tear & to tread vnder fote the authorite of the chyrche Christes spouse, yea Apoc. xxi. & to make shorte tale, to caull oute of hel the heresies that were buried and layd to slepe.
               By this meanes haue they theise many hundred yeares not only seduced the simple and vnlerned peo ple, butte also falselye vsurpedde the name of the Chyrche, callynge them selues the mother holye chur che, beynge so rather in name thā in very dede. If they were faith full, & dyd continewe in ye doctrine of the holy Scripture so were they
               
                  〈1 page missing〉
               
               
                  
members of this chyrche of Christ, yf contrarywyse, than pertayned they not vnto this holy catholyke chyrche, but were corrupt & rotten members, h
                     •…
                  ynge nothyng lesse thē pertakers of this helth and saluacion, that is in this moost pure & vndefyled chyrche.
               This chyrche of Christ, whome Dauid calleth here, the handmayd of the LORDE, is the vniuersall What the Chyrch is Ioan. iii. vi. Collos. i. Matth. xvi. i. Ioan. iiii. Ioan. x.  congregacion of the faythfull, whiche wt a sure & vndoubted fayth beleue in Christe, acknoweledge hym to be theyr heade, confesse hym to be the sonne of the lyuynge God, graunt vnfaynedly that he came in ye flesh, heare the voyce of theyr Sheppard cleaue only to his worde, flye ye voyces of straungers, stycke vnto him us to theyr alone treasure, & looke for all good thynges at hys hande only.
               Unto this churche pertayne

so many as from the begynnyng of the world vntyl this tyme haue vn 
                     
                        •…
                     at. 
                        •…
                     vi. xxi Esa. xxviii. Dan. ii. i. Cor. x. Matxx. viii faynedly beleued in Christe, or shall beleue vnto ye very ende of ye world. Agaynste this chyrche the gates of hell shall not preuayle, seynge it is bylte on the rocks Christ For Chri
                     •…
                   hymselfe hathe promised, yt he wyll be with it by his holy spirite euen vnto the very cōsummaciō and end of the world.
               Moreouer Christ loued this chirch so well, that he gaue hymselfe for it Ephe. v. Gala. i. Cit. iii. i. Pet. iii. Apoc. xxi. i. Tim. iii. to sanctify it, & clensed it in the fo
                     •…
                   tayne of water, by ye word, to make it vnto hym selfe a glorious congre ciō hauynge no spot or wryncle, nor ony suche thyng, but that it should be holy & without blame. This chir che is the spouse of Christ, and matrone of heauen, the house of God, whiche is the congregacion of the li uynge God, the pyller & ground of trueth. This chyrche is the mount

Syō, the Cytye of the lyuyng god, the celestiall Hierusalē, the company Heb. xii. of innumerable aungelles, & the congregacion of the fyrst begotten, which are written in heauen. This chyrche is the holy cytie, that newe Apo. xxi. Ierusalem, which came downe frō God oute of heauen, prepared as a bryde garnysshed for her husbonde. This chyrch is that loue, that dere Cant. i. ii. iii. iiii. dearlynge, that doue, that fayreste amonge all women without spotte or deformite, of whome we rede in y• Balades of Salomō. This chyrch cā neuer erre, seinge that it is euer Ioan. xiiii. xv. xvi. Mat. xxviii Ioan. x. gouerned with the spirite of Christ seynge also that it cleaueth only to the worde of God, neyther dothe it heare ye voyce of ony straunger, but only heare and followe the voyce of her Sheppard, which is Christ. To know therfore this chyrch of Christ from the Synagoge of Antichriste it is very easye, For the Chyrche of

Christ leaneth with a sure fayth to A comparison betwene y• Chyrch of Christ, & the Synagoge of antechrist Christ alone the sonne of the liuing God, as an omnisufficient sauiour. The Synagoge of Antechriste although it confessethe Christ after a certayne manner, yet it sekethe saluacion also at the handes of other. The chyrch of Christ followeth only the word of God, & accordyng to that worketh in all thynges. The Synagoge of Antechrist followeth the voyces of straungers, deuyseth newe decrees, constitucions, lawes ordinaunces &c. & vnto them it stic keth maynly. The chyrch of Christ practysethe those workes, that ar
                     •…
                   commaunded in the holye Scripture. The Synagoge of Antechrist worketh thynges of her owne yma ginacion, not prescribed in the law of God. The chyrch of Christ seketh aboue all thynges the glory of god, & the health of her neyghbour. The Synagoge of Antechrist seketh her

owne pōpe, honour, glory & prayse. The chyrche of Christ is redy at all tymes to suffer persecuciō for Goddes truethes sake. The Synagoge of Antechrist hateth y• crosse, seketh to lyue all in pleasure, to persecute so many as loue god and his word. The chyrche of Christ seaketh euer after heauenly thynges. The Synagoge of Antechrist hūtethe after temporall promocions, worldly honours, fleshly dignities, easy lyuin ges, carnall pleasures, galant pasti mes, sumptuous fare, gorgious apparell. &c. The chyrche of Christ spē deth her goodes vpon the poore mē bers of Christe. The Synagoge of Antechrist bestoweth her goodes af ter her owne fansye, & not after the commaundement of God. To conclude, The chyrche of Christ is alto gyther godly & celestiall. The syna goge of antechrist is altogither wic ked & earthly. Hereby do we learne

which is the true chyrch, & which is ye false, which is ye chyrche of Christ & which is ye sinagoge of Antechrist
               But it is not to be gone ouer wt 
                  Why the chyrch is cal an hande mayde. a lyght fote, as they vse to say, that Dauid calleth this chyrch of Christ the handemayde of God, neither is it withoute a cause. For as a true, faythfull and diligent handmayde haue her eyes alwayes fyxed vpon her mastres for to wayte & se, what Psal. cxxii. Mark well. shall be her pleasure to commaund her to do, that she maye do it wyth all redines & spede, euē so becometh it them of Christes chyrche diligent lyto wayte vpon theyr Lord God, & to marke what his moost godlye Esa. viii. Psal. cxviii. Luc. xvi. wyll, pleasure and commaundemēt is that they shoulde do. And thys shall they assuredly knowe by searchynge the holye Scriptures. And as it becometh not an honest hand mayde to leaue the cōmaundement of her mastres vndone, and to busy

herselfe about suche thinges, as she ☞ her selfe thynketh best to be done of her owne brayne, euē so doth it not become them that professe them selues members of Christes chyrch to leaue the cōmaundementes of God vndone, & to fall in hande withe doynge thynges of theyr owne fansy & ymaginacion. For they that do so shewe them selues no handmaydes, but mastresses, nether are they obedient subiectes vnto God, but rather take vpon them to be arrogāt superiours, & presumteous checkemates. Let them therfore that wyl ☜ be of Christes chyrche learne to be handmaydes & no mastresses, to be obedient subiectes, & not arrogant superiours & presumpteous checke mates, vnlesse, whyle they followe theyr owne fantasyes and dreames they fall from the chyrche of Christ vnto Antichristes Synagoge, as we may se in the Papistes, Anabap

tistes, Sacramentaries. &c.
               Moreouer we reade that thys The true Chyrch is the spouse of Christ. chyrch is not only called the hande mayde of the LORDE, but also the spowse of Christe, yea & that not vn worthy. For as a good, honeste, and faythfull wyfe is obediēt to her hus bonde in all thinges, loueth hī pure ly, cleaueth vnto hym only, hath no pleasure to ronne after other men, delyghteth her self wt her husbōdes cōpany alone, is glad to please hym Cant. iiii. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Cor. xi Apoc. xxi. alway, seketh the accomplyshment of his wyll, & by no meanes wyll at tempte ony thynge that shoulde be displeasaunt to hym: So lykewyse this chyrche, which is the spouse of Christ, is obedient to her husbonde Christ in all thynges, loueth him wt an ernest, pure & vnfayned loue, cle ueth to him only, hath no plesure to Mark well. ronne after other men, wherby she may be entised from the loue of her husbonde, delyghtethe only in hym

and in his worde, sea
                     •…
                  eth the accō
                  plyshment of his wyl, & sheweth her selfe in all poyntes conformable to his moost diuine wyll, beynge lothe that ony thynge shoulde be commit ted on her behalf, that should be displeasaunt to hym in ony poynte.
               Let them therfore nowe take hede, that recoūte thē selues to be of this chyrche, & wyll be called the spouse of Christe, that they cleaue onlye to theyr husbonde Christ & his worde, Ioan. viii. x. heare hym alone, followe hys voyce delyght only in his moost holy law, seke the accomplysshment of his diuine wyll, & by no meanes admytte nor heare the voyce of ony straūger For as ye womā is an whore, thogh she bereth ye name of an honest wife Note neuer so moche, ye is not contented with her owne husbonde, but followeth other men, ronnethe a whore huntynge after straung louers, castyng away the sincere & true loue,

that she ought to beare toward her husbonde: So lykewyse, if suche as call thē selues the chyrche & spouse of Christe, forsake theyr husbonde Christe, be not contented wt hym & his word alone, but followe straūg doctrines, & ronne a whorehūtinge 
                     
                        •…
                     eb. xiii. after new lawmakers, which teach thynges cōtrary to the wyll of this bridegrome, yea or els they themsel ues make lawes, decrees, actes, con stitucions. &c. that fyght withe th
                     •…
                   voyce of this heauenlye shepparde, Brydegrome and husbonde Christ Iesu, surely, surely let them beleue me, they are not y• spouse of Christ, but fylthy whores, vnclene harlottes, stynckynge strompettes, abhominable adultresses, & stulyke Goshyppes, thoughe they weare neuer so many triple crownes, carnal hat tes, glysterynge myters, forked cap pes. &c. vpon theyr heades, & haue neuer so many pilers, pollaxes, cros

ses, crosser staues, & syluer roddes Ioan. x. Cant. iiii. borne before them. For ye spouse of Christ only hereth the voyce of her husbonde, followeth that, cleaueth to that, & by no meanes ronneth a whorehuntynge after straunge louers, neyther carethe she for theyr voyce, fayre wordes, & flatterynge promyses, seynge she knowethe full well, that no man can shewe thynges more necessary & profytable vn to her health & saluacion, than her husbonde hath already done. Ther fore recounteth it she a very vayne & madde thynge to forsake this her true & alone husbond Iesus christ, & to followe straungers. I am gelous ouer you, sayth S. Paule, wt a godly ielosye. For I haue maryed ii. Cor. xi. you to one man, to brynge a chaste virgine vnto Christ.
               This moche haue I spoken by the waye concernynge the chyrch, y• all men maye knowe the chyrche of

Christ, whiche is the handmayde of Ephe. v. God, & the spouse of Christ, hauing nother spor nor wryncle, but altogither glorious, pure & vndefyled, from the Synagoge of Antichrist, & be no more deceaued wt outward appearaunces, glysterynge visars, and paynted clokes, vnlesse they go forthe to worship, reuerence & haue in honour certayne deceatfull shadowes for ye self trueth, as we haue done in tymes paste. God make vs al the seruauntes of ye Lordes hand mayd, and graunt that we maye so abyde in the olde catholyke fayth & in the doctrine of Christes chyrche, y• we may be blissed, & haue our bondes Search the Newes out of heauen. broken, as it followeth.
               O LORDE because I am thy seruaunte, yea thy seruaunte in dede, sayth Dauid, and the sonne of thy handemayde, thou haste broken my bondes. What bōdes are these, that The bōdes God hath broken, & made vs fre frō
                  
them thorowe Christe, settynge vs agen at liberte? Uerely the bondes of Satan, synne, death, hell, desperacion, and the curse of the lawe.
               Fyrst as concernyng Satā, eue Sata
                        •…
                     . Gen. iii. Rom. v. Ephi. ii. ry man knoweth, howe we were in captiuite & bondage to hym by the sinne of our fyrst father Adā which thorowe his disobedience dyd caste vs into the bondes of that infernal Prince, made vs captiue & thraull, so that by our owne strēgth, power wytte, polecy, & free wyll we could neuer haue set oure selues agayne at liberte. But God of his tender mercy & fre goodnes, whan we had caste our selues into this bondage, promised vs deliueraunce, when he spake these wordes vnto y• serpent: I wyll set emnite betwene the and an woman, betwene her seed & thy seed That selfe seed shal trede down G
                        •…
                     e. iii. thy heade. And so many as beleued them, were at that very instant de

lyuered from the bondes of Satā. What it is to treade downe the heade of the Serpente For what other thig is it to treade downe the heade of the serpent, thā to vanquish & subdue hym, to make his power frustrate & of no strēgth yea and to set those agen at liberte, whiche before were his bonde preso ners. Nowe although this promise were not streyghtwayes fulfylled, yet stode it in effect with y• faithful, & they so sone as they beleued, were Mark well. Ioan. i. Galathi. iii mat. iii. xvii Marc. xix. Luke. iii. ix. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Ioan. iii. deliuered out of captiuite, set at liberte agayne, & made the sonnes of God, thorowe the faythe that they had i Gods promise, which he made vnto thē in his derely beloued sōne Christ Iesu. But whan christ was once come, & had fulfylled this promyse of hys celestiall father, than was Satans power vtterly adnihilated and made of no strength. His bōdes were broken, wherwithe so miserably he dyd detayne & hold vs, as S. Iohn̄ testifieth, The sōne

of god dyd appere for this purpose, euen to dissolue, losen & breake the workes of the dyuell. So that now Satan hathe no more power ouer vs, excepte wyllyngly we cast oure selues agayne into hys bondes, as S. Iames sayth, resist the dyuell, & Iaco. iiii. i. Pet. v he shal flye from you. For although he goeth about lyke a roryng lyon, seakyng whome he maye deuoure, yet can not he deuour, no nor yet so muche as once byte or towche ony faythfull man, excepte he wyll of a set purpose caste hymselfe into that Dragons rauenyng teth to be rent & torne, the sōne of God hath set vs at such libertie, & gyuen vs our ma numission so frely and plenteously.
               Nowe seyng that Satan, which is our moost vtter enemye, is so vā quisshed & subdued, & we vtterly de liuered from his captiuite, that our bondes are brokē, wherwith he had vs bound, it is to be thoughte that

synne, death, hell, desperacion, and the curse of the lawe can worcke vs ony euell, or that theyr power is so gret, that they are able to make vs styll captiue and bonde presoners?
               As towchynge synne, to whome is it vnknowen, that as the power Synne. of Satā is vāquisshed by Christ, so in lyke māner is synne thorow hym put to flyghte. He is that lambe of God, which taketh away the synne Ioan. i. Math. i. Esa. xiiii. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Tim. i. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Cor. v. i. Pet. ii. Ephe. v. Esa. iiii. of the worlde. He is that sauioure, which saueth his people from theyr synnes. He is, yea he is that Lorde in dede, whiche putteth awaye our iniquities, yea & that for his owne sake, & wyll remēber them no more. He came into y• worlde to saue synners. He beynge without all synne offered hym selfe vpon the altare of the crosse, a swetesmellynge Sacri fice to God y• father for vs, & made a sufficiēt satisfacciō for al our syn nes. Thorow his name all the Pro

phetes beare witnes, that so many i. Ioan. ii. Act. x. Act. iiii Heb. vii. viii ix. x. i. Ioan. i. as belue in him, shall receaue remis sion of theyr synnes. For ther is no health in ony other, nether is there ony other name gyuen vnto men, wherby they myghte be saued, but only the name of Iesus Christe. He is that Bysshop, whiche wt one oblacion yea & that once for all, hathe made them perfecte for euer more yt are sanctified. To be short, ye bloud of Iesus Christ Goddes sonne maketh vs clene from all synne. Thus se we yt by Christ, by Christes death passion & bloud the bondes of synne are broken, and we sette agayne at liberte. Death, hell, desperacion
               
               As for death, hel, & desperacion, what can they do? Are not they also ouercome? Let vs heare what ye Scripture sayth, out of the power of deathe, saythe the LORDE wyll I Oze. xiii. delyuer them, & from death wyll I redeme thē. O death I wyll be thy

deathe. O hell I wyll swallowe the vp. S. Paule also saythe, Death is i. Cor. xv. swallowed vp into victorye. Where is thy stynge O deathe? Where is thy victorye O hell? The stynge of deathe is synne, & the power of syn i. Ioan. v. is the lawe. But thankes be to god whiche hathe gyuen vs the victory thorowe our LORDE Iesus Christ. Agen, By death hath Christ put hī 
                  Heb. ii. to flyght, that had lordshyppe ouer death, that is to say, the dyuel, that he myght delyuer them, which thorow the fere of death, were al theyr lyfe tyme in daunger of bondage. O swete and confortable sayenges. O thalone true and christen pleasu res. The lawe
               
               As touchynge oure last enemy, whiche is the curse of the lawe, are not we also made free from that by Christ? What sayth the scripture? Gala. iii. Christ hath redemed vs frō y• curse of the lawe, whyle he was made accursed

for our sake. Agayne, Christe Rom. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   is ye perfect fulfyllyng of ye lawe to iustificacion for euery one that beleuethe Also in another place, be it knowen vnto you, ye men & brethrē 
                  Act. xiii. that thorow this man Christ is pre ched to you the forgyuenesse of synnes, & from al the thynges, wherby ye coulde not be iustifyed by ye lawe of Moses, thorowe hym euery one that beleueth is iustified.
               Thus se we, that our bōdes are broken thorow Christ, & we also set at liberte frō the daunger of all our enemies, so that now there is no cō 
                  Rom. viii. Ioan. viii. Gala. iiii. Heb. vii Rom. viii. demnacion for thē that are engraffed in christ Iesu, whiche walke not after the flesh, but after the spirite. For the lawe of the Spirite of lyfe thorowe Christe Iesus hathe made them fre from the law of synne and death. Who wyl now lay ony thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that iustifyeth, who can than

condēne? Hereof cōmeth it to passe, Luke. i. Psal. cxv i. Ioan. iii. Math. i. Oze. xiii. i. Cor. xv. Rom. x. that after we be once delyuered frō ye power of our enemies, haue oure bondes broken, & set at liberte thorowe christ & christes passion, death & bloud, by whome Satan is vanquisshed, synne put to flyght, death ouercome, hel swallowed vp, desperacion driuē out of place, the curse of the lawe vtterly takē away, yea the lawe fulfylled, and heauē gates open for the faythfull, all that euer A good lesson. we do in christ, is acceptable in the sight of God, taken to good worth, & moche made of, not for the dignite of the worke it selfe, but because it is salted with ye dignite, holines, i. Cor. x. Colos. iii. ryghteousnes, purite, & innocency of Christ, in whose name what so euer is done, smelleth swetely before GOD, so that bothe the thoghtes, wordes, dedes, lyfe & death of ye Sayntes, that is, of the faythfull, yea & all ye euer we do, is precious

in the syght of y• Lorde, as we herd before. For sure we are that all thin ges worke to the best for them that loue God, whiche are called of purpose. For those whome he knewe before, Rom. v
                        •…
                     . hathe he ordened also before, yt they should be lyke fashoned vnto y• shape of his sonne, that he might be the fyrst begottē amonge many bro thren. As for those, whome he hath ordyned before, them hath he called also, & whōe he hath called thē hath he also made ryghteous, & whōe he hath made ryghteous, them hathe he glorified also. What shall we saye than vnto these thynges? If God be on our syde, who can be agaynste vs? But let vs se, what is to be ren dred, & gyuen agayne vnto God for these his inestimable benefytes toward vs miserable synners?
            
            
               ¶ The seuenth verse.
               
                  I wyll offer to the / the sacrifyce of prayse / & on the

name of the Lorde wyl I call.
               
               ¶ The tente strynge.
               OUr Mynstrell Dauid goethe Dauid is lyke hym selfe. forth to be lyke hymself, y• is to saye, to shewe that he is one of a very gentle & thankefull nature, redy at all times vnto the vttermoost of his power to recompēce and make amendes for ony poynte of kyndenes that is shewed to hī, as we may se here. For after y• he hath songe of the singulare & incōparable benefi tes of god, which are shewed not on ly to hym, but also to all mankynd, I meane so many, as are the faythfull people of God, beleue in hym, & lyue accordynge to his diuine wyll, and hathe consydered howe greatly Ephe. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . both he & all the faythfull are blyssed of God thorowe them in Christ Iesu, he now taketh an occasion to ponder wyth hym selfe how he may

shewe hym selfe thankefull agayne to God, as he dyd before in y• 
                  
                     •…
                  ourth & fyfte verse of this his songe. For he desyreth nothynge to be more estraunged from his manners, than ingratitude & vnthankefulnes. He Note thyncketh it no poynte of humanite to leaue the beneficence and gentle liberalite of a mortall mā vnrecompensed to neglecte therfore and nothynge to regarde the inestimable goodnes & the infinite benefites of God, he recoūteth it an acte highly to be detested and abhored of ony christen harte. To shewe hymselfe therfore thankefull to God for his benignite, he is now full bent. But what wyll he gyue God agayne? What amendes wyll he make him? In what thynges wyll he shewe 
                     〈◊〉
                   selfe thanckefull agayne vnto the LORDE▪
                   Wyll he gyue hym mountaynes of golde? Wyl he bryng him heapes of precious stones? Wyll he

fetche hym frankensence, and other swete sauours out of Araby? Wyll he offer vnto hym fatte oxen, lusty hayffers, well lykynge shepe. &c. Na verely, for he knoweth ful wel, that Esa. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Iere. vii. Psal. xxiii. xlix. Agge. ii. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Cor. x. Math. xxv. GOD reiectethe all these thynges in many places of the holy Scripture, neyther hathe he ony nede of Dauids goodes, which hath bothe heauen and earth at his owne plea sure, and all that is contayned in them. Dauid knowethe full well, y• his goodes were gyuen hym of god that he should help his poore neigh bours with thē. What wyl he gyue God than? Uerely the sacrifyce of The Sacri fice of praise Psal. xlix. prayse & of thanckes gyuynge. For this is that thynge, whiche God de syreth so greatly, as he hymselfe testifyethe, The Sacrifyce of prayse, sayth he, shall honour me. Agayne, offer to God the sacrifyce of prayse Co
                        •…
                     oss. iii. What so euer ye do, sayth s. Paule, in worde & dede, do all thynges in y•
                  
name of the LORDE Iesu, gyuynge thanckes to God and the father by hym. Agayne, he mercyfull. Also in Ephe. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     ▪
                   another place, Gyue thākes alway for all thynges in the name of oure LORDE Iesu Christ to God & the fa ther. To the Hebrewes also he wry teth on this māner: By hym, he me Heb. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   neth Christ, do we offer the Sacrifice of prayse alwaye to god, that is to saye, the fruyte of y• lyppes, that gyue glory to his name.
               Thus se we howe acceptable a What it is to offer y• sacrifice of prayse. thyng to god, the sacrifice of praise 
                     •…
                  s. But what is it to offer the Sacrifyce of prayse vnto god? Uerely to confesse & vnsaynedly to graunt that what so euer is noughte, commeth of our selues, agen y• all that euer good is, commeth of God only as he saythe by the Prophet, O Israell thy destruccion commethe of 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . xiii thy selfe, but thy health and saluacion commeth only of me. For this

is the greatest prayse y• we can giue ☞ to God, for to knowlege hym alone the author & gyuer of all goodnes, & that all oure ryghteousnes, wysdome, holynes, sanctificacion, redē
                  cion, 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . Cor. iiii. Iacob. i. vertue, deuocion, and all that euer good is, cometh of hym alone, & not of our selues. This is that sa crifyce wherwith God is hyghly de lyghted. This is that oblaciō, that gyueth so godlye an odoure before god. This is that offryng, that ma keth God well pleased with hym, y• doth offer it, in as muche as by the oblacion hereof he confessethe hym selfe to be able to do no thyng, that of the owne dignite & righteousnes 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   therof, maye seme worthy to be accepted in the syght of god, and ther fore gyueth he al the glory, honour encomy, laud, prayse & magnificēce to god alone, as the Prophet sayth 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . i. O Lorde all glory be vnto the, and to vs shame & confusion. The sayntes

thēselues also praye on this mā 
                  Psal. 
                        •…
                     xi. ner, Not to vs, O Lorde, not to vs, but to thy name gyue all the glory for thy mercy and truethes sake. God hymselfe also sayth, I am the Esa. xiii. Lord, this is my name, I wyl giue my glory to no other, nor my praise to grauen Images. If God hym selfe wyll not gyue away hys glory & prayse to other, certes we do hym thā much iniury, yfwe steale it frō hym, and gyue it to ony other crea ture eyther in heauen or in earthe. If we depely consyder with our sel ues at al tymes the great kyndnes of God toward vs, we shal vndoub tedly be moued to synge perpetual prayses to his moost blyssed name, and continuallye to offer the sacrifice of thankes gyuyng vnto hym.
               But in as much as I haue entre ted abundātly of thankes gyuing, and of the sacrifice of prayse in my Pathway vnto prayer, I wyl now

cease to speke ony more of it at this tyme. Reade from the li
                     •…
                  . vnto the 
                     •…
                  v. Chapter.
               As towchynge the inuocacion of the Lordes name, wherof Dauid agen maketh mēciō in this place, I haue spoken sufficiently of it in the fourth verse of this Psalme. Thou mayst therfore (moost gentle Reader) yf thou wylte, resorte thyther for this matter. I am lothe to be te dious vnto the. I wyl go forth and make an ende, althogh that whiche followeth, maye also seme abundāt ly to be entreated of heretofore.
            
            
               ¶ The eyght verse.
               
                  I wyll pay my vowes vn to the Lorde in the syghte of all his people ī the courtes of the Lordes house / yea euen in the myddes of the / O Ierusalem.
               
               
                  
DAuid is euer one man. He had Dauid is euer one man. rather synge one song a thousand tymes, than he woulde once at tempte ony thynge without the au thorite of Gods word. He is at this poynte, that he wyll do nothyng, ex cepte Gods worde bearethe hym in it. He wyll not cleaue to his owne good intentes, myndes and zeles. He wyl worshyp God accordyng to his worde. He setteth before his eyes this commaundement. That I commaund the, do that only to the Lorde, neyther put thou ony thing to it, nor yet plucke ought therfrō. Agayne, I commaunde the to do y•, whiche is pleasaunt in the sight of the Lord thy God. Also in another place, Ye shall not do euerye one of you, that which ye yourselfe think Deu
                        •…
                     ro. xii xiii. right & good. He can make no shyft to be diuers in the worshippyng of God. He can inuente no newe and straunge honorynges of god, as the

olde Phareses dyd in tymes paste, Esa. xrix 
                        •…
                     ath cv. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . vii. and the Papistes & Monckes haue done syns y• tyme, but all in vayne, as the Scriptures testifye. He kepethe hym selfe wythin the bondes of Gods worde, and as he sayde before that he would paye his vowes, that is to saye, do those thynges y• he had promysed to his LORD God, kepe his Commaundementes, followe & accomplysh his moost godly wyll in all poyntes vnto the vttermooste of hys power, and do the offyce of a true kynge, seake Goddes glory, promote his holy worde, tenderly The office of a true kynge. loue his subiectes, mayntayn vertue, and suppresse vice: euen so dothe he nowe agayne. So that Dauid knoweth not howe to recō
                  pense in ony parte the goodnes of GOD, but only by kepynge hys moost holy commaundementes, & in gyuynge hym hattye and contiall thanckes, whiche he also promisethe

to do in this verse.
               But seyng that I haue entreated of the whole matter, that this verie contayneth, in the fyfte verse and seuenhte strynge heretofore, I wyll speke no more of it at this present, but only note this one thinge that our Mynstrell sayth, He wyll paye his vowes in the courtes of y• Lordes house, and in the middes of Ierusalē. By the courtes of y• Lordes house, & by Ierusalem is none What is signifyed by the courtes of y• Lordes hous, and by Ieru salem. i. Cor. iii. v
                        •…
                      ii. Cor. v
                        •…
                     . other thyng signifyed, thā y• chirch of Christ, I meane the congregaciō of Saync
                     •…
                  es, that is to saye, of the faythfull, in whome God dwelleth by his holy Spirite, as S. Paule sayth. The Temple of God is holy, which ye are. His meanyng is this, loke wher so euer the people of god is mooste gathered togyther, euen there in the thyckest of them wyl he sette forthe the glory of God, as we read of the good Kynge Iosias. He

wyll seake all meanes possible, that 
                     
                        •…
                     iii. 
                        •…
                     e. xxiii 
                        •…
                     i. pa. xxxiiii Would god that all kyn ges would
                        •…
                      
                     
                        •…
                     o this. all thynges in his Realme shalbe or dered accordyng to y• law of God, & that no vice shal reygne among his people, nether I dolatry, nor swearynge, nor disobedience, nor whoredome, nor manslaughter, nor stealynge, nor bearynge false wytnes, nor ony other vice, that is prohibited by the holy scripture. And that thys thynge maye the more fortunately come to passe, Dauid hym selfe, in as muche as he is king and excelleth all other in dignite, wyl al so farre excell & passe all his subiectes in vertue & godlynes. He wyll be vnto them an example & spectacle of all goodnes. He wyll lyke vnto Phil. ii. Math. v. Iosue. i. Psal. i. as great lyghte shyne before hys people in godly conuersacion. The boke of the lawe of the Lorde shall neuer departe from hym. He wyll read & meditate in it daye & nyght. He wyll not steake to the corrupte

iudgementes of other, nor be led wt the dotyng fansys of those pestilēt flatterers, Trueth wyll we, but he hymselfe wyll looke vpon the scriptures Ma
                        •…
                      we
                        •…
                     
                   of God wythe all diligence, & & euermore caull vnto God for the assistence of his moost holy spirite, Ioā. xiiii. xv that that swete confortoure maye both assist & conforte hym in all his godly and vertuous enterpryses, & also lead hym into all trueth, & kno ledge of Gods moost holy wyll. To make an ende, come ther lyfe, or cō
                  meth ther death, Dauid is fully determned to stycke by Gods word, & Math. x. Mar. iiii. Luke. viii. to seke his glory aboue all thynges yea and that not in corners and secret places, but openly, that all the worlde maye euidently se that Dauid is an earneste setter forthe and an vnfayned promotoure of Goddes glorye, and by that meanes be occasioned also wyth Dauid to honoure, worshyppe, magnify, laude,

and prayse GOD wyth one mynd and voyce for euermore, as Christe Math. v. saythe: Let your lyght so shyne before menne, that they maye se your good workes, and glorifye your father, which is in heauen, to whome wythe his onlye begotten s
                     •…
                  nne oure LORDE and omnisufficient sauiour Iesus Christ, & the holy Ghoste that moost swete confor toure, be all honoure, prayse and glory for euer and euer.
               Am̄.
            
            ¶ Gyue the glory to God alone.
         
         
            
            ¶ The. Cxlv. Psalme.
            
            I Wyll magnifye the, O God my kyng, I wyl prayse thy name for euer and euer.
            Euery day wyll I gyue thākes vnto the, and prayse thy name for euer and euer.
            Great is y• Lord, and maruelous worthy to be praysed, ther is no ende of his greatnes.
            One generacion shall prayse thy workes vnto another, and declare thy power.
            As for me I wyll be talkynge of thy worshyp, thy glory, thy prayse, and wonderous workes.
            So that men shall speake of the myghte of thy maruelous actes, & tell of thy greatnes.
            
               
The memoriall of thyne abundant kyndenes shall be shewed, and mē shall synge of thy righteousnes.
            The LORDE is gracious & mercifull, longe sufferynge, and of great goodnes.
            The LORDE is louynge to euery man, and his mercye is ouer all his worckes.
            All thy worckes prayse the (O LORD) and all thy Saynctesgyue thanckes vnto the.
            They shew the glory of thy kingdome, and talke of thy power.
            That thy power, thy glorye and myghtynes of thy kyngdom might be knowen vnto men.
            Thy kingdome is an euerlastyng kyngedome, & thy dominion endureth thorowe oute all ages.
            The LORDE vpholdethe all suche as shoulde fall, and lyfteth vppe all those that be downe.
            The eyes of all wayte vpon the,

and thou gyuest them theyr meate in due season.
            Thou openest thyne hande, and fyllest all thynges lyuyng with plē teousnes.
            The LORDE is ryghteous in all his wayes, & holy in all his workes.
            The LORDE is nye vnto them y• call vpon hym, yea all suche as call vpon hym faythfully.
            He fulfylleth the desyre of them that feare him, he heareth theyr cry and helpeth them.
            The LORDE preserueth all them y• loue hym, but scatterethe abroad all the vngodly.
            My mouth shal
                  •…
                speake y• prays
                  •…
                of the LORDE, and let all fleshe gyue thanckes vnto his holy name for euer and euer.
            Prayse the euerlastynge.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ Imprynted at London in Botulph lane at the sygne of the whyte Beare, by Iohn̄ Mayler for Iohn̄ Gough. Anno Dn̄i. 1542.
            
               
                  Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum. Per Septenn
                        •…
                     m.
               
            
            
         
      
   