
      
         
            
            
            ¶ The booke of Marchauntes, very profitable to all folkes to knowe of what wares they ought to be ware of, for the begilyng of them▪ Newly peruſed and augmented by the fyrſt authoure well practiſed in ſuche doynge.
            Reade and profite.
            ¶ Ad libelli Repertorem.
            
            ¶ 
                  〈◊〉
                ſine mercatu Merces Mercator inen
                  ••••…
               
            
            
               
                  •
               olle tibi, Merces has tibi ſponte damno.
            ☞Anno. 1547.
         
         
            
            
            ¶ The prologue of the author.
            
               THe purpoſe that we preſently intende, is as me morable & worthi to be knowen as any other that may be ſpoken of, and alſo y• mater ther of is ſo euident, cleare, and ue rytable, that all people may eaſyly vnderſtand it, yea truly ſmall chyldren in all countreis, and landes what ſoeuer they be, for ther be many marchants and chapmen in euery place wherby the trade is the more euident to be knowē To be brief in all the ſayeyng of thys boke is not one ſpytefull difficulte, but onely ſome

abuſes (ouer manyfeſt) ſhewed and bryefly touched, bycauſe that they may be eſchewed in tyme comynge. And therfore I praye al thē that ſhal haue this boke to rede it diligētly, For of trouth if it be well vnderſtanden there ſhall come ineſtimable profit to the poore worlde, by the healp of god, whiche eternally be praiſed and magnifyed.
            Amen.
         
      
      
         
            
            Here begineth the Marchants boke
            He eſtate of Marchandiſe (for the time of thys mortall lyfe) is ſo neceſſary, that without it we can ſtant ly leue, it is ſo alowable and profitable. Prouided that it be faythfully maynteyned.
            That it is neceſſari, lyuely experyence ſheweth it openly, for of truth it is neceſſary that the haboundance of one countrey healp to ſatiſfy that whych lacketh in an other. And therby al labouryng perſones by diligēt induſtry are requiſit for the mainteinyng of the cōmōweale the whyche without fraude or gyle ought to diſtribute cōuey, chaunge

conſerue and tranſporte all ſortes of wares frō one place to an other accordinge to the exigence of the tyme, and behouf of y• people. The whiche is behouffull to all faythfull marchants, as good & truſty ſeruants of the comen welth wyth moderate gaynes and profyte of theyr wares without dyſſemlyng in maynteninge their eſtate, of their perſone & houſholde ſo that they occupy in all trouth without circumuention and domage of theyr neybour with out be gylynge or any deceyt. For ifTheſ
                     •
                  . i. fydelyte and enteyer veryte be not foūde in them, they be not marchātes but rather wi

ly theues, and cautelous gallants.
            By ſimilitude of this eſtate Ieſus Chriſte hath taught his children. To multyply, en creſe, and do profite with the talentes and gyſtes of God, whyche are delt to euery one according to his good wyl, ſai yng thus▪ Occupy vntyll ILuk. xi
                     •
                  . come, And at hys comyng agayn puniſhed the ſlouthful and yll ſeruant that dyd not his deuour to bringe y• frute of the gyft that he had receiued, doyeng vs to wite that wee ſhoulde not be ydle and not to receyue the gyftes of God in vayne, or els we cannot eſcape y• punyſhment of

God. And it is to be thought that he ſpake theſe wordes of bodi marchādyſe. For of trueth as thys eſtate wherof I ſpeake is honorable botth in temporall and ciuil thynges: euen ſo is it curſed and deteſtable in ſpirituall thynges. And therfor ſaynt Paule in the vertu of God forbiddeth euery man that wylbe a miniſter, and ſeruant of ſpirituall thinges, whiche is the adminiſtration of y• holy worde of God, and the ordinances of Ieſus Chriſt, that he appl
                  •
                hym not to tēporal and ſeculerii. Tim. ii. chafferinge, and netheles, God hath permitted in hys 
                  •
               uror that in ſtead of good paſters,

and veritable miniſters of the ſaide worde, to chaunce in the church I ſay not alone li groſſe chapmē but furious theues, and inſaciable rauenyng wolues.
            Should not he be iuged a begyler and theſe, whych ſelleth the thynge yt is not hys own, or that by ſubtyll meanes in ſted of gold and ſyluer ſelleth tyn & bras? And ſhould not the byer bee begylled and deceiued? Thus certainly (long ago) to the greate detriment of ſoules, of bodyes & goodes of the poore people is chaunced to vs, that in ſtead of faithfull ſeruannts of God that ſhould lede and teach y• poore

worlde to the waye of ſaluacion, be entred, not by ye doreIohn. x. which is Ieſus Chriſt, but by violence haue clymed in by another waye as falſe impoſtores, and as. S. Peter ſayeth,i. Pet. ii. fals maſters, lyers, teachyng ſectes of perditiō, forſakyng the Lorde that hath bought thē, blaſpheming the waye of trouth, the whiche in auarice by feined wordes of our ſeyde marchants haue occupied, for ſuche workers of iniquytie, haue forgotten nor left nothing wher with by cautelus inuentions they 
                  〈…〉
               ht occupy at their pleaſure▪ 
               
                  •
               nd will,
            And to ſay the trueth they haue ſet all thynge to ſale euē
               
to crye, Paradyſe is to ſel, by Paradyſe by. There is no ſpirite that can compriſe, nor tong declare all the marketes of theſe chapmē, and ſo great a ſwalow & prodigious multitude. Some poynts we muſt declare, leauyng ye reſydue to be thought of pepole of more ſubtyl vnderſtandynge.
            The marchants that wee ſpeke of be maruelous wyly. And haue encreaſed their wares ſo gratly with their workmanſhip, that they haue not left towne nor vilage. hil nor valey but thei haue filled thē with theyr ſhoppes.
            There wer neuer ſlyer foxes, for they haue ramped all

vnder theyr pawes. And the better to lede their trade thei cauſe y• people to beleue that it is a greate welth, and yet is it neither mornor leſſe thā as the fals Ieſabell payntediiii. Re. ix. her eies ye & all her face with ruddy colours & other hewesIer. iiii. for to ſeme fayre and eſthew the fury of Iehu. Thus likewiſe theſe coueytous of glori 
                  •
               uaricians marchants paint their workes, at trybuting it to them 
                  •
               el
                  •
               s that belongeth to God. As rightuouſnes vertu, ſapience, pardane, mercy, re
                  •
               i ion of ſyne, haucuing euer in their month. Lord God thankes to God, in the named. God, of the authory

of God, of. S. Peter of ſaint Paule. &c. beholde here the trompe the paynted gloſſe of theyr malycyouſnes, for they knowe well that other wyſe they ſhould not be ſet by, and theyr trade ſoone be diſtroed. In bieynge and ſelling muſt be good faceyng & diſguiſyng among thē, hauing their heades al moſt al plucked, ſhorne or clipped, therfore it is wrytten, y• none may do as they, biey nge and ſellynge, but he haue the name or marke of the beaſt.
            They chepen, they chop, changeand ſell, they bye and ſell agayne, they barginge to gyther on the beſt faſ you,

for parſonages curats, and do hoke benyfyces, and the better to do they teache eche other theyr vacatiō and craft. Theyr tyme of barganing is euer redi, & haue ſōtim great fayres as tyme and ſeaſon requireth, and always on high feaſt dayes, clene contrary to the other Marchants. Whē Eſter, witſōtyde, halowmas, Chriſtemas and ſuch other come, whiche they them ſelfes haue ordeined, all Marchāts ceaſe ſaue theſe.
            For there is nonne handycraft but when they luſt they cauſe it teaue of, bycauſe they a lone make ſale and works, and all the other do homage

vnto them becauſe it ſerueth greatly to theyr gaynes.
            Of this in or tyme we haue ſene an example meruelouſly to purpoſe, that was of a croſey generally made and publiſſed almoſt ouer al the erth. And God knoweth by what meanes. God knoweth by what ſuppoſts by what work men by what croſeidiers, ſuch a worke was handled. They conſtreyned all them whome the woulde, to obey to theyr deſires. They threatned al th
                  •
                that in any wyſe gaynſayed theyr lyes and abuſes.
            There was neuer ſene agreatter market, hel and heauen were openned, for to take

in, put out, or kepe ſtyll all that came at theyr pleaſur, ſo that thei brought any preſent, for wythout that a man could not ſpede of theſe galantes. We dyd make holidayes, aſſēbles, feaſtes and proceſſions, altogether at they myndes & ordynaunce, and not ſo hardy to ſay, nay
            They griped, they plucked, rauyſſed, ſlax, woul, yarne, thred, butter, cheſe, oxē, caulue
                  •
                ſhepe, gold and ſiluer, al thynges were ſaleable. And than thei ruff
                  •
               ed, thei drāke, 
                  〈…〉
               led and plaied, I dare not 
                  ••
               ye whored, for eury thynge went forwarde wyth them.
            And to ſay the trueth, theſe

marchants be different from the other, for it is not lyghtly ſene but they be cōtent with ſome one trade, ſome wt cloth, other with cataile, ſome with ſylke or metall, other wt corne or wine. &c. but theſe woluiſh groſſers, groſſe vp all at once and rauyſh euery where, to ſet all thynges on ſale, it is a worlde to ſe theyr trade, nothynge ſcapeth them, but at their plaſures thei occupi it, yea mē, womē, childern, now borne and vnborne, bodyes, ſoules of the quicke and dead of goodes viſible and inuiſible, heauen, earth, and h
                  •
               lle bread, meat, tyme and dayes. Mariage, veſtimentes, raſures,

ſhauing, anointinges, clo thinges, bulles, pardons, indulgences, remiſſions, bones other relykes and rogacions, expectyues, diſpences, exemptions, ſacramentes, and holi workes of god. Of bread, wine, oyle, towe, mylke, water, ſalt, fyer, fumigations, encenſynges, ceremonies, ſonges, melodies, wod and ſtone, of brotherhodes, inuentions tradicions, deceptions, lawes and wythout nombre of ſuch tryfetrafe, wherby they ca
                  ••
                meruelouſly well drawe money to them, wherby the por
                  •
                people are ſo vndertrod, gna wen, deuoured, and ſo ſtrau
                  •
                ged for y• knowledge of God

that it is not poſſyble to beleue it.
            And who euer woulde haue thought y• whyche they haue deuyſed, that by ouer greate ſubtyltie they haue ſo abeaſtad the people that thei makthē kiſſe a trenchor or a ſmall platter of gold, ſiluer, or lead: which thei name the platine, ſomtyme their fyngers endes that is to witte theyr nayles, or ſome dead bones of dead folke, whiche they call relikes whereby they haue goten ſo many gyftes and preſents.Luk xxi
                     •
                  .
            
            The Byſhopes of Ieruſalem gaue money to Iudas for to kiſſe a precious and worthi thynge, a thynge a lyue and

fayre, whyche was ye precious and worthy face of our ſauyour & redēptor. Ieſu Chriſte.
            But theſe are more wyly, and by their fraude do other wyſe, for by their fals babelynges and cautelous waies, they haue ſo puniſhed almoſt al people, in makyng them to kiſſe bones and other vnleful dead thinges. And receyue therfore plenty of money euery where not paſſyng where, ſo they maye haue it▪
            
            I leaue the kyſſyng of the capmerchants ſhoo or ſlipper for the kiſſe of baudy Thais was neuer ſo dearly ſolde as that is, or the kiſſinger of his minions. But for bicauſ that

here aboue wee haue ſpoken of bones and other traſhe of dead thinges vnlafull: it ſhal be behouefull to ſe and reade a lyttel treaty ingeniouſly & profitablye compiled but late by a ryght docte and learned man named M. Iohn, Caluyne, of the abuſe of relykes intituled the vtile aduertiſment, of the greate proffyte that ſhould come to Chriſtē
               dome, if an inuentory were made of all the holy corpſes, and relykes in al regions the begynnyng wherof is thys.
            Saynt Auſtyn in a boke that he intiled, of the labour of Monkes lamentynge certayne bearers of rogations,

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
which alredy in his tyme exercyſed vilayne and dyſhoneſt fayres and markets, bearyng hyther and thether the relikes of martirs. Adde yea, if they bee mertyrs.
            By the whyche worde it ſingnifieth that as than begon the abuſe of tropery, berynge about bones gathered here and there. Makyng the ſymple people beleue y• they were ſaynts bones.
            Syth the begynnyg herof is ſo aunciēt, it is no doubt but they haue greatly encreaſed all this long while alſo ſeyng that the world is ſo merueillouſli corrupt ſith that tyme, that is declyning ſtyll in appayringe

tyll that it camè to the extremitie that we ſee it in now.
            For certaynely by ſuche mayſter liers, workers of wickednes, people effeminate, the worde of verite is hyd, let ted: corrupt and blaſphemed, to exalt, a
                  •
               aunee, and publyſh and vtter their moſt fals and aduou
                  •
               erous wares not wyth out dere ſale of thē. For neuer the wordes of an aduo cacite, at torney, orator or phiſitiō were ſo dere, as the wordes of ſuch patriarkes.
            Nede it were that y• great paſtori. P
                     ••
                  . 1. our ſauiour & redemptor Ieſu Chriſt that bought vs not wyth golde and ſyluer,

or any corruptible thing: but wt his precious bloud, ſhould come wyth power and dryue away theſe great maſtyfhrigant Marchāts, wyly changers, and abuſers, whych occupy the temple of God the whyche by figure was ſometyme made in the cite of Ieruſalem, and whan hys goodIohn. ii. pleaſure is in the vertue of his holy name, by the wepon of hys holy worde, and ſpirit of his mouth: make an end of ſuch a miſerable worke.
            Alas, whan ſhall we ſe the tyme accompliſhed that oure Lorde hath promiſed by hys
                  
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  h. xiiii. prophete zacharye ſayeyng. There ſhall nomore be marchants

in y• hous of our Lord God in theſe dayes.
            Oh howe theſe good marchants will grene and frown whan they may nomore ſell theyr wares and works? as it is writen. The marchants ofApo. xviii. the erth ſhal wepe and wayle bycauſe that none ſhall bye theyr wares any more. And after y• letter, thys is ſpokē of thoſe marchantes of whome we ſpeake. Ryght happy they are & ſhalbe y• maye ſe y• tyme and day ſo deſirable. And truly it is greate wonder that the worlde can ſuffre and ſuſteyne ſo horryble and outragious fardelles. For there is no deſolation vpon the erth,

but that it is come by theſe moſte fearfull and fallatious marchants.
            And althoughe the doinges be ſo merueylous that it is impoſſible to know it, or writ it fully, yet muſte wee ſomwhat touch their nimbleniſſe and gentylcaſtes of their wiles. In their practyke they be ſowple and ſleight, wythout doubt more than I wene.
            I sit not a greate actiuite, to ſell well, and in ſellynge to be well payde: and at the lenth the byer hath but the ſyght therof? Scantly any It alian or Lomberd cā do it, but theſe can do it welmough Euery man ſeeth that it is

ſo, but euery man doeth not perceyue it they haue ſo ſ
                  •
               ombred, blinded, & abeaſted theprobatū. poore worlde.
            Amonge good and true marchāts it hath not ben ſeen that euer they ſold the onely ſight of their wares. For thei ſay cominly the ſight ſhal coſt you nothynge but all theſe iackes lyke i
                  •
               gelers, momers or tomblers haue well lerned to play theyr pageants for wyth out ceaſe they can ſell and reſele derely y• onely ſight of theyr baggadge. This y•. I ſaye is beſte knowen in good townes. For if any be called of god by death ſodainly theſe marchants do enquire of the

frendes or executers if they wyl haue the beſte cloth the next or ye leaſt, y• beſt croſt, or the next for to bringe y• corps to the church, and therto accordynge for to paye, wher in the pore people be ſore abuſed for all wel conſydered, it uayleth aſmoche to the dead perſone as to the byer and all a lyke. Of the corps it is certain couer it neuer ſo wel, yet wyl it not ſweate, nor ſaugh nor ſtier at the beautie of the cloth nor at the riches of the croſſe. As to the folyſh byer, it is wel ſene that he may pay wel for he hath nothyng but the ſight ther of. And on the morow it ſhalbe ſolde lykwiſe

to another. Thus can theſe maiſters pollers uymbly vnfold and ſhowe theyr wares, and properly fold it and bere away theyr tooles.
            Moreouer is it not an actyuite to ſel wares more dere after the rate of the gramēts wher wyth the marchante is arayed yea though the ware be neuer the better. Suche thynges were neuer ſene in other marchants but theſe, yet with out ceaſe they do it & yet no body doeth perceyus it nor thynke theron.
            I would wytte of you, if y• maſſe (as they do ſaye) of a Chanon be not dearer thā of a vicar, of an abbot than of a

monke of a byſhop than of a dean and ſo of the other, And yet they ſaye them ſelfe that the maſſe of a naughty prieſt is as much worth as another which we beleue wel mough
            Wherfore I woulde wite of them wher of cometh ſuch diuerſyte of price of one maner of marchandyſe as for anſwer they haue none, but by the diuerſite of y• veſtiments, wher in they be lyke to a harlo
                  •
               , that ſeketh her fylthynes more or leſſe after the ſorte of her rayments.
            In this paſſage theſe great harlo
                  •
                
               
                  〈…〉
               gers wyll loue me better and be more pleaſed to compare them onely but to

an harlot, and that in this I woulde not compare them to the traitour Iudas, as one of their bokes doeth, named,Stella clericorum. Stella clericorum, where the faire boke ſaieth thus.
            Qui miſſā celebrat pro pecunia, videtur mihi dicere cum proditore Iuda. Quid vul
                  •
               is mihi dare, et ego e
                  •
                vobis tradā?
            That is to ſaye. Whoſo celebrateth maſſe for money, he ſayeth with iudas the traitor. What wyll ye gyue me, and I ſhall delyuer hym to you? Here be terrybel marchants that this do ſel their God. They ſell God and deuil nothyng ſcapeth them.
            They conger, they charme the wether, the hayle, y• tempeſt. They make ſalte watres

and vintage. To be brief thei playe wunders in al thynges and ar a great dele more fyue than muſterd.
            Is it not a great ſleyght to ſel one piece of ware al hole to mani folkes at once in one ſelfe houre and inſtant, with out knowledg ether of other, and of eche of them to take and receiue the hole payment and money. They name them ſelfe angeles bycauſe of theyr offices but angeles make not the people blinde for all their brightnes, as theſe darke angels do. If they were but angels only thē were this great meruel, but by their own ſainge▪ thei be gods & half gods,

great gods, and litel gods doinge all at theyr wille in heauen in erth, and in hel. And therfore they may (as it is ſayde) as it pleaſeth them ſell theyr wares eaſyly al at one chop to ſondri people, but the wilyſte is oftimes taken.
            That it is ſo the practyſe ſhewth, as it is opēli ſen whā there is great preaſe, as whā the kynges court is nygh to them, or any other great aſſemblyng of noble men.
            The mother is, the better the practiſe is handled, and namely whan the Marchante is eſtemed and that he can ſtoupe and nod, or hange hys head 
                  •
               n y• one ſyde, and make

a ſad countenaunce. The caſe may be thus.
            Some greate Lorde cometh to a conuente of fryres, bee they greay or blake, the one is as good as the other, ſayeng to one of them ſhal we haue a maſſe? yea mi lorde, another cometh to the ſame fryre, and aſketh for a maſſe alſo, yeſhal haue my Lorde. Yet an other cometh for aſmoche, yee my Lorde, and ſo come as many as will, he refuſteth none.
            Than cometh the goodly Domine, & diſpatcheth them all at ones, and the gentylm
                  •
                go their waie wel pleaſed, the marchante is payed and paied agayne, both go theyr way

laughynge, aſwell the byer as the ſeller. Is not thys a great habilite? is it not wel wrought? Of ſuche wares their ſtore houſes are ful, and theſe be called, ſtore hous maſſes, or ſalted maſſes. That god of hys gracious goodnes ryght ſoone vnſalte and water it.
            Truly they be ſo apte and prōpte, that fewe or none can do their beanes. Amōge other thynges they be almoſte all marchants of war but in all the worlde is no appoticary nor chāldeler that can worke in theyr maner.
            Some poore, foole cometh to the tempel, deuoutly (as

they ſay) & ſtycketh vp a candell vpon a pyller, and oure marchaunt anone ſnatcheth and puffeth it out, and for y• pryce ſellethe it to an othere, that ſetteth it vp in the ſame plaſe. And oure marchāt that watcheth for it, is ſtyll redye to ſnatche & to blowe, and ſell it to an other that anone wyl ſette it vp agayne, ſo that by ſnatchyng and by pouffeyng oure marchantes ceas not to gatherin al day, wherby they are ryche anone for as ye ſe al retorneth to them both ware and money.
            A lytel war doeth thē great caſe, be the marchants great or litel for comenly they vſe

it all. The lytell ones ſell it wrought in candells, and the greate marchauntes ſelle by lumpes tacked vpon paper, or at the tayle of parchement. This that I ſay is well knowen, at the leaſt way to offycyals, ſcribes notaries, ſecretaries of abbayes, proctours chancelers of Byſhops, archbyſhops, cardinalles &c.
            The great Gargantua. I ſay the hygh prouoſt of theſe marchants that is the moſte feared and dred the wyleſt of thē al kepeth his bank vnder exchang to all people conuertynge leade into golde. In thys worlde was there neuer ſeen ſuche an alcumyſte, that

vnder lead (by hym and hys) could fynde ſuche a vayne of golde. The whyche the good marchāt Pauorme hath not hid in his writīges. Whā by elegant ceremony, or at leaſt:Pauorm ſuper pri▪ prin
                     ••
                  
                  ▪ de electione, in gloſſa prima in fine. wai barbariē, he wrate thus.
            Di
                  ••
               nt aliqui quod nuncii pape non ſunt deaurati ſed plumbati: ſed dic ni
                  •
               ilominus quod poſſūt di
                  •
               i deaurati: quia dant plūbum et reportant autum.
            That is to ſaye. Some ſay that the popes meſſagers be not gylded but leaded, but neuertheles, ſaye thou, they maye bee called golden, for they gyue leade and receyue gold. This may be called an eaſy bodyly worke. To ſuch a worke man all thynges are proper to cheapen and ſteale.

And y• better to cloſe hys mater, the name of Sanetiſſimu
                  •
                receyueth it.
            Albeit that he is but a hat maker yet he is a hatſeller to,The hat maker of Rome. and there was neuer hat maker that ſolde hats ſo deare, and acordyng to the color he maketh the pryce for if thei be read they be the derer, and alſo the byers mater is the better, wytnes of Chriſtofer of Forlinio, of thetytle of Aracclie the ſpaniard of Angloys, wyth hys greate corde. Alſo T. Wolſay of the tytel of. S. Cicelie & other whōe I leaue for al the worlde doeth know them. And whan theſe gentyl byers be thus coyffed and

wrapped with their read hat tes of this great capper, they go fro town to town, fro place to place, ſpecyally to the courtes of Princes and Kinges to make their muſtres, and ſtall theyr marchandiſe, or els it maye be to practiſe ſome buttin for this read hat is full of great vertue, to them that knowe it fyrſte fro the tyme y• he is couered wyth all, he is at leyſer to do all what he wyl, to kepe as many benifyces as he can catche, whither they be (as they ſaye) compatyble or vncompatyble, leſſe or more, al ſerueth the kechin.
            Secondly he is affraūcheſed and fre fro the vnanites,

that is, for any benefice that he catcheth, he oweth no vacation, whiche is a ioly practiſe. Thirdly he is alredy in the way and nygh to be hymſelf the great hatmaker, or ſouerayn haberdaſher.
            
               
                  •
               ee not theſe goodly priuileges. Thys is it that maketh the derth of ſuch hate.
            Than at the example of thē there be cappers y• lykewyſe are ſellers of bonets. The ſellers dyne veray well at the exſpences of y• byers, y• which folyſhe byers be ſo mad and folyſhe that they brybe and ſtryue in many places for cap pes and hooddes with tayles ſtyckinge on them, who ſhall

haue the fyrſte, the ſecond or thirde. &c. Not with ſtanding that they be al alyke of ordre. Other ther be y• ſeke for ſuch byggynnes (I woulde ſaye bo
                  •
               etts) wherin thei haue nether more nor leſſe knoledge, thowgh that they wil not for get theyr liripypies, I mene their peltry capperons.
            Now I am in thought of a mater new inought, that hath comen in times paſt.
            And I pray al you that ſhall rede thys preſent treatyſe to pardone me if ye know it. 
                  •
               t is of a chapman that kepeth in Rome, y• rowme of y• great
                  
                     •
                  la
                     〈…〉
                  a. marchāt. For as Platina writeth in the boke of the lyfe of

the byſhope Ione the .viii. of that name the .Cvi. byſhop was a womā which held and poſſeſſed the pontifical ſyedge two yeres, a moneth and .iiii. dayes.
            At the end of whyche tyme (and ſhe beynge pope, or thatQueſtio pregnās I do not lye popeſſe) ſhe childed a yong popy. I would wit than if ſhee were choſen. Via Spiritus ſanc
                  ••
               . And if her marchantdyſe were ſale worthy, and as good as of a mā? And when ſhe gaue abſolutyon, or that ſhe gaue or ſolde any Croyſe, Miter, or Hatte.
            Or that ſhee ordeyned anye Byſhopes, Preſtes, or Deakenes, what cometh all thys

geare to? Item whereby cam the ſacerdotall Carecte, & many other thynges whyche for this tyme I let pas if ye can ſay any thinge to this, do all ſwere me, for as for me I vnderſtand nothynge els, but that it was very gallyardde and pleaſaunt.
            Wherby I retorne to my marchants, of whome truely ſome be wilier thā ſome, and al together to the wilynes of the kechin. For albeit that in France Normādi & Picardi▪ &c. be maruaylous wyly, yet haue they not as touchynge this wrought ſo fineli, as thei of the contrey of Santonge, and of Towrain. That wher

fro Chriſtemas to the feaſt of candelmas as they call it, at euery tyme y• theſe marchāts ſynge euenſong, whan they come to an anthem that they name. De fructu. Yf they do ſpieOf fruterers. hapely any fruytfull perſone.
            I meane fruitfull, yf the purs be well ſtored to whom they knele, and ſtowpe alowe to begyn the De fructu, and thā the poore ſimple kneler gooth full ſympelly to ſynge the De fructu on the beſt faſhion, and than the marchantes chaūte, cry and howle, to the end, and afterwarde all the euenynge laugh, toye, play, God knowethe howe they fare. And as theſe marchāt fruters fructifi

for the profyte of the table al togither I ſay to profyte of their gaynes, and domage of theyr neyghbours that hyer and fynde them, and yet the good ſimple folke holde them content with their knauery.
            Thys fruitefull people be in fraunce and other regions but in Englande I thinke be but a few, for thanked be god many of there il tres be plucked vp by the rotes and felled and their wicked marchants fruiterers be wel ſteyed, and ſhalbe God wyllyng more.
            Thus can theſe fyne marchants by wyls and trewan
               
                  •
               iſe fructifie at the expences of other. In ſinging and playeng

nymbly for theyr owne welth lyke fals futers.
            In dede their ſinguler halilite is very euydent that they hauyng nothynge haue multitiplied and encreaſed to ſo great goodes, that al moſt they haue vſurped and obteined all the richeſſe of the erth, as Realmes Dukedōes, Cōutyes Principalites, Baronies Towns, Lordſhips, Herita-Rentes, Houſynges. Fruits, and all that is poſſible to ſay.
            Truly I am aſhamed to thinke on it, they haue ſwalowed al togyder. They haue diſheryted Princes, Kynges, Lordes, Machāts, Burgeſes and people of all eſtates and

al becauſe at theyr beginning they in hypocriſi could fayne their pope holynes.
            But now they be ſo riche and mighty, that bi force thei do wytholde, & rather would mengyle and melt the ſkyes, the erth and ye ſee, and al that is in them, than any thynge ſhould ſcape their handes.
            And therfore they reiſe and▪ moue warres, debates ſtryues & troubles, they brynne, they ſlea, they perſecute, they 
                  •
               npriſone, and to their power driue away al them that gain 
                  〈…〉
                them. They haue no nede of bokes of holy ſcripture for to mayntene theyr feats but 
                  •
               pholde them by ſtrength, as

brigants and murtherers do for to reſyſt verite theyr is no thyng wyth thē but force and violence.
            O peaſant wolues, wolues inſatiable, that haue ſpared nothing but ye haue plucked it vnder your pawes HoweAct .xx. trulye ſpake ſaynt Paule of you, whan he wrote thus. I knowe that after my departynge rauiſhinge wolues ſhali. Timo .iiii. enter that wyll not ſpare the floke. Of ſuch marchants itEzechiel. xxxviii. ii. Pet. iii is wryten to Timothe in the fyrſt, In Ezechiel and diuersIude. ii. other paſſages.
            Yf there were euer matter of iniquite, there was neuer ye like vnto this. For good

marchāts, onely perſent their wares expoſing to them that wyll bye a reaſonable pryce, and conſtrayne no bodye to bye or take therof. But theſe wicked do the contrary, for boyſtouſly they conſtrayne the people will they or not to paſſe thorough theyr cruell handes, and without reſpite, to bye theyr fals marchandiſes at theyr owne pleaſures, or elles pronoūce thē heretiks and who that hath no money muſte go ſeeke for ſome, and make ſhifte though nothyng ſhoulde remayne.
            The caſe is thus. Some poore mā dyeth charged with wife and ſmal children. This

thynge is pitefull and requireth mercy. And for to confort the pore widow, certayn almeſſes ought to be delt vnto her, to confort her and her houſhold. But in ſtead of kind prouidēce, theſe vnkindi. Tim. iii and cruell marchantes of her lytelle come to make an ende of all, & they by force or ryght wyll haue y• they do demand, bread, drinke, offrynges, candelles, oxe or cowe gown, kirtell, Iaket, bed, ſhetes, good fare, or money, and put▪ her from all vnder ſhadow of.
            Requiem, Fundis, and Libera.
            And ſyth we are in this purpoſe, there was neuer ſuche iniquite knowen amonge ani

marchants but in theſe. The whiche openly wythout feare or ſhame ſell that the whiche is nothynge theyrs, and yet they ſel them to the perſones to whome they do belong of ryght. Yea, and that worſt is a. M. tymes and mo they ſell one ſelf thing.
            Anſwer to me. Who cauſed to make the belles of the church? whoſe be they? dydtheſe fals marchants bere thē thyder? lykewiſe the ground in the church or churchyard, whoſe is it fro whens can it? Is it of theyr fatherly heritage? It is not certaynely.
            But belongeth to the peopel and paryſhiens. I would

wit of thē fro whēs came ſuch a boldnes to thē ſo for to ſell y• ſowne of the belles, which thei cauſed not to bee made, & alſo tak not y• pain to ring thē, for they be to dilicate minſtrels, & ſo for to ſel & reſel ye groūd that is not theyrs. Truely after their accuſtomed facion it is a veri dere groūd, that ſo oftenOf buriynges. tymes is ſo vniuſtli pa
                  •
               ed for. For it is euer to begyn. They wil anſwer me (I knowe wel) y• it is y• right of their church,Prop
                     〈…〉
                   quar to modo. whych eaſyly I agre to. For properly y• right of their churche is to cach, flei, rauiſh ſteal & polle, which is neuer don in the church of Ieſus Chriſte & therfore conſider pore 
                  •
               eople

on whoſe ſyde thoſe marchants be. Ieſus Chriſte commandethMath. x. to giue for nothing that whyche he hath gyuen. And theſe marchants engroſſe it outragyouſly, and ſo become Marchauntes, ſheweynge therby appertly that they haue nothinge comyn wythCananea
                     •
                  s & negotiator idē
                Ieſus Chriſt. Showing thē alſo to be wors thā the other Cananeans, whā good Sara toke her reſt in God, for in theyr right of theyr ſepulcher they woulde take nothing of Abraham.
            But he whych before y• death
                  
                     〈…〉
                   ii. of hys wyſe poſſeded neuer in 
                  •
                ſaid groūde, would haue had ſome ryght therin, prefiguring

that ſome day by the pormiſe of God it ſhoulde be his own truli, he would haue gyuen ſome money therfore to Ephrom the ſōne of Seor,Gen. xviii. for a very poſſeſſyon, where as a ſepulchre was in a dowble felde, the which poſſeſſion was entierly gyuen and adiugged to hym in herytage wyth y• vſufruits of the tres growing ther. And herby it is certain that this pore painime toke no money of Abraham for nothynge, but take hym a faire heritage, whiche theſe fals marchants do not to the pore people. For wythout ceas they take much money. Alas they do not knowe

wherfore. But for a paſtyme is it not a good ſyght to ſe ſometyme a ſorte of diſgiſed and countrefet galāts openly feyght for to haue a dead corps of ſome body.
            The gray a gainſt the gray. Frauciſcans a gaynſt the dominicans? The auguſtines a gaynſt ye Carmelyts. Blacke againſte white. The pyed agaynſt the Croſſed. Prieſtes a gaynſt Monkes. Curates agaynſt Chanons, and al ſuch ſortes of cauellers, whyche ought to be dryuen away as maſtyfes, as raueus, and cormorants Thys that I ſay is manifeſt, and yet it can not be remembred of what ſpirite

theſe marchāts wer driuen abrode, who moeued thē thus ſo ſhamefully as to rēne after they pray as wolues and foxes after caryon but the deſyre to noriſhe well their potage or ſoppes, their rybawdry or (as thei ſaye) their eſtate, that is to ſaye, theyr gormandyſe and ouer licarous kitchin, for they thynke on none other thynge.
            There of cometh if there be any mocyon of a benefyce that alwaye, they enquire of the proffytes therof by yere ferme, bi pencion, bi reſidenceCorban. Corban. how much the church, aduantage is, that is to wyte, theMar. vii baptyſmes, maryages, offringes,

kiſſynges, lyghtes, oblacions, pilgrimages. Yf ther be any Irefull ſaint that wylbe feared, and aboue all, if there be moche people becauſe of mortuaryes, burynges legaries anniuerſaries, and ſuch fine mētions, and huge charges vpon the poore people, for as they ſaye in right fayre laten. Vbi oues, ibi pelles. That isVbi oues ibi pelles. to ſay, where as ſhepe is ther is wolle, whyche truely they can well ſheare and gather.
            And in dede they be all of one craft & can none other ſo wel as thys. That is, they be al ſhearers, deuoures, ſleyers yea & that ſo neare that they ſucke ye bloud, and the ſweat.
            
               And of ſuch rapine they vphold eche other iolily, it is playnly ſene dayly, wythout any remedy.
            And they be not onely marchants, ſellers and occupiers but alſo the moſte parte are couetous ſellers agayne. Or the better to vnderſtād what I ſay, a ſeller again is he that byeth for to ſell agayne to another, for proffite and gaynesAct. viii. by it as alſo Simon Magus would haue done, wherof it is ſpoken in the Aacts of thappoſtles. And. S. Auſtin vppon the Cxxx. Pſalme, after hys maner of rekenyng in ſpeakynge of the ſayd Simon ſaieth thus, The power

of the Apoſtles pleaſeth hym more than the goodnes of the Chriſtians, in aſmoch as he ſaw bi y• leing on of y• apoſtles handes God gaue the gyftes of the holi goſt in ſuch maner that the Chriſtianes ſpake new languages, he would haue done as they dyd, But he would not be faythfull as they were and be a good ſeruant of Ieſus Chriſt, but becauſe that he would be ſeen mighti and ſomwhat hie and therfore he offred and would haue gyuen money to haue ſuch a power as thei had, and truly he would haue derely bought that whiche he knew w
                  •
               ll afterward. The felawes

of this ſayde Simō be al miſerable biers of benefices and eccleciaſticall officers, whyche are excommunicate by the authoritie of God, & not one lye of God, but alſo by the authoryte of the decres and auncient cannos, as peſtilent people, by whō the churche of God is robbed, waſted, and deſolated, y• reformation of the church letted, and the ſaluation of y• people withdrawen.
            O Lord God what a boke might be made of this mater if tym woulde ſuffer it, but I remit it al to the Iugemēt of thoſe perſones whiche loue and dread the almighty lord.
            What do you noble and Rom. xiii vertuous

Princes, Lordes and Ladyes, why haue ye no regarde ouer theſe marchants, and notwythſtandynge that by theyr pride they wyll not be viſyred of you, yet will thei or not, ye haue authoritie ouer thē. And to you and none other it belongeth to caſtyſe, to correct, and repreſte the great exceſſe of ſuche theues.
            Do it than, to thende that it be not uerified of you that is voken in Eſaye.
            Suche princes are infidelsE
                     •
                  le. i. companiōs of theues, but rather that in y• preſence of the liuinge God, of whom ye bereE
                     •
                  o him the name, whiche hath giuen you the poure of the ſworde,

for to vſe it to hys honor, defendynge innocentes puniſhing al male factors, be ye foūd faithfull and veritable, Conſentynge to all godnes reſyſtynge euylle wythe all your power, for hys good wyll, for by hym ye are commited ther to, & he alone may exalt you or put you down in this preſent lyfe, and the life to come, and herof ye maye be ſure, if ye ſeke his honor, he wil honor you. Yf ye exalt hym he wyll exalt you.
            By hys wiſdome kynges doPro viii. reygne, and Lordes do ordein ordinaunces of Iuſtice. And the myſpriſion of the dyuine wyll & wiſdome is cauſe of al

euyls ouer Kinges, Princes, Lordes, coūtres and nationsii. Regū. xxiiii. Which may be ſen in Dauid Solomō, Ezechi, Achab, Manaſſesiii. Re, xi. and other. And let no man take feare in forthering the honore of God, as the ſimple Sedechie dyd. Fearynge more the prynces of Iuda & of Ieruſalē, thē y• only God. Not beleueyng y• good coūſelIeremie. xxxii. et xxxix. of Ieremi. The which Sedechie neuertheles afterwarde foūde tru that which the prophete had tolde him. And was put fro the goodes y• wer ordened for him. For it is not in y• power of men to put Kynges fro their crowes but it belongethDanie. i. to y• only god, which trās

ferreth kingdomes as it pleaſeth hym. The which if he be with you: who cā be againſteRom. viii. you? Oh God if ye were as prompt and redy to procure the honor of God as theſe auaricyous marchāts are apt and diligent about theyr buſines, that nothing eſcape thē O Lorde howe euery thinge ſhould be well.
            It is no nede to ſpeak of ther ſtudy and diligence, for euery body ſeth it. They haue a. C. eyes euer open to watch as the cat for the mous. Argus ſawe neuer clerer before and behynde, nomore dyd Ianus wyth hys dowble face. If the belles rynge in any place (as

thei ſay) for an obit than oure gentyl gallants trudge apace but our Lord knoweth what a drage there is of them.
            Yf the mayſter or the dame of a hous be ſeke, ſo that they be any thing riche, for of the poore they pas not, and that they haue any token of death oure marchants togo thether a pace a pace to put in theyr myndes to remember theyr ſhoppes, theyr byldyng theyr church, their brethen, and for to haue ſome aniuerſari foundacion, or other teſtamentary gift. Do what ye wyl, out of the hous ye get them not tyll they haue ſome praye, or elles they will ſaye that he or

ſhe be Lutherien heretykes:
            God knoweth what wily wrinches, what ſubtyll fallaces they do commit fro day to day. Thinke who will on the houſhold, on the famuly, on of the chyldren, rent or detts al is one to them ſo they may haue theyr aſkynge they care not. If any bridales be, thyder rene oure marchants to fare well, and to blyſſe y• bride bed. If any woman lye in childbed, thei togo, to ſay goſpels ano to be at the ſyttyng vp and chirching.
            To be ſhort be it at lyfe or death, our marchāts be euer practiſyng ſome bribles, they neuer make an end. And the

better to dyſpoſe the matter after theyr ſorte not one of them will mary, becauſe they maye the better vſe theyr byt cheri at their eaſe to paſſe the tyme, and to lyue wythout thought.
            For to conclude it is to be noted that amonge ſo greate a felowſhyppe of marchants there be two ſorts, yet none of them both do liue in purenes of chaſtite, of the whiche ſome of them gouerne them ſelfe in courſe & rude tyranie, the other in fayre hypocryſy.
            The fyrſt be thei that opē
               ly conſtraine the people to by theyr wares, and there is no remedy but paſſe that wyae,

or els to be flayne and murdred of them, or at the leaſt excōmunicate in their ſinagog.
            The other that could not come to vſurpe the power to commaunde, can by an other meane, that is to wite in the apparence of pouertie bering walets all vpō their ſhulders full ſimply faining a lowting caūtenance ſelling them ſellfe as the Eſſians, Saducians, or Phariſians dyd.
            Sōtyme they would giue their owne habite to the pore, pretendyng ſome holynes the which afterwarde was paied a. C. times dowble. Thus can they worke ſubtylly in they marketes and fayres. Than

is there anothor ſorte of fyne beſtial frires lowtes, lowting theyr heades bi the waye bearing great beades lyke father Robert of Iſlyngton, Marchants of theyr owne workes and merytes, as if they hade ſome in ſtore to ſell againe.
            And openly thei haue made to beleue that all the benefactoures of theyr orders haue won heauen bi the merites of theſe holy beaupers, quentchyng the fayth therby, and putting the holy name of Ieſus Chriſte in darcknes, blaſphemeynge openly the grace and mercy of the Lorde God, the whyche is not wone by worke or merite, or elles grace

ſhould not bee grace, howebe i
                  •
                by ſuch dreamyng lyes, and fayninge, theſe arrogant ſuperſticious fat trewāts haue ſed theyr myſerable bealyes wyth the labour of the ſimple people.
            I maye ſay miſerable weſt inoughe, for there was neuer ſo manye vngracious ſortes of people vpon the earth.
            They do diſfigure and fatten them ſelues, they extermine theyr faces as hypocrits.
            They torment & puniſhe them ſefes for to appere to the worlde ſuche as they bee not. Truly thei tak great paynes to go to the Deuill.
            And often tymes whan they

ſe a yong child comē of a good ſtocke and riche kinred, they wylle ſo entyce hym aſmuche as they may to catch hym in limetwyges & ſnare to make him lyke vnto them. To ſuch folkes Ieſus Chriſte gyueth his curſe, when he ſaieth woMathei. xxiii. vnto you hypocrits that compas both ſea & lande, to make one your nouice, and whan he is made he ſhalbe dowble wors than you. This is theirConſolacio miſe
                  
                     •
                  orum. ioy and conſolacion to drawe any to their eſtate. Wherby it is very veryt able, that the delyte of a wycked perſone is to haue thē that be lyke vnto him. This is true that I ſay. And it is not ſayd of a deſire

or affection to miſſay any perſon: but to the ende that the ſheepe of Ieſus Chriſte may kepe and delyuere them ſelfe from ſuch deceiuers, that out warde ſeme to bee ſympleMat. vii ſheepe, and in warde be very rauēing wolues. And by the healpe of their great and verye ſhepeherd Ieſu, they may be preſerued, & that of thē & al other that are in darcknes & errour bee entierly verified y• which S. Pet. ſaith you hauei. Pet. ii. ben as loſt ſhepe, but nowe ye be retorned to the paſtor & biſhope, of your ſoules. And weiii. Regū. xx. xviii. et xix. muſt not in this point ſtay at y• great nōber, at y• multitud, or at their riches & pouer. For

it is much better to here Miche alone, thā the. iiii C. falsLu
                     •
                  . ii. prophets, Helie alone than all the ſacryficers of Baal.
            The good and ſimple. Simon and the aūcient wydow Anne thā al the Phariſiens, ſacrifiers, Scribes, & docters whyche hade made a dene of murtherers of the houſe of God. Of whoſe ſucceſſors I pray oure Lorde ryght ſoone to giue knowledge to al princes and Lordes, men lerned and of authoriti, y• they maye make ſuche prouidens and remedy that the vengeaunce of God do not fall on the poore peopel, and on all y• erth. For thei commit ſo mani deteſtable

wyles and gyles that it is not poſſible to thinke it, wytnes y• fals fayned ſpirite, that ſeth. xx. yeres was gylefully and maliciouſly mente by the gray fryeres of Euereus in y• conuent of Normandy. And of late tyme ſuche another by the gray fryeres of Orliance.
            To the greate ſclander not only of the realme, but alſo of all other Chriſten nations. Thys was in Fraunce.
            I pray you was there noThe tranſlatour. ſuche folyſh fayned triflyng deceite in England I report me to thē that haue ſeen and herd of them as of rodes and other geugaus, whyche mockage is true, euident, and comēly

knowen of al mē of euerye degre, whyche as nowe to ſpeak of ani more I wil leaue of abiding to ſe y• there ſhalbe done ſuch iuſtice that it ſhall be example to all the worlde.
            For if any partyculer perſone be puniſhed for a folyſh or lytell fawt that he doeth, how moche more ought ſuche hypocrites for to be puniſhed extreamely, the which vnder the ſyght of holyneſſe abuſe the poore people in ſuche wiſe to the great blaſphemi of god & diffamatiō of theyr neyghbour. All the world than may bee ſure that if the Lordes of Iuſtyce cauſe not puniſhmēt as is apperteyneynge for it,

that y• Lorde God wil take ſo terrible reuengeaunc that al the worlde ſhall tremble for the hyd
                  •
               ouſnes of it.
            Lykewyſe of the wyles of theſe croſcrepers whych faynyng multytude of prayers with multytude of pardoned prayers, and beades: thynke the ſoner to begyle the people kneling euer in one place daly, and lycking of pyllers, kyſſing of y• images fete, to ſeme more holy, and amōge thēſelfe very detratores of God. And yet they feare to diſpleaſe one the other for feare of accuſemēt. O diſſimbling foliſhnes and foule hypocryſy.
            There be mani other thynges

whych as now I reporte me y• I coulde 
                  •
               ay of a trueth if I woulde but I wyll abſteyne me fearyng to offend the weake.
            Nowe after that I haue ſpoken of theſe will foxes and cautelous Marchants wyth whom is comprehended here mites and recluſes.
            It ſhalbe good to ſpeake of a great flocke of Chap womē aſmuche or wylyer than the marchants whiche be of them ſelues named Mōkeſſes, Abbeſſes, Prioreſſes, Chanoneſſes, ſyſters of al colors, recluſes, & many ſuch other ſortes of vermyne, but I reſerue this mater (the whiche truly

be not very cleane) tyli ſome other tyme.
            For thys preſent ſeaſon i
                  •
                I haue ſayd il or lytell, I put it all to the iudgment of more wyſe and fayethful louers of verite to whom humbly I require to encreas, amplify and ſet forth that whyche I haue willed to pas bryefly, fearing to anoy y• readers by mi rude ſpeache.
            It hath ſuffyſed me for to ſhew ſomewhat of y• euil that hurteth vs ſo ſore, oneli for to giue occaſiō to people of good deſier here after to deuiſe ſom what more, finally truſteyng by the boūtie of the father of mercy, of ſome goood delyneraūce,

the whiche of his grace delyuer vs all fro y• darkenes of errour, fro deceiful lyuing, fro Idolatrie and infidelite.
            Wherin wee be myſerably fallen, in aſmoche as we haue leſt his pure and holy worde, folowynge oure owne opinionsii. Cor. xi. and folyſhe fantaſies, for Satā y• tēptor, enimie of our ſalnacion by cautyle tranſfigurynge hym into an angell of lyght, vnder ſhadow and colour of veryte alwaye cam agaynſte y• wyll of God, lyke as among other thinges it is Deu
                     ••
                  r. xxxiiii. certayn that y• body of Moyſes the which God dyd bury, and vnto thys day neuer mā
               dyd fynde hys ſepulchre, allthoughe

that the deuill hathIude. i. inforced hym to reueyle and ſhewe it. but ye angell of God reſyſted him, alwaye callinge for healp to the Lord. For truly thys fals ſerpent woulde haue abuſed & deceiued vs wt the body, bones, and relykes of the ſayd holy prophete teching to reyſe ſome hous of deuotion, ſome faire pilgrimag, and a pleaſant and new maner to ſerue God, other thā that whiche he hath cōmaunded. The whyche thynge the prophets could not haue condempned afterwarde nor reproued it, oneles they ſhould haue ben accuſed of infidelite and malyſe: ſeynge the holynes

and great excellencie of y• ſame, whereby God had done ſo many admirables. For the folyſh men wythout Iugement beholdynge the workes of ſaints onely, do forget him that bi them doeth ſuch workes. In good ſoth vnder ſuch apparence and colour of goodnes, the deuill ſhould greatly triumphe in that place as he hath done ſyth, and dayly entend eth to do in mani places as it appeared here in thys land and doeth yet in ſome other countrees, with other in finite abuſions.
            Alas what an horror hath ſpred throughe the vniuerſall worlde by that meanes. The

marchants haue ſcraped wel, pilled wel, heaped wel, and loked well throught that hole. And where is any ſpirit that euer could recite, or tong declare, al the viage, al the wild and newe pylgrymages that by lytell and lytel haue ben inuēted? There be as many maner of ſaynts as of people and beaſtes.
            As. S. Loye for horſes S. Anthony for ſwine, S. Loup for ſhepe. S. Iohn for lames S Hubbert for dogges. One for gotes an other for kien. S fereioll for gees, and ſo forth of y• remenaunt. And for people there is great plentie. For there is no mēbre vpon man,

nor any diſeaſe reygnynge vpō him, but it hath a perticuler phiſitiō. S. Iob (that neuer thought on it (healeth y• great pockes. ſaynct Appolin the tethe.
            Howbeit that I haue meruayled of tentyms, that theſe good workemē gaue not that office to. Saint. Chriſtophre, whych had ſo great and long tethe that Cobrande was no thynge lyke. Probacion.
            In a certain place of Fraunc called Beaunoys is a lytell abbay of. Sain. Chriſtopher, where as the reuerends ther do ſhewe a to the whyche as they ſay is one of. S. Chriſtophres. The whych to the is ſo

bygg and long that if he had had but. xii. in hys mouth, it ſhould haue ben wyder than the greateſt ouens mouth in all parys, what a felowe were he y• had. xxiiii. or. xxx. ſuche in his mouth atones? Truly thys goodly toth in brede is more than agreate halfe fote, and byg accordyngly. O intollerable irriſyon. And yet it ſerueth a monge theſe good marchants.
            And to come to our purpoſe Saynt Quintin healeth the Cough. Many healeth the feuers, but there is ſo many of thē that they let eche other S. Clare helpeth redde eien. S. Aduertyn the head ache

of women. S. Mayn of the ſcab. I leaue. ſaynt. Gyles in Cōſtantin that often helpeth womē to haue childrē. Such ſaints inow are found at the fryres and monkes. S. Mor healeth the gowt whan he is at leyſer. S. Syeth fyndeth loſt thinges, another ſerueth to go. Another to come. One to begin, an other to make an end. Neuer was ſeen ſuche worke men. Nor neuer was ſeen ſuch afyre. But aboue al other y• can be deuiſed, there is none Iolier. S. Maturin that healeth all them wyth empty heades as mad and abſtraught people, which be thy der brought, God knoweth

Howe they be handled. The meaſur of olde fathers cānot ſerue. They ſhallbe rubbed, horſcomed, and whipped that it is pyte, and yet neuer the wyſer, but whan they haue done, they muſte haue money and wyne, and ſo he is fayne to renne a way luſtyly.
            Were it not agreat almes by charyte to haue whypped and ſcourged a gallant naminge, hym ſelfe an aulmoſiner, I wotte not frowhens, whiche a whyle ago in the cite of, Abeuile in Pycardy played aprety gewgaw.
            And the better to vnderſtand his gābawed whan the Quene made her enter there
            
               She beyng with her aſiſtantes in the churche of. S. 
                  •
               oulfrāe this holi father after his maſſe ſayd, he made a ſuperſault and willyngly as a tumbler fell downe as in a ſown, feining to be rauiſhed, or to ſe ſōme heauenly viſion.
            And in dede the good gen, tylman woulde haue perſuaded the ſimple people that he had ſeen the virgen Mary accōpanied with certain ſaints. As. S. Peter and. S. Paule whiche had ſhewed him ſome diuine ſecrets.
            The whiche thinge anone was publyſhed for certayne and true by the vpholders of his degre. I meane valyaunt

pillers of ye church, although it was but a lye and deceyt.
            As hymſelf ſyth hath confeſſed, ſayenge that he dyd it onely to be eſtemed the more holy man, and by cauſe more credet ſhould be giuen to his wordes. This was the inuention of ſuche a worke man, which had nofeare to lye, and in his mockery offended God greueouſly, for to accompliſh hys knauery.
            How be it. S. Paul hath expreſſely writen that the verite of God hath no nede of oure dreaming lyes, and thatRom. iii. none ought to do ani euill, to thend that goodnes may happen hym. But what thought

take ſuch folkes for. S. Paul or of hys wrytynges? Wherfore ſuch a Iacke aboue all other yt coulde bee thought or ſpoken of as a fole wyth hys lyke felowes ought to be led to the god. S. Maturin and ther as a holi bodi to be reiſed vp, and pleaſantly haue hys head rubbed, horſcomed, bruſhed handled tormoyled and whipped, to make hym know what it is to bee folyſhe or wyſe, ſpeciallye in mattiers of greate weyght.
            For aboue all y• folyes that can be done, ſayd or thought, the greateſt is to counterfeit any thynge belonging to god
            O Lorde God how ye world

by ſuch minions and fals menes hath ben in tymes paſt, and yet is enpoyſoned wyth greate erroure and ſedicion.
            There be other ſaynts for artifycers or handy craftes, euery one in hys occupation and faculte. S. Criſpian maketh ſhoes. And ſaynt. Rocke cobbleth them. S. Coſme hea leth ſoores and wounds. S. Iuy kepeth proces in y• lawe. S. honory maketh matches.
            One goeth on fot, another rideth, one is naked, another well clothed. One is armed another with a ſingle wepon It is wonderous to think on it. And in good ſothe if I would delate, worke ſet forth

and amplifie all y• is hyd vnder thys fayned ſhadowe I had nede to make agreat boke by it ſelfe a lone.
            Wherfore I differ this purpoſe tyll another tyme, abydynge the helpe of the Lorde. The whiche for euer b
                  •
                prayſed exalted, and manyfied his onely beſt beloued ſone oure Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, whyche wyth hys bloud hath purged vs who be bleſſed In the worlde of worldes
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted in Lōdon & ar to be ſold by Richard Iugge, at the North doore of Pouls.
            Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
            
         
      
   