
      
         
            
            
            ¶ The Gouernaunce of Uertue, teaching all faythful christiās, how they oughte daily to leade their lyfe, & fruitfully to spend their time vnto the glorye of God & the health of their owne soules. Newlye corrected & augmē
               ted by Thomas Becon. 1566
            ¶ Imprinted at London by Iohn Day.
            
               ❧ CVM PRIVILEGIO Regie Maiestatis.
         
         
            
            
               
                  THOMAS BECONVS SACROSĀCTAE THEOLOGIAE PROFESSOR.
                  AETATIS SVAE. 41 ANo. DN̄I. 1553.
               
            
            
               Ora expressa vides viuos immitantia vultus,
               Quod potuit calamo pictor & arte vides.
               Mentis quam Nullus potuit tibi redere pictor,
               Effigiem scriptis prebuit ipse suis,
            
         
         
            
            To the Godly Reader.
            
               
                  GRace groweth after gouernaunce,
               Is an olde saide saw in eche place:
               If gouernaunce hath good resemblance
               Grace delighteth to folow the trace.
            
            
               Grace glorieth in godly gouernance,
               Grace hasteth 
                     •…
                  o her haule and palace.
               Grace doth godly gouernaunce auaunce,
               And cause it to excel in eche place.
            
            
               Where gouernaunce is godly wise,
               Sage Sober, Honest, and Prudent:
               There doth grace, gloriously deuise,
               To haue her seate aye permanent.
            
            
               But if gouernaunce be wicked,
               Idle wanton, vndiscrete and vaine:
               Grace whiche is godly disposed,
               With such gouernaunce can not remaine.
            
            
               This boke shall thee instruct therfore,
               Thy life vertuously to leave:
               That grace with thee may euermore,
               Remaine as Gods moste blessed seede.
            
            
               To fight against Sathan and sinnes
               To represse errours and heresies:
               To pray to God his grace to winne,
               In this boke to learne thou maiest deuise.
            
            
               Take thou it therfore in good part,
               As a ioyful Iewel for thy welth:
               And geue God thankes withall thy hart.
               Which by his worde worketh thy helth.
            
            
               As for my trauaile and paine,
               I craue none other recompence:
               But thy life vertuously to traine,
               That thou maiest enioy gods presence▪
               
            
            FINIS
         
         
            
            
               3. Regum 1.
               If a man be vertuous, ther shal not an heare of his fal to the ground. But if wickednesse shalbe found in him, he shall dye for it.
            
            
               Tobi. 4.
               Loue vertue all the dayes of thy life, and walk not in the wayes of wickednes For while thou studiest for vertues, thou shalt haue good successe in al thinges that thou goest about and so shall all they that loue goodnesse.
            
         
         
            
            
               A Table to fynde the principall matters contayned in this booke.
            
               AN exhortacion to the Reader.
               The Epistle dedicatory.
               How a man should be haue himself in the morning when he riseth.
               A prayer in the morning.
               A confession of our sinnes vnto God the father.
               How thou shouldst behaue thy selfe before thou go to dinner.
               A prayer before dinner.
               Of the behauiour at the Table in dinner time.
               A thankes geuinge after dinner.
               What is to be done after dinner.
               Of Supper.
               A prayer before Supper.
               Of the behauiour at the table in supper time.
               A thankes geuing after supper.
               Of going to bed.
               A prayer to be sayd when we goe to bed.
               A prayer to be sayd▪ when thou art in bed.
               Remedies against all kindes of temptacions.
               Against Idolatry.
               Against infidelity or misbeliefe.
               Against the heresy of such as deny Iesus Christ
                     •…
                   to be god.
               Against the heresy of them, which holde that Iesus Christe the sonne of God, tooke no fleshe of Mary his Mother.
               Againste the grosse and fantasticall opinion of the Papistes, which affirm that Christes naturall body and bloud is carnally eaten and dronken in the Lords supper.
               Against the plucking away of thy trust and confidence from Christ and his merites, to put in the merites of other creatures, or in thine own good workes, or in the intercession of Saintes, or in sacrifice of the popish Masse.
               
                  Against such as go about to diswad
                     •…
                   the christian people from the studiing, reading or hearinge of Goddes woorde.
               Against strange religion, or newe found woorshipping of God.
               Against mens traditions and vnwritten verities
               Against the folowing of vngodly forefathers.
               Against the wicked olde customes & longe vsages.
               Againste suche as slaunder Christes gospell by cal linge it newe learninge.
               Against pensiuenes and thought taking for the life.
               Against hunger pouerty, or carefulnes of liuing.
               Against keping of euill company.
               Against idlenes.
               Against swearing.
               Against lying, slaundering▪ and filthy or vncleane talke.
               Against pride or vayneglory.
               Against feasting glotony, and dronkennes.
               Against fornication and adultery.
               Against couetousnes.
               Against rebellion and disobedience.
               Against malice, grudge, enuy, hatred, and anger.
               Against the temptation of the faythfull in consideringe their owne miserye, and contrarywise the wealth of the wicked.
               Against the most horrible and dampnable sinne, the sinne against the holy Ghost.
               Against the despising of gods word: and of the plagues that folow the same.
               Against carnall security and fleshly liuing without the feare of God.
               Against the flacknes of doing good workes.
               Against the troublous tempestes of sicknes, of losse of goods, or any other kind of aduersity
               Against the temptation of the Deuill for no
                     •…
                  t satis fieng the lawe of God, and for thy sinfull liuing▪
               
               Against desperation for thy late conuersion and tur ning vnto God.
               Against sinne, death and hel
                     •…
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
               To the right honorable and moste vertuous young Lady Iane Semer, daughter to the highe and mightie Prince Edward Duke of Somerset his grace, Thomas Becon wisheth increase of godlye knowledge in Christe Iesu our Lord.
            
               THere are no Parents (most godlye Ladye) that deserue better of the Christen publique weale, then they whiche thorow gods gift hauing Children, employ all their endeuours to traine them vp euen from theire verye cradels in good letters & in the knowledge of gods moste blessed wil, that with their young yeres, learning, vertue and godlines, may grow and encrease and the younglinges by this meanes be made at the last auncient and perfect schollers in the mistery of Christes schole. This careful study and studyous care for the vertuous bringing vp of youth, god in time paste earnestlye required of all Fathers and Mothers in the common weale of hys people the Israelites, and according to gods holy commaundement suche as vnfainedlye feared the Lorde their God, and wished wel to their countrey, refused no laboure, no paine, nor cost that their children might be made profitable members of the publique weale. As I may pas ouer the auncient and holye PatriarchesDe. 4. 6. 
                     •…
                  
                whiche were before the law of Moyses (of whose diligēce in the vertuous bringing vp of their yonglinges, it is more than double wickednesse to doubt, seing we haue this euident testimony of Abraham euen of gods own mouth. Shall I hide frō Abraham saith god, that thinge which I entend toGene▪ 1
                     •…
                  
                do. Seing that Araham shalbe a great and a migh
               
                  •…
               ye

 people, and all the nations of the earth shalbe blessed in him? I know this also, that he wil commaund his Children and his housholde after him, that they keepe the way of the Lorde, and do after righte and conscience. What earnest diligence did the moste noble and vertuous King Dauid shew in the godly bringing vp of his Children, speciallye of Salomon, that he might become a Prince worthye both for his godlynes, learning, wisedome and pollicye, to rule in the common weale after him? What godly instructions also gaue he him, when he was at the point of deathe? Beholde (saieth he) I muste walk by the way of all the worlde, neuerthelesse be strong and quite thy sel
                  •…
                manfully, and se thou kepe the appointment of the Lorde thy god, that y• walke in his wayes▪ and kepe his commaundement, ordinaunces, lawes and testimonies, as it is written in the law of Moyses. &c.
            Likewise rede we of the auncient Father Toby which taught his young Sonne Toby to f
                  •…
               are god from his infancye, and to abstaine from all sinne. His exhortations are to godly and so meete for all persons to learne, that I think it not conuenient to passe them ouer with silence. His wordes are these.
            Herken my Sonne what I wil say, and lay my wordes in thy harte as a foundation. My Sonne when I am dead bury me and after despise not thy Mother, but honoure her all the dayes of her lyfe, and do to please her, and not to displease her. My Sonne remember howe greate perill she suffered bearing thee in her wombe, and when she is deade, bury her in the same graue by me. Sonne reuerēce our Lord God at all times, sinne not, nor break not his commaundements▪ but loue vertue all the dates of thy life, and walk not in the waies of wickednes For while thou studiest for vertue, thou shalt haue good successe in all thinges that thou goest aboute, and so shall all they that loue goodnes. Do almes of thy substance and be no 
                  •…
               igard in doing of it.
            
               Turne not thy face awaye from any poort man, as thou wouldest that God should not turne away his face from thee. Geue as thou shalt be able, if y• haue much, geue much, and if thou haue little, geue of that little. For thou shalt lay vp for thee a good treasure against the daye of necessitie. For almes deliuereth from death, and suffreth not the soule to come into darknes. Alms is a great comfort before the highest to all that vse it.
            My Sonne beware, kepe thee from all whordom and vse no euil company besides thy wife, Suffer pride neuer to ryse in thy minde no not in word for death is ioyned to pride and muche trouble, and to hautines is ioyned displeasure and great pouertye, and she is mother of honger. Let no mans hire remaine with thee, whose seruice thou hast had, but forthewith pay his wages, for vnto thee also seruing God, reward shalbe geuen.
            Sonne be circumfpect and ware in all thy deedes and in all that thou doost, while thou liuest, be wise and do not to any man that thou wouldest not to be done vnto thee. Drink not wine vntil thou be drōk nor cary it not with thee by the way, geue thy bred to the hungry, and with thy clothes couer the naked. What soeuer thou hast more then is sufficient geue it to the poore, and neuer grudg to be liberall, set thy bread vpon the Sepulcres of the iuste▪ and bestow it not vpon the noughty, Aske councel alwayes of the wise, and despise no good councel. Be alwayes praying vnto the Lord, and beseeche hym that he willorder thy footesteppes and wayes, and prosper thy deuises, for no people are wise, but the Lord him selfe is the geuer of all good thinges, and thrusteth down whome, and who hee listeth. My Sonne be not afrayde, we leade a poore life in this world, notwithstanding if thou feare god, and studye to please him, thou shalt haue goodes inoughe. Therefore my sonne remember my preceptes, and put them not out of thy minde. Againe being redye

to dye, he called vnto him his sonne and his sonnes Children, and among all other things he spake vnto him on this wise: kepe thou the law and cōm
                  •…
               un dements, and shew thy selfe merciful and iust, that thou mayest prosper. Haue god euer in thy remembrance, and praise him at all times wt all thy might
            In like maner reade we of the Parentes of thatTob. 14 most godly and chast woman Susanna, whiche be ing righteous thē selues, taught their yong daugh ter to feare the Lord her god, euen from her verye cradle, and diligently brought her vp, according to the law of MoysesDan. 18
            
            Luke also in his boke of the Apostles, maketh mē
               Act. 2
                     •…
                  . cion of the foure daughters of Phillip the euangelist, whiche did Prophecy (that is to saye) were so godly brought vp in the knowledge of gods moste blessed lawe, that they were able to declare and expounde the holy Scriptures and misteries of GodIoel. 2 according to this prophecy. I wil poure out of my spirit vpon all flesh, and your sonnes & your daugh ters shall prophecye, Dooth not blessed Paule also commende Timothe because he had knowen the holy scriptures euen of a childe.
            Diuers histories mo mighte be alledged out of the holy Scriptures to declare the carefull studies and earnest labours which the holyfathers in time past tooke for the godly and vertuous bringing vp of theyr younglinges, that they mighte be fathers not onely of the bodye but also of the minde and for theyr power satisfy the good will of God which re quireth of all parents, an earnest diligence & a watching ye in bringing vp theyr children in his nou
                  •…
                ture and feare, in his word and doctrine, but these for this present may seme aboundauntlye to suffice. Furthermore as touchinge the heathen, whiche of them all euen from the lowest both amongest the Romaines and the Greekes, with diuers other na tions although hauing respecte not vnto the glorye of God, wherunto the end of all studies oughte to

be directed, but only vnto the auauncement of thē
               selues vnto the maintenaunce of good politique ciuill and honest orders, vnto the hability of rulinge in a comom weal vnto the polishing of their wit vn to eloquence, vnto immortality of their name: Enforced not both them selues to bee learned, but also soughte all meanes possible to haue their children brought vp in good letters. That their yonglings might become learned, what paynes or costes refu sed the parentes? They sente theyr children from country to country, from one learned man to an other. Many of them called learned men home vnto theyr houses, gaue them honorable intertainmente great giftes and large stipendes for teaching theyr children. There was no burthen to heauy, no laboure to paineful, no cost to charge able for them so that theyr children might proue learned. If they obtayned that, they thoughte themselues worthye and righteous parents, and to deserue well both of theyr children and of the publike weale. And as euery one of them excelled in worthines and auctority, so laboured they that both themselues & their children should excell and passe the baser sort in lear ninge, iin knowledge, in vertue & honest behauiour in so much that if any wer vnlearned, and wanted the godlye qualities of the minde, albeit he wer of an honourable parentage, he was counted of no re putation, & called a stone, a blocke, a beast, a golden slaue, a sheepe with a golden Flcese, an horse trapped with siluer, an asse couered with purple with suche other despytefull names, so little regarded (euen amonge the Heathen) was noble bloude, worldly substaunce, sumptuous apparell, gorgious buildyng, delicate fare, and what soeuer besydes the foly she worlde wondereth at, and moste highlye extolleth, if learning and vertue were absent. By this meanes, came it to passe that Philip king of the Macedonians, and his sonne Alexander, Iulius Cesar, Darius, Antonius Philosophus the

Emperour, Hieron, Attalus, Magones, I
                  •…
               , Dion Siracusanus, Thebanus Epaminondas, Pompeius, Augustus, Traianus, Antonius Pius, Claudins▪ Tiberius, Titus Uespasianus, Domicianus, Aelius, Adrianus: Galerius, Maximus▪ the sonues of Tiberius Gracchus, with other innumerable, became both learned, and the vnfayned fauourers of learning, yea and the diligent promoters of learned men. Many of them which were right excellent Emperours and noble kinges thought themselues more noble and more worthy of renowne for their learning and vertue then for their imperiall dignitie and princelike authoritie. When king Alphonsus heard a certayne man say, that learning was not semely for a prince, or for a noble mā, he cryed out and sayd, vox bouis non hominis. Thys is the voyce of an oxe and not of a man: When a certaine man demaunded of Isocrates whether he thought the kyng of the Persians happie and blessed or not, he answered, I know not howe much learning and vertue he hath, meaning that the true felicitie, happines, and wealth consisteth not in the flitting and vncertain goods of fortune, but in the constant & immortall treasures of the minde. The bringing vp of youth in learning and honest qualities, was so much regarded among the Lacedemonians, that they made a law, who soeuer dyd not studie for the honest & vertuous trayning vp of their children in good letters and other necessarie artes profitable for a common wealth: the same should be depriued of all such priuiledges and liberties, as were due to true and faithfull Citizens. Our auncetors both amonge the people of God, and among the heathen, did consider, that the health, prosperitie, & safegard of the cōmon weale, 
                  •…
               th principally consiste in the godly and vertuous bringing vp of youth. If they be learnedly & fruitfully brought vp, then shall they afterward proue, 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •…
               ble Magistrates, some wyse and faythfull

counsellours, some godly spirituall ministers, some learned scholemaisters, some diligent labourers, some cunning artificers, some, yea and ail obedient subiectes to the high powers, and profitable members of the common weale. Contrariwyse, if they be brought vp in barbarous rudenes and wt out any ciuilitie or knowledge of good letters & such other necessarie artes: it must nedes come to passe yt they shal be rather pestilēces thē preseruers of y• cōmon weale. Therfore dyd our elders aboue all thinges shewe earnest diligence about y• godly trayning vp of their youth, in honest & vertuous exercises, euer setting before their eyes, that learnyng to a noble man, is a ioyful iewel, to the baser sort, a sure defence and a mightye bulwarke, against the stoute stormes of froward fortune, & to a common weale a precious preseruatiue. In like maner my Lords grace your father a prince of noble renoune in whō 
               
                  •…
               s in a true mirror liuelye shyneth ye beautifull bea mes of right nobility, considering that the office of a worthye Parent appeareth in nothing so manyfestly as in the Godlye bringing vp of youthe in heauenlye mysteryes, that is to say, in the knowledge of good letters and in the studye of Godes moste blessed woorde, hath with my Ladyes grace your mother a Ladye of a notable godlynesse, and of singulere pity toward y• poore mēbers of Christ euen from your cradels studyed to trayne & bring vp both my Lordes your brothers, and my Ladies your Sisters and you likewise his graces children in good literature, and in the knowledge of Gods most holye lawes, that ye maye learne from your infancye to feare the Lord your God, and to walk in his godly ordinaunces, and so be come truely noble, not onely for birthes sake, but also for learning and vertue, and for the Godly qualities of the mynde. In the whiche Godly exercises ye haue so profited euen in these your tender yeares, that ye 
                  •…
               aue not only answered but also ouercome the expectation

of many. If ye goe forth accordyng to your beginnings, I doubt not, but that ye shall get to my Lordes grace, and to my Ladies grace your most honourable Parents, much renoune, and to your selfe noble fame and glorious immortalitye. And albeit your good Ladiships brest is so furnished withal godly doctrine, that ye nede not my simple and homely exhortations to moue you vnto godlynes and vertue, whereunto of your owne disposition ye are moste willinly bente and enclined, yet to declare some parte of my good wil toward your Ladishippe I thought it not good to let go the occasion offred vnto me. Certayn wekes past considering the miserable face of this to much wretched and lamentable worlde, and weighinge with my selfe that the next and most ready way to redresse our miseries, is to flye vnto God wyth continual & harty prayer. I made a boke intituled: The Floure of Godly prayers, dedicated to my ladies grace your mother, wherin ar contained pray yers not only for al degrees and states of men, but also for all other thinges necessarye to be asked of God, eyther for the bodye or for the soule, which prayers I woulde with daylye as occasion shall serue, to bee vsed of the faythfull. Immedyatly after the setting forth of these prayers, certayn of my frends came vnto me, and earnestly requyred of me to peruse and correcte the Gouernaunce of Vertue, which aboute viij. yeares paste, euen in the bloudye wysterous burning time, when the reading of the holye Bible, the worde of oure soules health, was forbidden the poore lay people, I gathered out of the holy scriptures, and caused to bee printed for the edifiyng of the simple and vnlearned Christians. Yet suppressinge my name which at that time was odious to those ou
                  •…
               s that could not abide the glorious lighte of gods blessed word, that the boke might haue the better successe, and be the more free frō Antichristes thonderbolt
                  •…
               
               
I knowinge my self debter to all good men and to all their godly requestes, perused the boke, wherin I found so many fautes thorowe the negligence o the hongry printers, that very pitie without anye request of frendes, might haue bene thought sufficient to haue geuen me occasion to correct the boke which hitherto hath bene so greatly desired and gre dely red almoste of all men, yea and that not wt out great profite, as the often printing of the boke doth rightwell declare. I haue diligentlye perused the boke corrected the faultes chaunged diuers things and added many necessari instructions with diuers godly prayers for the edifiyng of the readers. This little boke recognised and augmented (moste vertuous Lady) I geue vnto your Ladyship as a testimony of my good will towarde you desiring you to take this my poore gifte in good part. And I shall moste humbly beseeche the Lorde our God to preserue my Lords grace and my Ladyes grace your honourable parentes in good health longe life and encrease of honoure, and to geue my Lordes, youre Brothers and my Ladies youre Sisters, and you also grace to go forth in your godly enterprises and Christen studies, that ye may tru ly know the Lord your God & the saluation whiche ye haue by his sōne Iesus our alone Sauiour, who euer preserue your good Ladyship in cōtinuall helth and prosperous felicitie.
            Amen.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               
            
            
            THE GOVERNANCE of Vertue.
            
               
                  ¶ How a man should behaue him selfe in the morning when he riseth.
                  When thou risest in the morning, looke that thou with all humblenesse of mynde knelest downe, and lifting vp thy harte, thy handes and thine eyes into heauen vnto God the father almighty, pray on this maner.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              ¶ A prayer for the morning.
                              
                                 O Lord God my heauēly father I most humbly thanke thee, y• thou of thy fatherly goodnes hast vouchsafed to defend me this night from all euil: I most entyrely beseche thee, to preserue me also this day, both from suffring and doyng any euill, and to geue me grace so to walke in the lyght of thy holy woorde, that I may bring forth ye frutes of y• same vnto the glorye of thy blessed name, and the profite of my neighbour.
                              Amen.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  ¶ After thou hast prayed on this maner, seing we be al sinners, it shall be expedient (if thou hast conuenient leasure) to confesse thy selfe to God on this maner.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              ¶ A confession of our sinnes vnto God the father.
                              MOst greuouslye haue I wretched sinner offēded thee my Lord God

and heauenly father, both in thought word and dede, in so much that in my selfe I ūnde such vnworthines, that if I did not behold thine exceding great mercies, set forth in thy dearely beloued sonne our Lord and sauiour Iesu Christ, I could not but dispayre and wholy geue my selfe into the hands of Satan that olde enemy of mankynd. But when thorow thy grace and holy workyng, I loke vpon thy mercies offered frely to all faythfull penitēt sinners in thy son Christ Iesus, for whose sake thou art well pleased with man, and of thy own good will forgeuest vs al our sinnes whē soeuer we flee vnto thee in his name, I cease to dispayre, & beginne to conceiue an earneste faithe and an vndoubted hope of obtaynyng forgeuenesse of al my sins in Christes bloud for thy louing and fatherly promise sake. I therfore poore and wretched sinner, most humbly beseche thee for Christes sake, to forgeue me al my sinnes, where with from the day of my byrth vnto this present tyme I haue most greuously offended thy fatherly

goodnesse, and to geue me grace so to resiste the deuill, the world, & the flesh▪ and so to order my lyfe accordyng to thy blessed will, that thou mayest delight in me as a father in his sonne, de fend me frō all euill, and worke in me all good thinges vnto the glory of thy holy name.
                              ☞ After the confession, say the Lordes prayer called the Pater noster, and so commendyng thy selfe vnto God, faule in hand with some honest and vertuous exercise, accordyng to thy callyng. But whatsoeuer thou doest, do it with purenesse of hart & singlenes of eye▪ yea, so do it, as though God wer present and looke vpon thee, as vndoubtedly he doth.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Of Dinner.
                  ☞ Whē the time cōmeth, that thou shouldest refresh thy wery and hongry body, approch vnto the table with reuerence, and when thou art set, lyft vp thy hart, thy hands and thy eyes vnto heauen, and pray vnto God on this maner.
                  
                     A prayer before dinner.
                     O Most gentill God and louyng father, whiche mercifully 
                           •…
                        edest al ly uing creatures, we beseche thee blesse vs and all these thy giftes, whiche we at this present shall receyue of thy beū teous hande, for the refreshyng of our

hungry bodies, and geue vs grace to doo all thynges vnto the glorye of thy name, thorowe Iesu Christ our Lord.
                     Amen.
                  
               
               
                  Of the behauiour at the table in Diner tyme.
                  ☞ Whē thou hast thus prayed vnto god eate thy meate soberly and christenly: esche wyng all superfluitie, surfeting and drouckenship. Consider that thy meate and thy drinck, are the giftes of God, & are reuerently & thanke fully to bee receyued▪ Remember that in the tyme of thy repast, thy behauiour be honest & comely in all thinges. Let thy communica tion, as the Apostle sayth, ve well sauoured and powdred with 
                        •…
                     t: that is to say, seasoned with godly wisedome, that thou mayest know how to answere euery man. Let no fil thy talke procede out of thy mouth, but that whiche is good to edifie, when neede is, that it may haue fauor with the hearers, remem bring that thou shalte geue accountes at the day of iudgement, for euery idle worde that thou speakest. Eschewe all dissolute and vncomely laughyng, least thou be therby counted wilde, wa
                        •…
                     ton, foolishe, & without good maners. Let thy coūtenaūce he graue, sober, modest, gentle, and 
                        •…
                     ouyng, towarde al that be at the table, and so fashion thy selfe in gesture, worde and deede, as though God and his aungels we
                        •…
                      visibly present at the table: And when Dinner is done, geue thankes to God for his benefites on this maner.
                  
                     A thankes geuyng after Dinner.
                     
                        WE thanke thee O heauenly father for this our foode, which being sā
                        ctif
                           •…
                        ed by thy worde, thou hast vouchesafe at this present to geue vs: wee beseche thee, that thou wilt also fede our soules wt the liuely bread of the word, which commeth out of thy mouth, that we receauyng at thy merc
                           •…
                        full hande, meate both for our bodyes and soules▪ may lyue and growe in all godlynesse vnto the glory of thy blessed name, tho row Iesu Christ our Lord.
                     Amen.
                  
               
               
                  VVhat is to be done after dynner.
                  ☞ After thou hast geuen thankes vnto God for thy repast▪ returne vnto thy labour, & vertuously exercise thy self, accordyng to thy voca tion and callyng. Employ earnest diligence about thy businesse, and alway in thy minde desire God to blesse, to prosper, and to bryng to passe all thy counsels, deuises, trauailes, labours and enterprises. Do not thy worke negligently and deceitfully, but so laboure as thoughe God were present and beheld thee, as vnfaynedly he doth. Cursed be he sayth Hiere mye, that doth the Lordes worke deceitfully. Saint Paule also exhorteth, that what soeuer we doo we should do it hartly, as though we did in vnto the Lorde, and not vnto men: for as much sayth he▪ as ye know that of the Lord ye shall receyue the rewarde of inheritaunce, for ye serue the Lord Christ. Yea verely so many as labour or trauayle in any vertuous enterprise,

they serue God, and of God shal they receiue their rewarde. Therfore in thy calling labour earnestly and diligently, what soeuer thou be, sekyng not onely thyne owne lucre & 
                        •…
                     uaunt age: but much more the glory of God, and the profite of thy neighbour, as the Apostlesayth: do all thyngs vnto the glory of God. Agayne, let euery man looke not for his owne profite, but for the profite of other. Charitie seketh not her owne.
               
               
                  Of Supper.
                  ☞ When the tyme is come▪ that thou shalte leaue of thy worke, and prepare thy selfe vnto supper, euē with the same reuerence that thou camest vnto the table at dinner, come agayne nowe: but before thou doest taste any meate, pray on this maner.
                  
                     A prayer before Supper.
                     THe eyes of all thynges looke vnto thee, O Lorde, and thou geuest thē meate in due tyme, thou openest thy hand, and fillest euery liuyng creature with the blessing: vouchesafe, O heauē ly father for Christes sake, mercifully to loke vpon vs, louingly to blesse vs, & liberally to geue vs grace so to taste of these thy creatures, that our bodyes beyng satisfied with the moderate vse of them, we may bee the more able to serue thee our Lord God, and to profit our neighbour, thorow Iesu Christ

our Lord.
                     Amen.
                  
               
               
                  Of the behauiour at the table in Supper tyme.
                  ☞ After thou hast thus prayed vnto GOD▪ eate thy meate with a chearefull and thankefull mynde vsing the same modesty and honest behauiour, that thou diddest vse at dinner. And whē thou hast supped, geue thankes vnto god for his benefites on this wise.
                  
                     A thankesgeuing after Supper.
                     FOr these thy benefites, wherewith thou hast refreshed our hungry bodyes, we thanke thee (most merciful fa ther) desiring thee that thou wilt also feede our soules with y• lyuely faith in the bloud of thy sonne Iesu Christ our Lord, that we beleuyng stedfastly, and working diligently thy holy wil, may obtayne thy glorious kyngdome, thorowe the same Iesu Christ our Lorde.
                     Amen.
                  
               
               
                  VVhat to be done after Supper.
                  ☞ When thou hast on this wise geue thākes vnto God, thou mayest do what thou wilt, so it be godly and honest▪ vntill thou goest to bed▪ If thou canst rede, rede thou thy selfe or els here some other rede parte of the holy scriptures, that may be to the comfort of thy self, and of so many as be with thee, or passe the tyme by frendly and honest talke with some of thy lo
                        •…
                     yng and trusty familiares, or els debate

with thy selfe, how thou mayest most conueniently bryng that to passe, that thou hast to doo the next day folowyng.
               
               
                  Of goyng to bed.
                  ☞ And whē the time cōmeth, that thou must go to bed thou beyng in thy chamber, to cal remēbraūce how thou hast spent the day past. If thou perceiuest, that yu hast offēded God in any thyng at all, confesse thy fault vnto him with a repentaunt and sorowfull heart▪ and desire hym of hys great mercye for Christes sake to forgeue thee, and promise that vnto the vttermost of thy power, hys grace woorkyng with thee, thou wilt amende that wherin thou hast offended, and walke more diligently in the rules of thy profession. Cry with the Publicane. O God be mercifull to me a sinner. Cry with that lost sonne: Father I haue synned against heauen and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy sonne. Pray with Dauid: for thy names sake. O Lorde, for geue me my sinne for it is excedyng much. Thus with a faythfull hart beleuyng that thy sinnes are for geuen thee, content thy selfe and quiet thy conscience. If thou perceyuest, that thou hast that day committed no notable crime▪ then geue to God right harty thankes, whiche by his holy spirite hath wrought the same in thee: and desire him to encrease his giftes in thee, that hys glory may be shewed in all thy actes & dedes. This done, prepare thy selfe to bedward, and when thou art ready to lye down, lift vp thou hart, thy eyes, and thy handes vnto heauen, & pray to God on this maner.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              A prayer to be sayd when we go to bed.
                              
                                 
                                 I Thāke thee (O heauenly father) by thy dearelye beloued Sonne Iesu Christ our Lord and Sauiour, that of thy free mercy thou hast preserued me this day from all hurtes, and daūgers.
                              Uouchesafe also I most humbly besech thee to kepe me this night, and to saue me ftom all myne enemyes both bodely and ghostlye. Gyue to my body quietnesse and fleepe, but let my mind continually watche vnto thee, thinke on thee, and on thy holy law, that whē the cherefull light of y• day shal spryng and appeare. I being whole both in bo dy and mynde, may ioyfull ryse again: be thanckefull vnto thee, and diligent ly walke in my vocation vnto the glo ry of thy blessed name, and the commo ditie of my neighbour, thorowe Iesus Christ thy sonne. Amen.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  ☞ When thou hast thus prayed, lye down in thy bed and say on this maner.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              The Prayer.
                              O Lorde God and my heauenly Father, I commende my bodye and soule into thy handes, that in Christe whiche is our life and resurrectiō, thou

mayest defende me from euerlastyng death, and giue me that blessed and ioy full lyfe of immortalitie, and that he which is the true light, may poure out the brightenesse of hys grace into my hart, & preserne me both bodye & soule vnto that day of the glorious resurrection where the faythfull with ioyfull harts shall see thee face to face, and for euer reygne with thee in glory.
                              Amen
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               ☞ Remedyes agaynst all kyndes of temptations.
               
                  Against Idolatry.
                  ☞ If that olde enemy Satan goeth about to persuade thee, that there be 
                        •…
                     o gods then one resiste him with these Scriptures.
                  
                     ☞ Sentences out of the olde Testament.
                     I am the Lord thy God. Thou shal
                           •…
                        
                        Exo. 20 haue none other gods in my sight.
                     Understand and marke wel that theDeut. 4 Lord he is God in heauen aboue, and vpon the earth beneath, neither is therDeut. 6. any other God besides him. Here Israel, the Lord our god is one Lord.Deut. 32
                     
                     Se howe that I, yea that I am the Lord and that there is no god but I.
                     Heare O my people I will chargePsal. 81
                        
thee, O Israell, that if thou wilt her
                        
                           •…
                        en vnto me, there shall no straunge god be in thee, neither shalt thou worship any other god. For I am the Lord thy God.
                     I am the lord, & there is none other.Esay 4
                              •…
                           
                        
                     
                     I am the Lord, & there is els none, It is I that created light and darknes I make peace and trouble, yea euen I the Lord do all these thynges.
                     Am not I the Lord? is there any god but I? A god that is righteous, & such one as saueth, ther is none besides me.
                     Turne vnto me all ye coastes of the worlde and ye shalbe saued, for I am God, and there is els none.
                     Haue we not all one Father? hathMal. 
                              •…
                           
                         not one god made vs?
                  
                  
                     ☞ An example out of the old Testament.
                     Abrahā saw three, & worshipped oneGene. 8
                     
                  
                  
                     ☞ Sentences out of the newe Testament.
                     Thou shalte worshyp the Lord thyMath. 4 god, and him onely shalt thou serue.
                     We haue but one god, whiche is the1. Cor. 8 Father, of whom are all thinges, and 
                           •…
                        e in him, and one Lord Iesus Christ

by whom are al thinges, & we in him.
                     There is one Lord, one faith, one baEphe. 4. ptisme, one god, & father of all, whiche is aboue all, & thorow all, & in you all.
                     There is one god, and one mediatour1. Tim. 2. betwene god and man, euen the man Christ Iesu, which gaue him self a ra
                           •…
                        nsome for all men.
                     There are three which beare recordIhon. 5. in heauen, the father, the worde, & the holy ghost. And these thre are one.
                  
               
               
                  Agaynst infidelitie or misbelief.
                  IF Satan at any tyme moueth thee, vnto in fidelitie or misbelief, either toward God or his woorde, by no meanes leane vnto him, vnt agaynst hys temptation enarme thy selfwith these holy scriptures.
                  
                     Sentences out of the old Testament.
                     If ye do not beleue, there shall noEsay. 7. promise be kept with you.
                     Thy eyes, O Lord, loke vpon fayth.
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           . 5.
                     
                     The righteous shall lyue by fayth.Abacu. 2.
                     
                     I will mary thee vnto me in faith, 
                           •…
                        
                        Ose. 2. thou shalt know that I am the Lord.
                     The wrath of y• Lord came vpon IPsalm. 78 raell, because they beleued not in god, nor trusted not in his sauing health.
                     
                        The Lorde doth appeare vnto themS
                              •…
                           pi. 2 that hath fayth in him.
                     Wo be to the dissolute in hart, thatEccle. 
                              •…
                           
                           ▪
                         
                        
                           •…
                        eleue not god, & therefore shall they not be defended of him.
                     In all thy woorkes put thy trust inEccle. 3
                              •…
                           
                           ▪
                         god from thy whole harte, for that is the kepyng of the commaundements. Who so beleueth gods worke taketh 
                           •…
                        ede to the commaundementes: and he that putteth his trust in the Lord shall want nothyng.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the olde Testament.
                     Abrahā beleued god, & it was reckenedGene. 15. vnto hym for righteousnesse.
                     Dauid beyng a younge man and of1. Reg 17. 
                        
                           •…
                        itle stature thorow fayth in the name of the Lord of hoastes, fought with that proude monstruous gyante Go
                        
                           •…
                        iath the Philistine, and slue him.Dan. 
                              •…
                           
                           ▪
                        
                     
                     Sidrach Misach, and Abdenago thorow faith, chosed rather to be cast into a whote burnyng fornace, then at the kyngs commaundement to cōmit Ido latry, and to worship straunge gods.
                     Daniel thorowe faith wished ratherDan. 
                              •…
                           
                           ▪
                        
                        
to be cast quicke into the denne of Lyons, then by the space of thyrty dayes, not to pray vnto the Lord his god, according to the kings commaundemēt.
                  
                  
                     ☞ Sentences out of the new Testament.
                     He that beleueth & is baptised shalbeMat. 16. saued. But he that beleueth not, shalbe condempned.
                     As many as receaued christ he gaueIohn. 1 them power to be the sonnes of god, in that they beleue on his name.
                     As Moses lifted vp the serpent in theIhon. 3. wildernes: so must the sonne of mā be lyfted vp, ye so many as beleue in him may not perishe, but haue euerlastyng lyfe. For god hath so dearely beloued the world, that he gaue his onely begot ten sonne, that euerye one that beleueth in him, may not perishe, but haue euerlastyng lyfe.
                     He that beleueth in y• sonne of god, is not condempned. But he that beleueth not, is already condempned, because he hath not beleued in the name of the onely begotten sonne of god.
                     He that beleueth in the sonne hath

euerlastyng lyfe, but he that beleueth not in the sonne, shall not see lyfe, but the wrath of god abideth vpon him.
                     This is the wil of him that sent meIohn. 6▪
                         that euerye one that seeth the sonne & beleueth on hym, should haue euerlastyng lyfe, and I will rayse hym vp at the last day.
                     I am the resurrectiō and life, he thatIhon. 1
                              •…
                           . beleueth in me, although he wer dead yet shall he lyue, and euery one that ly ueth and beleueth in me, shall not dye euerlastyngly.
                     Ye beleue in god, beleue also in me,Ihon. 14. sayth Christ.
                     Be i
                           •…
                         knowē vnto you, ye mē & breActes. 89. thren, that thorow the name of Christ is preached vnto you ye forgeuenes of sinnes, and that by him are all that beleue
                           ▪15. iustified from all thynges, from the whiche ye could not be iustified by the law of Moses.
                     With fayth doth God purifie oureActes. 1
                              •…
                           
                         heartes.
                     The ryghteousnes that is alowedRom. 
                              •…
                           
                           ▪
                         before god cōmeth by the faith of Iesu
                           
                              •…
                           
                         Christ vnto all, & vpon all that beleue
                     
                        We beyng iustified by fayth are atRom. 
                              •…
                           . peace with god, thorow our lord Iesu christ by whom we haue a way in, tho row faith vnto this grace, wherin we stand, and reioyce in hope of the prayse that shalbe geuen of god.
                     Christ is the perfect fulfillyng of theRom 10. law, to iustifie euery one y• beleueth.
                     If yu wilt knowledge with thy mouthEsay. 28. that Iesus is the lord, and beleue with thy hart, that God raiseth hym from death, thou shalt be saued. For the belief of the hart iustifieth, and to knowledge with the mouth maketh a man safe. For ye scripture saith: who soeuer beleueth on him, shall not be ashamed.
                     What soeuer is not of faith is sinne.
                           
                              •…
                           m. 14.
                     
                     All ye are sonnes of god, because ye
                           
                              •…
                           lla. 3. haue beleued in Christ Iesu.
                     In Christ Iesu neither is circūcision
                           
                              •…
                           la. 4. any thing worth, nor vncircumcision, but fayth whiche worketh by loue.
                     By grace are ye saued thorow fayth,
                           
                              •…
                           e. 
                              •…
                           . ye & that not of your selues. It is the gift of god, & commeth not of workes, because no man should boast him selfe.
                     Aboue all thinges take vnto you the
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           . 
                              •…
                           .
                        
shielde of fayth wherby ye may be able to quēch al the fire dartes of the deuil.Heb. 11.
                     
                     Without fayth it is not possible to please god. For he that commeth vnto god, must beleue that God is, and that he is a rewarder to thē that seke him.
                     Be ye sover and watch, for your aduersary1. Pet. 5. the deuil goeth about like a ro aryng Lyon, seking whom he may deuour, whom see that ye resiste with a strong fayth.
                     This is the victory whiche ouercom meth the world, euen our fayth.
                  
                  
                     ☞ Examples out of the new Testament.
                     The woman that was diseased byMath. 9. the space of. 12. yeares of the bloudy issue, thorow fayth was made whole.
                     The woman of Canane thoroweMath. 15. faith, obtayned of Christ health for her daughter.
                     The father of the childe possessed wt
                        Mar. 9. a deuill from his childhoode, obtayned of Christ thorowe fayth, perfect health for his sonne.
                     Bartimeus the blynd man thorowMar. 1
                              •…
                           . fayth recouered his sight.
                     
                        A certayne sinfull woman thoroweLuke. 7 fayth obtayned of Christ forgeuenesse of all her sinnes.
                     The Apostles of Christ thorow faithActes. 5 notwithstāding y• hye priests cōmaūdment, continued in the preachyng of Christes gospel, and both paciētly, ioy fully, & thākefully, suffered al kinds of displeasure for y• name of y• Lord Iesu. Rede ye. 11. chap. of the Epistle vnto the Hebrues, where thou shalt fynd plēty of examples concernyng this matter.
                  
               
               
                  Agaynst the heresie of such as deny Iesu Christ, to be God.
                  IF Satan at any time moueth thee to doubt of the godhead of Christ as though he were onely man & not God, a creature or a thing made, and not the creator and maker of all thynges, enarme thy selfe agaynste hym with these scriptures.
                  
                     ☞ Sentences out of the old Testament.
                     VNto vs a childe is borne, and vntoEsay. 9. vs a sonne is geuen, vppon hys shoulder doth the kingdome ly, and he is called we his own name, wonderful, the geuer of coūcell, the mighty god, y• euerlasting father y• prince of peace. & 
                           •…
                        
                     
                     In that day it shalbe said: Lo, this isEsay. 25
                        
our god, we haue wayted for him, & he shal saue vs. This is the Lord, in whō we haue hoped, we shalbe mery and reioyce in the saluacion that commeth of hym.
                     They shall see the glory of y• Lord, & Esay. 35 the maiestie of our god. And therfore strēgth the weake handes, & cōfort the feble knees, say vnto thē y• ar of a feare full hart, be of good chere & feare not.
                     Behold your god cōmeth to take vē
                        geaunce, & you shall see the reward ye god geueth. God commeth his owne selfe, & will deliuer you. Thē shall the eyes of the blind be lightened, and the eares of the deafe opened. Then shall the lame mā leape as an hart, and the dumme mans toung shalbe losoned.
                     O that thou wouldest cleaue y• heauensEsay. 64 in sonder, and come downe.
                     Behold, I see foure men goyng loseDan. 4 in the middest of the fire, and nothyng hurt, and the fourth is lyke the sonne of god to looke vpon.
                     Out of Egipt haue I called my son.Ose. 11
                     
                     This is our god, & ther shal none otherBaru. 5 be cōpared vnto him. It is he that

hath found out all wisedome, and hath geuen her vnto Iacob hys seruaunt, and to Israell his beloued.
                     Afterward did he shew him selfe vppon earth, and dwelt among men.
                     The Lord said vnto me, thou art myPsal. 2. sonne, this day haue I begotten thee.
                     Thy seat (O god) endureth for euer,Psal. 45 the scepter of thy kyngdome is a right scepter.
                     The Lord hym selfe had me in possessionProu. 7. in the beginning of his wayes, or euer he begā his workes afore time. I haue bene ordeyned from euerlasting, and from the begynning or euer the earth was made.
                     When I was borne, there were net ther depthes nor springs of water. Be fore the foundaciōs of the moūtaynes, were layde, yea before all hils was I borne. The earth and all that is vpon the earth, was not yet made, no not ye ground it selfe. For when he made the heauēs I was present, when he set vp y• depthes in order, whē he hanged the cloudes aboue, when he fastened the springs of the deepe, when he shut the

sea within certayne boundes, that the waters shuld not go ouer their marks that he cōmaunded. When he layd the foundacions of the earth, I was with him, ordryng all thinges, deliting dayly, and reioysing alwaye before him.
                     I came out of the moste hyest, fyrste borne before all creatures.
                     I caused the lyght that fayleth notEccle. 24. to aryse in the heauen, and couered all the earth as a cloude.
                     I will be his father, and he shalbe2. Reg. 7. my sonne.
                  
                  
                     ☞ Examples out of the old Testament.
                     WHen god created the earth and allGene. 1. thynges therein, he sayd: Let vs make manne in our Image, after our owne lykenesse: this worde, vs. doth euidently declare that there bee three persōs in the godhead, the father, and the sonne, and the holy ghost. Wherof it manifestly foloweth, that as the father is god, and the holy ghost god, so likewise is the sonne god, yea true and naturall god, hegotten of god the Father from euerlastyng.
                     
                        Abraham sawe three, and worshyppedGen. 18 one, saying: Lord I beseche thee, if I haue founde fauour in thy sight, go not away from thy seruaunt.
                     ☞ Here it is euident also, that there are three persons in the deity, and yet notwithstanding they three are one God. Therfore lyke as the first and the second persons in the deitie are ve ry God (I meane the father & the holy ghost) so likewise is the second person in, the trinitie, I meane the sonne, true & naturall God, worthy all honour and glory for euermore.
                     GOd sayd vnto Moses I am the godExod. 3 of thy father, the god of Abrahā, the god of Isaac, and the god of Iacob.
                     ☞ Here also is euidently declared the blessing and glorious trinitie, and that there be three persones in the godhead, and yet one God: so that as the father is God and the holy ghost God: so lykewise is the sonne God.
                     IN the same yeare that kyng OsiahEsay. 6 dyed, I saw the Lord, sayth the Pro phete Esay, sittyng vpon an hygh and glorious feat, and his trayne filled the temple. And about hym stoode Seraphins, wherof euery one had. 6. wings With twayne eche couered hys face, with twayne hys feete, & with twaine

dyd he flee. They cryed also eche one to another on this maner. Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hostes. The whole worlde is full of his glory.
                     ☞ This worde holy, thryse rehearsed, doth also manifestly declare that there are three per sones in the godhead, and that they three are one God: Christ therfore the second person in the Trinitie, is very God.
                     Kyng Nabuchodonosor commaundedDan. 4 these three men, Sidrach Misach and Abdenago, to be cast into an excedyng hote burning ouen, because they would not become Idolatours and at his commaundement, fall downe and worship the golden Image. And whē they were bounde in theyr coates, bosen, shoes, with their other garmentes and caste into the hote burnyng ouen, the kyng looked into the ouen, & sayd vnto his counsell: did ye not cast these three men bounde into the fyre? They aūswered vnto the kyng, yea, O kyng. He aunswered and said, lo for all that, yet doo I see foure men goyng lose in the middest of the fyre, and nothyng corrupt, and the fourth is lyke the son of god to looke vpon.
                     
                        Here is a manifest testimony yt Iesu Christ is the son of God, and God hymselfe, as we shall euidently learne of the histories of the new Testament.
                  
                  
                     ☞ Sentences out of the newe Testament.
                     Hys name shall be called Emanuel,Mat. 1 which is by interpretation, God wyth vs, or God and man.
                     This is my welbeloued sonne, inMat. 3. 17 whome I haue great pleasure.
                     Thou art Christ the sonne of the liuyngMat, 16 God.
                     Without all doubte thys was theMath. 27 sonne of God.
                     He shall be great, and shall be calledLuc, 1 the sonne of the most highest.
                     That holy thing which shal be born, shall be called the sonne of God.
                     In the beginning was the word, & y•
                        Ihon. 1. word was wt god & the word was god
                     We sawe the glory of the worde, as the glorye of the onely begotten sonne of the father.
                     No man hath sene god at any tyme, the onely begotten sonne: whiche is in the bosome of the father, he hath declared hym. Thou art the sonne of god, y•
                        
art the kyng of Israell.
                     He that beleueth not, is condemnedIohn. 3. already, because he beleueth not in the name of the onely begotten sonne of god. The father loueth the sonne and hath geuen all thinges into his hande. He that beleueth the sonne hath euerlastyng lyfe, and he that beleueth not on the sonne, shall not see lyfe, but the wrath of god abideth on hym.
                     I am that liuyng bread, which cameIohn. 6. downe from heauen.
                     Except ye beleue that I am the sonIohn. 8. of god, ye shall dye in your synnes.
                     I and my father are one.Iohn. 10.
                     
                     I beleue that yu art Christ the son ofIohn. 11. god, which should come into the word.
                     Doest thou not beleue, that I am inIohn. 14. the father. and the father is in me?
                     This is euerlastyng lyfe, euen toIohn. 17. knowe thee the alone true God, and whom thou hast sent Iesus Christ.
                     O father thou louedst me before theIohn. 20. worlde was made.
                     These thinges are written, that ye might beleue, that Iesus is Christ the sonne of god: and that in beleuyng ye

lyfe thorough his name.
                     Iesus Christ was declared to be theRom. 2. son of god with power of y• holy ghost.
                     Christ is the image of the inuisibleColos. 1. god, first begotten of al creatures. For by him were all things created, things that are in heauen and things that are on earth, things visible and things inuisible, whether they be maiesty or lord ship, either rule or power. All thynges are created by him and in him, and he is before all thinges, and in hym all things haue their being.
                     We looke for that blessed hope andTitus. 2 glorious appearing of the great god & our sauiour Iesu Christ.
                     God in tyme past diuersly and manyHebr. 1. wayes spake vnto the Fathers by the Prophetes, but in these last dayes he hath spoken vnto vs by his Sonne, who he hath made heyre of all things, by whome also hee made the worlde. Whiche Sonne beyng the brightnes of hys glorye, and very image of hys substaunce, bearyng vp all thynges wyth the worde of his power, hathe in his own person purged our sinnes, & is

sitting on the ryght hand of the maiestye on hie, and is more excellent then the aungels, in as much as he hathe by inheritaunce obtained a more excellēt name then they haue. For vnto which of the aungels sayde be at anye tyme. Thou art my sonne, this day begate IPsal. 2. thee. And agayne, I will be his father and he shall be my sonne.
                     And agayne, when he bringeth inAct. 13. the first begotten sonne into y• world, he sayth: & all the aungels of god shall worshippe him. And of the aungels he sayth: he maketh his aungels sprites, & his ministers flames of fyre. But vnto the sonne he sayth: God, thy seate shal be for euer and euer. The scepter of thy kingdome is a ryght scepter.
                     Iesus Christ yesterday and to day,Heb. 13. and the same cōtinueth for euer. Who is a lier, but he that denieth that Iesus is Christe? The same is the Antichrist that denieth the father & the son: who so euer denyeth the sonne, y• same hath not the father. Let therfore abide in you that same, which ye heard from the beginning. If that which ye hearde

from the beginning shall remayne in you: ye also shall continue in the sonne and in the father, and this is the promise that he hath promised vs, euen euerlastyng lyfe.
                     For this purpose appeared y• sonne
                           
                              •…
                           . Iohn. 3. of god, to lose the workes of the deuil.
                     This is gods commaundemēt that we beleue on the name of his sonne Ie sus Christ.
                     In this appeared the loue of god towards
                           
                              •…
                           . Iohn. 4. vs, because y• god sent his onely begotten sonne into the world that we might lyue thorow hym.
                     Who is it, that ouercommeth the
                           
                              •…
                           . Iohn. 5. world, but he which beleueth that Iesus is the sonne of god.
                     God hathe geuen vnto vs eternall lyfe, and this life is in hys son. He that hath the sonne, hathe lyfe, and he that hath not the son of god, hath not lyfe.
                     We know that the sonne of god is come, and hathe geuen vs a mynde to know him whiche is true, and we are in hym that is true, euen in hys son Ie sus Christ. The same is verye god and eternall lyfe.
                  
                  
                     
                     Examples out of the new Testament.
                     God the Father proclaymed IesuMat. 3. 17. 
                              •…
                           
                         Christ both when he was baptised and transfigured, hys onely begotten, naturall and welbeloued sonne, saying: this is my dearely beloued son, in whō I haue great pleasure.
                     Two men possessed wt deuils calledMath. 8. Iesu the son of god saying: O Iesu the son of god, what haue we to do wt theeMath. 13.
                     
                     The men which were in the ship, se yng that the winde ceased so soone as Christ was come into the ship, said vnto him, truly thou art the son of god.
                     When Christ demaunded ōf hys disMath. 17. ciples, whom they thought him to be, Peter in the name of all the disciples aunswered and sayd: thou art Christe the sonne of the liuyng god.
                     When bishop Cayphas sayde vntoMath. 26. Christ, I charge thee in the name of ye liuing god, that thou tell vs whether thou be Christ the sonne of god, Christ answered: thou hast sayd. Neuertheles I saye vnto you, hereafter shall ye see the sonne of man sitting on the righte

hand of power, and come in the clouds of the sky.
                     Whē the Centurion and they thatMath. 26. were with him watching Iesus, sawe the earthquake, & those thinges which happened they feared greatly, saying: Of a surety this was the son of god.
                     They brought to Christ a mā sickeMath. 9. of the palsie, lying in his bed, & whē Iesus saw the faith of them, he said to the sick of the palsey, son be of good chere. Thy sinnes be forgeuen thee. And behold certain of the Scribes sayd in thē
                        selues, this man blasphemeth. And when Iesus sawe their thoughtes, he sayde: wherfore thynke ye euill in your hartes? Here Christ proueth himselfe god agaynst all his enemies two maner of wayes. Fyrst, in that he forgeueth sinnes. For no man can forgeue sinne but god alone. Secondly, in that be knoweth the verye hidde and secret thoughtes of men. For who searcheth the hartes and raines of men but god onely.
                     When a certayne man possessed wt
                        Mar. 15 an vnclean spirit saw christ a far of, he

came runnyng and worshipped hym, and cried with a loude voyce, saying: What haue I to do with thee, O Iesu, thou sonne of the most hyest god?
                     The high priest asked Iesu
                           •…
                         and saidMar. 14 vnto him, art thou Christ the sonne of the blessed? He aunswered, I am. And ye shall see the sonne of man sitting on the right hand of power, and comming in the cloudes of heauen.
                     Christ sayde vnto Nathanaell: BeforeIhon. 1. 
                              •…
                           
                         that Philip called thee, whē thou wast vnder the 
                           •…
                        ygtree, I saw thee. Na thanaell answered and sayd vnto him, Rabby, thou art euen the verye sonne of god, thou art the king of Israel. Iesus aunswered and sayd vnto him: Bicause I sayd vnto thee, I saw thee vnder the figtree, thou beleuest: thou shalt see greater thinges then these. And he said vnto them, verely verely, I say vn to you, hereafter shall ye see heauen open, and the aungels of god ascēdyng and descendyng ouer the sonne of mā.
                     The miracle which Christ wroughtIohn. 
                              •…
                           
                           ▪
                         at the mariage in Cana by turnyng water into wyne, proueth hym manifestly

to be god.
                     After the sermon that Christ madeIohn. 6. of the eating of his fleshe, and the drinking of his bloud, manye of his Disciples vnderstandyng his wordes grosely (as the papistes doo vnderstande the wordes of the Lordes Supper) wente backe and forsoke him, and walked no more with him. Then said Iesus to y• twelue, will ye also goe away? Then Simon Peter aunswered him, Lord to whome shall we goe? Thou haste the wordes of eternall lyfe, and we beleue and are sure that thou art Christe the sonne of the liuyng god.
                     Iesus heard that the Iewes had excommunicateIohn. 9. the blinde man, whome he had made to see, and when he had found him, he said vnto him: doest thou beleue on the sonne of god? He answered and said: who is it Lord y• I myght beleue on him? And Iesus sayde vnto him, thou hast sene him, and he it is y• taketh with thee. And he sayd, lorde I beleue, and he worshipped him.
                     Martha said vnto Christ, I beleue y•
                        Iohn. 11. thou art Christ the sonne of god which

should come into the world.
                     Iesus sayde to Thomas, bring thyIhon. 20. finger hether, and see my handes and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side, and be no more faithles but beleuing. Thomas answered and said vnto him: My Lord and my god. Iesus said vnto hym: Thomas, because thou hast seene me thou hast beleued, blessed are they that haue not sene, and yet haue beleued.
                     The Enuche sayd vnto Phillip: seeActs. 
                              •…
                           . here is water, what doth let me to bee baptised? Phillip said vnto him. If thou beleue with all thine heart thou maiest. And he aunswered and said, I beleue y• Iesus Christ is the sonne of god.
                     The restoryng of y• blind to their sight the raysing vp of the dead vnto life, the clēsing of the leapers, the healyng of thē that were diseased with the palsey, the restoring of men possessed with deuils & vncleane spirites to their whole minde, the makyng of the deafe to heare, and the dumme to speake, with the other mi racles that Christ wrought, do euidently proue Christ to be the natural sonne

of god, yea and god himselfe.
                  
               
               
                  Against the heresie of them vvhich hold that Iesus Christ the sonne of God toke no fleshe of Mary hys mother.
                  ☞ I feyther Sathan wyth hys subtle suggesti ons, or anye of hys decetifull worke men wyth theyr crafty reasons and falsifiyng the holy scrip tures, goe about to perswade thee that Iesus Christ the sonne of God, tooke no fleshe of that blessed virgine Mary hys mother, but brought hys body wyth hym from heauen, enarme thy sel
                        •…
                     e wyth these authorities of gods worde against theyr pestilent and damnable dartes.
                  
                     Sentences out of the olde Testament.
                     I will set enmitie betwene thee andGene 3. the woman, betwene thy seede and her seede. The verye selfe same seede shall treade downe thy head, and thou shalte tread vpon his hele.
                     In thee all kynreds of the earth shal be blessed.
                     In thy seede shall all the nations ofGene. 22. the earth be blessed.
                     The scepter shall not departe fromGene. 49. Iuda, and a lawe geuer from betwene his fete, vntil S
                           •…
                        lo come, and vnto him shall the gathering of the people be. He shall bynde his fole vnto the vine, & hys Asses colte vnto the braunche. He washed

his garment in wyne, and his man till in the bloud of grapes. His eyes are redder then wine, and his teethe whiter then mylke.
                     There shall come a star of Iacob andNum. 24 raise a Scepter of Israel. Out of Iacob shall he come that shall haue dominion.
                     I will raise them vp a Prophet fromDeut. 
                              •…
                           
                         among their brethreb lyke vn to thee, & wil put my wordes in hys mouth, & he shal speake vnto them all that I shal cō
                        maūd him, and whosoeuer wil not har ken vnto the wordes whiche hee shall speake in my name, I wyll require it of hym.
                     I wil set vp thy sede after thee, which1. Par. 1
                              •…
                           
                         shall be of thy sonnes, and will stablish his kingdō. He shall build me an house and I will stablish his seate for euer. I will bee his father, and he shall bee my sonne, and I wil not put away my mercy from him, as I did from him y• was before thee, but I will set him in my house, and in my kingdome for euer, & his seate shall be sure for euer.
                     I haue sworne once by my holines, y•
                        Psal. 89 I will not fayle Dauid. Hys seede shall

endure for euer, and his seate also like as the sunne before me. He shall stande for euer more as the moone, and as the faithfull witnes in heauen.
                     The Lord hath made a faithful othePsalm. 132 vnto Dauid, and he shall not shrink frō it, out of the fruite of thy body shal I set vpon thy seat.
                     Behold a Uirgine shall conceaue & Esay. 7. beare a sonne, and shall call hys name Emanuell.
                     Unto vs a child shal be borne, & vntoEsay. 9. vs a child shal be geuen, vpō his shoulder shall the kingdome lye, & he shall be called with his owne name, the wonde rous geuer of councell, the mighty god the euerlasting father, ye prince of peacer he shall make no ende to encrease the kingdome and peace, and shall sit vpon the seate of Dauid, and in his kingdom to set vp the same, to establish it with equitie and rightousnes from henceforth for euer more. This shall the gelousy of the Lord of hostes bring to passe.
                     There shal come a rod forth of the kinEsay. 11. dred of Iesse, & a blossō out of his roote. The spirit of the Lord shall light vppon

it, the spirite of wisedome and vnderstanding, the spirite of councel & strēgth the spirit of knowledge and of the feare of god, &c.
                     Behold the tyme commeth sayth theIere. 23. Lord, that I will raise vp the righteous braunche of Dauid, which shall beare rule, and discusse matters with wisdō, and set vp equitie and righteousnesse agayne in earth. In his tyme shall Iuda be saued, and Israell shal dwel without feare. And this is the name yt they shall cal him, euē ye lord our rightous maker.Iohn. 29.
                     
                     Behold the time commeth sayth the lord, that I wil performe the good thing which I haue promised vnto the house of Israell, and to the house of Iuda. In those dayes and at the same time. I wil bryng forth vnto Dauid the braunch of righteousnesse, and he shall doe equitye and righteousnes in the lande. In those dayes shal Iuda be helped, and Ierusalem shal dwel safe, and he that shal call her, is euen god our righteous maker. For thus the Lord god promiseth: Dauid shal neuer want one to sit vpon the stole of the house of Israel.
                     
                        I will rayse vp vnto them one onelyEze. 34, 37 shepeheard euen my seruant Dauid, he shall feede them and he shall be theyr shepeheard, I the Lorde will bee theyr god, and my seruaunte Dauid shall be their prince. Euen I the Lorde hathe spoken it.
                     Understand this and marke it well,Dan. 9. that from the tyme it shall be concluded to go and to repayre Ierusalem againe, vnto Christ, there shal be seuen wekes. Then shal the stretes & walles be builded againe, 62. wekes, but wt heard trou blous time. After these 62. wekes shall Christ be slaine, and they shall haue no pleasure in hym.
                     Thou Bethelem Ephrata art litleMich. 5. among the thousandes of Iuda, out of thee shal come vnto me, which shall bee the gouernour in Israell, whose out go ing hath bene from the beginnyng and from euerlastyng.Zach. 
                              •…
                           .
                     
                     Be glad and reioyce O doughter of Sion: for lo, I come to dwell in y• midst of thee, saith the Lord. At the same time there shal many heathen cleane to the Lord, and shal be my people.
                     
                        Behold I wil sende my messengerMal. 3 which shall prepare the waye before me and y• Lord whom ye would haue, shall soone come to hys temple, ye euen the Messenger of the couenaunt whome ye looke for.
                     This is our god, and there shal noneBarue. 
                              •…
                           . other be compared to hym. It is he that hath found out all wisedome, and hathe geuen her vnto Iacob his seruaunt, and to Israel hys beloued. Afterward did he shew himself vpon earth, and dwelte among men.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the olde Testament.
                     AFter that Adam and his wyfe thorow the crafty perswasions of Satan had transgressed gods commaundement, god in the presence of them both, euen for their comfort and for the quietnes of their conscience, sayd vnto the ser pent. I will set enmitie betwene thee & a woman, betwene thy seede & her sede. The selfe same seede shall tread downe thy head, and thou shalt treade vppon hys heele.
                     
                        These wordes of God the father spokē vnto the serpent, shewe euidently and manifestlye proue, that Iesu Christ our Lorde is the true and natural sonne of Mary, and vnfainedlye tooke his flesh and humanity of her. For this word seede, in thys place signifieth the whole substaunce of Christes manhode, and proueth euidently, that whatsoeuer Christ was being man, he truly and naturally receiued it of the corporall substaunce of Mary his mother the virgine. Cursed therefore is the heretike Appelles, which thought that Christ had receyued his body of the elementes in the ayre, and passed through the virgine, as the water passed through a pipe. Cursed are these heretikes Cerdo, Marcian and Manes, whiche holde that Christ had a fantastical body, appearing to be man, & pet hauing no parte of manhode in hym. Cursed is that heretike Ualentinus with his Apes the Anabaptistes, which hold that Christ tooke no fleshe of Marye his mother the virgine, but brought hys bodye with him frō heauen. God the father calleth Christ the seede of the womā. He therfore is the naturall sonne of Mary his mother, and receyued hys whole bodely substaunce of the most pure virgine or els should God greatlye haue erred, which called hym the seede of a womā, but let God be true and all heretikes lyers.
                     TO Abraham god the father sayd: inGene. 22. thy sede all nations of the earth shal be blessed.
                     This sede is Christ, as S. Paul declaGala. 3. reth to the Galathians, whiche borne

of the virgine Mary, came of the sede of Abraham.
                     ☞ Now if Christ had taken no flesh of Mary, how could he haue come of the sede of Abrahā? But that we should be without all doubt cōcernyng Christes humanitie, and be certaine that he was the true and naturall sonne of Mary, re ceiuyng his manhoode neither of the elementes of the ayre, nor yet bringinning it with him frō heauen, but takyng it of the true and naturall substaunce of Mary his mother. God sayth expresly: In thy seede. Let vs note well this pronown. Thy. In thy sede sayth he, and not in the sede that Christ shall bryng from heauen, or out of the ayre. Howe could Christ iustly haubene called Abrahams sede, if he had neuer taken any part of Abrahams substance? But the Apostle sayth: Christ toke the sede of Abraham, and not of the aungels, so that he must be lyke to his brothers in all thinges. Let God therfore be true, and all heretikes lyers.
                     In like maner the Lord swore a truthPsal. 1
                              •…
                           
                           ▪
                         vnto Dauid, and wyll not go from it. I wil saith he, set vpon thy seat one of the fruite of the wombe. Here Christ, which before was called the sede of a woman, & the sede of Abrahā, is called the fruite of Dauids wōbe.
                     ☞ What cā be spoken more playnly, to declare and proue, that Christ came of the sede of Dauid as concernyng his fleshe? If Christe be the fruite of Dauids belly, I meane concernyng his posteritie (for Mary the mother of Christe, came of the stock and kindred of Dauid) so doth

it euidently followe that Christ passed not thorow the wōbe of his mother without any part
                           •…
                         king of y• natural substāce of his mother as y• wa ter passeth and runneth thorowe the pype, and yet receyueth no part of the pypes substaunce, but rather that he tooke a perfect body of substaunce of his mother, and so became true and perfect man. Otherwise should not he haue ben the fruite of Dauids belly, neither should God haue kepte hys othe and promise made vnto Dauid. But let God be true and all heretikes lyers.
                     THe Prophet Esay doth lyuely describe,Esay. 7. painte & set forth both the mother of Christ, and Christ him selfe in these wordes: The Lord, sayth he, shall geue you a token. Beholde a virgine shall conceyue and beare a sonne, and thou shalt cal his name Emanuel, But ter & hony shall he eate, y• he may know to refuse the euill and chose the good.
                     ☞ First as concernyng Christes mother, we learne here that she was a pure and vnde
                           •…
                        yled mayde, and that she, and not the heauen nor the ayre conceyued and brought foorth Christe her sonne. In that she conceyued and brought forth Christe, it is euident that she was vnfaynedly Christes naturall mother, ministres part of her 
                           •…
                        bstaunce to the perfourmyng and makyng a
                           •…
                         her sonne thorow Gods operacion, and dyd the duty and office of a true mother in all poyntes. And where as the Prophete calleth Christ her 
                           •…
                        onne he declareth manifestly. that Christ tooke his flesh of the substaunce of his mother Mary

the virgine, and is her true and naturall sonne, or els to what ende shoulde he bee called hee sonne? And that we should be as assuredly perswaded of hys humanitie of Mary hys mother, as of his deitie of God his father. The Prophet calleth hym Emanuell, that is to say, God and man, true God of God his father, an
                           •…
                         true man of Mary hys mother. And because there should want nothyng vnto the true perfite and full dis cription of Christes humanitie, but that Christ shoulde be declared to bee a true and a naturall childe, and not fantasticall nor celestiall the Pro phet as it were with certain notes and markes both lyuely set forth, and sheweth that he after that maner of other children shall eate butter & Hony, that is to say, refuse buter and vnsauery meat
                           •…
                        s, and chose those that are sweete and plea saunt in taste. This were vaynly put in of the Prophete, if Christe had no bene a naturall child, takyng his flesh or the substance of Mary his mother, and not bryngyng hys body with hym from heauē, or I know not from whence, as the vngodly Anabaptistes in these our dayes do most fastly dreame. But let God be true, and all heretikes lyers.
                     IN another place the Prophete sayth,Esay. 11. there shall come a rodde foorth of the kyndred of Iesse, and a floure shall florishe out of hys roote.
                     ☞ In thys place the Prophete doth so openlye declare Christe to be true man and the naturall sonne of Mary the virgin, that it is won der that any Hereticke can haue so w
                           •…
                        oryshe a forehead once to denye i
                           •…
                        . Thys rodde and 
                           •…
                        loure, which spryngeth out of rodde and kint
                           •…
                        
                        
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         Iesse, is Christ the Lord▪ The roote out of the whiche floure vndefiled virgine Marye. Christes mother, whiche came of the kynred of Iesse, kyng Dauids father. Can any man deny, but that the floure is of the same nature and substaunce that the tree is of, whiche beareth the floure? If we graūt the floure to be of the na ture and substāce of the stocke that beareth the floure, why are the Anabaptistes more wicked and cruell agaynst Christ the floure and fruite (by Gods ordinaunce) of the holy virgine, then vnto the stocke and roote of euery floure of the fielde? Can the floure of an Orāge spryng out o
                           •…
                         an Oke? No more can the humanitie of Christ which is the blossome and floure of Mary, take his originall of the ayre, of heauen, or of such other matter they know not what. But as the floure of the Orāge springeth out of the Orāge tree, and is of the very same nature and substāce that the Orāge tree is, so likewise Christ being the floure of the most blessed Uirgine tooke his begynnyng of her, and is of the very same substaunce and nature that she is. Let God therefore be true, and all heretikes lyers.
                     AFter the. 62. weekes, sayth the Prophet Daniell, shall Christ be slaine,Dan. 9. and they shal haue no pleasure in him.
                     ☞ The sleyng of Christ euidently proueth that Christ was v
                           •…
                        y man, yea and a ma
                           •…
                         mortall and subiect vnto death, so well as we. If he had brought his body with him from heauen▪ so had bene a celestiall body▪ an impassible and immortal body. But for asmuch as Christ feared death▪ 
                        
                           •…
                        uffed the paines of death, yea and dyed in ded
                           •…
                        ,

accordyng to the Scriptures, it followeth that Christ was true and vnfayned man, takyng his humanitie of that holy virgine Mary his mother, and lyued in all pointes lyke man, sinne alone extep
                           •…
                        e, and at the last dyed for our synnes▪ as the Apostle sayth. Let God therfore be true, and all heretikes lyers.
                  
                  
                     ☞ Sentences out of the new Testament.
                     THe booke of the kyndred of IesusMal. 1 Christ the sonne of Dauid the sonne of Abraham.
                     Iacob begat Ioseph, the husbande of Mary, of whome was borne that Iesus whiche is called Christ.
                     The byrthe of Iesus Christe was on this wise. Whē hys mother Mary was maried to Ioseph, before they came together, she was found with child by the holy ghost. Then Ioseph her husbande being a perfect man and loth to defame her, was mynded to put her away secret ly. While he thus thought, beholde the aungell of the Lord appeared vnto him in a dreame saying: Ioseph the sonne of Dauid, feare not to take vnto thee Mary thy wife. For that whiche is conceyued in her, is of the holy ghost. She shal bryng forth a sonne, and thou shalt call

his name Iesus. For he shall saue hys people from their sinnes. All thys was done to fulfil y• whiche was spokē of the Lord by the Prophet Esay, saying: beholdeEsay. 7. a mayd shall be with child, & shall bryng foorth a sonne, and they shall call hys name Emanuell, whiche is by interpretacion GOD with vs, or God and man.
                     The aungell gabriell was sent from god vnto a citie of galile named Nazareth, to a virgin spoused to a mā whose name was Ioseph, of the house of Dauid, and the virgins name was Mary. And the aūgel went in vnto her, & said: Hayle ful of grace, y• Lord is with thee? Blessed art thou among women.
                     When she sawe hym, she was abashed at hys saying, and caste in her mynde, what maner of salutation that should be. And the aungell sayd vnto her: feare not Mary, for thou hast foūd grace with god, thou shalt conceiue in thy wombe, and beare a sonne, and shalte call hys name Iesus. He shall be greate, & shall be called the sonne of the hyest. And the Lord god shall g
                           •…
                        ue vnto hym the sea 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        
of his father Dauid, and he shall reygne ouer the house of Iacob for euer, and of hys kyngdome shalbe none ende. Then 
                           •…
                        ayd Mary vnto the aungell: howe shal this bee, seyng I knowe not a mane And the aungell aunswered and sayde vnto her: the holy ghost shall come vppon thee, and the power of the hyest shall ouershadowe thee. Therfore also that holy thyng which shall be borne of thee, shall be called the sonne of god.
                     Elizabeth was filled with the holye ghost, and cried with a loude voyce and sayd: Blessed art thou among women, 
                           •…
                         blessed is y• fruite of thy wombe. And whence hapneth this to me, that the mo ther of my Lord should come to me. &c.
                     It fortuned while they wer there, herLuke. 
                              •…
                           
                         time was come y• she shuld be deliuered. And she brought forth her first begottē son, & wraped him in swadling clothes, & layd him in a maunger, because there was no roume for thē within y• Inne.
                     Behold I bring you tidings of great 
                           •…
                        oy, y• shal come to all y• people. For vnto you is borne this day y• city of Dauid 
                           •…
                         sauiour, whiche is Christ the Lord.
                     
                        The child grew, and waxed strong in spirite, and was filled with wisedome & the grace of god was with him.
                     Iesus encreased in wisdome and age and in fauour with god and man.
                     Blessed is the wombe that bare thee,Luke. 11 and the papes whiche gaue thee sucke.
                     The worde was made fleshe & dweltIohn. 1 among vs.
                     Dauid was a Prophet & knewe thatActes. 2. god had sworne with an othe to hym, y• the fruite of his loynes, that is to say Christ, should sit on his seate.
                     God dyd sette vp Dauid to be theyrActes. 13 kyng, of whom he reported, saying, I haue founde Dauid the sonne of Iesse, a man after my owne heart, he shall fulfill all my will. Of this mans sede hath god accordyng to hys promise, brought forth to the people of Israell a sauiour, euen Iesus.
                     Iesus Christ the sonne of god was beRom. 1. gotten of the seede of Dauid as pertaynyng to the flesh.
                     Christ as concernyng the flesh cameRom. 9 of the Israelites.
                     To Abraham and hys seede were theGal. 13
                        
promyses made. He sayth not in the sedes as many, but in thy seede, as in one, whiche is Christ.
                     When the tyme was full come, GodGala. 
                              •…
                           . sent hys Sonne borne of a woman, and made bounde vnto the lawe, to redeme them, which were vnder the law, that we thorow election myght receiue the inheritaunce that belōgeth vnto the naturall sonne.
                     Christ beyng in the shape of GODPhil. 
                              •…
                           
                         and thynkyng it no robbery to equall with God, neuerthelesse made him selfe of no reputa
                           •…
                        ion, & toke on hym y• shape of a seruaunt, & became like vnto men & was found in his apparell as a man.
                     Without doubt great is thys mystery1. Timo. 3 of godlynesse, God was shewed in the fleshe, was iustified in the spirite, was sene of aungels, was preached vnto the gentils, was beleued on in earth and receyued vp in glory.
                     Remember that Iesus Christ beyng2. Tim. 
                              •…
                           
                         of the seede of Dauid, rose agayne from death accordyng to my gospell.
                     He that sanctifieth, and they whicheHebr. 
                              •…
                           
                         are sanctified are all of one. For whiche

causes sake he is not ashamed to cal thē brethrē, saying. I wil declare thy name to my brethrē, and in the myddes of the congregation wil I prayse thee. And againe, I will put my trust in hym. And againe, behold here am I, & the children which god hath geuē me. For as much then as the children were partakers of flesh & bloud, he also hym selfe likewise tooke part with them for to put downe thorowe death hym that had Lorshyp ouer death, that is to say, the deuill, and that he myght deliuer them, which thorowe feare of death were all their lyfe time in daūger of bōdage. For he in no condicion taketh on him the aūgels, but the sede of Abraham taketh he on hym. Wherfore in all thinges it became him to be made like vnto his brethrē, that he myght be mercifull and a faithfull hys priest in thinges concerning god for to purge y• peoples sinnes. For that it fortuned him selfe to be tēpted, he is hable to succour them also that are tempted.
                     Dearely beloued, beleue not euery spi
                           
                              •…
                            Iohn. 4. rit, but proue the spirites whether they are of God, or not. For many false Pro

phetes are gone out into the worlde. Hereby shall ye know the spirit of god. Euery spirit that confesseth that Iesus Christ is come in y• flesh, is of god. And euery spirit, which cōfesseth not y• Iesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of god. And this is the spirite of Antichrist, of whō ye haue hard, how y• 
                        
                           •…
                        e shuld come, & euen now already is he in the world.
                     Many deceyuers are entred into theIohn. 
                              •…
                           . world, whiche confesse not that Iesus Christ is come in the flesh. This is a deceiuer and an Antichrist.
                  
                  
                     ☞ Examples out of the new Testament.
                     WHen the tyme was come y• the blessedLuke. 
                              •…
                           
                         promised sede should be borne. God sent his messenger Gabriell vnt
                           •…
                         that holy Uirgine Marye, whiche was of the house of Dauid which among ma ny other thinges sayd vnto her: feare not mary. For thou hast founde grace with God. Behold thou shalt conceyue in thy wombe, and beare a Sonne. &c.
                     ☞ Note that the aungell sayth, thou shalt conceyue. He sayth not, heauen shall conceyue. And the aungell like as the Prophet vsed this word conceiue, to declare that the flesh whiche Christ

had, was truly and naturally taken of the substaunce of his mother Mary the virgine. For to conceiue, is none other thyng, than a woman to be a very true & naturall mother by ministryng parte of her corporall substaunce to her childe, wherof also the child is formed and made. Now on this maner by the workyng of the holy ghost without the sede of man did this blessed virgine conceyue Christ, it therfore truly foloweth, that Christe brought not hys body with hym from heauen but receyued it of the naturall substaunce of his mother Mary. And because we should not doubt of this thyng, the aungell calleth Iesus Maries sonne. If Christ had not ta ken his humanitie of the blessed Uirgine, of her nature and substaunce, and so be made very true and perfect man, the aungell had not sayd truth, when he called Christ her sonne. For neyther should Mary haue bene Christes mother, nor Christ Maries sonne. And so should the aungell haue brought a false and a lying message from God, whiche is the selfe truth. But let God be true, and all heretikes lyers.
                     ☞ The godly and vertuous womā Elizabeth, wife to 
                           •…
                        acharie the priest, said to Mary her Co sen, beyng newly conceiued with childe, thorow the operacion of the holy ghost: blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruite of thy wombe. And whence happeneth thys vnto me, y• the mother of my lord shoulde come vnto me? what soeuer thys holy woman sayth here, it muste nedes bee beleued as an infallible truth. For she speaketh not of her owne head, but as she was filled wt the holy ghost. In this her salutacion: she calleth Christe the fruite of Maries wombe. If Christe bee the fruite of Maryes wombe as vndobutedlye hee is, then is

Christ made of the substaunce of Mary, and is her true and naturall sonne, or els were it a manifest lye to call Christ the fruite of her wombe. Who is so madde, to call a thyng the fruite of a tree, that neuer had the nature of a tree? Were it not double madnes to call a peare the fruite of a chery tree? so greate a fondnes and a greater lye had it bene to call Christ the fruite of Maries wombe, if he had brought his body with hym from heauen or from any other place. But as it is truly sayd thys peare is the fruite of a peare tree, because it had hys beyng and naturall substaunce of the nature and substaunce of a peare tree, so likewise is it truly said Christ is the fruite of Maries wombe, because he had hys beyng and naturall substaunce as concernyng hys humanitie of the nature and substāce of Mary. Let God therefore be true, and all heretikes lyers.
                     IEsus sayth Luke, grew in wisedomeLuke. 12 and age, thys also declareth Christ to to be true man, seyng he grew in age and strength of bodye yea and also in wisedome after the maner of other children, all though in the gyftes of the mynde he farre excelled all other men, as the Scriptures testifie. God sayth Dauid, euen thy God hath annoynted thee with the oyle of gladnesse aboue thy fellowes. S. Ihon Baptist also spea keth of Christ on this manner. God geueth not the spirit by me sure vnto him.
                     
                        ☞ If Christ had brought hys body with hym 
                           •…
                        ō heauen so could not Christes body haue ben a naturall body, nor haue growen after the man ner of other chyldren but should haue bene as bygge when it came from heauen into the Uirgines wombe, as it was on the same day that it was put to death. But the holy Scriptures teache vs, that Christ is the fruite of Maryes wombe, that he is her sonne, that he was borne a litle childe, and grewe in age after the manner of other children vntill he became a perfect man. It therefore truly followeth, that he brought not his body with him from heauen, or I know not from whence▪ as the wicked Anabaptistes teache at this present, but that he vnfaynedly, tooke it of Mary hys mother▪ and is her true and naturall sonne formed & made of the nature and substaunce of her body. Let God therfore be true, and all Heretikes lyers.
                     ☞ Christe calleth hym selfe many tymes in the gospell the sonne of man to declare that as concernyng the fleshe, he is the sonne of Abraham▪ & of Dauid, forasmuch as he tooke his māhode of Mary, whiche was of the stocke & kynred of Abrahā & Dauid▪ to whō God promised, that of their sede & of the fruite of their wōbe one shuld be borne in whom all nacions of the earth shall be blessed. So is it euident, that Christ is the naturall sonne of Marye the virgine. Let God therfore be true, and all heretikes lyers.
                     ☞ Christ in many places of the holy scripture is called the sonne of Dauid▪ not onely because hee was promysed vnto Dauid, but bycause he came of his kynred, and tooke flesh any bloud of his stocke and family euen of the most vndefi
                        
                           •…
                        ed virgine Mary hys mother Christ therfore is true and perfect man of the blessed virgine▪ & had no fantasticall nor heauenly body. Let God

therfore be true, and all heretikes lyers.
                     ☞ Christ was borne, wrapped in cloutes, layd in a maunger, sede, circumcised, embrased in armes, grewe, was made stronge in spirite, profited in wisedome and age, hungred, thyrsted, eate, dranke, wept, was wery, slept, reioyced, was moued with wrath and indignation, sorowed, was heauy, sad, was in such an agony, that his sweat was lyke drops of bloud trickelyng downe to the grounde, feared death, and at the last suffered the most spytefull death of the crosse, and was buryed. All these are manifest tokens and euident signes of Christes true man hoode. Neyther could he haue done or suffered these thynges▪ if he had a fantasticall body or a body brought from heauen. Let God therfore be true, and all heretikes lyers.
                     CHrist after his resurrectiō appearedLuke. 24. vnto his disciples & sayd vnto them peace be vnto you. The disciples beyng abashed & afraide, & supposing that they had sene a spirite, he sayd vnto them, why are ye troubled, and why doo thoughtes arise in your hartes? Behold my handes and my fete, that it is euē I my self hādle me & see. For a spirit hath not flesh & bones, as ye see me haue.
                     ☞ Here Christ after hys resurrection proueth and shewed hym selfe not to bee a fantasticall but a very man, not to haue an heauenly body, but a body of fleshe and bones. And to declare him selfe true and perfect mā, he dyd eate before them 
                           •…
                         peece of a broyled fishe and of an honye

tombe. Let God therfore be true and all heretikes lyers.
                     PEter in a certayne sermon declaredActes▪ 2▪
                         vnto the Iewes, that Christ as concernyng the fleshe came of the fruite of Dauids loynes.
                     ☞ In the whiche wordes he manifestly declareth his fayth concernyng Christes humanitie, which is, that Christ is very 
                           •…
                        an commyng of the sede of Dauid, & takyng his manhode of the blessed virgine, which came of the stocke of Da uid. Hereof may we also learne, that the true and Christen faith is to beleue, that Iesu Christ tooke his flesh of Mary his mother, & brought not his body with him from heauen, as the wicked Anabaptistes hold.
                     PAul in his Epistle to the RomainesRom. 9 playnly teacheth that Christ as concernyng the flesh came of the fathers of the old Testament, that is to say, Abraham, Isaac, Iacob, Dauid. &c.
                     In this Epistle to the Galathians heGal. 4 sayth, that whē the time was full come. God sent his sonne, made of a woman.
                     ☞ He sayth not, that he was made afore of the elementes in the ayre or that he brought hys b
                           •…
                         
                        
                           •…
                        y with hym from heauen, but that he was made of a woman, that is to say, tooke hys begynnyng and naturall substaunce of Mary hys mother, concernyng hys humanitie.
                     
                        AGaine in his first epistle vnto Timothe,1. Tim 
                              •…
                           
                         he nameth the man Iesus Christ a mediator betwene god & man.
                     ☞ This name Mediatour, proueth Christ both God and man. For he that should be a mediator betwene God and man, set them at one y• were at debate, make peace among them that before dyd disagree, and conioyne them to perpetual amitie, which before were ennemies one to another, yea and by hys owne dignitie, worthinesse and iustice, make a loue day for euer and euer, betwene God and man, must haue in hym both the nature of God and the nature of man. Christ is that one and alone mediatour, which hath by his death ad passion set God and man together in an euerlasting peace and quietnes, which before thorowe sinne we are at strife and debate. As Christ therfore is true God, so is he true man, God I say, of God the father, and man of vs, of our flesh and of our bloud, or els should blessed Paule erre, which calleth hym a mediatour▪ But let God be true, & all heretikes liers.
                     ☞ Finally, in his epistle vnto the Hebrewes, after that he had spoken much of the deuine nature of Christ, prouing Christ to be very god, he also setteth forth Christes humanity, and pro ueth hym to be true and naturall man, made of our flesh and of our bloud, this alone excepted, y• we receyued our nature with sinne, and in sinne and by natural coniunction, Christ receiued his humanity of hys mother without sinne, wythout the company of any man by the operation of the holy ghost. But let vs heare the wordes of the Apostle.
                     For as muche as the children wereHeb. 2.
                        
pertakers of flesh and bloud, he also him selfe likewise toke part with them.
                     ☞ Here as S. Paule declareth euidently, that as the children, that is to say, men be pertakers of flesh and bloud, so lykewise Christ (because he might destroy him that had lordship ouer death: that is to say, the deuill by the death in his owne body) was made pertaker of the same, that is, of flesh & bloud. No man doubteth that our flesh is of the nature and substance of a womā, no more is it to be doubted that Christ toke his fleshe of the nature and substance of Mary his mother, seyng the epistle saith that Christ was made per taker of flesh and bloud wyth vs. This coulde he not haue ben if he had brought his body with hym from heauen, or had taken it of anye other then of a naturall woman, although a pure and vndefiled Uirgine.
                     Therfore lyke as a man taketh hys nature of his parentes, so lykewise toke Christ by humain nature of the blessed Uirgine his mother. He sai eth moreouer (He) meanyng Christ, in no place taketh on him the aungels, but the sede of Abraham taketh he on hym.
                     Here the Apostle manifestlye confuteth the wicked opiniō of them which teach that Christ had a celestiall body or a body made of the ayre, and plainly affirmeth that he toke the sede of Abraham, that is to say: was made and became ve ry true and naturall man of the kinrede of Abra hā accordyng to Gods promise. So that all that euer he had, concerning his humanitie, he had it of the blessed Uirgine, which came of y• stocke of Abraham.
                     ☞ Agayne he saith in all things it became hym

to be made lyke vnto hys bretherne. Here saint Paule confesseth that Christ was made like vn to vs in all thynges, which thyng by no meanes could be true, yf he had not taken vpon him our nature and substaunce. If he belyke vnto vs in all thynges (sinne alone excepte) so followeth it that he is of the same nature, & of the same fleshe and bloud that we are, or els could not he be like vnto vs in all thynges. And so should thys holy apostle and al other godly writers and teachers haue brought vs in errour. But let god be true and all heretikes lyers.
                     ☞ Now haue we learned both truly and fullye of the holy scriptures, which are infallible verities, that Christ was cōceiued by the holy ghost and borne of the Uirgine Mary. By the which worde (of) we beleue that he toke his humanity of her substaunce, and had none other begynnyng as touching his humanity than in her and of her, by the operation of the holy ghost: so that we may truely conclude, that as Christ is very God of God the father wythout a mother, so is he very man of Mary his mother wythout any Father. Therfore may hys God head be as iustly denied, as hys manhode and flesh takyng of the blessed virgine Mary. But Christ abydeth very god and very man whatsoeuer the wicked hiretikes hable. Cursed therefore bee Cerdo, Marcian and Manes, which taught that christ appeared as man, and yet had no parte of true manhoode in hym, but onelye had a fantasticall bodye.
                     ☞ Cursed be Cerinthus, which taught that Iesus was begotten of Ioseph and Mary, after y• maner of other men, and that Christ came down from aboue vnto Iesus▪ Cursed bee the Ebionites,

the Theodosians, the Antimonians and the Photinians, which affirmed that Christe was borne of the virgine onely man & not God. Cursed be Appelles which taught that Christ had his body of the elements in the ayre. Cursed be Ualentinus which sayd that Christ brought his body wyth him from heauen, and tooke no fleshe of the Uirgine Mary: but passed through her as water through the pype. Cursed be hys Apes the Anabaptistes▪ which in these our dais haue raysed vp that most detestable and horryble heresie. Cursed and confounded be all they which wyth theyr hartes do not beleue, & wyth their mouthes vnfainedly confesse, that Iesus Christ is both God and man, to whom be glory for euer.
                     Amen.
                  
               
               
                  Against the grosse and fantasticall opinion of the papistes, which affirme that Christes naturall body and bloud, is carnally eaten and dronken in the lordes supper.
                  IF the deuill or the pope, or any of their impes go about with sophisticall reasons to persuade thee, that Christ is naturall in the sacramentall bread and wyne, or that the bread and wine is turned vnto the reall and naturall body & bloud of Christ: euen as he receaued it of the blessed Uirgine: suffer not thy selfe to bee beguiled and mocked, but valiauntly resiste them wyth these sentences and histories of Gods moste holye worde.
                  
                     ☞ Sentences out of the olde Testament.
                     THe Lord is in his holye temple, thePsal▪ 11▪
                         Lordes seat is in heauen.
                     
                        The Lord lord looked downe fromPsal. 13 heauen vpon the children of men, to see if there were any that would vnderstād and seeke after god.
                     God is gone vp wyth a mery noyse,Psal. 47. and the Lorde wyth the sounde of the trompet.
                     God sitteth vpon his holy seate.Psalm. 6
                              •…
                           
                        
                     
                     Thou art gone vpon hie (O Christ) thou hast led captiuitie captiue, & receiued giftes for men.
                     Syng vnto God (O ye kingdomes of the earth) O sing praises vnto the lord, which sitteth in the heauens ouer all.
                     He looked downe from his sanctuarye,Psal. 10
                              •…
                           
                           ▪
                         euen out of heauen did the Lord behold the earth, that he might heare the mourninges of such as be in captiuitie, and deliuer the children appointed vnto death.
                     The Lord hath prepared hys seat inPsal. 103. heauē, and his kingdom ruleth ouer al.
                     O Lord my god, thou art become excedyngPsal▪ 104▪
                         glorious, thou art clothed wyth maiesty and honor, thou deckest thy self with light as it were with a garment, and spreadest oute the heauens lyke a

curtayne. Thou layest the beames of thy chambers in the waters, & makest the cloudes thy charets, and walkest vpon the winges of the winde.
                     The Lorde sayd vnto my Lorde, sitPsalm. 10 thou on my right hand, vntill I make thyne enemies thy footestole.
                     The Lorde is hie aboue all heathen,Psalm. 113 and his glory aboue the heauens. Who is like vnto the lord our God, that hath his dwellyng so hie, and yet humbleth himselfe to behold the things that are in heauen and earth.
                     Wherefore shall the heathen saye,Psalm. 115 where is now their god? As for our god he is in heauen, he hath done what so euer pleased hym.
                     Unto thee O Lord, lift I vp my eies,Psalm. 133 which dwellest in the heauens.
                     Whither shal I go from thy spirit, orPsalm. 129 whether shal I flee from thy presēce? If I clime vp into heauē, thou art there, &c
                     Wil god dwel on the earth. Behold
                           
                              •…
                           . Reg. 8. the heauens and heauens of all heauēs, are not able to contayne thee. And how should then this house do it, that I haue builded.
                     
                        The house which I build shal be great2. Par. 
                              •…
                           . for great is our god aboue al gods. But who is able to build hym an house, whē that heauen and heauen aboue all heauens, is not hable to receiue him?Iob. 11.
                     
                     God is hyer then heauen, what arte thou able to do? Deper then hell, howe wilt thou then know hym? His length excedeth the length of the earth, and hys breadth the breadth of the sea.
                     Thus saith the Lord, heauen is myEsay. 6
                              •…
                           
                         seate, and the earthe is my footestoole, where shall now the house stand that ye will build vnto me? And where shall be the place that I will dwell in?
                  
                  
                     Sentences out of the new Testament.
                     IF any man say vnto you: Loe, here isMath. 13▪
                         Christe, or there is Christe, beleue it not. For there shall arise false annoynted, and false teachers, and shall shewe greate myracles and wonders: in so muche, that yf it were possible, the verye electe should be deceaued. Beholde, I haue tolde you afore. Wherfore if thei say vnto you, behold he is in the desert, goe not ye forth, behold he is in y• secret

places, beleue it not. For as the lightnyng commeth out of the east, and appeareth into the West, so shall the commyng of the sonne of man be.
                     Ye haue the power alwayes wt youMath. 26. but me shall ye not haue alwayes.
                     And when the Lord had spoken vntoMat. 16. them, he was receiued into heauen, and is set downe on the right hand of god.
                     It came to passe as Christ blessed thē
                        Luc. 24 he departed from them, and was caryed vp into heauen.
                     I go to prepare a place for you: AndIohn. 24. if I goe to prepare a place for you, I wil come agayne, and receiue you euen vnto my selfe, that where I am, there ye may be also.
                     If ye loued me, ye would reioyce because I sayd, I go vnto the Father.
                     Now I go my way to him that senteIohn. 16. me, and none of you asketh me whether I goe. But because I haue saide suche thinges vnto you, your hartes are ful of sorrow. Neuertheles I tell you y• truth it is expedient for you that I go away. For if I go not away that cōforter will not come vnto you. But if I departe, I

wil. send him vnto you.
                     I went out from the Father, & came into the world. Againe, I leaue ye world and go to the Father.
                     It is Christe whiche dyed, ye ratherRom. 8 which is risen againe: whiche is also on the right hand of God.
                     So ofte as ye shall eat of this breade,1, Cor. 11. and drinck of the cup, ye shall xemēber the Lords death til he come.
                     God the father raised Christe frō theEphe. 1. dead, and set him on his right hand in heauenly things, aboue al rule, power, might, dominiō, and aboue all names that are named, not in this world only but also in the world to come.
                     Christ is gone vpō highe, & hath led capEphe. 4 tiuitie captiue, and hathe geuen giftes vnto men.
                     That he ascended what meaneth it, but that he also descended first into the lowest parts of the earth.
                     He that descended is euen the same also that ascended vp▪ euen aboue all heauens to fulfil al thinges.
                     God hath exalted Christ on high & geuenPhil. 
                              •…
                           
                         him a name, whiche is aboue all

names, that in the name of Iesus euery knee should bowe bothe in heauen, and thinges in earth, and things vnder the earth.
                     If ye be risen againe with Christe,Colos. 3 seeke those thinges whiche are aboue, where Christe sitteth on the right hande of God.
                     Whensoeuer Christe (whiche is oure life) shall shew him self, then shall we al so appeare with him in glory.
                     The Lord him selfe shall come downe1 Thess. 4 from Heauen with a shoute, and the voice of the archaungell and trompe of God. &c.
                     Christe the Sonne of God, being theHeb. 1. brightnes of his fathers glory, and the very image of his substaunce ruling all thinges with the woorde of his power, hath by his own person purged our sins and sitteth on the right hand of the maiesty on hye.
                     This man Christ after hee had offeredHebr. 10. one sacrifice for sins, sitteth downe for euer on the right hand of God, and from hence forth tarieth till his foes be made his fotestoole.
                     
                        Let vs runne with pacience vnto theHeb. 
                              •…
                           . battayl that is set before vs, lokyng vn to Iesus the captain and finisher of our fayth, which for the ioy that was set before him abode the crosse and dispised the shame, and is set down on the right hād of the throne of god.
                     Iesus Christe is on the right hande of1. Pet. 3. God, and is gone into heauen, Angels, powers aud might subdued vnto him.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the newe Testament.
                     When Iesus had spoke these things,Act. 
                              •…
                           
                         whyle the Disciples beheld him, he was taken vp on hye, and a cloud receyued him vp out of their sight.
                     And while they loked vp stedfastly to ward heauen, as he went, behold two men stode by them in whyte aparell, whiche also sayde: ye men of Galyle, why stande ye gasyng vp to heauen? This same Iesus which is taken from you into heauen, shall so come, euen as ye haue sene him go into heauen.
                     Stephen beyng full of the holy ghost,Act. 7▪
                         loked vp stedfastly with his eies into heauen,
 and sawe the glorye of god, and Iesus standynge on the ryghte hande of God, and sayd. Beholde I see the heauens open, & the sonne of man standing on the right hand of God.
                     When Saule iornyed, it fortunedActs. 9. that as he was come nye to Damasco, sodenly there shyned rounde about him a lyght from heauen, and he fell to the earth, and heard a voyce saying to him: Saule, Saule, why persecutest thou me? And he sayde, what art thou Lord? and the Lord said, I am Iesus, whom thou persecutest. &c.
                  
               
               
                  Against the plucking away of thy trust and confidence from Christ and his merites, to put it in the merites of other creatures or in thine owne good workes, or in the intercession of saints, or the sacrifice of the Popish Masse.
                  
                     IF Sathan by this subtile and crafty suggestion seking thy dānation, go about to pluck thy faith, confidence, and truste from Christe his bloud, and his merites, to repose it in the merites of men, or in thine own good dedes, works and merites, or in the intercession of saintes, or in the sacrifice of the Popishe masse, so that thy whole saluation shall not hang on Christ▪ & his deseruīgs only but rather on some other stran̄g meanes: leane not to his temptations, but manfully

resist them, stedfastly abiding in this pers
                        •…
                     asion that Christ alone is thy righteousnesse and that all thy saluation dependeth on him alone and on none other thinge, neither in heauen nor in earth. And that thou may est be confirmed in this faith, let these scriptures whiche are vn
                     
                        •…
                     ubted verities, euer be before thine eyes & suffer not thy self neither by y• crafty assaults of sathan, nor by the subtle and fleshly reasons of any man to be plucked from them.
                  
                     ☞ Sentences out of the old Testament
                     Christ is that seede, which did treadGene. 4. down Sathans head.
                     Christ is that seede, in whom al nationsGene. 22. of the worlde shalbe blessed.
                     Christ is the ruler, duke and captain,Gene. 49. whome al nations haue so long looked for, whiche also defendeth his people from the power of Sathan.
                     Christ is that Sonne of God whomPsalm. 2 wee are commaunded to kisse and embrace, least wee pearish from the ryghte way.
                     Christ is our vpholder, our glory, & Psal. 3▪
                         our strong shield.
                     Christ is the Lord, from whō al helth and saluation commeth, and hee it is ye blesseth his people.
                     Christ is the Lorde that neuer forsakethPsal. 9.
                        
them that truste in him and seeke after him.Psalm. 18.
                     
                     Christ is our strength, our sure rock, our bulwarke, our refuge, our defence, our buckeler, and oure mighty sauinge helth, and our sanctuary.
                     Christ is he that saueth vs, because it is his pleasure.
                     Christe saueth the poore oppressed, and layeth full lowe the highe lookes of the proude.
                     Christ is the Lord, in whome alonePsal. 12. our fathers trusted, they trusted, I say in him, and he deliuered them.
                     They cryed vnto him, and they were made safe, they trusted in him and they were neuer confounded.
                     Christ is that Lord, whose waies vPsalm. 25. niuersall are mercy and truthe to them that seke after his Testament and ordinaunces. He it is that will be mercifull to our sinnes, euen for his owne names sake, be they neuer so great.
                     Christ is our light & our sauing helthPsalm. 27 whō thē shall we fear? Christ is the defē der 
                           〈◊〉
                         our life, of whome then shall we 
                           •…
                        e afrayed?
                     Christe is the strength of his people

and the defender of the health of his annointed.
                     Christ is our refuge in all tribulatiōsPsalm. 32. that assaile vs.
                     Christes eyes are vpon them that fearPsalm. 33. hym, and vpon them that trust in hys mercy, he may deliuer their souls from deathe▪ norishe them in the time of hunger.
                     Christ is gentle, blessed is that manPsal. 34. that trusteth in him.
                     Christ beholdeth the righteous, and heareth their prayer.
                     Christ is at hand for them that are troubled in hart, & he shall saue the hum ble and meke spirited.
                     Christe geueth saluation to the rightePsal. 37. ous, and he is the defēder in the tyme of trouble. He helpeth thē and deliuereth them, and maketh them free from finners, and saueth them because they trust in hym.
                     Christ pardoneth all our iniquities,Psal. 103. and healeth all our dyseases, he delyuereth our lyues from destruction, and crowneth vs in iuercye and louynge kindnes.
                     
                        Christ is righte mylde and mercyfull, flow vnto wrath, but ready to forgenenes. He chydeth not euer, neither is he angrye alwayes, he dealeth not with vs after our sinnes, nor rewardeth vs accordyng to our wickednesse. The height of the heauens is not so present ouer the earth, as is his merciable goodnes ouer them that worship him. He setteth our sinnes as far from vs, as is the East frō the West.
                     Neuer was there any father so tender vnto his chyldren, as is the Lorde vnto them that worshippe hym. For it is he that knoweth our making, he remembreth that we are but of dust.
                     That the age of man mortall is lyke grasse, that he florisheth lyke a flowre of the fielde. Whiche as soone as anye sharp wind toucheth it, it is gone being no more founde in hys place. But the merciable goodnes of the Lord is for euer and euer, preseruyng hys worshippers, and the form of his rightwise m
                           •…
                         kyng is presente with theyr chylders chyldren, so long as they kepe his couenaunt and hold his commaundementes inmynd to do them.
                     
                        Christ is the Lorde, with whome therePsalm. 129 is both infinite mercy, & plenteous redē
                        tion: For he it is that redeemeth Israel from al their sinnes.
                     Christ is that Lord, yea Christ is thatEsay. 43 Lord in deede which putteth awaye our iniquities for his owne sake, and will remember them no more. Neither haue we anye thyng wherby we may be iusti fied in his sight.
                     Christ alone is that sauiour, in whomEsay. 45 Israel is saued with an euerlasting health.
                     Christ can no more forget vs, then aEsay. 49. mother can forgette the chylde of her wombe. And thoughe she forgetteth her childe, yet cannot he forget vs: For he hath written vp vs in his hands, so that we are alway in his sight.
                     Christ hath taken vpon him our dyseases,Esay 53. and borne awaye oure sorowes.
                     Christ was wounded for our iniquities, and brused for our sinnes.
                     Christ was offerd for vs, because it was his pleasure.
                     Christe alone hath troden downe the vynepresse, neither was there any at al that helped him.
                  
                  
                     
                     Examples out of the old Testament.
                     When God determined to slea all theExod. 12. first borne in the land of Egipt bothe of man and beaste, hee commaunded his people euery man in hys house to slea a Lambe of a yere olde, and without spot, and with the bloud therof to annoynte the vpper doore post, and the two syde postes, that whan the Aungell, whiche smote the land of Egipt, should see the bloud, he mighte passe ouer them & not destroy them. This pascal Lambe of the Iewes, is a figure of the true Pascall lambe, Iesus Christ the Lorde, whiche is the pure and vndefiled lambe of God, whiche offered him selfe a sweete smellynge sacryfice vnto God for vs, which neuer committed synne, and in hys mouth no gyle was founde. For as the bloude of the Lambe sprynckled on the doore postes of the Israelites dydde dryue awaye the auenger, and kepte harmles the fyrst begotten of the Israelites: so lykewyse the bloude of Christ sprinckeled in the heartes of men by 
                           •…
                        aythe, dryueth Sathan, synne, death,

desperation, and hell from them, puryfieth their consciences, maketh their hear tes merye, setteth them at one wyth God, and bringeth ouerlastyng lyfe as Sainct Iohn saith. Behold that lambe of god, which taketh away the sinne of the world.
                     Hereto agreeth the saying of S. Paule:1. Cor. 5 christ our passeouer is offred vp for vs.
                     Christ was figured by Manna whichExo. 16 God gaue from heauen vnto the Israelites to eate in the desart.
                     For as that breade was very plesaunte,Sap. 16. and good of taste, and had in it the sauour of all sweete and deintye meates, so that they whiche dyd eate of that, neded none other meate.
                     Euen so lykewyse is Christ the mostePsal. 78. sweete and pleasaunte breade, that came downe from heauen.
                     He that eateth of thys bread, shal lyueIohn. 6. for euer, neyther nedeth he to folow ani other straung repast. For in Christe the soule of a christen man through fayth findeth enough to fede vpon.
                     The rock, out of the whiche plenty ofExod. 17. swete waters gushed out for the cōfort

of the thirstye Israelites in the wildernes, signifyed Christe also as Sainte Paule dothe declare. For as that rocke gaue out abdundance of swete and plea sant waters to the great comfort of the peple of Israel, which otherwise should haue pearished: so likewise is Christe y• rock, out of the which floweth plenty of heauenlye waters, comfortable for the thirsty soule, whiche otherwise can not be succoured but muste needes pearish. And he that drinketh of those heauenly waters whiche come out of the rocke Christ, shall not nede to seeke after the 
                           •…
                        inking & dirtie puddles of other. For in this Christe, he shall finde plentye of waters to drinke, yea and that vnto the vttermost for his soules helth, as Christ him self sayeth.
                     Whosoeuer shall drink of the waterIohn. 4. that I shall geue him, shall neuer more be a thirste, but the water that I shall geue him shall be in him a wel of water springing vp into euerlasting life.
                     The brasen serpent in the olde laweNum. 21. was a figure also of Christ.
                     For as those whiche were striken of

y• fyry serpentes were made whole, whē they loked vppon the brasen Serpent for their faithes sake which they had in the promise of god annexed vnto the ser pent: so likewise they that are wounded with the firie darts of Sathan, are made whole, when so euer they beholde with the eyes of the inward man by fayth. Iesus Christe whiche was crucified for our synne, as Christ himselfe testifieth, sayinge: As Moises lyfted vp the Serpent in the wildernesse, euen so must the Son of man be lyfted vp: that none that beleueth in him peryshe, but haue euer 
                           •…
                        astyng life.
                  
                  
                     Sentences out of the newe Testament.
                     Christ is so called a Sauiour, for heeMath. 9. it is that saueth hys people from theire synnes.
                     Christe came not to call the iusticiariesMath. 11. but sinners to repentaunce.
                     Christ calleth al them that labour andMath. 11. are laden, and he promiseth that he wil refresh them.
                     Christ is that true lyghte, which lightIohn. 
                              •…
                           
                         neth euery man that commeth into this

worlde.
                     Christ is our Lord of whose fulnes alIohn. 1. we haue receyued, euen grace for grace. For the lawe was geuen by Moses, but grace and truth came by Iesus Christe
                     Christ is that lambe of god, whiche taketh away the synnes of the world:
                     As Moses lyfted vp the Serpent inIohn. 3. wildernesse, so must the Sonne of man be lyfted vp, that euery on that beleueth in him, may not perishe but haue euerlasting lyfe. For God loueth the world so feruently that he gaue his only begot ten sonne that euery one that beleueth in hym may not pearish, but haue euerlasting lyfe.
                     For god sent not hys sonne into the world to condemne the world, but that the world should be saued by hym. He that beleueth in the sonne, hath euerlasting lyfe, but he that beleueth not in the son, shall not se lyfe, but the wrath of God abydeth vpon him.
                     Christe geuethe that lyuynge water,Iohn. 4. whereof whosoeuer drinketh, shal neuermore thirste, but that water shalbee vnto hym a fountayne of water that springeth vp into eternal lyfe.
                     
                        Christ is that bread of life, whiche cameIohn. 6. down from heauen. If any man eate of that bread, he shall liue for euer.
                     Christe alone the Sonne of God makethIob. 8. vs free.
                     Christe is the dore. If any man enterIohn. 10. in by him, he shall be safe.
                     For he shall go in and come oute and 
                           •…
                        nde pasture.
                     Christ is that good shepeheard which gaue his life for his shepe.Iohn. 11.
                     
                     Christ is the resurrection and life, he that beleueth in him althoughe he were dead, shal liue and euery one that liueth and beleueth in him shall neuer dye.
                     Christe is the light of the worlde, andIohn. 12. came into the worlde for this purpose y• euery one that beleueth in him shoulde not abide in darknes.
                     Christe is the waye, truthe and life.Iohn. 14. No man commeth vnto the Father but by him.Iohn. 15.
                     
                     Christe is that mighty prince whiche hath ouercome the world.Act. 4.
                     
                     There is none other name geuen vnto men vnder heauen where in they muste be saued, but onely that name of

Christ. Neither is ther any saluation in any other, but in him alone.Actes. 10.
                     
                     Christe is ordained of God a iudge of quick and dead. To him geue all the pro phets witnesse, that thorowe his name all that beleue in him, shal receiue remis sion of sinnes.
                     Thorow Christ, is preached vnto vs the forgeuenes of sinnes, so that by himAct. 13. all y• beleue, are iustified from all things from whiche we coulde not be iustified by the law of Moyses.
                     The righteousnes no doubt, whicheRom 3. is good before God, commeth by ye faith of Iesus Christe vnto all, and vpon all that beleue. There is no difference, for all haue sinned, and want the glorye of God, but are iustified freely by his grace thorow the redemption that is in Christ Iesu, to whom God hath made a 
                           •…
                        eat of mercy thorow faith in his blud, to shew the righteousnesse, whiche before him is of valoure.
                     Christ died for our sinnes, and rose 
                           •…
                        
                        Rom. 4. gaine for our iustification.
                     We beinge iustified by faithe, are atRom. 5. peace with god thorow our Lord Iesus

Christe, by whom we haue awaye in thorowe fayth vnto thys grace, wherein we stande and reioyce in hope of the prayse that shalbe geuen of God.
                     God setteth out hys loue that he hath to vs, forasmuche as while we were yet sinners, Christe died for vs. Muche more then nowe (being iustified in his bloude) shall wee be saued from wrath thorowe hym. For if when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the deathe of hys sonne: muche more seinge we are re conciled, we shalbe preserued by his lyfe. Not onelye so, but we also ioye in God by our Lord Iesus Christe, by whom we haue receaued the attonement.
                     ☞ Rede the whole Chapter.
                     Euerlastinge life is the gifte of GodRom. 
                              •…
                           
                         thorow Iesus Christ our Lord.
                     There is no dampnation to them whichRom. 8 are in Christe Iesus, which walke not after the flesh, but after the spirit. For the law of the spirite that bringeth life thorow Iesus Christe, hath made vs fre frō the lawe of sinne and death.
                     We know that al things worke for the best vnto them that loue god, whiche also

are called of purpose. For those which he knew before, he also ordayned before, that they should be a like fashioned to the shape of his sonne that he might bee the first begotten sonne among many brethren. And whom he appointed before, them also he called. And which he called, them also he iustifyed, which he iustifyed, them also he glorifyed.
                     What shall we thē say to these things? If God be on our side, who can be against vs, which spared not hys owne sonne, but gaue him for vs all, how shall he not with him geue vs all thinges also? Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that iustifyeth, who then shall cōdemne? It is Christ which is dead, yea, rather which is rysen agayne, which is also on the ryght hand of God, and maketh intercession for vs.
                     Christ is the end of the lawe to iustifyeRom. 10. all that beleue. Whosoeuer beleueth on Christ, shall not be ashamed. There is no difference betwene ye Iewe and the Gentile. For one is Lorde ouer all that cal on hym, for whosoeuer shall call on the name of the Lord, shal be safe.
                     
                        Christ is made of God our wysedome,1, Cor. 1. our righteousnes, our sanctification, and redemption
                     Christ our Easter Lambe is offered vp1. Cor. 5 for vs.
                     We are washed, we are sanctified, yea,1. Cor. 6 we are iustifyed by the name of the Lorde Iesu, and by the spirite of our God.
                     The liberalitie of our lord Iesus Christ2. Cor. 8. is greate, which though he were riche, yet for oure sakes he became poore, that we through hys pouertie myght be made rich.
                     If righteousnes come of the lawe, thenGal. 2. died Christ in vayne.
                     Christ hath deliuered vs frō ye curse ofGal. 3. the law, and was made accursed for vs.
                     S
                           •…
                        ande faste in the libertie wherwithGala. 5. Christ hath made vs free, and wrappe not your selues again in the yoke of bondage.
                     Ye are gone quite frō Christ as many as are iustifyed by the law, and are fallen from grace. For we looke in spirite to be iustifyed thorow faith. For in Iesu Christ neither is circumcision any thing worth, neither vncircumcision, but fayth which by loue is mightie in operation.
                     God forbyd y• I shoulde reioyce in any thing, but onely in y• crosse, death & passiō,

of our Lord Iesus Christ.
                     Blessed be god the father of oure Lorde Iesu Christe, whiche hath blessed vs with all manner of spirituall blessings in heauenly things by Christ.
                     By christ we haue redemption thorowEphe. 1 his bloud, euen the forgeuenes of sins according to the ritches of hys grace which he shed on vs aboundauntlye in all wisedome and prudence.
                     God whiche is riche in mercy thorowEphe. 2 his great loue, wherewith he loued vs euen when we were dead in sin, hath quic kened vs to gether in Christ (for by grace are ye saued) and hath raysed vs vp together, and made vs sit together in heauenly thinges thorow Christ Iesus.
                     By grace are ye made safe thorow faith and that not of your selues. For it is the gift of God, and commeth not of works, least any man should boast himself.
                     We were straungers and farre of, but nowe we are made nigh by thy bloude of Christe.
                     Christ is our peace.
                     By Christ Iesu our Lord are we boundEphe. 3 to draw nighe in the trust which we haue by fayth on him.
                     
                        Christ is ascended vp on high and hathEphe. 4 led captiuity captiue, and hath geuē gifts vnto men.
                     In Christ haue we redemption thorowCol. 1. his bloude, that is to saye, forgeuenes of sinnes.
                     By Christ thorowe the bloude of hyscrosse are all things reconciled to God the father and set at peace both in heauen and in earth.
                     This is a true saying and by all meansTim. 1 worthy to be receiued, that Christe Iesus came into this world to saue sinners.
                     There is one God, and one Mediatour2. Tim. 2 betwene God and man, which is the man Christ Iesus which gaue himselfe a raunsome for all men.
                     God hath not saued vs for the dedes ofTitus. 3. rightousnes which we haue wrought, but of his mercy hath he saued vs.
                     We are not redemed with corruptible1. Pet. 1. siluer and gold, from our vayne conuer sation, which we receiued by the tradicions of the fathers, but by the precious bloud of Christ, as of a Lambe vndefiled and without spotte.
                     Christe is the shephearde and bishop of1. Pet. 2. our soules
                     
                        The bloud of Iesus Christ Gods sōne,Ihon. 1. maketh vs cleane from all sinne.
                     If any mā sinne, we haue an aduocateIohn. 2. with the father, Iesus Christ that ryghteous one, and he is a mercye stocke for our sinnes: not for our sinnes onely, but also for the sinnes of all the world.
                     Our sinnes are forgeuen vs in ye name of Christ.
                     For thys purpose appeared the sonneIohn. 3. of God to loose the workes of the deuill.
                     In thys appeareth the loue of God towardesohn. 4. vs, because that God sent his onely begotten Sonne into the worlde, that we myght liue thorowe him. Herein is loue, not that we loue God, but that he loued vs, and sent his sonne to be a sacrifice for our sinnes.
                     Christ in hys owne person hath purgedHebr. 1. our sinnes.
                     Christ thorow death put down him thatHeb. 2. had rule ouer death, that is to say, the deuill, and hath made vs free from the daunger of bondage. In that Christ himself suffred and was tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted.
                     We haue not an high priest which canHeb▪ 5
                        
not haue compassion on oure infyrmities, but was in all poyntes tempted lyke as we are, but yet without sinne. Let vs therefore goe boldelye vnto the seate of grace, that we may receaue mercye and fynde grace to helpe in tyme of neede.
                     Christ hath an euerlasting priesthoode.Heb. 7. Wherefore he is able also euer to saue them that come vnto God by hym, forasmuch as he euer liueth to make intercession for vs.
                     Christ being Byshop of good thingesHebr. 1
                              •…
                           
                         to come, came by a greater and a more perfecte tabernacle, not made wyth handes, that is to saye, not of thys manner buildyng, neyther by the bloude of Goates, and Calues, but by hys owne bloude he entred in, once for all into the holy place, and founde eternall redemption. For if the bloud of Oxen and Goates, and the ashes of an Heyfer, when it was sprinckled, purifyed the vncleane, as touchyng the purifyeng of the fleshe: howe muche more shall the bloude of Christ which thorowe the eternall spirite, offered himselfe without spotte to God,

purge your consciences from dead workes to serue the liuing god.
                     And for this cause is he the mediator toure of the newe Testamente, that thorow death which chaunced for the redē
                        tion of these transgressions that were in the first Testament, they which were called might receiue the promise of eternall inheritaunce.
                     Christ now in the end of the world hath appeared once for al, to put sinne to flight by the offering vp of him selfe.
                     We are sanctified by the offeringe of
                           
                              •…
                           eb. 10. the body of Iesu Christ once for all. With one offring hath Christ made perfect for euer them that are sanctifyed.
                     Christe loued vs and washed vs frompoc. 1. our sinnes in hys owne bloud, and made vs kings and priests vnto god his father.
                     Christe liueth for euermore, and hath the keyes of hell and death.
                     Christ is Lord of Lordes and king ofpoc. 17. kings, and they that are on his side, are cal led and chosen, and faithful.
                  
                  
                     ☞ Examples out of the new Testament.
                     Christ is that welbeloued Sonne of
                           
                              •…
                           ath. 3. god, for whose sake the heauenly father is

well pleased with man.
                     Christ is that kyng which forgaue theMat. 18. seruaunt the ten thousande talentes that be oughte.
                     Christ is that moste louyng Samaritane,Luke. 10. which healed the wounded man that was halfe dead.
                     Christ is that tender shepeheard whichLuke. 15. fetched home vnto the shepefolde euen vpon hys shoulders the lost shepe.
                     Christ is that most gentle father which wyth so great ioy and with embracinge armes receiued home againe the lost son.
                  
               
               
                  Against suche as go about to disswade the christen people from the studying, readyng, or hearing of gods worde.
                  
                     IF Sathan or any of his impes goe about to disswade thee, and to plucke thy minde from studying, readyng or hearyng gods woorde, that thou mayest walke in darkenes, and neuer come to the knowledge of the truth, least by this meanes thou shouldest be saued: leane not vnto hym, but enarm thy selfe against his wicked tēptations with these scriptures followyng.
                  
                     ☞ Sentences out of the olde Testament.
                     THou shalte tell thy sonne at the sameExod. 13. dai, & say: because of that which the lord dyd for me, whē I departed out of Egipt.

Therfore shall it bee a signe vnto thee in thyne hand, and a token of remembrance before thine eyes, that the law of the lord may be in thy mouth, how that the Lord broughte thee out of Egipt with a mightye hande.
                     Speake to the children of Israell, and say vnto them, that they make thē gardes vpon the quarters of their garmentes amongst all your posterities, and put yellow r
                           •…
                        handes vpon the gardes in ye quarters. And the gardes shall serue you that ye may looke vppon them and remember all the commaundements of the lord, and do them, y• ye order not your selues after the meanyng yf your owne harte, nor go a whoryng after your owne eyes. Therefore shall ye remēber, & do all my cōmaun dements, and be holy vnto your God.
                     Take heede to thy selfe now, and kepeDeut. 2 well thy soule, that thou forgette not the thynges which thine eyes haue seene, and that they depart not out of thy harte all the dayes of thy lyfe. And thou shalte teach them thy children, and thy childers children.
                     Heare O Israell, the Lorde our God isDeut. 6 one Lord onely. And thou shalte loue the

Lord thy God with all thy harte, with al thy soule, & with all thy might. And these woordes which I commaunde thee thys day shalt thou take to harte, and shalt rehearse them vnto thy children, and shalt talke of them, when thou sittest in thyne house, and whē thou walkest by the way, when thou lyest downe, and when thou rysest vp. And thou shalt binde them for a signe vpon thine hand, and they shall bee a token of remembrance before thine eies, & thou shalt write them vpon the postes of thine house, and vpon the gates.
                     If ye harken vnto my commaundemētsDeut. 1
                              •…
                           
                         which I commaund you this day, that ye loue the Lorde your God, and serue hym with all your hart, & wyth all your soule, then will I geue rayne vnto your lande in due season, earlye and late, that thou mayest gather in thy corne, thy wine, and thine oyle, and I wyll geue grasse vppon thy fielde for thy cattell, that ye maye eate and be fylled. But beware that your harte bee not deceyued, that ye goe aside, and serue other gods, and worship them, and then the wrathe of the Lorde waxe whote vppon you and he shutte vppe the heauen, that there come no rayne, and the

earth geue not her encrease, and ye perish shortly from the good land which the lord hath geuen you.
                     Put vp therefore these my woordes in your hartes and in your soules, and binde them for a signe vpon your handes, that they bee a token of remembraunce before your eyes, and teache them your childrē, so that thou talke of them when thou sittest in thine house, or walkest by the way, when thou liest downe and when thou risest vp, and write them vpon the postes of thine house, and vpon the gates, that thou and thy children may liue long in ye land which the Lord sware vnto thy fathers to geue them as long as the dayes of heauen endure vpon earth.
                     Let my doctrine encrease as rayne, andDeut. 32. my speach flow as doth the dew. Euen as the rayne vppon the grasse, and the drops vpon the herbe.
                     Take to heart all the wordes which I testifie vnto you this day that ye cōmaūd your children to obserue and do all these woordes of this lawe. For it is no vayne worde to you, but it is your lyfe, and this worde shall prolong your life.
                     Be strong and verye bolde, that thouIosua, 1.
                        
mayest keepe and doe euery thing according to the lawe that Moses my seruaunt commaunded thee.
                     Turne not aside from it, neither to the right hand nor to the left, that thou maiest deale wisely whether soeuer thou goest And let not the booke of this lawe depart out of thy mouthe, but exercise thy selfe therin day and nighte that thou mayest keepe and doe euery thing according to it that is written therin.
                     Then shalt thou prosper in thy wayes and deale wisely. Lo I haue commaunded thee to be strong and bolde. Fear not and be not afrayde, for the Lord thy God is with thee, whersoeuer thou goest.
                     Blessed is the man that deliteth in thePsal. 1. law of the Lord, and exerciseth himself in his law both day and night.
                     Lay hand on the learning lest the LordPsal. 2. be angry, & so ye perish frō the right way.
                     The law of the Lord is pure, it turnethPsal. 18. soules. The witnesse of the Lord is faith full it geueth wisdom euen vnto babes.
                     The statutes of the Lord are right they reioyce the hart, the commaundement of the Lord is bright, and lighteneth the eyes
                     
                        The feare of the Lord is holy, it endureth for euer, the iudgements of the Lorde are true and righteous altogether, they are more pleasaunt and worthy, more to be desired then golde and precious stone, yea they be sweter then the hony and the hony combe.
                     The Lord shall tell in the ScripturesPsal. 85. of the people and of those Princes that were in her.
                     Blessed is the man whom thou hast nurPsalm. 113 tered, O lord, and taught him thy lawe.
                     He hath sent his word & healed them & Psal. 117. deliuered them from their destructions.
                     Blessed are thei ye search his testimoniesPsal. 117. & seeke after him with their whole harte.
                     Thou hast geuen strait charge that thy commaundements should be kept.
                     Oh that my wayes were stablished to kepe thy statutes, then should not I be cō founded while I haue respect vnto all thy commaundements.
                     Where with all, shall a younge man clenfe his way? Uerely by ruling himselfe according to thy worde. With my whole hart haue I sought thee, oh let me not goe wrong out of thy commaundements.
                     Thy wordes haue I hid within my hart

that I should not sinne against thee.
                     Thou rebukest ye proud, cursed are they that depart from thy commaundements.
                     In thy testimonies is my delite, yea thy statutes are my counsellers.
                     Teach me O Lord the way of thy statutes, and I shall kepe it vnto the ende.
                     Oh geue me vnderstanding and I shall kepe thy law, yea I shall kepe it with my whole harte.
                     Leade me in the path of thy commaundements, for that is my desire: Enclyne my hart vnto thy testimonies, and not vn to couetousnes.
                     The law of thy mouthe is better vnto me then thousandes of gold and siluer.
                     The wicked mē haue told me tales but nothing agreable to thy law. For all thy commaundements are true, yet haue the vngodly persecuted me.
                     If my delite wer not in thy law, I shuld perish in my trouble.
                     Oh how swete are thy wordes vnto my throte, yea more then honye is vnto my mouth. Thy worde is a lanterne vnto my feete, and a light vnto my pathe.
                     It is hie time for thee O Lord to laye to thyne hand. For they haue destroyed thy

lawe. For I loue thy commaundementes aboue golde and precious stone.
                     The preachinge of the worde geueth sighte, yea and bringeth forth vnderstanding euen vnto the very babes.
                     Helthe is far from the vngodlye, for they regard not thy statutes.
                     But great is the peace that they haue which loue thy lawe, and they are not offended at it.
                     My Sonne, if thou wilte receiue myProu. 2. wordes, and kepe my commaundementes by thee, that thine eare may harken vnto wisedome, apply thine hart then to vnder standing. For if thou criest after wisdome and callest for knowledg: if thou sekest after her as after mony, & diggest for her as for treasure, then shalt thou vnderstande the fear of the lord, and find the knowlege of God.
                     For it is the Lorde that geeueth wisdome, out of his mouthe commeth knowledge and vnderstandinge. He preserueth the welfare of the righteous, and de
                           •…
                        ēdeth them that walk innosētly, he kepeth thē in the right path, and preserueth the way of the saintes? Then shalt thou not vnder stand rightuousnesse, iudgement and equi

tie, yea and euery good path. If wisedome enter into thine harte, and thy soule delite in knowledge, then shall councel preserue thee, and vnderstanding shall keepe thee.
                     That thou maiest be deliuered frō the euill waye, and from the man that speaketh froward thinges, from such as leaue the high streat & walk in the way of darknes, which reioyce in doing euill, and delite in wicked thinges, whose wayes are crooked, and their pathes slaunderous. That thou maiest be delited also from the straunge woman, and frō her that is not thine owne, which geueth sweet wordes, forsaketh the husbande of her youth, and forgetteth the couenaunte of her God. For her house is enclined vnto death, and her pathes vnto Hell. All they that go in vnto her come not againe, neither take they holde of the waye of life. That thou walk in the good way, and keepe y• pathes of the righteous. For the iust shall dwell in the lande, and the innocentes shall remaine in it, but the vngodly shall be rooted out of the lande, and the wicked doers shalbe taken out of it.
                     Blessed is the man that findeth wisedomePro. 3 and obtaineth vnderstanding, for ye
                        
getting of it is better then any m
                           •…
                        rchandise of siluer, and the profit of it is better then gold. Wisdom is more worth then precious stones, and all the thinges that thou canst desire, are not to be compared vnto her. Upon her ryght hand is long life, and vppon her lefte hande is ryches and honor. Her wayes are pleasaunt waies, and al her pathes ar peaceable. She is a tree of life to them that lay hold vpon her, and blessed are thei that kepe her fast.
                     My son let not these thinges depart frō thine eies, but kepe my law and counsail so shall it be life vnto thy soule and grace vnto thy mouthe.
                     Then shalte thou walke safely in thy waye, and thy foote shall not stumble. If thou slepest, thou shalt not be afrayed, but shalt take thy rest and slepe swetely. Thou shalte not nede to be afrayed of any soden feare, neither for the violent rushing in of the vngodly whē it commeth.
                     For the lord shall be beside thee, and kepe thy fote that thou be not taken.
                     Let thine heart receiue my words, kepePro. 4 my commaundementes, and thou shalt
                           •…
                         lyue.
                     Get the
                           •…
                         wisdome, get thee vnderstandinge,

forget not the wordes of my mouth, and shrink not from thē. Forsake her not, and shee shall preserue thee, loue her, and she shal kepe thee. The chief point of wisedome is, that thou willingly to obtaine wisedome, and before all thy goods to get vnderstandinge. Make much of her and she shall promote thee, yea if thou embracest her, she shall bringe thee vnto honour.
                     She shall make thee a gracious head & garnishe thee with the crowne of glory. Heare my son, & receiue my wordes, that the yeres of thy life may be manye: I will shew the way of wisdome and lead thee in the righte pathes. So that if thou goest therin, there shal no straitnes hinder thee: and when thou runnest thou shalt not fall. Take faste holde of doctrine, let her not go, kepe her, for she is thy life.
                     The commaundement is a lantern,Pro. 6. and the law is a light and the way of life.
                     Wher no knowlege of gods word is,Pro. 19 the soule is not wel,
                     Apply thy heart vnto learning, andPro. 2
                              •…
                           
                         thine eare to the wordes of knowledge.
                     
                        Hee that turneth away his eare fromPro. 28 hearing the lawe, his prayer shalbe abhorred.
                     When the preachinge of Gods worde
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           ▪ 29 faileth, then perisheth the people.
                     Euerye worde of GOD is pure andPro. 30 cleane, yea it is a shield to them that trust in it.
                     Uaine are all those men, in whom noSap. 13 knowledge of god is.
                     Neither hearbe nor emplasture hatheSap. 16. healed thē, but thy worde O Lord, which healeth all thinges.
                     The fountaine of wisedome is theEccle. 1 the word of god.
                     Be make and lowly to heare the wordEccle. 5 of god, that thou mayest vnderstand, and bring forth a wise and true answer.
                     Haue all thy pleasure in the commaunEccle. 7 dements of god, and in his lawes be thou most of al occupied, and he shall geue thee an hart, and a desire of wisdome shal be ge uen thee.
                     Be not slacke to beleue the worde ofEccle. 16 God.
                     Learnig is a precious iewel to a wisemā.Eccle. 21
                     
                     Nothing is better then the feare of god, and nothing is sweter then to haue a respectEccle. 23
                        
to the commaundements of the Lord
                     My people is led captiue because theyEsay. 5. haue no knowledge.
                     They haue caste away the lawe of the Lorde of hostes, and the worde of the holy one of Israell haue they blasphemed.
                     Therfore is the wrath of the lord who
                           •…
                         agaynst his people, and he wyl stretche oute his hande, and destroye them.
                     Make hast vnto the law and witnesse.Esay. 8. If they speake not according to this word they shall not haue the morning light.
                     All ye that are a thirst; come vnto the waters, and ye that haue no mony, makeEsay. 55 haste, by and eat. Come I say, by without mony and without any 
                           •…
                        xchaunge, wyne and milke. Why lay ye out your monye for that that is not breade in deede, and spend your labor about that that shall neuer satisfye you? Heare me, heare I saye, and eate that which is good, that ye may be well liking. Geue eare and come vnto me, heare me I say, and your soule shall liue.
                     As raine and snowe commeth downe 
                           •…
                        rom heauen and returneth not th
                           •…
                        ther agayne, but watereth the earth and maketh

it to bud, and bring forth the fruit, so that it geueth sede to the sower, & breade to the eater: so shall my word be that shal come out of my mouth.
                     It shall not returne vnto me boyde, but shall do what soeuer I wil, and prosper in them, to whom I send it.
                     Let not the wise man reioyce in hisIere. 9 wysedome, nor the stronge man in hys strength, nor yet let the riche man glorye in his riches, but let him that reioyseth, reioyce in this thing that he know me, that I am ye Lord which doth mercy, iudgemēt and righteousnes in the earth.
                     Withdrawe not the woorde from theIere. 26 people, if peraduenture they heare & turne from their wicked way, so that it may repent me of the euil which I haue determi ned to do vnto them for the maliciousnes of their councels.
                     Heare Israel the commaundementsBaruc. 3. of life, geue eare that thou maiest become wise. Howe chaunced it O Israell, that thou arte in the lande of thine enemies? Thou art worne out in a straunge lande, thou art defiled with the dead. Thou art
                           •…
                         reputed with them that go down to Hell.

Thou hast forsaken the fountain of wisedome. For if thou haddest walked in the way of god, vndoubtedlye thou haddest dwelt in rest vpon the earth: Learne therfore where wisedome is, and vnderstanding is, that thou maiest also know where continuance of life is, and all thinges necessary for to maintaine the same, agayne where the light of the eyes and peace is.Bar
                              •…
                           c. 
                              •…
                           
                        
                     
                     This is the booke of the commaundementes, and the lawe whyche abideth for euer. All that keepe it, shall come vnto life, but they that forsake it, shall come vnto death.Amos. 8
                     
                     Behold, the day is come, sayth y• Lord that I wyll caste an hunger vppon the earth, not the hunger of breade, nor the thirst of water, but of bearing the word of the Lord. And they shal go from sea to sea, and walke aboute from the South to the East, sekinge the worde of the Lorde, and yet shall they not finde it.
                  
                  
                     ☞ Examples out of the 
                           〈◊〉
                         Testament.
                     GOd the Father wrote the law of theExod. 2 ten cōmaundements in tables of stone

with his finger, and commaunded Moyses to declare them vnto the people.
                     The people are commaunded of God,
                           
                              •…
                           eut. 4 not only to rede his holy law, but also diligently to exercise them selues in the me ditation therof so long as they liue, and to teach it their childrē, yea to talk of it, both in their house, and when they go abroad, and to write it vpon t
                           •…
                        e thresholds, dores and postes of their houses, that it may bee 
                           •…
                        er in their sight. For man shall not liue with breade alone, but with euery worde that procedeth from the mouth of God.
                     A kinge is commaunded to reade the
                           
                              •…
                           eut. 17 boke of the law of the Lorde all the dayes of his life, that he may feare the Lorde his God.
                     Iosua was commaunded that the boke
                           
                              •…
                           sua. 1 of the Lordes law should not depart from his mouth, but that he shoulde study in it day and night, that he might kepe and do all thinges that are written in that boke.
                     King Saul was cast down from his roy
                           
                              •…
                           g. 15 all estate, because he was negligente and disobedient to the law of God.
                     When Dauid lay on his deathe bed,Pa. 29 he saide to Sallomon: thou shalt prosper

and come to great renoume, if thou kepest the commaundementes and ordinaunces, which the Lord commaunded Moses.
                     Ioas, when he was crowned in y• temple,2. Par. 23. had the law of the Lord deliuered vnto his handes, that he shoulde keepe and maintaine the same.
                     Iosaphat that walked in the commaundementes2. Par. 27 of the Lord & loued Gods word so entierly, that he sent hys princes, Leuites, and priestes to teach in all partes of Iuda, which had the booke of the Lordes law with them, and went about in all the cities of Iuda, and taught the people.
                     Ezechias diligently walked in the law2. Par. 29. of the Lord, purged his realme of all idolatry, set vp againe the true worshipping of God, & exhorted all his subiectes to followe the lawe of their Lord God.
                     Iossas that most godly king which walked2. Par. 34. so purely in the waies of the lord, that he declined neither on the ryght hand nor on the left, when the boke of the law was deliuered vnto him, did not only cause the booke to be red before hym, but he himself also red it before all his people, both small and great, and (all idolatry destroyed) restored the true religion to hys kingdome.
                     
                        Esdras red the law of the Lord plainly
                           
                              •…
                           . Esd. 8. and distinctly to the people, & they gaue very earnest and diligent attendaunce to the bearing of it.
                     Susan from her infanci
                           •…
                        , was so diligentlyeDan. 13 brought vp of her parentes in the lawe of God, that she did not onely feare god, but also chused rather to be stoned vn to death, then she would once transgresse the law of god by committing adultery.
                  
                  
                     Sentences out of the newe Testament.
                     Man shall not liue with breade alone,Math. 4 but with euery worde that commeth out of the mouth of God.
                     Uerely, verely, I say vnto you, this ageMath. 24. shal not passe, till all these things be done. Heauen and earth shall passe awaye, but my wordes shall not passe away.
                     Blessed are they that heare the wordLuke. 11. of god and kepe it.
                     Blessed is he that eateth bread in theLuke. 13. kingdome of God.
                     They haue Moyses and the Prophets,Luc. 16. let them heare them. If they heare not Moyses and the Prophets, neither will they beleue though one shoulde rise from the dead.
                     
                        Thys is condemnation, that lyghte isIohn. 
                              •…
                           
                           ▪
                         come into the world, and that men loued darkenes more then lyght, because theyr workes were euill. For euery man that doth euill, hateth the lyght, neyther commeth he to y• light, least his workes should be reproued, but he that doth truth, commeth to light that his deedes myghte bee known how they are wrought in god.
                     Search the scriptures for ye thinke toIohn. 5. haue eternall lyfe in them, and these are they which testifie of me, neyther will ye come vnto me that ye may haue life.
                     The wordes that I speake to you, areIohn. 6. spirite and life. Lord to whom shal we go? Thou hast the wordes of euerlasting lyfe.
                     He that is of god heareth the wordes ofIohn. 8. god. But ye heare not bicause ye are not of god. If a man kepeth my worde, he shal neuer see death.
                     My sheepe heare my voyce, and I knowIohn. 10. them, and thei folow me, and I geue them euerlasting lyfe.
                     Walke while ye haue light, least darknes ouerwhelme you. He that walketh inIohn. 12. darknes, knoweth not whether he goeth. While ye haue light beleue in the lyghte: that ye may be the children of lyght.
                     
                        He that hath my preceptes and keepethIoh. 14. them, he it is that loueth me. If any man loueth me, he will kepe my word, and my father will loue him, and we shall come to him, and dwell with hym.
                     This is euerlasting life, euen to knoweIoh. 17. thee the alone true God, and whom thou hast sent Iesus Christ.
                     Euery one that is of the truth, hearethIohn. 18. my voyce.
                     The gospell of Christ is the power ofRom. 1. god vnto saluation, for so many as beleue.
                     Except the Lorde of bostes had left vntoRom. 9. vs sede, that is, hys most blessed word, we had bene as Sodom, and might well haue bene likened to Gomorra.
                     Faith commeth by hearing, and hearingRom. 10 by the word of God.
                     Whatsoeuer thyngs are written aforeRom. 15. time, are writtē for our learning, that we thorowe pacience & comfort of the Scriptures might haue hope.
                     The word of the crosse, is to them that
                           
                              •…
                           . Cor. 1 perishe, folishnesse, but to vs▪ that obtaine saluation, it is the power of God.
                     If the gospell of Christ be yet byd, it is
                           
                              •…
                           . Cor. 4. byd among them that are loste, in whom y• god of this world hath blinded y• minds

of them which beleue not, least the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, which is the image of God, should not shyne vnto thē. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly with all wysedome. Teach and monish one an other.
                     Quench not the spirite. Despise not the studies and preachinges of the holy Scripture. Proue all thinges, and that is good, holde faste.
                     God will all men to be saued, and come vnto the knowledge of the truth.1. Tim. 
                              •…
                           
                           ▪
                        
                     
                     Geue thy minde to reading, exhortation, and doctrine, continue in these things.1. Tim. 4
                     
                     Continue in reading the holy scripture, which is able to make thee wyse vnto saluatiō,2. Tim. 3 thorow the fayth which is in Christ Iesus: For all Scripture geuē by inspiration of God, is profitable to teache, to improue, to amend, and to instructe in ryghteousnes, that the man of god may be perfecte and prepared to all good workes.
                     The word of God is liuishe and mightie in operation, and sharper then any two edged sworde.
                     Lay a part all filthinesse, all superfluitieHeb. 4. of maliciousnesse, and receaue with meke
                        
                           •…
                        es, y• word that is grafted in you, which

is able to saue your soules. And see ye be doers of the word, and not hearers onely, disceauinge your selues. For if any heare the worde and doe it not, he is like to a man that beholdeth hys bodely face in a glasse: For as sone as he hath looked on hym selfe hee goeth hys waye, and forgetteth forthwyth what his fashion was. But who so looketh in the perfecte lawe of libertye, and continueth therin (if he bee not a forgetfull hearer, but a doer of the worke) the same shall be happy in hys dede.
                     Lay a side all malice, & guile, and dissimulation
                           
                              •…
                           . Pet. 2. and enuy, and al backbityng, and as new borne babes desire that milke not of the bodye, but of the minde, which is without corruption, that ye may grow therin.
                     We haue a ryght sure word of prophecie:
                           
                              •…
                           . Pet. 1. wherunto if ye take heede as vnto a light that shineth in a darke place, ye doe well vntill the daye dawne, and the daye starre aryse in our hartes. So that ye firste knowe thys, that no prophecie in the scripture hath any priuate interpretation. For the scripture came neuer by the will of man, but holy men of God spake

as they were moued by the holy ghost.
                     Whosoeuer transgresseth and abydeth2. Iohn. 1. not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not god. He that endureth in the doctrine of Christ, hath both the father and the sonne.
                     If there come any to you, and bring not thys learning, him receaue not to house, neither once bid him god spede, for he that biddeth him God spede, is partaker of hys euill deedes.
                     Blessed is he that readeth and hearethApoc. 1. the wordes of the prophecte, and keepeth these thinges that are written therin.
                     Blessed is he that kepeth the words ofApoc. 22. the prophecie of this booke.
                  
                  
                     ☞ Examples out of the new Testament.
                     THe people preased so greatlye vpponLuk. 6. Christ to heare the word of God, that he was compelled to enter into a ship, and so to teach them.
                     Mary the sister of Martha, sat at IesusLuk. 10. feete and hearde hys preaching. And when Martha being greatlye combred aboute muche seruing and other worldlye busines, sayd to Christ: Maister, doest thou not care that my sister hath leste

me to minister alone. Byd her therefore that she helpe me. He said: Martha, Martha, thou carest and arte troubled, aboute many thinges, but one thing is needefull. Mary hath chosē her that good part, which shall not be taken away from her.
                     Whan Christ preached in the temple,Luk. 19. all the people did hange of his mouth, hearing hym.
                     Peter turned three thousande at one ofAct. 2. hys sermons.
                     The Eunuch chamberlain, and of greatAct. 7. authoritie with Candace, Queene of the Ethiopians, read the Prophet Esaye, sitting in his charet, to whom the holy ghost sent Philip, which did both expounde the Scriptures vnto him, & also baptised him. So dere are they to God which delight in the reading of his holy word.
                     The noblest of byrth amonge them of
                           
                              •…
                            Acts. 17. Thessalonia, which receaued the worde with all diligence of mindes, searched the Scriptures dayly, whether those thinges were euen so as Paule & Silas preached.
                     Apollos was an eloquent man & mightieAct. 18. in the scriptures, He was informed in the way of the lord, and he spake feruently in the spirite, and taught diligently the

thinges of the Lord, and yet knewe he but the baptisme and doctrine of Iohn onely, whom whē Aquila and Priscilla his wife being lay persons, had herd, they toke him vnto them, & expounded vnto him the way of God more perfectlye, in somuch that afterward he mightely ouercame the Iewes and that openly, shewing by the scriptures that Iesus was Christ.
                     Philip the Euaungelist and preacher of the gospell, had foure daughters excellentlyAct. 21. learned in the holy scriptures.
                     Timothe was brought vp in the holy2. Tim. 3 scriptures from his young age.
                  
               
               
                  Against straunge religion or newe found worshipping of God.
                  IF thou be moued vnto straunge religion or new found worshipping of God, eyther by Sathan, by the pope, or by any subtue hipocrite, loke that thou by no meanes doest leane vnto their wicked motions, but rather valiauntly withstād thē, with these sentences and examples of the holy scripture.
                  
                     ☞ Sentences out of the old Testament
                     HEare Israell, your Lorde God is one God. Thou shalt loue thy Lord godDeut. 1
                              •…
                           
                         with all thy harte, with all thy soule, and with all thy strength. Thou shalt feare thy Lord God, and serue him alone.
                     
                        And now Israell, what doth the LordeDeut. 6 thy God require of thee, but that thou fearest the Lorde thy God, and walke in hys wayes, and loue him, and serue the Lorde thy Godwith all thy harte, & with all thy soule, and kepe the commaundementes of the Lorde.
                     Doe that which is pleasaunt in y• sightDeut. 13 of the Lord thy God. Sacrifice to the Lord the sacrifyce of righteousnesse, and trust in hym.
                     I will not reproue thee in thy sacrifices,Psal. 5. sayeth the
                           •…
                         Lord, for I am full of thy burnt offeringes. Offer to God the sacrifice of prayse, and pay to the most highest thy vowes. Call on me in the day of trouble, and I will deliuer thee, and thou shalt honour me.
                     Heare O my people, I will geue theePsalm. 81. a charge O Israel: If thou wilt heare me, there shall be no straunge nor new found God in thee, neither shalt thou worship any foraine God. For I am the Lorde thy God, which brought thee out of the lande of Egipt. To doe mercy and iudgement pleaseth the Lord more than sacrifice.
                     A sacrifice well pleasing to the Lorde isto attend to hys cōmaundementes, and

to departe from all iniquities and vnrighteousnes.
                     What shall I do with all these your sacrifices,Esay. 1. sayth the Lord: I am full of them. The burnte offeringes of Weathers and fatlynges, the bloude of Calues, Lambes, and Goates, I will none of them. When ye come before my sighte, who requyred these thinges at your handes, that ye shoulde walke in my courtes? Bryng me no more sacrifice on thys manner in vain: Your sensing is abhomination vnto me. The feastes of the new Moone, and the Sabbothes, and other holy dayes I can not abide. Your congregations are wicked: Your Kalendes and your solemne feastes, my soule hateth. I am euen werye of them. It greueth me to the hart for to suffer them. When ye shall praye many prayers: I will not heare you. For your handes are full of bloude. Bee ye washed and cleane. Take awaye your euil thoughts from myne eyes. Cease to do euill, learne to doe well. Seeke iudgement, helpe the poore oppressed: be fauourable to the fatherlesse, defend y• widdow, and then come & proue me, sayth the lord. If your sinnes bee as redde as scarlet,

yet shall they be made as whyte as snow. And if they be made like purpell, yet shall they be made as white as wolle. If that ye will be contented & heare me, ye shall eate the good fruites of y• earth. If that ye will not, but prouoke me to anger, the sworde shall deuoure you, for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.
                     Put your burnt offerings to your sacrifices & eate the flesh. For when I brought your Fathers out of the lande of Egypt, I spake not one word vnto them of burnte offeringes and sacrifyces, but thys I commaunded them, saying: heare my voyce, and I shall be your God, and ye shall be my people. See ye walke in all the wayes that I haue commaunded you, that ye may prosper.
                     I hate and vtterly defie your holy daies, and where as ye sense me when ye come together, I will not accept it. And though ye offer me burnt offeringes, yet will not I receaue your giftes. Awaye from me with the noyse of thy songes, for I can not abyde the hearyng of thy playeng at the Organs. Prouide that equitie may followe as the water, and righteousnesse as a mightie streame, for in these thinges

haue I delight and pleasure sayeth the Lorde.
                     I will mercy and no sacrifice, sayth theOse. 6. Lord, and the knowledge of God do I set more by, then burnt offeringes.
                     What shall I offer worthy the Lorde?Mich. 6. Shall I bowe my knee to y• hie god? Shall I offer vnto him burnt sacrifices & calues of a yeare olde? May the Lorde be pleased with a thousande fat Weathers? Or with many thousandes of lustie Goates? Shall I geue my first begotten for my wickednesse? Euen the fruite of my wombe for the sinne of my soule? I will shewe the
                           •…
                         (Oman) what is good, and what the Lord requireth of thee: verely to do iudgement, to loue mercy, and carefully to walke with thy God.
                     How long will ye halte on both partes.3. Reg. 18. If the Lord be God, follow him. If Baall be God, follow him.
                  
                  
                     ☞ Examples out of the old Testament.
                     NAdab and Abihu of a good entent offered incense to the Lord wt straungeLeuit. 10▪
                         fyre, yet for all their good zeale, they were consumed with fyre, so that they dyed before the Lord.
                     
                        King Saule thought that he had done1. Reg. 13. great worship vnto God, when in the absence of Samuell he offered burnt offeringes, but Samuell said vnto him: thou hast done folishly, neither hast kept the cō
                        maundements of the Lord thy God, which I commaunded thee.
                     Saule also of a good zeale contrarye2. Reg. 15. to the commaundement of God, spared Agag the kyng of Ameleche aliue, with the best and fattest flockes of sheepe, oxen, 
                           •…
                        c: Pretending, that he reserued them for to offer vnto the Lorde. But Samuell sayd vnto him: for asmuche as thou hast caste away the word of the Lord, the Lord hath cast away thee: that thou be no more king. Willeth the Lorde burnt offringes and sacrifices, and not rather that it maye be obeyed vnto his worde? Obedience is better then sacrifices: and to geue eare to the lordes commaundement, is more then to offer the fatte of Weathers.
                     Oza thought y• he had done God highe
                           
                              •…
                           . Reg. 6. seruice, when he stayed the Arke of God in the waine, being in ieoperdie of falling: but yet was y• Lord angry with him, because he touched it contrarye to hys word,

in so muche that he was striken and sodenlye dyed.
                     King Ozias toke vpon him to burne incense2. Par. 26. vnto the Lord, thinking that by this meanes he should highlye please God, but for all his pretensed holines he was strikē with leaprosie: and so being cast out of the house of the Lorde, he continued a leper euen vnto his death.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Sentences out of the new Testament.
                     THese people draw nighe vnto me withMath. 15 their mouthes, & honour me with their lippes, but their hartes are farre from me. Beholde, they worship me in vaine, teaching doctrines, euen the cōmaundements of men.
                     Woe be vnto you ye Scribes & Pharisees,Ma. 23. yea very ipocrites: which deuour widowes houses vnder the pretence of long prayer, ye shall therefore receiue the more greuous dampnation.
                     God hath deliuered vs from the hand ofLuk. 1. our enemies, that we should serue him in holines and righteousnes all the daies of our life.
                     The houre commeth and now it is, whē
                        Iohn. 4. true worshippers shall worship the Father

in spirite and truth, for the father seketh such, that should worship him.
                     God is a spirite, & they y• worship hym, must worship him in spirite and truth.
                     The time shall come, that whosoeuer killeth you, shall thinke that they do vntoIoh. 16. God an hie good seruice.
                     God is my witnesse whom I serue inRom. 1▪
                         my spirite.
                     Be ye fulfylled with the spirit, speakingEphe. 5 with your selues in psalmes and hymnes & spiritual songes, and making melodie to the Lord in your hartes, geuing thankes alwayes for all thinges vnto God in the name of the Lord Iesus Christ.
                     Unto god king euerlasting, immortall,
                           
                              •…
                           . Tim. 1. inuisible and wise only, be all honour and glory for euer and euer.
                     Amen.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Examples out of the new Testament.
                     OUr Sauiour Christ whan he liued in thys worlde, dyd all thinges accordingIohn. 5. to hys heauenly fathers commaundementes as he hym selfe sayth, as my father hath geuen me commaundement, so doe I: thys dyd he to geue vs example, that in matters of religion we shoulde attempte nothing as due seruice vnto god,

but that only which we haue learned out of his holy worde.
                     The apostles of Christe bothe taughte and wroughte that onelye, whiche they had receaued of their Lorde and maister Iesus Christ.
                     Of these aforesaid Scriptures & histories, maiest thou learne that God is not worshipped as carnall reason and fleshly wisdome imagineth and prescribeth, but as god by his holy worde biddeth, appointeth, and commaundeth. A Christen man oughte to followe Christes steps and to walke, as he hath walked.
                  
               
               
                  Against mens traditions and vnwritten verities.
                  IF Sathan or any of his impes vnto the derogation of Gods glorye. shall at any time tempt thee with mans tradicions or vnwritten veryties, for to geue no les credite vnto them, than vnto the word of God: auoyde him with these scriptures.
                  
                     ☞ Sentences out of the olde Testament.
                     YE shall not ad vnto the worde that IDeut. 4 speake, nor take ought from it.
                     Ye shall not turue vnto the right hand nor vnto the left hād: but by the way that the Lord your god hath commaunded you ye shall walke: that ye may liue and haue

good luck.
                     Keepe the commaundementes of theDeut. 6 Lord thy god, and the testimonies and ceremonies, whiche hee hathe commaunded thee: and do that whiche is pleasaunt and good in the Lordes sight, that thou maiest haue good luck.
                     That I cōmaūd thee, do y• only neitherDan. 12 put to any thing, nor take ought away.
                     Put nothing to his wordes, least thouPro. 20. be reproued and found a lier.
                     Wo bee vnto them that cal euill good, & good euil: which make darknes lighte, and light darknes: that make sower swete and sweet sower.
                     Wo be to them that are wise in theirEsay. 5 own sight, and think them selues to haue vnderstanding.
                     Wo be vnto you that make vnrighteousEsay. 10. lawes, and deuise thinges which be to harde to be kept: through which the poore are oppressed on euerye side: and the innocentes of my people are therewith robbed of iudgement.
                     Wo be to those shrīkīg childrē saith y• lordEsay. 30. which seke counsel but not at me: whiche take a web in hād, but not after my will y• they may heap one sinne vpon an other.
                     
                        Thus saith the Lorde, my thoughtesEsay. 55 are not your thoughtes, and your wayes are not my wayes: but as farre as the heauēs are higher then the earth, so far do my wayes exceade youres, and my thoughtes your thoughtes.
                     Your lippes speake leasinges: and your tong setteth out wickednes.
                     No man regardeth righteousnesse, andEsay. 59. no man iudgeth truly.
                     Euery man hopeth in vaine things: and imagineth disceite, conceiueth wickednes, and bringeth forth euil.
                     They breede Cockatrices egs, & weaue the spiders web: Whosoeuer e
                           •…
                        eth of their egs dieth, but if one tread vpon them, their commeth vp a serpent. Their webbe maketh no cloth, and they maye not couer them with their laboures. Their deedes are the deedes of wickednesse, and the worke of robbery is in their handes: their feete runne to euill, and they make haste to shed innocent bloude. Theyr councels are wicked councels, hate and destruction is in their wayes: but y• way of peace they know not. In their goings is no equitie, their waies are so crooked y• who so goeth therin, knoweth nothing of peace.
                     
                        My people haue committed two greateIerem. 2 euils. They haue forsaken me the fountaine of liuing waters, and digged them pits, pits I say that are broken, and can hold no water.
                     Take b
                           •…
                        de saithe the Lord ye truste inIere. 7 co
                           •…
                        sels that begile you & do you no good.
                     Heare not the wordes of the Prophets,Iere. 23. that preach their owne dreames.
                     Heare O ye house of Israel, saith theEze. 18 lord. Is not my way right, or ar not your waies rather wicked?
                     The children of thy people, saye, tusheEze, 33 the way of the Lord is not right, where as their way is rather vnright.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the olde Testament.
                     Ieroboam kynge of Israel, contrary toReg. 12 gods word, made two calues of gold and set them vp to be worshipped of people as their goddes, but both he and his posteritie were greuously punished for it.
                     How greuously god punished al such as brought in straūge worshippings of god, or any matters concerning Idolatrye or ought els contrary to y• word of God, although y• authors of thē made the simple people to beleeue y• they were verities, although

vnwrittē as the Papistes do now adaies, y• holy scriptures in diuers places do euidētly shew, namely in the bokes of the kinges and of the chronicles.
                  
                  
                     ☞ Sentences out of the new Testament.
                     Except your righteousnesse dooth excedeMath. 5 the righteousnes of the Scribes and Phariseis, ye can not enter into the kingdome of heauen.
                     Beware of false Prophets which c
                           •…
                        meMath. 7 vnto you in sheepes clothing, and inward ly are rauening wolues.
                     Why do ye transgresse the commaunden
                           •…
                        entMath. 15 of God for your tradicions.
                     Euery plant y• my heauēly father hathMat. 15 not planted, shal be plucked vp by ye rotes.
                     This is my welbeloued Sonne, inMath. 17 whom I am wel pleased, heare ye him,
                     Teache them to kepe all thinges thatMat. 28. I haue commaunded you.
                     Ye leaue the commaundemēt of god,Mar. 7. and maintaine your owne constitutions. Well, ye do caste aside the commaundemēt of god, to kepe your own tradicions.
                     If ye abide in my worde, ye are my disciplesIohn. 3. in deede, and ye shall knowe the truthe, and the truthe shall make you fre.
                     He that is of god, heareth the wordes

of God.
                     My sheepe heare my voice & I knoweIohn. 10 them and they followe mee: neither shall they at any time pearishe, nor yet shall any man pluck them out of my hand.
                     He that hathe my commaundementesIoh. 14. and kepeth them, he it is that loueth mee: If any man loueth me, he will keepe my wordes.
                     If ye keepe my commaundementes,Iohn. 15. ye shall abide in my law.
                     Ye are my frends, if ye doe those things that I commaund you.
                     Euery one that is of the truthe, hearethIohn. 19. my voyce.
                     I dare not speak of any of these thingsRom. 15. that Christ hath not wrought by me.
                     I beseeche you brethern, marke them that make deuision and geue occasions of euil, contrarye to the doctrine y• ye haue learned, and auoid them. For they that are such, serue not the Lord Iesu Christe, but their own bellies: & with swete preachīgs and flattering words, deceiue the harts of the simple.
                     Though we our selues or an Angel frō
                        Rom. 15 Heauen, preache any other Gospel to you

then that whiche we haue preached vnto you, holde him accursed. As I saide before so say I now againe, if any man preach any other thing vnto you then that ye haue receiued, holde him accursed.
                     Thoughe it be but a mans testamentGal. 3. yet no mā despiseth it or addeth any thing therto, when it is once alowed: How much more ought nothing to be added to the tes tament of the moste highe God, nor yet be taken from it.
                     Be no more children from hēceforth,Ephe. 3 wandring and caried with euerye winde of doctrine, by the wilines of men & crafts: whereby they lay awaite for vs to deceiu
                           •…
                         vs, but let vs follow the truth in loue, and in all thinges growe in him whiche is thy head: that is to say Christ.
                     Caste away vngodlye & olde wiues fables,1 Tim. 4. exercise thy self vnto godlines.
                     If any man teache otherwise, & is not1. Tim. 6. content with the wholsome words of our Lord Iesus Christe, and with the doctrine of godlines: He is pufte vp & knoweth no thing, but wasteth his brains about questiōs & strife of wordes, wherof spring enuye, strife, rayling, euill surmisinges, and vaine disputations of menne of corrupte

mindes and destitute of the truth, whiche thinke that lucre is godlynes: From suche seperate thy self.
                     If any man speake, let him speake as2. Pet. 4. though it came of gods owne mouth.
                     Whosoeuer transgresseth and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not god He that endureth in the doctrine of Christ, hath bothe the Father and the Sonne.
                     If there come any vnto you and bring2. Iohn. 1 not this lerning, him receiue not to house neither bid him god spede. For he that bid deth him god spede, is partaker of his euil deedes.
                     Be not caried about with diuers andHebr. 13 straunge learninges.
                     If any man addeth to these thinges,Apo. 22 god shall adde vnto hym the plages that are written in this booke, And if any mā shall minish of the wordes of this boke of this Prophecy, god shal take away hys parte oute of the booke of life, and out of the holye citie, and from those thynges which are written in this booke.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the newe Testament.
                     Christ rebuketh the pharises for bringingMath. 15 their traditions into the churche of

God, by that meanes defacyng the glory of Gods most holy worde.
                     Blessed Sainct Paule reproueth themCol. 2. which be dead with Christ, from the commaundements of the world, and yet suffer themselues still to be led with traditions, as these for an example touch not, tast not, handle not, &c. Which all perish through the verye abuse after the commaundements and doctrins of men which thinges outwardly haue the similytude of wisdome by superstition and humblenes of minde. &c.
                     Thapostles of Christ would not burdenAct. 15. the christen congregations with new and superfluous tradicions, but only charged them with such thinges as were necessary.
                     Sainct Paule in his Epistle vnto theGala. 4. Galathians inueieth against them, which after they haue known god, turne agayn vnto nedie and beggerlye ceremonyes, traditions or ordinaunces obseruing dais monethes, times and yeares.
                  
               
               
                  Against the folowing of vngodly forefathers.
                  If thou through temptation of the Deuil or the 
                        •…
                     alse perswasions of Antichrists Prophets be m
                        •…
                     
                     
                     
                        •…
                     ed at any time to doubt of the truth of gods word which the papistes at this daye cal seditious doctrine, new learning and heresy, because thy forefathers haue both beloued and done the contrary▪ call these scriptures to thy remembraunce.
                  
                     Sentences out of the olde Testament:
                     Folow not the multitude to do euill.Exod. 23.
                     
                     Doo not you these thinges that theyLeu. 18. haue done, which were before you neither be ye defiled in them: I am the Lord your God kepe my commaundements.
                     The Lord sent his prophets to his people,4. Reg. 17. saying: returne from your vnrighteous wayes, and keepe my preceptes and ceremonies, according to all the lawe that I commaunded your fathers. But they would not heare, but became stifnecked, euen as their forefathers were stifnecked, whiche would not obey the Lord God.
                     Let them put their hope in God, & notPsal. 69. forget the works of the Lord but seke after his commaundementes, Let them not be like their forefathers, whiche were a frowarde and a spitefull nation, a nation that would neuer be true harted, nor bear an vpright mind toward God.
                     Be not hard harted as your forefathersPsal. 125. were, saith the Lord whiche chyde and rebelled

against me.
                     We haue sinned with oure forefathers we haue done vniustly, and commited iniquitie.
                     Trust not in rulers nor in the sonnesPsal. 146. of men, in whome is no health. For whē theyr breath goeth away, they return vn to their earth: In y• day shall al their thou 
                           •…
                        hts, counsels, deuises and imaginations come to naught. I haue alway sayd vnto your forefathers synce I brought them out of the land of Egipt euen vnto thys daye heare my voice, but they would not hear nor once bow their eare vnto it: But euery one of them is gone astray in the fr
                           •…
                         wardnes of his wicked harte, ye the people of Iuda and the men of Ierusalem are also fallē vnto the wickednes of their fore fathers which would not hear my words: Insomuch that thei ar alredy gone away after straunge Gods and serue them. The house of Israel & the house of Iuda, haue brokē ye couenaunt which I made wt their fathers. Therfore thus saith the lord: Beholde I wil bring in extreme punishments vpon thē, so y• they shal not escap frō thē.
                     They shall crye v
                           •…
                        to me but I will not heare them. The cityes of Iuda and th
                           •…
                        
                        
inhabiters of Hierusalem, shall goe & crye vnto them, to whom they offered sacrifice: and yet shall they not saue thē in the time of their trouble. According to the number of thy cities were thy Gods, O Iuda, and after the number of thy waies, O Hierusalem, haste thou set vp altars of abhomination to do sacrifice vnto Baalim.
                     Your forefathers haue forsaken me,Ierem. 16. sayth the Lorde, and they are gone awaye after straunge Gods, and haue serued thē and worshipped them: yea, they haue vtterlye geuen me ouer, and haue not kept my lawe. But you haue wrought more abhomination, than all your forefathers haue done.
                     For behold, euery one of you walke after the leudnesse of his own wicked harte, and will not heare me.
                     Their forefathers haue broken my couenauntEze. 2. euen vnto thys day, and they to whom I send thee, are children without all shame, and of such an harte, as can not be reclaimed.
                     Walke not in the commaundementesEze, 20 of your fathers, nor keepe not their ordinaunces: neither pollute your selues with their idoles. For I am the lord your God.
                     
                        Therefore walke in my preceptes, and kepe my iudgementes, and do them.
                     Confusion of face and vtter shame beDan. 9. vnto vs, vnto our kings, vnto our rulers: & to our forefathers, which haue sinned.
                     Be not like your forefathers, vnto whō
                        Zach. 1. the Prophets in tymes past cryed, saying: thus sayth the Lorde of hostes, turne from your euill waies, and from your abhominable thoughtes, but they would not harken nor geue any attendaunce vnto me, sayth the Lord.
                     Our forefathers haue sinned, and haue2. Par. 19. done euill in the sight of the Lord our god. For they haue forsaken him, and turned awaye their faces from the tabernacles of the Lord our God.
                     Be not lyke your forefathers and brethren,2. Par. 30 which rebelled against the Lorde God of their fathers, and he gaue them ouer into desolation, as ye see your selues. Be not ye hardnecked now as were your forefathers, but offer your hande vnto the Lorde, and come to his sanctuarie, which he hath sanctifyed for euer, and serue the Lorde your God, so shall the indignation of his wrath turne away from you.
                  
                  
                     
                     Examples out of the olde Testament.
                     CAin 
                           •…
                        lewe his brother Abel, and followedGen. 4. his forefather the deuill, which was a mansleyer from the beginning.
                     Nadab king of Israell folowed his forefather3. Reg. 15 Hieroboam, cōmitting idolatrie against the lord his God. Therfore Baasa destroyed him and his kingdome, & all the house of Hieroboam, so that one of the stocke remained not aliue.
                     Ozochias king of Israell followed hys1. Par. 22. wicked forefather Achab, & greuously sinned against the lord his God. He therfore reigned but a litle time, and also died a miserable death.
                     Amon king of Iuda, followed hys Idolatrous4. Reg. 21. forefather Manasses, and dyd that whiche was euill in the sight of the Lord his God. He reigned but two yeres, and was slaine of his seruauntes in hys own house.
                     Ioakim kyng of Iuda for
                           •…
                        oke the godlye4. Reg. 23. waies of his moste vertuous father king Iosias, and followed the steppes of his wicked forefathers. The Lorde therefore suffered him to raigne but three monethes in Ierusalem, and gaue him ouer

into the handes of his enemies.
                     Sedechias king of Iuda followed hys4. Reg. 25 wicked forefathers, and prouoked y• lord his God vnto anger. He therfore was depriued of his kingdome, sawe his children slaine before his eyes, and afterward he hauing his eyes plucked out of his head, was bound in chaines, and miserably caryed away into Babilon.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Sentences out of the ne
                           •…
                         Testament.
                     All that come before me are theeues andIohn. 10. robbers, but my sheepe haue not heard them.
                     O ye stifnecked and vncircumcised ofAct. 7. hartes and eares, ye haue alwayes resisted the holy ghost▪ as your forefathers did, so do ye.
                     Which of the Prophets haue not yourAct. 7. forefathers persecuted.
                     See that ye passe the time of your pilgrimage1. Pet. 1▪
                         in feare, for as much as ye know how that ye were not redemed with corruptible siluer and golde from your vaine conuersation, which ye receaued by y• traditions of the forefathers: but with the precious bloude of Christ, as of a Lambe vndefiled and without spot.
                  
                  
                     
                     Examples out of the new Testament.
                     THe Pharisies and the Scribes followingMat. 15. their vngodlye forefathers, obserued the traditions of their elders, and neglected the commaundementes of God.
                     The Iewes fulfilling the measure ofMath. 23. their forefathers, whiche slewe the Prophets that were sent vnto them frō God, killed Christ and his blessed Apostles.
                     Paule before his conuersion followingAct. 9. his wicked forefathers the Iewes, persecuted the congregation of Christ, euen as hys elders persecuted Christ and the Prophets.
                  
               
               
                  Agaynst the wicked olde customes and long vsages.
                  IF Sathan or any of his members labour to plucke thee from gods word vnto wicked olde customes and longe vsages, auoyde him with these scriptures following.
                  
                     Sentences out of the olde Testament.
                     ACcording to the custome of the landLeu. 18. 3. of Egipt wherin ye dwelt, shall ye not do: and after the manner of the land of Canaan, whether I wil bring you

shall ye not doe, neither walke in their ordinaunces, but do after my iudgements, & keepe my ceremonies to walke therin. I am the lord your God. Ye shall keepe therfore mine ordinaunces & my iudgements, which if a man do, he shall liue in them. I am the lorde.
                     Take heede that ye commit not one ofLeu. 18. 30 these abhominable customes, which were committed before you, and loke that ye defyle not your selfe therin. I am the Lorde your God.
                  
                  
                     An example out of the olde Testament.
                     EUen vnto this present day do they still2. Reg. 17 followe their olde customes.
                     They feare not the Lord, neither kepe they his ceremonies, his lawes and commaundements. The Prophets cried, worship no straunge Gods, but feare the Lord your God, and he shall deliuer you from the power of all your enemies. But they would not heare, but still committed wickednes according to their olde custome. They pretended as though they serued the Lorde and yet neuerthelesse did they also seruice to their idoles.
                     For as their forefathers did, so do their

sonnes, & neuewes vnto this present day▪
                     
                  
               
               
                  Against such as sclaunder Christes Gospell, by calling it new learning.
                  IF the aduersarye of true godlinesse goe about to perswade thee, that Christes gospel is new learning, and that therefore thou oughtest to geu
                        •…
                      no care vnto it, nor beleue it: looke that thou by n
                        •…
                      meanes consent vnto them, but rather remember that thys is no newe blasphemie, but vsed manye yeares before of wicked hipocrites, as thou shalte perceaue by these examples following.
                  
                     ¶ Examples out of the new Testament.
                     WHen Christ preached in the SinagogeMar. 1. at Capernaum, and healed the man that was possessed with an vncleane spirit, the people cryed out and sayd: what newe learning is this.
                     When Paule preached at Athens theActs. 
                              •…
                           7. resurrection of the dead, certayne bellye gods as the Epicures & Stoikes, straue with him and sayd: what meaneth thys pratler? Other sayd, he semed to be a preacher of new deuills. An other companye sayd, maye we not know what new learning this is, that thou shewest? Thou bringest in new things in deede vnto our eares. Our olde fathers neuer taught vs

any such geare. We will knowe what these thinges meane.
                  
               
               
                  Agaynst pensiuenesse and thought taking for the life.
                  IF thou be troubled for the preseruacion of thy life eyther in sickenesse, trouble, persecution, emprisonment, or otherwyse, comfort thy selfe with these scriptures.
                  
                     Sentences out of the olde Testament.
                     THe Lorde killeth and geueth life agayne.1. Reg. 2. He bringeth euen to hell, and backe agayne.
                     The Lorde is my light and my health whom then should I feare? The Lorde isPsal. 27. the strength of my life, of whom then should I be afrayd: though an host of men were layde agaynst me, yet shall not my harte be afrayde. And though there arose vp war against me, yet wil I put my trust in him.
                     He hath geuen his Aungells charge ofPsal. 91. thee, to kepe thee in all thy wayes.
                     The Aungell of the Lord shall be sentPsal. 34. among all them that feare him, and shall deliuer them.
                     The sourges of the sea are maruelous,Psal. 93. yea the lord on high is rather maruelous.
                     
                        They consented all against me, they cō
                        spiredPsal. 31. to take away my life, but in thee (O Lord) haue I trusted, and I sayd, thou art my God, In thy hand are my destenies.
                     Many tribulations fall on y• righteous,Psal. 34. but from them all, the lord deliuereth thē. The Lorde kepeth all their bones, so that not one of them shall be broken.
                     The health of the righteous is of thePsal. 37. Lord, and he defendeth them in the tyme of their trouble. Yea the lorde will helpe them and deliuer them, and set thē harmeles from the vngodlye: and saue them because they haue trusted in them.
                     Thou haste limitted the waters thesePsal. 104. bounds: which they may not passe.
                     The Lord is my helper, I will not fearePsal. 118. what man doe vnto me. The Lord is my deliuerer, therefore will I set nought by mine enemies.
                     The Lord hath geuen a cōmaundemēt:Psal. 148. and none shall go beyond it, Fyre, Hayle, Snow, Ise, and vapours, stormie windes accomplishe his worde.
                     Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy fleshEccle. 5 for to sinne, neyther saye thou before the Aungell, there is no prouidence: least peraduenture the Lord being angry against

thy wordes do destroye all the workes of thy handes.
                     Life and death are of God.Eccle. 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                        
                     
                     Thy prouidence (O father) gouernethSap. 14 all thinges frō the beginning.
                     Thou (O Lord) art he which hast power of life and death. Who can say that any thing can be done without the Lordes cō
                        maundement? From the mouth of the highest, goeth there not good and ill?
                  
                  
                     ☞ Examples out of the olde Testament.
                     ESau burned with an immortall hatredGen. 27. 32. 33. against his brother Iacob: because of the blessing wherwith his father had blessed him: and purposed fully in his hart to kill his brother. But Iacob prayed vnto the Lord, and he mollifyed Esaus hart, in so much, that whan Iacob thought that both he and his shoulde be slaine, his brother Esau came gently vnto him, louinglye embraced him, kissed him frendly, and for very ioye wept: so mightie is God to mollifie tira
                           •…
                        ntes hartes, whan it pleaseth him, and to make them gracious and fauourable to his seruauntes.
                     Saule persecuted Dauid cruelly, purposing1. Reg. 1
                              •…
                           . to kill him, but his labor was in vain.
                     
                        Iezabel threatned and sware to sley Helias,3. Reg. 19. but the Lorde preserued him.
                     Sathan coulde doe nothing to Iob, tillIob. 2. God suffered him: neither exercised he hys cruelnes any further against Iob, than he was appointed of God.
                     The godly woman Susan through theDan. 8. false accusations of ye two wicked iudges was at y• point to be stoned vnto death, but God wonderfully deliuered her from the handes of her enemies.
                  
                  
                     ☞ Examples out of the new Testament.
                     FEare not them which kill the body,Mat. 10. and be not able to kill the soule. But rather feare him, which is able to destroye both soule and body in hell. Are not two sparowes solde for a farthing? And none of them fall on the ground without the will of your father. Yea all the hayres of your head are numbred. Feare not therfore, ye are of more value than manye sparowes.
                     Ye be come out as vnto a theefe withMath. 26. swordes and staues. When I was daylye with you in the temple, ye layd no hand vppon me, but this is your houre and the power of darkenesse.
                     
                        Thou couldest haue no power at all againstIohn. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . mee (sayd Christ vnto Pilate) except it were geuen thee from aboue.
                     All thinges are of him, by hym andMath. 12. in hym.
                     If we liue, we liue to be at the LordesRom. 14 will. And if we die, we die at the Lordes will. Whether we liue therfore or die, we are in the Lordes hand.
                     Beholde, I am aliue sayth Christ, forApoc. 1. euermore: and haue the keyes of death 
                           •…
                        nd hell.
                  
                  
                     ☞ Examples out of the new Testament.
                     Mat. 8.
                     THe ship, wherin Christ and his Disciples were, was greuouslye tossed with the waues of the sea, through y• winde and the tempest that arose, in so muche that it was at the point of drowning. Notwithstanding, neither water, winde, nor tempest, did once hurte it.Math. 8
                     
                     The deuills had no power to enter into swine till Christ gaue them leaue. If thou cast vs forth, sayd they, suffer vs to enter into the herd of swine. Christ aunswered,Iohn. 7. goe ye, and they went.
                     The Iewes did seke to kill Christ, but hys tyme was not then come. No man

dyd set hys handes on hym because hys houre was not yet come.
                     They went aboute to take Christ, butIohn. 10. he escaped from the midst of their hands.
                     There came certain of ye Pharisees andLuke. 13. said vnto Christ, get thee out of the waye, & depart bence. For Herode will kill thee. And he said vnto thē, go & tell that Fore: behold I cast out deuills, and heale y• people to day and to morow, and the iii. day I make an end. Neuertheles, I must walke to day, and to morow, and the day following: for it can not be that a prophet perish any other where then at Ierusalem.
                     Herode threwe Peter in prison, boundActs. 12. him faste with chaines: and set certaine souldiours for the more assurance to kepe him, purposing after Easter to bring him forth vnto the people, and so to haue slaine him. But God being mightier then all the tirannie and power of the world sent his Aungell, and deliuered Peter out of prison.
                     Paule being at Milete gathered aAct. 28. bundel of stickes, and put them in the fire, and sodenlye there came a venemous adder, otherwise called a Uiper, out of the heate, and lepte on his hande. The men
                     
                        The men that were present and sawe this thinge waited when he shoulde haue swollen or fallen down dead sodynly.
                     But Paule shoke of the vermine into the fier and felt no harme.
                  
               
               
                  Against hunger, pouertie, or carefulnes of liuing.
                  IF at anye time thou be tempted with the carefulnes of liuing, comfort thy self with these holy scriptures.
                  
                     Sentences out of the olde Testament.
                     THey that feare the Lord, shall haue no scarcenesse. They which seke the LordPsal. 33▪
                         shall want no good thing.
                     Beholde the eyes of the Lord are vpon them that feare him, and vpon them thatPsal. 34 trust in his mercy, y• he maye deliuer their liues from deathe and norishe them in the time of honger.
                     I haue bene young and am waxē old, and I haue not seene the righteous forsaken,Psal. 37▪
                         nor his children begging their bread on the earth.
                     Lay thy care on the Lord, and he shal norishe thee.Psal. 55
                     
                     All creatures depende vpon thee (O Lord) that thou shouldest geue them meatPsal. 10
                              •…
                           
                         in due time. For thou geuing it them, they

take it, and thou opening thy hande, they are well satisfied.
                     But thou hidinge thy face they are sorowful, & thou taking away their breath, they are but dead, and turned into y• earth that they came of.
                     The eyes of all things loke vpon thee,Psal. 165 (O Lorde) and thou geuest them meate in due time. Thou openest thy hande, and replenishest all thinges liuing with thy bles singe.
                     The Lord geueth meat to the hungry.Psal. 166.
                     
                     The blessing of the Lord maketh menPro. 10. riche: and there shall no greife accompany them.
                     The Lord wil not let the soule of the righteous suffer hunger, but hee putteth the vngodly from his desire.
                     He that tilleth his land shall haue plē
                        Pro. 12 teousnes of bread, but he that foloweth idlenes, is a very foole.
                     Good and euil, life and death, pouertyEccle. 11. and riches are of God. Trust in god, abide in thy place. For it is an easy thing in the sight of God, quickly to enrich a pore mā.
                     Feare not my sonne, we leade a poreTob▪ 4 life, notwithstanding we shall haue plenty of all good things, if we feare the Lord

depart from all sinne, and do wel.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the olde Testament.
                     GOd fed the people of Israel with meatExod. 16▪
                         from heauen, and gaue them drinke out of the rock.
                     God sent meate by the Rauens to Helias.3. Reg. 17.
                     
                     The Aungell of god tooke Abacuk byDan. 14 the top, and bare him by the heare of the head, and thorow a mighty winde set him vpon the den wher Daniel was prisoner: and gaue him that meat, whiche the Prophet had prepared for his reapers,
                  
                  
                     Sentences out of the new Testament.
                     MAn shall not liue with breade alone,Math. 4 but, with euery word that cō meth out of the mouth of god.
                     Take no thought, sayinge what shallMath. 6 we eat? or what shal we drīk? or wherwith shall we be clothed, after these things seke y• heathen. For your heauenly father know eth y• ye haue nede of all these things. But seke ye first the kingdom of god, & the righ teousnesse thereof: and all these thinges shalbe caste vnto you.
                     God geueth vs abundantly all things to enioy them.1. Tim. 
                              •…
                           
                           ▪
                        
                     
                     
                        I wil not fail thee, nor yet forsake thee.Hebr. 13
                     
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the new Testament.
                     CHriste at the mariage, turned water inIohn. 2 to wine.
                     Christe with fiue barlye loues and twoMath. 10 fisshes, fed fiue thousande people and yet remained. xii. baskets ful of fragmentes.
                  
               
               
                  Against keping of euil companye.
                  When the Deuil, the Fleshe or the worlde moue thee to resorte vnto any euill company, defende the selfe from it with remembring these scriptures.
                  
                     Sentences out of the olde Testament.
                     HE shall dwel in the Lords tabernaclePsalm. 15. and rest vpon his 
                           •…
                        oly hil whiche setteth not by the vngodly, but maketh much of them that feare the Lord.
                     With the holy shalt thou be holye, andPsalm. 19. with the innocent thou shalt be innocent. With the cleane thou shalt be cleane, and with the frowarde, thou shalt be froward.
                     A froward hart, shall depart from me, I wil not know a wicked person.
                     Who so hath a proud loke and an high stoPsal. 101 make, I may not awaye with him. Mine eyes shall looke for suche as be faithful in the lande, that they maye dwell with me,

and who so leadeth a godly life, shalbe my seruaunt. There shall no deceitful person dwel in my house.
                     He that telleth lyes shall not tarye inPsal. 119 my sight,
                     I hate the vngodlye, but thy lawe O Lord do I loue.
                     My Sonne, if sinners entice thee vntoPro. 1. wickednes, leane not vnto them.
                     If they say, come go with vs, let vs lay awaite for bloude, and conuey our selues priuely to trap the innocent. Let vs swalow them vp quickly like hel, and deuour the perfect like a whirle pit. For thus shal we finde great ritches, and garnishe oure houses with oyle. Cast in thy foote among vs, and let vs make a common purse.
                     My sonne, walk not with them, but refraine thy feete from their wayes, for their feet run vnto mischiefe. In vaine are nets spread abrode for birdes before their eyes. For euen these men lay awaite amonge them selues one to shed anothers bloud.
                     Neither are their owne liues in sauegard amōg thē selues. These are y• pathes of couetous men amonge whome one spareth not the life of another.
                     Come not in the path of the vngodlyPro. 4
                        
and walk not in the waye of the wicked. Eschue it, and go not therin, depart aside, and passe ouer by it. For they cannot slepe except they haue first done some mischiefe. For they eat the bread of wickednesse and drink the wine of robbery. The path of the righteous shineth as the light, and is euer brighter and brighter vnto the perfect day. But the way of the vngodly is as y• darknes wherin men fall or they be aware.
                     Who so accompanieth the wise, shallPro. 13 haue wisedome, but he that is a companion of foles, shall proue like them.
                     Trauail not by the way with him thatEccle. 6 is brainles, least he doo thee euill.
                     For he foloweth his owne wilfulnes and so shalt thou pearish thorow his foly.
                     Striue not with him that is angrye and cruel, go not with hī into the wildernes, for bloud is nothing in his sight, and where there is no helpe, hee shall murther thee.
                     Loke not vpon a woman that is desirous of many men, least thou fall into herEccle. 9 snares.
                     Use not the company of a woman that is a player and a daunser, and heare her not least, thou perish through her entising
                     
                        Beholde not a maiden, that thou be not hurt in her beauty.Eccle. 1
                              •…
                           
                        
                     
                     Bring not euery mā into thine house for the disceitfull layeth wait diuersly.Eccle. 1
                              •…
                           
                        
                     
                     Who will haue pitie on the charmer that is stinged of the serpent, or of all such as come nie the beastes? Euen so is it with him that kepeth companye with a wicked man, and lappeth him self in his sinnes.Eccle. 13
                     
                     He that toucheth pitche shalbe defiled of it, and he that kepeth companye with a proud person, shall also become proud and stately.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the olde Testament.
                     Ge. 11. 12
                     ABraham because he woulde not be partaker of their Idolatry, fled from the▪ people of Chaldea, beinge his natiue country.Ge. 19
                     
                     Lot at the commaundement of the An gels, departed out of Sodome, least he tari yng with y• Sodomites, shoulde haue ben consumed with them.Ge. 12
                     
                     Sara would not suffer Ismael which was geuen to mocking, to kepe company with her Sonne Isaac, least he also should become a mocker.Ge. 33
                     
                     Iacob would not kepe cōpany with his Brother Esau, althoughe greatly entreated

least some wickednes shoulde thereof haue happened.
                     Moyses at Gods appointment commaundedNum. 16. the people to departe from the dwellinge places of Chore, Dathan, and Abiron, least they also be wrapped in their sinnes and so pearishe among them.
                     Iosaphat king of Iuda, was almost slain3. Reg. 22. in the bartail, because he kept company & wēt vnto the wars we wicked king Achab.
                     After his returne also he was greatlye
                           
                              •…
                           . Par. 19 rebuked of Iehu, for so doing.
                     When all the people went to worshipTob. 1. the Golden calues whiche Ieroboam had made: Tobias onely fled awaye from the company of them all and went to Ierusalem vnto the Lordes temple, and there worshipped the Lord God of Israel.
                     So long as Iudas Machabeus did putMac. 89 his trust in the Lord, all thinges prospered wel with him: but when he begā to ioyne frendship and to kepe cōpany with the hea thē & the Romaines, shortly after he was ouercome and slaine in battel.
                     The like thing chaunced to Ionathas.Mac. 12.
                     
                  
                  
                     ☞ Sentences out of the new Testament.
                     GO not into the wayes that lead vnto
                           
                              •…
                           ath. 10
                        
the hethen, and into the Cities of the Samaritans, enter ye not.
                     I beseeche you brethern, marke themRom. 16 whiche cause deuision and geue occasions of euil, contrary to the doctrine whiche ye haue learned, and auoide them.
                     Do ye not know that a litle leuē sow
                           
                              •…
                           . Cor. 5 reth the whole lump of dow. Purge therfore the olde leauen, that ye may be newe dow 
                           •…
                        s ye are swete bread.
                     I wrote vnto you that ye should not kepe company with whoremongers
                     If any that is called a brother that is to say (a Christen man) bee a whoremonger, or a couetouse person, or a worshipper of images, eyther a rayler, or a dronkarde, or an extorcioner: with him that is suche se ye neither eat, nor yet kepe company.
                     Put away from among you that euill person.
                     We require you brethern in the name2. Thes. 3 of our Lorde Iesus Christe, that ye withdraw your selues from euery brother that walketh inordinatlye, and not after the institution which ye receiued of vs.
                     If any teach otherwise, and is not content1. Tim. 6 with the wholsome words of our lord Iesu Christ, & with y• doctrine of godlines,

he is puft vp, and knoweth nothing, but wasteth his braines about questions and strife of words, wher of spring enuy, strife railings, euil surmisinges, and vayne disputations of men with corrupt myndes, and destitute of the truth, which thinke that lucre is Godlynesse: From such seperate thy selfe.
                     A man that is geuen to heresy, after theTitus. 3 fyrst and seconde admonicion auoyde. Remembring that he that is such, is peruerted and sinneth, euen dampned by hys owne iudgement.
                     If there come any vnto you, and bring
                           
                              •…
                           . Iohn. 1 not this learning, hī receaue notto house, neyther byd him GOD speede. For he that byddeth hym god speede is, partaker of his ill dedes.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the newe Testament.
                     Luke. 22
                     Peter so long as he kept company with Christ and Christs disciples, he concinued in the truth, preached the truth, confessed openly Christ to be the sonne of the liuing god: and promised that he would not onely goe into prison, but also vnto the verye death with Christ, but when he once came into the courte into the Byshoppes house,

he straight wayes was striken with suche feare, that a poore mayde and a symple Simme Shakebuckler, made hym both to denye and also to forsweare Iesus Christ his Lord and maister: whome before he had boldly so oft confessed before the worlde. Saint Peter preaching to the beleuing & repentaunt Iewes among other his godly exhortations, commaunded them, to saue themselues from the vntowarde generation of the vnfaithfull, and to flee the companye of suche as denye Iesus to bee Christ and the sonne of the liuing God.Act. 7. 8. 
                              •…
                           
                        
                     
                     Saule keping compani with the vnfaith full Iewes as with the byshops, the priests the pharises, &c. became a greuous persecutour of the christen congregation, but being deliuered from their felowship he be came a worthy Apostle, and a feruent prea cher of gods truth.
                  
               
               
                  Against Idlenes.
                  IF Sathan moue the vnto idelnes, which is the wel spring and rote of al vice, 
                        •…
                     et before the eyes of thy mind both these sentences and examples of the holy scripture.
                  
                     Sentences out of the olde Testament.
                     The Lord toke Adam, and put him intoGe. 2. the garden of Eden, that he might dresse

and kepe it.
                     In the sweate of thy face shalt thou eatGene. 3 thy bread, vntil thou teturnest into the earth, from whence thou wast taken. For dust thou art and into duste thou shalt bee turned agayne.
                     A man is borne to labour, and a byrdeIob. 5. to flye.
                     Thou shalt eate the labour of thy hand.Psal. 128
                     
                     Go to the Emmet (thou fluggarde) considerPro. 6 her wayes, and learne to be wyse. She hath no guyde nor ouersear, nor ruler: yet in the sommer she prouideth her meat, and gathereth her foode together in the haruest. How long wilt thou slep thou sluggish man? When wilt thou arise out of thy slepe? Yea slepe on still a litle, slum ber a litle, folde thyne handes together yet a litle that thou maiest slepe: 
                           •…
                        o shall pouerty come vnto, the as one that traualeth by the way, and oppresse thee like a thefe.
                     If thow be not stouthful thy haruest shal come as a springinge well, and pouertye shall flye far from thee.
                     Who so gathereth in sommer is wyse,Pro. 10 but he that is sluggishe in haruest, bringeth himselfe to confusion.
                     The sluggard would 
                           •…
                        aine haue, and cā
                        Pro. 13. not get his desire, but the soule of thē that

woorke shal haue plentye.Pro. 2
                              •…
                           
                        
                     
                     A 
                           •…
                        outhfull body wil not go to plowe for colde in Winter, therfore shall he go a begging in sommer, and haue nothing.
                     Delight not in slepe, least thou come vn to pouerty, but open thyne eyes, that thou mayest haue breade inough.Pro. 2
                              •…
                           
                        
                     
                     He that tilleth his lande shall haue plē
                        teousnesse of bread, but he that followeth idlenes, shall haue pouertye ynough.
                     Idlensse hath bene the occasion of muchEccle. 33 euill and wickednes.
                     Behold the sinnes of Sodom were theseEzech. 1
                              •…
                           
                         pryde, fulnesse of meat, aboundaunce, and idlenes.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the olde Testament.
                     Adam gate his liuing with the labour ofGe. 2. 3 his hands, and the sweat of his browes.
                     Caine was a plowman and tilled theGe. 4 earth.
                     Abel was a shepeheard and kept shepe.
                     Iubal was a Musicion and exercised Musycke.
                     Thubal Cayne was a Smithe, and a grauer in mettall.
                     Nohe was a Planter of Uineyardes.Gen. 9
                     
                     Abraham, Lot, Isaac, and Iacob, wereGe. 13. 2
                              •…
                           
                        
                        
Plowmen and shepeheardes.
                     Ioseph was a magistrate and a publiqueGe. 14 minister in the common weale of Egipt vnder king Pharao.
                     Moyses was a shepehard and kept theExo. 3 shepe of Iethro his Father in law, Preist of Madian.
                     The Children of Israell got their lyuing with hard and painful laboure in EgiptExod. 1 vnder king Pharao.
                     Dauid before he was annointed kinge of Israel, was a shepeheard.
                     All the preistes and leuites of the oldeExod. 28 law, euery man according to his vocation laboured by geuing attendaunce in the tē ple, by killing of beastes and offering of sacrifices, by studiyng the scriptures of god and teaching the same vnto the people.
                     Amos the Prophet was one of ye shep
                           
                              •…
                           mos. 1 heardes of Thecua.
                     Abacuk the Prophet trauailed in husbandry.
                           
                              •…
                           an. 14
                     
                  
                  
                     ☞ Sentences out of the olde Testament.
                     LEt vs not be wery of wel doyng. For
                           
                              •…
                           al. 6 when the time is come, we shall reape without werines.
                     Let him that stole, steale no more: but
                           
                              •…
                           he. 4
                        
let him rather labour with his handes the thing whiche is good, that he may geue to him that needeth.
                     We beseche you brethern that ye studye.1. Thes. 4 to be quiet, and to meddle with your own busines, and to worke with youre owne handes, as we commaunded you.
                     When we were with you, we gaue you2. Thes. 3 this commaundement, that if anye man wil not labour, the same should not eate. Let▪all men worke with quietnes and eat their own bread.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the newe Testament.
                     CHrist was a carpenter.Math. 6
                     
                     The Apostles of Christe were fisherMath. 4 men.Act. 20
                     
                     Paule laboured with his own handes, and get both his own liuinge and others that were with him.
                     Saint Luke was a Phisicion, and asCol. 4 some write a painter also.
                     Aquila was a maker of tentes, of theAct. 18 which occupation saint Paule was.
                     Simon S. Peters host was a tanner.Act. 10
                     
                     Dorcas that vertuous woman madeAct. 9 garmentes with her owne handes & gaue them to the poore people
                     
                        YE haue hearde how it was said to themMath. 5 of ye olde time, thou shalt not forsweare thy selfe, but shalt performe vnto the Lord those thinges that thou swearest. But I say vnto you sweare not at all, neyther by heauen, for it is Gods seat: nor by the earth for it is his footestole, neither by Ierusalē, for it is the Citie of the great Kinge: neyther shalt thou sweare by thy hed, because thou canste not make one hayre white or blacke. But your communication shalbe yea, yea, nay, naye. For whatsoeuer is added more then these, it commeth of euill.
                     Aboue all thynges my brethren sweareIacob. 5 not, neyther by heauen, neither by earth, nether any other othe. Let your yea, be yea and your naye, naye, leaste ye fall into hipocrisy.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the newe Testament.
                     HErod to performe his wicked and diuelisheMath. 14 othe which he had made to the doughter of▪ Herodias hys whore for her pleasaunte daunsinge, suffered and commaunded the heade of that moste godlye preacher saynt Iohn Baptist, to be cut of. Let all men therfore beware of vayn, rash and wicked othes.
                     
                        Saynt Peter, when it was layde to hisMath. 2
                              •…
                           
                         chardge, that he was one of Christes disciples▪ sware that he knew not the mā. But afterwarde he bitterly wept for his swearing and denying of Christ. Let vs also lament and be sory sor our idle and wicked manner of swering and leane it, and praise t
                           •…
                        e name of the Lord our God.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ Agaynste lying. slaunderinge and fylthy or vncleane talke
                  IF Sathan at any time moueth thee to abuse thy tonge contrarye to the will of God, either in lying slaundering, or other wicked and idle words resist his temptacion 
                        •…
                      these scriptures following.
                  
                     Sentences out of the olde Testament.
                     THou shalte eschue lyinge.Exod. 23
                     
                     Ye shall not lye, neither shall anyeLeuit. 19 of you deceiue his neighbor.
                     Thou (O Lord) shalt destroye all themPsal. 6. that speake lies.
                     There be sixe things that God hateth,Pro. 6 and the seuenth hee vtterlye abhorreth. A proude countenaunce, a lying tong, hands defiled with innocent bloud, an harte imagining wicked councels, feete swifte vnto mischiefe, a false witnesse, the sower of discorde among brethren.
                     Liyng lips are abhominatiō to the lord:Pro. 2
                        
but they that do faithfully, please him.
                     A false witnes shall not escape vnpunished,
                           
                              •…
                           ro. 19 and he that speaketh lyes, shall pea rish and come to nought.
                     He that gathereth his goodes with a ly
                           
                              •…
                           ro. 14 ing toung shall leese all, and be in peril of his life. He that kepeth his tonge, kepeth his life from troubles.
                     A lying witnes shall perish, haue thou
                           
                              •…
                           ccle. 7 no delite to speak lies against thy brother, nor yet against thy frend: haue no pleasure in lying, for the vse therof is naught.
                     The mouth that lyeth sleyeth, the soule.
                           
                              •…
                           ap. 1.
                     
                  
                  
                     ☞ Examples out of the olde Testament.
                     SAthan brought forth the first lie, whenGene. 3. he made our grandmother Eue beleue that if she and her husband did eate of the forbidden fruite, they should be as Gods. Therefore, is he a lyar and the Father of lying.
                           
                              •…
                           an. 3.
                     
                     The two iudges whiche accused the moste vertuous woman Susanna of vnclennes, because she woulde not agree to their most filthy & vnhonest request: were moste abhominable lyers and slaunderers, but they receiued a reward worthye their lying.
                     All the false prophets of ye olde law which

                        
                           •…
                        ained them selues to be sent of God, and yet prophecied lyes to please the Princes and rulers withall, were lyers ond blasphemers of God.
                  
                  
                     Sentences out of the new Testament:
                     LYing set aside, let euery man speak theEphe. 4 truth to his neighboure for as much as we are members together.
                     Lye not one to another.Col. 3.
                     
                     Let no filthy communication proceadeEphe. 4▪
                         out of your mouthes, but y• whiche is good to edifie. Let all bitternes, fearcenes, and wrath, roring and cursed speaking be put away from you, with all maliciousnes. Be curteous one to another and merciful, for geuīg one an other euē, as god for christes sake forgaue you.
                     Let neither filthines, nor foolishe talking,Ephe. 5 neither iesting, whiche are not comely, be once named among you, but rather thankesgeuing.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the new Testament.
                     THe Scribes and the Phariseis with ye
                        Math. 1
                              •…
                           
                         other enemies of Christe whiche called Christ a wine bibber, a glotton, a deceiuer of ye people, a blasphemer, one possessed we
                        
a deuill, suche one as forbade the people to pay tribute vnto Cesar. &c, were moste ab hominable liers and blasphemers.
                     Ananias and Saphira died sodenly, becauseAct. 5. they lied.
                     They were liers & blasphemers, whicheAct. 6. said that the blessed Martir saint Stephē, spake blasphemous words against Moyses and agaynste God: when of God, no man spake more godlye, nor of Moses more reuerentlye.
                     They also that complayned of the ApostiesActs. 17. of Christ, calling them sedicious persons and teachers of new learninge, were also liers and slaunderers.
                     So many as make or loue lies, shalbe cast
                           
                              •…
                           po. 22 among murtherers and Idolatrers in the lake of hell, burning with fire & brimstone
                  
               
               
                  Against pride or vayne glory.
                  IF thou be tempted vnto pride or vayne glory of the deuill that old enemy of mankind: defend thy selfe with these scriptures.
                  
                     Sentences out of the olde Testament.
                     Thou shalt saue (O Lorde) the peoplePsal. 18. that are humble, meke and lowlye: but the hygh looke of the proude thou shalt bring downe.
                     
                        The Lord will saue suche as be of anPsal. 33. humble spirite.
                     The Lord hateth a proud countenaunce
                     Disoain pride▪ a wicked way, & a mouthPro. 8 that is double tonged, I vtterly abhorre, sayth the Lord.
                     The Lord abhorreth all such as be of aPro. 16 proude harte, hys hande, is agaynst theyr hand, & they shal not escape vnpunyshed.
                     Better it is to be of humble mind with the lowly, then to deuide the spoyle wyth the proud.
                     Presumptuousnes goeth before destruc tion, and after a proud stomacke there fol loweth a fall.
                     Why art thou proude, thou earth andEccle. 10 
                              •…
                           
                         ashes? Pride is hated before God and man Pride is the beginning of all sinne, and 
                           •…
                        e that maynteined that shalbe cursed, and at the last he vtterlye destroyed.
                     God hath destroyed the seates of proud Princes, and set vp meeke in theyr steade.
                     Wo be vnto you that are wise in yourEsay. 5 owne eyes.
                     I hate the pride of Iacob, and I abhoreAmos. 
                              •…
                           
                         his pallaces, 
                           •…
                        ayth the Lord.
                     Let neuer pride haue rule in thy mindTob. 4 nor in thy word: for in pride began all destruction▪
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Examples out of the olde Testament
                     LUcifer for his pride fell down from theEsay. 14. glory of heauen into the paines of hel.
                     Pharao for his pride was plagued, andExo. 14 at last drowned.
                     Sennacherib for all his boasting, pride,
                           
                              •…
                           Reg. 19. and proud crakes, cowardly fled away and afterward was slaine of his own sonne.
                     Nabuchodonozor was so punished for
                           
                              •…
                           an. 4 his pride, that he was made of man a beast til he had geuen ouer his pride, confessed him self to be but a man, & that God alone is the Lorde, worthye all glorye and honoure.
                     Proud Aman was hanged on those ga
                           
                              •…
                           est, 13 lowes, whiche he had set vp for good Mardocheus.
                  
                  
                     Sentences out of the new Testament.
                     LEarne of mee saieth Christe, for I amIath. 11 meeke and humble in hart.
                     He that eralteth him selfe shalbe made
                           
                              •…
                           ath. 15. lowe, and he that lowely meketh and submitteth him self, shalbe exalted.
                     Be not hie minded, but make your selues
                           
                              •…
                           om. 12. equall to them of the lower sorte. Be not

wise in your owne opinions.
                     What hast thou, that thou hast not receiued.1. Cor. 4. If thou haue receiued it, why reioy sest thou, as though yu hast not receiued it.
                     Humble your selues in the sight of theIa. 4 Lord, and he shall lift you vp.
                     Submit your selues euerye man one1. Pet. 5. to another, knit youre selues together in lowlines of minde.
                     For God resisteth the proude, and geueth1. Pet. 5. grace to the humble. Submit youre selues therfore vnder the mighty hand of God that he may exalt you, when the time is come.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the new Testament.
                     MAry that blessed virgen being mekeLuk. 1. humble, and lowly, was made the mother of oure Lorde and Sauioure Iesu Christ.
                     Peter, Iames, Andrew, Iohn & the otherMath. 4 disciples of Christe, were humble and low ly in their owne eyes, and estraunged frō all pride and arrogancy. Christe therefore chosed them to be his Apostles.
                     Our Sauiour Christe disdained not toIohn. 13. washe his disciples fete, to geue vs an example of humilitie and of brotherly loue,

The proud Pharisy was reiected and cast away as vnrighteous because hee bosted him self of his good dedes, and dispised the poore Publicane.Act. 1
                              •…
                           .
                     
                     King Herod vpon a daye appointed, a rayed himselfe in royall, apparell, set him in his seate, and made an oration vnto the people.
                     The people gaue a shoute, saying, it is the voyce of a god and not of a man. And immediatly the angel of the lord smot him, because he gaue not god the honour, and he was eaten of the wormes and gaue by the ghost.
                  
               
               
                  Against feastyng, glotony, and dronkennes.
                  TO auoyde feasting, glotony and dronkennes▪ set these holy scriptures euer before the eyes of thy mynde.
                  
                     Sentences out of the olde Testament.
                     WYne make folke lecherous and dronkenship causeth braw
                           •…
                        ing and chyding Who so hath a pleasure in them shall not be wise.
                     He that loueth banketes, shalbe brought▪
                        Pro. 20 to pouerty. Whoso deliteth in wine and de licious meates shall not be riche.
                     Accompany not with riotous drinkersPro. 33. and eaters, for such shal come to pouerty,

and such sluggish slepers shal go all to rag ged. Where is wo? Where is wailing? where is stryfe? where are trappes layde? where are wounds without a cause? wher are bloudy eies? Do not al these thinges chawnce vnto them, that sit alway at the wyne, and geue their mindes wholly to gulling and glossing.
                     Wo be to you that rise vp early to geueEsay. 5 your selues to dronkennes, and set al your mindes so on drinking, that ye syt sweating therat vntill it be nyght. The harpe, the Lute, the Tabour, the droumslade, the trumpet, the shalme, and plenty of wyne are at their feastes: but the workes of the Lord do ye not behold, neither consider ye the workes of his hand.
                     Woo be vnto you that are stronge to drinke wyne, and are mighty to auaunce dronkennes.
                     Fornication, wyne and dronkennes,Ose. 5. take away the hart.
                     Thorow feasting many haue died, but heEccle. 23 that eateth in meane shal prolong his life.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the olde Testament.
                     Adam and Eue by satisfiyng their gred
                           •…
                        
                        Ge. 
                              •…
                           . appetite in eating the forbidden fruit, dyd

not only transgresse the commaundement of god, but also throw both themselues, and al their posteritie into euerlasting dā
                        pnation, if we had not bene redemed by Christ.
                     The stinking Sodomits by geuing thē
                        Eze, 16 selues to inordinate eating and drinking, fel vnto vnnatural lusts, and so most miserably perished.
                     Thorow dronkennes, Lot committedGen. 9. incest with his owne doughters.
                     The people of Israell geuing their mindExod. 32 vnto bancketting, fell into Idolatry.
                     Holofernes that moste Ualeant captainIudith. 13 being dronken, was slain of a woman.
                  
                  
                     ☞ Sentences out of the new Testament.
                     Take heede that your hart be not ouerwhelmedLuc. 21. with feasting and dronkenship.
                     Let vs walke honestly, as in the dayeRom. 13 tyme: not in banketting and dronkennns, not in chambring and wantonnes, nor in strife and enuiyng: but put ye on the Lord Iesus Christ. And make not prouision for the flesh to fulfil the lustes therof.
                     Banketeing add dronkennes are theGal. 5 workes of the flesh.
                     Be not dronken with wine wherin isEphe. 5
                        
lechery, but ye be filled with the spirit.
                     It is a good thing that the hart be establishedHeb. 13 with grace, and not with meates, which haue not profited them: they haue had their pastime in them.
                     Dronkardes shall not inherite the kingdom1. Cor, 6 of God.
                     Be ye sober and watch, for your aduersary 1. Pet. 5 the Deuill goeth about like roaryng Lion, sekyng whom he may deuour: whō see that ye resist, being strong in fayth.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the newe Testament.
                     Herod geuing his mynd to banketting,Mat. 14. graunted that the holy man Iohn Baptist shoulde bee beheaded at the desire of his whorishe doughter.
                     That euill seruaunte, which sayth in hisMa. 24 hart, my Lord wyll be long a commyng, and so begin to smite his felowes, yea and to eate and drynk with the dronken: The same seruauntes lord shall come in a day when hee loketh not for him, and in an hour that he is not ware of, and shal hew him in peces, and geue him his porcion wt the Hipocrites, there shall be weping and gnashyng of teath.
                     The rich gloton that fared so daintelyLuke. 16.
                        
euery day, was cast downe into hel, and most greuously punished,
                  
               
               
                  Against Fornication and adultry.
                  IF at any time thou be tempted of the Deuill of the world, and the flesh, to defile thy selfe with fornication, adultery, whoredom, incest, or with any other vncleannes: call these sentences and examples of the holy Scripture to remembraunce, and valeantly resiste those most wicked temptacions.
                  
                     Sentences out of the olde Testament.
                     Thou shalt not commit adultery. ThouExod. 10. shalt not lye with thy neighbours wife to defile her with sede.
                     Thou shalt not make thy doughter com mon, that thou wouldest cause her to bee an whore.
                     The man that breaketh wedlocke with an other mans wife, euen he that breaketh wedlock with his neighbors wife let him be slain, both ye aduoterer & ye aduoutres.
                     If a priests daughter fall to playe theLeuit. 21 whore, she defileth her father: therfor must she be burnt with fyre.
                     If a man be found lying with a woman that hath a w
                           •…
                        dded husband, they shall die eyther of them, both the man that lay with the wife, and also the wife: & so shalt thou 
                           〈◊〉
                         away euell from Israell.
                     
                        Cursed be he that lieth with his neighbouresDeut. 
                              •…
                           7 wise, and all the people shall saye. Amen.
                     There shalbe no whore of the daughtersDeut. 23 of Israel, nor no whoremonger of the sonnes of Israell.
                     An whore geueth swete wordes, forsakethPro. 2 the husbande of her youth, and forgetteth the couenaunt of her god. Her house is enclined vnto death, and her pathes vnto hel. All they that go into her, come not againe, nether take they hold of the way of lyfe.
                     The lips of an harlot, are a droppingPro. 5 honye combe, and her necke is softer then oyle: but in the ende she is as bitter as wormewood, and as sharpe as is a swerd. Her feete goe downe vnto death, and her steps hast them into hell.
                     Wherefore deare childe geue eare vnto me, and swarue not from my wordes. Fly frō her wayes, and come not once so niegh 
                           •…
                        s vnto her dores.
                     Kepe thee from the euill woman andPro. 6 from the flattering tong of the harlot, that thou lust not after her beauty in thine hart and le
                           •…
                        t thou be takē with her faire lokes.
                     An harlote will make a man to beg hys breade, but a maried woman wyll hunt
                           •…
                        
                        
for the precious life.
                     May a man hide fire in his bosome, and his clothes not be burnt? Or can one go vpon coales, and his feete not be hurt? Euen so, whosoeuer goeth into his neighbours wife, and toucheth her, cannot be vngilty.
                     He that is an whoremonger, is a foole and bringeth his life to destruction. He getteth himselfe also shame and dishonor, such as shall neuer be put out.
                     He that accompanieth himselfe with anPro. 9 whoore, shall go downe vnto hell: but he that goeth away from her, shalbe saued.
                     He that medleth with an whore, is aProu. 18 foole and without wit.
                     He that maintaineth whores, shal comeProu. 29 vnto beggary.
                     If mine hart hath lusted after my neighbours
                           
                              •…
                           b. 31. wife, or if I haue laid waight at his doore: Oh then let my wife grind vnto another man, and let other men ly
                           •…
                         with her. For this is a wickednes and sinne that is worthye to be punished, yea a fire that should vtterly consume and 
                           〈◊〉
                         out al my substaunce.
                     My sonne, kepe thee well from all whor
                           
                              •…
                           ob. 4 dom, and beside thy wyfe see that no 
                           •…
                        aut

be found in thee.
                     Cast not thy mind vpon harlots in any manner of thing, least thou destroye both thy self and thy heritage.
                     Go not about gasinge in euery laneEccle. 
                              •…
                           
                         of the City, neither wander thou abroade in the streates therof.
                     Turne away thy face from a beautifull woman, and looke not vpon the fayrenes of other.
                     Sit not with another mans wife by any meanes, lye not wyth her vpon the bedde, make no words with her at the wine, lest thy hart consent vnto her, and thou wyth thy bloud fall into destruction.
                     A man that breaketh wedlocke, and reEccle. 23 gardeth not his soule, but sayth, tush, who seeth me? I am cōpassed about with darke nes, the walles couer me no body seeth me Whome nede I to feare? the highest wyll not remember my sinnes. He vnderstandeth not that his eyes, see all thynges, for all such feare of mē, driueth away the fear of God from him. For he feareth onelye the eyes of men, and considereth not that the eyes of the Lorde are clearer then the Sunne, beholdinge all the wayes of men, and the ground of the deepe, and loking euen

to mens hartes in secrete places. &c. Reade forth the Chapiter to the ende.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the olde Testament.
                     God drowned once all the whole worldGe. 7 (eight persons only excepted) for the sinne of vncleannes.
                     God poured downe from heauen waterGe. 19 fyre, and brymstone vpon the Sodomites, Gomorrians and such other, and destroyed them al for their abhominable vncleanes.
                     When Sychem the sonne of Hemor hadGene. 34 violently defloured Dina the doughter of Iacob, her brothers hearing of the matter, slew not only Sichem and Hemor, but also al the men and men children that were in the city, and afterward spoiled the city. And when Iacob their father talked with them of the matter, they answered, should they deal with our sister, as wt an whore?
                     When it was told Iuda, that ThamarGen. 28 his doughter in law had played the whore and with playing the whore was become great with child. Iuda her father in lawe answered and said, bring her forth that she may be brent.
                     Ioseph feared god and woulde not consenteGene. 29 vnto his Lordes wyfe in any pointe

of vnclenes, but chosed rather to be cast into prison, then he would commit so great wickednes, and defile his Lordes wyfe. Therfore did God bless him, and brought him to hyghe degree.
                     There were slayne in one day of y• IewesNum. 25 24. thousand, for the whoredom that they committed.
                     For the defloring of a certayne LeuitesIudith. 2 wife, there were destroyed mo thē an hun dred thousand people.
                     Dauid committed adultery with Bethsabe2. Reg. 
                              •…
                           
                         Urias wife, but he escaped not vnplaged
                     Salomon before he doted in loue of womē
                        3. Reg. 
                              •…
                           
                         was wholy geuen to the setting forth of Gods honor, but beyng once nous
                           •…
                        ed with theyr loue, he dyd not onely neglecte the glory of the alone true and lyuynge God, but he also thoroughe the entisment of these women, fel vnto the worshippyng of straunge godes and so he prouoked the highe displeasure of God agaynst him and his realme.
                     Susan feared God, and desired ratherDan. 1
                              •…
                           
                         to be stoned vnto death then she should de file her husbandes bed or once consent to the two filthy Iudges, and so become an

whore, god therfore preserued her.
                  
                  
                     Sentences out of the new Testament:
                     Ye haue heard that it was sayde to thē
                        
                           
                              •…
                           ath. 5 of olde tyme, thou shalt not commyte adultry. But I say vnto you, that whosoeuer loketh on another mans wyfe to luste after her, hath committed adultry already with her in his harte.
                     It semeth good to the holy ghost, and to
                           
                              •…
                           ct. 15 vs, to charge you that ye abstayne from whordome.
                     Kepe no company with whoremongers.Cor. 5
                     
                     If any that is called a brother, that is to say, a christen man, be an whorehunter, with such one se that ye eate not.
                     Neither whoremongers nor adulterers,
                           
                              •…
                           . Cor, 6 nor weakelynges neyther abusers of them selues with mankinde, shall inherite the kingdom of god.
                     Knowe ye not that youre bodyes are the members of Christe, shall I now take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? God forbid. Do ye not know that he whyche coupleth him? selfe with an harlot, is become one body. For two saith he shalbe one fleshe. But he that is ioyned to the Lorde is one▪ spirite

whoredome. Euery sinne that a man doth is without the body. But he that is a whoremonger sinneth against his own bo dy. Knowe ye not how that youre bodyes are the temple of the holy ghoste, whiche dwell in you whome ye haue of god, and how ye are not your own. For ye are dearly bought. Therfore glorify god in your bo dyes and in your spirits, which are gods.
                     To auoyd whoredome, let euery man1. Cor. 7▪
                         haue his wife, and let euery woman haue her husband.
                     It is better to marry then to burne.Gal. 5 Adultery, fornication, vnclennes, wanton nes. &c. are workes of the flesh and whosoeuer doth them, shall not inherite y• kingdome of god.
                     Let not whoredome or vnclennes beEphe. 
                              •…
                           
                         once named amōg you. For this ye know that no whoremonger or vncleane person hath inheritance in the kingdome of christ and of god.
                     This is the wil of god that ye abstain1. Thes. 
                              •…
                           
                         from whoredome. For god hath not called vs vnto vnclennes, but vnto holynes.
                     Kepe thy self pure and honest.
                     Auoyd the lustes of youth, but follow righteousnes, faithe, loue, and peace, wyth

them that call on the Lorde with a pure hart.
                     Wedlock is honorable among all mē:
                           
                              •…
                           eb. 13 and the bed vndefiled, but whoremongers and adulterers god wil condemne.
                     Whoremongers shall haue their part
                           
                              •…
                           poc. 21. in the lake that burneth with fire and brim stone, which is the second death.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Sentences out of the new Testament.
                     WHoredome was the occasion that Herodias
                           
                              •…
                           ath. 14. Herods whore sought so dilygently the death of godly Iohn Baptiste, which reproued them of their abhominable liuing.
                     Thorow whoredome and kepinge of
                           
                              •…
                           ke. 15 riotouse company the prodigall sonne was ted away his goodes, and fel vnto such necessitie, beggerye and misery, that he was glad to kepe swine, and would faine haue filled his bellye with the coddes that the swine did eat, but he could not be suffered
                     Learne of this history what the ende of whoredome is.
                     Saint Paule did excommunicate thatCor. 5 man of Corinth, which vngodlye kept his fathers wife. and woulde not suffer that any of the faithful should kepe him company,

nor yet eat or drink with him.
                     The ende of the whore of Babilon isApo. 18. described of Saint Iohn to be wonderfull wretched, miserable and dampnable.
                  
               
               
                  Against Couetousnes.
                  If the deuil and the worlde moue thee not to bee content with that is sufficient and enough, but inordinatly add vnmeasurably to scrat together the goods of the world, to oppresse the pore▪ to ioine house to house, land to land, lordship to lordship, &c. to take great incommes, to raise the rentes, and to get that maye be gotten by right or by wrong, defend thy selfe against them with these holye scriptures that folow euer remembring that thou arte but a straunger and a pilgrime in this worlde, and that thou must go hence, eyther vnto glory or vnto paine, yea and that▪ how sone thou knowest not.
                  
                     Sentences out of the olde Testament.
                     TThou shalt not couet thy neyghboursExo. 20 goods.
                     Ye shall not trouble, hurt, nor anoy noExo. 22 widow nor fatherles childe.
                     If ye shall hurt them, and they cry vnto me, I wil surely heare t
                           •…
                        eir cry, and thē wil my wrath waxe whote: and I will kill you with the sweard, and your wiues shalbe widowes, and your children fatherles.
                     Thou shalt take no giftes, for giftesExod. 
                              •…
                           
                         blinde the wise, and peruert the wordes of the righteous.
                     
                        Thou shalt not do thy neighbour wronge
                           
                              •…
                           eu. 12. neither violently oppresse him. Ye shal do no vnrighteousnes in iudgement, in mete yard, in weighte or in measure. True ballances, true weightes, a true Epha and a true Hin, shall ye haue.
                     Fire shall consume the houses of such
                           
                              •…
                           ob. 15 as are gredy to receiue giftes.
                     He heapeth vp treasure and yet knowPsal. 39 eth not he for whom he gathereth it.
                     O truste not in wronge and robbery,Psal. 42 geue not your selues vnto vanities▪ and if ritches encrease, set not your harte vpon them.
                     Encline my har
                           •…
                         (O Lord) to thy testimoniesPsalm. 119 and not to couetousnes.
                     Who hordeth vp his corne shalbe cursedPro. 11 among the people, but blessing shall light vpon his hed that geueth food.
                     He that trusteth in his riches, shal haue a fall, but the righteous shall florishe as ye greene leaf.
                     Better is a little with the feare of the Lorde, then great and innumerable treasures otherwise. He goeth aboute to destroy his own house, that geueth his mind to couetousnes but who so hateth reward

shall liue.
                     Better it is to haue a little with righteousnesse,Pro. 16 then great rentes wrongfully gotten.
                     He that hateth couetousnesse shall liuePro. 18 long.
                     A man that is sodenly riche, enuyeth other, and considereth not that pouertye shall come vpon hym.
                     Who so robbeth his father and saith it is no sinne, y• same is like vnto a mans
                           •…
                        ear.
                     O Lord geue me neither pouertye norPro. 30 riches: onelye graunt me a necessarye lyuinge.
                     He that loueth mony, wil neuer be satisfiedEccle. 5 with monye, and who so delighteth in riches, shall haue no profit therof.
                     Where as muche riches is, ther are ma ny also that spende them away. And what pleasure more hathe hee possessed then sauing that he maye looke vpon them wyth his eyes.
                     A labouring man slepeth swetely, whether it be litlle or much that he eateth, but the aboundance of the riche wil not suffer him to slepe.
                     There is a sore plague, which I haue sene vnder the sonne, namely riches kept to the

hurte of him that hath them in possession. For oftimes they pearishe with his great misery and trouble, and if he haue a childe it getteth nothing.
                     Read forth the Chapiter.
                     Let not thyne hande be stretched outEccle. 4 to receaue, and shut when thou shouldest geue.
                     Trust not vnto thy riches, and saye notEccle. 5 tushe, I haue inoughe for my life. For it shall not helpe thee in the time of vengeance and temptation.
                     Trust not in wicked riches, for they shal not healp thee in the daye of punishment and wrath.
                     Nothing is more wicked and vngratiousEccle. 11 then a couetous man.
                     He that with all his carefulnes heapethEccle, 14 together vnrightuously gathereth for other folkes, and another man shal make good chere with hys goods.
                     A couetous mans eye, hath neuer inough in the portion of wickednes vntil the time that he wither away, and hath lost his own soule.
                     The riches of the proude shalbe rootedEccle. 21 out.
                     He that loueth ritches, shall not 
                           •…
                        e iustified.Eccle. 31
                     
                     
                        Manye one is come in great mysfortune by the reason of gold, and haue found their destruction before them. It is a tree of fallinge vnto them. It is a tree of passage vn to them that offer it vp, and al such as be folish, fall therin.
                     Blessed is the riche, which is founde without blemish, and hath not gone after gold, nor heaped in mony and treasures, where is there such a one: and we shal com mende him and call him blessed? For great things doth he among his people.Esay. 5
                     
                     Wo be vnto you, that ioyne house to house, and coopl
                           •…
                         land to land euen so lōg as any can be gotten. Shal ye alone dwel vpon the earth? These things are in the eares of the Lorde of hostes &c.
                     Wo bee vnto them that geue sentence with the vngodly for rewards and condemne the iust cause of the righteous.
                     Wo be vnto thee that spoylest, for thouEsay. 33 also shalt be spoyled.
                     Wo be vnto him that heapeth vp other mennes goods. Howe long will he lade himselfe with thick claye?
                     O howe sodenly will they stand vp, thatAbac. 
                              •…
                           
                         bite and awake, that shall teare thee in

peces? yea thou shalt be their pray.
                     Wo be vnto him, that couetously gathe reth euil gotten goods into his house, that he may set his neste on hye, to escape from the power of misfortune Thou haste deuised the shame of thyne owne house, so that the very stones of the wall shall cry out of it, and the tymber that lieth betwixt the ioynts of the building, shall aunswere.
                     Their siluer and theyr gold shall not be able to deliuer thē in the day of the Lords wrath.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the olde Testament.
                     Balaam for luc
                           •…
                        es sake would haue curNum. 12 sed the people of Israel contrary to his own conscience, but he was reproued of the Aungell of the Lord, so that his cursing was turned into blessing.
                     Acham by the commaundement of GodIosue. 7 was stoned to death, because 
                           •…
                        e toke of the excommunicate goods.
                     Saul for the couetousnes of the praylost1. Reg. 13. his kingdome.
                     The couetousnes of Naball & his churlishnes
                           
                              •…
                           . Reg. 35 shewed vnto Dauid, had almoste caused that Naball and all that euer hee had, had bene vtterly destroyed, if Abigail

his wife had not pacified the matter. Notwithstanding God shortlye punished him with death so that he was taken away frō all that euer he had.
                     The couetousnes of Achab and Iesabel3. Reg. 
                              •…
                           
                         was the occasion that the good Nabothe was stoned vnto death, against all equitie and right, that by this meanes they might haue his vineyarde. But howe miserable their end was for that their abhominable murther, the holy stories do declare.
                     Gehesy was striken with leprosy, because4. Reg. 5 he receiued mony of Naaman.
                  
                  
                     ☞ Sentences out of the new Testament.
                     BLessed are the poore in spirit for theirsMath. 5 is the kingdome of heauen.
                     Lay not vp treasure for youre seluesMat. 6 vpon earth, where neither rust nor mothe doth corrupt, and where theues break thorow and steale.
                     But lay vp treasures for you in heauē where neither rust nor moth doth corrupt and where theeues do not breake through nor steale. For where your tresure is ther wil your hart be also.
                     What dooth it prophet a man to winMath. 1
                              •…
                           
                         the whole worlde, if he loseth his soule? A

rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdome of heauen.
                     It is more easye for a cable rope to goMat. 19. thorow the eye of a nedle, then a rich man to enter into the kingdome of heauen.
                     Wo be to you riche men, whiche haueLuke. 6 your comfort.
                     Take heede and beware of couetousnes.Luke. 12 For no mans life standeth in the aboū dance of thinges which he possesseth.
                     Thou foole this night wil they fetche away thy soule againe from thee. Then whose shall the thinges be, that thou hast gathered.
                     Take hede to your selues, lest at anyLuke. 21 time youre hartes bee ouercome with the cares of this life.
                     If any that is called a brother, that is1. Cor. 5 to say a christen man, be couetous or an ex torcioner, with him eat not.
                     Neither theues, neither couetous per1. Cor. 6 sons, nether extorcioners, shal inherit the kingdome of God.
                     Let not couetousnes be once named amongEphe. 5 you. For no couetous parsō, which is a worshipper of Idols, hath any inheritance in the kingdome of Christ and God. Godlines is great riches, if a man be content

with suche as GOD sendes. For we brought nothing into the worlde, neither shall we cary any thing out.
                     Whan we haue fode and rayment, let vs therwt be content, they that wil be rich fall into temptation and snares and into many folishe and noysome lustes whiche drown men in temptation and destructiō For couetousnes is the roote of all euill, which while some lusted after they erred from the faith, and tangled them selues wt manye sorowes. But thou whiche art the man of god, flee such things. Folow righteousnesse, godlynesse, loue, patience, and mekenes.
                     Let your conuersation be without couetousnesse, and bee content with that ye haue alredy. For God verely hath saide, I wil not faile thee, nor yet forsake thee.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the new Testament.
                     ACertaine riche and couetous person,Luc. 21. made great prouisiō for many yeares that he might liue pleasantly and welthely, but shortly after God tooke awaye hys life, so that he died.
                     The riche and vnmerciful glotton thatLuke. 1
                              •…
                           
                         fared daintely euerye daye, and was gorgeously

apparaled, died and was buryed in Hel.
                     Iudas for lucre of mony, sould and betrayed his maister christ to the bishops Scribes and Pharises. Afterward he hanging vp him selfe, brast a sunder in the mides and al his bowels gushed out.
                     Ananias and Saphira were punishedAct. 5 with soden death, because of a couetous mynde, they kept away parte of the mony which they receyued for the possession that they had sould.
                  
               
               
                  Againste rebellion and disobedience.
                  IF the deuill that old enemy of mankind and troubler of all good orders goe aboute to put in thy head, that the maiestrates and hye powers do not their duty in the right gouernmente of a cō
                     mon weale, but to muche cruellye oppresse thyre subiectes and that therefore thou maist iustly ryse and rebell agaynst them, and take vpon thee of thine owne priuate authority to redresse thinges that are amys in the commone w eale take heede that thou by no meanes consentest to his most suttle and wicked temptations, wherby he goeth about to throw thee into euerlasting dampnation both of body and soule, beside the shameful death, that thou shalte haue in this worlde, and the losse of all that euer thou hast, but content thy selfe with thy vocation▪ laboure diligently and quietly for thy 
                        •…
                     uing, study to maintaine peace, pray for the highe powers, th
                        •…
                     k that crosse to be layde vpon the
                        •…
                      for

thy distres, amēd thy life, humbly lamēt thy cause to God which will not leaue thee succour
                        •…
                     s, and defend thy self againste Satan, and al his craftye suggestions, with these scriptures folowing.
                  
                     ☞ Sentences out of the olde Testament.
                     THou shalt be ouer my house, and accorGe. 4. ding to thy word shall al my people be ruled.
                     Thou shalt do what soeuer they say vntoDeut. 17 thee that 
                           •…
                        e rulers ouer the place, which the Lorde hath chosen.
                     Al that thou hast commaunded vs, saydIosue▪ 
                           
                              •…
                           
                           ▪
                         the people to Iosue, we will do and whether so euer thou sendst vs we will go.
                     Who so euer he be, sayth God, that doth disobey thy mouthe, and wil not hear ken vnto thy woordes, in al that thou cō
                        maundeste him, let him dye.
                     The Lord hath heard your murmuringsExod. 16 sayth Moyses, which ye murmur agaynst him. For what are we? (he speaketh of him selfe and of Aaron) your murmurings are not against vs, but against the Lord.
                     They haue not caste thee awaye, but1. Reg. 81▪
                         me (sayde God to Samuell) that I should not reigne ouer them.
                     Beholde to obey is better then sacrifyce1. Reg. 15 and to harken is better then the fat of ram

mes. For rebellion is as the sin of witchcrafte, and stubbernes is as the wickednes of idolatry.
                     By me, kinges raigne, by me Princesrou. 8. make iust lawes. By me Lords bear rule, and al Iudges of the earth exercise iudgement.
                     Where no ruler is, there the people decay,rou. 12 but where as many are that can geue counsel, there is wealth.
                     The kynges displeasure is a messengerro. 16 of death, but a wise man wil pacify hym. The chereful countenaunce of the kyng, is life, and hys louyng fauor is as the eue ning dew
                     The king oughte to be feared as the roringro. 20 of a Lion. Who so prouoketh him vn to anger, offendeth against his own soule. My son feare thou the Lorde and the king, and kepe no company withthem that slide backe from his feare. For their destruction shall comsodenly. And who knoweth the aduersyty that may come from thē both.
                     Wish the king no euel in thy thoughte,Eccle. 10 and speake no hurte of the noble man in thy priuy chamber.
                     For a byrde of the ayre shall betraye thy voice, and with her feathers shall shee bewray

thee.
                     Whosoeuer wil not fulfill the lawe of1. Esdr. 7 God. and the kinges law, let him haue his iudgment without delay, whether it be vn to death or to be rooted out, or be condemned in goods, or to be put into prison.
                     The kinge is ruler ouer sea and lande3. Esdr. 4. and hathe dominion of all thinges, & loke what he commaundeth is done. The common people▪ and the rulers are obedient vnto him.
                  
                  
                     ☞ Examples out of the olde Testament.
                     GOd did strike Miriam with moste greuousNum. 12 and horrible leprosy, because she murmured against her lawful magistrate Moyses.
                     God plagued the Israelites for murmuringeNum. 21 against his seruaunt Moyses, wt stinging serpents which stong them vnto death.
                     Corath, Dathan, and Abiron, becauseNum. 16 they did not obeye Moyses Gods magisstrate, but disdained that he should raigne ouer them, althoughe appointed of God, were swalowed vp of the earth, both they, their wiues, their children, and all their goodes. They went down aliue vnto 
                           •…
                        el,

and the earthe closed vpon them, and they perished from among the congregation.
                     Absolon king Daulds sonne made anReg. 15 insurrection against his Father, and thorowe the councaile of wicked Achitophel, wrought most vilany against his fathers honoure. What folowed? Was not Absolon miserably slaine? Did not his vntrusty counselor hang him self, were there not also xx. M. men slaine in battaile, that tooke Absalons part.
                     Seba the son of Bechey had his he
                           •…
                        d cut of, because he conspired against kinge
                           
                              •…
                           . Reg. 22. Dauid, and disswaded the people from du
                           •…
                         obedience to their liege soueraigne Lord.
                     Baasa the sonne of Abia conspired a
                           
                              •…
                           . Reg. 15. gainst Nadab king of Israel, slewe him, & raigned in his steade. But in hat folowed
                           •…
                         though Baasa in the sight of the world dy ed no shameful death, yet died he in the dis pleasure of God, and afterwarde all hys succession with all his frendes and kinsfolkes were al destroyd, so that ther was not one left aliue.
                     Zimry conspired against Ela king of Israell,3. Reg. 15. slew him and raigned in his steade. But shortly after he was driuen to suche misery and straytes that he fledde into the

kings pallace at Thirza, and settng it on a fyre brent himselfe, and so wretchedlye ended hys lyfe.
                  
                  
                     Sentences out of the new Testament.
                     Let euery soule submit himselfe vnto y•
                        Rom. 13 aucthority of the higher power For there is no power but of God. Thepowers that be are ordeined of God. Who soeuer therfore resysteth the power, resisteth the ordi nance of God, but they that resyste shall get to themselues dampnacion. For rulers are not fearefull to them that doo good, but to them that do euil. Wilt thou be without feare of the power. Doo well then & so shalt thou be praised of the same. For hee is the minister of God for thy wealth. But if thou donst that which is euill, then feare. For hee beareth not the sword for noughte. For he is the minister of god to take vengance on him that doth euill. Wherfore ye must nedes obey not onelye for feare of vengeaunce, but also because of conscience. And euen for thys cause paye ye tribute. For they are Gods ministers, seruinge for the same purpose. Geue to euery man therefore his duty tribute 
                           •…
                        o whō tribute belongeth, custome to

whom custome is due, feare to whom fear belongeth, honoure to whom honour pertaineth.
                     I exhort that aboue all things prayers,Tim. 2 supplications, intercessions and geuinge of thankes be had for all men, for kinges & for all that are in authoritye, that we may liue a quiet and a peaceable life, withall godlines and honestye. For that is good & accepted in the sight of god our Sauyour, whiche will haue all men to be saued, and to come vnto the knowledg of the truthe.
                     Warne them, that they submit them
                           
                              •…
                           it. 3. selues to rule and power, that they obey the Magistrates, that they be ready to doo euery good work, that they speake euill of no man, that they be no fighters, but gentle, shewing all meekenes vnto all men.
                     Submit your elues vnto all maner ordinancePet. 3 of man for the Lordes sake, whether it be vnto the king as vnto the chiefe head, either vnto rulers as vnto them that are sent of him for the punishment of euill dooers, but for the praise of them that doo wel. For so is the will of god, that with well doing ye may stop the mouthes of folish and ignoraunt men, as free, and not as hauing the liherty for a cloke of malyciousnesse,

but euen as the sernauntes of God.
                     Honour all men, loue brotherly felow ship, feare god, honour the king.
                     Wicked are they and damned shal they2. Pet. 
                              •…
                           
                         be, that despise authority, and 
                           •…
                        eare not to speak euil of them that excel in honour.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the new Testament.
                     MAry Christes mother and IosephLuk. 2. her husbande, obeyed the Emperours commaundement, and went into their citie Bethelem to be taxed.
                     Christe payed tribute to Cesar both forMath. 1 him self and for his disciples, and willed o ther so to do.
                     Christe euen vnto the death obeyed theMath. 
                              •…
                           
                         temporall rulers.
                     The Apostles of Christ were obedient to the higher▪ powers and taught other so to be.
                     Saint Paule willinglye obeyed the publique Magistrates, Felix & Festus. &c
                     Theudas and Iudas of Galile were two sedicious persons. The one boasted to doo greate thinges and so allured muche

people to follow him, the other councelled the Iewes by no meanes to pay tribute to Cesar, but to mayntayne theyr olde liber ties, and by this meanes moued greate sedicion among the people.
                     What became of them, were they not put to death, and so many as folowed th
                           •…
                         eyther slayne or els scattered abroad, and so brought to nought. We read not in all the holy scriptures that anye traytour or notable sedicious person hath at any time 
                           •…
                        scaped without notable and famous punishmente. God can not suffer his magistrates to be disobeyed, his cōmon weales to be disturbed hys polytyqne or cyuyl
                           •…
                         lawes to be contēned his godly and honest orders to be broken. Whosoeuer attempteth any such wickednes, God wil be a uenged of him, as it is euidente not onely in the holye Scriptures, but also in prophane histories.
                  
               
               
                  Against maliçe, grudge, enuy, hatred and anger.
                  IF thou be tempted of Sathan to breake the order of charitie, & to malice thy christen brother▪ set these scriptures before the eyes of thy mynd.
                  
                     Sentences out of the olde Testament
                     
                        Thou shalt not hate thy brother inthineLeuit. 19. hart, but shalt in any wise rebuke thy neighbour that thou beare not sin ne for hys sake.
                     Thou shalt not auenge thy selfe nor be myndefull of wrong, agaynst the children of my people, but shalt loue thy neighbours euen as thy selfe.Pro. 25
                     
                     If thine enemy honger, fede him, if he thirst, geue him drinke, for so shalt thou heape coles of fyre vppon his head, and the Lord shal reward thee.
                     He that seketh vengeance shal find vengeaunceEccle. 2
                              •…
                           
                         of the lord, which shal suerly kepe him in his sinnes.
                     Forgeue thy neighbour the hurt that he hath don the, and so shal thy sines be forge uen to thee also when thou prayest. A man that bereth hatred agaīst āother, how dare 
                           •…
                        e destre forgeuenes of god? He that shew 
                           •…
                        th no mercy to a man whiche is like hym selfe, howe dare he aske forgeuenesse of his sinnes. If he that is but fleshe beareth hatred and kepe it, who will entreat for hys sinnes? Remember thy end, and let enmitie passe.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the olde Testament.
                     
                        Samuell prayed for kinge Saul,1. Reg. 15. although a wicked man an enemy to gods seruaunts, a
                           •…
                        d altogether disobedient to the will of God.
                     Moyses prayed for the stubborne and vnExod. 22. faythfull Iewes, which not withstandinge rebelled agaynste him, and woulde haue slayne him.
                  
                  
                     ☞ Sentences out of the new Testament.Math. 5
                     
                     Lou
                           •…
                         your enemies. Blesse them that curse you. Do good to them that hate you. Pray for them whiche do you wronge and pursue you, that ye may be the children of your father that is in heauen.Mat. 7
                     
                     Whatsoeuer ye will, that men shoulde do to you: euen so do you to them. That is the law and the prophetes.Math. 19
                     
                     Thou shalte loue thy neighbour as thy selfe.Luke. 9
                     
                     Be mercifull as your father is merciful. Iudge not, and you shal not be iudged. Cō demn not, and you shal not be condemned Forgeue, and ye shal be forgeuen. Geue, & it shal be geuen to you, good measure pressed downe, shaken together, and running ouer, shall men geue into your b
                           •…
                        somes▪
                        
For wyth the same measure ye meete, wyth the same shall other meete to you agayne.
                     A newe commaundemente geue I vnto you, that ye loue together as I loued you,Iohn. 13 that euen so you loue one an other.
                     By this shall all men knowe that ye are my disciples, if ye shall haue loue one to another.
                     Though I bestow all my goods to feede the poore, and though I geue my bodye to1. Cor. 13
                              •…
                           
                         be brent, yet if I haue no loue, it profiteth me nothing at all.
                     Brethren if any mā be fallen by chanceGal. 6 into any fault, ye which are spiritual, helpe to amende him in the spirite of mekenes, consideringe thy selfe, least thou also be attempted.
                     Beare ye one an others burden, and so fulfill ye the law of Christ.
                     Let not the sunne go downe vpon your wrath.Ephes. 4
                     
                     Be gentle one to another, mercifull forgeuing one another, euen as GOD for Christes sake, hath forgeuen you.
                     Let euery man be slow vnto anger. For
                           
                              •…
                           acob. 1 the wrath of man worketh not that which is righteous before God.
                     
                        Aboue all thinges haue feruent loue among1▪ Pet. 4 you. For loue shall couer the multitude of sinnes.
                     If anye man saye, I loue God, and hateth1, Iohn. 4 his brother, he is a lyer. For he that lo ueth not his brother whom he hath seene god whome he hathe not seene how can he loue. And this commaundement haue we of him, that he that loueth god, shoulde al so loue his neighbour.
                     He that loueth not his brother, a
                           •…
                        ideth1. Iohn. 3. in death. Whosoeuer hateth his brother is a murtherer. And ye know that no murthe rer hathe euerlasting life abidinge in him▪ My babes let vs not loue in worde nor in tongue, but in worke and truthe.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the new
                           •…
                         Testament.Luke. 23
                     
                     Christ so dearly loued vs, yea and that when we
                           •…
                         were yet his enemies, that hee gaue him self euen vnto the death for our sake. Yea he hanginge on the cros prayed for his very
                           •…
                         enemies, vnto his heauenly
                           •…
                         Father.
                     Blessed Stephen in the middest of hisAct. 7 tormentes prayed for his enemies.
                     S. Paule wished him self to be cursedRom. 9. from Christ
                           •…
                        , so that his kinsmen might
                           •…
                        
                        
be saued.
                  
               
               
                  Against the bitter stormes of persecution of Gods worde.
                  IF at a
                        •…
                     y time thorow the frailti of nature thou be troubled in thy minde when the cros 
                        •…
                     f persecution is laid vpon thee for the word of God. looke that thou shrinke not backe from the truthe nor discourage thy selfe. but think thy selfe blessed of G
                        •…
                     d, call these scriptures that follow vnto rei membrance for thy comfort.
                  
                     Sentences out of the old Testament.
                     THe Lorde killeth and geeueth life again
                           •…
                        ,1. Reg. 
                              •…
                           
                         hee bringeth euen to Hell and back agayne.
                     The righteous cry, and the Lord hearethPsal. 34. them, and deliuereth them out of all their troubles.
                     The Lord is nigh vnto them that ar of a troubled heart, and wil saue such as be of an humble spirite.
                     Great are the troubles of the righteous but the Lord deliuereth him out of thē all
                     He kepeth all his bones, so that not one of them is broken.
                     But misfortune shall flea the vngodly,

and they that hate the righteous shalbe desolate.
                     The Lorde deliuereth the soules of his seruauntes, and all they that put theyr trust in him, shall not be comfortles.
                     For thy sake O Lord are we killed allPsal. 44 the day long, and are counted as shepe ap pointed to be slaine.
                     Up Lord, why sleepest thou, awake and be not absent from vs for euer.
                     Wherfore hidest thou thy face, and for gettest our misery and trouble? For oure soule is brought low euen vnto the duste, our belly cleaueth vnto the ground. Arise and helpe vs, and deliuer vs for thy mercies sake.
                     Thou O god hast proued vs, thou alsoPsalm. 66 hast tryed vs like as siluer is tryed. Thou broughtest vs into the snare, and laydest trouble vpon our loynes. Thou suffredest men to ride ouer our heades, we went thorow fire and water, and thou broughtest vs out into a comfortable place.
                     I beleued and therefore haue I spokenPsal. 115 but I was sore troubled.
                     Righte deare in the sighte of the Lorde, is the death of his saintes.
                     
                        The way of the righteous is iudged toEccle. 2 be vtter destruction, but they are in rest. Althoughe they suffer paine before men, yet is their hope ful of immortality. They are punished but in few things, neuertheles in many thinges shall they be well rewarded.
                     For God proueth them and findeth thē mete for hym selfe, yea as the golde in the furnace dooth 
                           •…
                        e try them, and receyueth them as a burnt offring, and when ye time commeth, they shalbe loked vpon.Sapient. 3
                     
                     My sonne, if thou wilt come into the seruice of god, stand fast in righteousnes and feare, and arme thy soule to temptation. Setle thine heart, & be patient, 
                           •…
                        ow down thine eare, receiue the wordes of vnderstā
                        ding, and shrink not away when thou art entised. Holde thee faste vpon god, ioyne thy selfe vnto him, and suffer that thy life may encrease at the last.
                     Whatsoeuer happeneth vnto thee, receyue it, suffer in heauines, and be paciēt in thy trouble. For like as gold and siluer are tried in fire, euen so are acceptable mē in the fornace of aduersity. Beleue in God, and he shal helpe thee.
                     For righteousnesse take payne with all

thy soule, and for the truth striue thou vnto death and God shall fyghte for thee against thy enemies.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the olde Testament.Ge. 4.
                     
                     Abell was cruelly slaine of his brother Cayne, whome he neuer offended.Gen. 39.
                     
                     Ioseph was cast into prison, because he woulde not leane to the fy
                           •…
                        thy requeste of his lordes wyfe.
                     Moses, Aaron, and the Israelites wereExod. 14. greuously entreated & persecuted of King Pharao.
                     Saule with great diligence soughte to destroy Dauid.
                           
                              •…
                           . Reg. 18
                     
                     Quene Iezabel pursued the Prophete3. Reg. 19. Helias.
                     Zachary the sonne of Barachias was
                           
                              •…
                           . Pare. 2. stoned to death for telling the king truth.
                     Achymeleche with certayne other holy
                           
                              •…
                           . Reg. 22 men of god, was slaine at king Saules commaundement because he shewed kind nes to Dauid the harty beloued seruant of God.
                     Sydrac, Misac and Abdenago were castDan. 3. into a firye fornace, because they wouldnot worship the golden Image, that king Nabuchodonosor had made, but only the

God of Israell.
                     Daniel was cast into the den of Lions, becauseDan. 6. that contrary to king Darius commaundement he had prayed vnto his Lord God, the God of Israel.
                     At an other time also he was caste intoDan. 14. the den of Lions, because he sayde, that Bell and the Dragon were no Gods.
                     The vertuous and chast woman SusanDan. 13. was at the point to be stoned vnto death, because she woulde not breake the commaundement of god, and consent to the vn lawfull and filthy requests of the two Elders.
                     Eleazarus was miserably put to death,2. Mac. 
                              •…
                           
                         because at the kinges commaundemente he woulde not eate swines flesh, contrary to the lawe of god.
                     A certaine woman also with her. vii.2. Math. 7. sonnes were with moste extreme cruelty put to death, because they would not obey the wicked precepte of the moste wicked kyng.
                     The prophets were vnmercifullye slain because they rebuked synne, and taught
                           •…
                         the wyll of God.
                     The most excellent Prophet Esay, for his libertye of speach in re
                           •…
                        uking the sins

of the princes and of the people and prophe
                           •…
                        iyng of Gods vengeaunce to fall vpō the countrye and people, was cut in two partes asunder with a saw, and buried vn der an Oke.
                     Ieremy after much enprisonment was stoned onto death of his people at Taphu as in Egipc
                           •…
                        , because he warned them of their wicked liuing, and exhorted them vn to repentaunce.
                     Amos at the commaundement of kinge Amassas for his preching was cruelly bea
                        
                           •…
                        en and greuously formented. At the laste Ochozias sonne of Amasias caused him to be thurste into the temples with a great nayle, and being half deade he was caryed into his own countrye, where he sone after died.
                     Micheas was buffeted emprisoned and fed with bread and water.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the olde Testament.
                     BLessed are they that suffer persecutionMathe. 5. for righteousnes for theirs is the kingdome of heauen.
                     Blessed are ye when men reuile you & perse
                           •…
                        ute you, and 
                           〈◊〉
                         speak all eu
                           •…
                        l sayings

against you for my sake:
                     Reioyce and be mery, for great is your rewarde in heauen. For so persecuted they the Prophets before you.
                     The scoler is not aboue the maister, norMath. 10 the seruant aboue his Lorde. If they haue called the Father of the housholde Belzebub, how much more shall they so cal them that are of his houshold.
                     Be not afrayed of them that 
                           •…
                        il the body, but rather feare him whiche is able to destroy both body and soule in hel fire.
                     Euery one that shall confesse me before men, I shall confesse him also before my fa ther whiche is in heauen. But whosoeuer shal deny me before men, I shall also deny him befyre my Father that is in heauen.Math. 24
                     
                     Ye shalbe hated of all men for my sakeMarke. 8
                     
                     Whosoeuer wil follow me let him forsake him self and take vp hys crosse and folow me. For whosoeuer wil saue hislife shall lose it. But whosoeuer shall lose his life for my sake and the gospelles the same shall saue it. For what shall it profite a man, if he winne all the world and & lose his owne soule, or what shall a man geue to redē his soul wtal agaī: whosoeuer

fore shalbe ashamed of me and my wordes in this whorish and sinful generation, of him also shall the son of man be ashamed when he commeth in the glory of his Father with the holy angels.
                     The seruaunt is not greater thē his Lord.
                           
                              •…
                           ohn. 16 If they haue persecuted me, they will also persecute you.
                     If the world hate you, know ye, that it hated me before you: If ye were of the world, the world wold loue that is his. But forasmuch as ye are not of the world but I haue chosē you out of the world therfore doth the world hate you.
                     The tyme shall come, that who so euer
                           
                              •…
                           ohn. 16 killeth you, wyll thinke that he doth God seruice.
                     Ye shal lamēt and wepe, but the world shal reioyce.
                     In the world ye shal haue trouble, but be on a good comfort, I haue ouercom the world.
                     If we suffer with Christ, we shall also be glorifyed together with him.
                     I suppose that the afflictions of thysRom. 8. life, are not worthy of the glorye whiche shalbe shewed vpon vs.
                     Blessed be God the father of our Lord1. Cor. 1. Iesus Christ, which is the father of 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        
and the God of al comfort, which comforteth vs in all our tribulations.
                     As the afflictions of Christ are plenteous in vs: euen so is our consolation pleuteous by Christ.
                     We are not weried, but though our out ward man perishe: yet the in ward man is2. Cor. 
                              •…
                           
                         renued day by day. For our trouble which is shorte and lighte, prepareth an exceding and an eternall waight of glorye vnto vs: while we loke not on the things which are sene, but on the things which are not sene: For thinges whiche are seene, are temporal, but things which ar not sene are euerlasting.
                     We know, that if our earthly mansion2. Cor. 
                              •…
                           
                         of this dwelling were destroyed, we haue a building of God, an habitatiō not made with handes, but euerlasting in heauen.
                     Unto you it is geuen, not only to beleeuePhil. 1. in Christ, but also to suffer for his sake.
                     Suffer affliction as a good souldiour of2. Tim. 
                              •…
                           
                         Christ.
                     If we dy wyth Christ we shal liue with2. Tim. 
                              •…
                           
                         him. If we suffer we him, we also shalreig
                           •…
                         with him: if we deny him, he will also dny vs.
                     
                        All that wil liue godly in Christe Iesu, shall suffer persecutions.
                     This is thanke woorthy
                           •…
                         if a man for conscience toward god, endure grefe and suffer wrong vndescrued.
                     If when ye do wel ye suffer wrong and take it patientlye, then is there thankes with God, For here vnto verely were ye called.
                     Blessed are ye if any trouble happen vnPet. 3. to you for righteousnes sake.
                     Dearly beloued maruel not that ye arePet. 4. proued by fire (which thing is to trye you) as though some straung thing hapned vnto you: but reioyce, in as muche as ye are partakers of Christes passion, that when his glorye appereth, ye may, be merye and glad. If ye be railed vpon, for the name of Christ, happy are ye. For the glory and the spirite of God, resteth vpon you. On theyr parte, he was euill spoken of, but on your parte he is glorified.
                     If any man suffer as a christian man, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify god in this behalfe.
                     Let them that be trooubled according to he wil of god, commit their saules to him

with wel doyng, as vnto a faithfull creatour.Heb. 13.
                     
                     Iesus to sāctify the people with his own bloud, suffered without the gate. Let vs go forth therfore out of the tentes, and suf fer rebuk wyth him. For here haue we no continuyng city, but we seke on to come.
                     By many trybulations must we enterAct. 14. into the kingdome of heauen.
                     The holy ghost witnesseth in euery cityAc. 20. saying, that bandes and trouble abide me. But none of these things moue me, neyther is my lyfe dear vnto my selfe, that I mighte fulfill my course with ioy, and the ministration of the word whith I haue receiued of the Lord Iesu to testify the Gospell of the grace of God.
                     I am ready not to be bounde only, butAct. 21. also to dy for the name of the Lord Iesu.
                     Blessed are the deade that dye in theApoc. 1
                              •…
                           
                         Lorde, euen so sayth the spirite, that from henceforth they reaste from their labours. But theyr worke folow them.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the new Testamen.
                     IOhn Baptist for truth telling to kingeMath. 1
                              •…
                           
                         Herod, was cast into prisō & beheaded.
                     Iesus Christ our Lord and sauiour afterMath. 2
                              •…
                           
                        
                        
many blasphemies rebukes, slaunders and bitter tormentes suffered the moste spitefull deathe of the crosse, and so entred into glory.
                     The holy marter S. Stephen, was stonedAct. 7. vnto death.
                     Iames y• brother of Iohn was beheded.Act. 12.
                     
                     What kindnes Peter and Paule wyth the apostles found at the handes of them whose saluatiō they most diligētly sought, the histories make mencion. Neither I heare speak of those blessed Marters, which sence their dayes haue dyed for the confession of gods truthe, so that the gospell is not without a cause called of blessed Paul the word of the crosse.
                     For all that wil liue godly in Christ IeCor. 1▪
                         su saith he, shall suffer persecution.
                     I saw saith Sainct Iohn vnder the altar,
                           
                              •…
                           poc. 6. the soules of them that were killed for the woord of god, and for the testimony
                           •…
                         whiche they had, and they cryed with a loud voice, saying: how longe tariest thou O Lord, holy and true, to iudge and to reuenge our bloude on them that be on the earth? And long white garments were g
                           •…
                         uen vnto euery one of them. And it was said vnto them, that they should rest a little

season, til the nomber of their fellowes and brethren and of them that shoulde be killed as they were fulfilled.
                  
               
               
                  Against the temptation which the faithful haue, when they compare their miseries and wretchednes with the welth, prosperitie▪ and pleasures of the swinish Epicures and wicked worldlinges. Where thou also shalt see the misera ble end of the vn godly.
                  IF Sathan our olde aduersary with his handemaide, the fleshe shall at any time moue thee to forsake God and his holy worde▪ by considering the florishing and triumphant estate of the wicked worldlinges, and the to muche miserable and base trade of the Lordes seruauntes and professoures of gods truth, which liue in all kinde of misery. wretchednes and pouertie, and ar piteously oppressed of the tirants of this worlde, when on the contrarye part the vngodlye haue all thinges at their owne pleasure, and liue at their hartes ease without disturbance for lacke of temporall thinges: consent no
                        •…
                      to his subtil assaultes▪ but manfully resist them, cō
                     sidering with thy selfe, that thoughe the vngodlye raigne in tis world, and haue the vppermost hand yet shall their end be miserable when the poore afflicted for Gods cause shall altar their manifolde temptations be rewarded with perpetuall ioy, and euerlastinge glorye. and that thou mayest be the more assuredly perswaded in these thinges▪ call to remembrance these holy scriptures folowing.
                  
                     Sentences out of the olde Testament.
                     
                        KNowest thou not this, that from theIob. 15. beginning euer since the creation of man vpon earth, the praise of the vngodly hath bene short, and that the ioy of the hipocrites hath continued, but the twinck ling of an ey? Though he be magnified vp to the heauen, so that his hed reacheth vnto the cloudes, yet he perisheth at the laste like dong: in somuch that they which haue seene him shall say, where is he? He vanissheth as a dreame, so that he can no more be founde, and passeth away in a vision in the night, so that the eye whiche saw him before, getteth now no sighte of him & his place knoweth him no more.
                     Wherefore do the wicked men liue inIob. 
                              •…
                           1. healthe and prosperitie, come to their olde age, and encrease in riches.
                     Their Childers children liue in their sighte, and their generation before their eyes. Their houses are safe from all feare for the rod of god doothe not smite them. Their bullock gendreth, and that not out of time, their cowe calueth, and is not vnfruteful. They send their children forth bi flockes, and their sonnes lead the daunce. They bear with them tabrets and harpes

and haue instrumentes of musick at their pleasure. They spende their dayes in welthynesse but sodenlye they go downe to Hell.
                     O Lord thou art more righteous thenIere. 1
                              •…
                           
                         that I should dispute with thee. Neuertheles let me talke with thee in thinges resonable. How happeneth it, that the way of the vngodlye is so prosperous, and that it goeth so wel with them whiche without any shame offende and liue in wickednesse. Thou plantest them, they take roote, they growe and bring forth fruite. They boste muche of thee, yet art thou far from their raines. But thou Lorde to whō I am wel knowen thou that hast sene and proued my hearte, take them awaye like as a flocke is caried to the slaughter house, and appoint them for the day of slaughter.
                     O Lord, how long shal I crye and thou wilt not heare? how long shall I cōplainePsalm. 73. vnto thee, suffering wrong and thou wilt not helpe: why lettest thou me se werinesse and labour: Tiranny and violence are before me, power ouer goeth right, for the law is torne in pyeces, and there can no right iudgement go forth. And why, the

vngodly is more set by then the righteous This is the cause that wrong iudgement procedeth. Thine eies O Lord, are clean: thou mayest not see euil, thou canst not be hold the thing that is wicked. Wherfore then dost thou looke vpon the vngodly, & holdest thy tong when the wicked deuoureth the man that is better then himselfe. Thou makest men as the fysh of the sea, & like as the creepyng beastes that haue no guide, they take vp al with their angle, they catch it in their net, & do sacrifice vn to their yarne, because that thorow it their porcion is become so fat, and their meat so plenteous. Wherfore, they cast out their net againe and neuer cease to slay the people.
                     Like as the wyne deceiueth the dronkard,Abac. 1. euen so the proud shal fal and not endure.
                     Ful miserable, is the death of vngodly,Psal. 34. for they that hate the vnrighteous shall be plucked vp by the roote.
                     Freate not thy selfe at the vngodly, be notPsal. 37. thou enuious against the euil doers. For they shal sone be cute down like the grasse and be withered euen as the grene herbe. Greue not thi self at one y• is in prosperity and liueth in abhominacion. Leaue of frō
                        
wrath, let god displeasure, let not thy gelousy moue thee also to do euil, For wicked doers shall bee rooted out, but they that paciently abyde the lord shal enherite the land. Suffer yet a litle while, and the vngodly shalbe cleane gone, thou shalt loke after his place and he shall be away.
                     Reade forth the Psalm
                           •…
                         and marke it well.
                     Wherfore thus arrogantly magnifiest thou thy selfe at all tyme. O mischeuous gyaunt, wherfore enforceth thy tonge mis chief, fordgyng disceat lyke a new set Rasour. Wherfore louest thou malice rather then honesty, rather to lye then to saye truth. For thou delightest in all maner of pernicious speach, oh thou desceitful tong. Wherfore, god shall vtterly rende thee vp by the rootes and destroy thee, and he shal throwe thee downe out of thy tabernacle, and pluck thy rootes out of the land of the liuing.
                     Rede diligently and marke well the. 73. Psalme whiche altogether belongeth vnto this matter.
                     Wo be to the proud wealthy in Sion,Amo
                              •…
                           . 
                              •…
                           
                           ▪
                         euen to suche as thincke them selues so s
                           •…
                        re vppon the mounte of Samarya

which holde them selues for the best of the world, and rule the house of Israel at their owne pleasure. Ye are taken out for the euil day, euen ye that sit in the stoole of wilfulnes: ye that lie vpon beds of Iuory and vse your wantonnes vpon youre couches, ye that eat the best Lambes of the flocke, & the fattest calues of the drouy, ye that sing to the lute, and in playing of instruments compare your selues vnto Dauid, ye that drinke wine out of goblets, and annoynte your selues with the best oyle, but no man is sorye for Ioseph hurte, therfore shall ye now be the firste of them that shalbe led awaye captiue, and the lustye 
                           •…
                        heare of the wilful shall come to an end.
                  
                  
                     Sentences out of the olde Testament.
                     CAine the figure of all wicked and blouGene. 4. dy Tirantes, slew his brother Abel, & while he liued he was a runnagate, and a vagabound hauing an vnquiet conscience and now being dead he is a dampned soul in Hel.
                     The Tirauntes and mighty GiauntsGen. 6. 7. with all the world besides 8. persons were drowned, after they had liued long in plea sure and in all the filthy desires of the wic

ked flesh without repentaunce.
                     The filthy Sodomites liued in all kindGen. 19. of voluptuous abhominacion, the conclusion was that they were consumed with fire and brimstone from heauen.
                     Pharao handled the people of God veryExod. 14. cruelly entending vtterly to destroy thē all, but the ende was, that bothe he and all his army were drowned in the sea, and the people of Israel harmeles preserued.
                     Sisar and Abimelech beinge greuousIud. 4. enemies of gods people, were slayne of wo men.
                     Holophernes for all his proud lokes en tending to destroy the Israelits, was slain him self of a woman.
                     Saule persecuted Dauid the seruant of1. Reg. 3
                              •…
                           
                         God, entending to slea him, but Dauid escaped, & Saule was slaine with the sword
                     Achitophel remembringe what wicked2. Reg. 17 councel he had genen Absalon against his Father Dauid, & perceiuing that it wold not come to passe so mighty is God to destroye the wicked councels of the vngodly he went home and hanged him self.
                     
                        
                           •…
                        bsolon pursuing and sekinge his Fathers2. Reg. 18▪
                         death, in the midst of his furye was

hanged, by the heare of his head on a tree, and so dyed.3. Reg. 2.
                     
                     Ioab was slaine, because he killed two good men, euen Abner and Amasa.
                     The house of Hieroboam because hee3. Reg. 15. made Israell to sin, was destroyed by the sword of Baasa king of Israel.
                     Quene Iesabel that great enemy to the4. Reg. 9. seruantes and Prophets of the Lorde, was throwne downe hedlonge out of an highe windewe, and troden downe with horses feet, and at the last deuoured and eaten vp of dogs. Iehu slew the house of Achab for the Prophets that were slaine.
                           
                              •…
                           . Par. 24
                     
                     King Ioas was slaine of his owne seruauntes, because he slewe Zachary the sō of the hyghe Priest Ioiada, wythoute a cause.4. Reg. 25
                     
                     The wicked king Sedechias, whiche so cruelly handled the Prophet Ieremy: had both his eyes put out, and being fettered with chaines of Iron, he was caryed priso ner into Babilon, where hee miserablye died.
                     Amon that most proud accuser and inuentourHester. 7. of mischiefes against the Iewes, preparing a paire of galows for good Mar docheous that faithful Israelite, was han

ged vpon them him self.
                     They that accused Daniell to y• kingeDan. 6. and sought his death, were caste into the dongeon, and deuoured of the Lions.
                     The vngracious and wicked Iudges,Dan 13 which sought the deathe of that godly woman Susan, were slayne them selues.
                     Andronicus, which s
                           •…
                        ew that good man1. Mach. Onias, was slayne him selfe.
                  
                  
                     Sentences out of the new Testament.
                     WO be to you that are rich, that haueLuk. 6▪
                         therin your consolation. Wo bee to you that are full, for ye shall honger. Wo be to you that now laugh, for ye shal wail and wepe. Wo bee to you when all men shall prayse you, for so dyd their fathers to the false Prophetes.
                     Many walk of whome I haue told youPhil. 3. often, and now I tel you wepyng, that they are the enemies of the crosse of Christ who se ende is damnation, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is their shame whiche are worldly mynded.
                     Go to now ye rich men, wepe and houle one your wretchednesse that shall come vpIacob. 
                              •…
                           
                           ▪
                         on you. Your riches is corrupte, your garmentes are motheaten, your golde and

siluer is cankered, and the ruste of the
                           •…
                         shalbe a witnesse vnto you and shall eate your flesh as it were fyre. &c.
                     I heard a voyce from heauen sayinge
                           •…
                        
                        Apoc. 17 O my people come awaye from Babilon that greate whore and mighty, strompet the mother of the abhominacions of the whole earth. Come away I say from her, that ye be not pertakers of her sinnes, that ye receaue not of her plages, for her sinnes are gone vp to heauen, and god hath remē
                        bred her wickednes▪ Reward her as she re warded you, and geue her double, accor
                           •…
                        
                        dinge to her woorke. And pooer in double to her in the same cuppe whiche she filled vnto you. And asmuch as she glorifyed her selfe and liued wantonly, so muche poure ye in for her of punishmente and sorowe. For she sayd in her selfe, I sitte beinge a Queene and am no widow and shal see no sorow. Therfore shal her plagues come at one day, death and sorow and hunger, and shalbe brent wyth fyre. For stronge is the Lord god which iudgeth her.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the new Testament
                     The riche and proud glutton which was
                           
                              •…
                           uke. 1
                              •…
                           
                        
                        
gorgeously apparelled, and fared daintely euery day, and yet woulde haue no pity on the poore Lazare, dyed and was caryed in to hell.
                     Iudas that betrayed Christ, hanged himAcc. 1▪
                         selfe.
                     Herode which greatly vexed the congregationAct. 1
                              •…
                           
                           ▪
                         of Christ, and slew Iames the brother of Iohn: euen in the middes of his pomp and glory, was smitten down of the Lords angel and was eatē with wormes, and so miserably perished.
                     Elimas the sorcerer and false PropheteAct. 13▪
                         resisted Paules preaching, but he therfore was stretght wayes striken blynd thorow the mightye power of God.
                  
               
               
                  Against the most horible and damnable sinne, the synne against the holy ghost.
                  IF the Deuill which seketh nothing but thy des
                     
                        •…
                     ruction, labour so to harden thy harte that thou contrary to thy knowledge euen of a pretensed & wilful malice shouldst impugn the truth of Christs gospel, and persecute the same in his menbers, and so sinne against the holye ghost, and blaspheme the Lorde thy God vnto the damnation both of thy bodye and soule, loke that aboue al thinges in this be halfe thou leauest not vnto his wicked temtations if thou 
                        •…
                     enderest thyne owne saluation, but rather withal thy power resist him by calling these holye scriptures vnto thy remembraunce.
                  
                     Examples out of the olde Testament.
                     
                        I will put him oute of the booke that
                           
                              •…
                           od. 33 sinneth against me.
                     A man that speaketh euill of his God,
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           . 33. shall beare his sinne, and he that blasphemeth the name of the Lorde
                           •…
                        , let him dy
                           •…
                         the death: All the people shall stone him, whether he be a citezen or a straūger: what soeuer he be that blasphemeth the name of the lord, let him dye the death.
                     If one man sinneth against another,
                           
                              •…
                           eg. 2 God maye be mercifull vnto him: but if a ny manne sinne againste God, who shall pray for him?
                     The soule that dothe oughte presumt
                           •…
                        
                        
                           
                              •…
                           m. 15. ously, whether he be an Israelite or a straū ger, the same blasphemeth the lord. And that soule shalbe rooted out from amonge his people, because he hath despised the worde of the Lorde, and hath broken his cōmaundemente. That soule therfore shal perish, and hys sinne shalbe vpon him.
                     They reioyce in doyng euil, and delight
                           
                              •…
                           o. 
                              •…
                           
                         in wicked thinges.
                     They make boast of theyr sinnes them
                           
                              •…
                           ay. 3 selues as the Sodomites did, and hide thē
                        not. Wo bee vnto their soules, for they haue rewarded 
                           〈◊〉
                         vnto thēselues. Byd

the righteous do wel, for they shal enioy y• fruites of their study. But wo be vnto th
                           •…
                         vngodly and vnrigheeous, for thei shal be rewarded after their workes.
                     Thou shalt not praye for thys people,Iere. 7. thou shalte neyther geue thankes nor byd prayer for them. Thou shalte make no in tercession to me for them, for in no wise will I heare thee. Read
                           •…
                         fourth.
                     This said the lord vnto me, thou shalt notI
                              •…
                           re. 4
                              •…
                           
                           ▪
                         praye to do this people good, for though
                           •…
                         they fast, I will not heare their prayers: Though they offer burnt offrings and sacrifices, yet will not I accepte them. For I wil destroy them with the sworde and hunger and pestilence.
                  
                  
                     ☞ Examples out of the olde Testament.
                     THe seruauntes and all the army of the4. Reg. proude Senacherib, were destroyed for their blasphemy agaynst god.
                     Holo
                           •…
                        rnes blasphemed God when
                           
                              •…
                           t. 3 he sayde, that there was none other god of the earth but Gabuchodonosor, and therfore was he afterwarde slayne euen of a woman.
                     Nabugodonosor blasphemed god, whē
                        
he sayde to the three chyldren, who is the God that cā delyuer you out of my hands?
                     The children of Isarell blasphemed god
                           
                              •…
                           re. 44. & therfore perished, when they sayd to the Prophet Ieremy: As for the wordes that thou haste spoken vnto vs in the name of the lorde, we will in no wise heare them: But whatsoeuer goeth out of our owne mouth, that will we doo. We will do sacrifice and offer oblations vnto the quene of heauen, lyke as we and our forefathers, our kyngs, and our rulers haue done in the cityes of Iuda and in the streates and fieldes of Ierusalem. For then had wee plenteousnesse of vitails, then were we in prosperytye and no mysfortune came vpon vs. But sence we lefte to offer and to sacrifice vnto the quene of heauen, wee haue had scarsnesse of all thynges, and perish with sworde and honger.
                     Those Iewes blasphemed God, which
                           
                              •…
                           ach. 1. saide, let vs goe and make a couenaunte with the Heathen that are rounde aboute vs. For since we departed from them, we haue had sorowe inough.
                     Nicanor blasphemed god when he saide
                           
                              •…
                           ach. 1
                              •…
                           
                         Is their a mighty one in heauen that commaunded the Saboth daye to be kept. It

was aunswered, yea euen the liuing god, the mighty Lorde in heauen, commaunded the. vii. daye to be kepte. Then sayde be: and I am myghty vpon earth, to commaunde them for to arme themselues, and to performe the kinges busines.
                  
                  
                     Sentences out of the newe Testament.Math. 1
                              •…
                           
                           ▪
                        
                     
                     He that is not with me, is again me, saith Christe. And be that gathereth not with me scatereth abrode. Therfore I say vnto you, all manner of sinne and blasphemy shalbe forgeuen vnto men, but the blasphe mye agaynste the spirite shall not be forgeuen vnto men. And whosoeuer speaketh a worde against the sonne of man, it shal be forgeuen him. But whosoeuer speaketh against the holy ghost, it shal not be forgeuen him neither in this worlde nor in the worlde to come.
                     If any men see his brother sinne not vnto1. Ioh. 5
                              •…
                           
                         death, let him aske and he shal geue him life for thē that sin not vnto deth. Ther is a sin vnto death, for which I say that a mā should not pray.
                     It maye not be, that they whiche wereHeb. 6
                              •…
                           
                         once lightened and haue tasted of the heau
                           •…
                        nly gifte, and were become partakers of

the holy ghost and haue tasted of the good word of god, and the powers of the world to come: If they fall awaye 'that they should againe be renewed by repentaunce which in them selues do crucify the sonne of God making a mock of him.
                     If we sinne wilfully after that we haueIeb. 10. receiued the knowledge of truth, there remayneth no more sacrifice for sinnes, but a feareful loking for iudgement, and violent fire whiche shall deuoure the aduersarie. He that despiseth Moyses lawe, dyeth without mercye vnder two or three wytnesses: How muche sorer suppose ye shall he be punished which treadeth vnder foote the Sonne of God, and counteth the bloud of the Testament, wherewith he was sāctified, as an vnholy thing, and dishonoure to the sprite of grace.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the new Testament.
                     The Iewes spake blasphemie against
                           
                              •…
                           ke. 11. the holy ghoste, when they said of Christ: by the power of Belzebub doth he cast out Deuils.
                     They were blasphemers whiche sayde
                           
                              •…
                           ath. 27. to Christe hanginge on the cros, thou that destroyedst the Temple of GOD and

buildest it againe in three dayes, saue thy selfe. If thou be the sonne of God, come down from the crosse.
                     They also spake blasphemy against the holy ghost, which now adaies of a pretensed malice condemne the worde of God as herey, and persecute the preachers therof as heretickes and sedicious persons.
                  
               
               
                  Against the despising of Gods word, of the plagues that follow the same.
                  IF the deuil go about to pluck downe thy minde from the loue of gods worde, and to moue thee to despise the doctrine of thy saluation, so that thou shouldest no more delight in the moste comfortable gospel of Christe, which is the power of god to saue so many as beleue, but rather in thinges of vanitie, 
                        •…
                     ake hede that thou leanest not to his subtile suggestions, but standing in awe of gods iudgementes▪ and fearing his plagues, valeauntly resist Sathan with these holy scriptures following.
                  
                     ☞ Sentences out of the olde Testament.Leuit. 26
                     
                     IF ye wil not harken vnto me saieth the Lord nor kepe my commaundementes, but despise them. &c. then wil I doo this againe vnto you. I will set my face against you, and ye shall fal before your enemies, and they that hate you, shall raigne ouer

you. I will make the heauen ouer you as hardyron, and your land as hard as bras. I will sende my wilde beastes vpon you whiche shall rob you of your children, and destroy your cattel. I wil send a sword vp on you that shall auenge my Testament with you. I wil send the pestilence among you. Reade the Chapiter to thend.
                     If thou wilt not harken to the voice of the Lord thy God to kepe and to do all hisDeu. 27. commaundements and ordinaunces, then all these curses shall come vpon thee, & ouertake thee. Cursed shalt thou be in the Towne, and cursed in the Fielde, cursed shall thine almayrye be and thy store. Cur sed shall the fruite of thine bodye and the fruite of thy lande be, and the fruite of thy oxen, and the flock of thy shepe. The Lord shall make the pestilence cleane to thee, vn til he haue consumed thee from the lande: The Lord shall smite thee with madnesse blindnes, and dasing of hart, because thou seruedst not the Lord thy god with ioyfulnes and with a good hart for the aboūdācs of all thinges, wherefore thou shalt serue

thine enemie which the Lord shal send o
                           •…
                         thee in hunger and thirste, in nakednes, & in neede of all thinges: And he shall put a yoke of iron vpon thy necke vntil be haue brought the to nought. Read this Chapiter diligētly from the beginning to thend.
                     They haue caste away the lawe of the Lord of hostes, and haue blasphemed theEsay. 5. word of the holy one of Israel. Therefore is the wrath of the Lorde kindled against his people and he shaketh his hand at thē, yea he shall smite so, that the hils shal trē
                        ble. And their carcasses shall lie in the open streate.
                     They haue offended the law, chaungedEsay. 24 the ordinaunces, and made the euerlasting testament of none effect. And therfore shal the curse deuoure the earth, for they that dwel thereon haue sinned, wherefore they shall be brent also, and those that remaine shalbe very fewe. The sweete wine shall moorn, the grapes shalbe weake, and all ye haue bene mery in hart shall sighe.
                     The mirth of tabrets shalbe laid down, the chere of the ioyful shall cease, and the pleasure of the Lutes shall haue an ende. There shall no more wine be dronk with

                        
                           •…
                        irth, the beere shalbe bitter to them that drinke it, the wicked cities shalbe broken down, al houses shalbe shut, that no man may come in.
                     Woe is me sayth the Prophete all isEsay. 24 full of synners which offend of purpose & malice: And therfore (O thou that dwellest vpon the earth) ther is at hand for thee feare, pit, and snare. Whosoeuer escapeth the terrible crye, shall fall into the pitte, and yf hee come out of the pytte he shall bee taken with the snare, For the windowes aboue shalbe opened, and the foundation of the earth shall moue: The earth shall geue a great crake, it shal haue a sore ruine, and take an horrible fal: The earth shall stacker like a dronken man, and bee taken away like a tent: Her misdedes shal light so heauy vpon her, that she must fall and neuer rise vp againe: Reade 
                           •…
                        e whole chapterEsay. 30.
                     
                     These people are obstinate they prouoke me vnto anger, they are lying childrē and euen such children that will not heare the law of God.
                     They say to them that see, see nothing: and to the Southsayer, tell of nothinge for to come if it bee either good or honeste, but

                        
                           〈◊〉
                         pleasant things vnto vs, and preach vs false things.
                     Treade out of the waye, goe out of the path, turne awaye the holye one of Israell from vs. Therfore thus saith the holy one of Israel: for asmuch as ye haue cast away his worde, and haue comforted your selues with power and nimblenes, and put your confidence therein: therefore shall ye haue this mischiefe againe for your destruction, & fall like an hye wal that falleth because of some rift or blast, whose breakinge commeth sodenly. And your destruction shalbe like an earthen pot which breaketh, no mā touching it, but breaketh so sore that a mā shall not finde a sheu
                           •…
                        r of it to fetche fyre in, or to take water out of the pit. For the God, euen that holy one of Israel hath pro mised thus.Esay. 44.
                     
                     Who suffered Iacob to be troden vnder foote, and Israell to be spoyled: was it not the Lord himselfe, against whome we haue sinned? we had no delight to walk in his waies, neither were we obedient to his lawes. Therfore hath he poured vpon vs his wrathfull displeasure, and straunge battayle, which maketh vs haue to do on euery side, yet will we not vnderstand. He

burneth vs vp, yet it sinketh not into our hartes.
                     Because they haue sorfaken my laweIerem. 9. that I gaue them, and haue not harde my voyce, nor yet walked therafter but folow ed the wickednes of their owne hartes, & runne after straung gods, as their fathers taught them:
                     Therfore thus saith the Lorde of hostes the god of Israell: beholde I wil feede this people with wormewoode, and geue them gall to drinke: I wil scatter them amonge the Heathen, whom nether they nor their fathers haue knowne. And I wil sende a sword amonge thē to persecute them and neuer leaue, vnto I bring them to nought
                     If ye wil not obey me, saith the LordeIerem. 17 to walk in my lawes whiche I haue geuē you, and to heare the words of my seruāts the Prophets whom I sent vnto you, and rising vp timely, and stil sēding. If ye will not folow them I say, then will I do vnto this house as I did vnto Silo, & will make this Citie to be abhorred of all the people of the earth.
                     I wil send vpon them, sworde, honger,Ierem. 29. & pestilēce, because they haue not regarded my words, which I sent to them sayth the

Lord by my seruauntes the Prophets.
                     They would not take hede saith y• lord,Zach. 7 but turned their backe, and stopped their eares, that they should not heare. Yea they made their hartes as an Adamant stone, least they should heare the law and words which the Lord of hostes sent in his spirit by the Prophetes afore time. Wherefore the Lord of hostes was very wroth at thē. And thus it came to passe, that like as hee spake and they woulde not heare, euen so they cried and I would not heare, saith the Lord of hostes.
                  
                  
                     Sentences out of the olde Testament.
                     NOhe preached to the olde world andGen. 7 exhorted them to repent and amend their life, or els god woulde surelye plage them. But they laughed Nohe and hys doctrine to scorne, and continued in their abhominable, and wicked liuinge. What folowed? was not al the world drowned, right persons onely excepted?
                     Lot seing the vnnaturall most filthyeGen. 19 vnclennes of the stinking Sodomits coun selled them to cease so to muche licentiouslye▪ to offende their Lorde God. They

would not heare Lot, nor his sermons, but churlishly entreated him: what folowed: Wer they not consumed with water, fyre and brimstone from heauen? O most dread full plages.
                     After what sorte the Israelites were plaged for their disobediēce to gods word, the bookes of the old Testamente do euidently declare.
                     The despisers of Gods word are punished manye and sundrye wayes: as wyth sword, pestelence, hunger, wilde beastes and fyre.
                     
                        Of the sworde.
                        
                           Read Exod. 5. Leuit. 26. Deut. 22. Iob. 19. Esay. 1. Iere. 9. 15. 20. 25. 29. 42. 43. 46. 50.
                        
                        Of the pestelence.
                        
                           Reade. Exod. 5. Len. 26. Deut. 18. 32. 1. Reg. 24. Psalm. 104. 1. Par. 22. Ezech. 7. 14 18. 33. 23. 38. Math. 
                                 •…
                              4.
                        
                        Of hunger.
                        
                           Read
                                 •…
                               Deut. 28. 32. 1. Reg. 24. Psalm. 104 Eccle. 39. Iere. 1
                                 •…
                              . 14. 18. 54. Amos. 8. Act. 11. Apoc. 18.
                        
                        Of Beastes.
                        
                           Read Leuit. 26. Deut. 22. 1. Reg. 27. 3. Reg. 13. Sap. 16. Esay. 18. Ieremy. 11. 15. 27. 34. Ezech. 4. 5. 14. 20. 32. 13. 39. Ose. 
                                 •…
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           Of Fire.
                        
                           Read. Gene. 19. Leuit. 10. Nume. 1. 16. 21. Deut. 32. Iosue. 7. 3. Reg. 18. 2. Par. 7. Iob. 1. 15. 20. 31. Psalm. 10. 87. Esay. 9. 26 66. Ier. 15. 2. 7. Treno. 1. 2. Baruc. 4. Eze. 22 28. 30.. 38. 39. Danie. 3. Ose. 8. Amos. 1. 2. Abd. 1. Mich. 6. Sopho. 2. Nahum. 3. Zach. 11. 12. 13. Apo. 9. 11, 18. 19. 20.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Sentences out of the newe Testament.
                     Whosoeuer shall not receiue you norMath▪ 10 heare your Sermons, goe ye oute of that house or citye, and shake the duste of your feete. Uerely I say vnto you it shal be more easy for the land of Sodome and Gomorre at the day iudgement, then for that city.
                     Wo bee to the Choraryn, wo be to theMath. 11 Bethsaida. For if the miracles which wer shewed in you, had bene done in Tyre and Sidon, they had repented long agone in sackecloth and ashes. Neuerthelesse I saye vnto you, it shal be easier for Tyre and S
                           •…
                         don at the day of iudgment, then for yon. And thou Caparnaum, whiche art lift vp vnto heauen, shalt be broughte downe to hel. For if the miracles, whiche haue bene done in thee, had bene shewed in Sodome,

they had remayned vnto this day. Neuertheles I say to you it shalbe easier for the land of Sodome in the daye of iudgeMath. 21 ment, then for thee.
                     The kingdom of God shalbe taken frō you, and shalbe geuen to a nation whiche shall bringe foorth the fruites of it. And whosoeuer it shall fall vpon it will grindMath. 13 him to pouder.
                     O Ierusalem, Ierusalem which killest the Prophets, and stonest them whiche are sent to thee, how often woulde I haue gathered thy children together as the hen ga thered her chekins vnder her wings, and ye would not. Behold your habitationLuke. 10. shalbe lefte vnto you desolate.
                     He that heareth you, heareth me, and he that despiseth you, despiseth me, and heIohn. 3. that despiseth me despiseth him y• sent me.
                     This is the condemnacion that light is come into the world and men loued darknes more then, light because their deedesIohn. 12. were euel.
                     He that refuseth me, sayeth Christ and receaueth not my wordes, hathe one that iudgeth him. The worde that I haue spoken shal iudge him at the last day.
                     
                        If I had not com and spoken vnto them,Iohn. 5. they shoulde haue had no synne, but now they haue nothynge to cloke their sinne withal.Act. 13.
                     
                     It was mete that the worde of God should first haue bene preached vnto you, but seyng you put it from you, and thinke your selues vnworthye of euerlasting life, lowe tunre to the gentiles for so hath the Lord commaunded vs.1. Thes. 4
                     
                     He that despiseth the preacher despiseth not man, but God which hath sent his holy Spirite among you.Heb. 10▪
                        
                     
                     He that despiseth Moses law dieth without mercy vnder two or iii. witnesses. Of how much sorer punishmente suppose ye, shal he be counted worthy, which treadeth vnder foote the son of God, and counteth the bloud of the testament asl an vnholy thinge? Uerelye it is a fearefull thinge to fall into the handes of the liuing God.
                     The vngodly shal be so plaged, that theiApoca. 
                              •…
                           
                         shall seke death, and finde it, they shall desire to dye, and deathe shall flye from them.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the newe Testament.
                     THey that were called to the mariage &

would not come, but vngently treated the messengers, were destroyed and theyr city brent vp.
                     When Christ came neare to Ierusalem,Luke, 19 he beheld the city and wept on it, saying, if thou knewest also euen at this day, the things appertayninge vnto thy peace, thou wouldest be more diligent to looke vpon them.
                     But nowe are they hidde from thine eyes. For the dayes shal come vpon thee, that thine enemies shall caste a banke aboute thee, and besiege and keepe thee in on euerye side, and make thee euen with the grounde, with thy children which are in thee. And they shall not leaue one stone vpon an other, because thou knowest not the time of thy visitation. Hereof may we learne that Ierusalem was destroyed, because they would not receiue Christe nor his word, but despised the doctrine of their saluation, and the preachers of the same. If we do not repent and amend, the same or more greuous plages abide vs.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ Agaynst carnall security and fleshlye liuing withont feare of God.
                  IF Sathan tempteth thee to liue after the lusts of the flesh without all feare of God and to tak
                        •…
                     
                     
no thought for thy saluation, that by this meanes he may prouoke thee vnto all kind of wickednes: loke hat thou by no meanes geuest place to his temptations, but rather watche the more diligently about hyne owne healthe yt he may not preuayle agaiust hee, enarme thy selfe with stronge faithe, & alwaye et before thine eyes these Scriptures folowing.
                  
                     ☞ Sentences out of the olde Testament.
                     SEeke after God, and your soule shallPsalm. i
                              •…
                           
                         liue.
                     Seke the Lorde whyle he may be found,Esay. 55 and cal vpon him whyle he is nie. Let the vngodly man forsake his owne wayes, and the vnrighteous hys owne imaginations, and turne againe vnto the Lord, so shal he be mercifull vnto him. &c. Folow not the lust of thine owne hearte in thy strengthe, and saye not: tushe, howe haue I hadde strength? or who wyll bryng me vnder because of my workes? for doutles god shall auenge it. And say not: I haue committed no sinnes, & what euil hath hapned to me? For the almightye is a pacient rewarder. Because thy syn is forgeuen thee, be not therfore without feare, neither heape one sinne vpon another. And say not, tush: the mercye of the lord is great, he shall forgeue me my sinnes be they neuer so many. For like as he is merciful, so goeth wrath from

hym also, and his indignation commeth downe vpon sinners.
                     Make no tarying to turne vnto the lord & pute not of from day to day, for sodenly shall his wrathe come, and in the tyme of vengeaunce he shal destroy the.
                     A man knoweth not his tyme, but like as the fishes are taken with the angle, and as the byrdes are caught with the snare euen so aremen taken in the perillous time when it commeth sodenly vpon them.
                     Let thy garments be alway white, and let thine head lacke no ointment.
                  
                  
                     ☞ Examples out of the olde Testament.
                     THe people to whome. Nohe preached, woulde not amend but wente forth toGen. 7. nousle themselues in all kynde of worldlys pleasures, and euen in the mydes of their riotous liuing, the floude came and drowned them all.
                     The Sodomites laughing Lot and hysGen. 19. exhortations to scorne, and going forth to offende God with theyr to much beastlike voluptuo
                           •…
                        snes whan they thought themselues to be in moste safegard and furdest from any misfortune, were consumed vnto ass
                           •…
                        es wyth fire and brimston from heauē.
                     
                        The Iewes setting at nought y• admo4. Reg. 
                              •…
                           
                         nitions of Gods Prophets continued in all their wickednes and euen in the mids of their carnall securitie and fleshly quietnes, god sente their enemies vpon them, which destroied their coūtrey slew a great number of people, and led awaye most miserable captiues so many as pleased them, leauing the residue behynd them in moste wretched slauery.
                  
                  
                     Sentences out of the ne
                           •…
                         Testament.
                     WAtche for ye knowe not what houreMath. 24 your lord wil come. Of this be ye sure that if the housholder knewe what howre the thiefe woulde come he would surelye watche and not suffer his house to be broken vp. Therefore be ye also redye, for in such an hour as ye thinke not, wil the son of man come.Mhth. 2
                     
                     Watch and praye, that ye fall not into temptation.Luc 
                              〈◊〉
                           .
                     
                     Let your loines be gird about and your lightes be burning, and your selues like men that waite for their maister when he

will returne from the weddings, that as foone as he commeth and knocketh, they may open vnto him. Blessed are those seruauntes, whome the Lorde whan he commeth shall find waking.
                     Take hede, watch & pray: for ye knoweMarke. 13. not whan the time is: As a man which is gone into a strange country, and hath left his house, and geuen his substance to his seruaunts, and to euery man his worke, and commaunded the porter to watche: Watch ye therfore, for ye know not when the mayster of the house will come, at euē or at midnight, whether at the cockecrow ing, or in the dawning, lest if that he come sodenly, he find you sleping: and that I say vnto you, I say vnto all: watch.
                     Take heede to your selues, least your
                           
                              •…
                           uke. 21 hartes be greued with sur
                           •…
                        eting and dron kennes, and cares of the worlde, and that daye come sodenly on you. For as a snare shall it come on all them that sit on the face of the earth,
                     It is euen now hye time that we w
                           •…
                        ke
                           
                              •…
                           om. 13 out of sleepe.
                     Beholde nowe is the accepted time,Cor. 6. now is the day of health.
                     The day of the Lord shall come euen a
                           •…
                        
                        Thes. 5.
                        
a thefe in the night. When they shall saye peace and no danger, then commeth there on them soden destruction, as the trauayling of a woman with child, & they shall not escape. Let vs not sleepe as other doo but let vs watch and be sober.
                     The Lord is at hand.Phil. 4.
                     
                     Be patient and settle your hartes, forIacob. 5 the comming of the Lord draweth nigh. Behold the iudge slādeth before the dore.
                     Be sober and watche, for your aduersary1. Pet. 5. the deuil walketh aboute like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may deuour, whome resist being stedfast in fayth.
                     The daye of the Lorde shall come as a2. Pet. 3. theefe in the night.
                     Litle children euē now is the last time.1. Iohn. 2
                     
                     Yet a little while, & he that shal come,Heb. 10. wil come, and will not tary.
                     If thou shalt not watch, I wil come onApoc. 3 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         as a theefe, and thou shalt not know what hour I will come vpō thee. Behold I come shortly. Hold that which thou hast that no man take away thy crowne.
                     Beholde I stande at the dore to knock. yf any man heare my voyce, and open the doore I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me.
                     
                        The time is at hand. He that doth en
                           •…
                        
                        Apoc. 12 let him do euil stil. And he which is filthy, let him be filthy stil. And he that is righteous, let him be more righteous. And he that is holy, let him be more holy. And because I come shortly and my reward with me, to geue euery man accordinge as his deedes shalbe.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the newe Testament.
                     That seruaunt that diligētly watchethMath. 14 at all hours for his masters cōming & doth in the meane season such things as his ma ster hath appoynted him is blessed: for he shall enter into his masters ioye. But the seruaunt that liueth without care is idle, watceth not, loketh not diligently vpō his office thinketh not of his masters cōming smiteth his fellowes, eateth and drinketh with the dronken that seruant I say, shall haue his part with Hipocrites, and shalbe cast into vtter darknes, where wepinge & and gnashing of teeth shalbe.
                     The 5. wise virgines prepared both lampes and oyle, tarriing, and watchingMath. 25 for the comming of the bridgrome. There fore when he came they being in a redines

went in with him vnto the wedding. But the fiue folishe Uergines slumbred and slepte, so that when the bridegrome came they were vnprepared and hadde no oyle in theyr lampes, and therfore were they shutte out of the dores, and entred not into the mariage. Let vs therfore watche, for we know neither the daye nor the howre, when the sonne of man shall come.
                  
               
               
                  Against the slacknes of doyng good workes.
                  IF that futtle Sathan by his crafty persuasions woulde at any time make thee beleue that thou art so thorowly iustified by faith alone, and so perfectly saned by Christe onelye, that thou nedes
                        •…
                      not do any good workes nor yet bring forth the frutes of faith according to thy profession but liue as thou lust, and do what thou wilt, so at the full art thou saued thorow faith in Christe, take hed
                        •…
                      thou be not deceiued with this painted visar, but rather to the vtteri
                        •…
                     ost of thy power, labour to cō firme thy faith with the plenteous doynge of good workes workyng thinc owne saluation as blessed Paule saith with feare and trembling. And that thou maiest be the better encouraged so to do, set these sentences and examplee of the holy scripturs euer before the eies of thy minde.Gen. 17.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the olde Testament.
                     I am the almightye God walke before me and be perfect.
                     
                        Kepe the commaundementes of the lordDeut. 6. thy God, and his witnesses, and his couenauntes which he hath commaunded thee, and do thou that which is acceptable and good in the sighte of the Lorde, that thou mayest prosper.
                     Now Israel, what doth the lord thy godDeu. 10 require of thee? but to feare the Lorde thy God, and to walke in all his wayes, to loue him, and to serue the Lorde thy God with all thyne harte, and withal thy soul, namely that thou kepe the commaundementes of the lorde and hys ordinaunces, that thou maiest doe wel and prosper.Psalme. 1.
                     
                     The faithful man is like a tree planted by the water side, that will bring forth his fruite in due season.
                     Thou hatest althem (O Lord, that workPsalme. 5. iniquity.
                     Lord who shall dwel in thy tabernacle?Psal. 15. who shall rest vpon thy holy hill? Euen he that leadeth an vncorrupt life & worketh righteousnesse. &c.
                     ¶ Reade the whole Psalme.
                     Departe from euill and do good.Psal. 34
                     
                     Put thou thy truste in the Lord, and bePsalm. 37. thou doing good.
                     Cease to do euil, learne to do good, SekeEsay. 1.
                        
to do right, deliuer the oppressed, helpe the fatherlesse to his right, defend the widow.
                     Breake thy bread to the hungry, the nedy,Esay. 58. and the wayfaring man lead thou into thy house. Whan thou seest a naked man, couer him, and hide not thy face from thy neighbour. &c.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the olde Testament.
                     Nohe was perfect and iust in his generations,Gen. 6. 7. and walked with god, loued god, that is to say, beleued in god, leued god, feared god, soughte the glory of god, and framed his life according to the wil of god, being plenteous in al good and godly workes: therfore God preserued him and his, when he dro
                           •…
                        ned all suche as were wicked persons and doers of no good workes.
                     Abraham was obedient to the wil of godGen. 17 and walked after his holye commaundements, euer doing good works: god therfore meruelously blessed hym, made him the father of many nations, and promised him, that in his seede all kinreds shoulds be blessed.
                     God saw the workes of the NiniuitesIon. 3 (which vndoubtedly sprange of faith, for they beleued the words of the Prophet) &

he had psty on them and spared them.
                  
                  
                     Sentences out of the new Testament
                     Now is the axe put to the roote of theMath. 3 trees. Euerye tree therefore that bringeth not foorth good fruites is hewen downe & cast into the fyre.
                     Let your light so shine before men thatMath. 5 they may see your good workes and glorify your father which is in heauen
                     Euerye good tree bringeth foorth goodMath. 7 fruite. An euil tree bringeth euil frute. A good tree cannot bring foorth euill frute nor an euill tree good frute. Euerye tree that bringeth not forth good fxnte, is hewen down andeast tnto
                           •…
                        he fyre.
                     Whosoeuer heareth of me these words 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        Math. 7 doth the same, I wil likē him vnto a wise man, which bnilte his house on a rock, &c.
                     A good man out of the good treasure of his hart, bringeth soorth good thinges, andMath. 12 an euill man out of that euill treasure, bringeth forth euil thinges.
                     If ye were Abrahās children, ye would
                           
                              •…
                           ohn. 8 do Abrahams workes.
                     We knowe that God heareth no sinners, but if anye man be a worshipper of
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           . 9 God and obedyent his wil, him heareth he
                     He that hath my commaundements, &

kepeth thē, he it is that loueth me. If any man loueth me, he will keepe my wordes.
                     In the sighte of God they are not righteous which heare tee lawe but the doers of the lawe shalbe 
                           •…
                        uste fied.
                     We are the workemanship of God created in Christ Iesu, vnto good workes, which god had prepared that we shoulde walke in them.
                     Be ye renued in the spirit of your minds and put on the the newe man which after the image of god is shapen in righteousnes and true holines.
                     walke worthy of y• lorde in al things y• please, being fruitful in al good workes, & 
                           •…
                        ncreasing in the knowledge of God.
                     Br
                           •…
                        theren be not werye in wel doing.
                     Be to them that beleue an example in woord, in cōuersation, in loue, in spirit, in faithe, & puernes.
                     Thou which art the man of Godfollowe righteousnes, godlines, loue, patience, and 
                           •…
                        eaknes.
                     The suer grounde of God remaineth & hath this seale. the lorde knoweth them y• are his: and let euery man that calleth on the name of Christ depart from iniquitye.
                     Lusts of youth loke thou auoyd & folow

righteousnes, fayth, loue, & peare wt them that call on the Lord with a pure hart.1. Pet. 2.
                     
                     Dearely beloued I besech you as straū
                        gers and pilgrimes, abstaine from fleshly lustes, which fight against the soule. And see y• ye haue honest conuersation among the heathen, that they which backbite you as ill doers, maye see your good works, and prayse God in the day of visitation.1. Ioh. 1.
                     
                     If we say we haue felowship with god, and yet walke in darknes, we lie, & do not the truth. But if we walke in light, euen as he is in light, then haue we fellowship with hym, and the bloude of Iesu Christ hys sonne maketh vs cleane frō all sinne.
                     He that doth righteousnes, is righteus.1. Iohn. 3. He that cōmitteth sinne, is of the deuill, for the deuil sinneth from the beginning.
                     See ye be doers of the worde, and notIames. 1. hearers onely, deceauing your selues.
                     Read the whole epistle of S. Iames.
                     God sayth to the false and fayned Christians:Apoc. 2 I knowe the blasphemie of them which cal themselues Iewes, and are not, but the Sinagoge of Sathan.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the new Testament.
                     THe idle were reproued because theyMath. 20.
                        
wrought not, & they that would laboure, were hired into the vineyarde, & at nighte receiued their reward.
                     The seruauntes which receiued talētsMath. 2
                              •…
                           
                         of their Lord and occupied them and gayned moe by them, are praised and rewarded for wel doing. But the idle seruaunte whiche would not occupy the talent that he receiued of his Lorde but went and hid it in the grounde, gaining nothing therewith, was cast into vtter darknesse, where weping and gnashing of tethe is.
                     The fig tree whiche was vnfruitful, & Marc. 1
                              •…
                           
                         brought for the nothing but leaues, was cursed and withered away.
                     Zache a ruler amonge the PublicanesLuke. 19▪
                         gaue half his goods to the poore and if he did any man wrong, he restored him foure times as much. Therefore said Christe vn to him: this day is helth come to this house forasmuche as he also is become the childe of Abraham.
                  
               
               
                  Against the troublous tempestes of sicknes, of losse of goods or any other kinde of aduersitie.
                  IF Sathan when thou art assailed 
                        •…
                      any kinde of trouble, laboureth to moue thee to despaire of Gods good wil toward thee, as though he had vtterly forsaken thee, geuen thee ouer, and care no more for thee, but sendeth thee that punishment and

layeth y• cros vpon thy back 
                        〈◊〉
                      tokē of his anger and heauy displeasure against the, take hede that y• doest not submit thy selfe to his suttle sugestiōs, but rather perswade thy selfe that thy crosse.
                  Whatsoeuer it he cōmeth of the good wil of god towarde thee, and is sente vnto thee for thy healthe, comforte, and saluation. Looke that thou therfore take it both patiently and thankfully and that thou maist so do furnish thy brest with these treasures of Gods most blessed word.
                  
                     ☞ Examples out of the olde Testament.
                     After y• lord hath punished the & tried the
                           
                              •…
                           eut. 5. at last he wil haue pity on the. The lord kileth & maketh aliue bringeth down to the graue & fecheth vp again. The lord maketh pore & maketh rich bringeth low and heauethe vpon high.
                     Call vppon me in the time of thy troble,Psal. 50. & I wil deliuer the & thou shalt honor me. Blessed is y• man whō thou nurterest, O Lord, and teachest him thy lawe.
                     It is for my welth y• thou haste broughtPsal. 119. me vnder, y• I may learn thy righteousnes
                     Naked came I out of my mothers wōbeIob. 1. & naked shall I turne thither againe. The Lord gaue & y• lord hath taken away euen as it pleaseth y• lord so is it come to passe, blessed be the name of the lorde.
                     If we haue receued prosperity at y• hādIob. 2. of god, why should we not also receue and

suffer aduersitye.
                     Blessed is the man whō God punishethIob. 5. therfore refuse not thou ye chastening of ye almighty. For though he make a woūd he geueth a plasture, though he smite, his hād maketh whole agayn.
                     My Sonne despise not the chastning ofPro. 3. the lord neither faint when thou art rebuked of him. For whom the Lorde loueth, him he chasteneth & yet delighteth in him, as a father in his owne sonne.
                     Whatsoeuer hapneth vnto thee, receiueEcble. 2. it, suffer in heuines and be patiente in thy trouble. For like as gold and siluer are tried in the fire, euen so are acceptable men in the fornace of aduersity.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the olde Testament.
                     Iob being grieuously plagued not onelyIob. 1. with the losse of his goods, but also with di 
                           •…
                        ers diseases of his dody, praysed the Lord 
                           •…
                        uen in the middest of his trouble.
                     Tobye when he had lost his sight grudgedTob. 2. not aginst god that the plage of blindnes chaunsed vnto him but remained stedfast in the feare of god, and thanked God 
                           •…
                        l the dayes of his life.
                     Ezechias being warned of God by the Prophet to prepare himselfe vnto death
                           •…
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
death, prayed vnto god in the time of hys sicknes, and obtained fifteene yeres longer to liue.
                     Manasses being afore an Idolatour & a2. Par. 3 maintayner of Idolatry, after that god had plagued 
                           •…
                        i, euen whē he was in tribulatiō He besoght ye Lord his god, & humbled him self excedingly before y• god of his fathers, & made intercessiō to him: He hard his pray er, & brought him againe to Ierusalem into hys kingdome.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the new Testament
                     IF any man wil come after me, let hi forMath▪ 26 sake him self & take his cros & folow me.
                     By manye tribulations must we enterAct. 14. into the kingdome of heauen▪
                     
                     We reioyce in tribulatiō, for we knowRom. 6 that tribulation bringeth experience, experience bringeth hope, and hope maketh not ashamed.
                     If we suffer together, we shalbe gloryfiedRom. 8 together. For I suppose that the afflictions of this life ar not worthy of y• glory which shalbe shewed vpon vs.
                     Be patient in tribulation.Rom. 12
                     
                     If we liue, we liue to be at the lords wilRom. 
                              •…
                           4 And if we dye, we dy, at y• Lords wil, whether we liue therfore or dy we are y• lords.
                     
                        While we are punished, we are corrected1. Cor. 
                              •…
                           
                         of the Lord, lest we shuld with this world be condemned.
                     We are not weried, but though our ont2. Cor. 4 warde man perishe, yet the inwarde man is renewed day by day. For our exceading tribulation whiche is shorte and lyghte, prepareth an excedinge and euerlastinge weyght of glory vnto vs, while we loke not on the thinges whiche are seene but on the thynges that are not seenne. For thinges whiche are seene, are temporall, but things which are not sēe, are eternall.
                     Reade the fist Chapter of the seconde to the Corinth.2. Cor. 
                              •…
                           
                        
                     
                     My strength is made perfect thorowe weaknesse. Uery gladlye therfore will I reioyce of my weakenes, that the strength of Christe maye dwell in me. &c.Iacob. 
                              •…
                           
                        
                     
                     Reade the. 12. chapter, to the Hebrues.
                     Be pacient aud settle your hartes: for the commyng of the Lord draweth nye.
                     Take the Prophetes for an example of suffring aduersitie and of long patience: whiche spake in the name of the Lorde Be hold we count them happy which endure. 
                           •…
                        e haue heard of the patience of Iob, and

haue knowne what end the Lorde made, for the Lord is very pitiful and mercifull.
                           
                              •…
                           . Pet, 2.
                     
                     The Lord knoweth how to deliuer the godly out of temptacion.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the newe Testament.
                     The prodigall sonne before hee wasLuc. 15. plagued gaue his mind to all kind of riot and vnthriftye rule, but after that he was striken with pouertye, he knowledged his faulte, he submited himself to his fathers wil & pleasure, and so was receued again into fauour.
                     A certayne man after he had bene punishedIhon. 5. with sicknes for his sin by the space of thirty eight yeares, was made whole of Christe.
                     There haue bene many good men bothHeb. 
                              •…
                           
                           ▪
                         in the olde & new testament of whom som were racked and woulde not be deliuered that that they might receiue a better resurrection some tasted of mockinges and scourgings some of bondes and emprisonmente some were hewen a sunder, were tempted were slayne wyth swoordes walked vp and down in sheues skinnes in

goates skins, in neede, in tribulation, and vexatiō, which the world was not worthy of, they wandred in wildernes, in mountaynes, in dens, & in caues of the earth. &c.
                  
               
               
                  ☞ Against the temptation of the deuel for not satisfiing the lawe, of god, and for nby sinfull liuinge.
                  If Sathan at the houre of death or any other timet would pluck the from thine assuered & stedfast faith in Christs bloud, and perswade thee that thou art but a dampned wretch forasmuch as thou hast not so trayned thy life that thou hast satisfied the law of God, but rather liued wiakedly and therfore deserued euerlasting damnation, be on good comfort, des
                        •…
                      paire not, harken not to this wicked suggestions, neither haue thou respecte to thy workes & deedes (which whan they be moste righteous and pure) ax as the Prophet saith like a cloth polluted with m
                        •…
                      strue if they be cōpared to that puritye and cleanes whiche the law requireth, and shoulde be iudged of Gods righteousnes according to their desarts, but settle thine eyes stedfast on Christ and his merites. consideringe not what thou haste doone, but what Christ hath done for thee, if thou repent and beleu
                        •…
                      and alwayes haue these moste comfortable Scriptures in thy remembrance.
                  
                     Sentences out of the olde Testament.
                     AL they that put their trust in thee, shallPsal. 
                              •…
                           
                           ▪
                         not be put io confusion. Call to remem brāce (O Lord) thy tender mercies and thy

louing kindnes which haue bene euer of olde. Oh remember not the sins & offences of my youth, but accordinge vnto thy mercy thincke thou vpon me O Lord, for thy goodnes sake. Mine eyes are euer looking vnto the Lord, for he shal plucke my feete out of the net.
                     Because he hath put his trust in me, IPsal. 91 wil deliuer him, I wil defēd him because he hath knowne my name.
                     Reade the. 104. Psalme.
                     I know that thou wouldst maliciously
                           
                              •…
                           say. 48 offend, sayth God. Therfore haue I called thee a transgressoure, euen from my mothers womb. Neuertheles for my names sake I will withdrawe my wrath, and it shalbe for my honours sake, if I patiently forbeare thee and roote thee not out.
                     By the knowledge of him whiche is my
                           
                              •…
                           ay. 53 righteous seruaunte sayth God the father of christ He shal iustefy the multitude, forasmuch as he hath borne away theyr sins.
                     To know thee O Lord, is perfect righte15 ousnes, yea to know thy righteousnes and power, is the roote of immortality.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the olde Testament.
                     Adam transgressed thē commaundementn. 3
                        
of God in Paradise, and by his transgression made both hymselfe and all vs bound to eternall dampnation.Gen. 9
                     
                     Nohe fell into the sinne of dronkennesGen. 19
                     
                     Lot was not onelye dronken, but also lay with his owne daughters: and so committed the greuous sinne of incest.
                     Abraham denied his wife.Gen. 20
                     
                     Moses committed manslaughter. DauidExo. 2 committed both manslaughter and whoredome.
                     Salomon was an idolator.2. Reg. 11
                     
                     All these wyth manye other of the olde3. Reg. 1
                              •…
                           
                         Testament were sinners and offended the Lord their God by breaking of his lawes, yet for theyr fayth whiche they had in that blessed seede which was so oft promised of God the father, euen Iesus Christe they were saued.
                  
                  
                     Sentences out of the newe Testament.
                     We are not vnder the law but vnder grace.
                     The law of the spirite that bringeth lifeRom
                              •…
                            8 thorow Iesu Christ hath made me free frō the law of sinne and death.
                     Christ is the perfect fulfilling of the laweRo. 10 to iustefy all that beleue
                     No man is iustefied by the law in the sightGala. 3.
                        
of god. The iust, that is the faithful christian, shall liue by faithe.
                     Christ hath deliuered vs from the curse of the lawe, whyle he was made accursed for vs.Gal. 5.
                     
                     As manye of you as are iustified by the lawe, are fallen from grace. We loke for and hope in the spirite to be iukified thorowe fayth.Eph. 
                              •…
                           
                        
                     
                     Christ is our peace, he hath broken down the walle that was a stop betwene vs, he hath also put awaye thorow his fleshe the cause of hatred, that is to say: the lawe of commaundementes contained in the lawe written, be so making peace hath reconciled vs to God thorow his crosse.
                     Christe hath put oute the, band wrighting,Colos. 
                              •…
                           
                         that was agaynst vs contained in the lawe written, and that hath he taken out of the way and hath fastned it to his crosse and hathe spoyled rule & power, and hath made a shew of them openly, and hath triumphed ouor them in his owne person.
                     Be it knowne to you, ye men and brethren,Act. 13. that thorowe this manne Christ: Is preached vnto you the forgeuenes of sinnes, and that by him all that beleue at iustified from al things from the whiche 
                           •…
                        
                        
could not be iustified by the law of Moses
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the new Testament.
                     Math. 9
                     MAthew was a tol gatherer.Math. 20
                     
                     The Apostles were ambicious and did striue amōg them, who should be highest and of greatest authoritye.Luke. 7.
                     
                     Mary Magdalen was a greuouse sinner.Iohn. 18
                     
                     Peter denied and forsoke Christ thrise.Act. 9.
                     
                     Paule persecuted the congregation of Christe.Ioh. 7
                     
                     Al these yea and why not? transgressed the lawe of God (for as Christ sayth) Moses hath geuen you a law and yet none of you do fulfil it not with standing for theyr repentance and fayth in Christes bloud they obteyned remission for their sinnes and are made the sonnes of God, heires of God & felow heyres with christe of euerlastinge glory.
                     For if righteousnes come by the lawe,Galat. 1 then died Christ in vayne but euerl
                           •…
                        sting life is y• gieft of God thorow Iesus Christ our Lord.
                  
               
               
                  Against disperation for thy late conuersion and turning vnto God.
                  IF Sathan lay to thy charge that thou commest very late and turneste vnto God out of tyme, and therefore there is no hope to bee looked

                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , set these scriptures before thine eyes, and euer remember that there is no conuersion vnto God, to late in this life 
                        •…
                     f it come of faith, but at whatsoeuer houre a sinne
                        •…
                      repenteth, beleueth and turneth vnto God, he is well accepted and freely receiueth remission of all his sinnes.
                  
                     ☞ Sentences out of the olde Testament.
                     Let the vngodly man forsake hys owneEsay. 55. wayes, and the vnrighteous his owne imaginat ions, and turne againe vnto the Lord, so shal he be merciful vnto him, & to our God, for he is very ready to forgeue.
                     Returne (O thou rebel Israel) saith theIerem. 3 lord, and I wil not turne awaye my face from you. For I am holy sayth the lord, & I wil not turne away my face from you. For I am holy saith the Lorde, and I wyll not be angry for euermore.
                     As truely as I liue, saith the Lord god,Ezech. 32 I haue no pleasure in the death of the wic ked, but much rather that the wicked turne from his way and liue. Turne you, turne you, from youre vngodlye waies. O ye of the house of Israell. Oh, wherefore will ye die. The wickednes of the wicked shal not hurt him whensoeuer hee conuerteth from his vngodlines.
                     
                        If the wicked shal repente him and turnEzech. 18 from al his sins which he hath wroughte, and shal kepe all my precepts and do iudg ment and righteousnes, he shall liue and shall not dye, I will not remember all his iniquities which he hath wronght. In his righteousnes which he hath wroght, shall he liue. It is not my will saith the lorde, that the wicked should dye, and not rather that he shoulde turne from hys wayes and liue.
                     Turne and repent ye from al your iniquities, and your iniquityes shall work you no displeasure. Cast away from you all youre wickednesse, wherein ye haue offended, & make you a newe hearte, and new spirite. And wherfore wyl ye die. O ye house of Israell. For I wyll not that any man should dye, sayeth the Lord. Returne therfore and liue.
                     Turne to the Lord, youre God, for heIoel. 
                              •…
                           
                         is great and merciful pacient and of much kindnes, and redye at all tymes to forgeue yea, euē whē he is at the point to punish.
                     At all tymes when a sinner turneth vnto me sayth the lord. I wyll no more beare hys iniquityes in my mynde, but freely forgeue them.
                     
                        God appointeth here no time of our cō uersion, but whensoeuer we turne, he pro miseth vs fauour, life mercy, and forgeuenes of sinne.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the olde Testament.
                     After that the Prophete Nathan at theReg. 12. cōmaundement of god, had rebuked kinge Dauid for his dissolute manner of liuing. Dauid strait waies with a sorowful repen taunt hart turned vnto the Lord, and hū
                        bly confessed his sinnes, saying. I haue offended the Lord. The Prophet immediatly answered, the Lord also hath put away thy sinne. Dauid did not so sone conuerte but that he was as sone forgeuen to signifie vnto vs, that at what so euer time wee vnfainedly turne vnto the Lorde our god, he will haue mercy on vs and forgeue vs.
                     The Niniuites for theire abhominable
                           
                              •…
                           na. 3. liuyng were thretned vtterly to be destroi ed within forty dayes but they falling vnto repentaunce and turning vnto the lord theire GOD were forgeuen, spared and not destroyed.
                  
                  
                     Sentences out of the new Testament
                     
                        They that are whole, haue no nede of aMath. 
                              •…
                           
                         Phisicion, but they that are sicke? I came not to call the righteous but sinners vnto repentaunce?
                     Come vnto me all ye that laboure andMath. 
                              •…
                           
                         are laden, and I shall refreshe you. Heere Christ prescribeth no time, he only biddeth vs come and be the burthens of our sinnes neuer so greuous and heauy, yet wyll be ease vs of them.
                     The Sonne of man came to seeke andLuc. 19 saue that which was lost.
                     God wil haue all men to be saued, and1. Tim. 
                              •…
                           . to come to the knowledge of the truthe. If any man sinneth, we haue an aduocate1. Ihon. 2
                              •…
                           
                         with god the father, Iesus Christ ye righte ous one. And he it is that obtaineth mercy for our sinnes, not for our sinnes onely, but for all the worldes.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the new Testament
                     The labourers in the Lordes vineyardeMath. 1
                              •…
                           . that came last of all receiued their peny s
                           •…
                        
                        wel as they that came in the morning, nei ther had one more then another.
                     The history of the thefe, which was fulLu
                              •…
                           . 32. of wicked deedes, and neuer turned vnto God, vntil the very houre of his deathe

declareth manifestlye that there is no con uersion in this life to late, if it be accompanied with true repentaunce and vnfained fayth. The thief hanging on the crosse, and at the poynt of death onlye sayd to Christ, Lorde remenber me when thou cōmest into thy kingdome. And Christ wel acceptīg his conuersion, sayd vnto him: truly I say vnto thee, this day shalt thou be with me in Paradise.
                  
               
               
                  Against sinne, death, and hell.
                  IF Sathan in the time of sicknes or els whā, goe about to fray thee & to quenche thy spirit, either with the greatnes of thy sinnes or els with the error and fearcenes of death and hell, be not dismayd, but with a lustye courage resiste his temptations, with these most swete and comfortable scriptures.
                  
                     Sentences out of the olde Testament.
                     I am he indede sayth god he which putethEsay. 43 away thy sinnes, yea & that for myne own sake, & will remēber them no more. As for thine offēces I haue driuen thē away like the cloudes and thy sinnes as the miste. Turne thee againe vnto me, for I haue redemed thee.
                     Where is ther such a god as thou art
                           •…
                        
                        Mich. 7. that pardonest wickednes, and forgeuest

the offences of the remnaunt of thine heritage. He keepeth not his wrathe for euer. And why? for his delighte is to haue compassion. He shall turne againe, and be mercifull to vs, hee shall putte downe our wickednes, and caste al our sinnes into the bottome of the sea.
                     Out of the power of death sayth the lord wil I deliuer them, yea from the death it self wil I redeme them. O death I will be thy death, O hel, I wil swallow thee vp.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the olde Testament.
                     That holy king and prophet Dauid, beingPsal. 20. fully perswaded that by Christ which was to come, Sathans head was broken a sunder, sinne was vanquished, death was ouercome, hell was swalowed vp, that they could nothinge hurt that faythful man lamented & sorowed, that he continued so long in this vale of misery, and moste hartelye wished to be deliuered out of thys prison, and to goe vnto the Lord his God.
                     That godly and aunciente father Toby, knowing that neither sinne, death, nor hell, can do any thing against gods chosē people which in Christe haue gotten the

victory ouer them al, so that they nede not to feare death, nor anye thing to come after this life, praied to god on this maner: Nowe O lord drale with me according to thy wyl, and commaūd my spirite to be receiued in peace, for more expedient were it for me to dye, than to liue.
                  
                  
                     Sentences out of the new Testament.
                     CHriste shall saue hys people from theirMath. 1 sinnes.
                     Behold the Lambe of God that takethIohn. 1 away the sinnes of the world.
                     There is no damnation to thē that areRom. 8. graft in Christ Iesu.
                     Christe came into the worlde to saue
                           
                              •…
                           . Titus. 1. sinners.
                     The bloud of Iesu Christe maketh vs
                           
                              •…
                           . Iohn. 1 cleane from all synne.
                     Thorow the name of Christ al ProphetsActes. 13 beare witnes, that so many as beleue in him, shal receiue remissiō of their sinnes. Death is swalowed vp into victory. Wher1. Cor. 15 is thy sting O death? Wher is thy victory O hell? The sting of deathe is sinne, and the power of sin is the lawe. But thankes bee to God, which hath geuen vs the victory thorow our Lord Iesus Christ.
                     
                        By death hath Christ put him to flightHeb. 2. that had lordshippe ouer deathe, that is to saye, the Deuill, that he myght delyuer them, which thorow the fear of death were all theyr lyfe tyme in daunger of bondage.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the new Testament.
                     SO sone as the auncient father SimeonLuke. 
                              •…
                           
                         had seene and receiued Christe into his armes, he fering neither sin, death nor hel, shewed himselfe redy to depart out of this world, and spake with a ioyful voice O Lord now lettest thou thy seruaunte depart in peace. &c.
                     Blessed Paule knowing that thorowePhil. 1. Christ the power of synne, death and hel is so altogether weekened, that they can do the faithful no harme: wished to be losoned out of this world, and to be with Christ.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ Against them that deny the resurrection of the body.
                  IF that olde enemy Sathan labour to perswade thee, that there is no resurrection of the dead, but as the bodye returneth to death, so shall it for euer continue in the earth, & neuer receiue lyfe again, nor line either in glory or in peace after this present life, that therfore thou maiest liue as thou iust, defende thy selfe against his cruel assaults 
                        〈◊〉
                      these sentēces & exāples of the holy scripture.
                  
                     
                     Sentences out of the olde, Testament.
                     The Lorde killeth and maketh alyue againe,Reg. 2. bringeth downe to the graue, and stretchet
                           •…
                         vp againe.
                     I am sure, that my redemer liueth, and
                           
                              •…
                           b. 19. that I shall rise out of the earth in the latter day, and that I shall be clothed againe with this skinne, and see god in my flesh, yea I my self shall beholde him, not wyth other but with these same eyes.
                     These that be deade will I raise vp againe
                           
                              •…
                           . Esdr. 2 from their places, and bringe them out of the graues.
                     Thy dead shall liue, euen with my bodyEsay. 26. shall they rise againe. Awake and singe ye that dwel in the dust. For thy dew is euen as the dew of hearbes, and the earthe shall cast out of her them that be vnder her, the earth shall disclose her own bloud, and shal no more hide 
                           •…
                        em that are slaine in her.
                     Your bones shall florish like an herbe.Esay. 66
                     
                     Beholde saith god, I wil put breath inEzech. 37. to you, that ye may liue, I wil geue you sinowes, and make fleshe growe vpon you and couer you ouer with skin, and so geue you breath that ye may liue & knowe that I am the Lord. Thus saith the Lord god,

behold I wil open your graues (O my peo ple) and take you out of your SepulchresDan. 12.
                     
                     Many of them that slepe in the duste of the earth shall awake, some to euerlasting life, some to perpetuall shame and reproofe.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the olde Mestament.
                     THe Prophet Helias raised vp frō death3. Reg. 1
                              •…
                           
                         vnto life the Sonne of the widdow of Sarepta, which is in Sidon.
                     Helizeus obtained of God a Childe for4. Reg. 
                              •…
                           
                         his Hostesse, which dyed, and as afterward by the prayer of Helizeus raysed vnto life.
                     Read and mark diligently the 37. Chapiter of Ezechiel.
                     A certaine woman with her 7. Children2. Mac. 
                              •…
                           
                         were cruellye put to death because they would not eate swines flesh, contrary to gods worde at the commaundement of the kinge. The seconde of the brethren saide vnto the kinge, thou moste vngracious person puttest vs now to deathe, but the kinge of the worlde shall raise vs vp (which dy for his lawes) into resurrection of euerlasting life.
                     The mother of the 7. Children sayde thus vnto them: I cannot tel how ye 
                           •…
                        am

in my wōbe, for I neither gaue you breath nor soule, no, nor life. It is not I that ioyned the members of youre bodyes together, but the maker of the worlde, whiche fashioned the birth of man and began all thinges. Euen he also of his owne mercye shall geue you breath and life againe, like as ye now regard not your own selues for his lawes sake.
                  
                  
                     ☞ Sentences out of the newe Testament.
                     AS touching the resurrection of y• deadMath. 23 haue ye not reade, what is said vnto you of god, which saieth: I am Abrahams god, and Isaackes god, and god is not the god of the dead, but of the liuing.
                     The houre shall come in the whiche all
                           
                              •…
                           ohn. 5. that are in the graues shall heare his voice and shall come forthe, they that haue done good, vnto ye resurectiō of life, & thei ye haue done euel vnto ye resurrectiō of damnatiō.
                     I know that my brother shall rise again
                           
                              •…
                           ohn. 11 at the latter day.
                     God hath raised vp ye Lord, and shall rais
                           •…
                        
                        
                           
                              •…
                           . Cor. 6. vs vp by his power. If there be no risinge again from death, then is Christ not risen.
                     If Christ is not risen, then is our preaching
                           
                              •…
                           . Cor. 15 vaine, & your faith is also vaine.
                     
                        Read and commend to memory the xv. Chapiter of the first to the Corinth.
                     The Lord Iesus shall chaunge our vlle bodies, that they may be fashioned like vn to his glorious body. &c.
                     I would not brethern haue yon ignorāt1. Tim. 4 concerning them which are fallen a slepe, that ye sorow not as other do, which haue no hope. For if we beleue y• Iesus Christe died & rose againe, euen so they also which slepe by Iesus, wil god bring againe with him. Read forth.
                  
                  
                     ☞ Examples out of the new Testament.
                     CHrist raised from death the daughter ofMath. 9 y• Rular, the Son of a certaine widow, and Lazarus, with many other. These are euident examples of our resurrection.
                     After Christ had geuen vp the ghoste,Math. 27. the graues did open, and the bodyes of ma ny Saintes whiche slept, arose, and came out of y• graues after his resurrectiō & cāe into the holy citie & appeared vnto many.
                     Christ rose againe from death the thirdMath. 28. day accordinge to the scriptures, and was sene of Cephas, then of the twelue. After that he was sene of mo then fiue hundreth brethern at once. &c
                     S. Peter raised Tabitha from death.Act. 9
                     
                     
                        S. Paule restored vnto life a certaine
                           
                              •…
                           ct. 20 yong man named Euticus.
                     Christe rebuked the Saduces, becauseMath. 22 they beleued not the resurrection of ye ded.
                     The Epicures and Stoykes laughed S
                           
                              •…
                           ct. 17. Paule to scorne, when as he at Athens taught the resurrection of the dead. But he defended the doctrine.
                  
               
               
                  Against them that deny the immortalitie of the soule.
                  IF Sathan or any of his, tempte thee to liue at thy pleasure, labouring to perswade the 
                        •…
                     y sophi sticall reasons of carnal imaginations y• the soul of man is but as the breath of other beastes, & that after the dissolutiō of the body it is nothing, nether liueth afterward, but hath an end with the bodye, take hede that thou geuest no place to such wicked and most damnable doctrine, but enarme thy selfe a gainst it wt these authorities of the holy Scripture
                  
                     ☞ Sentences out of the olde Testament.
                     GOd created man in his owne image,Gen. 1 in ye image of god created he him, male and female created he them.
                     The Lord god shope man euen dust frō
                        Gen. 2. the ground, and breathed in his nostrels the breathe of life, and Adam was made a liuing soule.
                     I should vtterly haue fainted, but that
                           
                              •…
                           salm. 27 I beleue verely to s
                           •…
                         the goodnes of ye lord

in the land of the liuing.
                     Like as the harte desireth the water brookes, so longeth my soule after thee O god. My soule is a thirste for god, yea euen for the liuing god, when shal I come to ap peare before the presence of god?
                     The bodye shalbe turned againe vntoEccles. 
                              •…
                           
                         earth, from whence it came, and the spirit that is the soule shall returne vnto God whiche gaue it.
                     God made man to be vndestroyed, thatSap. 2. is to say immortall, yea after the image of his own likenes made be him. The soules of the righteous are in the hand of God, and the pain of death shall not hurt them. In the sight of the vnwisethey seme to dy, and their end is taken for very destructiō, but they are in rest.
                     The hope of the faithful is ful of immortalitie.
                     The righteous shall liue for euermoreSap. 5. their reward also is wt the Lord, and their remembrance with the highest. Therfore shall they receiue a glorious kingdome, & a bewtiful crowne of the Lordes hand. Read the third, fourth and fift Chapiters of the boke of Wisedome.
                     We are the children of holy men, and

looke for the life whiche God shall geue vnto them, that neuer turne their faythe from him.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the olde Testament.
                     THe holy scriptur testifieth, that EhoreNum. 16 and his complices went downe quicke vnto Hel, and the earthe couered them, so that they perished. By this it is euident, that the soules of the wicked are immortall, and liue in the paines of hel fire.
                     If Saule had not beleued bothe the resurrectionReg. 28. of the body, and immortalitie of the soule, he wold neuer haue gone about to haue had Samuel raised vp.
                     When Dauid saw that his childe was
                           
                              •…
                           . Reg. 12 dead, he wept no more, but said, I shall go vnto him, he shal not come again vnto me
                     Helias prayed for the rasing vp againe
                           
                              •…
                            Reg. 17 vnto life of his hostes Sonne, sayinge: O Lord my God, I beseche thee let the soule of this Childe come into him againe. And he reuiued.
                           
                              •…
                           ob. 2
                     
                     When Tobias was laughed to scorne of his elders and kinssolkes, which said vn to him: here is thy hope for the which thou hast done almose and buried the dead. He rebuked them and sayde: say not so, for we

are the children of holy men, and looke for the life which god shall geue vnto thē that neuer turne their faith from him.
                     Againe he prayed vnto god on this maTobi. 3 ner. Now O Lorde, deale with me according to thy wil, and commaund my spirite to be receiued in peace. For more expediēt were it for me to dye, than to liue.
                  
                  
                     Sentences out of the new Testament.
                     FEare not them whiche kil the bodye,Math. 10 but are not able to kil the soule. But rather feare him, whiche is able to destroy both soule and body in hel.
                     Ther is no man that hath forsakē house,Luke. 18 eyther father or mother, either brethren or wyfe, or children, for the kingdom of Gods sake, which shall not receiue muche more in thys worlde, and in the worlde to come lyfe euerlasting.
                     Thys is the wyll of hym that sent me,Iohn. 6 that euery one which seeth the sonne, and beleueth on him, haue euerlasting life, and I wyll raise him vp at the last day.
                     My shepe heare my voyce, and I knoweIohn. 10 them, and they followe me, and I geue vn to them euerlasting lyfe, and they shal neuer peryshe, neyther shall anye man pluck

them oute of my hand.
                     I am the resurrection and the lyfe. HeIohn. 11 that beleueth on me, yea though he were dead, yet shal he liue, and whosoeuer liueth and beleueth on me, shal neuer dye.
                     Let not your hart be troubled. Ye beleueIohn. 14 in God, beleue olso in me. In my fathers house are many mansions. If it were not so, I would haue told you. I go to prepare a place for you. And if I goe to prepare a place for you, I will come agayne and receiue you euen vnto my selfe, that where I am, there may ye be also.
                     Father I wyl that they which thou hast
                           
                              •…
                           oh. 17. geuen me, be with me where I am, that they maye see my glory, whiche thou hast geuen me.
                     We knowe that if our earthy mans
                           •…
                        on
                           
                              •…
                           . Cor. 5 of this dwelling were destroyed, we haue a building of God an habitation n
                           •…
                        t made with handes, but euerlasting in heauen. Reade forth the Chapter.
                     When soeuer Christe our lyfe shall appeare,Col. 3 then shall you also appeare with him in glory.
                     The lorde hymselfe shall come downe
                           
                              •…
                           . Thes. 4. from heauen wyth a shoote and the voyce of the Archaungel and tromp of God. And

the dead in Christ shall arise first, then we whiche shall lyue (euen we which shall remayne) shalbe caught vppe with them also in the clouds, to mete ye Lord in the ayre & so shal we euer be with the lorde. Therefore comfort your selues one another with these wordes.
                     The spirite or soule is before God a precious thinge and much set by.
                     Christ was killed as pertaning to the flesh,1. Pet. 3. but was quickened in the spirit. In which spirite he also went and preached vnto the spirites that were in prison. &c. Here it is manifest that the spirites or soules of men are immortal, and liue either in glory or in payne after they be losoned from the body.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the new Testament.
                     WHen the Sad
                           •…
                        ces denied the resurrecMath. 
                              •…
                           
                         tion of the body, and the immortaliti of the soule, Christe aunswered thē saying haue ye not reade what is wrytten? I am the God of Abrahā, the God of Isaac, and the God of Iacob. He is not the God of the dead, but of the liuing. By this testimony of the holy scripture Christ declareth that though Abraham, Isaac, Iacob, and al other of the faithful be dead, as concerning theyr bodyes, yet their soules liue with

God, and are immortall.
                     The history of the pore mā Lazarus & ofLuke. 16. the rich vnmercifull gloton, proueth euidentlye that the soules dye not with the body, nor yet slepe vntil the day of iudgement (as the vngodly Anabaptists dream) nether are they cast into purgatory, as the papistes teach, but that the soules of the faythfull goe immediatly after their departure from the body, vnto eternal glory, and the soules of the vnfaythfull, vnto euerlasting damnation: so that the soules of al men are immortall and liue for euer, either in heauen or in hel, in glory or in payne.
                     The parable of the vnrighteous steward setteth forthe also the immortality of the soule, as these words of Christ do declare, Make you frends, sayth he of the wicked Mammon, that when ye shal depart hence, they may receiue you into euerlastig dwel ling places.
                     The soule came agayne to the widowes
                           
                              •…
                           uke. 7 son, to the rulers doughter, to Lazarus, to them that after Christes resurrection came out of their graues, to Dor
                           •…
                        s, to Eu tichus. &c. Which thing declareth ma
                           •…
                        
                        festlye that the soule dyeth not with the bo dy, but stil liued and remayned immortall.
                     
                        The thiefe that hanged one the crosseLuke. 23 with Christ, sayde vnto him. Lord remember me, when thou shalte come into thy kingdome. Christe aunswered verelye I saye vnto thee, this daye shalt thou be with me in paradise. The body of the thiefe dyed shortly after, and was committed to the earth. The soule of the thiefe was in paradise with Christ. The soule therfore liueth and remaineth immortall, or els muste Christ be a liar. But let God be true, and all heretikes liars.
                     Sainct Stephen being at the pointe ofAct. 7 death, prayed, saying: lorde Iesu take my spirite.
                     Sainct Paule wisshed to be losoned outPhil. 1 of his bodye and to bee with Christ. I saw vnder the aulter, saith Sainct Iohn, the souls of them that wer killed for the word of God, and for the testimony whiche they had, and they cried with a loude voyce, saiing: howe long tariest thou O lord, bolye and true, to iudg and to auenge our bloud on them that dwel on the earth? and longe white garmentes were geuen vnto euery one of them. And it was sayde vnto them, that they should rest for a little season vntyll the number of their felowes and brethren,
 and of them that should be killed as they were, were fulfilled.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ Of the glory of heauen, and of euerlasting lyfe.
                  IF Sathan go forth to tempt thee that thou mightest lose the inheritance of the kingdome of god, and say vnto thee that thou art a sinner & an abhominable liuer, and therfore thy faith is frustrate, and thy hope vain in loking for the glory of heauen, for God is a righteous Iudge, and rewardeth euery man according to his deedes and merites: let all these his crafty
                        •…
                      assaultes nothinge moue or abashe thee, but call to thy remembraunce and beleeue stedfastlye, that the heauenlye kingdome is not geuen thee for thy merites and desartes (for so shouldest thou receiue nothing but eternal dampnation) but for the promises which god the father hath made thee in Christes bloud, if thou repent & beleue. Therfore cast away that rightousnes which the hypocrites chalenge by their good works, and lay handes on that which commeth by faith of Iesus Christe, so canst thou not be deceiued, so can sathan win nothyng at thy hande, so can it not but come to pas, that thou shalt enioy the glory of heauen thorowe Christe Iesu. And that thou mayest doubt nothinge in this behalfe, imprint these sentences and examples of the holy 
                        •…
                      scripture diligētly and earnestly in thy minde.
                  
                     ☞ Examples out of the olde Testament.
                     THe Lord hath saued me because it was
                           
                              •…
                           salm. 23. his pleasure.
                     Prayse the Lorde O my soul, and all that is within me, praise his holy name.
                     Praise the Lord O my soule, and forget

not all his benefites, which forgeueth all thy sinnes, and healeth all thine infirmities, which saueth thy life from destructiō and crowneth the with mercy and louing kindnesse.Esay. 37
                     
                     They that put their trust in me shall inherite the land, and possesse my holy hil.Osec. 13
                     
                     Thy damnation (O Israel) came of thy selfe, but thy saluation commeth of me.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the olde Testament.
                     That princelye Prophet Dauid being thorowly perswaded that the inheritance of the glory of heauen and the possession of euerlasting life is the free gift of god thorow Iesus Christe, and is denied to none, although neuer so sinful and wretched, if they repent: being nothing appalled with his former sinful liuig, as though y• shuld pluck him from the inheritaunce of the heuenly kingdome, knew what blessed felicitie and ioyful quietnes the soules of the faithful do enioy after their departure frō the bodyes: lamented, he caried so longe in this vale of misery, and no lesse feruently desired to come and appeare before the face of god, than the thirstye harte desireth to come to the water brookes.
                     The godly auncient Tobye knowinge

gods exceeding great liberalitie in the gift of euerlastinge quietnes after the humble submission of him self vnto the Lorde hys god, wyshed rather to dy than to lyue, and beseched god that hys spyryte might be receiued in peace.
                  
                  
                     ☞ Sentences out of the new Testament.
                     FEare not litle flocke, for it is your Fathers
                           
                              •…
                           uc. 12 plesure to geue you a kingdom.
                     Euerlasting life is the gift of God thorowRom. 6 Christe our Lord.
                     Whome god hathe predestinate, themRom. 8. hath he also called, whome he hath called, them also hath he iustified whome, he hath iustified, them hathe he glorified.
                     The eye hath not sene, and the eare hath1. Cor. 2 not heard, neither hath it entered into the hart of man, what thinges god hath prepared for them that loue him.
                     By grace are ye saued thorow faith, andEphe. 2 that not of your selues. For it is the gifte of god, and commeth not of workes, least any man should boast him self.
                     God saued vs, not for the dedes of righTim. 3. teousnes whiche we wrought, but for hys mercy and louing kindnes.
                     God hath geuen vs euerlasting life, and1. Iohn. 5 this life is in his Sonne, he that hathe the

Sonne hath life: and he that hathe not the Sonne of god, hath not life.
                     Be faithful vnto the death, and I willApoc geue thee the crowne of life.
                     To him that ouercōmeth will I geueApoc to sit with me in my seate, euen as I ouercame and haue sitten with my father in his seate.
                  
                  
                     Examples out of the newe Testament.
                     The reuerent & auncient father Simeō
                        Luke. being nothing apalled with y• remēbraūce of his sinnes, after he had seene and embra sed Christ in his armes, knowinge him to be the alone Sauiour of the world, shewed himselfe ready, glad and willinge to dye, that he might enioy that heauenly enheritance purchased by the same Iesus Christ our Lorde.Phil. 
                              •…
                           
                        
                     
                     S. Paule being fully perswaded that al his sinnes were washed away in Christes bloud, desired to be loosoned from that his mortall body and to be with Christ.
                     Virescit vulnere virtus.
                     Geue the glory to god alone.
                     Here endeth the Gouernance of vertue.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Here followeth certayne godlye prayers, for sundry & diuers purposes.
            
               A prayer for the Queenes Maiesty.
               O Lord our heauenly father high and mightye king of kinges, lord of Lords, the onely ruler of Princes, which doest from thy throne behold al y• dwelllers vpon earth most hartely we besech thee with thy fauour to behold our
                     •…
                   moste gratious soueraigne lady Queene Elizabeth, and so replenish her wyth the grace of thy holy spirite, that she may alway incline to thy wil, and walke in thy way. Indue her plentifully with heauenly gifts, graunt her in health and wealth long to liue, strength her that she maye vanquish & ouercom al her enemies. And finally y• after this life, she may attayne euerlasting ioy and felicity, through Iesus Christ our Lord.
               Amen.
            
            
               A generall confession.
               O Lord God almighty, father of mercy, and God of all comfort, we thy poore creatures resort vnto thee, knowledgyng and confessing our selues before thy gloryous maiestye, that we are all greuous sinners, and can of our selues do nothing

but sinne. For all our imaginations, intentes and thoughts are enclined and disposed vnto euel from our youth vp. Our damnation cōmeth of our selues, wee our selues are not able to thyncke a good thought. It is thou onlye that doest worke in vs both the will & the dede.
               We are but earth and naturally the children of wrath. We of our selues are but vaine, yea lighter then vanitie it self. We can do nothing without thee, theris not one of vs whole, we are all vnclene, & al our rightousnes is but as a filthy cloth. We haue no more power to doo good of our selues then a man of Inde hath power to chaunge his skinne, or the leoparde her spottes. Nowe accordinge to this euell and corrupte inclination of our nature so haue we liued in thought
                     •…
                   worde and deede. We haue finned, we haue offended,Dan. 
                        •…
                     
                   we haue gone backe from thy lawe, & haue not harkned vnto thy worde. We haue not loued th
                     •…
                  , O Lorde with all our strength, with all our heart, with all our power. We haue bene sore transgressors of thy commaundementes, wee haue not putt oure whole truste, and confidence

onelye in thee. Wee haue in oure troubles and neede, not soughte for helpe onely in thee. We haue not called onely vpon thy name, but with false confidence, with vaine supersticion, and vnlawfull othe
                     •…
                  , haue we blasphemed thy name. We haue prayed and made intercession vnto stockes & stones, & made the creatures oure aduocates & mediatours cōtrary to thy word. We reposed our trust and affiance in our own deedes▪ and in such workes as haue bene deuised by mens fantasies besides the scripture. We haue wandred on vaine pil gremages, offering vp mony, candels, and tapers to Images and reliques, with such like supersticion. We haue bene slouthful in our busines. We haue not bene feruēt and diligent in doing of our duty. Special ly on suche dayes as be appointed for the preaching of thy word, we haue not plyed our selues wholly to learne it, nor occupied our time in prayer, & geuing of thanks vnto thee. And as touching the loue that we ought to haue vnto all men & women for thy sake, we haue not bene ernest in it at al times. We haue not loued our neigh houre as our selues, we haue not done as we would be done vnto, we haue bene vngentle,

vnpaciēt, vncurteous, froward, angry and displeased: we haue reioyced in our neighbors hurte and bene sory of his welfare. We haue bene led with false doc trine & errours from the way of thy truth. We haue sinned wt our fathers, we haue don amisse, we haue delt wickedly, therfore our most deare father whiche art in heauē, forasmuch as we haue blasphemed thee & not soughte alway the glory of thy name, graunt now that from henceforth thy name may be sāctified and halowed in vs. Graunt now that thy kingdome maye come, and that in steede of sin and errour thou onely maiest raigne in vs: graunte now that our wil may be cōformable vnto thine, and that in al aduersitie we may be hartely wel content to suffer thy wil to be done in vs. Graunt now, that we bee neuer destitute of our daily food, but that we may alway be nourished wt thy worde in our soules, and haue such a competent liuing in this life as is necessary for our body Graūt now that we may euen from our heart rootes, forgeue one another all maner of trespasse, as y• for Iesu Christes sake thy Sonne, haste mercifully forge
                  
                     •…
                   vs. Graūt now that where the world

the deuill, and our owne flesh, doth dayly tempt and prouoke vs to sin, we may thorow thy strength be able to resist all their temptation, Graunte nowe that thorow thy helpe and grace we may be deliuered from all euill, from all daunger, and peryll of soule and body, from all synne, hel, and dampnation, from all pryde, and enny, from all wrathe, and slouthfulnes, frō couetousnesse, vnmeasurable and filthy lyuing. Graunt now, that from hence forth we may be content with such fatherly pro uision as thou haste made for vs already, graunte now that we may be temperate in eatyng and drinking. And of so honest and cleanly cōuersation, that we geue no man occasion of euyll. Graunte nowe that in steade of our old fayned works we may be occupied with suche fruites of thy holy spirite, as thy worde maketh mencion of. Graūte now, that according to the wholsom monition of thy blessed apostle Peter and of al the scripture besyde, we may be faithful true & obediēt vnto the king our soueraigne Lord and Supreme head immediatly vnder Christ. And not only vnto al such officers as be sēt of him, but also vnto al such wholsō lawes & iniunetions

as by his autority be made for ye tranquilt ty and wealth of vs his subiects. Graunt now that we al may encrease in ye knowledg of the, that our youth may be brought vp in vertue, that children may obey their fathers & mothers, that seruauntes may be true to their maisters, that landlordes may be gentle to their tenantes, that husbands may be louing to their wiues, and wiues likewise to their husbandes, that men may kepe their houshold in the feare & knowledge of thee, ye idle people may be set to labour, & that al such as be poore in dede, may be wel and louingly prouided for. Graunt ye for the loue of thee we may fede y• hūgry, geue drink to y• thirsty cloth ye naked, geue lodging to thē that be harbourlesse, 
                     •…
                  urye the dead, visite thē that be in prison, & helpe such as be in sycknesse. Finally, graunt now most mercifull father, that whatsoeuer thou forbiddest, we may forbeare it, and whatsoeuer: thou▪ cō
                  maundest, we may euery one in his calling performe the same, and so cōtinue in thy seruice till our liues ends, that al our thoughts, words & deds may redound vn to ye glory of thee, now & euermore Amē.
               Thankes be geuen to God.

Obedience vnto our Prince
                     •…
                   and loue to our neighboures.
            
            
               For the Cytie or towne wherin thou dwellest.
               EXcept thou (O mercifull lorde God almighty) kepe the citye, the watchmen wake but in vain that kepe it. Therfor O lord god, send thy holy spirit into y• harts of them which rule our citye or town, to the intent that we with them & they with vs, may liue in thy godlye feare, so that it may goe well with vs. And suffer vs not good Lord to put our truste any more in worldly power, as money, horse, weapon artillery, gunnes or strong walles, but much rather in thee, which arte adefender of al them that put their whole affiaunce and trust in thee.
            
            
               For kinges, Princes, and Rulars.
               O Lord of Lords, Iesus Christ thou art an example and glasse or myror of thē which gouern and beare rule of realmes, coūtreis & cities whome they ought to folowe, for thou art the best and the wisest, and therfore canst thou not erre nor doe any other thing but wel. Uouchsafe with the lyghte of thy clearnes, and wyth the

fyre of thy loue, to kindle the hartes of al such as thou through thy godly prouidēce hast instituted and ordayned to be rulers ouer the people, to the intent that they through thee as by a fore going light, may see and perceiue what is best to be done, and fulfyl the same, and that they taking thee alwaies for a sure mark of their eye, do not that thing which only semeth good in their syghte, but that which may be to thy honour, to our profitte, and to their health and saluation, to the intent also that they may iustly and duly minister, & execute their office geuē vnto thē of thee, so that we with thē, & they with vs, maye lead a peaceable, vertuous, and quiet life So be it.
            
            
               Wheu thou goest to thy labour or worke.
               O Most kynd and gentle heauenly father thou knowest and hast taught vs how great the weakenes of man is so that no man without thy godly helpe, can do any thing. Thus vo
                     •…
                  chiafe to send vs thy ho ly spirit, ye he may strengthē, styrre & indu our vnderstāding & reasō in al things, ye we this daye outwardlye shal goe aboute. & take in hande, or it that we in wardlye

shall think or haue in minde, to the intent that it may be done to thy glorye, and to y• profite of our neighbour.
            
            
               A Prayer for a godly life
               IT greatly greueth vs, O mercifull Father and euerlasting God, that we thorow the gre
                     •…
                  ous and continuall assaults of our enemies are not able to passe ouer our yeres in this worlde with such puritie of life, as we ought, and as thou requirest of vs. Uerely we are on euery parte so besieged and compassed round about of oure aduersaries, that scarsely at any time we can be free from their pestiferous & deadly darts, nor yet haue so much respite as once to breath toward true godlines. Oh moste louing Lord, thou art our Father and we thy children: conuenient therfore is it that we thy children represent and openlye declare in oure conuersation the maners of thee our father.
               Thou art good, gentle, louing suffring holy, righteous, faithful. &c.
               It therfore becommeth vs thy children in our liuing to practise goodnes, gentlenes loue, charitie, mercy, patience, longe suffering holines, righteousnes, faith. &c
               ¶ Thou haste geuen vs an exampleIoh. 13
                  
that euen as thou hast done, so we likewise should do. If we say we dwell in thee, we ought to walke as thou haste walked.
               For thou hast called vs not to vnclennes,1. Iohn. 3 but vnto holines.
               Thou hast deliuered vs from y• power1. Thes. 4. of our enemies, that we being wtout feare should serue the
                     •…
                  , in holines and righteous nes all the dayes of our life.
               The bloude of thy sonne Iesu Christe1. Ioh. 1 hath clensed vs from al sinne, net that we shoulde continue in darkenes, but rather walke in the light, as thou art in light. Thy louing kindnes hath appeared vnto all men, not that we shoulde followe vngodlines and worldly iustes, but that we should liue soberly, righteously, and godly in this present worlde.
               Thou diddest chose vs in Christ beforeEphe. 1. the foundacions of the world were layde, that we should be holy and without blame before thee through him.
               We are thy workemanship created inEphe. 2. Christ Iesu vnto all good woorkes which thou ordayneste afore, that wee shoulde walke in them. Forasmuche then as all the benefytes which thou haste bestowed vppon vs, are geuen vnto this e
                     •…
                  de, that

we should walk worthy of thy kindnesse, represent thy maners in our cōuersation, mortifye the fleshe and the lustes thereof, haue nothing to do with Sathan, nor the world, but leade a good life garnished full of good workes, and in all pointes fashioned after the rule of thy blessed words: we moste hartely pray thee to endue vs with thy holy spirit, which may take away our stony hart, and geue vs a new fleshly and soft harte, kil that olde man in vs whiche is corrupt thorow deceiuable lustes, and fashion in vs that new man which is made after thy image and likenes in righteousnes & true holines. Suffer vs not to geue ouer our selues againe vnto our olde lusts and conc
                     •…
                  piscences, where with we were led when we knewe not thee nor thy So
                     •…
                   Christe, but euē as thou whiche hast called vs art holy, so likewise graunt yt we may
                     •…
                   be holy in all our conuersation. O mercyful god, not the hearers of thy law but th
                     •…
                   ful
                     •…
                  llers of it shalbe iustified. Neither sha
                     •…
                  
                  Math. 7. euery one that saith vnto thee: Lord, Lord enter into the kingdom of heauē, but the that do the wil of thee our Father which art in Heauen. To confes thee with our

mouth, and to deny thee with our deedes, worketh rather our damnation then saluation. For the true knowledge of thee consisteth not in talking, but in working, not in fauouringe, but in folowinge, not in louinge, but in liuinge. To promise thee by mouth, that we wil worke in thy vineyarde, and yet worke nothing at all, declareth not vs to bee thy sonnes, but rather bastardes. To bragge of the iustification of faith, and not to bringe forthe the fruites therof, to glorye in the merites of thy sonne Christe, in his bloude, death and passion, and not to liue worthy in his kind nesse, to profes thy holy gospel, and not to walk according to the doctrine thereof, to be baptised in thy name and not to morti
                  
                     •…
                  y our members which are of the earth, nor to walke in a new life, to be partakers of the deuine misteries, and not to bee made one spyryte wyth thee: what auayleth it? Wee are thy freendes, if wee doo those thinges that thou commaundest vs. We are thy seruauntes, if we be obediente to thy will. Wee are thy Sonnes, if we honour and reuerence thee according to thy woord. We seeke thy glory, if we attempt nothing, whereof thou shouldest be dyshonoured.

Leadinge a life confirmable to thy blessed will, wee shall prouoke the ve ry enemies of thy truth to prayse thee, but cōtrariwise, thou shalt be euel spoken of. Graunt therfore we beseech thee, that our life may answer to our professiō: and that the light of our good workes may so shine before men, that they seinge our godly cō
                  uersation, may gloryfye thee our heauenly father.
               Amen.
            
            
               ¶ A short praier to be sayd at the receiuing of the mystery of Christes bodye at the holy communnion.
               O Heauenly and blessed father, I render vnto thee most harty thanks for all thy benefites, which thou hast shewed vnto me most wretched sinner, but specially for y• most swete smeling sacrifice which thy only begotten son offred vnto thee on the aulter of the crosse, by geuing his most pure and vndefiled body vnto the deth for the redemption of mankind, in the remenbraunce wherof according to thy welbeloned sonnes ordinance, I now receiue this holy bread, most entierly beseching thee, ye I may both be partaker of the merites of thy deare sonnes body breaking, and also lead a life worthy of so great a benefit, vnto the glorye of thy name.
               Amen.
            
            
               
               A Prayer to be sayd at the receyuing of the mistery of Christs bloud in the holy communion.
               O Blessed and merciful Father, thy loue toward me sinful creature is so exceading great and vnspeakeable, that I cannot but geue vnto thee most hūble thāks▪ namely for the sheding of the moste precious bloud of thy dear Sonne Iesu Christ, by the vertue wherof thy wrath stirred vp against mee wretched sinner, is pacified: My raunsome is payed, the lawe is fulfilled, my enemies are ouercome and put to flight. In remembraunce of this so noble a victorye and of so great a benefite, I am come to this thy table, O mercifull father to drink of this cup. Desiring thee, that as my outward man is comforted by the drinking of this wine: so likewise, my inward man may be comforted and made stronge by true faith in the precious bloude of thy moste deare son. O Lord my heauenly, father, geue me thy holy spirit, which may so rule and gouerne my hart, that I neuer be vnthankful nor forgetful of this thine exceading great kindnesse: But so traine my life according to thy blessed wil, that what soeuer I do speake or thinke, may be vnto

the glory of thy blessed name, and the helth of my soule: thorowe Iesu Christe oure Lord.
               Amen.
            
            
               For all them whiche lye in the extreme panges of death or otherwise.
               O Pitiful Phisicion and healer bothe of soul and body, Christ Iesu: Uouch safe to cast thine eyes vpon this poore sinfull creature. N
                     •…
                   who lyeth heere captiue and boūd with sicknes, turning his weaknes to thy glory and to his helth. And bout safe good Lorde, to send him pacience and sufferance, that he maye with a true and perfect faith fight manfully against all tē
                  tations of the Deuil, that he maye no longer continue. So be it.
            
            
               ☞ A confession for all people to be sayd in the morning.
               
                  O Merciful and most louing father, whose loue is infinite, whose mercy endurethe for euer: We sinful creatures trustinge in thine vnspeakable goodnes, and loue towards vs, do appeare this morninge before thy deuine maiesty, most lowlye confessing our manifolde sinnes and in innumerable transgressions of thy commaundements and fatherly wil. Against thee onlye

against thee, O Lorde, haue we sinned, therfore we confesse our sinnes, we knowledge our offences, we accuse our selues vnto the O mercifull Lord, and wil not hied our vnrighteousnes. We find in our selues nothing but ignoraunce of thy wil, disobedience, mistrust, doubtfulnes in thy goodnes, incredulitie, hatred, and con tempt of al spiritual thinges, selfloue, con fidence in our selues, and f
                     •…
                  ruent lustinge after carnal thinges of this worlde. And this tree of our corrupt nature, bringethe forthe continually in vs none other fruit, but rotten and vnsauery workes of the flesh, in thoughtes, wordes▪ and doinges, vnto condemnation. Wherfore, we humbly besech thy fatherly goodnes, euen for thy sonne Iesus christes sake, whom thou hast set forth for a purchaser tōwardes vs of mercy throughe faithe in his bloude: to make our hearts cleane: Take away our stony hartes, and geue vnto vs a true and a liuelye taith, whichshal worke continually by loue, through Christe. Haue mercy vpon vs, forgeue vs our sins, for thy sons sake: Certefy our cōscience of remission of the same, by thy holy spirit, by whose operation we maye so mortefye in vs our old

man the whole body of sinne that we continually dyinge vnto sinne, may walke in newnes of life, to the glory of thy name, through Iesus Christ our lorde. So be it.
            
            
               Then say this 86. Psalme treatably.
               BOw downe thyne eare O Lord, and heare me, for I am pore and in misery.
               O preserue my soule, for I am holye: my God saue thy seruant, that putteth his trust in thee.
               Be mercifull vnto me (O Lorde) for I will call dayly vpon thee.
               Comforte the soule of thy seruaunt, vnto thee O lord, do I lift vp my soule.
               For thou lord art good and gracious, and of great mercy vnto all them that cal vpon thee.
               Geue eare Lord to my prayer, and ponder the voyce of my humble desyres.
               In the tyme of my trouble, I wil cal vp on thee, for thou hearest me.
               Among the Gods there is none like vn to thee O lord, there is not one that can do as thou doest.
               Al nations whom thou hast made, shal come worship thee, O lorde: and shal gloryfy thy name.
               
                  For thou art great and doest wonderous thinges, thou art God alone.
               Teach me thy way O lord, and I will walke in thy truth. O knit my hearte vnto thee, that it may feare thy name.
               I will thanke thee, O Lorde my god wyth all my hearte, and wyll prayse thy name for euer.
               For great is thy mercy toward me, and thou hast deliuered my soule from the neithermost hell.
               O God, the proud are risen against me, and the congregations of naughty men, haue not set thee before their eyes.
               But thou O lorde god art full of compassion and mercy, long suffring, plenteous in goodnes, and truth.
               O turne thee then vnto me, and haue mercy vpon me, geue thy strength vnto thy seruaunt, and help the sonne of thine handmaid.
               Shew some tokē vpon me for good, that they whiche hate me may se it, and bee a shamed, because thou Lorde haste helped me, and comforted me.
               Glory be to the father, and to the sonne and to the holy ghost.
               As it was in the beginning. &c.
               
                  Lord haue mercy vpon vs.
               Christ haue mercy vpon vs.
               Lord haue mercy vpon vs.
               Then say the Crede and the Lordes prayer. &c.
               Lord shew thy mercy vpon vs.
               And graunt vs thy saluation.
               O lord saue the Queene.
               And mercifully heare vs when we cal vpon thee
               Indue thy ministers wyth righteousnes.
               And make thy chosen people ioyful.
               O Lord saue thy people.
               And blesse thine heritaunce.
               Geue peace in our tyme O lord.
               Because there is none other that fighteth for vs, but only thou O god.
               O god make cleane our hartes within vs.
            
            
               And take not thy holy spirite from vs. Let vs pray.
               
                  O God which art authour of peace and louer of concorde, in knowledge of whome standeth our eternall life, whose seruice is perfect fredom: defend vs thy humble seruauntes in all assaultes of our enemies, that we surele trusting in thy defence,

maye not feare the power of any ad uersaryes, thorowe the myghte of Iesu Christ our Lord.
                  Amen.
               
               
                  
                     O Lord our heauenly father almighty & euerlasting god, whiche hast safelye brought vs to the beginning of this day: defende vs in the same with thy mightye power, and graunte that this day we fal into no sin, neither rune into eny kinde of daunger, but that al our doinges may be ordred by thy gouernaunce, to do alway that is righteous in thy sighte, through Iesus Christ our Lord.
                  Amen.
               
               
                  GOd preserue Quene Elizabeth, god destroy al her enemies, God preserue her most honorable counsellers, God ayde the clergy wyth hys spirit in setting forth of his truth, God preserue al the nobelity of this realme, and the commones of the same, God defend the fauorers of the gospel, God chaūge the harts of our enemies and send them better mynds. The power of god destroy Antichrist with al his wicked kingdome. God send the gospel a ioyfull and a free passage throughoute the whole worlde. God send vnto all degrees such grace, that they may walke worthyly in their vocation and calling. Amen.
                  
                     The peace of God which passeth all vnderstanding, kepe our harts and minds in the knowledg and loue of God, and of his sonne Iesus Christ our Lorde: And the blessing of God almighty, the father, the sonne, and the holy ghost, be amongst vs and remain with vs alwais
                  Amen.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London by Iohn Day, dwelling ouer Aldersgate, beneath S. Martins.
            Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
            
         
      
   