
      
         
            
            
            TIMOTHIES
TASKE:
OR
A CHRISTIAN SEA-CARD,
guiding through the coastes of a peaceable conscience
to a peace constant, and a
Crowne immortall. Wherein I. Pastors are put in minde of their
double dutie, and how to discharge it. 1. Personall,
as watchfull men. 2. Pastorall, as faithfull watchmen.
II. True doctrine is advanced. III. Traditions
discountenanced, & their rancour discovered. In two Synodoll assemblies at Carliell, out of two seuerall, but
sutable Scriptures. This of 1 Timoth. 4. 16. and
that of Actes 20. 28. Since concorporate, and couched with augmentation
vnder their prime Head:
            BY
ROBERT MANDEVILL, sometimes of Queenes Colledge
in Oxford, and Preacher of Gods word at
Abbey-holme in Cumberland.
            
            
               2 TIM. 4. 5.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
            
            
               AT OXFORD,
Printed by JOHN LICHFIELD, and JAMES
SHORT. An. Dom. 1619.
         
         
            
            
            CELEBERRIMAE ACADEMIAE
OXONIENSI, MATRI SVAE,
AC PATRONAE (AMORE
DVCTVS, NEC NON MORE)
IN PERPETVVM
OBSERVANTIAE TESTIMONIVM, OPVSCVLVM
HOC
DICAT, CONSECRATQVE
            
               ROB. MAGNADEVILLA.
            
         
         
            
            
            INSIGNISSIMO VIRO DD. GOODVVIN
Aedis Christi Decano & Academiae Oxoniensis
Vicecancellario longè dignissimo.
            
               QUod ego homo tibi forsitan ignotus
& ex antro nescio quo
obscurus erepens, Dignitatem
Tuam in vestibulo statim hujusce
operis Epistolio quodam ausim
compellare; hujus fiduciae
afferenda est nonnulla excusatio,
ne temeritatis simul & imprudentiae macula meritò
me inustum iri quispiam existimet. Duae autem
sunt inter caeteras potissimae rationes, quae me hoc
tempore impulerunt, ut lucubrationem hanc tuo nomini
dicarem; Tum quòd patrono opus haberet, tum
quòd talem patronum merebatur. Patrono certè opus
est, cum ipse pater qui foetum hunc aleret & foveret
praematura morte absorptus sit. De quo quid attinet
singula quae noverim hîc infarcire? quàm impensè
opus Evangelistae peregerit fidelis Christi servus
cùm veritatem propugnando, tum contradicentes impugnando;
quantis ingenij, artis, gratiae dotibus ad miraculum
fere excultus fuerit; quàm in sermone potens
in vita pius, ut non modo sacrisiculos Missaticos & superstitiosos
id genus homulos gladio spiritus fuderit,
profligaverit; verum etiam & parochianos suos, Christianos,
ne quid asperiùs dicam, parùm probos negotia

emporetica & nundinationes solennes, quas sine omni
conscientiae scrupulo diebus Dominicis exercere
solebant vniuersas, die Saturni peragere prudenti zelo
et suaui cumprimis eloquio fecerit, coegerit. Haec inquam
& multa alia de authore ipso, quae sciens praetereo

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , quia illius laudes una non capit
pagina, quid attinet hic commemorare? Illud unum
adjiciam, studia, vigilias, sermones, quorum nunc gustum
praebemus, animum in divino opere planè indefessum,
conatus
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                illius admodum foelices, quàm verè
magnus vir f
                  •
               erat, liquidò demonstrare. Nam vt Atticus
ille orator appositè,

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Ejusmodi dubio
procul terris invident 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                ingrati populi peccata,
quae, si conjectura non sum vanus, effecerunt, ut hic
veluti Phoebus alter, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , summo quasiaetatis
ver
                  •
               ice & puncto meridionali positus, Oceano immersus
occideret. Certe in scelere Iacob omne istud & in
peccatis domus Israel. Cujus obitum heu nimis (si Deo
allter visum fuisset) praematurum ut patria illius lugebat
tota, ita neillum lugeat sent
                  •
               átve liber iste posthumus,
potes Tu, vir clarissime, pro singulari humanitate
& authoritate tua effectum dare. Orphanus hic infans
est & fari vix potest quae sentiat, inter spem curam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   timores
inter & i
                     •
                   as modesti patris germanus partus in
lucem prodire subverebatur. Quare me rogatum habuit
& facundia balbutienti postulavit, ut 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                cuidam
doctissimo pariter & dignissimo eum velim commendare,
sub cujus tutela & patrocinio tanquam sub
Ajacis clypeo ab invidorum & malevolorum quibus
haec aeta
                  •
                scatet, morsibus tutus delitesceret. Ego autē
               
tam honestae petitioni, quantum in me est, obsecundare
obni xè studens, (quòd ex philosophorū coryphaeo
didicerim parentum & praeceptorum beneficia aequis non
posse rependi officijs) quamvis to gatorum unus sim tantum
non infimi subsellij, & oratorum longè pessimus,
verum enimvero, cum Aristides ille mihi consulat moneat
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               : non potui meipsum temperare, quin ad te ista scriberem, peterem
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ut in clientelam
tuam hunc libellum, qui talem omnino meretur
patronum, recipere non dedigneris, qui tantum
habes authoritatis, ut possis; tantum prudentiae, ut no
veris; tantum deni
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                humanitatis, ut cupias studio sorū
hominum conatibus patrocinari. Id
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                feci eo lubentius,
quod gravislimus hic author, dum in vivis esset,
Tibi toti
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                literatorum cohorti numerosae satis & nobilissimae,
quam Dignitas Tua non sine maxima laude
moderatur, tanquam amoris & observantiae suae 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
ob vicariam quandam apud suos Brigantes illi ab
Academia matre nostra concessam, hanc opellam suam
ipse etiam Academiae hujus florentissimae alumnus
consecraverat. Vale vir claris
                  •
               . scitó
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                me unum
esse ex ijs, qui pium affectum tuum in deum, charitatē
propensam in fratres, & merita in ecclesiam suspicit &
miratur. In Coll: Regin: scribebam 8. Idus Julij, anno
reparatae salutis 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                DCXIX.
            
               Dignitatis tuae  Observantissimus THO: VICARS.
               
            
         
         
            
            AD LECTOREM.
            CArmina praefantur tali rarissima libro:
            Haec praeter morem carminae, Lector, habes.
            Defuncto, praeter morem, praestemus amorem,
            Non est vulgaris, credito, talis amor.
            Officium signare opus est, laudarier ipsum
            Authorem, aut opus hoc, non opus esse scio.
            
               C. R. R.
            
         
         
            AD MAGISTRVM ROBERTVM
de magna villa Apostrophe.
            MAgna sonas, & magna facis, (vir maxime) rebus
            Quam benè conveniunt nomina saepè suis!
            Terrae parva haec villa dedit sed non nisi parva,
            
            Coeli villa potest praemia magna dare.
            
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   T. V. M. A. C. R. O. S.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            TIMOTHIE HIS
TASKE:
OR
A CHRISTIAN SEA-CARD.
            
               1 TIMOTH. 4. 16.
               Take heed vnto thy selfe, and vnto learning, continue
therein. &c.
            
            
               THey are the wordes of a spirituall
Father,1 Tim. 1. 
                     •
                  . to his sonne, in the faith;
Paul now aged to young Timothie,
whom hee instructs in things that
concerne his function as a Teacher,
his conversation as a Christian.
The former hee doth from the 6 to
the 12 verse. The latter, from the 12
vnto the 16. In which hee coucheth and combines both.
Let no man now thinke admonition vnnecessarie (not
though he be the best of many.) For Timothie is heere exhorted
to follow that which by the Apostles owne testimonie,Verse 6.
hee had followed constantly. Let no man despise
youth in a Minister if it bee authorized with competent
gifts,Wisd. 4. 9. for wisdome is the gray haires, and an vndefiled life is
the old age.
            
               
This Scripture doth branch it selfe into two parts.
1. An advice or exhortation. Take heed &c. 2. A motiue,
or inducement inforcing the same. For in so doing, &c.
                In the exhortation, each word riseth into a head. One
doth opus imponere▪
                enjoyne a taske of attention or Christian
watchfulnesse, and that sollicite with a care & circumspection,

               Cave, Take heed or attend. An other points at the
immediate obiect whereat this watch must begin, and that
ordinate, orderly and answereable to the rule of Charitie
which begins at home. Cave tibi, take heed to thy selfe.
 The third doth onus apponere, annexe a further charge of
feeding others, inferred by a necessary particle of connexion,
& doctrinae, and to learning.
            
                The last toucheth the omission or intermission of this
duty, he must neither tyre, nor retyre, but manly march on,
and stoutly hold out to the last gaspe. Permane in istis,
continue therein. Thus Timothie is stirred vp and set on
his way as Elias was foure times by the spirit.1 Kings 14. First to a diligent
warynesse, and wary diligence, lest while the husbandman
sleepes,Marke 13. 25. the enemie come & sowe tares amongst
the wheate. 2. To an eminent and more then ordinarie
sanctitie of life, for sedes prima, and vitaima, the best place,
and basest life sort not well together. 3. To the care of a
pastorall cure, whereof Paul saith, Quis idoneus ad haec?
who is fit for these things? 4. To perseuerance in the
good begun, for he beginnes ill, that goes not on; therefore
hauing put thy hand to the plough,Gen. 19. 26. looke not backe,
behinde thee stands a pillar of salt.
            The first thing is the care which Timothie must take,
                  
                     •
                  . Take heed. or
the watch, he is to set. The word imports in the originall
a bent of mind, an intention of will, ioyn'd with a care and
contention of the whole man, that his workes warre not
with his wordes, and his deedes disgrace not his doctrine,
whence this collection may be made, That vigilancie or
heedfulnesse is a necessarie companion to all such as seriouslie
commence a spirituall course, chieflie to Pastors and Superintendents
as Timothie was. A doctrine which wants not

the commendation of a threefold commoditie. 1. It is a
gratious preseruatiue against sinne, deceiuing vs. 2. It is
an antidote against troubles and crosse occurrences, lest
they vnsettle vs. 3. It instils strength and pith into all other
duties, and parts of Gods worship; without which,
they be either wholly omitted, or but hoverly done, by
which they are quickned, cheered, and well ouerseene.
These three things in their order handled, you haue my
purpose in this first head.
            
               First it preserues against the deceits of sinne.
               Watch,Math. 26. 
                        •
                     1. and pray, to begin (with Christs owne speech)
lest you enter into temptation. What other is the drift of
the Prophets demand (directing the whole Church in one
mans person) wherewith shall a young man clense his
way?Psal. 119
                        •
                     
                   by taking heed thereto according to thy word; this
seede is rife, and many whers ranke sowen, yet growes reformation
but thinne and rare, because little or no heed is
taken of the stonie,Math. 13 4. 5 6 7. thornie, and high-way hearers. How
often is attention commanded and commended vnto vs by
our Sauiour against intemperancy and worldly cares?Luke 21. 34. by
Saint Peter,
                  1 Pe
                        •
                     . 5. 8. that the life breake not out into licenciousnes?
By the Authour to the Hebrewes,Heb. 3. 12. that the heart with the
seuerall affections, may from time to time be held in awe?
What was Pauls counsell to the Corinthians?1 Cor. 10. 12. hee that
stands, let him take heed lest he fall: either it was the Apostles
purpose to bring men into a needlesse feare, or too
much heed cannot be had. But good men haue fallen, Patriarkes,
Prophets,Iude 5. 6. Apostles, yea (better once then th
                     •
                   best
of men) the Angels kept not their first estate. This Apostle
writing to the same people,1 Cor. 16. 13. wills them to watch, and hee
puts on the Thessalonians in the former Epistle,1 Thess. 5. 6. lest they
sleepe as others doe, who were rockt in a cradle of deepe
securitie. By immoderate sleepe, the humours of mans bodie
are so dissolued, that naturall heate is thereby much abated,
and in time quenched. So fareth it with the drowsie
and slouthfull soule, wherein wicked thoughts being bred

and multiplyed, quench the heate of holy affections, and so
separate man from God.Wisd. 1. 3.
               
               Christ doth checke his heauy-headed Apostles, Math.
26. 40.Math. 
                        •
                     5. 12. And those foolish girles fore-shewing the time of
their preparation, leaue a caveat to all, that they spend not
these houres in idle adoes, which God hath giuen to gaine
their blisse. Of vapours that arise from the stomacke or
heart, (say Physitians of the body) and ascend vp into the
the braine, proceedes sleepe: so the vapours foaming and
reaking out of the secure and carnall heart, send a spirituall
slumber ouer the whole man, as the Physitian of our soule
infallibly defines,Verse 19. Math. 15. Against which the wise man
giues this prescription,Prov. 4. 23. Keepe thine heart with all diligence,
for from thence commeth life. Whereunto adde
that of Paul in the latter to Timothy,
                  2 Tim. 4. 4. and it will adde great
strength vnto our ward. Evigila t
                        •
                      i
                        •
                      omnibus, watch thou
(saith he) not in some few onely, giuing way to other, nor
in many, omitting some, nor in most, passing by the rest; but
in all watch thou in all things. A hard saying, who can
heare it? What action is heere excluded? What occasion
is not meant? What place can bee exempt? Or who are
the persons for whose presence wee ought discontinue or
breake off our watch? But to whom speakes the Apostle
this? A man meerely? If so, then watch in some things
had beene enough, and scarcely allowable, but Timothie
was more, a man of God. To whom speakes the Apostle
this? a Christian? if so, then watch in most things had
beene enough, and hardly tollerable, but Timothie was
more, a guide to such: to whom speakes the Apostle this?
some Angell? if so, then watch in all things were charge
enough. A taske best fitting those pure spirits, which
most approximate God in dignitie. To Timothie then
a keeper and teacher of his brethren, in him to vs, in vs,
to others is this precept giuen. Let vs first amend in
ourselues the contrarie securitie, and so commend this duty
to others.Reasons of heed▪ fulnes drawne from Christs t
                        •
                     
                     ing the houre whereof is imminent but not▪ knowne
               
               But they must be motiues of no small moment that fasten

such strictnesse on vs, or them. Take heed (saith our 
Saviour Christ) watch and pray for you knowe not when
the time is.Mark. 13. 33. Be sober and watch (faith S. Peter) the reason
followes, for your adversarie the Divell as a roaringly on
walketh about, seeking whom he may devoure. Satan is an
enemie, and such an enemie as admits neither truce, nor attonement.
The houre of Christs comming is vncertaine,1. Pet. 5. 8. & 
as vncertaine,From the nature of our adversary. Who is. as is the onset of the theefe: is it not then
high time to take heed either that Lyon devoure vs, or this
houre come vpon vs vnawares?
               
                  Epaminondas (a renowned captaine) hauing foūd one of 
the watchmen fallen asleepe thrust him through with his
sword,Sedulo
                        ••
                     . and being chid for so severe a fact, replied: Talem
                        •
                      eumreliqui,
qualeminvent. I left him right such a one as I
found him.Mark. 13. 37. That which Christ our Captaine said vnto his
Disciples hee saith vn to all that lie in this field of christian
combate, watch. Sure we are that he will come (as did Epaminondas)
in his owne person to search and see how wee
keepe our watch. Wee must therefore attend and looke to
our stand, least comming suddenly, hee finde vs sleeping,
which if he doe, relinquet tales, quales invenit, he will leaue
vs such as he findes vs. Since he h
                     •
                  th threatned to cut such
in sunder,Luk. 12. 46. and to appoint them a portion with the vnbeleevers.
Were the adversarie onely sedulous in pacing this
earth and had no power, or strength to hurt, our case were 
other,Powerfull. but he is like that Leviathan whom Iob describes,Iob. 41. 17.
when the sword toucheth him he will not rise vp, nor for
the speare, dart, nor habergeon. Had he force only and no 
fraud,Politike. or power without pollicie, we need the lesse suspect
him: but he is as politike, as powerfull, being that old serpent,
whose wisdome is perfected by long experience;
could he be satisfied with some small revenge, or were the
body alone, to beare the smart of all, it were another matter,
such warinesse were lesse needfull, but as he was a murtherer
(aswell of soule as body) from the beginning: so his
inveterate rage keepes him in continuall motion, causing
him not only to prey on such as he vsually meets, which lions

                   for hunger sometimes doe: But this Lybard of meere
malice pursues mankinde,Malicious and seeks out of rage towards
God to teare his image. What made the Romans so carefull
and circumspect waging warres in Italie against Hanniball?
the nature and disposition of the enemie: for in him
was courage and boldnesse to vndertake dangers, much
counsell and policie in the midst of perills: hee had a body
indefatigable by labour, a stomacke invincible, the foremest
in conflict, the last in retreat, there was in him an inhumane
crueltie, more then Punicall perfidiousnesse, no
truth, no holynesse, no feare of the Gods, no respect of
oath,Iob. 7. 1. no religion. Our life is a warfare on earth: the masterie
for which we contend, and striue in this warfare, is a
matter of more moment then was theirs▪ the things where
with their enemie was furnished, are much more found in
this hellish and infernall Hanniball, who for his power, is
not to be matched, for his wisdome, not to be sounded, for
his malice not to be appeased, and vnweariable in all his
 endeavours. He hath more gainefull advantages of vs, thē
                  Hannibal had of them:Wanting no war like advantage, nor will. to vse it to his best furtherance. First Personall, we being flesh and
therefore weake, he, and his complices, moe for number,
since a legion possesseth one; more mightie, being powers
more maliciously bent, because spirituall wickednesses,
they invisibly repaire,Mark. 5. and retire at pleasure, hauing personall
accesse vnto our spirits;Ephel. 12. we sensible, and sensuallie alwaies
open to their assaults. 2. Reall hee profers so faire
howsoever he performe, pleasures, profits, preferment, and
what not? all these will I giue thee, if thou wilt fall downe
and worship me.Mat. 4. 9▪
                   3. Formall as better discipline, and order
of fight, no mutinous sound is ever heard in Satans
campe,Math. 12. for he is not divided against himselfe. In ours the
frogge contends with the mouse till the kite himselfe become
vmpire, we being not only at ods with our fellowe
souldiers,Rom. 7. but fostering dissentiō within our own bowels.
The manner of his fight is secret, and manifold, such as no
man throughly can vnfold generally with the Polypus
(that to compasse his prey) carries a semblance of the rock

neere which he lies, he applies his temptations to the state,
temper, and inclination of every man. With the Panther
he hides his deformed head till the sweet sent haue drawne
other beasts into his danger; I meane he allures men with
the sweetnesse of pleasures, masking the monstrous and
deformed head (1) the end thereof vnder some guilded
shewe of goodnesse,Gen. 3. 5. or some disguised shape of sin.Cloathing vice with a vi
                        •
                     grd of vertue 
                        〈◊〉
                      drunkennesse with brothe
                        •
                     ly fellowship, covetousnesse with christian providence, &c. Sometimes
hee assaults vs fiercely,2. Cor. 11. 14. as a lyon in the open field, other
whiles he seemes to sooth vs in our good intents,Iohn. 2. 16.
transforming himselfe as the Apostle saith.When his 
                        〈◊〉
                      is to frustrate that intention, and depraue our good purpose by perverting the manner, corrupting the meanes or altering some circumstance to marre the whole worke and make it worthlesse. If he cannot
conquer Attalanta by speed of foot he will goe about to
giue her with golden fetters, casting out three bals of gold
(the lust of the eye, the lust of the flesh, & the pride of life,)
for her to gather, whilst he gaines the prize, and depriues
her of the garland of eternall happinesse. This cursed Chameleon
turnes himselfe into all colours, to the end he may
infin
                     •
                  ate vnder some. 4. Accidentall, as place, time, sun,
winde. They are aboue vs in the high places, wee beneath
and faire vnder them: they assault vs when we are solitary,
secure and (which bewraies greatest cowardlinesse) when
we are asleepe. In the sunshine of prosperitie, who sees not
how subiect man is to pride, presumption of Gods loue,
loosenesse, coldnesse in profession, contempt of others, cō
                  fidence
in outward things, & hope of too much assurance?
If any adverse winde blowe cold on his patience by crosses,
on his continuance by tribulation, or on his peace of
conscience by inward guiltinesse,Eph. 6. 12. as prone he is on their
side to doubt of Gods favour,2. Sam. 12. distrust his providence,
grudge at his designes,Psal. 30. 7. and seeke redresse by vnlawfull
meanes.Ion. 4. 4.
               
               Besides the world is on his side,1. Sam. 28. 5. 7. 8. and there lye vires & virus,
much both power, and poison to infect some Acham,
                  
to entice some Balaam,
                  From the world which is 1. deceitfull. and withdrawe Demas from the
worke of the Lord. Who walkes in this wildernesse, and
wanders not? Quando
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      bonus dormitat Homerus, the most
watchfull,Iosh. 1. 21. sleepe and slippe sometimes.2. Pet. 2. 15. A whole navie of
ships may surrow the Ocean,2. Tim. 4. 10. and scarce one bee endangered,

                   but of soure, or fewer soules failing on this glassie sea
of the world,Dangerous. hardly one can make escape in this desert, we
are beset on every side. On the right with faire faced shews
fit to allure; on the left, with cares, and crosses, of force to
dismay; before with example, strong to seduce; behinde by
censure eagerly pursuing, he that is not puf
                     •
                   vp with her favours,
nor danted with her frownes, that can picke good
out of the evill of example, and burye her censures in a
christian contempt, so that no one of these, nor all these
teare his saile, or turne his helme; Hunc dignum spectatu
arbitramur. That he shrowdes a great wonder in a little
world, and may safely beare a pea
                     •
                  elesse treasure through
perilous pathes.
               
                   But the malice of the world, & of the God of the world,
Satan,From the flesh which is false & fraile. might both be borne, if a domesticall and inward
friend, with whom we repast daily, and nightly repose our
selues, the flesh I meane, wherewith we are clothed, and
clogged, did not conspire, and partake with them against
vs. This is the Delilah which reveales Sampsons secret to
the Philistines. It is not an open enemie that doth vs this
dishonour,Ps. 55. 12. 13. for then we could the better beare it, neither is
it a professed adversary that doth magnify himselfe against
vs, for then peradventures we could hide our selues from
him, as looking for nothing from such, but adverse and enemie
                     •
                  
like dealing. But it is a companion, a guid, a familiar
frend, with whom we take sweet counsell together, and
repaire to the house of God as friends: one nearer & dearer,
then alter idem, a second selfe, now a kingdome, or
house, that is devided against it selfe, cānot possibly stand.
Who more mortified then he who chastned his owne body?
&c.1. Cor. 9. 27. Notwithstanding with diligence hee vehemently
exclaimes, O wretched man that I am who shall deliuer me
from this body of sinne? so hot is the skirmish, so fierce
the conflict, betweene the flesh and the spirit.
               If then we haue such an adversarie as is for power, vnmatchable,
for wisdome vnsoundable, for malice implacable,
and vnweariable in his indeavours. If besides the siege

of forraine enemies, wee beare a Sinon in our bosome, that
opens the gates of our sences, for troupes of temptations
to enter in▪ the counsell of our Apostle here seemes (I had
almost said) more then necessary that good heed be taken,
to decline such mischiefs as they meet withall, who take
not heed. This lesson we might learne in natures schoole
did we but marke the face, & fashion of brutish creatures,
which haue this ingrauen & giuen of god, to beware of
mischeife, & defend themselues from annoyance. What
prudence is showen in civill gouerment? What policye or
successe in Martiall exploits? What foresight or prudence,
in secular dealing? What progresse in the affaires of faith
without heed? what man is he that desireth life, and loueth
long dayes for to see good, that (to attaine a tast & experience
of such things, as may make his dayes delightfull, and
his delight good) would discharge dutie to God aright, &
carry himselfe vpright before men? Let him with that
princely and royall Prophet, invre himselfe to take heed
vnto his waies. Such warinesse is good wisdome though it
be as manicles vpon their right hand,Psal. 39. 1. to the worldly wise.
Can a man touch pitch without defilement? walke in the
world without worldly affections? Liue in the flesh and
warre against the flesh, except hee attend and take good
heed?

                     Ha
                           •
                        d facile est, tribulos & spinas inter euntem,
                     Illaesos habuisse pedes, illaesa
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         crura.
                  
It is hard for a man walking amongst thistles and thornes
to safegard himselfe from sharpe gratulations.
               Imagine two men fraught with some knowne treasure,
were to passe through as dangerous and suspected a place,
as our border hath sometimes bin, would they not, if they
were circumspect, looke warily to their way, and cast their
eies on each side, least suddenly they were surprised? would
they not prepare themselues, sometimes by fight, other
whiles by flight, to escape danger? Vita haec via est, our life
is the way wherevnto we are to look, the soule is the treasure,
then which (of all things that are had in price) what is

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
more pretious? Here Divells lie in ambush by legions, to
bereaue vs, and disordered appetites giue many onsets at
times,R
                        •
                     sist the Divel Iam. 4. 7. Fly fornication. we must purchase safetie by resistance, sometimes by
giving ground we gaine our peace.
               That thing would surely be had in great request which
could eyther prevent sickenes,1. Cor. 6. 18. or remoue it with least danger,
yet cannot that secure (which rescues for a tin) the
body from death. But the prevention of sinne, b
                     ••
                  ore it
ceaze, or the abandoning thereof before it come to perfection,
causeth not only a momentany health, but a perpetuall
safety of the soule. And yet see how our corruptiō misplaceth
our care.Ier. 6. 20. To saue the one, men will seeke remedie
be it never so rare, never so deare, were it to be fetcht with
incense from Sheba,
                  Vt corpus redimas ferrum. &c. arida nec sitiens ora &c. or sweet Calamus from a farre countrie.
They will sustaine, and abstaine: Sustaine what lancing,
searing, mangling, and mutilating of their bodies?
They abstain from that they most desire. But for the health
or safegard of their soules,Take heed men thinke it a bondage to take
heed. Wee will not conquer our patien
                     •
                  e to disgest two
syllables though the receit promise as happy an effect, as is
the salvation of our selues and others. Must it not needs be
a speciall good thing, whose contrary (to wit carelesnesse,
or security) is such a mother of mischief?Gen. 19. 33. 
                  Solomons wisdom,
Lots integritie,Gen. 9. 21. and Noahs sobrietie felt the smart of this
Serpents sting. The first was seduced, the second stumbled,
the third fell, whiles the eye of watchfulnesse was fallen a
sleepe. Sed cur ist a dicimus, cum maior a noverimus? Heauen
and earth, and (sometimes a heauen on earth) Paradise, can
all record, what want of attention hath wrought in them,
transforming Angells, disparadising our Parents, & gleaning
Iudas from amongst his fellowes. If any calling whatsoever
could priviledge, Iudas was billed amongst the
twelue, If inward perfection, or original excellency, Adam
was armed with the righteousnesse of his creation. If any
place or presence could secure, then heauen, the throne of
God, his presence there, whose brightnesse they beheld,
had kept those aspiring spirits in their first, and best estate,

but Nusquam est securitas, fratres, nec in eoel
                        •
                     , 
                        〈◊〉
                      in paradiso,
multo minùs in mundo, in coelo enim cecidit Angelus sub
praesentia divinitatis, in paradiso Adam, de loco voluptatis,
in mundo Iudas, de schola salvatoris; Securitie (my bretheren)
is found no where, neither in heaven, nor paradise,
much lesse on earth. Satan fell as lightning from heaven,
the deitie on looking; Adam out of Paradise, the place ingrossing
all earthly pleasures, and Iudas slipt out of our Saviours
schoole into Satans cell. I could tell you here why
Sampson so strong,Iudg. 16. became so weake, as to bee inveigled
with a woman.Mat. 26. 6
                        •
                     . 
                  Peter so confident, proued such a coward
as to be shaken with the breath of a Damsells mouth.2. Sam. 11. 
                        •
                     . Why
Dauid soe holy slid so vnhappilie, Whilst his eye bewrayed
his heart, and his heart gaue eare to that hastie message.
Nemo securus esse debet in vita, quae tota tentatio nominatur.
No man must be secure in this life where temptations
bid perpetuall battle, le
                     •
                  t that inversion proue subversion,
vt qui fieri potuit ex deteriori melior, non fiat etiam ex meliore
deterior, that he who of worse might become better, do
not fall from better to worse. Wee must not bee like to
Agrippa's dormouse which would not awake, till beeing
boyled in lead, the heat caused her to vnseale her eyes; but
rather wee ought to resemble those who were wont to
sleepe with brasen balls in their hands, which falling on
vessells purposely set at their bed sides, the noyse did disswade
immoderate sleepe: So, and more watchfull then.
was he,Ps. 119. 148. who (to keepe his heart in vre with God) made
the Commandements his meditation;Psal. 5. 3. not in the morning
only, and that early, and all day long too, but (when hee
should haue taken his rest, as others doe) his eyes prevented
the night watches: yea his manner was to rise at midnight
(when others slept) for to giue thankes.Psal. 119. 62.
               
               It is storied of Sampson, that when Delilah was set on
worke by his enemies,Iudg. 16. from the 5. verse to the 22. to knowe how he might bee bound
to doe him hurt, he dallied a while first with seauen withs,
then with new ropes which he brake as threds, &c. In the
end importunitie made her mistris of his minde, and him

miserable: for when shee had caused the seauen lockes of
his head to be shauen, hee was afraid, and troubled at the
voice, which said; The Philistines bee vpon thee Sampson.
Then awaking out of sleepe, and thinking to goe out, and
shake himselfe, as at other times, hee could not doe as hee
had done, therefore they tooke him, and put out his eyes,
bound him with fetters, and set him to grinde in the prison
house.
Mutato nomine de te fabula narratur.
Change but the name, and each christian is the man whose
strength lies in the lockes of heed-taking and attention,
which so long as they are preserued and kept in vre, the
Philistines, his fore-named enemies, cannot prevaile, but if
a rasor of securitie come over his head, and shaue his haire,
(the Divell I meane secretly stealing his heart from his true
treasure, and set it on other strange delights) then Sampson
like, he becomes weake as other men, the voice of pleasure
allures him, the voice of profit intangles him, hearing
that voice,Vers. 17. in the 6 of Ieremie, which saith; take heed
to the sound of the trumpet; hee answers as they say
there. I will not take heed. Then the enemy of the soul
takes him captiue, puts out, or bleres at least, for some
space,1. Ioh. 2. 16. his eyes, his affections are then fettered, and grinde
he must to that lust of the flesh, that lust of the eye, & pride
of life, which he before had in subiection. Satan sent a Delilah
to lull Paule in her lap, and binde him with withs of
greene delights,
                     
                        •
                     . Cor. 12. 7. but his watchfull soule displeased deepely
with that flesh-pleasing force complained thereof,
shaked himselfe, and so found ease. Lot so long as his
soule was kept waking by the city of Sodome, brake with
ease those ropes of vanitie, which drew destruction on the
cittie. Sed qui in ipsa ciuitate peruersa i
                        •
                     stus fuit, in monte
peeca
                        •
                     it, he that walked vprightly in the midst of that peruerse,
and forlorne place, fell downe right in the mountaine.
Sinne is that to the soule,Ioel 2. 
                        •
                     0. which putrefaction is to
the natural bodies, as in nature three things preserue therefrom,
heate, cold, and motion: so the same through heedfulnesse

preserue the soule from corruption. First, intensiue 
heate, and drynesse hath a hindering hand in this businesse;
so whilst attention keeps the heart frequent, and feruent
in prayer, no aire of temptations can corrupt the
soule. Thereupon Christ tels vs,
                     
                        •
                      Math. 26. 41. that if we watch and pray,
we shall not enter into temptation. 2. Cold that is outward
is another let, or preseruatiue, because it resists extrinsecall,
or outward heat, which hath the chiefe stroke in the
worke. The aire of affliction is cold, and causet
                     •
                   many to
fall away. yet warily drawne in,Math. 43. 21. and wisely referred to the
right end, it breedes good blood in distempered bodies,
causing them with diligence to seeke the Lord. Againe,Hosea 5. 15.
the neighbour-hood of cold Christians, and cohabitation
of lukewarme professours (by a spirituall antiperistasis)
warme some the more. Lot was the forwarder amidst theGen. 5. 19.
frozen Sodomites: Enoch walked with God alone,Gen. 5. 22. when
others went from him. Noah in his generation sought the
Lord, by the practice of faith and repentance, when all the
world forsooke him, and made way by their wicked practice 
to their destruction. The third preseruatiue in nature,
and naturall things, is motion, which hath the like effect
in our soule affaires. For this cause the Apostle exhorts
vs not to be wearie of well-doing,Gal. 6. 9. wherein also this
text requires continuance; the aire doth euer moue in his
Region, so ought we in our seuerall stations, alwayes be
exercised in the course of godlinesse. No mosse stickes to
the rowling stone, which if it laid still, would be ouergrowen:
standing ponds gather skumme, whilst murmuring
brooks runne filth-free. The neglected plant, (be it of
the best) either dyes, or frustrates hope. An vntilled field
(be it of the fertillest) brings forth weedes, briers, thistles.
You wote why Aegistus became an adulterer; Desidiosus

                        •
                     rat, he was entomb'd before his time,Otium viv
                        •
                      hominissepultura. for idlenesse is the
graue of a liuing man. The crabfish is desirous of Oysters,
but because she cānot perforce open them, she watcheth
the time when they open themselues, & then thrusting
in her clawes shee speedes her selfe. There is a time when

mans heart is shut vp, and kept so close, that sinne cannot
ceaze thereon, nor enter therein, a time when it is more open,
and apt to receiue the infectious impressions of lust,
anger, envy and the like; Which Satan obseruing by his diligent
attendance,
                     
                        •
                      Sam. 11. ensnares the soule, as he did Dauids, who
first slept securely on his bed, then paced it idlely on the
roofe of his palace, when he should haue gone forth to the
battell, and displayed his banner against the enemie. Hee
that lookes to his feet, and numbers his steps in a slipperie
path shall set the surer, whereas he that sets he lookes not
where, must needes-slip, and fall the oftner.
               
                   Secondly, as it preserues from sinne, so it is an antidote
against crosses,Prov. 9. 17. the fruite of sinne, as Moses makes them,
Deut. 28.Where the curse of GOD 
                        •
                     aunts the wicked (as it were a fury) in all his wa
                        •
                     es. If he bee in the Citie it attends him there, in the field it hovers ouer him, comming in, it accompanies him, going forth, it followes him at the heeles, and in trauell it is his commorade. If it destaste not his doughe, or empty his basket, yet will it fill his store with strife, or swallow the wrath of God with his sweetest morsels. It is a mothe in his wardrobe, murraine amongst his cattell, mildew in his field, rot amongst his sheepe, and ofttimes makes the fruite of his loi
                        •
                     es his greatest 
                        •
                     eart
                        •
                     break. Stolne waters are counted sweet, and hid bread
is pleasant, but this pleasantnesse ends in painfull accusations,
and secret checkes of conscience, those waters coole
loue, quench the spirit, and both may breed that distresse
of minde,Prov. 18. 14. wherewith no worldly crosse may compare.Prov. 14. 17. For
the spirit of a man will sustaine his infirmities,2 Sam. 2. 23. but a wounded
spirit (a burden importable) who can beare it?Prov. 13. 10. Vers. 16. 17. &c. To
proceede from inward troubles which are lesse seene to
those which are outward and better discerned; Some finde
that true in proofe, which Solomon speakes by way of Proverbe,
he that is hastie to anger, committeth folly, and folly
sometimes commits him to be cooled within the prison
wals, and the busie-bodie is hated. Can Elyes education
but breed ill blood in his prosperitie? Is not pride the Mother
of contention? contention of discontentment? and
shall not he that loues pastime be a poore man? What dilapidations
and alienating of states, doe prodigall and intemperate
Heires make, causing auncient houses to spew
out their owners, and teaching their lands to deny their

names? Hell should haue no suburbes on earth, if rash and
and vnripe contracts did not maintaine marriage broyles.
The malefactor on the ladder, taking his farewell of the
world, leaues this Cave for the best Legacy he can bestow,
take heed (saith he) of this or that vice (naming some)
whereon he layes the guilt of his vntimely death. To whom
is woe?Prov. 23. 29. 30. to whom is sorrow? to whom is strife? to whom is
murmuring? to whom are wounds without cause? search
and see if these bitter fruits doe not follow such as delight
in drunkennesse, the beggers burden. If David had beene
as circumspect at that one time, walking on the roofe of
his house, as he was at other, hee might haue walked free
from that anguish and reproach,Psal. 51. 3. 8. which afterwards did find
him out. It must needes be seene by this time, that by heed-taking,
some escape the crosses which enormous demeanour
draw on others. The Saints in this life haue no supersed
                        •
                     as
against all incumbrance; for sometimes troubles
come towards them in troupes,Psal. 34. 18. 
                  multae tribulationes iustorum,
many are the troubles,Were these troubles not many, or that many, no troubles, 1. fewer, or more affecting nature, they should distract the lesse; but many troubles may perplexe a weake mind, possesse a wicked with opinion of being a good thing, not to be a good man, therefore the spirit elsewhere appeaseth the one, and spites the other. The righteous shall escape out of trouble, an
                        •
                      the wicked shall come in his stead. Prov, 11. 8. If then troubles
dismay, yet may hope of deliuerance bearten, 2 Deliuerance more certaine, that from the Lord. 3 From the Lord more acceptable, that out of fauour. 4 Fauour more gratefull, that findes riddance out of all. And 5 (which graceth all the more) the wicked shall come in his stead. of the righteous; but the
right manner of taking, and entertaining them, and how
wisely to mannage them to our best aduantage, is a mysterie
worthie light and labour, a priviledge enioyed by them
alone. Euill tidings throng vpon Iob,
                  Iob 1. 14. 15. as if they had striuen
which should come first. Whilst one was speaking of the
stealth and slaughter of the Shabeans,Verse 16. an other Messenger,
hotter then he comes, the fire of God is fallen from Heauen,
and hath burnt vp thy sheepe, and seruants, and hath
deuoured them &c. Neither had the third ended his rueful
relation,Verse 17. till the most mournefull accident dispatched the
fourth.Verse 18. 19. Thy sonnes and thy daughters were eating, and
drinking wine in their eldest brothers house, and behold

there came a great wind from beyond the wildernesse, and
smote the 
                     •
                  oure corners of the house, which fell vpon thy
children, and they are dead &c. See what a table of euill
tidings was prepared for a righteous man. A single crosse
lesser then the least of this kinde, hath disquieted, yea euen
amazed some; imagine then (in my silence) what one more
then tripled, and without respit would worke with the
strongest patient. How was Baltazar daunted, when in
the height of his royaltie, and amidst his mirth, that fearefull
hand writing was seene of him? was not the Kings
countenance changed?Dan. 5. 6. did not his thoughts trouble him,
so that his ioynts were loosed, and his knees smote one against
the other? What if an inferiour, nay no true, but a
fained affliction be found of force to disorder the ranke of
vnarmed passions?Esth. 3. 5. Though Haman be promoted by Ahashuerosh,
and placed aboue all the Princes that bee with
him, though all the Kings seruants bow their knees, and do
reuerence to the man whom the King will honour, yet cannot
all this honour, and promotion please and content
him; if Mordecai, but one, a meane one, and a stranger, deny
him homage.1 Sam. 25. 37. If Nabal but heare of his wife Abigail,
how nigh death he was, and neere to haue left all, his heart
will dye within him after the retreat of death, his feare
will transforme him into a stone. Contrary, the forewarning
of Agabus did forea
                     •
                  me Paul, I am ready (saith hee)
not to be bound onely, (for these being assoone digested
by him as named by the other, hee singled out in his owne
conceit,Act. 21. 11. 13. and there hearing a harder, and more terrible encounter,
to wit death) but also to dy at Ierusalem for the
name of the Lord Iesus. See you not that some one disturbance
dasheth all other delights and maketh their life i
                     •
                  ksome,
perhaps loathsome? witnesse Achitophel inferring
that cursed conclusion vpon crossed premisses when hee
hanged himselfe.2 Sam. 17. 23. Againe attention, and expectation of
change dulls the edge, abates the force, and allayes the
tartnesse of suddaine vexation.Affliction wee 
                        •
                     ffect not (for there is no tast in the white of an egg) yet doe our affections increase our afflictions, throu
                        •
                     h securitie in not preueting, whilst we may, way
                        •
                      wardnes in not entertaining them as wee ought, or want of wisdome 
                        〈◊〉
                      not entertaining the as we might doe onely the watchfull are wise, and the wise watchfull, to p
                        •
                     event some before they fal
                        •
                     , Math. 28. to welcome other by preparation Luke. 23. to reape a ioyfull haruest after a teary seede
                        •
                     ime, by taking thankfully, disges
                        •
                     ing patiently, and burying all in the hope of a good issue. Let here retire your attention,
and my speech to visit Iob, in those sharpe visitations

of his, we shall neither finde him a Stoicke so much as
to feele vacancy of passions; (for he rent his garments, shaued
his head, and fell vpon the ground,) nor so little a christian,
as to entertaine deiection of minde, in so sore trialls.
Iob. 1. 20. The Lord giueth, and the Lord taketh away, euen as it
pleaseth the Lord, so come all things to passe, blessed bee
the Name of the Lord. It wrought stupiditie in secure Nabal,
which wrung praise and patience from watchfull Iob.
               
               To all these things there is an appointed time, and one
thing must be in request at all times, to wit, that one which
is necessarie; the former as men wee gather by obseruation
of things naturally accomplished, voluntarily done, or necessarily
endured; the other we must beleeue as Christians.
In a quiet state wee forget God. In a troubled, wee
thinke God hath forgotten vs, Psal. 77. In a calme, wee
are too prone to presume, in a storme, too too abiect to despaire.
He that said; In my prosperitie I shall neuer be moued,
was presently troubled vpon the change, Psal. 30. not
vnlike the bladder, that is forth-with swolne with a puffe▪
but incontinently shrunke with a pricke; how needfull
now is heed-taking, and circumspection in all estates? in
aduersitie against vnsettling, and backsliding. in prosperitie
against loosenesse, and too much hope of assurance.
There can be no stabilitie in our affections, no stayednesse
in any state of life, no constancie kept in a Christian course,
before we haue learned this briefe summe, and summarie
abridgement of all dutie,Heb. 3. 12. to take heed.
               
               
                  Thirdly, this heedfulnesse puts life and strength as hath
beene said, into all other parts of Gods worship. The skilfull
Pilote beholds all the parts of Heauen continually, that
so hee may at all times accordingly, guide, and direct his
ship; so ought the carefull and wise Christian, giue diligent 
attendance, to all such meanes, as God from Heauen hath
reuealed, to land him in the hauen where hee would be.
Take heed to thy foote (saith Eccles.)Eccle: 4. 17. when thou enterest
into the House of God. Our Sauiour giues further direction
for our carriage, and abode there, when hee saith,

                  Take heed how you heare.Luke 8. 13. Men weare Gods threshold,
without looking to their feete, that is, what affections they
come withall, they wearie him with their idle presence,
not caring how they demeane themselues. The proud enters,
and profits not, because he takes not heed to his feete;
for God resisteth the proud,Iam. 4. 6. and giueth grace to the humble.
The malicious and wrathfull enter too, but without
fruit; for the wrath of man doth not accomplish the righteousnesse
of God.Iam. 1. 20. Vnbeleeuers ioyne themselues to others,
in the exercises of Religion, but with so ill successe, that the
word which they heare, profits them not, because it is not
mingled in their hearts with faith.Heb. 4. 2. The conceited Laodicean
(being full afore-hand) enters heere, and is no more
edified then the other,Luke 1. 53. for God fils the hungry with good
things, as for the rich and opinatiuely righteous, he sends
them empty away.Psal. 42. 12. & 84. 2. Few come with that good thirst, and
holy hunger which Dauid had; few with Maries care, to
lay vp in their hearts.Luke 2. 19. 51. Many banish attention out of their
eares, most bring no purpose to practise ought. What maruell
therefore though such depart as emptie of heauenly
wisdome, as they came voide of holy desire. Sobrietie is a
commendable, and seruiceable vertue in the life of man, to
order and keepe the same in frame; yet this without attendance,
and looking to, may be lost,Gen 9. 21. or at least depart for a
time,1 Pet. 5. as it did from Noah. Therefore Saint Peter, to backe
and strengthen the moderation of affection, and conversation,
requires the attention of the minde, that so the enemie,
through his vigilancie, neither withdraw vs from the
good which we would, and he impugnes; nor draw vs to
the euill we would not,
                     
                        •
                     phes. 6. 13. and which hee importunes vs to.
Pauls Panoplie or Christian armour, is so necessarie a furniture,
as no man can with safety want this; Notwithstanding
when we haue put on, not a part, but the whole, and
haue had proofe thereof,Verse 28. by withstanding the enemie, yet
are we warned to watch withall, that we may stand fast: So
necessarie is vigilancie, euen to an armed and weaponed
Christian, that without it, he may be driuen from his stand,

as were our first Parents, in that state wherein they were
likest to haue with stood. Prayer is the highest linke in that
golden chaine,Rom. 10. 13. coupling saluation to the soule of man, yet
will prayers be few, and those frozen too, where no heed is
giuen to our selues;Math. 26. therefore doth Christ ioyne invocation,
and attention together,1 Pet. 4. 7. saying, Watch and pray. And his
Apostle exhorts to be watchfull vnto prayer. Wandring
thoughts flye rife, at such times chiefly, and distract the
minde,Gen. 15. 11. as the fowles did hinder Abrahams sacrifice, these,
attention must restraine. There are times wherein wee are
more willing, yea desirous to talke with God, then at other,
those oportunities must attention take; the force of
invocation is much abated, if it be not accompanied with
attention,Alterius sie altera posci
                        •
                      ope
                        •
                     , &c. and the eye of attention would close oft-times,
and steale a nap, if it were not kept waking by the voice of
prayer.
               In the principall parts of Gods worship, either he speaks
to vs; as in the holy assemblies, or we to him, in the language
of prayer. We must avoid Hypocrisie, as the bane of both.
In our conference with God, lest the fault of these auncient
hypocrites, and hypocriticall Pharises, be laid at our
doore (whose mouthes and mindes,Isa. 29. 13. went sundry wayes)
we must take heed, to ioyne these two together, the lippes
nigh,Ier. 38. and the heart farre off, and then the King will deny
vs nothing.1 Iohn 5. 14. Concerning the latter, Gods speech to vs, lest
that complaint of the Prophet, or the Lord rather by his
Prophet, (my people sit before thee, and heare thy words,
but they will not doe them)Ezek. 33. 31. rise in record against vs, we
must be carefull to ioyne obedience to our audience. If ye
know these things,Iohn 13. 17. happie are you if you doe them,
               Hitherto haue I shewed a threefold vse of Christian
heedfulnesse or attention. The first, that it keepes vs from
sinne, viz. grosse and enormous, such as Dauid calls the
great offence,
                  Eccl. 27. 
                        •
                     . otherwise there is no man iust in the earth,
that doth good, and sinneth not; and this is a blessed thing,
as the Prophet affirmeth in the first Psalme.Verse 1. 
                  Secondly, it
prevents many troubles, wherewith others meet, & teacheth

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
cheerefully to vndergoe such as God shall see meet for
our exercise,1 Pet. 1. 6. the way whereby we come to the Crowne of
life, and this can be no lesse then a blessed way, for it leades
to Canaan, though it lye through the wildernesse. Thirdly,
                  Act. 14. 22.
that it hath the tuition & ouer-sight of all other meanes,
to set and keepe them on foot, that which Christ himselfe
pronounceth to be the true happinesse.Luke 11. 28. Seeing then there is
no diuision of languages, in this triplicitie, but each doth
seuerally promise blisse; I may (to close the whole point)
seale vp all with that saying of the Spirit; Blessed is he that
 watcheth &c.Reu. 16. 15. He shall weane his heart from vnlawfull liberties;
 enlarge his libertie in heauenly affaires, fill his
 heart with sollid delights, free himselfe from much in cumbrance,
 and safegard his soule from deadly wounds.
            
            
               
                   The second generall head, or immediate obiect,
whereat this watch must begin.
               OVr Apostle hauing exhorted his Scholler Timothie in
the 12 verse,Thy selfe. to the practice of particulars, hee doth
heere imply no lesse in this one word, Tibi, then was expressed
in those many. Hence, to set consideration on
worke,Rom. 2. 23. they who teach others, ought first to take out the
Lesson themselues. Thou that gloriest in the Law, through
breaking the Law dishonourest thou God? Some man
is wittie, and hath instructed many, but is vnprofitable
vnto himselfe, as Balaams Asse rebuked the foolishnesse
of the Prophet, nothing bettered himselfe thereby.
Pulcherrimus est ordo, & saluberrimus (saith one) vt
enus quod alijs portandum imponis, tu portes prior. It is
the most comely and meet method a preacher can vse,Math▪ 
                     
                        •
                     3. 4. first
to beare the burden himselfe which he laies vpon another.
Christ taxeth those 
                     •
                  s too hard impositors, and immoderate
commanders, who would lay burdens on other mens
shoulders, from which they withdraw their owne. His Apostle
counts those wise men who take heed to themseluesEphes. 5. 15.
& whose liues are circumspect. Who can commend Noah
                  
his shipwrights, who made an arke for the safetie of others
but were not themselues preserued by it? What wisdome
is it to send others to the promised land, and build Tabernacles
in this wildernesse for our selues? What charitie to
open the kingdome of heauen to others, and to beare keys
to shut out our selues? He can never (bee said what can, to
contradict) he I say, can never seriously seeke, not earnestly
thirst after the salvation of others, who hath no care to
worke out his own. Qui sibinequam, cui bonus? The charge
Paul ga
                     •
                  e to Titus was,Tit. 2. 7. 8. in all things to shew himselfe an
example of good workes with incorrupt doctrine, &c. Mē
are sooner perswaded by workes, then words, eye-sight,
then heare-say to well doing.

                     Non sic inflectere sensus
                     H
                           •
                        manos edicta valent, quàm vita docentis.
                  
Practice will set an edge on the bluntest precept, and actiō
is the best rule in our Rhetoricke, to moue men to put a
good lesson in vre. The Pharises had tongues which spake
by the tal
                     •
                  egrave;et, but their hands scarce wrought by the ounce.
Therefore no time shall weare out the staine wherewith
our Saviour Christ did blemish them in his time,Mat. 23. 3. they say,
With their tongues men professe that they are Christians, when by their deed; they controule the truth of their profession. Those 
                        〈◊〉
                      for thew, these witnesse against them, their tongues are partiallin this plea and speake out of the information of a deceitfull heart, Ier. 17. Their deeds giue evidence according to truth, for the kingdome of God 
                        〈◊〉
                      not in words, but in power and practice. He is a miserable and vnhappie man, who hath his 
                        〈◊〉
                      to countenance his christianitie, in an vnchristian carriage, and course of life. For 
                        〈…〉
                      pretends in natures corrupt court of common pleas, where many men boast every one of his 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     P
                           •
                        ov. 20 6: Yet is he sure to speed ill in the Kings bench where iudgement is already and 
                        〈…〉
                      gone out against him. Not every one that saith Lord, Lord shall enter into the kingdome of 
                        〈…〉
                      he that doth the will, &c. Mat. 7. and doe not. Their breast plate was all composed of Vrim
without 
                     
                        •
                     hummim, they had knowledge, void of holinesse,
resembling the coine, which being in it selfe white,
notwithstanding drawes a blacke line. Or water in great
mens kitchins which hauing purged, and clensed other
things is it selfe cast into the sinke, & such are all they who
Grecian-like knowe what is good, but with the Lacedaemonian
forbeare to practise the good they know. It is said

of our Saviour Christ,Mark. 7. 37. that he spake as never man spake,
that he did all things well.Ioh. 5. 35. Our Saviour saith of Iohn Baptist,
that he was a burning and shining candle, It may bee a
candle that hath neither warmth nor light, but Iohn had
both a shining heat, and a burning light, his light did shew
others the way, his heart did inflame them with desire of
it. That precept of Christs was not giuen in vaine, and if it
ought to be practised by any, then of such chiefely who
should resemble the things allotted to the Temples service;
which were double to those of ordinary vse. Let your light
so shine,Mat. 5. 16. &c. shine we must, not so, that wee be like the Lyzards
which make prints with their feet, and dash them
out with their tailes, but so, that saying and doing wee adorne
the doctrine of our Saviour Christ: not so, that Lapwing-like
we cry there, as if our affections were fixed aboue,
when yet they are fastned here below. But so that in
heart and affection we aspire whence wee speake as Paule
did and his like;Phil. 3. 20. not so, that we shew miserable penurie, in
vnfruitfull plentie; penurie of conscience, in plentie of
knowledge, but so, that by the light of life, and learning as
two bright lamps wee may goe before, and guid others,
through this region of darknes, into the land of light. The
words of the Apostles slew as sparkles out of the fornace of
zealous hearts, and their hearts were kindled with the fire
of faith.2. Cor. 4. 13. We also beleeue and therefore speake, &c. They
make the best harmonie, and the most shall dance to their
pipes, whose tongues and hearts are tied together, whose
precept and practise kisse each other. Good trees bring
forth more then leaues, by their fruits yee shall knowe th̄e,
if we haue a voice, to say, this is the way, and like Plinie's

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   want feet to walke in it, trees we may bee, I say not
good ones, but like that withered one in the Gospell,
which was cursed by the breath of Gods own mouth. The
doues eye is an ornament to the Serpents head.Mat. 21. 19. We must
therefore be innocent aswell,Mat. 10. 16. as wise, for as wise innocency
foresees, and shunnes dangers: so innocent wisdome fits
vs to doe, and suffer the will of our maker. Ministers are

sembled by starres which affect (as some say) those inferior
things three waies,Rev. 1. 20. by motion, light, and influence; so they
as fixed starres in the Churches firmament, must by the influence
of their lips, Feed; By the regular motion of their
liues, Confirme; And by the light of both, Inlighten many.
Those that giue precepts of militarie discipline, require
three things in a worthy leader, skil, vertue, and authority.
1. He must be skilfull not from report, or reading onely, as
some tongue-tall captaines are, but such a one as knowes
well himselfe to order his army, to protract and lengthen
the warre, or drawe on the enemie. 2. He must haue vertue,
that like a true leader, he may say of himselfe, my souldiers
I would haue you follow my deeds, not my words:
the former of these fits him for direction, the latter for execution,
and both iointly cast a reverend, and awfull opinion
vpon his person. So in the manage of spirituall warres,
the Captaines must be men of skill,Mal. 2. 7. because the Priests lips
must preserue knowledge, this knowledge must vtter it
selfe by practise, for whosoever hath not vertue is blind, &
where the blind lead the blind,2. Pet. 1. 9. leader and follower, both
fall into the ditch;Mat. 15. whereas knowledge followed with
practise, procures an authority, and reverend esteeme amongst
men, which I will make my first motiue, to induce
this point.
               How did S. Paul and his fellowes procure authority to
themselues,Motiue. we (saith he) giue no offence in any thing;2. Cor. 6. 3. that
our Ministerie should not be reprehended. Loquendi authoritas
perditur,
                  Ioh. 1. 20. 
                  quando vox opere non adiuvatur. Iohn the Baptist
was had in such esteeme that some thought he was the
Christ. What great things did Iohn to purchase such appla
                     •
                  se?
happi
                     •
                   by some miracles hee wrought amongst
them; but Nullum signum fecit,
                  Ioh. 10. 41. 
                  Iohn did no such things
whereby to drawe the wonder of men on him, it was onely
his mortified and sober course of life, which gained him
this respect. Holynesse of conversation concurring with
the measure of his vnderstanding. Timothy was a young
man to whom the Apostle writes that no man should despise

his youth, this may seeme not to haue layne in his own
power, but the Apostle tells him how it may bee brought
about, even by covering greennesse of yeares with gravitie
of carriage,1. Tim. 4. 12. be vnto thē that beleeue, an ensample, in word
in conversation in loue, in spirit, in faith, and in purenesse.
Thus, if his speech be gratious, and powdered with salt, if
his life teach religion, aswell as his learning, if out of loue
he doe all good offices to all men, if besides the vse of an
edifying lenity, he haue spiritual fortitude, to further Gods
businesse, if through faith he can conquer such difficulties
as otherwise would weary him of well doing, if an habituall
puritie accompany, & adorne the rest: Timothy though
young, shall neither expose his profession to contumely,
nor his owne person to contempt.
               The growth of the Gospell is much hindred by our evill
conversation,2 Motiue. because hereby we shut vp the kingdome of
heauen against men,Mat. 23. 13. for we neither goe in our selues, nor
suffer we them that are entering to goe in. Frustra al
                        •
                     os in
                     
                        •
                     itabit
adpiè vivendum qui nullum prae se fert pietatis studiū.
The labour seemes lost, and the paines to perish of such as
would plant pietie in others, and make the law of vnrighteousnesse
his owne rule. Mans affection by nature giues
more credit to the eye,Gen. 30. 37. then eare, and the eyes of his vnderstanding,
like Iacobs sheepe, too firmely fixed on such partie
coloured obiects, as say well, and doe ill, cause their affections
to bring forth spotted fruits. The Prophet brings
in God to demand disdainfully in the Psalme, with what
face men of vncircumcised lips, and liues, dare presume to
meddle with his mysteries. But vnto the vngodly, saith
God,Psal. 50. 16. why dost thou preach my lawes, and takest my covenant
in thy mouth, whereas thou harest to be reformed, &
hast cast my words behind thee? He speakes not by way of
advise, or instructiō, it is not meet that the vngodly should
meddle with my ordinances, &c. Nor vseth he a simple prohibition,
let no vngodly man preach my law, &c. but with
words of increpation, and sharpe reproofe he shakes them,
saying, Cur? Why dost thou preach my laws? &c. Hee that

steeps his tongue in religion, and staines his life with gross
transgressions, that publisheth Gods law with his mouth
and preacheth lewdnesse by his manners, is like the Phisitian
that should minister at once two contrary potions to
his patient, the one being soveraigne to prevent death, the
other deadly to take away life; whereof the latter & worser
hath this advantage, that the eyes fasten more firmely,
and stirringly on things seene; then the eare of what wee
heare:Segnius irritant animos impressa pe
                        •
                      aures, &c. and men are farre more aptly and liuely led by practice,
then precept; examples, then edicts. Thou therefore
that teachest another, teachest thou not thy selfe? Qui negligit
recta facere, desinat & recta docere. Let him cease (saith
Isidor) to teach well,Rom. 2. 21. that cares not to liue well. A spot in
the face, doth more blemish the body then doth elsewhere
a bile. Our moates are beames, our beames put out the eys
of others, aswell as our owne, our moles, are mole-hils, our
mole-hills, mountaines,Cum pastor per abrupta graditur ad praecipitium grex. sequitur▪ Ier. 2. 7. from the hight whereof some
throwe themselues headlong, as if no evill were to be feared
where we goe before. The theefe may with as easy censure
steale the horse, as he that saith thou shalt not steale
looke over the hedge. The Lord expostulating with his
people for their ingratitude, saith thus. I brought you into
a plentifull country &c. but whē you entered, you defiled
my land. &c. A great and foule fault indeed and deseruing
reproofe,Vers. 8. but farre overgone in greatnesse by that which
followes. The Priests said not, where is the Lord, and they
that handle my law knewe me not &c.
               Christ called Peter,
                  Mat. 16. 2
                        •
                     . Satan, when if carnall reason might
rule a case divine, he gaue no ill counsell. Master pittie thy
selfe, &c. Now whether it be that others indifferences bee
our faults, or lesser faults in vs breed greater offences, both
which haue their truth and place, though no place here to
lessen Peters rashnes, yet that for which Peter is so roundly
come over by our Saviour with get thee behind me,Vers. 23. Satan,
the Pope would easily haue pardoned, or not so sharply
censured for the intents sake. The number of the twelue
Apostles was singularly & specially chosen amongst whō
                  
                  Iudas stood as a cypher in Algorisme to fill vp roome, or
as Satan amongst the sonnes of God. Haue I not chosen
you twelue,Iob. 1. 6. and one of you is a Divell? Such piety & faithfulnesse,
aboue others,Iohn. 6. 70. had not beene required of Iudas, if
he had not beene chosen before others to the office and
dignitie of Apostleship, nor had he ever been clothed with
so hatefull and odious a title, if the prophaners of so honorable
a sanction, so sacred a function, were not most cursed
of other creatures, and to bee counted the worst of all. A
man of great science, and little conscience, whereto shall I
compare him? hee is like an image which hath the head of
gold,Humano capiti cervicem pictor equinam, &c. the body of brasse, or baser mettall, yea hee is more
monstrous thē the Poets picture, which hath a mans head,
a horses necke, with varietie of other formes, and feathers.
Spectatum admissi. fletum teneatis?
Can any eye but teare, any heart but breake, can our bones
but shake at the sight of such? better it were for others,
they had not beene Prophets, for themselues, they ha
                     •
                   never
beene. Will men be moued so much with words, which
they see confuted with contrary deeds? Hands are stronger
to ruinate, then tongues to renew; The one to scatter,
then thother to gather, those to pull downe, then these to
build vp. Will they not say secretly within themselues,
whilst our words sound in their eares, Cur ergo quae dicit, ipse
non facit? If there were such danger in sinne, why would
not he himselfe shun it? would he doe otherwise then hee
saith? Thus we strengthen the hands of the wicked that
none can returne from his wickednesse.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 23. 14.
               
               Our open reprehensions of them are so many secret and
sealed condemnations of our selues. Comfort we other? we
cast downe our selues. Threaten we other? we deceaue and
send our selues to hell. Evill words corrupt good manners,
but evill manners corrupt more, of Ministers chiefly. Others
examples, if they be not lesse evill, yet are they lesse
dangerous. But theirs are Basilisks which by their sight infect
deadly.Mat. 6. 
                        •
                     2. The light of the body is the eye, &c. The candle
giueth light to them which are in the house,Mat. 5. 15. but going

out, men grope after the walls, like blind men, & the snuffe
is offensiue and vnsavorie: so if these eyes be darkned, these
candles bee dimmed by some grosse offence,Qui ducunt, seducunt. the losse of
their light misleads,Isa. 3. 12. their sent is vnsavorie, and both quenches
many good purposes & breeds abortiue births in the
hearts and minds of the beholders. Let your light therefore
shine with such an ocular demonstratiō of your faith,
that men may see to imitation, what by voice is vttered for
instruction. Otherwise (as in too many) if ill life quench
the light of good learning, as by profitable doctrine wee
hew timber out of thicke trees,
                  Psal. 74. 6. 1. so by dissonant condition,
and contrary practice wee breake downe all the carved
worke. Whereas if both hands were set to the Lords building,
vprightnesse in liuing well, and diligence by teaching
well, wee should bee knowne to bring it to an excellent
worke. Salt is good, other things though they degenerate
may notwithstanding by some meanes become profitable,
after their corruption;Luk. 14. 34. 35. but if the salt haue lost his favour,
wherewith shall it be salted? it is neither meet for the land,
nor yet for the dunghill, but men cast it out: that goodnes
is in such as haue salt in themselues; this contempt abides
those that loose their savour.
               Thirdly,3 Motiue the Gospell is hereby scandalized. For as others
faults are oftentimes laid at our doores: so ours reflect
after a speciall manner vpon our profession; the very
reason that the Apostle giues in the person of all, why they
forbeare to giue offence. 2. Cor. 6. Servants are inioyned
to count their Masters worthy of all honour,1. Tim. 6. 1. and that for
this end, that the name of God and his doctrine, bee not evill
spoken of. This which he requireth at the hands of servants,
how much more ought it to be performed of such as
are imployed in the best service, of the best master? Least
the wickednesse of Elie his sonnes,1. Sam. 2. 17. cause men to abhorre
the Lords offering. Woe be to that man by whom offence
commeth, it were better that a milstone were hanged about
his necke, and hee were cast into the bottome of the
sea, thē to swim in that sea of sorrowes (wherein he should

sinke infinitly, & never find bottome) which remaines vnto
him in the world to come. If any man beleeue not the woe
here denounced, what hath he to glory in more, then the
outside of a Christian? If beleeuing, he be not moued there
with, his heart is as strong as a stone, and as hard as the nether
milstone.I
                        •
                     b. 41. 15. Seeing then our enormities impeach that authoritie
we should beare, and the Maiestie of that message
which we bring, since they open the mouth of wickednes
not against our selues alone, but our Gospell, which is
greater then our selues, yea the name of God, greater then
the Gospell; it behoues Timothie to walke more warily thē
other men, and never to thinke that he hath taken heed enough
till he hath beheaded sinne, if it bee possible in the
conception, and held vnder every shadow, & shew (so farr
as frailtie may obtaine) of outward evill.1. Thess. 5. 22. How many eyes
are vpon vs? Who can bee attended with moe, or more
sharply sighted? Spectaculum facti sumus, wee are made a
gazing stocke vnto the world, which hates vs,1. Cor. 4. 1. 9. and to the
Angels, which ioy in mans reformation, and to men, who
if we slip,Psal. 38. 16. reioyce against vs. The world with a malitious
eye,Gen. 9. 22. 23. lookes abroad on our least blemishes; as the eye of
wicked Ham with delight beheld that from which his brethren
did avert theirs. Angells look on with gratious eies
of tuition, to guard vs in our waies: men, if some behold, &
not the best of vs, with single eyes, like that Aegyptian bird
which picks wholsome food out of the serpents eggs; yet
to other, and those the greater part, wee must restore the
things we never tooke, as we knowe who did; and though
our penny too be good silver,Psal. 
                        •
                     9. 4. bearing both the stampe of
profession and mettall of true sanctification, yet nobis non
licet esse bonis, we goe not for currant with them who haue
taught their tongues to depraue, and depresse what is well
done, and they themselues cannot doe, applauding all contrary
appea
                     •
                  ance,Psal. 35. 25. with there, there so would wee haue it.
To what in offensiuenesse of life should this call, that such
a multitude of monitors, be aboue, and about vs? What warinesse,
reverence, and strictnesse of carriage should this

wring from them, on whom heaven, and earth seeme to
pore, as on their proper and peculiar object?Re
                        •
                     . 4. 8. They should
be like those beasts mentioned in the Revelation, which
were full of eyes. Because more then vsuall vigilancy is required,
to the discharge of so reverent, and high a charge.
They should be Quercus i
                        •
                     stiti
                        •
                     . so rooted in righteousnes,
that they bow not with euery blast, but beare out the force
of all temptations. When others limpe, wee must goe vpright.
If they goe, we must runne. Be it they be fashionable
in profession, profit not by affliction, ioyn'd in league
with their corruption; for fruite, be as grasse growing on
the house top, whereof the mower filleth not his hand,Psal 1. 29. 6 7. and
in time of temptation fall away;Psal. 92. 12. & 1. 3. yet must we resemble Dauids Palme. In
               The Qualitie of our site, or the soile we affect,Gaudet regius, &c. desirously
meeting God in his appointed meanes. Isay. 12. 3.
               The temper of our nature,A fimo laedi putant quidā. Plin. which must be so renewed,
that dung annoy it not, (i.) it sort not with delight in sinne.
Prov. 8. 13.Innititur oneri.
               
               Our proofe in affliction, whilst we grow vnder the crosse.
Exod 1, 12.Semper illi pomum est subna
                        •
                     cente alio.
               
               Our fruitfulnes, faith working by a liuely loue. Gal. 5. 6.
               The seasonablenesse thereof, being neither vntimelyAs in such who are soone ripe in their owne conceit, & therefore too well conceited of themselues, & too censorious of their brethren.,
nor too lateIt is a timely endeauour that intitles vs to heauen: for albeit none enter but such as striue, yet al that striue, shall not enter. Luke. 13. 24..
               
                  Huius folia germina & 
                        •
                     ortexin medicinam. The vertue of our leaues which must bee medicinall,
whilst our lippes giue counsell, our liues good example vnto
others.
               
                  Semper viret & non dejicit folia post decerptum fruetum. Their lastingnesse
                     •
                  , whilst they neither decay in colour,
nor fall from the tree. We being as greene Oliue trees,
fresh and fruitfull in the house of God. Psal. 52. 8.
               To conclude this point, two things are carefully to bee
eyed of vs, a good name, and a good conscience more; this
for our selues, that for others; this to secure at h me, against
secret accusations, subtill suggestions of sinne and

Satan, that, to warre abroad against euill surmises, false suspitions,
slanderous tongues. care of conscience, with neglect
of name, is a selfe-done wrong, mixt with a kinde of
crueltie; care of name with neglect of conscience, is meere
vaine-glorie. Cloathe not a good intention with an euill
appearance, a misshapen coate may blemish a well shaped
bodie, neuer was there euill so euill, that wonne not approbation,
neuer goodnesse so good that escaped detraction.
Not Davids, the man after Gods owne heart, Not Iohns
the Baptist, then whom, there arose not a greater amongst
men: Not Christs, the worlds renowned Sauiour, whose
shooes latchet, Iohn thought himselfe not worthy to vnloose.
Is the Disciple aboue his Lord? or the Seruant
greater then his Master? then in reason not to exspect a
better condition. It hath bin done to the green, in all times,
that haue beene euer of old; what then shall become of the
dry? Sibonum quod de nobis dicitur, in mente non invenitur,
magnam debet in nobis tristitiam generare; & é contra, si malum
quod de nobis dicitur, in nobis non invenitur, in magnam
debemus laetitiam prosilire. If the good which men report of
vs, be not found in vs, wee ought to be sorrie; therefore on
the other side, if the euill spoken of vs, be not in vs, wee
ought thereat to reioyce:Math. 5. 12. reioyce & be glad (saith Christ)
for great is your reward in Heauen.
            
            
               The third generall Head and Doctrine.
               THis particle of connexion (And) stands not heere idle,
but coupleth and ioyneth those things together, which
if we loue not our liues so ill, as to loose them; we must not
vnloose,Ezek. 3. 17. 18. and doe asunder. Sonne of man, I haue made thee
a watch-man, &c. When I shall say vnto the wicked, thou
shalt surely die and thou giuest him not warning, nor speakest
to admonish the wicked of his wicked way, that hee
may liue; the same wicked man shall die in his iniquitie,
but his blood will I require at thy hand. Here therefore is
another head, and a chiefe point, whereunto we are exhorted,

and in which our care must (as the next words import)
grow gray-headed, the very same in effect with that exhortation
which the Apostle in the Miletaine Councill,Act. 20. 28. gaue
vnto the Ministers of Ephesus. Take heed therefore vnto
your selues, and to all the flocke, whereof the Holy Ghost
hath made you ouer-seers, to feede the Church of God,
which he hath purchased with that his owne blood. Ministers
are, as Christians, so Christs Embassadours, Christians,
for their owne good chiefly, Embassadours for their brethrens.
As Christians they must reconcile themselues to
God, as Embassadours, seeke the attonement of others. No
Timothie hath done sufficient in taking heed to himselfe, if
he neglect his doctrine. We must duely he Quercus institiae,
oakes o
                     •
                   righteousnesse, or righteous our selues, but wee
must be Quercus in a derivatiue sense, that is, such as are to
be sought after for spirituall sustenance, and reliefe Nihil ei
sua i
                        •
                     stitia suffragatur, de cuius manu anima pereuntis exigitur. Christ compares vs to housholders, Math. 13. 52. The
provident housholder, doth not provide for a day onely,
but stores vp, to the end he may bring forth, out of his treasure,
both new and old as need requires, so ought wee by
studie, reading, hearing, conference, meditation, and all
good meanes, enrich our braines, and brests, that as faithfull
and good Stewards of the Lords houshold, we may
prouide, and bring things forth to the benefite of the familie.
If either wee be ignorant of this practice of providing,
or negligent to dispose of our provision, then Pauls
vae,
                  1 Cor. 9. or Ieremies curse, fals soule on vs. It is opus Domini, the
Lords worke we haue in hand, which must neither bee left
vndone,Ier. 48. 10. nor yet done without due regard. Who shall rebuke
the obstinate, comfort the feeble binde vp the broken hearted,
seeke what is lost, bring againe what is driven away, and reduce
a despairing soule from hell, if the Priests lippes preserue
not knowledge? how shall the ruder know falshood
to flye it, the truth, and how to try it, tryed, to retaine it,
retained, to conferre their practice therewith, if the blinde
leade the blinde? how (I pray you) shall the vulgar see sin,

and the meanes to subdue it, wrath, and the way to shunn
it, death, to avoide it, and life to secure it, if the Master
in Israel know not these things?
               The discreet housholder makes a difference betwixt his
family, and him that tarryeth but for a day, betwixt his familiars
and strangers, in the matter, and manner of his entertainment.
Neither doth he giue the like vsage to all. The
like must be done in doctrine, the dyet of mens soules, wee
must haue milke for some, for others stronger meate, ignorance
craues instruction; if affected, obiurgation; straglers
must be corrected, lingerers exhorted, contumacy threatned,
and mourners comforted. Wee must know when to
mourne with Christ, and when to pipe with Iohn the Baptist.
We must be the sonnes of thunder sometimes, aswell
as consolation. The vineger of the Law, and oyle of the
Gospell must be so wisely tempered, and wrought together,
that proud and haughtie spirits presume not, that
bruised reedes breake not, smoking flax fall not into pangs
of despaire.1 Cor. 9. 22. Wee must learne to become all things to all
men, that by all meanes we may saue some; wee must not
therefore onely care to be wise our selues, but dispose the
wisedome of God to others:Ezek. 34. 2. should not the sheepheards
feed their flockes? Let thē answere the Prophet, that thinke
otherwise. The Lyon hath roared (saith Amos) who will
not be afraid?Amos 3. 8. The roaring of this Lyon,Motiue 1. made the Apostle
roare for feare:1 Cor. 9. 16. Woe is vnto me if I preach not the Gospel,
and hee will one day teare all idle and dumbe dogges in
pieces, for reward of their silence, and sinfull negligence. If
the terrour of God, which I, or rather the Prophet perswades,
cannot perswade vs to prevent our owne danger.
The like necessitie of others doth sollicite vs, who cannot
be saued except they beleeue, nor beleeue, vnlesse they
heare,R
                        •
                     v. 10. nor heare, except we speake. Take heed vnto your
selues, is but one halfe of the Apostles counsell; and to all
the flocke, there is the whole. Are we obliged, or bound
hereto? whereof (saith he) neither Satan in malice, aliance
by friendship, nor corrupt patrons by Simonaicall cōpact,

but the Holy-Ghost hath made you ouerseers. not to fleece,
but feed,
                  Psal. 84. 10. the end of your vocation, The Church of God, no
meane honour in Dauids esteeme, which he hath purchased
with his owne blood, such a price as cannot be valued to the
worth. 1. Loe heare the deitie of the Patron. 2. The
dignitie of our commission. 3. The purpose of our election.
4. The price of the thing committed to our charge,
there is no one of these which might not, much more ought
they all, to stirre vp our diligence, and awake our care. May
any man without danger attend a flocke, which he hath
more will to fleece, then skill to feed? can hee without
breach of dutie, (I dare say sacriledge) neglect his dutie to
such a Mother, as the Church of God? Dare hee deny his
seruice to such a Master as hath set him ouer her? can hee
without treacherie, suffer that to perish through his negligence,
which Christ hath bought at so deare a rate.2 Cor. 5. 14. The
loue of Christ constraines vs heereto. No man can adorne 
the bride, but the bridegroomes friend; and he cannot loue
the bridegroome, who showes not his affection by his effect
of feeding the flocke committed to his charge. The
best proofe of our loue to the great Pastour, and Bishop of
our soules, lyes in the performance of this great worke, that
as by faith we apprehend Christ, and in him, our owne salvation,
so we labour in loue, to comprehend so many as we
may, within the compasse of the promise. They therefore
that loue God, will doubtlesse labour in his Vineyard, that
by the beames of their light, the grapes thereof may bee
ripened, which if we doe not, it is past coniecture, that wee
loue not; and if the loue of God be not in vs, the fiercenesse
of his wrath, and wrath of his furie is kindled against vs, &
bent to consume vs.
               Let vs further see, and consider (the last inducement to
take heed to doctrine) whether the reason heere vsed by
our Apostle, to enforce his precept, can convince our reason,
and confine our affections, to their right channell, in so
doing, &c. Behold an honour and vtilitie, such as the
world cannot paralele, vtilitie, that in so doing wee saue

our selues; honour, that not our selues alone, but those that
heare vs.
               One profit we reape by a faithfull discharge of our place,
and calling is encrease of gifts, and growth of grace. It is his
manner who giues, because he hath giuen, to requite the
godly vse of his gifts, with his latter and larger graces, so
that fiue talents employed gaine fiue, two other two, and
one will multiply, so it be not hid.
               Another benefit we haue hereby, is, that which is better
then the Empire of Alexander, the riches of Croesus, the
topaze of Ethiopia, the Emeraude, the Iasper, the Hyacinth,
and all the gold of Ophir, euen the peace of conscience,
which Timothie may, (if it bee not otherwise through his
owne default) enioy more constantly, and more plentifully
 feast with, then other men. The third vtilitie is that
saluation which we with our faithfull hearers, and our hearers
with vs, haue in common. If any place, or stand,
may claime diligence, then doth that best deserue it,
wherein diligence may most please God, and pleasure others.
what more pleasing to God, then the advancement
of his name on earth, the enlargement of his Kingdome in
Heauen? what more pleasurable to man, then to enioy
that peace in this life, which passeth vnderstanding; Gods
presence in the next, without separation?
               If the tenure of a mans land, or propertie of his goods
come in question, Iustian may besteed him. If his bodie be
diseased, Aesculapius can ease him. It his state be bare, or
next to beggerie, friends may enrich or relieue him. The
being we haue, is from the parents of our bodies. If a man
be put in feare of life, or other losse, Caesar, or his substitute
may command the peace. Mans minde is naturally fraught
with ignorance, and full or rudenesse, therefore schooles
are founded for education. But what are the goods of this
world, compared to the life of man? what is mans life,
without Gods mercie rightly felt? what is soundnesse of
body;Psal. 63. 4. to the health of soule? a worldly and outward peace
with men, to that vnspeakeable, and glorious peace which

man hath with God? What is humane science,The worke of the ministeri
                        •
                      the Worthiest Worke. In want whereof the best
ornament of the naturall man, compared to the sauing and
sanctifying doctrine, which giues assurance of mans redemption?
suppose a being, (and it is not impossible for a
man so to be) stript of the rest,1. mans life is Worse then death. whereof Iobs storie is a rich
record, but without the knowledge of our saluation in
Christ, and reconciliation with God, I may say of the rest,
as Iob of his three friends:2. his health hurtfull 
                  Miserable comforters are see all.
Iob. 16, 2. Two potent Princes,3 His peace the strong mans possession. lay claime to both thy
soule and body; the Prince of Peace, and duke of darkenes.
It highly concernes thee to know, vtriregno, to whether
kingdome thou dost belong.4 His learning like Vriahs letters. Repaire to some Timothie, &
he will cleare this case of conscience. Revel. 3. 8. Thou art
naturally poore, blind, and naked,5 His nature polluted in her purest natural
                        •
                     . embrace that truth
which Timothie teacheth, and it wili enrich thee as gold
doth, adorne thee as Robes doe, and as eye-salue cure thy
spirituall blindnesse. The expert Physician, turnes thy sicknesse
into health; but he is an odde man, and one of a thousand,Iob 3. 23.
who in the bitterest pangs of a distressed minde, can
couer thy sinnes, and recouer thy soule. The naturall Parents
beget,6 The Prerogatiue of his birth a bankarisme in grace. and bring forth, but to mortalitie, yea miserie
immortall, except regeneration, which thou hast by Timothies
helpe, come betweene. The Magistrate, procures thy
peace with man, whose breath is in his nostrils, whose
wrath is mortall as himselfe. Or if he liue so long, that thou
see the graue before him, yet thy goods or bodie beares the
smart, thy soule is not endangered, but Timothie drawes
vp conclusions of peace twixt God and man, whose wrath
workes both on soule and body,Math. 25. euen to the casting of both
into that place where the tormenters are spirits created of
vengeance, the torment, fire, the manner, burning, and the
measure, enternitie. We reade of Prometheus, that when he
had framed man of the earth, but senselesse without life, being
by Minerua's helpe lift vp to Heauen, he tooke thence
fire from the Sunnes wheele, which applyed to that earthly
Masse of mans body, gaue life to it. That which is fabled
of Prometheus, is truly verified of our Timothie, who elevated

in affection, and conversation, to Heauen, to him who
is the true Minerva, the liuely Image of his Fathers wisedome,
thence as it were à solis rotâ from Mal
                        •
                     ch his sonne
of righteousnesse, the fountaine of light and life, he brings
the fire of sacred doctrine, which laid, and by him applyed
to the hearts of men dead in trespasses and sinnes,1 Cor. 9. 1. doth
quicken and make them his worke in the Lord. Many
daughters haue done vertuouslie, but thou surmountest
them all (saith S
                        •
                     lomon) describing a good huswife.Prov. 31. 29. So
may I say, that many commodities come to man by the
helpe, and hand of man, but Timothies part excels them all.
Since other benefites but better our outward state onely,
which makes many worse then otherwise they would be,For case and prosocritie slay the foolish.
or procure the welbeing of the body, which is but the
outward rinde of man;Prov. 1. 32. or purchase a better being of the
minde by knowledge which is vaine, without the knowledge
of Christ crucified, or giue a being in this life, by
which, though we haue a name we liue, yet we are dead; or
long being,1 Tim. 4. 6. which makes the end more bitter, and loathsome,
vnlesse we be in Christ, new creatures. Since Timothie
by his doctrine adornes the soule,2 Pet. 1. 4. our nobler part, with
the noblest qualitie, making it partaker of the divine nature.
If men would rightly consider Timothie, and Timothie, himselfe, and them: they him as the Minister of Christ,
and their saluation, he himselfe as one, them, as ouer whom
the Holy Ghost hath set him; as they would be more swift
to heare, that they might be saued, so could not he be slow
to speake, that they might heare. So from the vtilitie, to
the honour,1. From the 
                        •
                     onour. the other branch of this Motiue. It was an honorable
place which Ioseph held in Pharaohs court, yet Da
                     
                        •
                     id
himselfe a King, prefers the basest office in the Church
of God, to the greatest glory that worldly Kings without
the Church can either inioy thēselues, or confer vpō others.
I had rather be a doore-keeper in the house of God,Psal. 84. 10. then
to dwell in the tents of vngodlinesse. To be a controwler
steward, or treasurer in a Christian kings court, or a keeper
of the great seale, i
                     •
                   a roome of more respect and honour▪
                  
then the other: but to be a steward, treasurer and disposer
of his mysteries, on whose thigh that name is written, Th
                        •
                     
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, is such an honour as kings
themselues haue therewith beautified their scepters,Witnesse David a Prophet and Sal
                        •
                     mō a pr
                        •••
                     cher. and
enobled their crownes. To be the servants, friends, and
sonnes of God, the heires of his kingdome, and coheires
with Christ, is a prerogatiue, and that such as many Kings
and Princes, haue never attained, and yet this honour haue
all Gods Saints. But to bee Gods messenger to his people,
and as it were the peoples mediator to him againe to open
and shut the gate of life, to haue ratified in heauen what
he doth on earth, to succed the sonne of God in that ministerie
and function, which hee exercised himselfe in the
daies of his flesh; to be a fellow laborer in the blessed work
of the more blessed Trinitie, the salvation of soules, is such
an honour, as none may take vnto him, but he that is called
of God,Heb. 5 4. as was Aaron. Good men shall receaue crownes,
their pilgrimage finished, but good Ministers, not onely
receaue themselues,Heb. 2. 4. but by their labours purchase crowns
to others. The iust man (as saith the Prophet) shall liue by
his faith, but the man of Gods mercy, as he liues himselfe,
so he begets other to the life of faith. Righteous men shall
shine as the brightnesse of the firmament,Dan. 12. 3. but they that
turne many to righteousnesse (Righteous Ministers) shall
shine as the starres for ever and ever.
               Our Saviour Christ spared no paines on his tender body
to traine vp soules in his fathers schoole,Iohn. 4. 34. hee was so wholly
taken vp with the excellency & execution of such things,
that he quite forgot to eat his meat.Act. 20. 
                  Pauls imploiment this
way was aswell private as publike, by night as day, not
without testimony of his teares. What is the charge which
Paul giues to his pupill Timothy,
                  2 Tim. 4. 1. 
                        •
                     . is it not to preach the
word? But how? With a holy importunity, bee instant, in
what measure, or quantitie might Timothy say? so seldome,
as all shall think it done in season? No, but such & so much
as some will thinke, and not sticke to say (as too often they
both say and thinke) that it is out of season, In season and

out of season, wherein if he faile, both is duty broken, and
danger incurred, whereof hee is one day to heare with terrour
and confusion of face. The Church is a garden which
we must weed: a fountain which we must keep both sweet
and cleare: she is her husbands iewell, wee must watch for
her safegard: she is his best beloued, he therefore that loues
God, must spare no paines to keepe her chast. If I forget
thee O Ierusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning, my
pulses beating,Psal. 137. 5. 6. my lungs breathing, & let his tongue cleaue
to the roofe of his mouth, who preferres not Ierusalem in
him mirth, that is, the welfare of Christs flocke, before all
other ioyes in the world besides. This glory of ours (my
brethren) so David calls it, and all other the instruments
God hath lent vs, of his glory, and our husbandry, if they
be not kept in vse they will become vnserviceable, & shall
be eaten vp with the rust. Wee are called by God into his
vineyard, which if we dresse not with diligence, prune uot
with care, and wisely vnderprop by our good example,
the Master will come, pull vs out by the poles of our heads
and put vs to tread the great wine-presse of the wrath of
God.R
                        •
                     v. 14. 19. Christ compared his Disciples to a cittie that is set
on a hill,Math. 5. 14. we may also compare them to the hill, or mount
whereon the cittie stands. 1. Montes are eminentiores terrae
partes, more seene and obiect to mans eye, then plaines &
lower places, so in that height of place wherein they were
set to be seene of all, more integritie, and pietie was required,
then in the ordinarie ranke of professours. 2. The grass
springs purer, & more wholsome for pasture on those tops
and heights of hills; so the Lords flocke, and sheepe of his
pasture feed better, and fat sooner by Pastors examples,
then by private persons.
               
                  Tum demum exempla probantur,
                  Quando rex aliis quod inbet, ipse facit.
               
               Thirdly, the dewe and moisture, which falls from heaven
vpon Hermon,
                  Psal. 65. descends from thence vpon the plaine
of Bashan, clothing her vallies so thicke with grasse, that
they laugh and sing,Cant. 4. 6. so from those mountaines of Mir
                     •
                  h, &

Incense drop and distill the dewe of heavenly doctrine,
godly consolation, and saving grace, such as causeth the
Saints to reioyce for their glory,Psal. 149. 5. & to sing lowd vpon their
beds. This was prefigured in the law by the golden bell, &
pomegranate placed about the skirts of Aarons robe.Exod. 28. 34. The
pomegranate signified the sweet savour of Christs death:
the golden bell the Gospell preached; the ioint mixture of
them both did intimate thus much, that God would make
manifest the savour of his knowledge,2 Cor. 2. 14. & the saving knowledge
of his sonnes sufferings by his Aarons and preachers
in every place.
               Now what is the doctrine which Timothy must teach,
and take heed vnto? for matter,Tit. 2. 7. the truth of God, without
traditiō, for measure, fully, keeping naught backe, for manner,
in a holy boldnesse,1 Pet. 2. 2. discreet roundnesse, in loue with
diligence,Act. 20. 20. 27. applying himselfe to the hearers capacitie, with
desire of Gods glory and their good.Ier 17. 27. His words thus guided
by knowledge,1 Cor. 13. 1. 2. backt by truth, tempered with loue, applyed
with discretion,Prov. 25. 11. and forced from a knowne watch
over his owne waies,Eccles. 12. 11. shalbe like apples of gold in pictures
of silver; like the words of the wise, which are as goads, &
nailes fastned by the Masters of the assemblies. As goades
they shall rowse them out of the sleepe of sinne, as nailes
fasten, and ioyne them close to Christ their head. Hee shall
be vnto them the sweet savour of God vnto salvation, they
an acceptable sacrifice vnto Christ, by his admonition. But
where is this truth found? in the Turkes Alcoron, or Popes
Canon?Iohn. 14. 16. No, but with him alone, who saith of himself, I am
the way, wherein walking we stray not: the truth, which
imbracing, we erre not: and the life without which we die,
although we liue, a spirituall death, in a naturall life. To
this Christ, all both Prophets and Apostles send vs, as the
welspring of life;Iohn. 5. 39. and Christ to the Scriptures, search the
Scriptures for in them yee thinke to haue eternall life; and
they are they which testifie of me. Where he is so far from
impeaching that authoritie, & sufficiency which the Iews
gaue vnto the Scriptures, that he doth not only, as it were

countenance and covertly commend that their opinion,
but openly argue and reason therefrom. Notwithstanding
the Church of Rome doth not only wrest, corrupt, misconstrue,
contradict, and disanull these Scriptures, but teach
for doctrines,Math. 15. 9. mens precepts. Rome was sometimes a famous
Church,Rom. 1. 8. her faith was published throughout the
whole world;—sed quantum mutatur ab illa?
How farre is she fallen from her first loue? for her children
haue committed two evills. They haue forsaken the fountaine
of living waters,Ier. 2. 13. which refreshed the Saints hearts in
their necessity with sound comfort,Rom. 1. 7. and digged them pits,
that cā hold no water to comfort her now revolted brood
withall.
               S. Paul taught and Rome receaued it:Rom. 3. 28. that a man is iustified
by faith without the workes of the law.Foure diff
                        •
                     rences, de
                        •
                     ated betwixt, Rome, & Rome, that was and is.
               
               The Romanists maintaine a iustification by workes,The first about the efficient cause of our insti
                        •
                     ication and salvation. and
a merit of the same, without the faithThe faith which Paul meant implies 
                        •
                      confident boldnesse and firme perswasion. Heb. 3. 6. Eph. 3. 12. Rom. 4. 20. which respecting the word relies thereon without a 
                        〈◊〉
                     , finding in God a safe harbour as in the bosome and necke of rest it selfe. Ps. 11. 1. Repairing to the Master of heavenly requests, vseth 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , libertie of speech in asking as his will, and our wan
                        •
                     s direct, or otherwise as her state requires, being in the mean time supported & possessed 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      with assurance of obtaining her suit. Secondly it appropriats and applyes the promise of salvation personally as it doth also other the treasures of Gods Church, Act. 15. 11. David by this faith praiseth God for the forgiuenesse of his particular sinnes. Ps. 103. 3. Paul assureth himselfe of Gods favour and loue in this life, and of his vndoubtable salvation in the next. Gal. 2. 20. Iob comforteth himselfe with the assurance of his redemption and r
                        •
                     surrection to life, Iob. 19. 25 26. 27. I knowe, &c. This Christ iustified in Thomas, crying my God and my Lord, when he reioyned, thou hast beleeued Thomas. Mary of her selfe, when her soule reioyced in God her Saviour. This kinde of beleefe our adversaries vtterly renounce and revile which yet makes the difference betwixt Christian obedience and godly honestie, and civill carriage and honest in
                        •
                     ideli
                        •
                     ie, and without which it is impossible for to please God. Heb. 11. 6. which Paul meant.
               1 Against the professed and profound disputes of our Apostle
there, and elsewhere.
               2. Against the end of good workes; supreame, which is
Gods glory. 1. Cor. 1, 21. subordinate, being ordained for
vs to walke in. Eph. 2. 10. By walking therein to winne others.
1. Cor. 7. 14, witnesse our faith, I am. 2. 18. Testifie
our thankfulnesse. Luk. 1. 74. 75. and settle vs in the assurance
of our salvation. 2. Pet. 1. 10.
               
                  
3 Against the law and Prophets. Moses proposing a reward
of mercy not merit to them, that loue God and keep
his Commandements. Exod. 20. 6. David deriving expresly
all reward therefrom. Psal. 62. 12. and pronouncing him
a happy man to whom the Lord imputes righteousnesse,
without workes, as one interprets, who could neither mistake
his meaning, misconstrue his scope, nor erre in right
conference of the Scriptures. Rom. 4. 6.
               4 Against the tenor and title, by which the state of salvation
is firmely holden, which is the adoption of sonnes,
no earned hire of mans service, since the seed of the bondwoman
cannot inherit, with the free-borne. Gal. 4. 30.
               5 Against the light of reformed reason, since wee afford,
1. nothing vndue, for he made vs and not we our selues, yea
and made vs againe, both in our redemption and renovation.
Psal. 100. 2. Nothing proper, he working in vs, as subiects,
by vs, as instruments, both wil and worke. Phil. 2. 13.
3. Nothing profitable for what can wee doe, so well as to
deserue of him, to whom our weldoing doth not extend,
Psal. 16. 4. Nothing proportionable to Gods bountie
whether we doe or suffer, obey or beare, for what is a light
and momentary affliction to that glory which for, first,
weight cannot bee countervailed by a world of woes, 2,
Cor. 4. 17. Secondly, for eternitie admits, neither abatemēt,
limit, nor intermission. Rom. 8. 18. Thirdly, for excellency
surpasseth all, that eye hath seene, eare hath heard, or any
heart of man can conceaue. 1. Cor. 2. 9. Fourthly, so farre, as
no speech can vtter because it is vnspeakable.
               6 Against the drift and maine scope of the Gospell. 1.
Manifesting that righteousnesse in Christ alone, by which
the law is fulfilled, Gods iustice satisfied, and life obtained
so absolutely, that if righteousnesse bee by the law, &c. So
plainely as not of workes, least any man should boast himselfe▪
so peremptorily, as yee are abolished from Christ
whosoever are iustified by the law,Gal. 2. 21. yee are fallen frō grace;Eph. 2. 9.
distinctly,Gal. 5. 4. with direct exception to our righteous deeds.
2.Tit. 3. 5. Speaking of the never enough admired meanes of our

salvatiō,Heb. 10. 14. as of a thing already done not to be done, perfectly,
not in part, by another for vs, not by our selues, or any
worke of God in vs.Eph. 2. 5. Freely without merit or motiue on
our pa
                     •
                  t.Rom. 5. 6. 8. Fully without our furtherance, in our incogitancy
without knowledge. Having neither will to affect our
spirituall welfare,Rom. 5. 10. we being dead in such desires; nor goodnesse
to deserue well,Rom. 5▪ 6. being vngodly sinners; nor reason to
expect such good, being enemies, nor power to doe for our
selues,Heb. 5. 9. because we were of no strength. 3. Pointing out
Christs person for the author,1. P
                        •
                     t. 1. 18. 19. his blood for the price, his
passion for the mean,Heb. 9. 22. his glory as the finall cause, the riches
of his goodnesse as the efficient and impulsiue,Eph. 1. 6. so that the
true Christian need neither buy it in the royall exchange
of the Romish merchants,Eph. 2. 7. nor seeke it by intercession of
Saint or Angell, nor can challenge it for the worthines of
his owne workes, or thinke to purchase it by the overplus
of other mens.
               7 Against all grounds of Christian confidence and consolation.
1. The mercy of God which is lesse magnified by
mans merit.Rom. 11. 6. 2. The merit of Christ which is mangled and
made insufficient without supply of theirs. 3. Grace which
is disclaimed,Rom. 5. 1. for if it bee of workes then is grace no more
grace. 4.Gal. 2. 21. Peace of conscience which is discarded, for being
iustified by faith we haue peace with God.Rom 4. 16. 5▪ Christs death
which is frustrated. 6. The assurance of Gods favour which
is forfeited, therefore it is of faith that the promise might
be sure to all the seed. 7.Which is yet the fittest mean to set f
                        •
                     rth the grace of God as the Apostle himselfe there imports. Faith. 8. And the promise, which
are made voide and of none effect.
               8 Against our Saviours application of the exāple drawne
from the husbandmā.
                     
                        •
                     uk▪ 17. 8. 10. God owes vs no thanks though we doe all things commanded, bec
                        •
                     use wee ought to doe th
                        •
                     . Where or what is our desert then, who doe not all? If an earthly master owe not so much
as thanks to his servant for his good service, on whose
head hee made not the worst haire blacke or white, into
whose hands he put no pith, neither infuseth the least force
into any other part, much lesse is the heavenly master and
maker of mankinde, bound, or beholden to such for their
broken service, as he fashioneth secretly in their mothers
wombe, supports by his providence each moment of their

time,1. Ioh. 4. 19. and begets to the hope of better things. Such as hee
loues first,1. Cor. 4. 7. or they could not re-loue. Such as he giues to, or
they could not re-giue.Phil. 1. 6. Such as hee beginnes it in, or they
could doe no good.1. Cor. 15. 10. Such as he goes on with, or they could
not persist in the good begun. They therefore that extenuate
grace, to apparell nature with her stolne plumes, that
obscure Gods glory to leaue matter of glorying in themselues,
never learned that language of the spirit, when they
haue done all they can to say they are vnprofitable servāts.
If servants, then out of duty they ought to doe what possibly
they can doe; if vnprofitable, what so great vertue can
spring thence of power to turne dutie on mans part toward
God into debt on Gods side towards man? Which were
in some sort to make the creator inferiour or subiect to the
worke of his owne hands, and to advance the clay aboue
the Potter.
               9 Against thePapists confine Gods kindnesse in Christ to this present life, averring Christ to haue merited gra
                        ••
                      for them, by the right vse whereof they truely and properly merit for themselues, and are fully worthy of everlasting life, after that insolent assertion of the Rhem. 2. Tim. 4. 8. Hereby 1. they make Chri
                        ••
                     s merit a remote and inchoating cause in this businessē, their owne the compleat and immediate. 2. Christs infinite worth of finite efficacy, their owne sorged, finite & defiled workes of infinite force. 3. the sure
                        •
                     y to pay a debt, not for the discharge of the debter, but to the end that the debter should more fully and sufficiently discharge it himselfe. 4. Men more beholden to themselues then they are bound to God, sithence he only enables them by grace to doe well, they are thenceforth to depend vpon their own deeds, by which they deserue that life, to the attainement whereof all that ever Christ did serues but as an introduction or disposition which they can accept of, or reiect at their pleasure. 5. They set vp too arrogantly mans ri
                        •
                     hteousnesse against the righteousnesse of God. Rom. 10. 3. 6. So should workes merit which are 1 too due to deserue, as Christ: Luk. 17. 2. Too impure and void of proportion with eternitie, as Ferus grounding on Isa 4. and Rom. 8. 18. 3. Not our owne but his workes in vs, as Paul. Eph, 4. Then good habits and deeds which God hath enabled vs to doe binds him in iustice to giue vs more, so that he should be vniust if he gaue it not. Against Durands vnanswerable reason that no mans free gift can bind him to giue more. 7. Then should that grace either make our workes perfect; o
                        •
                      mans imperfect workes should thereby become meritorious. If the first, whence come the complaint
                        •
                      of men in the state of grace▪ yea of highest stature in that state. Rom. 7. Psal. 130. If the latter, the
                        •
                      must God, who is perfectly iust, change this righteous sentence of his law that every transgressor is c
                        •
                     r
                        •
                     sed, and only the perfect keeper thereof blessed. Gal. 3. 10. 12. extent of Gods mercy, and full effect of
Christs merit whose meares they pitch in this life onely.Ioh. 3. 16.
dishonorably to God whose bounty in giuing his beloued
sonne to the end &c. should so lesse bestead then his owne

intention, and the Evangelists relation beare vs in hand.
Discomfortably to man whom they desperately expose to
that curse whereto all are liable,Gal. 3. 10. who for life relie vpon
their owne performance of the law.2 Tim. 1. 18. Dissonantly to that
which the Gospell giues thereto,Heb. 9. 
                        •
                     8. aswell at that as this day.
Detractingly to that righteousnesse which is shouldered
out of its proper place,2. Cor. 5. 21. that redemption whereof wee pertake
not fully,Luk 21. 28. and in each respect,1 Cor. 1. 30. till after dissolution,Heb. 10 19. and
then onely through him,Ioh. 14. 2. who was therefore giuen,Eph. 3. 6. that
blood and obedience which is the proper, compleat, and
meritorious meanes of our entrance that ascentiō which is
the immediate cause of our session in the heavēliest places.
               10 Against the nature of God himselfe, who is 
                     •
                   mercifull,
gracious, and bounteous not through obligation, as
indebted to any, but by a voluntary communication of his
gifts and graces flowing originally from his good pleasure
as the fountaine and first motiue,Eph. 1. 5. exhibitiuely from Christ,Eph. 2. 7.
whose death and passion are the only meritorious cause, &
(to vnfold the effect of an impatible nature after an humane
manner of speech) are impulsiuely occasioned vpon
the exigence of mans misery.Ps. 103 13. 14. 2. Whose pleasure and purpose
is absolute within himselfe,Rom. 9. 11. and whatsoever hee delights
in,1. Sam. 12. 22. or doth good to without himselfe, is for that
which is in,Isa. 43. 25. and from himselfe.Ezek. 36. 22. 3. Whose indulgence is nether
deserved,Rom. 9. 11. nor desired, but hee promiseth and performeth
freely out of an inward and essentiall propertie, without
all externall prevention or provocation.Rom. 11. 35. 4. Who delights
in shewing mercy, not vrged, allured, or outwardly
set on worke, but out of a liberall and selfe inclination, a
gratuitall and independent propension of nature, doth he
pleasure vs,Mi
                        •
                     . 7. 18. 19. because mercy pleaseth him. 5. Whose kindnes
towards vs in Christ Iesus is much disgraced and disparaged
by the pretended worth of mans workes, since no created
vertue is so powerfull, or power of vertue, to binde, &
bring the creator within a compasse of a debter.
               11 Against the scope of that parable, Mat. 20. each part
whereof speakes pithely against all ability in man to merit.

Doe the labourers offer their service, or the householder
goes forth to seeke the labourers? Loe mercie preventing
by invitation,Isa. 65. 1. I am found of those that seeke mee not.
Come they vpon their call? It is mercy and that moving
by attraction,Iohn 6. 44. no man can come to mee, except the father
drawe him. Labour they being come? They are enabled
thereto by influence of grace.Phil. 2. 13. It is God that worketh
in vs both will & deed. Recea
                     •
                  e they the peny their labors
ended? Behold mercy rewarding out of a benevolēt dispositiō,
Is thine eye euill, because mine is good? doth he stop
the murmurers mouthes by an impeacheable power and
preroga
                     •
                  iue, that it was lawfull for him to doe as he lifted
with his owne? then if his worke had earned, and not his
larges giuen the hire, he could not rightly cal that his own,
which was alienated, and become anothers, nor (which
was more) assume the libertie of giuing equall recompence
to vnequall labours, with a due reseruation of that iustice
which giues to euery one his owne. nay then their eyes had
not beene euill and envious (as was obiected) but Gods
distribution in giuing to them their pence too, who came
in the last houre. had beene partiall and vnrighteousIf nature the
                        •
                      pride her selfe of any inb
                        •
                     ed vertue and pro
                        •
                     er power of so much as assenting to her first call, cut her in the mouth with that negation, Not vnto vs O Lord: if of strength to concurre and cooperate with grace assisting, curbe her againe with Not vnto vs. If yet borne vp with her borrowed plumes she soare so high as to claime heauen by merit, for her habitation, conuince her of pride and pr
                        •
                     sum
                        •
                     tuous intrusion by warrant from him, vnto whose name we giue all the glorie of our pre
                        •
                     ention, employment, compensation..
               12 Against the truest touch-stone of the trueth of doctrine:
for if the glorie of God cannot be communicated to
any creature without a curse. Isa. 45. 8. compared with Ierem.
17. 5. then the point wherein they differ from St 
                  Paul,
is a Popish device, hewen out of the invention of mans
braine, since it diuides Gods honour, and imparts the incō
                  municable
glory of the Creator to the creature.
               13 Against the experience and profession of Patriarkes,
Prophets, Apostles, and other the men of God, who never
stood on like tearmes with their Maker. I am not worthie

(said Iacob) of the least of all the mercies,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 3
                        •
                     . 10. &c. much lesse did
he thinke himselfe worthy, fully worthy, (as the Romish
Pharises are opinioned of themselues) of euerlasting life.
Dauid the man after Gods owne heart, appeales from the
iustice of God,Psal. 143. 2. to his mercy: Enter not &c. Iob who had
letters of commendation from God himselfe, not onely debarrerh
himselfe of the plea of innocency before Gods
Throne:Iob. 9. 20. If I iustifie my selfe, my owne mouth shall condemne
me. If I say I am perfect, it shall also proue me perverse;
but debaseth and beateth downe all imagination
thereof in others,Verse 2. 3. how should man be iust with God? if hee
will contend with him, hee cannot answere him one of a
thousand.2 Cor. 12. That priviledged Apostle, so abundant in labours,
1 Cor. 15. 10. so much in perils, and more then a conquerour in all,2 Cor. 11.
yet out of himselfe (a regenerate person) to bee found in
Christ,Phil. 3. 9. renounceth his owne righteousnesse, to be invested
with the rich mantle of Christs merit.
               14 Against their owne forces affronting them:Papists act their opposite part on the Popes owne theatre. for, suis
& ipsa Romaviribus ruit, the division of languages is the
confusiō of Babel. Decet parabola gratiam non debitum esse,
&c. the Parable teacheth vs, that whatsoeuer God giueth
vs, it is of grace, not of debt, saith a deuout Friar Ferus vpon
the Parable. Math. 20. In his iudgement 1 life eternall
is a reward of mercy, no recompence of mans merit.
2. He drawes the reasons from the imperfection and disproportion
of the reward, and our workes alleadging for
proofe. Isa. 64. Rom. 8. 18. 3. Touching the word Merces
he giues this caveat, Quod si audis mercedem polliceri,
scias non ob aliud esse debitum quàm ex promissione divina.
Gratis promisit, gratis reddit. 4. of merit he ouerthroweth
all imagination, and disalloweth the very name. If therefore
thou thinkest to attaine and retaine the fauour of God,
let no mention of merit walke through thy lips.
               Their Angelicall Aquinas vpon Tit. 3. 5. seconds him thus.
               
                  Ponit rationem salutis, excluditur ratio praesumpta, includitur
v
                        •
                     ra, praesumpta quod propter merita nostra simus saluati,
quam excludit cum dicit non ex operibus, &c. Rom. 11. 5.

Deut. 9. non propter iustitias &c. vera ratio 
                        •
                     st sola miserati
                        •
                     
dei. Iam. 3. 22. Luc. 1. Didacus Stella,
                  Stell in Lue. 7. pag. 215. a starre which sometimes
beautified the Romish firmament, subscribes to this
truth.Non me aspicias, &c. when hee desires not to bee looked on in himselfe,
without the respect and reflexion of Christs righteousnes.
Looke not on me, but first behold thy onely Sonne. If thy
eyes looke angerly on our sinnes, and behold me at the first
fight,Moriar, peri
                        •
                     . I shall die, I am vndone; but if thy eyes behold thy
Sonne, and through him, mee at his backe, I shalbe safe, the
beames of thy eyes passing by thy Sonne, shalbe meekned
and made gentle in him, and so modified, come vnto mee;
place therefore betweene thee and me, him thy Sonne, his
crosse, his blood, his passion, his merits, that so thy iustice
passing through his blood and merits, when it comes to me
it may be gentle and full of mercy.
               
                  Lastly. Against Gods open reiection and resolute 
                     •
                  oome
passed vpon all such workes as want warrant for their matter
out of his word,The defect whereof caused God in iealousie as ho
                        •
                     e as fire, to renounce the ordinances of his owne lips, the sacrific
                        •
                     s and other seruices of the lewes. right forme for manner which is faith
working by a lowly loue, and aime not at Gods glorie (the
Spheare which giues motion to all godly actions) as their
principall end. Seeing then the Papists exercise themselues
chiefly in matters not commanded, or if at any time they so
doe, yet is not done after the minde and prescript of the
Commander, since the end whereat they aime, is a mistaken
marke of their owne setting vp, to wit, desert of Gods favour,
and their owne iustification:Isa. 1. 12. 15. seeing all, or some, or
one of these dead flies is alwayes found to corrupt the ointtment
of the Popish Apothecaries, God will not in mercy
crowne,Rom. 3. 27. much lesse in iustice admit the merit of any such as
not onely disrobe him of a part of that glory,Isa▪ 42. 8. and 48. 11. which is solely
and wholly due vnto him, and which he will not giue to
any other,Rom. 4. 16. but make him withall a chiefe recepter of their
theft and robbery.The second difference about the assurance of saluation.
               
               
                  Secondly, Saint Paul preached the certaintie of mans saluation,
making it the end of our free iustification by faith.
Th
                        •
                     y call this a diuelish faith.
                  Conc. 
                        •
                     rid. Sess 6 c
                        •
                     p. 3. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 15. 
                  cloathing them with curses
as with a rayment, that subscribe vnto it. The pulses of

Poperie beat soOne reason why the Church of Rome cannot attaine this assurance, lyeth pa
                        •
                     tly in the change, partly in the corruption of that seed and food whereof she sho
                        •
                     ld 
                        •
                     e b
                        ••
                     d and brought vp. For where the right seede is rightly sowne, where the true bread of life is faithfully broken with
                        •
                     ut m
                        •
                     xt
                        •
                     re of mans leauen, and the milke of the word s
                        ••
                     
                     cerely suckt in, there it attaines the end for which it was dispatched, by causin
                        •
                      the faithfull soule to put off, in the Apostles sense, feare of death, and loue of life. to assront Angels, withstand principalities, & contest with powers, to dispense with things present. for passing things to come, for suspend
                        •
                     ng with the affrightment of height, and discouragement of depth, as vnable any, or all of them (backed with the countenance of any other creature) to separate it from the loue of God which 
                        〈◊〉
                      in Christ Iesus. Rom. 838. 39. doubtfully about the assurance of God
                     •
                  
fauour, and particular certaintie of saluation (whereof yet
St 
                  Peter would haue vs to be perswaded, and with all diligence
to seeke certificate) that she descries her selfe, to bee
not diseased onely, but dead, dead through distrust and infidelitie.
The pens and tongues of her champions crosse so
palpablely the maine drift and scope of the Scriptures in
this head point, that they proclaime the things wherein
they are exercised to be no 
                     •
                  a
                     ••
                  ers of true godlinesse, because
men are not built vp the
                     •
                  eby in the knowledge of
their owne saluation (the confirmation whereof is one subordinate
end of weldoing, 2 Pet. 1. 10.) as Pauls hearers
were, when he grounded the defence and tryall of his doctrine,
vpon their experience, and proficiency in this very
point; which if they had not attained so certainely, as they
could not therein be deceiued, then had his preaching done
them no good, his provocation had beene frivolous, and
to no purpose, examine your selues, &c. to countervaile or
out-countenance this truth of particular assurance they
haue excogitated, a numberlesse number of toyes and vntruths,
to turne men out of the way, to peace and tranquillitie
of minde, they haue traced out by paths tending to
destruction, and discruciation of mens soules, and the multiplication
of their sorrowes. Such are Purgatorie pardons,
pilgrimages, sale of superfluous workes, Beades, Granes.
Rosaries, Medals, with the like hallowed things, things of
great value, and rare vertue in their fancies, who sit in Popish
darkenesse, and the Romane cell of death. But why do
our adversaries so traduce this doctrine, to induce their
doubtfulnesse and distrust? The children of this world are
wise in their generation, amongst whom none haue beene
found more wise, more worldly, then the Romish crew, to
support and prosper their avaritious and ambitious hopes.

                  Demetrius and the siluer-smiths haue gotten their goods
by this craft,Act. 19. 25. 28. therefore Diana of the Ephesians must bee
great.Act. 16. 18. 19. If the maide at Philippi be dispossessed of her divining
spirit, then farewell the hope of her Masters gaines. Should
not they then couer the light which otherwise would discouer
them? Is it reason they abiure such charmes as haue
beene, and still are of power to coniure wauering and vnstable
spirits, within the bounds of their Churches circle,
and cause them stoope to the lure of their insatiable lucre?
—Quis nisimentis inops?
Were they not reasonlesse if they should not (I say not
onely willingly recept and receiue) but (as they doe) ēxtort
and steale such golden oblations?
               
                  Accipe nunc Danaum insidias & crimine ab vno,
                  Disce 
                        •
                     m
                        •
                     es:—
               
               See heere the deceitfull dealing of these treacherous
Graecians, and by this one we may discerne the rest. St 
                  Paul
taught godlinesse to be great gaine,1 Tim. 6. 6. but the Paules & Popes
of Rome haue since reversed, or at least inverted that sentence,
by making gaine godlinesse, and godlinesse a pretence
vnder the covert and colour whereof, they might
with lesse suspition, or if it were possible, generall consent
and conniuencie aspire to Satans stile,Eph. 2. 2. that as D
                        •
                     us mundi,
supreme god of this world, they might raigne and rule the
same at
                     O. a
                           •
                        u
                           •
                        o vocis mundi mode
                           •
                        aris habenas, 
                           〈◊〉
                         merito in terris diceris esse deus. If the seuerall points of Popish doctrine, with the meanes of planting and supporting them, be throughly weighed, Poperie will appeare to be but a wittily contriued policy, ingrossing prioritie, wealth and worldly pleasures. will.The third difference touching mans perfection in this morta
                        •
                     l life. 
                  Thirdly, he by an instance drawne from his
owne person, proueth mans obedience to labour with defect
in this life, and his perfection to be imperfect, whom
yet I suppose to haue beene perfecter then their lord god
the Pope is.Rom. 7. 15. 18. 19. 21. They on the other side doe, and ouer-doe;
they doe all commanded, and that perfectly to satisfaction,
they ouer-doe so farre, as to spare superfluities, and ouerplus
of oyle to supply the wants of such foolish Virgins as
will buy at their rate, of fiue kindes of righteousnesse that

raigne in the world. 1. The imaginarie iustice of some
conceited ones. 2. The ciuill carriage of men morally
good. 3. The glorious shew of counterfeite Israelites.
4. The fained perfection of Popish professours. 5. The
sincere endeavour of true Nathanaelites. the first in opinion
is last in Gods acceptation, and the last first: but who they?
Avant selfe-soothing iust ones,Prov. 26. 12. the wings of your hopes are
clipt, which letts you to soare, you are not they. Repent ciuill
worldlings, they were as honest as so, who were but
corrupt branches,Act. 17. 12. before they beleeued. Howle yee hypocrites,
though you shine like glowormes, yet haue you not
that holinesse, without which no man can see the Lord.
Purge you,Heb. 12. 14. purge you Romane Catharists, the sounder and
purer you seeme opinatiuely,Math. 9. 12. and in your owne conceit, the
more impure,Paul. and dangerously sicke you are. He was purer
and perfecter then so, who was pained, and complained,
Miser homo,
                  Rom. 7. 24. O wretched man, &c. His wayes were likewise
directer then yours,Dauids. yet not so direct as was deseruedly wished,
Psal. 119. 5. that he could fully and perfectly keepe,Psal. 130. 3. (whereof you
notwithstanding falsely boast) Gods righteous iudgments.
God alone is that light which admits no mixture of darkenesse,
but if any man say that he hath no sinne, hee sinnes so
saying, deceiues himselfe, depriues his soule of pardon, his
conscience of true peace and turnes the truth of God into
a lie, which saith that in many things wee offend all, the
most renewed in many, the vnregenerate in all. For your
ouer-deeds they exile you by an Ostracisme from the common-weale
& wel-fare of Gods Israel. They are therefore
but fig-leaues, wherewith you labour to couer your owne
and others nakednesse; and the more you couer, the more
you discouer the guides which haue misled you, namely,
nature and tradition.Math. 19. 26. It is a carnall conceit bred and
brought vp in the wombe of our corruption, I haue observed
all these things from my youth. And where humane edicts,
stand for diuine statutes, men may easily ouer-weene▪
The gate is straite that leades to life,Math. 7. 14. whereat tradition can
not enter, it is so fraught with that, which God requires

not;Iohn 3. 7. the way likewise thereto is narrow, which nature
through blindnes cannot finde; for except a man be borne
againe, &c. Reioyce true Christians, though you cannot
doe (through frailtie) that good which ye would, through
Gods grace your defects are couered, your desires shalbe
accepted, the good ye would doe shalbe imputed, the euill
you ha
                     •
                  e, and through strength of corruption, or violence
of temptation are haled to, shalbe discharged, seeing
there is no condemnation to them (though the reliques of
sinne remaine in them) that are in Christ.Rom. 8. 
                        •
                     .
               
               St 
                  Paul commanded euery soule to be subiect vnto the
higher powers:The fourth difference about subiection to temporall sowers which they discl
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     e themselues, and dispence with in others. the reason? because there is no power but
of God. They arme subiects against their lawfull Soueraignes.
They commaunde the slaughter of Christian
Kings as an act meritorious, and Canonize the agents for
Saints. such seede they cast into the Lords field, such tares
are sowne by the man of sinne, and his Emissaries. Such is
the salt wherewith the falsely surmised Peter of Rome, or
rather the salt-Peter wherewith wrought to the temper of
their sierie passions,Rom. 13. 1. they haue attempted to blow vp States.
How is the faithfull Citie become an harlot?Isa. 1. 2
                        •
                     . it was full of
iudgement, and iustice lodged therein, but now they are
murtherers. Her faith is turned into infidelitie, her piety
into aspiring policy, her profession into faction, her godlines
into ga
                     •
                  ne, so that where the seed was vncorrupt, & the
soile once good, Infaelix lolium & steriles dominātur avenae.
By reason hereof,1 Tim. 
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     . that they consent not to the wholesome
words of the Lord Iesus Christ, and to theThe bl
                        ••
                     s
                        •
                     d Tri
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     ie, w
                        ••
                     h which the true Church and her children onely haue fellowship, 1 Iohn 1. 3. i
                        •
                     yneth with such 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •••
                     taine and keepe Christs doctrine. The Father will haue the Sonne heard. Math. 17. 5. the 
                        〈…〉
                      the Sonne is an essentiall marke and sure of signe Christs sheepe. Iohn 10. 27 and the 
                        〈…〉
                      the promised Tutor and teacher of the Church for euer Iohn 14. 26. subscribes to that truth 
                        〈◊〉
                      Christ hath tau
                        •
                     ht, inspiring vs with the true effects thereof. so that they who 
                        •
                     bey the F
                        •
                     th
                        •
                     rial 
                        ••
                     ring his Sonne, the Sonne, in hearkning to such as he sends. Luke 10. 16. and where the inward w
                        ••
                     k
                        •
                      of Gods spirit concurres with the outward word of reconciliation, there men increase with the 
                        〈◊〉
                      of God. Col. 2. 19. whereas they who practise their owne devices, placing great 
                        〈◊〉
                      in their vse, whilst they despise Gods owne device, and spurne against his appointed meanes, haue neither promise from the Father of spiritual thrift, who teacheth, but by the Sonne, nor furtherance from the Son, who clenseth but by his w
                        •
                     rd. Iob. 15. 3. nor assurance or assistance from that spirit wh
                        •
                     ch 
                        〈◊〉
                      and prospereth such onely, as the Father hath planted, & the Son purged with his heauenly du
                        •
                     . doctrine which

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
is according vnto godlines. What for want of good seed,
the word partly taught, what for excesse of darnell, their
owne additions, so many monstrous births are brought
forth by the whoore of Babylon, the purple harlot, which
opens her quiuer to euery arrow. Add to her wresting and
misconstruction of Scriptures, this further that she doth,
—Noua pascua quaerere, & amnes,
Gadd after,The Papacy is a hotch potch, composed of the shreddes of other heresies. and guide her louers to other pastures, and
streames, then that greene pasture, wherein Dauid fed:
those still waters which refreshed him, chusing rather to
bathe in the puddle of her owne inventions, then to wash
in Bethesda, Gods poole: delighting more to defile her selfe
with the one,
                     
                        •
                     . King. 5. then with the Syrian Leper to be clensed by
the other. Whose impudencie is such, that out of Luciferian
pride of spirit (incident to none but the Antichrist) she
challengeth to be heard before the Scriptures: whose impiety
is so great,Rev 22. 18. that she dare speake where they command
silence,Tradition discountenanced. and that vpon paine of the greatest paine that God
can impose. Why did St 
                  Paul send this Epistle to Timothie
left at Ephesus about the Lords businesse, since it containes
the same things which he receiued from his mouth? Had
Timothie so 
                     •
                  iven a head, that Paul beganne so soone after
his departure, to distrust his memorie? could he so soone
be carried away with errour or worldly cares,2. Tim. 3. 15. who had dedicated
his childhood to devotiō? Might not Timothie his
asseveration, whom they well knew to haue beene taught
by Paul, and left to that end for some space amongst them,
might not the bare affirmatiō, I say, of his doctrine, to be Apostolicall,
and suckt (as it were) from Pauls teat, haue supplied
the place of an Epistle, to authorize his person, & stablish
his doctrine, as well for after, as present times? Certes
the Apostle might haue spared his pen, and paines, if he had
beene Iesuited in this point, touching the authority of vnwritten
traditions. Did the Apostles, Prophets, and Euangelists,Rom. 15. 4
(all guided by one spirit) propose to themselues the
same end in writing, that they had in preaching the message
of life? it is more then plaine that they did. If mans perfection

in this life,Ioh. 20. 31. and eternall saluation in the next, was the
marke whereat they aymed in both,2. Pet. 1. 12. 13. then why should some
onely of things necessarie,2. Pet. 1. 2. be registred, and other of the
same nature,1. Cor. 15. 2. and like necessitie be exposed to neglect, oblivion,Luk. 1. 1. 2. 3. 4.
corruption & discountenance of times,Gal. 1. 6. 7. the moathes
which bred in the Apostles owne traditions, and encumbred
them, vpon the absence of their persons? Rash and inconsiderate
actions are incident, to mans weake & improvident
spirit; the omniscient spirit of God doth nought in
vaine, nought but vpon deliberate grounds. If then the wil
and word of God could haue beene kept purer and more
entire, or alike entire and pure by tradition as writing, why
was it written? Or if any part thereof (my speech keeps still
within compasse of things necessarie) why not the whole?
Was God so forgetfull, as when he had purchased and promised
life to his Church,There is no likelyhood that God would haue so many things of greatest necessitie reserved to the publication of the putatuie deitie of the Pope which hee hath not revealed by his sonne. not to prescribe the way to it? Or
so ignorant that man can devise a neerer, better, and safer
meane to saue himselfe by, than God hath done? Was it
out of good providence and discretion to omit things necessarie,
& commend vnto vs matters of lesse importance?
Was it out of envy, that he would not haue his minde fully
knowne to man? Or impotency that hee could not aswell
haue revealed it wholy, as by halfes? Or out of exception,
that fi
                     ••
                  er pen-mē should record the rest then his Evangelists
and Apostles were? When, or where doth God cancel
that seale, and call it the commission which alone was authenticall?
Wills he the end without the meanes, or such a
meane as warres with it selfe, and disappoints of the end it
should attaine? Did Moses or any of the Prophets in the
old? Did the Evangelists or any of the Apostles in the new
so mince the matter, as some doe? alter, and add to the Testators
minde: allow or disallow (as some presume) what
they thought meet? Can God bee charged with such blasphemies,
or his actuaries, and pen-men iustly challenged
for such treacherie? The law of the Lord is perfect.Can ought be added to that is perfect? May addit, 
                        •
                     o be made without marring it? Dare any mar where addition is as dangerous as it is needlesse? Doth the spirit delude vs calling that perfect wherein so many things lacke and those of necessary vse? How much safer were it to fasten on the written truth which sufficeth to salvation then to forge vntrue writings, and vnwritter▪ truths to the destruction of 
                        〈◊〉
                      soules. Therefore they alone richly and fully afford things needfull to bring vs there to. Mat. 10. 19. May

not this perfection be comparatiuely taken, that a fuller &
clearer knowledge of God is had in the lesser booke of his
law, then in that larger volume of his creatures? But the
Prophet attributes such a perfection thereto, as can imply
no defect, vnlesse the vigor, and force of the cause bee inferiour
to the vertue of the effect, converting the soule. Esay
examines both faith and life of Priest and people by the
law and testimonie. If they speake not according to this
word, it is because (being but blind leaders of the blind)
there is no light in them. The Apostles preached no other
things then those which the Prophets and Moses said
should come. The doctrine which Timothy is here charged
to looke vnto, and touching which hee was to charge others
that they taught no other, was not contrary but consonant
to those Scriptures, wherein Timothy was trained
from his youth; and those Scriptures were able to make
him wise vnto salvation. what may wee thinke of S Paul?
was not he a good Christian? How doth he proue that and
approue himselfe? But this I confesse, &c. Act. 24. 14. These
words Paul spake. When? accused by Tertullus, and other
Iewes, before whom? Foelix a governour. In what cause, &
particular case? The rule of right worship. Who did suggest
the words he vsed? The spirit of God, for such was the
promise, To what end and purpose were they vttered? To
proue the truth of his religion, pietie and profession, where
of God was author, antiquitie an ornament, the Prophets
witnesses, and their records did containe the tenour: which
tenour is here made the touchstone of Gods truth and triall
of his sinceritie. Now either did Saint Paul faile in his
proofe, the spirit notwithstanding prompting him, or God
failed in performance of his promise; or the Scriptures suffice
to make a true and perfect Christian, such as Paul was
in this life, and an inheritour of salvation (as we doubt not
but he now is) in the next. If it were otherwise, the Apostle
would never haue vndergone the burden of so bold an assertion,
as elsewhere he doth. ButThe same things for substance being penned which were preached. 1. Papists preaching the Pope & his decretaline doctrine which is besides and contrary to S. P. Gospell cannot keep without compass of the cu
                        •
                     se 2. Their Romanū Evangelium, a Gospel framd on the Popes owne anvile A• 1592. ascribes to certaine holy beads, and the like trumperies, with the vse of some Ave Maries, Pater nosters, or our Ladies Psalter. asmuch as P. Gospell giues to the bloud of Christ. viz. remission of sinnes to all men in every place. Can any Christi is heart but abominate such blasphemies, and yet behold more abominations then these. 3. A Iesuits Gospell broaching such blasphemies, as neither earth nor heauen can heare without trembling and astonishment. Here Maries milke is mingled with Christs blood, as the Soveraignst salue for a sicke soule, and which yet is more horrible and hellish (if ought can be) the milke is pr
                        •
                     ferred as more pretious. Vbera dextrâ, vulnera prensabo levâ.
                   though that we (chosē
                  
by God to doe the worke of Evangelists) (to whom yet
he restraines not his speech, but goes further and ascends
higher) Or an Angel, meaning no evill one (as Satan when
he doth transforme himselfe) but an Angell from heaven,
pretending he were sent from God. If an Angell from heaven
preach, &c. And that no man thinke these words of execration
to haue fallen from him vnawares, or lesse advisedly,
he toucheth the same string againe, saying as he said
before, and leauing his latter supposall as a thing not possible,
that such contradiction should come from heaven, hee
iterates thus. If any man preach any other, &c. As holy men
of God spake,Ver. 9. so they wrot by divine instigation, For first
the Scripture the writing surpasseth all other writings.2. Pet. 1. 21.
2. The whole Scripture aswell the law which is the Gospell
fore
                     •
                  told,2. Tim. 3. 16. 17. as the Gospell which is the law fulfilled, is
not a Rabbinicall fancie, Anabaptistical revelation, popish
fiction, or any other humane suggestion. But thirdly, inspiration
giuen of God. 4. The vse whereof is manifold, as, 1.
to arme against errour in opinion which it improoueth.
2. Corruption of life, by correcting iniquitie, & to furnish
with a contrarie abilitie of holding. 3. That truth in iudgement
which it teacheth. 4. That righteousnesse of life,
wherein it instructeth. Some admitting the vtility of the
Scriptures, gaine-say their sufficiencie, but amongst other
errours it refells this convincing the authors for gainesayers
of Gods spirit and purpose, seeing it is not meerely said
to be profitable, but so profitable as naught is wanting
therein to make 5 absolute, perhaps the people or laitie in
whom so great 
                     •
                  urniture of knowledge is not required; not
those only, but the Pastor too the man of God. And if an
Angell from heaven, much lesse Antichrist regreet, wee
ought not to be troubled thereat, sithence the spirit of God
doth not content himselfe with so plaine an affirmation
thereof, but to beat the absolutenesse, and all sufficiency of
Scripture into mens braines, and breasts, hee repeateth the
thing againe more fully then before, being made perfect,
or throughly furnished. May not the matter for all this be

yet minced and this perfectiō, or through furniture meant
of most good workes? To all good workes required of mā
to doe. Haue the Scriptures God their author? Afford they
all things necessary to soundnesse of faith and sinceritie of
life, in their vse? Is the end of their transmission to posteritie
by writing, to make mē absolute, so absolute that there
is no good worke wherewith God is pleased, & which hee
requires in those whom he will saue, but they instruct him
in it, and how to doe it? Then wee are content that this errour
of the Scriptures perfection should close our eyes, desiring no other, no safer conduct then they reveale, to that
celestiall Elysium,

                     Sedes vbi fata quietas
                     —ostendunt.
                  
Where the rich man saw Abraham and Lazarus in his bosome.
Let all such as cannot be content with the Scriptures
direction, goe as farre as they can,
(Non equidem invideo, miror magis.)
Beyond all perfection, for the further they goe, the fuller
assurance of Gods favour they forfeit,Psal. 63. 4. the more frequent
feeling of that loue and kindnesse, which is better then life
it selfe, they forgoe, because they goe from God. We seeke
not, we wish not to be wise or perfect aboue the folly and
imperfection of that which is written: that is for higher
wisdome, or perfection, then that which leadeth to life, &
it rightly so called, life eternall.
               Thy word (saith David) is a lanthorne vnto my feet,1. Scriptures prescribe fully and precisely both what for matter we are to 
                        •
                     oe, and decline. &
a light vnto my path. Ps. 119. 105. The light of the lanthorne
descries the evill we are to decline. By the guidance
of this light we may bee led forward to the practise of all
good.Tit. 2. 11. 12. What thought is there of mans heart which may
not hence be established if doubtful?Prov. 2. 9. subdued if headstrōg?
What words idle,Prou. 10. 18. or evill are not here reproued, and may
not be reformed?2. Cor. 10. 4. 5. And wherewithall shall a young man (in
whom affections most rage,Col. 4. 6. and raigne) clense his way?
What sorrow so great,Eph. 5. 3. 4. or maladie of minde,Psal. 119. 9. which the
tongue of the learned may not hence allay?Isa. 50. 4. what infirmity

bodily,No man can rightly praise or prize this pearle, who is not acquainted with Davids practise Ps. 119. Solomons direction and our Saviors search. Iohn, 5. His preparation must bee reverence, humiliti
                        •
                      his insinuation, attention his cō
                     panion, industrie his guid, and prayer the spokesman and the commentarie. or affliction worldly, may not mans spirit be taught
hence to sustaine? Here is the season of salt, the force of fire,
the defence of armour, the nourishment of meat, the solace
of marriage, of spoiles the profit, of victorie the pleasure,
of light the direction, of musicke the delight, the sweetnes
of hony, and the hony combe. In heavinesse it cheares vs,
in wandrings recalls vs, giuing health to our bones, peace
to our liues, & content to our soules. The faithfullest coū
                  seller,
strongest supporter, best interpreter of strange evēts,
and heavenliest moderatour of crosse occurrents.By this seacard may every wise Christian so guide & stere his owne vessell whether in slorm or calme, as to awake with god in the morning, to walke all day long vnder his protection, to ly downe in peace & cōmune, with him in the night season. Prov. 22. Deut. 33. 12.
               
               Further since the matter of our practise without the right
maner of performance, is but a carcase of religion without
a quickning spirit: the Scriptures make knowne vnto vs
that mans deed in Gods matters, is but a desire, at most an
endeavour, which endeavour must bee thus conditioned.
1. Sincere, for he with whom we haue to doe, requres
truth in the inward parts. 2. Serious, or earnest, for heaven
is the hold which none surprise, saue such as will take no
nay. 3. Setled or constant, because he that is holy must bee
holy still. 4. Vniversall or entire, for whosoever shall keepe
the whole law and yet offend in one point, he is guiltie of
all. Now what more sit rule or perfect square can be found
to frame the Lords building by, then that which laies the
foundation in sinceritie, reares vp the walls in fervency,
covers the whole by constancy, and keeps it holy by entire
obedience. Their madnesse hereby appeares the more, who
accuse the scriptures of want and imperfection, to the ende
they may peice and patch them vp with their vnwritten verities,
indeed lying vanities, traditions, or rather (Sad. advers. Monach. Butdeg. 
                  as a compleat
and a most acute diuine calls them) contradictions.
Which first Preiudice, yea frustrate Gods purpose in penning
the Scriptures. These things are written that your ioy
may be full.1. Ioh. 1. 4. Againe these things, &c. Ioy is the companion,
and salvation the end of faith.Ioh. 20. 31. No ground of sollid peace,
& true ioy can be wanting,Mischiefes accompany traditions and their Patrons. where fulnes therof is found to
spring, and the meane is not imperfect which begets a perfect
faith, nor doth that faith frustrate which brings salvation.
The Evangelist S. Luke
                  Luk. 1. 1. 2. 3. 
                        •
                     . wrote not of some only but all

things, which he had searched out perfectly, yet no other,
then the Apostles were witnesses, and Ministers of, to Theophilus,
that he might knowe the certaintie of those things
wherein he had beene instructed. 1. Lukes diligence, which
was not perfunctorie. 2. The successe, that perfectly. 3. The
extent, that all. 4. Their authoritie, that no other then the
Apostles themselues delivered. 5. The estate of the person
to whom they were dedicated, Theophilus who before had
heard and been instructed in them. 6. The state of the time
wherein Theophilus lived, hauing himselfe heard, & beene
taught of the Apostles. 7. The end of committing these
things to writing, which was to cōfirme him in the things
he knew; convince plainely 1. That not only that which
the Apostles taught as necessary to salvatiō is writtē. 2. But
also that the writing of such things is more necessarie on
our parts who heard not the Apostles preachings & instructions
as he did. 3. And to beleeue and embrace nothing
of things necessary, as Apostolical, which hath notScriptures the sole, and sufficient guid to heauen. therfore they but wearie their bodies, & spend their spirits who walke in by paths, & the faster they run the farther they are out of the way, since they run not so as they that obtaine. 
                  scriptū
est for the best warrant.
               They falsifie such attributes as confirme the same.Secondly, Is not
grace an infallible earnest of glorie? By the word wee are
brought and stablished in this happie state,Act. 14. 3. else why is it
called the word of grace? Seeke we more then life? By the
light of this Lanterne we are led thereto.Phil. 2. 16. Else were it mis
                  
                     •
                  earmed
the word of life.Act. 13. 26. Desire we better things thē such
as doe accompanie salvation? it reveales the same and how
to attaine them. Else should the spirit delude the Church.
Need we more or other food then that which nourisheth
to life,Heb. 5. 18. and it eternall? And if when we were enemies, wee
were reconciled to God by the death of his sonne,Rom. 5. 10. much
more being reconciled (by the ministers of the word) wee
shall be saued by his life. Either these titles are vntruths, or
the Scriptures containe all necessarie truth for reformatiō
of life and sincerity of beleefe.
               Admitting them, we cānot beleeue the scriptures which
purposely and peremptorily forbid all additions of men.Thirdly.
Ad thou not vnto his words least hee reproue thee & thou
be found a lyar, which trade of lying and making of their

owne, if with the popish crew, it were not rise, they could
not sell so cheap as they doe; nor so cause their volumes
swell, but, Quid Romae faciant, simentiri nesciant? VVhat
should they doe at Rome if they could not over-reach?
               They load the spirit of God with blasphemous imputations
of falshood,Fourthly, & cōtrariety▪ The first, because it averres
so pregnantly the sufficiency of the scriptures.Papists a peremptory blood they dare giue God the lie. The latter,
because many things are fathered thereon contrary to that
which is revealed;1. Tim. 4. 1 3. as adoring of images, calling on Saints,
worshipping their breaden God, massing, communicating
in one kinde, with those which S. Paul calls the doctrine
not of Divines but Divells.
               They rase the old foundation,Fiftly. and erect a new Canon.
The foundatiō personall is rased. 1. In deifying, & adoring
a man, the man of sinne, as the sonne of man. 2. In doing no
lesse to a peece of paist. 3. In adoring the creaturesAs Ancells and Saints with invocation, Images with adoration, Beads and other hallowed toyes with a power that is proper to faith and repentance. The blessed mother of our Saviour, with 1. prayers. 2. A power over her sonne to command him. 3. In matters of mercy to manage them. And. 4. The milke of her breast with 
                        〈◊〉
                      equall vertue and efficacy to Christs blood. with
the spoiles of their maker. They destroy the foundatiō doctrinall,Stap. in praes. 
                        〈◊〉
                      rel. princ. doct. The papacy is pitched vpon the sand of mans fancie since it finds no sure footing in the word or erect a new Canon in being wise aboue that
which is written. We haue saith (a Rhemish ringleader, &
master builder of the Babilonish Synagogue) another foū
                  dation
of Christian religion, diverse from the Apostolicall
and propheticall scriptures. Therefore a new, another rule.
               They take the wall on Gods word. The Coūcel of Trent
embrace this trash of Apostolicall (as they stile thē) indeed
Apostaticall traditions pari pietatis affectu & reverentia,
                  Sixtly.
with the like reverence & pious affectiō that they doe the
Scriptures.
                     Sess. 6. Decr. 1. Non minus meretur inter Ethnicos, &c. St. in Luc. 10. 16. He doth no lesse deserue to be counted an Ethnick,
who refuseth Ecclesiasticall traditions, then hee that
reiects the Gospel, saith Stolla. Papists in their Practise &
punishments out-run this opinion fortifying traditiō with
fire & sword,Cap. de eccl. porro si plus vivere 
                        〈◊〉
                      &c. whilst they trample Gods edicts vnder foot.
Eckius doth not obscurely intimate that mē must liue more
according to the authoritie of the Church, then after the

Scripture.Luth. in Gal. 1. 7. & 4. 6. The lawes & rules of their irreligious orders are,
and haue been strictly kept in the omission & contempt of
Gods commandemen
                     •
                  s.God indeed doth dignifie & privi
                        •
                     edge his Church but with such caution & reservation that be e
                        •
                     pects and enacts of her the authoritie of a law-giver. The contempt of their idolatrous
& adulterous Masse, the eating of a peece of flesh vpon a
friday, is more abhorred and rigorously intreated then the
horrible guilt of Homicide, theft, avarice, vncleanesse, or
cursing of parents. Whither tends the pretended authority
of the Church aboue the scriptures, if not to prefer the darknesse
of her traditions before the light of Davids Lanthorne?
To make Abanah and Pharpar rivers of the Italian
Damascus more soveraigne then all the waters in Gods
Israel?
                     lam. 4. The subiectio of aspouse Ps. 40. 10. 11. 12. The homage belonging to a Lord. Mal. 1. 6. The honour and power that pertaines a head. Eph. 4. 15. VVhat other thing is meant by that blasphemous
and vnchristianMade by Bristow in his Motiues. challenge, provoking Protestants
out of the weake and false castle of onely scriptures into
the plaine field of Traditions? Whereby more strength
& authority is giuen to tradition for confirmatiō of truth,
and confutation of heresie, then to Scripture. What speakes
their immoderate praises of tradition? those disgraceful reproaches
cast on the Scriptures?Set out by Gregory the thirteth. The Canon Law strikes it
dead, affirming the Apostolicall See of Rome to be respected
with such reuerence that men rather desire to know
the ancient institution of Christian Religion frō the Popes
mouth, then from the holy Scriptures; and they onely enquire
what is his pleasure, and according to it they order
their life and conversation. wherein three grieuous crimes
are combined with one breath. Arrogancie, defection and
Antichristianisme. It is pride intollerable for thē to ascribe,
or the Pope to assume an authority and power of enacting
Lawes in Gods kingdome. Plaine Apostacy to
take heed to Popish fables & commandements of men that
turne away from the truth.Tit. 1. 14. Vndoubted Antichristianisme to
challenge hearing before Scriptures, & instead of searching
them to enforce subscription to the Popes pleasures. The
Asse finding the Lions skin, puts it on to domineere ouer
other beasts, but when his Master found him, (whether his
long eares bewrayed him, hapning to be seene, or his braying
betrayed him, fortuning to be heard) though he deceiued

others, yet him he could not gull. The Italian beast hath
cloathed himselfe with the Lions skin, euen the skin of the
Lion of the tribe of Iudah, I meane the power and authority
of God, whereby he Lords it ouer all Fathers, Councils,
Church & Scriptures. His Sycophants see and publish with
applause; but to such Masters in Gods Israel as examine his
title by the touch-stone of truth his long eares, which from
farre, suckes in such vniust aspersions, his brayes & brags of
two swords, his concealement, & putting of Gods Candle
vnder a bushell, that he might with lesse reluctation doe his
feares in the darke, his traducing of Scriptures for obscuritie
and insufficiencie, his impeaching of their authoritie, his
suiting of their sense to the complexion of times, his changing
of the very articles of faith,Articulos fidei soluit Pontifex maximus Episcopus vniversalis, Caput Ecclesiae, Dominus Deus noster Papa. & founding of new, his silencing
of that breath in cases controversed, which must
cōsume him, his preferring of chaffe to wheat, of that which
is worse then water to the wine of Gods Cellar, his supercilious
& superlatiue stiles, with other like, bewray him to
be the Asse, the Antichrist, who was to sit in the Temple of
God, as God. 2. Thessal. 2. 4.
               There is but one Law-giuer,Seuenthly. whose 1 allowance they
lack,Iam. 4. 12. whose 2 Lawes they disanull. Could God more plainly
reiect such seruice,Whatsoeuer des
                     
                        ••
                     nds from the lynes of mans braine is monsbane in Gods busines. reproue such practice then he doth by
that censure, which yet they contemne?
                     Math. 15. 9. In which kind
                        •
                      none haue so much pes
                        •
                     ered the Church as they whose traditions are 1. dissonant to the truth. 2. for varietie infinite. 3. in vse fruitles. 4. in effect dangerous. 1. impeaching the authoritie. 2. implying an insufficiency and 3. shouldring out of the exercise of Gods word. 
                  In vaine they &c.
wherein our Saviour covertly proposing his will and word
for the alone rule of all acceptable service, and opposing
mens precepts to that doctrine which is divine, vtterly and
vniuersally condemnes all such rules of his worship, as are
contrary to, or besides the Scriptures. And all works groū
                  ded
vpon such rules as are not learned out of the word,
though for wisdome they make a shew as if they came frō
Heauen, for humility they seeme to proceed from a mortified
mind, & for austerity do not spare the body, yet (take it
vpon the word of an Apostle) do they neither please God,
nor profit vs, since they are things of no value. Now Christ

we know to be truth it selfe, and Paul we acknowledge to
haue lighted his torch at our Saviours lampe,Marke 7. 8. but who are
these that presume to lay the cōmandements of God apart,
 & obserue the tradition of men? 1. Such as are zealous in
their profession:Rom. 10. 2. so were they whose zeale notwithstanding
the Apostle reproues,Verse 13. because it was not vshred with knowledge.The secret of the Lord is amongst them that feare him.
2. Such are ouerawed with a feare, not priviledged &
spirituall feare, whereof the Prophet speakes, Psal. 25. but
such as is taxed by another Prophet, because taught by the
precepts of men. Isa. 29. 13. 3. Such as are wearied with
pilgring,The true seruice of God consists not in bodily exercises, which profit not, but in the exercises of godliues, the practice wherof is most hard, & burthensome, & in truth impossib
                        •
                     e to the natural mā. Rom. 7. 8 Such is the curbing of our irregular wils, and breaking the clods of our vntowardnesse. pined with fasting, & clogged with imposts of voluntary
service: the Pharises did likewise furrow sea & land,
fast often, sting thēselues with thornes, lye vpō planks, beat
their heads against wals, till blood sprung, yet never a whit
more liked or allowed of God. Math. 5. 20, who requires
not mangled but mortified members. Col. 3. 5. a liuing sacrifice,
a reasonable service. Rom. 12. 1. And Baals Priests,
who went further (lancing their flesh with kniues. 1. King.
18. 29.) were farre enough frō Gods kingdome. 4. Such as
are wary & heedfull, but in the service of the worst Master,
whilst they obserue their owne ordinances. 5. Such as run
in the course they vse, but with more haste then good speed,
since they walke not in the rode-way wherein Dauid safely
ran, Psal. 119. 32. but run in those wayes wherein God suffered
the Gentiles for to walke (1.) their own wayes. 6. Such
as beleeue in Christs merits;A voluntarie and cheerfull resignation of our selues to Gods vsage. Luke 9. 23. bow euer it standwith our temporall comfort. a delight in holy exercises, which by nature we cannot rellish. Psal. 119. 97. a keeping of the heart in such plight as may command good motions, and haue dominion ouer vnruly passions, which Chirst cals a kingdome. Luk 17. Salomons conquest, & a great one too Prov. 16 32. a daily fostering of saith, with a constant fruition of her fruits & attendāis. Ioy▪ peace, loue, thanksgiuing, equabiliue of mind in estates, a propension & willingnes to dopart hence at Gods pleasure, breaking out sometimes into a desire of dissolution. Phil 1. 23. a forsaking of the world, not locally in habitation (as they do who confine themselues to some Frierie) but spiritually in affection, as they who re
                     
                        •
                     ouace that corruption which is in the world through lust, vsing it as though they vsed it not. 2 Pet. 
                           •
                        . 4. 1 Cor. 7. 31. but not as true Christiās ought
to do, seeing their trust in Christs merit is, that he hath purchased
grace for them, to merit for themselues Heauen by
free-will if they list, thereby to be iust before God in themselues,
and fully worthy of Gods kingdome, by which kind

of belie
                     •
                  e they are abolished from Christ,Rhem. vpon 2 Tim. 4. 8. fallen from grace,
and bereft of the benefits of his merit,Gal. 3. 1. & 5. 4. as were the bewitched
Galathians in the Apostles dayes.
               Againe,Papists pretending blasphemously that they fulfill the Law, doe disanull the law by their superstitious devices. when they draw men from the wholesome pasture 
of Gods word, to repast and feed in the strengthlesse
chaffe of mans braine, doe they not reiect the commandements
of God, that they may obserue their owne traditiōs?
In the three estates of humane gouernment, Oecomicall,
Civill, & Ecclesiasticall, the papacy masked with pretence
of Religion & regularitie (Davus like) disturbes all. In the
first which is Domesticke prohibiting mutuall offices of
loue,Papa perturbat omnia. obedience, hereditary succession, & due benevolence
twixt Master & seruant,Poperie out of a transcendent prerogatiue can godly transgresse all bounds of nature, religion, humanitie, and ciuill societie, forbidding the performance of promises, couenants, oaths, declaration of truth vpon oath, to these who worship the God of their fathers after the manner which they call heresie. father & sonne, husband & wife. In
the second dispencing with allegeāce, disposing of scepters,
deposing Caesar, & crowning of murtherous attēpts against
his person with a Lawrell of new-sprung martyrdome.
Touching the third, Diruit, aedificat, mutat diuina prophanis.
He destroyes & puls downe what God hath built, & with
those Nimrodian rebels in the tower Babel seekes to raise
the wals of Babilon higher then any mischance can soare,
Maio
                        •
                     sū, &c. as Niobe somtime said of her selfe. He changeth divine precepts
into prophane & blasphemous fictions;I sit as a Queen & shall see no mourning. Rev. 8. 7. whilst in euery
commandement & branch of the Law, the word is made
of no authority by the traditions which he hath ordained.
By this time I doubt not but we see good reason of obseruing
that Apostolicall rule.1 Pet. 4. 11. 
                  He that speaketh, &c. The Prophets
are Gods factors, sent to negotiate in these remote
Regiōs. There traffick is the reconciliatiō & gain of soules.
the Church is the ship wherein they imbarke, the world the
sea whereō she floates, the word the card that directeth her
course. Timothie as Pilot keepes the sterne. Tradition is the
rock which he must shun. The place of arriuall is the promised
Land, that coelestiall Canaan which is aboue. His exchange
there the richest for commodity,See Gualter on Mat. 15. 19. & Mar. 7. 7. & rarest for perpetuity,
euen the saluation of himselfe, & those that saile with
him. Let Timothie then take heed to himselfe, that his life be
vnreproueable touching the grosse offence, to doctrine,

that it be pure & profitable, to perseverance, lest beginning
in Leo he end in Cancer.
                  1 Cor. 9. 16. Let him looke to saying, because
a necessitie is laid vpon him, Woe is, &c. to doing, because
such as say & do, shalbe counted great in the kingdome of
God,Math. 5. 19. aswell this of grace as that of glory. continuance, because
not he that runs fast for a spurt, & setls before he come
at the goale, but he that endures & not that for a time, neither
till the sun of tribulation begin to scoarch, but he that
endures the heats & sweats of this holy Climate, & that to
the end he I say, or rather Christ saith it, & he alone shalbe
saued. Iudas shone for a space, & gaue a flash as if he had bin
a fixed star amongst the twelue, but time discovering his
false faith, he proued a Comet or shooting star, being drawn
down, & withdrawn with a Quid dabitis? what will ye giue
me & I will deliuer him vnto you?Math. 26. 15. St 
                  Paul on the other side
approued himselfe to be a fixed star in the Churches firmament.
1. by his owne heedf
                     •
                  lnes, since he knew nothing by
himselfe. 2. by his industry in teaching, whilst as a candle he
spent himselfe to giue others light.1 Cor. 4. 4. 3. by cōtinuance in holding
out vnto the end,Act. 20. 20 24. witnesse that Swan-like song, I haue
fought,
                  2. Tim. 4. 7. 8. 
                  &c. that loue that his appearing. Against which appearance
the Lord prepare vs by a care so circumspect, as
may keepe vs vnspotted of the world, a diligence so succesfull,
as may gaine others, & by such a continuance in both,
as may be intreated with that approbation. Euge bone serue.
It is well done good seruant & faithfull,Math. 25. 21. &c. Blessed is that
seruant,Math. 24. 46. 47. whom when his master commeth, he shall sinde so
doing.
               
                  
                     Soli DEO gloria. ConfIrMet qVoD In nobIs operatVs est JehoVah.
               
               FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   