
      
         
            
            
            
            
            THE HOLIE Historie of King Dauid, wherein is chieflye learned these godly and wholsome lessons, that is: to haue sure patience in persecution due obedience to our Prince without rebellion: and also the true and most faithfull dealings of friendes.
            Drawne into English Méetre for the youth to r
                  ••
               de, by Iohn Marbeck.
            
            AT LONDON Pri
                  •••
               d by Henrie Middleton, for Iohn Harison. ANNO. 1579.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT WORshipfull and his singuler good Maistresse, ELIZABETH BARRET, wife to Master EDVVARD BARRET Esquire: I. Marbeck wisheth long life and continuall health, to the pleasure of God.
            TO RENDER YOV THE CAVSE or rather the causes (Righte Worshipfull Maistresse) that first moued me to take in hande the trauell of this diuine Historie of the holy Prophet king Dauid? This, in my iudgement, were not so necessarie, as it might proue tedious vnto you, and therefore I omit it, sauing that thus much I affirme, that aswell in the writing, as in the deliuering of it to the presse, I not meanely regarded that suche histories as Gods spirite hath left and commended vnto vs in the sacred Scriptures, might be aduaunced before, and infinitely farre aboue those vayne, vnstable, and most vnfruitfull deuises whatsoeuer (so I terme them as they are to be compared with the histories of Gods holy Scriptures) whatsoeuer (I saye) proceeding from the penne of man, albeit neuer so throughly dipped in the deapth and soundest parte of that that mans reason might reach vnto: But muche more I intended to the vttermost of mine habilitie, to impayre hereby the credite aswell of all leude lying legends of vnsound Saintes, consecrated and canonized in the high Court of Rome, (the soueraigne seate of that purple Whore, whom the Lorde with the breath of his mouth shall shortly destroy to the great glory of the Lambe) as also of all filthy, fonde, and vnsauery songs, bookes, and fancies

farre vnfit and ill beseeming the eies of baptized Christians. And the better to bring this to passe, I haue not only endeuoured my selfe to be playne and familiar in all things, but also (for the more delectation to the Reader) haue continued the historie whole and entier of it selfe, without entermingling any matter or discourse that might seeme to digresse from the order of the Story. And now, hauing in this sort finished the same, and not finding in my selfe habilitie sufficient whereby to expresse the thankfulnes and entier affection of my heart, which I would should be manifested vnto you (to whom, as to the right worshipfull gentleman your husbande, the Lord hath graunted great measure of zeale to his trueth, and loue to his poore Saincts) what other shift shoulde I make, beeing now, as my yeeres and infirmities tell me, trudging to the end of my race, but to vse this as a pledge of these the premises which the Lord Iesus alone must make absolute at his comming? This litle booke therefore, in this onely consideration and respect, I humbly dedicate and exhibite vnto you, beseching you (right worshipfull Gentlewoman) that in receyuing it at my hands, you will looke into that that my heart hath herein behighted, namely that it be taken as a poore supply of the thing which I owe, but (for want of habilitie) can not otherwise render. I leaue to be tedious vnto you, beseeching that Lorde that hath a continuall eye to his Churche, to preserue you and your right worshipful husband long time as bright burning lamps to the comfort of the same, and in the end of your earthly pilgrimage, to clothe you, as he hath already chosen and called you, to waite vpon the Lambe, and with him to liue and reigne eternally.
            Amen.
         
      
      
         
            
            I. Regum xvi. Chapter.
            WHen as the Lorde out of his sight
            had Saul the king reiect,
            Unto the Prophet Samuel
            
            his worde he did direct,
            On this wise saying vnto him:
            How long wilt thou lament
            For him that I haue cast away,
            and of his reigne repent?
            Fill now thy horne with oyle and 
                  •
               ome, for I haue great delite
            To send thée forth to Isai that auncient Bethlemite:
            Because I haue prouided me a king among his séede
            To rule and gouerne Israel: make hast and go with spéede.
            O Lord, quod he, how shall I go? for I do greatly feare
            That Saul shall take away my life, when he therof doth heare.
            The Lord made answere thus & sayd, with thée an Heyfer take:
            And say thy onely comming is, an offring there to make.
            Giue warning vnto Isai, call him vnto the same,
            And whom thou shalt to me annoynt, him will I to thee name.
            So then the Prophet tooke his way, & came to Bethlem towne,
            The Elders feared much to sée his sodayne comming downe:
            Demaunding if he came in peace, or what was his intent?
            An offring héere to make (quod he) the Lorde me hither sent.
            Do therfore sanctifie your selues, and come with one accord,
            That we together may go forth, and offer to the Lord.
            He sanctifide both Isai, and eke his sonnes also,
            Exhorting them (as he was did) with all the rest to go.
            Now, as the people stood before the Prophet Samuel,
            
            He cast his eye on Eliab, whose stature did excell:
            Wherefore he gan within him selfe to thinke, and thus to say,
            The Lords annoynted certenly is present here this day.
            Then spake the Lord, let not thy minde nor eye be so abusde
            With fauour nor with comelynes, for I haue him refusde.
            God doth not sée as mortall man, nor looke on outward showes,
            But doth behold the heart within, & vertue where she growes.
            
               
               Eliab in his fathers sight when he repulse had take,
            
               Abinadab was brought to proue if he should be forsake:
            But whē ye Prophet had him séene, he made this answer plaine,
            How that the Lorde had neither cald nor chosen him to raigne.
            Then Samma was set foorth in place to waite the prophets will,
            And as his brethren sped before, his lucke was euen as ill.
            Thus Isai seuen of his sonnes he brought foorth one by one,
            Wherof the Prophet gaue to witte, the Lorde had chosen none.
            Hast thou no mo, quod Samuel, of sonnes then héere be tolde?
            I haue (quod he) a litle one remayning with my folde.
            Let him be fet, now out of hande send of thy seruaunts some,
            For we will stay and not sit downe till he be hither come.
            Then was he fet out of the field, and from the shepefold brought
            Unto the Prophet Samuel, as God the thing had wrought.
            This yong mans fauour did excell, in whom such beautie was,
            That with a speciall comely grace all other he did passe.
            Now sayd the Lord to Samuel, arise, do him annoynt,
            For this is he whom I do choose, and vnto thée appoynt.
            The Prophet tooke his horne of oyle, and with aduisement good,
            He shed it out on Dauids head before them as they stood,
            And so foorthwith returned home to Rama where he lay:
            And Dauid to his folde agayne made spe spéede and went away.
            From that day foorth the spirit of god from Saul to Dauid went,
            And vnto Saul a cruell sprite in stead thereof was sent,
            Which vexed him full often times, and did him so molest,
            That for the time of all his wittes he was quite dispossest:
            Which gréeued sore his men to sée, wherefore they gan to say,
            Behold how this most wicked wight doth haūt thée day by day:
            Let there be sought a cunning man, of good and perfect skill,
            On harpe or other instrument, some comfort bring it will.
            Prouide me then of such a one, go search both 
                  •
               arre and nere,
            Where that the best is to be had, and bring him to me here.
            Then one did say that Isai had a sonne that did excell
            In musike, and vpon the harpe he played passing well:
            A strong and valiaunt man of warre, well made of bone & lim,
            Excéeding wise in his affayres, and hath the Lorde with him.
            
               Then sent the king, and made request that Isai would him send
            His yongest sonne, that on his shéepe and shepefold did attend.
            Who at the kings commaundement prepared therewithall
            A simple present with his sonne, and sent him vnto Saul.
            
            So Dauid serued now the king, and in the Court remaynd,
            Where he was well accept of Saul, and gently entertaynd.
            His harnesse bearer he became. The king sent once agayne
            To Isai, that Dauid should with him a while remayne.
            Then Dauid great atendance gaue vpon his master Saul,
            
            To be at hande if that the sprite should chaunce on him to fall,
            As now and then it came to passe: then Dauid gan to play
            Upon his harpe so pleasauntly, that soone it went away.
            Now after this the Philistines came with a mightie hoast,Cap. 17.
            
            To warre agaynst the Israelites, & pitcht in Dammims coast.
            Then Saul the king of Israel them to resist he goes,
            And camped in the vale of Oke, in sight of all his foes.
            The Philistines stood
                  •
                on an hill: the Israelites were séene
            To stand vpon an other hill, a valley them betweene.
            And while the hoast stoode at a stay, a Philistine came downe
            Into the bottome of the vale, a strong and mighty clowne:
            His name it hight Goly of Gath, so bigge and huge a man,
            As was in length from top to toe six cubites and a span.
            An helmet on his head he had of hard and massy brasse,
            A coate of male vpon his backe of passing weight it was:
            A shield & bootes of brasse likewise, which he was wōt to weare,
            And scarsly could a weauers beame well coūterpeise his speare.
            Now hauing one to beare his shield, and waite vpon the same,
            Agaynst the hoast of Israel with voyce he gan proclame:
            Why come ye out in battayle ray? behold I am but one,
            Send out a man that dare assay to fight with me alone:
            If he do beate me in this place, then we will all be yours:
            If I preuayle with force and might, then you shall all be ours.
            This day the hoast of Israel I do it all defye:
            Send out a man that we may fight and here the matter trye.
            When Saul and all the Israelites had heard and séene his spite,
            They were with feare astonished, and out of courage quite.
            
               Here now to Dauid Isais sonne our talke returnd shal bée,
            An Euphratite of Bethleem, a man of good degrée.
            This Isai had vnto his sonnes in number eight in all,
            And he himselfe well stept in yeres now in the dayes of Saul:
            With whom thrée of his eldest sonnes into the warres did go,
            Both Samma and Abinadab, and Eliab also:
            But Dauid went not out with Saul, for he was gone before
            To féede his fathers shéepe agayne, and came to Saul no more.
            His father nowe an aged man, and of the warres afrayd,
            Bethought him of his sonnes with Saul, and thus to Dauid said:
            
               Isai sent Dauid to releue his brethrē, but God sent him for ye deliuerance of Israel.Come forth my sonne, Ile send thée now into the hoast of Saul,
            
            To sée thy brethren how they fare, and what thing i
                  •
                befall:
            Go carie them this parched corne, & these ten loaues of bread,
            For in their hunger it perhaps may stand them in some stead:
            And to their capteine vnder whom their lotte is for to serue,
            Present these chéeses in my name, that he may them deserue.
            If néede haue forsoe thy brethren so that 
                  ••
               ey haue gages layde,
            Redéeme their pledge, and sée that all their creditors be payde.
            Then Dauid early gat him vp, committing all his shéepe
            Unto an other skilfull man, to tende them and to kéepe:
            So going forth, he came vnto the hoast that lay about,
            Where as he heard the noyse of warre, & people make a shout:
            For both the hoasts were in aray, and stood in others sight,
            Ech one with weapon in his hand as ready for to fight:
            Thē leauing al his gere with one that mo things had in charge,
            He ran and found his brethren out, saluting them at large:
            And as he stood in talk, comes forth great Goly with his vaūts,
            Prouoking still the Israelites with spitefull bitter tauntes:
            Whose vgly shape and mighty corps did so the people fray,
            That they durst not abide his looke, but ranne from him away,
            Ech one to other saying thus, saw you this fiend of hell?
            His comming vp is to revile the hoast of Israel:
            Who so can him depriue of life, and master in the field,
            To him the king his daughter deare & great rewards wil yéeld,
            And furthermore he will also his fathers house to bée
            In all the land of Israel from tax and payments frée.
            
               Now Dauid hearing all the brags the Philistine had made,
            His heart was moued so within that he brast out and sayde:
            What shal be done vnto the man, what honour to his name,
            That beateth yonder Philistine to saue the land from shame?
            For what is this vncircumcisd, what power is in his rod,
            That he should thus reuile the hoast of the true liuing God?
            The people sayd to him agayne as they had sayd before,
            That so it should be done to him, with prayse for euermore.
            Which thing his brother Eliab tooke in such spite and hate,
            That he (offended with his talke) began him all to rate.
            What hast thou here to do? (quod he) go home & tend thy shéepe,
            Which thou hast left in wildernes without a guyde to kéepe:
            I know the malice of thy heart, which so in thée hath wrought,
            That it & pride hath brought thée down to sée the battel fought.
            Then Dauid saide, what haue I done? there is some cause certaine,
            And so departing farther of he spake the same againe.
            To whom the people, as before, assured him of all:
            But some that noted well his words rehearsed them to Saul.
            
            Who caused him for to be fet that he might sée the man,
            And being brought immediatly to speake he thus began:
            Let not the king dismayed be, let no mans heart him fayle,
            For yonder bragging Philistine I shall (God will) assayle.
            Thou art not able (quod the king) to cope with him in hand,
            So farre aboue thy power he is, thou mayst him not withstand:
            Thou art but yet a boy in age, and he a man of might,
            Brought vp & traded from his youth in warre & warlike fight.
            Then Dauid to encourage Saul in Gods great power and ayde,
            Gan to declare what he of late had done by him, and sayde:
            Thy seruant kept his fathers shéepe that they should not astray,
            Among the which a Lion came to féede vpon his pray,
            I ranne & caught him by the beard, & shooke him by the iawes,
            So that I rid him of his life for all his ramping pawes.
            A Beare likewise with gréedy paunch came to deuour his pray,
            Whom I by strength did onely kill before I went away.
            And as thy seruant now hath done to these two beasts in déede,
            I doubt not but this Philistine shall haue no better spéede.
            
               I mind (God willing) to remoue the infamy and shame,
            And to reuenge this wicked talke agaynst Gods holy name:
            And as the Lord defended me from Lion and from Beare,
            So from this bosting Philistine he will I do not feare.
            The king well pleased with his talke, gaue leaue & bad him go,
            Beséeching God to be his guyde and shield him from his fo:
            And gaue a charge to put vpon the armour of the king,
            His sword, his head peece, and his shield, and euery other thing.
            Then Dauid did assay himselfe how well that he could do,
            For he had neuer proued them ne wonted him thereto.
            Wherfore he turned to Saul and sayd, I can not go with these:
            So out of all he stripped him to haue his armes at ease.
            With staffe in hand he gat him forth vnto a litle brooke,
            Out of the which fiue pibble stones into his bagge he tooke,
            And so from thence he made his way apace vnto the man,
            No other weapon but a sting he had to fight with than.
            The Philistine then drue him neare to view him that was sent,
            A page before him bare his shield as he to Dauid went.
            Now when he saw so yong a man so nakedly arayed,
            Disdaynefully on him he cast his eye, and to him sayd:
            Am I a dogge that with a staffe thou commest me to beate?
            So cursing him by all his goddes he gan to fume and freate:
            Come on my childe (quod he) I will dispatch thée in this houre,
            And giue thy flesh vnto the beasts and birds for to deuoure.
            Then Dauid not afrayd of him nor any thing he saw,
            Did vse suche talke as he might sée he wayed him not a straw.
            Thou cōmest to me with speare & shield wherin is all thy trust,
            But in the name of God I come to thée in quarrell iust:
            The Lord whose name wt wicked mouth thou hast blasphemed so,
            This day will vse me as a meane to be thine ouerthrow,
            And minds your very carkasses to scatter so on ground,
            That to the foules & rauening beasts a pray you may be found:
            That al the world both farre and neare may know it very wel,
            How that there is a mighty Lord and God in Israel:
            And eke the whole assembly here shall perfect notice haue,
            That neither sword nor speare it is wherwith ye lord doth saue.
            
               For sure the battell is the Lords that ruleth in all lands,
            He will this day confound you all, and put you in our hands.
            With that he stepped forth and came with weapon in his fist,
            The other gan to buckle him his malice to resist:
            A stone he had already set and folded in his sling,
            Which at his head he hurled out as hard as he could fling,
            Which (through the Lord) light full vpon ye forepart of his head,
            And sanke so déepe into his brayne that downe he fell as dead.
            Then Dauid ran the groueling corps there lying to bestride,
            And from the body with his sword his head he did deuide.
            A sight no doubt that pleased much the Israelites that day,
            But so dismayed the Philistines that they did runne away.
            Then all the hoast of Israel they shouted at that sight,
            Pursuing them with bloudy swords, & slue them in the flight:
            And chasing them to Ekron gates they gaue them such a foyle,
            That they returned ioyfully and brought away the spoyle.
            Now whē as Dauid had (in God) this mighty cōquest wrought,
            He was by Abner vnto Saul before his presence brought:
            And standing with the bloudy head of Goly in his hande,
            The king gan say, whose sonne art thou, giue me to vnderstād?
            My soueraigne lord I am (quod he) the yongest sonne of all
            Of Isai the Bethleemite, most faythfull vnto Saul.
            
            This sayd the soule of Ionathas to Dauid did apply,
                  Cap. 18. The vnmoueable loue of Ionathas and Dauid.
            
            And firmly sought to knit with his by secret sympathy:
            Whom tenderly he did so loue with inward fancy then,
            That greater loue could not be wisht amōg the sonnes of men.
            The king also for this his act did cause him to remayne,
            And in no wise would suffer him to make returne agayne.
            With Dauid and with Ionathas a faythfull bond was made,
            That ech of them while life did last should be ech others ayde.
            At which time Ionathas did giue vnto his friend so deare,
            Both cote and cloke, his bow, his sword, & girdle he did weare.
            Now Dauid so behaued him that all men gaue him prayse,
            So faythfull and so circumspect he was in all his wayes.
            The king so well estemd of him that he put him in trust
            To rule and guyde his men of warre, and leade them as he lust:
            
               His name was praysed eury where his honour to enhaunce,
            The women also set him forth with timbrell in their daunce.
            As they the king met at returne from slaughter of his foes,
            They sung this song of victorie in méeter as it goes.
            King Saul to his great laude and prayse his thousande men hath slaine,
            But Dauid hath ten thousand times so many kild againe.
            With this the king was very wroth and eke displeased sore,
            That vnto him they gaue so much, and to the king no more:
            For they (quod he) haue set him vp ten times aboue my one,
            And what can he haue more except the kingdome all alone.
            From that time forth he cast an eye on Dauid somwhat straūge,
            Rewarding all that he had done with hatred for exchaunge.
            It so befell the morow next the king to be torment
            With that ill sprite which oftentimes the Lord had to him sent:
            Then Dauid as his custome was to be before his grace,
            Stood playing on his pleasant harpe to ease him in that case.
            The king beheld him earnestly, and to him selfe did say,
            I mind this iauelin here of mine shall rid him cleane away.
            So in his rage and madding moode at Dauid forthwithall
            He hurld the Iauelin in his hand to nayle him to the wall.
            But Dauid to auoyde the stroke as one that was full wise,
            Conueyed him selfe and did escape his daunger once or twise.
            The king no doubt was much afraide to sée his purpose fayle,
            And Dauid such defence to haue that nothing could preuayle:
            Wherfore he sought all meanes he could his honour to abase,
            Withdrew his charge and him remoud into a meaner place.
            This notwithstanding prudently he walkt in all his wayes,
            As one that had the Lord with him for to prolong his dayes.
            The king perceiuing how that he in fauour dayly grew,
            Was still afrayd that daunger might thereby to him ensue:
            For Israel and Iuda both to Dauid cleaued sore,
            And eke their loue to him ech day increased more and more.
            Then Saul attempted Dauid thus: I will on thée bestow
            My daughter Merob, whom thou hast deserued well I know.
            Which thing he spake of no good will as he did then pretend,
            But ment thereby the Philistines might bring him to his end.
            
               When Dauid had considered the offer Saul had made,
            Then he agayne with reuerence to him most humbly sayde:
            O what am I, what is my life, my stocke or my degregrée,
            That I so vile and base a wight thy sonne in law should bée?
            But how so ere the matter went, when Dauid should enioye
            His wife of Saul, he had conceyud in mind an other toye,
            And minded to defeate him cleane whom he entised so,
            Entending his forenamed childe on Adriel to bestow.
            Then was it vnto Saul declard what fauour Michol had
            To Dauid, as it did appeare, whereof the king was glad:
            She shal be his, and by her meanes he shal be caught in snare,
            And fall into the Heathens hands before he be aware.
            Pretending then as he would séeme his very friend to be,
            My yongest daughter thou shalt haue, & be my sonne (quod he)
            And turning him vnto his men, in secret to them sayde,
            Perswade him if ye can to cast his fancy on the mayde:
            And say to him, behold the king doth greatly fauour thée,
            In thee it lyes, refuse it not his sonne in law to bée:
            Also his seruants loue thée well, they wish thée for to stay
            Thy selfe vpon the kings request, and to his will obay.
            The seruants went & all these things they put in Dauids head,
            Whose answer shewd he would not be by their persuasiōs led.
            Doth it, saide he, séeme vnto you so small and light a thing,
            For me to be the sonne in law to such a mighty king?
            I am a man both poore and base, of reputation small,
            And haue no dowry for to giue, her to enrich withall.
            The men returned back agayne and made a true report
            Of all the answer Dauid gaue to them, and in what sort.
            Go yet, quod he, and tell him thus, the king doth nothing craue,
            But of one hundred Philistines their foreskins for to haue,
            That throgh his corage to his name immortall praise may rise,
            And I vpon my deadly foes may be reuengd likewise.
            Now Sauls intent was only this, to bring him into thrall
            And daunger of the Philistines, to loose both life and all.
            The messengers to Dauid went and told him how it stood,
            What dowry he must séeke to giue to match in Royall blood.
            
               Now hauing good occasion giuen with Philistines to mell,
            To be the sonne in law to Saul it pleased Dauid well.
            Not many dayes were past when he his promise had fulfild,
            And slayne two hundred Philistines as he thereto was wild,
            Whose skins were brought & giuen to Saul by Dauid & his men,
            So that of right he might not hold his daughter from him then.
            Wherfore the king did Michol giue to Dauid as his wife,
            Who loued him full tenderly euen as she loued her life.
            Now hauing both the Lord with him, & Michols heart in holde,
            It made the king the more afrayd of him an hundred folde.
            So déepe a roote had malice caught within his heart and eye,
            That vnto Dauid he became a deadly enemie.
            But Dauid so behaued him with wisedome as it séemd,
            That none among the men of Saul aboue him was estéemd.
            
               Cap. 19.Wherfore now Sauls hipocrisie which he so long had hid,
            Brast out in open crueltie, and caused him to bid
            Both Ionathas and eke his men that Dauid they should kill,
            Who were full sory in their hearts, and loth to do him ill.
            
               The firste profe of Ionathas fidelitie to Dauid.When Ionathas perceyued well his father sought to wreake
            His malice on the innocent, with Dauid he did breake,
            And said: my father meanes deceite and séekes thine ouerthrow,
            Lake héede therfore, it stāds thée on thy wisdome now to show,
            Go hide thée in some secret place, and kéepe thée out of sight:
            Untill the morow day put forth the comfort of his light,
            And I will stand my father by in field where that thou art,
            And do the best I can with him to féele and grope his heart:
            And as I find him bent to theée, to kill or eke to saue,
            Doubt not but I wil find the meanes that thou shalt knowledge haue.
            As Ionathas was in the field and by his father stood,
            And hauing talke of Dauid there, he spake of him much good.
            Let not the king (sayd Ionathas) agaynst thy seruaunt sin,
            For he hath not offended thée without nor yet within:
            Did he not kill the Philistine with daunger of his life,
            And brought therwith to Israel great peace in place of strife?
            Thou saw it well and did reioyce, now therfore take a pause,
            And do not hurt the innocent, nor kill without a cause.
            
               Then Saul gaue eare to Ionathas God wot full faynedly,
            Although he swore vnto the Lord that Dauid should not dye.
            Yet Ionathas vpon his othe did Dauid to him call,
            Declaring how the matter stood, and brought him vnto Saul.
            
            With whom he was, and serued him as he had in times past,
            But enuy bare such rule in him that long it did not last.
            For now the warres began a fresh, and Dauid by Gods might
            Slew many of the Philistines, and put the rest to flight.
            The king enuying this good lucke which God had Dauid sent,
            Was through the wicked sprit possest, againe to mischiefe bent.
            For as he sate his full intent was Dauid to haue slayne,
            At whō he threw with mighty force his Iauelin, but in vayne:
            For Dauid shund the deadly stroke, and durst not bide in sight,
            But gat him home vnto him wife, who saued him that night.
            For Saul had sent his men of armes to garde his house about,
            With charge to sée him there dispatcht before that he came out.
            Then Michol like a faythfull wife gaue counsell very good,The faithf
                     •
                  nnesse of Michol to her husband Dauid.
            
            And bad him saue himself yt night, for sure they sought his blood.
            No other shift she had to make their purpose to preuent,
            But at a window let him downe, and so away he went.
            Who béeing gone she tooke and layd an image in his bed,
            A pillow stuft with Gotish héere she put vnder his hed:
            Declaring to the messengers that came their lorde to please,
            How that in bed her husband lay not very well at ease.
            Of this they made certificate to Saul to know his will,
            Who bad them bring him bed and all that so he might him kill.
            But when the men were entred in and stoode by his bedstocke,
            They foūd not Dauid whō they sought, but in his place a block.
            Then Saul of Michol made demaund wherefore she had done so,
            Deluding him and all his men to let his enemie go?
            Alas (quod she) I could not choose I so enforced was,
            He threatned me with present death vnlesse I let him passe.
            Thus Dauid being fled away was gone to Samuel,
            
            To whom he had declared all the case; as it befell.
            From Rama then to Naioth with Samuel he went,
            Remayning there, although that Saul his messengers had sent.
            
               For they with other Prophets mo gan now to prophecie,
            So that they had no mind to séeke for Dauid earnestlie.
            But when as Saul himselfe was come to Naioth where he was,
            He then for feare departed thence and fled to Ionathas,
            
            
               
                  
                     •
                  he seconde 
                  
                     ••
                  ofe of Io
                  
                     ••
                  thas' fide
                  
                     ••
                  tie.Complayning thus: O Ionathas what cause, giue I of strife,
            That still thy father and my lord so séeketh for my life.
            Now God forbid, quod Ionathas, he deale so cruelly,
            Expell all feare, pull vp thine heart, trust me thou shalt not dye:
            For well I know my father will no one thing take in hand,
            But or he doth attempt the same I shall it vnderstand:
            And will he now hide this from me? he is not so vnkinde,
            To worke thy death so secretly, and show me not his minde.
            Oh Ionathas thy father knowes, and playnly this doth sée,
            What faithfull loue and tender heart thou bearest vnto me,
            Therfore perhaps he will it hide as though it were not so,
            To stay thy heart from pensiuenes and filling it with wo:
            But truly as the Lord doth liue, and thou dost liue with breath,
            One step there is, and scarcely that betwéene me and my death.
            What wilt thou haue me do (quod he) declare to me thy minde,
            For both in wealth and bitter wo thou shalt me faithfull finde.
            Behold (quod he) to morow next the king doth hold the feast,
            Where I should sit at boord with him, my roome to fill at least,
            But let me go into the fields and kéepe me out of sight,
            Till all the feast be done and past: the third day towards night
            If Saul thy father speake of me, demaunding to and fro,
            Say then I craued leaue of thée to Bethleem to go,
            Where once a yere a solemne feast is holden there within,
            For all the stocke and progenie of me and all my kinne.
            If he be pleased there withall thy seruant shall haue peace,
            But if he do intend me hurt his malice will not cease:
            Then shall thy mercy do me good, and with thy bond accord,
            Which to thy seruant thou didst make & promise in the Lord:
            For if in me there can be found offence in all the land,
            Then let me neuer farther go but kill me with thy hand.
            God thée defend, quod Ionathas, for if I did it know
            That any harme were toward thee, of truth I would it show.
            
               Then Dauid sayd, how shal I learne what Saul doth say to thée,
            Or who shall tell me if my lorde do answere cruelly?
            Come let vs go into the field, and so they tooke their way,
            Where Ionathas brast out in words, and gan to Dauid s
                  •••
               
            
            O Lord the God of Israel, when I haue gropen out
            My fathers minde, or that all these thrée dayes be gone about:
            If all things touching thée be well, word shalbe brought to thée,
            And if I kéepe not touch therin, the Lord then punish mée,
            And also if my father Saul do séeke thy blood to shed,
            I will my selfe be thy defence, till thou away be fled:
            And so the Lord kéepe and defend thée where so ere thou goes,
            And be with thée as he hath bene with Saul agaynst his foes.
            Now this request of thée I craue, which graūt thou wilt I trust,
            That I may liue my dayes in peace to make thy couenant iust,
            And when I haue ronne out my course, thē for my sake to mine
            Thou wilt not cut thy mercy off when that the sword is thine.
            No not euen when the Lord aboue thy foes hath all confounde,
            And left thée not an enemie aliue vpon the ground.
            So Ionathas renued his bond, and to the Lord he spoke,
            That Dauids foes might it reuenge if that the same were broke:
            And further sware to kepe ye bond that was betwene thē sowne,
            For Dauids body, life and soule, he loued as his owne.
            Then Ionathas to Dauid sayd, to morow doth begin
            The feast, whereas the king will spye thy place no man therin:
            Therfore go hide thée out of sight till thrée dayes passe, no more,
            Make haste & get thée to that place where thou was put before,
            Euen when the matter was in hand, and there remayne and ly
            By Ezel stone, which doth direct the way for passers by:
            And I will come & shoote thrée shafts, and they shall light beside,
            As though my marke were therabout where thou thy selfe dost hide.
            Then will I say vnto my boy go hence & tary not,
            Séeke out with spéede & gather vp the shafts that I haue shot:
            And if I call and say to him, they be on this side thée,
            Then all is well, be not afrayde to shew thy selfe to me.
            But if I say, they are beyonde, why standest thou so still,
            The Lord hath sent thée then away, and saued thée from ill.
            
               As touching this, and all that we haue spoken of before,
            Betwéene vs two the Lord shall be a witnesse euermore.
            So Dauid hid him selfe abrode when Saul the feast began,
            Where all the lords saue he alone were placed eury man.
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               Saul did note full wel and marke, yet nothing did he say,
            But thought some one or other let did kéepe him then away.
            But on the next day when he saw his place was voyde agayne,
            Of Ionathas he did demaund the cause of his refrayne.
            Where is the sonne of Isai? What is the cause (I say)
            He doth absent him from the feast both now and yesterday?
            Then Ionathas made his excuse, and sayd that he was gone
            To Bethleem towne, & askt him leaue, for that it stoode him on:
            For all his kinred there did méete an offering to present
            Unto the Lord, and therfore had his brother for him sent.
            This is the cause that doth him let to come and kéepe his place,
            Among the péeres that present be at table with your grace.
            Then Saul fell out with Ionathas at boord before them all,
            The sonne of his rebellious wife he did him name and call.
            I know that thou and Dauid both are ioyned in one frame,
            Which will be thy confusion, and eke thy mothers shame.
            For be thou sure so long as he doth liue vpon the earth,
            The kingdome thou shalt not possesse whilst yu hast any breath.
            Wherfore go séeke and fet him out where euer he be now,
            By force or any other meane, for sure his death I vow.
            What hath he done (quod Ionathas) with eyther hand or breath
            Agaynst your royall Maiestie, that you haue sworne his death?
            That said, he shooke his speare at him with discontented brayne,
            Which was a signe to Ionathas that Dauid should be slayne.
            Whose hart did bléede his friends estate and danger to cōceiue,
            No meate could downe, and therupon he rose & tooke his leaue.
            So on the morow which was now his iust appoynted day,
            He made his walke into the field and place where Dauid lay:
            And while he tried his shafts to shoot, he bad his page make hast
            and runne & marke them where they light, & gather thē as fast.
            The boy made hast, and Ionathas shot out a shaft or two
            Beyond the place were Dauid lay, as he did thinke to do:
            
               And when the boy was at the marke where Ionathas had shot,
            He called vnto him and sayd with heauy heart, God wot:
            Are not the shafts beyond thée now, make hast & stand not still,
            The boy with spede them brought to him according to his will.
            Then with his bow and furniture away the boy was sent,
            Not knowing ought of that was done, or what his master mēt.
            The boy no sooner home returnd with his artillery,
            But Dauid came and to the ground fell thrise vpon his knée.
            With wéeping eyes ech other kist, their harts did melt & bléede:
            They wept so long together both that Dauid did excéede.
            Then Ionathas to Dauid said, depart and go in peace,
            And let the bond betwene vs two stand fast and neuer cease.
            So Dauid to Abimelech Nobs priest his iorney tooke,
                  Cap. 21.
               
            
            Whose soden sight appald him much, so that for feare he shooke.
            And for to know the cause therof demaunded by and by:
            What is the matter thou art come, and hast so few with thée?
            The king (quod) he hath secret things committed to my charge,
            That none may know, wherfore I haue left all my mē at large.
            If thou hast any bread or meate, or ought vnder thy hande,
            I pray thée giue it vnto me, for here I may not stande.
            Then he for lacke of common bread did with himselfe deuise,
            To giue him of the holy loaues his hunger to suffise.
            Well yet, sayd Dauid, one thing more I shall of thée require,
            My harnesse haue I left behinde, my weapons be not here:
            If thou haue any better store I pray thée lend me one,
            The king did send me in such hast that I prouided none.
            Here is (quod he) great Golies sword, & shewd him where it lay,
            If that may haply serue your turne then spare it not I pray.
            
               
                  〈…〉
               etter sure (quod he) then that, and therefore made no stay,
            But tooke it vp, and to the king of Geth he went his way.
            Whose court did know him by and by, and therefore gaue it out
            That this was Dauid who was king of Iuda round about.
            Whose prayse the women did set forth aboue all other men,
            Ascribing vnto Saul but one, and vnto Dauid ten.
            Which saying Dauid noted well, and put them in his brest,Now Dauid feigned him selfe to be madde.
            
            But yet as one that stoode in feare least he should be opprest.
            
               Wherfore his speach he counterfeit, & played such madding fits,
            That all that saw him did beléeue that he had lost his wits.
            From mouth to beard with lothsome sight his filthy spettle ran,
            And scrauld about from dore to dore much like a Bedlem man.
            Then Achis sayd vnto his men, ye sée it is of troth,
            This man to be beside him selfe, and wots not what he doth:
            Wherfore thē haue ye brought him me, as though great nede I had
            Of frantike felowes in my sight so foolish & so mad:
            Away with him and get him hence, and trouble me no more,
            My pleasure is such frantike men come not within my dore.
            When Dauid had escapde the king by this deuised guyle,
            Within Odollams hollow caues he did him selfe a while:
            Who was no sooner there and knowen, but thither did resort
            His brethren with his fathers house, him onely to support:
            And those that were intangled then with det or els with law,
            And such as were disquieted, all such to him did draw:
            And those that so had flockt to him foure hundred were in all,
            And he as capteyne ruled them, they ready at his call.
            And from that place with all his men he gat him to Mizpa,
            
            A place among the Moabites, where he with fauour lay,
            And made request vnto the king his good will to obteine,
            That vnder his protection his parents might remayne
            A while with him for their solace, till he did sée and know
            What God would do for him and his in theyr distresse and wo.
            The king was well content, and glad that Dauid was so bold,
            And kept them all the while he lay within the fence and hold,
            Where he was warned of the Lorde euen by the Prophet Gad,
            
            That into Iuda he should go with all the men he had.
            Thē marching forth came to the wood of Hareth, where he 
                  ••
               e
                  •
               d,
            At whose approching Saul began, as one somewhat dismaid,
            Some meanes to séeke as he might best his state & honour saue,
            And leaning to his speare forthwith began such talke to haue.
            O heare ye sonnes of Iemini, what haue ye take in hande?
            Thinke you the sonne of Isai will giue you house and lande?
            Will he in office you promote great Capteins for to be,
            That ye haue thus with him conspirde, & none doth tell it me?
            
               And where as Ionathas my sonne with him hath made a bonde,
            Yet none of you will mourne with me, nor let me vnderstonde?
            Then Doeg start him vp and sayd, Abimelech the priest
            Had holpen Dauid in his néede agaynst the king most hiest.
            Wherfore the king put him to death, with all ye priests ech one,The Priests of Nob are slayne.
            
            Saue only that Abiathar to Dauid fled alone.
            Declaring how that wicked Saul his fathers blood had shed,
            For that he had sustayned him, and in his hunger fed.
            I thought no lesse, quod Dauid then, but such a thing would fall,
            That Doeg would in time accuse thy father vnto Saul:
            I am the cause of all this death and great destruction,
            Thy fathers house by me are brought to their confusion:
            Abide by me, and feare thée not where euer that I go,
            For he that séeketh for my life shall séeke for thine also.
            It so befell the Philistines their force and might had bent
                  Cap. 23.
               
            
            Agaynst the towne of Keilah, whose vtter spoyle they ment.
            Which thing when Dauid knew, he sought ye Lords good wil to know,
            Who wild him wt good corage fight, & giue ye ouerthrow.
            Then sayd his men, be we not all afrayde in Iuda héere,
            How much the more shall we to sée the Philistines appéere.
            He asked then the Lord agayne, who did him vnderstand
            He should go downe, for he would giue them all into his hand.
            So Dauid with his crue of men made hast vnto the towne,
            And fought agaynst the Philistines till he had bet them downe,
            And spoyled them of all their goods, and eury thing they had,Dauid saued the towne of Keilah.
            
            And saued the inhabitants, and made the people glad.
            Of this the king was certified, and farther to him tolde,
            How Dauid with his bond of men tooke Keilah for his holde.
            Whereat the king did much reioyce, and made his reckning so,
            That God had now deliuerd vp to him his mortall fo,
            For that he was within a towne that was of such a strength
            To hold him fast, so that he might dispatch him at the length:
            And so prepared him an hoast of warlike men and stoute,
            To take his way to Keilah the towne to siege about.
            Now Dauid béeing ware of all the mischiefe Saul had wrought,
            Began to call vnto the Lord, and thus he him besought.
            
               O Lord the God of Israel thy seruant heares report,
            That Saul with might and power intends to Keilah to resort,
            The same (for my sake) to destroy: good Lord I aske of thée,
            Will they that dwell in Keilah to Saul deliuer me?
            Will he come downe, as it is sayd, good Lord thy seruaunt tell?
            He will (quod he) come downe and bring the hoast of Israel.
            
            But will the men of Keilah deceiue both me and all?
            Yea (sayd the Lord) they will of truth betray thée vnto Saul.
            
            Then Dauid out of Keilah departed by and by,
            And sought abrode to finde a place where he might safely ly.
            At last within the wilds of Ziph he got a place, and lay,
            Where Saul for him did hunt about, but yet he mist his pray.
            
               The thirde profe of Ionathas fidelitie.As Dauid lay with fearefull heart within the wildernes,
            Came Ionathas to comfort him in his great heauynes.
            Feare not (quod he) in any thing, nor trouble not thy minde,
            My fathers hande, assure thy selfe, thy presence shall not finde.
            Thou shalt be king of Israel, and I next after thée,
            The which my father knoweth well, and oft hath tolde it me.
            And so the band was once agayne renued on their partes,
            Then ech of other tooke his leaue with heauy carefull hearts.
            Now while that Dauid lay in Ziph, the Ziphits tolde to Saul,
            
            How that both he & eke his men lay in the thicket all.
            Graund mercies (said ye king) my friends, but this you must me graūt,
            If all be true he lacks no shifts, and therfore marke his haunt:
            And search me out his lurking dens the wildernes about,
            And him with well appoynted men I minde to ferrit out.
            But Dauid béeing ware of this preuented all his foes,
            And so vnto the wildernes of Maon forth he goes.
            Where he had not bene very long or that he heard it sayde,
            How Saul was comming after him, or whom he was afrayde:
            And gat him vp vnto the rocke to kéepe him out of sight,
            The king pursuing him at hand with his great power & might:
            So much that they were almost met and of ech others seéene,
            But that it so fell out by chaunce a mount was them betwéene:
            Which Saul had almost compassed with armed men about,
            That neither he nor yet his men could any way get out.
            
               Thus taking thought how to escape his cruell enemie,
            The Lord prepared present helpe in his extremitie.
            Word came the king should home returne with al the spéede he could,
            The Philistines were in his realme and made what spoyle they would.
            Then Saul left of to persecute, & Dauid gat him thence,
            To wildernes of Engadi, a place of sure defence.
            When Saul was come from folowing the Philistines agayne,
                  Cap. 24.
               
            
            And was informed credibly where Dauid did remayne,
            He tooke thrée thousand chosen men and went to Engadi,
            
            To séeke out Dauid and his men which lay in rocke on hye.
            But by the way it fortuned the king to steppe aside
            Into a caue to ease him selfe, which was both large and wide:
            Where in the inward parts therof lay Dauid and his bande:
            Behold (sayd they) thine enemie is now within thy hande:
            According as the Lord did say and promise long ago,
            That he would giue him vnto thée, thy will with him to do.
            Then Dauid rose with stealing steps and got behinde the king,
            And from his garment cut a lap, and did none other thing.
            This béeing done forthwith he felt a pricke of conscience,
            As though agaynst his lord and king he had made some offence.
            The Lorde (quod he vnto his men) defend me from this thing,
            And graunt that I lay not my hande on Gods annoynted king.
            As truely as the Lord doth liue, till God his time hath sent,
            I will not lay my hand on him, nor yet thereto consent.
            So stopped he away his men from doing hurt to Saul,
            
            And would not suffer ought of them vpon the king to fall.
            When Saul was gone out of the caue, then Dauid did not slack,
            But went and cryed after him, whereat the king lookt back.
            To whom with all obedience, as subiects ought to do,
            He stouped downe vnto the ground and spake him thus vnto.
            My lord and king what credite hath the words of them that say,
            How Dauid goeth about thy hurt in all that ere he may.
            Behold this day thine eyes haue séene how yt the Lord thée gaue
            Into my hands, if that I would, when thou wast in the caue.
            Some bad me kill thée out of hande, but yet I did refrayne,
            And would not lay my hands on him who in ye Lord did reigne.
            
               Behold and sée within my hand a piece of thy coate lap,
            I might as well haue killed thée when this to thée did hap:
            Therfore thou mayst consider well no wickednes in me,
            And that I neuer in my life committed fault to thée:
            And yet thou huntest after me, away my soule to take,
            The Lord be iudge betwene vs both, my venger him I make.
            But God forbid agaynst my lord that I should once but thinke,
            In subiects hearts such wickednes ought neuer for to sinke.
            Then after whom art thou come out to hunt so cruelly,
            A dogge that hath no life in him, or eke a séely flye?
            The Lord which is a righteous God be iudge & plead my cause,
            And kéepe me from all violence that I offende no lawes.
            
               The great gentlenes of Dauid compelled Saul his enemy to yéelde.What voice (quod Saul) is this that so is come vnto mine eares?
            Ist thine my sonne? and therwithall he poured forth his teares:
            Thy goodnes farre surpasseth mine, thou hast done good for ill,
            And thou hast put my lot aside whom thou mights easily kill:
            For who is he that of his foe that vauntage hath to slay,
            And yet will suffer him vntoucht in peace to go his way?
            Wherfore the Lord reward it thée, and make thée recompence,
            For that thou suffredst none at all to do me violence.
            I know full well, and do confesse the kingdome of this lande
            Shall after my decease be thine, and come into thy hande:
            And that I may make sure account of thy good will to mée,
            Sweare that my name & that my séede shall not be hurt by thée.
            Then Dauid made a bond with him to kéepe it constantly,
            And so departed to an holde from Saul his enemie.
            
               
                  Cap. 25.
               And after that he went vnto the forrest of Pharan,
            
            Where Nabal his abiding had, a riche and welthy man:
            Who had a thousand gotes by tale, & eke thrée thousande shéepe,
            Which were defended all by him and those that did them kéepe:
            For all the while those shepheards lay by Dauid thereabout,
            They mist no goods, nor had no harme by Dauid nor his route.
            Wherfore he béeing in distresse and want of things to eate,
            Did send to Nabal, shearing shéepe, for vittels to intreate.
            
               Of the churlish parte of Nabal.Who then refused churlishly to helpe him at his néede,
            And moued Dauids patience agaynst him to procéede.
            
               Intending to destroy his house, his cattell shéepe and all,
            And for to leaue not one aliue to pisse agaynst the wall,
            Had it not béene that Nabals wife Abigael by name,
            With wisdome and discretion had well appeasd the same.
            In whom he blessed God that day that her to him had sent,
            To kepe him from his owne reuenge, & from the thing he ment.
            Which woman was of such a grace, and of so pure a life,
            That Dauid after Nabals death did take her to his wife:
            And tooke an other of the stocke of Israel also,
            For Saul vpon one Psaltiel his Michol did vestow.
            When Dauid had bene after this among the Ziphits spid,Cap. 26.
            
            They went to Saul and made report where he and his were hid.
            And thervpon he tooke to him thrée thousand of his men,
            And went vnto the wildernes to séeke for Dauid then.
            And pitched vp his tents vpon the hill of Achila,
            
            Which lieth ouer Iesimon hard by the common way.
            Then Dauid sent about his spies to know the certayntie,
            If that the king were come or no with such a companie.
            The thing now being vnto him affirmed to be true,
            He made him selfe a priuy spye and went the hoast to viewe.
            Beholding well his Lord and king and Abner how they lay,
            With all the people round about, so gat him soone away:
            And asked both Abimelech and eke Abisai,
            
            Who would into the hoast of Saul go with him priuily.
            
               Abisai offred him selfe and preased forth in sight,
            So went they forth as secretly as they could go by night.
            Into the hoast when they had put them selues in hazarde déepe,
            Behold the king with all the rest lay hard and fast asléepe.
            Then sayd to him Abisai, God hath deliuerd now
            Thine enemie into thy hands in forme as thou séest how.
            Giue leaue therefore that I may giue but one stroke with my speare.
            And he shall neuer after this put thée in any feare.
            No God forbid (sayd Dauid then) for who can more or lesseOf Dauids faythfulnes to Saul.
            
            Lay hand vpon the Lords anoynt, and be therein giltlesse.
            As truely as the Lord doth liue the Lord shall doo his will,
            In battell or by other meanes, before I doo him kill.
            
               The Lord me kéepe both now and ay my hand I neuer moue
            Against the Lords annoynted king, whom I am bound to loue.
            Then Dauid fayre and softly went till he came vnto Saul,
            
            And tooke his speare and water cruse, and went away withall.
            No man then saw ne marked it, ne tooke thereof no kéepe,
            For God had cast vpon them all a dead and heauy sléepe.
            Then Dauid gat him to an hill, where he aloude did call
            Unto the people in the hoast, and Abner most of all.
            O Abner Abner hearst thou not howe I do call to thée.
            Whose that (quod he) that so doth cry vnto the king and me?
            O Abner art not thou a man most chiefe in gouerning,
            Why hast thou then no better kept this night thy lorde & king?
            For one there was that entred in this night thy lorde to slay,
            Whose enterprise by weapon strong thou didst not séeke to stay.
            In this ye haue offended all, and worthy are to dye,
            In that ye haue not kept your Lorde with more securitie.
            Beholde & sée your masters speare which at his head did stande,
            And eke the cruse of water both, they are now in my hande.
            My son (quod Saul) is this thy voyce that cōmeth to mine eare?
            It is thy seruauntes voyce (said he) that liueth in great feare.
            Why doth my lorde thus persecute his seruaunt so at large,
            In whom there can no fault be found him iustly for to charge?
            If that the Lorde hath stirred thée to worke me all this smart,
            Then let him smell a sacrifice out of a patient hart.
            But if from wicked men do come the cause of this discorde,
            Then they and their deuises be accurst before the Lorde.
            For they haue wronged me and séeke to dispossesse in fine,
            Of that which in my Lorde my God is due to me and mine.
            Séeke not therfore to suck my blood, thou séekest but a flye,
            As he that séekes the séely birde to murder cruelly.
            Then Saul confessed his offence and wrong that he had done,
            Desiring Dauid to returne, and called him his sonne:
            And said he would him hurt no more, nor vse extremities,
            Because his life that night had bene so pretious in his eyes.
            And that with griefe he felt remorse of folly did him touch,
            And played the foole, and in his wayes had erred very much.
            
               But Dauid knowing Saul to haue his promise broke before,
            Would not returne, his sugred words to credite any more.
            But bad the king behold his speare, which he helde vp full trim,
            And wild him send and it should be deliuered vnto him.
            The Lord my God reward ech man, and eury man preserue,
            As his vpright and honest déedes and fayth shall best deserue.
            For though the Lord deliuered thée into my hands this day,
            Yet on the Lords annoynted king my hand I would not lay.
            As I haue alwayes pitied thée, and neuer bene thy foe,
            Euen so the Lord be mercifull to me in all my woe.
            Then he departing to him selfe complayned inwardly,
            And said, no doubt the day will come that he will murther me:
            And I no better way can finde this mischiefe to withstande,
            Then flye vnto the Philistines for succour in their lande.
            So he from Ziph to Geth that time his iourney did addresse,
            To make his suite to Achis king for helpe in this distresse.
            Where Dauid with his company and his two comely wiues,
            Did place thē selues, & minded there to passe & spend their liues.
            But yet misliking to remayne in Geth that Citie great,
            Some countrey place for to possesse he did the king intreate.
            At whose request he gaue to him the towne of Zikleg then,
            Whereto he went and dwelled there, both he and all his men.
            Which towne had euermore the name and counted to perteine,
            Unto the kings that wonted were in Iuda for to reigne.
            He and his men had there remaynd not fully halfe a yere,
            When he played rex, and ouerranne the countrey eury where.
            The Gersurites, Amalekites, the Gersites did he driue
            Out of the lande, and slue the rest, not leauing one aliue.
            And kept them so they could not passe to Geth no maner way,
            To tell the king how that he did them vse from day to day.
            And often béeing lade with spoyles to Geth he would thē bring,
            And make presentmēt of ye same in presence of ye king.
            Who musing much frō whence such store of spoyles & prayes he brought,
            Would aske what country he had roud, & for ye same had sought.
            Among the Iewes, and such (quod he) as Southwardly are set,
            I haue bestowd my selfe the spoyles and booties for to get.
            
               Thus making Achiz to beléeue he hated Israel,
            
            Became his man, and was retaynd with him for aye to dwell.
            
               Cap. 28.It so befell the Philistines to battell did addresse
            Them selues against the Israelites, and sought them to oppresse.
            Then Achis vnto Dauid sayd, thou shalt go forth with me
            Unto the battell, thou and all the men that are with thée.
            If thou (sayd he vnto the king) be pleased I shall go,
            Then shalt thou sée and well perceyue what I thy man can do.
            But when the lords of Philistines the Hebrewes saw a far,
            Which came behind wt 
               Achis men, demaunded what they war?
            Tis Dauid, said the king, that serud king Saul in Iewish ground,
            Who I haue long retaynd with me, and very faithfull found.
            The lords gan frowne & much mislike, & saide he should not go,
            least he in fight would giue the slip and be their mortall fo.
            For why? he could deuise no way in all the world so good
            
               Sauls loue to win, as to embrue his weapon in their blood.
            
               Cap. 29.Is not this he whose fame they sang in daunces heretofore,
            Ascribing somewhat vnto Saul, but vnto him much more.
            Then Achis called Dauid forth, and sayd to him his minde,
            As truely as the Lord doth liue I found thée euer kinde:
            So honestly thou hast thy selfe behaued aye with mée,
            That from the first day hitherto I can not burden thée.
            But so it is, those lords of mine such fauour do not beare
            As I would wish they did to thée, but somewhat stande in feare.
            Wherfore our pleasure is thou shalt returne with all thy men,
            And take thine ease till we appoynt thy seruice where & when.
            What haue I done (quod he agayne) what matter canst thou bring,
            That I may not to battell go to ayde my lord & king?
            Of truth (sayd he) I haue thée tried to be a man vpright,
            And as an Angell of the Lord I take thée in my sight.
            Yet since my Nobles towards thée do beare a burning harte,
            A greater mischiefe to preuent we will that thou depart.
            Then Dauid and his men with spéede vnto his home returnd,
            And found what hauock there was made, & al their citie burnd,
            The Amalekites had rushed in of malice and of spite,
            And all the people in the towne by force had taken quite.
            
               When Dauid saw their cruell spoyles and fury to be such,
            Their wiues and children led away, it gréeud him very much.
            And being then it doubtfull plight what he might best deuise,
            For that the people ready were agaynst him for to rise,
            And séeke to stone him vnto death, vnto the Lorde he drue,
            To know if that his pleasure was he should those men pursue.
            Yea (sayd the Lord) pursue them all, and make no longer stay,
            Make spéede, thou shalt them ouertake and get agayne the pray.
            So in pursuing after them he chaunced for to finde
            A certayne sicke Aegyptian left in the field behinde,
            Who béeing well examined did vtter all he knew,
            And told him when and where he might Thamalekites pursue.
            And brought him iust vnto ye place where they were laid along,
            Disperst abrode and making there, with dauncing & with song.
            Then Dauid did bestirre himselfe, and ere the morning light
            He slew them all, saue that a few escaped in the flight:
            And did recouer all his goods, his people eurychone,
            His men, their wiues and children al, so that there lacked none:
            Beside the spoyles that they had got by this their bloody fall,
            Whereby and that abundantly they were enriched all.
            Thus then returnd he gaue rewards, and sent about his giftes,
            To all his friends that him reléeud when he was put to shiftes.
            This victorie vpon his foes when Dauid had obtaynd,
                  2. Regum. Cap. 1.
               
            
            To Zikleg he him selfe retirde, and there two dayes remaynd.
            Behold to him the third day came one from the hoast of Saul
            
            With mourning wéede, and at his foote before him then did fall.
            The king forthwith askt what he was, & bad his message tell?
            I am (quod he) escaped from the hoast of Israel.
            
            What newes (quod he) are stirring there, & how do matters go?
            Both Saul (sayd he) and Ionathas are slayne with many mo.
            How art thou sure that Saul (quod he) and Ionathas are slayne?
            Uouchsafe (sayd he) O king to heare, & I will make it playne.
            As I by chaunce vnto the mount of Gilbo tooke my way,
            With mazed minde I found king Saul vpon his speare to stay:
            Then he demaunding who I was, and I confessing playne,Here Saul is slayne.
            
            Besought me to dispatch his life, and rid him out of payne.
            
               And thervpon I slew him straight, and toke away with me
            His crowne, his bracelet on his arme, which I haue brought to thée.
            Then Dauid rent & tore his clothes, both he & all his men,
            For sorow that the Israelites had such misfortune then.
            He did abstayne from meate that day, & mourned for king Saul
            
            And Ionathas, that now had lost their liues their men and all.
            Then Dauid did cōmaund the man yt had these tidings brought,
            To tell what countrey man he was, and to dissemble nought.
            I am my soueraigne Lord (quod he) as one to Israel sworne,
            And yet of truth an Amalekite in countrey bred and borne.
            How is it then (quod he agayne) thou wast not sore afrayde
            To kill the Lords annoynted king as thou thy selfe hast sayde?
            Then Dauid gaue his men a charge to rid him out of breath,
            For that this haynous fact of his deserueth iustly death.
            For he had with his mouth confest that he the king had slayne,
            Wherfore of right blood asked blood to be reuengd agayne.
            This done the kings surpassing griefe did not at all relent,
            But did for Saul and Ionathas thus bitterly lament.
            O noble king of Israel thus murthred on the mount,
            Thy mighty capteins ouerthrowē of whō thou madest accoūt.
            Let neither Gath nor Askalon be tolde this heauy chaunce,
            Lest that ye daughters of ye heathē triumph with song & daunce.
            On you ye mountaynes Gilboa your lord and king is slayne,
            Upon your fields be no increase for lacke of dew and rayne.
            The shields of all the mighty men are cast downe for a spoyle,
            The shield of Saul, as though he had not ben annoint with oyle.
            The bow of Ionathas my frieud it neuer turned backe,
            Nor yet the sword of Saul my lord of pray did neuer lacke.
            How louely were they in their liues, how pleasant to behold,
            And in their deathes they neuer were deuided nor vnfold.
            More swifter then the Eagles foule to flye vpon their pray,
            And stronger then the Lions were to beare the spoyle away.
            Ye daughters now of Israel bewayle your Lord king Saul,
            
            Who clothed you with scarlet robes, with purple, & with paul.
            His power, his might, his strength, his life, & all is gone you sée:
            O Ionathas my dearest friend my hart doth bléede for thée.
            
               Thy friendly loue and fayth to me so wonderfull it was,
            That all the loue that women haue it did surmount and passe.
            O Lord how are the mightie men orethrowen in Israel,
            
            Their warly weapons all destroyde that pitie is to tell.
            When Dauid had lament the death of Saul and Ionathas,
               Cap. 2.
            
            He went and asked of the Lord his pleasure what it was:
            Demaunding whether that he should to any Citie go,
            Or place that were within the lande of Iuda, yea or no.
            The Lord said vnto him, go vp. And whither Lord, quod he?
            To Hebron (sayd the Lord agayne) this answere take of me.
            Then Dauid went with his two wiues, the one a Iezralite,
            
            The other Nabals wife that was the welthy Carmalite.
            
            He tooke the men also with him that of his troubles felt,
            Who with their housholds al within ye towne of Hebron dwelt.
            Then came the men of Iuda forth to him with one accorde,
            And did annoynt him for to be their king and soueraigne lorde:
            And told him of the faithfulnes of Iabes done of late,
            In burying Saul as did become a prince of high estate.
            Then Dauid sent Ambassadours the Iabites to commende,
            For their great loue and kindnes shewd to Saul at his last ende.
            The Lord (quod he) do blesse you all with mercy for your fact,
            And I will do the like to you for this your godly act.
            Therfore now let your hands be strong, & turne your hearts to me,
            For Saul is dead, & Iuda hath me chose their king to be.
            So Iuda onely claue to him, the rest of Israel
            
            To Isboseth the sonne of Saul they stacke to him aswell.
            Now Dauid Ioab did appoynt his generall to bée,
            And Isboseth did Abner choose his men to ouersée.
            The wars betwéene these houses two increased more & more,
                  Cap. 3.
               
            
            But Dauid had the stronger hande, the other weakned sore.
            For Abner went from Isboseth vpon displeasure take,
            And with king Dauid secretly a faythfull bande did make:
            And Michol he brought home agayne, the kings beloued wife,
            Whom Psaltiel did neuer touche by way of spotted life.
            But or he could the rest all bring about effectually,
            He was by Ioab murdered, and that most Iudasly.
            
               Which sore agréeued Dauids heart, as one that giltles was
            Of Ioabs shamefull wicked act which he had brought to passe.
            Wherfore to Ioab then he wisht, that for his small regard
            Both blood and plagues on him & his might fal for his rewarde.
            And that he should go with the rest & bring the coarse to graue,
            In sackcloth & in mourning wede, he straite cōmandemēt gaue.
            Him selfe all full of heauynes, with sad and heauy chéere,
            Came after Abner as he went, euen next vnto the béere.
            And as they layd him in the graue according in Hebron,
            
            The king and people all they wept to sée the earth put on.
            But Dauid mourned most of all since treason did him kill,
            And knowing that by natures course he might haue liued still.
            Now when the people came to feast, as they were wont to do
            At burials, the king to eate they could not bring vnto.
            By that they knew that Abners death the king had neuer ment,
            But Ioabs grudge did worke it out without the kings consent.
            
               Cap. 4.It so befell that Baana and Rechab sought the way,
            How they their lord king Isboseth might craftely betray.
            The meane was this, they faynd thē selues gret marchants for to bée,
            Came to ye pallace of the king his corne & grayne to sée:
            
               Here Isboseth is slaine trayterously.Where they by chaunce found him a sléepe, & slue him as he lay
            Upon his bed, & brought from thence his head with them away
            To Hebron, where king Dauid was, and sayd, beholde and sée,
            Here is the head of Isboseth thy mortall enemie.
            For through the might that god hath giuen in working of this déede,
            Thou art auenged both of Saul & also of his séede.
            Then Dauid sayd vnto the men that brought to him the head,
            As truely as the Lorde doth liue ye are as good as dead.
            As you do now so one did once Sauls death to me report,
            And made account such newes as those should please me in like sort,
            And looked for some great reward for ye good newes he brought,
            But al the matter went awry agaynst his meane and thought:
            For he was slayne and put to death for his most wicked prank,
            And so he lost both life and all his labour and his thanke.
            So shall the wickednes of you which haue the righteous slayne
            Upon his bed, be recompencd with blood for blood agayne.
            
               Then hauing féete and hands cut off for eury man to sée,
            Were hanged ouer Hebrons poole as other felons be.
            As for the head of Isboseth the kings good pleasure wilde
            It should in Hebron be entombd, with Abner that was kilde.
            Then came the Tribes of Israel to Dauid flockingly,
                  Cap. 5. Dauid is annoynted king.
            
            As to their king and soueraigne lord, with him to liue and dye.
            So béeing now the lorde and king of all the Israelites,
            
            He gat him to Ierusalem, and to the Iebusites:
            Who bragging much vpon their hold of Sion where they dwelt,
            By force of armes he wanne the same, as many of them felt.
            The Philistines now hearing tell of Dauids power and might,
            Came to the vale of Raphaim agaynst him for to fight.
            Who then demaunded of the Lorde to know his will therein,
            And whether that the Philistins or he should honour win.
            Go vp (sayd God) and linger not while they be in thy lande,
            For I assuredly will giue them all into thy hande.
            So Dauid went him forth and came to Baal Perazim,
            
            Where that he smote the Philistines as God had said to him.
            Then gan he say, O Lorde my God thou hast mine enemies all
            Deuided them, as waters do deuide them when they fall.
            The Philistines for hast do leaue their Idols all behinde,
            And Dauid and his men do burne as many as they finde.
            Yet once agayne the Philistines came forth to fight with him,
            And brought their armie whole into the vale of Raphaim.
            
            Now compasse thē behinde (said God) & watch thē well, & when
            They come against the Mulbery trées the onset giue you then.
            So Dauid then obeying God a conquest did obteine,
            From Geba vnto Gazer towne the Philistines were slayne.
            Soone after this the king prepard to fet the Arke of God,
                  Cap. 6.
               
            
            With thirty thousand chosen men of Israel and od.
            And so out of Ierusalem he went his men with him,
            To set and bring away the Arke from Kiriath Iarim.
            
            And that he set with carefull héede vpon a Charret new,
            And from Abinadab his house he decently it drew.
            Two of his sonnes draue forth the same, Vza and Ahio,
            
            The one before, thother behinde the Chariot did go.
            
               The king and all the Israelites made melody, and played
            Triumphantly before the Lorde as they the Arke conuayed.
            But when the king did sée the hande of God on Vza light,
            And strike him dead, because he toucht the Arke yt wēt not right,
            He was aferd, and durst not séeme to driue it as before,
            But left it Edom for to kéepe till he had learned more,
            Where it remaynd about thrée months, wherby both him & his
            The Lord of hoasts with great increase abundantly did blis.
            Then was it tolde to Dauid how the Lord had Edom blest
            And all his house, since that the Arke of God had bene his gest.
            Then Dauid went and brought the Arke of God frō him away,
            With all the triumph and the ioy that could be had that day.
            For as the Leuites bare the Arke and had sixe paces gone,
            An Oxe and eke a fatted beast was offred vp alone.
            And Dauid daunst before the Arke as it was driuen there,
            And had a linnen Ephod on vpon his other gere.
            So all the house of Israel brought forth the Arke with shoute,
            And trompet blowing as they went, the noyse rang all about.
            
               Michol despiseth Dauid for dauncing before the Arke.But when as Michol Dauids wife saw him so daunce & spring,
            She grew in great disdayne therat, and did mislike the thing.
            Yet notwithstanding when the Arke was setled in his place,
            He made his offrings to the Lord of mercy, peace and grace.
            Which béeing done and finished, the people he did blesse,
            And to them all of banquet meate dealt something more or lesse.
            Then he dismissing all the folke assembled in that place,
            Returned home vnto his house to blesse it in like case.
            Wher Michol méeting him could not forbeare, but thus did say,
            Good God how glorious was the king of Israel this day,
            Which séemed in thy maidens eyes vncouered like a sot,
            Wherby of them and other mo great hatred thou hast got.
            It was before the Lord (quod he) that I did daunce and sing,
            Who ouerthrew thy father Saul and chose me to be king,
            And made me ruler ouer all the people Israel,
            
            Reiecting Saul and all his house, as thou thy selfe canst tell.
            And yet if my humilitie be grieuous in thy sight,
            I will be méeke in mine owne eyes before the Lord of might,
            
               And of the mayden seruauntes here which thou hast spoken of,
            I shall be had in honour great, when they at thée shall skoffe.Cap. 7.
            
            When God had setled Dauids raigne, and him & his had blest,
            And with all Princes rounde about had giuen him peace & rest,
            Gods glory to aduaunce he sought, and bended all his heart,
            And to the Prophet Nathan then his minde he did impart.
            Behold (quod he) how that my house is buylt with Cedre trées,
            And yet the Arke hath nothing els but curteins as thou sées.
            The Prophet sayd, do what thou hast determined to do,
            For God which hath respect to thée will set his hande thereto.
            Thus Nathan spake before he knew what Gods good pleasure was,
            And did receiue a coūtermaund before ye night did passe,
            That wild him go vnto the king and do him vnderstand,
            That Salomon should buyld Gods house & he not takt in hand.
            When Dauid béeing certified what God him selfe did say,
            He sat him downe before the Arke and thus began to pray.
            O Lord my God what great account of me and mine hast thou,Dauids prayer.
            
            That to such Royall dignitie hast me exalted now?
            And yet O Lord I know thou art of such a power and might,
            That greater things to bring to passe is nothing in thy sight.
            Thou spakest of thy seruaunts house a great long while ago,
            Which vnto men doth not perteine, but vnto thée I know.
            To kéepe thy word & promise sure, and make it to be knowne,
            Not for thy seruaunt Dauids sake (O Lord) but for thine owne.
            Thou art (O Lord) the onely God that euermore hast bene,
            None comparable to thy selfe was euer heard or séene.
            And what one people in the earth or nation who can tell,
            Is better and beloued more of thée then Israel?
            
            Thou wentest and redéemedst them out of captiuitie,
            That they might magnisie thy name and make it great to bée.
            With mightie signes & tokens out of Egypt thou hast brought,
            Thy people from the nations and from their Gods of nought.
            Thou hast elect and chosen them to be thy people ay,
            Aud art become their onely God to serue thée and obay.
            And now (O Lord) the word thou hast of me thy seruant spoke,
            And of his house, make thou it good, let not the same be broke.
            
               So shall thy name be magnified, and eury man shall say,
            The Lord of hoastes he is the God of Israel for ay.
            For thou Lord God of Israel hast thus reueald to me,
            And said, I will now buyld thy house and make it sure to be.
            And therfore hath thy seruaunt found now in his heart to pray
            this simple prayer vnto thée to be my helpe alway.
            Let all thy words therefore be true that thou thy seruaunt told,
            And kéepe thy promise vnto him which thou hast made of old.
            And let it please thée for to blesse thy seruants house with grace,
            That it for euer may abide and stande before thy face.
            For thou my God hast spoken it, let it be done therfore,
            That thou thy seruaunt Dauids house do blesse for euermore.
            
               
                  Cap. 8. The victorie that God gaue to Dauid ouer the Philistines and other straunge nations.Now after this the Philistines he vanquished by strength,
            And thereby rid all Israel from bondage at the length.
            He smote also the Moabites, and meate them with a line,
            And cast them flat vpon the ground, and made the rest incline.
            And being thus subdued to him, to him they tribute payed,
            In token that they were his men his Maiestie to ayde.
            He fought with Hadarezers hoast, and made a number fall
            As well of horsemen as on foote, beside his Charrets all.
            The Syrians which ayded him and came his parte to take,
            Of two and twenty thousande men a slaughter did he make.
            Thus Dauid by the might of God did conquer all the lande,
            So mercifull was God to him in all he tooke in hande.
            Now after these great victories the king of Hamath sent
            His sonne to Dauid with great gifts, therwith him to present:
            For that he had Hadarezer his enemie subdued,
            Who oftentimes with him and his had open warre renued.
            As for the spoyles that he did get of siluer, golde, or brasse,
            He gaue it to the house of God what euer thing it was.
            Thus Dauid hauing got a name through honor he had wonne,
            Sat in his seate, and iudged right to eury mothers sonne.
            And calling now to memory the bond that he did make
            With Ionathas the sonne of Saul, thus openly he spake.
            
               
                  Cap. 9.
               Doth any yet remayne (quod he) of all the house of Saul,
            
            That I for Ionathas his sake may him to honour call?
            
               One Ziba then his seruaunt old was brought vnto the king,The restoring of Miphiboseth the sonne of Ionathas.
            
            That he by talke might sée what he could say to eury thing.
            Of whom the king demaunded then if Ziba were his name?
            Yea sir (quod he) thy seruant is the selfe and very same.
            Is there (quod he) yet any left of Saul his line or blood
            To whom I may shew mercy too, or do him any good?
            Yea, Ionathas (quod he) hath yet a sonne aliue I know,
            But he is lame vpon his féete so that he can not go.
            And where is he (quod Dauid then, hide not if thou canst tell?
            He is (quod he) in Machirs house the sonne of Amiel.
            
            Now then whē that Miphiboseth was brought to Dauids sight,
            He fell to ground, and so did make such reuerence as he might.
            Then Dauid said, Miphiboseth be not afrayde of me,
            For I will for thy fathers sake be mercifull to thée.
            Thou shalt enioy thy fathers lands that did to Saul perteine,
            And at my boord thy foode to eate I will thée enterteine.
            
               Miphiboseth fell downe and said, what is thy seruaunt Lorde,
            That thou wilt looke on such a dogge, and set him at thy borde?
            Then Dauid said to Ziba thus: the lands and rents of Saul
            
            Unto thy masters sonne I giue, both vineyard, fieldes and all.
            Therfore thou & the men with thée do husband wel the ground,
            That foode for Micahs maintenance with plentie may be found.Micah was Miphiboseths sonne.
            
            For now thy lord Miphiboseth shall eate his bread with me,
            As though he were one of my sonnes, and be no charge to thée.
            Now after this it so befell king Ammon for to dye,Cap. 10.
            
            A friend of Dauids in distresse that shewd him curtesye.
            Wherfore he thought it reason good to recompence his sonne,
            In this respect for that he had his raigne but new begonne:
            And therevpon an Embassy to this yong king he sent
            To comfort him in heauynes, and for no worse intent.
            His Lords and his Nobilitie suspected Dauids men,
            And therfore came vnto the king and said vnto him then:
            What? dost thou thinke that Dauid doth intend to thée none ill,
            Or to thy father that he doth this honour of good will?
            His meaning is thy land & strength to search with priuy spies,
            And thervpon with might and maine thy kingdome to surprise.
            
               The king gaue credite to their talke and thought it verely,
            And therevpon deuised how to worke them villany.
            And so for spite and open shame to Dauid and his land,
            The one halfe of their beards he shaues, & lets the other stand,
            And did their garments all to cut accordingly with tooles
            Hard to the buttocks of the men, and sent them home like fooles.
            When Dauid heard this misdemeane he willed some to go
            And méete his mē, who were ashamd that any should thē know.
            So they abode at Iericho vntill their beards were growen,
            And then returning home agayne it was no farther knowen.
            This spite could Dauid not digest for ought that they could doo,
            But sought reuenge by open warre and did performe it too.
            
               
                  Cap. 11.
               The next yere Zibba to besiege he sent his souldiours prest,
            But he within Ierusalem abode and tooke his rest.
            
               Dauid committeth adultery and homicide.It chaunced so that on a time with some delightfull sightes,
            He walkt vpon his house aboue to recreate his sprites:
            Where he a passing goodly wight espied from aboue,
            As she was bathing of her selfe, with whom he fell in loue.
            And thervpon he sent his man and bad him word to bring
            What was her name, whose wife she was, & eury other thing.
            Word was returnde twas Bethsabe and one Vrias wife,
            Who in the warfares of his grace was ventring of his life.
            He sent for her, and when she came his heart was so inflamd,
            With her to ioyne in filthynes he nothing was ashamd.
            And she returning to her house by Dauid thus defilde,
            Did send him word of certentie howe that she was with childe.
            Then Dauid to auoyde the crime which he apparant saw,
            Deuised meanes her to defende from rigour of the law.
            To Ioab straight he did dispatche a post, and bad him tell
            That he should send Vrias home, to make the matter well.
            And when Vrias came before the presence of the king,
            And had discoursed of the warres and eury other thing,
            The king did will him to go home and with his wife to rest,
            To washe his féete and recreate him selfe as he thought best.
            
               Vrias tooke his leaue and home as Dauid thought he went,
            Who for his seruice in the warres a recompence him sent.
            
               But yet in déede Vrias did not moue one foote away,
            But for that night before his gates vpon the grounde did stay.
            Which thing when Dauid knew he askt what was the cause, & why
            He went not home vnto ye house, & with his wife did ly,
            And rest him there a while with her and eke his friends among,
            Untill he had refresht him selfe vpon his iourney long?
            
               Vrias said, our soueraigne Lord, the Arke of Israel,
            
            The tribes of Iuda, they also in tentes and boothes do dwell.
            My Capteine Ioab with his men in open fieldes they lye,
            Abiding hard aduentures there in wether wet and drye.
            And shall I now go to my house there for to eate and drinke,
            And haue the pleasure of my wife? I did it neuer thinke.
            I make an oth euen by thy life, and by thy soule, O king,
            So long the Arke doth lye abrode I will not do this thing.
            Then Dauid wild he should remayne and tary one day mo,
            And on the morow should haue leaue for to depart and go.
            That night he made Vrias dronke, him to prouoke thereby
            To haue a minde vnto his wife, and with her for to ly.
            But as before, so now agayne vpon the grounde he lay,
            And would not go vnto his house what euer he did say.
            Upon the morow Dauid wrote to Ioab his intent,
            Which lettor sealed surely vp he by Vrias sent:
            The summe wherof was onely this, he should Vrias trayne
            Unto some péece of seruice there where that he might be slayne.
            Which thing of Ioab béeing done and Dauid thereof tolde,
            He thought him selfe now safe inough & that he might be bolde.
            Then sent he for the woman home, and she became his wife,
            But God was very sore displeasd with this his sinfull life.
            Now Dauid béeing wrapt in sinne the Lord his Prophet sent,
                  Cap. 12. Dauid is reproued for his adultery and homicide.
            
            Who did propose this parable to make him to repent.
            Two men (quod he) vpon a time within one towne did dwell,
            The one but poore, the other God had blessed very well.
            The rich man had excéeding store of cattell, oxe, and shéepe,
            The poore man had in all the world but one poore lamb to kéepe,
            Which he had fostred & brought vp with him from day to day,
            Till it grew vp and with his babes gan pleasantly to play.
            
               It eate and dranke with him at home, and in his bosome slept,
            And as a daughter deare to him he causde it to be kept.
            Unto the rich mans house there came a straunger as a gest,
            Of all his shéepe he would not let so much as one be drest:
            But tooke the poore mans lambe away, who had no mo but one,
            And so prepard it for his gest, and let his owne alone.
            The king was moued with this talke, and grew in choler than,
            And thought no payne or punishment to much for suche a man.
            And made an oth that vnreuengd that man should neuer go,
            But should fourefold repay to him whom he had wronged so.
            Thou art (said he) the very man, euen thou thy selfe art he,
            The Lord therfore hath bid me come and say thus much to thée.
            He made thée king of Israel, and of his people all,
            And did also deliuer thée out of the hand of Saul:
            
            And gaue to thée thy masters house, and eke his wiues also,
            And gaue thée Iuda, Israel, and might haue giuen thée mo.
            Why hast thou thē so soone forgot the Lord his power & might,
            And fearing not what great offence thou dost before his sight.
            Thou hast Vrias murdered, and spoild him of his wife,
            And thinkest now by marying her to cloke thy sinnefull life.
            From thée therfore & from thy house the sword shall not depart,
            And thou shalt sée & féele those plagues, & rue thē with thy hart.
            And furthermore he will stirre vp of thine owne stock and race,
            Such as shall take by violence thy wiues before thy face,
            And giue them to thine enemie, who shall in thy despight,
            Misuse them to thine vtter shame, yea openly in sight.
            Thou diddest thy sinne most secretly to hide the same from me,
            But I will do this openly that all the world shall sée.
            Here Dauid with repentant hart his wickednes confest,
            And prayed God to send him grace to rectifie the rest.
            Then Nathan béeing at his hande, said to him by and by,
            The Lord hath put away thy sinne, be sure thou shalt not dye.
            Yet since by thée and thy default thy God sustayneth shame,
            The child that now is borne to thée shall dye & beare the blame
            And Nathan so departing home the child did sicken sore,
            Whose paine and griefe in eury place increased more and more.
            
               Then Dauid fasting for the child besought ye Lord with teares,
            To giue it health and life withall to runne his race of yeares.
            Great mourning made he for ye childe, & none could him intreate
            To rise from ground, but there he lay absteining frō his meate.
            The seuenth day came, & then the child did end his fatal thread,
            But none durst signifie so much or tell that he was dead.
            For al the while he was aliue he would not heare them speake,
            And now to tel him of his death would cause his hart to breake.
            But Dauid through the whispering he saw among his men,
            Perceiued well the child was dead, and asked of them then,
            If that the child did liue or no? who told him how it was,
            How God had wrought his will in him frō life to death to pas.
            Then from the earth he lift him vp and washed all away,
            Annoynting him and putting on apparell fresh and gay,
            And gat him first vnto the house of God to giue him prayse,
            And béeing turned home to eate his seruauntes to him sayes.
            We maruell why thou didst lamēt thy child while it was here,
            And now that he is gone from hence to be of so good chere?
            So long (quod he) as it had life I did both fast and wéepe,
            For this I thought, yt God alwaies doth mercy with him kéepe.
            And who could tell if that he would his mercy to him show,
            And saue the child from cruell death if that his will were so?
            But now he is departed hence it booteth not to fast,
            Nor yet to wéepe, for nothing here on earth is made to last.
            I can not bring his life agayne, but rather I shall go
            To him then he shall come to me, no doubt the truth is so.
            Then Dauid knowing Bethsabe to be in heauynesse,
            Went in to her and sought the meanes her sorowes to redresse.
            Who at her time brought forth a sonne one Salomon to name,
            Whom God appoynted to him selfe his temple for to frame.
            While Ioab Rabba to besiege with all his army lay,
            He sent to Dauid messengers, thus willing them to say,
            How he had take the chiefest place of all the Citie strong,
            Where that the pallace of the king and Condites lye along.
            Wherfore he willed Dauid now to come and giue the fall,A rare example in a Capteine.
            
            That he might haue the prayse him selfe, and Ioab none at all.
            
               Then Dauid with an armie went to Ioab his true man,
            And ioyning both the hoastes in one the Citie so he wanne.
            When he had now the Citie got and eke the king in holde,
            He tooke the Crowne of from his head a talent weight of golde,
            
               The ingratitude of the Ammonites punished.And therwith crounde him selfe as king to thē whō he did foyle,
            As for the riches of the lande his souldiours had the spoyle.
            And calling to his mind ye shame which to his mē they wrought,
            By all the meanes he could deuise a iust rewarde he sought,
            And plaged them with sundry deathes for to increase their wo,
            With sword, with saw, with fire, with rope, & many tormentes mo.
            Now Dauid as a conquerer returned with his pray
            Unto Ierusalem, the place where most he made his stay.
            
               
                  Cap. 13. Ammon rauisheth his sister Thamar.Now after this the Lord began to stirre his sonnes to strife,
            And him to plague for his offence commit with Vries wife.
            For Ammon with his sister fayre whom Thamar they did call,
            Did fall so farre in loue that he was very sicke withall,
            And could no maner way deuise his purpose to obtaine,
            For that within her fathers house she alwayes did remayne.
            
               Ionadab was ye sonne of Simeah Dauids brother.Then Ionadab a friend of his and one of subtill witte,
            Came vnto him and counsell gaue for such a purpose fit.
            How commeth this to passe (quod he) that thou art wasted so
            With inward pensiuenes of minde, and will not let me know?
            Then Ammon said, O Ionadab I am in loue so sore
            With Thamar, as no earthly man can be with woman more.
            Why then (quod he) do fayne you sicke, and kepe your chāber to,
            And when the king your father comes to sée you how you do,
            Then aske him leaue that Thamar may on you attendāce giue,
            And dresse good meates to nourish you, if he will haue you liue.
            This counsell his good friend did giue, and he did like the same,
            And so he lay and kept his bed vntill his father came,
            Whom he in humble wise besought his sister might take payne
            To dresse him some good prety meates to get his health agayne.
            The king did graunt, and did commaunde the maiden so to do,
            And bad her dresse such holesome meates as he had phansy to.
            So Thamar came vnto his house and tooke a litle paste,
            Wherwith she made him deinty meate that had a pleasant tast,
            
               And came & brought the same to him where he was laide alone,
            For he of purpose order tooke that eury man was gone.
            Then Ammon said, come lye with me good sister I thée pray,
            No man is here that can vs sée, thou shalt not say me nay.
            O good my brother force me not, that were too foule a fact,
            And neuer yet in Israel was heard of such an act.
            This would be such a blot as I should neuer purge the same,
            And thou likewise a great reproch shuldst purchase to thy name:
            Yet rather speake vnto the king we may in wedlocke dwell,
            And liue according to the law, and then it will be well.
            But Ammon stroue and would not cease vntill that he had got
            His filthy pleasure satisfied, would she or would she not.
            And after this vngodly fact all fansy gan abate,
            His loue was not before so much but more was now his hate.
            For when he had defiled her he made no longer stay,
            But in a fume and chasing heate he had her packe away.
            This spitefull vsage of thy part is very much (quod she)
            And is as ill as was thy force, and worse if worse may be.
            He gaue no eare vnto her talke, but like a Bedlem brayne
            He turnes her out, & lockes the doore least she returne agayne.
            And so poore soule away she goes as one without reliefe,
            With ashes cast vpon her head and crying out for griefe.
            Then said her brother Absalon, hath Ammon bene with thée,
            Well, grieue thée not but tary here and bide at home with me.
            Now when as Dauid vnderstoode of Ammons wicked part
            Which he with Thamar did commit, it grieud him to the heart.
            And Absalon bare it in minde although he nothing sayde,
            But thought to haue a iust reuenge when al ye wind was layde.
            Now after two yeres runne and past it chaunced Absalon
            
            To sheare his shéepe, and did inuite his brothers eury one:
            The king with smiling countenaunce he did inuite also,
            That with his sonnes for company might please him for to go.
            Not so my sonne (quod he agayne) thine offer is too large,
            All may not go, least that we should put thée to too much charge.
            Yet Absalon requested sore, and lay vpon him still,
            But he would not, and yet he gaue him thanks for his good wil.
            
               Then Absalon pretending loue to Ammon, did intreate
            That he might go for company more then for any meate.
            So many néedes not (said the king) thou shalt be but opprest,
            Yet since thou wilt, our pleasure is that he go with the rest.
            Now Absalon had giuen a charge vnto his wayting men,
            When Ammons heart was most in mirth to fal vpon him then.
            
               Ammon is slayne.And so they slue him at the borde, the rest were all agast,
            Who rose and gat them to their mules and fled away in haste.
            Then tidings came vnto the king how Absalon had slayne
            All Dauids sonnes, which he aliue should neuer sée agayne.
            Wherat the king his garments tore, and to the ground he fell,
            His men amazd, and what to do not one of them could tell.
            Then Ionadab sayd to the king, let not my lord suppose
            That they haue slaynè the yong men all, the rumor falsly goes.
            But Ammon (this my lorde is true) thine eldest sonne is dead,
            For that in heart of Absalon was long determined,
            Because his sister he misusde and did such shamefull wrong,
            And therfore thought to haue reuenge though he deferd it long.
            Therfore my lorde (I thinke) may well assure him selfe of this,
            He shall his sonnes all safe receiue, and none but Ammon mis.
            
               Thalmai was ye king of Gesur, & father to Maacha Absolons mother.It was not long (as Ionadab had sayd, but they came thither,
            And told the newes, and did lament the king and they together.
            But Absalon was fled and sought assurance to procure,
            And thrée whole yeres with Thalmai king remained safe & sure.
            
               
                  Cap. 14.
               The heart of Dauid somewhat lay to Absalon his sonne,
            Which Ioab saw and did inuent a way to haue him wonne.
            Which was, a certaine witty wench well spoken in her speach,
            Should mourningly come to the king and humbly him beseach,
            To graunt a pardon to her sonne which had his brother kild,
            As they by great misfortune were a fighting in the field.
            In fine the king smelt well inough her talke and her intent,
            And asked her if Ioabs head did not thereto consent?
            She said twas true, yet quit her selfe so well before her lorde,
            That by her meanes fayre Absalon was home agayne restord,
            Who falling downe before the king he openly him kist,
            In token that all former things were quite and cleane remist.
            
               But Absalon soone after this ambitiously began
                  Cap. 15. Absalon aspireth to the kingdome.
            
            For to prepare him selfe a king, with Charrets, horse, and man:
            Alluring eury where abrode the people as he met
            With fawning spech, so that they gan on him their harts to set.
            When he the hearts of Israel from Dauid had withdrew,
            To him he goes and frames a tale, and not a worde was true.
            The summe was this: Such time as he in Gesur did remayne,
            He made a vow if euer that he should come home agayne,
            He would serue God accordingly, his sute therfore is now,
            He might to Hebron go with leaue and satisfie his vow.
            The king was very well content. So he did then depart,
            And wrought such treason as was hid within his hollow hart.
            And being there foreslows no time, but sends throughout ye land
            To all the Tribes of Israel, by writing of his hande,
            That whē they hard the trūpet blow thē ech mā should accord,
            That Absalon of Hebron soyle should be the king and lord.
            Yet many of a simple heart with Absalon went out,
            Not knowing of his treason wrought nor what he went about.
            But through the feare and counsell of Achitophel thereto,
            They were perswaded for to ioyne and do as others do.
            For he was very popular and bore a mighty sway,
            And by his meanes to Absalon great strength grew eury day.
            Then Dauid being certified how that all Israel
            
            Did ioyne them selues with Absalon and eke Achitophel,
            
            Did will his men for to prepare them selues vnto the flight,Dauid flieth frō his sonne Absalon.
            
            For other meanes he knew of none for to escape his might.
            Make hast (quod he) least that they come vpon vs vnawares,
            And smite the Citie with the sword to bring it full of cares.
            They said to him, what ere thou shalt thy seruants poynt vnto,
            With all our harts and minds we are most ready prest to do.
            Then went he forth with all his folks, saue that he let remayne
            Ten Concubines to kéepe the house while that he came agayne.
            So going from Ierusalem vnto a certayne place,
            One Ithai with all his men did folow him apace.The fidelitie of Ithai the sonne of Achis king of Geth, as some do write.
            
            And when the king saw Ithai he said vnto him thus,
            O Ithai my faithfull friend why commest thou with vs?
            
               Returne vnto Ierusalem and with the king abide,
            For thou art but a straunger here, do for thy selfe prouide.
            Thou camst but yesterday my friend, should I disquiet thée?
            I am not sure, nor know what ill or good may hap to mée.
            Therfore returne, both thou and al thy souldiours, and be gone,
            The mercy and the truth of God be with you eury one.
            As truely as the Lord doth liue (quod Ithai agayne)
            I will not hence nor yet dpart, but with my lorde remayne:
            For in what place the king shal be to venture life or death,
            There will thy seruaunt eke appeare so long as he hath breath.
            Come on (said Dauid) let vs go, we will not here abide,
            So went he foorth with Ithai and all his men beside.
            The countrey wept all as they went, the people mourned sore,
            To sée the king so passe in feare the brooke of Cedron ore.
            
               Sadoch foloweth after Dauid with the Arke, & is sent backe agayne.Then Sadoch with the Leuites came out of Ierusalem
            
            Unto king Dauid where he was, & brought the Arke with them.
            Who would it not as then receiue, but bad that Sadoch should
            Go set it in his place agayne, let him do what he could.
            For if the Lord do fauour me héele bring me home agayne,
            And set mine eyes vpon the Arke and Tabernacle playne.
            But if the Lord do playnly say, I haue to thée no lust,
            Then let him worke on me his will, for he I know is iust.
            In secret sort then Dauid said to Sadoch, whom he knew
            To be a very secret priest, and faythfull, wise, and true.
            Returne thou and Abiathar, you and your sonnes also,
            And in the Citie there remayne till we do further know:
            And I will tary in the fields within the wildernes,
            Untill I reape some friendly fruite of your two faythfulnes.
            Then Sadoch and Abiathar as Dauid willed them,
            Returned with the Arke of God vnto Ierusalem.
            
            Then Dauid full of griefe and care as one that was distrest,
            Upon the mount of Oliuet went wéeping with the rest.
            With bared head and féete vnshod, and teares that trickled so
            That they bedewed all the place as they went to and fro.
            As they and he did thus lament, a messenger doth come
            With heauy chere & heauy newes, wherof this was the somme.
            
               
               Achitophel had ioynde him selfe with Absalon as than,
            And of his counsell and deuise was now his chiefest man.
            O Lord (quod he) let be thy will in this my great distresse,
            That all this traytor shall deuise may turne to foolishnesse.
            And béeing now ascended vp vnto the mount on hye,
            He worshipped the Lord his God in fayth vnfaynedly.
            There came to him immediatly, but as a man forlorne,
            With clots of earth vpon his head and garments all to torne,Chusai commeth to Dauid who sendeth him to Absalon.
            
            One Chusai a faithfull friend, and with well meaning hart
            Made offer in this time of néede his seruice to impart.
            If thou (quod Dauid) shouldst remayne and tary here with me,
            It would be but a charge to both, as I do playnly sée:
            But if thou wilt returne and go to Absalon the king,
            And make as though thou didst me not regard in any thing,
            But say thou wilt him only serue as thou his father did,
            And that thy faythfull heart to him at no time shall be hid:
            Thy wisedome and thy secretnesse may stand me in good stéede,
            And be a meane their practises may not at all procéede.
            But Sadoch and Abiathar thou shalt before thée finde,
            To whō as to my faithful friends thou maist disclose thy mind.
            And whatsoeuer thou shalt heare determined in hande,
            That I with all conuenient spéede may thereof vnderstande:
            For both their sonnes Ahimaas and Ionathan no doubt,
            Giue their attendance for to come if any thing fall out.
            So Chusai departed there as Dauid had him sent,
            The wickednes of Absalon and treason to preuent.
            When Dauid was a litle past the highest of the hill,
                  Cap. 16. Ziba cōmeth to Dauid to deceiue Miphiboseth his master.
            
            The false and flattering Ziba came with heart all bent to ill
            Against his Lord Miphiboseth, with presents that he brought,
            His master to defeate of all was his intent and thought.
            Now as the king beheld him well and stoode himselfe to ease,
            I pray thée Ziba (then quod he) what meanest thou with these?
            I haue (quod Ziba) asses brought thy men thereon to ride,
            With bread and meate for such as are with thée to eate beside:
            And where as many of thy folke be fayntie as I think,
            To quench their thirst I haue here brought good wine for thē to drink.
            
               Then Dauid minding Ionathas and pleasures to him done,
            Did aske of Ziba sodenly where was his masters sonne.
            Then Ziba falsly gan accuse his master to the king,
            How in Ierusalem he lay in hope of some good thing.
            This day the house of Israel I heard him say (quod he)
            The kingdome of my father shall restore agayne to me.
            Then Dauid blinded with the gifts that Ziba to him gaue,
            Bad take to him his masters lande, for he the same should haue.
            Whose swift & hasty iudgement might haue better bene deferd,
            Then so to credite Zibaes words the other yet vnherd.
            But Ziba now had that he sought and fell vpon his knées,
            With geuing thanks that he had found such fauour in his eyes.
            
               Semei curseth Dauid.Now when the king was past the hill to go to Bahurim,
            
            A kinsman of king Sauls came foorth and all to cursed him,
            Whose name was called Semei, a spitefull rayling man,
            Whose hands & tong ran all at large, and out of order than,
            Not only rayling to his face with bitter crooked talke,
            But also hurling stones at him as he and his did walke,
            And said: Come forth thou bloodshedder, thou man of Belial,
            The Lord hath brought on thée the blood of all the house of Saul:
            Whose kingdome thou vsurpest yet, but long yu shalt not reigne,
            For God hath gin it Absalon to whom it doth perteine.
            And so thou like a murtherer art into mischiefe brought,
            Because that thou hast heretofore the blood of many sought.
            
               Abisai so moued was with this his rayling tong,
            That he could not withholde him selfe but to the king he flong,
            And asked leaue that he might go that varlets tong to tame,
            So foule a mouthed Curre to barke to suffer was a shame.
            But Dauid full of patience in no wise would permit
            That any should gaynsay his talke, or that he should be smit:
            And said, that railing tong of his the Lord him selfe had sent,
            And therfore no man ought repine or he be discontent.
            And sée you not how Absalon my sonne is set on strife,
            And séeketh meanes to take away my kingdome and my life?
            If that my sonne dare this to doo, what maruell is to sée
            The sonne of Iemini to curse and rayle so sore on me?
            
               Therfore I pray you suffer him to rayle and curse his fill,
            For so the Lord hath bidden him to execute his will.
            It may be that the Lord will looke on mine affliction,
            And do me good for this his curse and malediction.
            So Dauid going with his men forth still vpon his way,
            The spitefull tong of Semei would neuer stint nor stay,
            But cursed him, and tooke vp stones and durt and earth to fling,
            And voyde of order, feare and wit, he hurles them at the king.
            So Dauid béeing with his men all weary, thought it best
            Within the towne of Bahurim to stay and take his rest.
            And in meane while came Absalon vnto Ierusalem
            
            With all his route, Achitophel for his part ayding them.
            Then Chusai the Harachite to Absalon doth go,
            And pressing neare vnto his seate he gan salute him so:
            God saue the king, God saue the king. And ist (quod he) euen so?
            Is this the kindnes that thou wilt vnto king Dauid show?
            Why dost thou now forsake him thus, & come & cleaue to me?
            Why dost thou not stick to thy friend that stāds in néede of thée?
            Not so (quod he) for whom the Lord and all the people chuse,
            I will obey and serue with heart, and neuer him refuse.
            To whom if not to thée his sonne should I my duety vowe?
            On thée my seruice to bestow I minde God willing nowe.
            Then Absalon to counsell went, and first he sayd vnto
            
               Achitophel, declare thy minde what we were best to do.
            Go take (quod he) the Concubines that Dauid left behinde,Achitophels counsell agaynst Dauid.
            
            And kéepe them to thy proper vse, and vse them to thy minde,
            Then will thy father thée abhorre, and those be firme to thée
            Which take thy part, when they perceyue you two do disagrée.
            This counsell pleased Absalon, and he perfourmd the same,
            And vsed them in open sight vnto king Dauids shame.
            And well it was allowed off of all men more and lesse,
            Because they saw it commonly to haue so good successe.
            Graunt me (then said Achitophel) twelue thousād mē of might,
            And I will after Dauid go and fall on him this night.
            I will vpon him sodenly while that he lyeth at rest,
            Who is but weake, and all his men with wearines opprest.
            
               So shall thy father be afrayde, the people will be gone,
            Then shall I ridde him of his life when he is left alone,
            And bring agayne the people all to thée with one accord,
            Who when they find him dead will come and serue thée as their lord.
            This saying pleased Absalon, his father should not liue,
            The rest they thought no man on earth could better coūsel giue.
            Yet let vs heare (quod Absalon) what Chusai will say,
            It may so fall that he perchaunce will take an other way.
            
               Chusai ouerthroweth the counsell of Achitophel.And when he came he brake to him Achitophels intent,
            And bad him fréely speake his mind and he would then consent.
            Forsooth (quod he) if I may speake my phansy from the rest,
            The counsell of Achitophel at this time is not best.
            For as thou knowest thy father and his men be very strong,
            And béeing chafed in their minds, as they haue bene so long,
            Are now become like cruell beares all robbed of their whelpes,
            So that their fiersnesse will not passe on thée nor on thy helpes:
            Thy father is a man also well practised in warres,
            He will not tary long in place for feare of soden scarres,
            And for my life he lieth hidde, within some caue or denne,
            Or other place, where is with him a number of his men.
            If some of those he left behinde at first be ouerthrowen,
            Yet that thy men haue got the worst it will abrode be blowen.
            So shall the ftoutest of thy route when they thereof do heare
            Be faynt & shrinke, as though they were all out of hart for feare.
            Wherfore my counsell now is this, from Berseba to Dan
            
            That all the people may be prest in armour eury man,
            So shall thy men as farre excéede as doth the seaish sande,
            And when thou comst into the field he fall into thy hande.
            For we shall come on him as thicke as dew vpon the ground,
            So that there shall not one of all his men aliue be founde.
            And furthermore if that he be in citie or in towne,
            We shall with ropes & strength of men pul al that citie downe,
            And draw it to the riuer side, and cast it stone by stone
            Into the sea, vntill we haue not left remayning one.
            This counsell pleased Absalon and all the other well,
            Who thought he gaue more sound aduise then did Achitophel.
            
            
               To Sadoch and Abiathar then Chusai doth come,
            And of Achitophels deuise he vttereth the somme.
            But thus and thus did I (quod he) his counsell ouerthrow,
            And therfore wish some messenger to Dauid now did go,
            And bid him get away this night out of the wildernesse,
            And passe the water, otherwise he will be in distresse.
            Then Sadoch and Abiathar herein had great respect,
            How that their sonnes might know of this ye matter vnsuspect.
            Wherfore the message they commit vnto a wenche that goes
            To Rogels wel, as though she went to water there her clothes,
            Where that their sonnes Ahimaas and Ionathas did lye,
            That none within Ierusalem should sée or them espye.
            So they receyuing of the mayde the message to them sent,
            Made hast and tracted not the time, but forth away they went.
            Yet of a ladde they were espied, who tolde it Absalon
            
            That such two men were passed forth and out of Rogel gone.
            But they before the messengers that he sent out from him,
            Were got into an house within the towne of Bahurim,
            
            Wheras their host to saue their liues within his well them hid,Ahimaas & Ionathan are hid in a well.
            
            And made his wife to couer it that they should not be spid,
            Who tooke a cloth and spred it forth vpon the well on hye,
            With wheate theron, as though it were set out abrode to drye.
            And when those came that after them did narrowly pursue,
            And made enquiry where they were, and bad her answere true,
            They are (quod she) gone ore the brooke but euen a while agoe,
            If you make spéede and follow them they cannot scape I know.
            The men with this delusion went forth and sought in vayne,
            Who in the end not finding them returned home agayne.
            This béeing knowen the messengers were let out of the well,
            And came to Dauid and began their message for to tell.
            Go get you ore the water brooke as quickly as you can,
            
               Achitophel is purposed to kill you eury man.
            Then Dauid béeing certified of all was done, and what,
            He slacked not but hasted forth and ouer Iordan gat.
            So going forth he came vnto the towne Mahanaim
            
            Belonging to the tribe of Gad, where he refreshed him.
            
               And lying there his very friends whom he had tryed long,
            Came in to sée and visite him, and for to make him strong:
            Who brought him beds to lye vpon & presents méete for kings,
            With erthen vessels for the vse of other néedefull things.
            Of barley floure and parched corne, of beanes and also wheate,
            Of honey, butter, shéepe and chéese, for all his men to eate.
            For weary, hungry and a thirst, was he and all his trayne,
            And their intent was to refresh and ease them of their payne.
            
               Cap. 18.Now Absalon with all his men, as ye haue heard before,
            Pursued Dauid, and was come the water Iordane ore.
            
               Achitophel hangeth him selfe.But destitute of his chiefe stay and staffe Achitophel,
            
            Who hangd him self when that he saw his counsell go not well.
            And béeing come within the coast and lande of Gilead,
            
            He camped there, and Israel with all the men they had.
            Preparing in a readynes his army in that coast,
            He made Amasa gouernor and Capteine of his hoast.
            And Dauid also now began his numbers to deuide
            Into thrée armies seuerall, with Capteines them to guide.
            The first to haue in gouerning to Ioab he commit,
            The seconde to Abisai to take the charge of it,
            The third he put vnder the hande and rule of Ithai,
            
            Who neuer would forsake the king but liue with him and dye.
            Thus when he had in order set his armies for to go,
            He told the people he him selfe would go with them also.
            Thou shalt not go, the people sayd, for if we chaunce to flye
            They will not care nor greatly passe, because they hunt for thée,
            Nor yet regard vs any whit though halfe or more were flayne,
            So long as thou art not in reach their labour is in vayne.
            Wherfore in Citie do abide, for thée it shall be best,
            And if we neede do succour vs, of God thou shalt be blest.
            Then said the king, looke what ye will in this thing haue me do,
            I am content to frame my selfe according therevnto.
            Now as the king stoode in the gate to sée the people passe,
            For disobedient Absalon his heart full heauy was,
            And as the Capteins passed by vnto them all he spake,
            Intreate the yong man Absalon most gently for my sake.
            
               The people heard what charge ye king vnto the Capteins gaue
            Concerning Absalon his sonne, how that they should him saue.
            So forth to battell all they went out of Mahanaim,
            
            And gan the field to fight within the wood of Ephraim,
            
            Where Dauids hoast a slaughter made of twenty thousand mē,
            That tooke the part of Absalon agaynst his father then.
            And by the wood and such mishaps as in the wood did light,
            As many did miscary as did perish in the fight.
            And Absalon when that he could not make his party good
            With Dauids men, was put to shifts and fled into the wood,
            Where he was hanged by the heare vpon an Oken bow,
            His horse was gone, and to vnloose him selfe he knew not how.
            A man of Dauids riding by and chauncing him to sée,
            Tolde Ioab how that Absalon was hanging on a trée.
            And why (quod Ioab) didst not thou dispatche him at a blow,
            Ten sicles should be thy reward if thou hadst done but so.
            I do (quod he) much more the kings commaundement regarde,
            Then all the sicles which thou wouldst giue me for my reward,
            For if to me were giuen so much as any house could fill,
            Yet would I not stretch out my hand king Dauids sonne to kill,
            For I did heare vnto his men when he did say thus much,
            Beware ye hurt not Absalon nor yet the yong man tutch:
            
               
                  •
               nd if I had I know full well it would haue cost my life,
            Yea thou thy self wouldst first of al haue slayne me wt thy knife.
            Then Ioab saide, I may not here with thée thus trifling stande:
            
               
                  •
               nd so he gat him forth apace with thrée dartes in his hande,
            
               
                  •
               nd thrust them into Absalon as he came vnderneath,
            
               
                  •
               nd other ten did lay him on as long as he did breath.
            Then Ioab blew his trompet vp the people for to spare,
            
               
                  •
               nd pitied them for that he saw how they seduced were.
            The bloody corps of Absalon they threw into a pit,
            
               
                  •
               nd layde thereon an heape of stones to be a marke for it.
            To Ioab came Ahimaaz he knowing of this thing,
            
               
                  •
               et me (quod he) I pray thée go with newes vnto the king.
            Thou art no man (quod he agayne) this tidings now to beare,
            Thou shalt therby displeasure get as I do greatly feare.
            
               But Ioab said to Chusai, go thou and tell the king
            Of this conflict, and make report of this and eury thing.
            He thanked him with reuerence, and as a ioyfull man
            Departed thence with his dispatche, and vnto Dauid ran.
            
               Ahimaaz to Ioab said, I pray thée hartely
            That I may at this time also runne after Chusai.
            
            And why (quod Ioab) wilt thou run? it is not worth thy payne,
            For neither thanks nor yet reward thou shalt receiue agayne.
            Well what so ere befall (quod he) yet let me go I pray.
            If thou (quod he) wilt néedes be gone I will not say thée nay.
            
               Ahimaaz a nearer way had found, and ranne so fast
            That he gat ground of Chusai although he came out last.
            Now as the king sate in the gate euen of Mahanaim,
            
            With other mo such as he had appoynted there with him,
            The watchman watching ore the gate at last he spied one,
            Where he came forth apace apace, and running al alone.
            With that the watchman cryed downe and tolde it to the king,
            Who said it was some person sent him tidings for to bring.
            The watchman sawe one other come, and thereof gaue a signe,
            Who said, it is some messenger with newes of me and mine.
            The watch againe said to his grace, me thinke the formost man
            Doth séeme to me as though it were Ahimaaz that ran.
            The king which had experience of his fidelitie,
            Gan say, he is a godly man and wisheth good to me.
            Then came Ahimaaz and said, to thée (O king) be peace,
            That many dayes and yeres thy life in honour may increase.
            And falling downe vnto the earth, he saith, the God of might
            Be blessed now and euermore which puts thy foes to flight,
            And shuts them vp into thy hande as birds within a net,
            That now I trust my lord the king securitie shall get.
            But is the yong man Absalon (quod he) all safe and well?
            
               Ahimaaz said somewhat then, but would not playnly tell.
            When Ioab bad thy seruaunts come both Chusai and me,
            I can no more but thus much say, a tumult did I sée.
            Well (quod the king) then stand aside, & turning him he stayde,
            And therevpon came Chusai, and thus to him he sayde.
            
               Good newes my lord, good newes I bring, the rebels of thy land
            Which rose agaynst my lord the king are fallen into thy hand.
            But is the yong man Absalon (quod he) all safe and sounde?
            Both he and his confederates lye dead vpon the grounde.
            Then was the king so much agréeud that vp on foote he steptDauid mou
                     ••
                  neth for his sonne Absalon.
            
            Into his chamber, where alone for Absalon he wept.
            And béeing but vpon the steppes his teares for griefe burst out,
            O Absalon my sonne my sonne, resounding round about,
            Would God (quod he with sobbing voyce) for thée I might haue dyed,
            O Absalon my sonne my sonne, still blubbering he cryed.
            Then was it vnto Ioab tolde how Dauid much bewayldeCap. 19.
            
            The death of Absalon his sonne, which nothing him auaylde,
            Whereby the day of victorie when they intended most
            To haue reioyced, did become a mourning to the hoast.
            The people went and stole away as men in daungers déepe
            Do flye in battell, and bethinke where they may safely créepe.
            The king by this time hid his face and cryed out amayne
            As one yt would giue vp the goast, because his sonne was slaine.
            Then Ioab standing in some feare his men would all away,
            He boldly prest vnto the king and thus to him did say:
            Thou shamest all thy men of warre and makest them to muse,
            Whose faythfull harts for thy defence no daungers did refuse.
            Thou liuest, & thy sons do liue, & we do liue thy men,
            Thy daughters, wiues, & concubines, what meanes this mourning thē?
            It séemeth that thou louest them who sought thine ouerthrow,
            And wayest not thy friends a whit that stucke vnto thée so.
            For this thy mourning doth declare that thou regardest not
            Thy princes, neither yet the men that honour haue thée got.
            If Absalon had scaped death, I do perceiue and sée,
            And we thy men our liues had lost, that had well pleased thée.
            Up, get thée forth abrode in sight, and do thy seruaunts cheare
            With gentle and with louing words, or else by God I sweare,
            Thou wilt not haue a man this night, for they will thée forsake,
            And be agaynst thée eury where with all that they can make.
            Which will be worse then all the harmes that yet vpon thée fel,
            Euen from thy youth, or since thou wast first king of Israel.
            
            
               Then Dauid gat him downe to shew him selfe among his men,
            And they that stept before aside came flocking to him then,
            For all the Tribes of Israel among them did contende,
            Who first should bring king Dauid home vnto his iorneys end.
            Then such as by the crafty meanes of Absalons aspire
            Seduced were by simplenesse, and knew not his desire,
            Gan thus to reason with them selues: full well we vnderstand
            That Dauid hath preserued vs, our wiues, our goods, and land,
            And that he hath in our defence withstoode our mortall foes,
            And for our better quietnes hath giuen them ouerthrowes,
            And that he is our lawfull king whom we did once annoynt,
            Whom Absalon of life and realme did séeke to disappoynt:
            Since Absalon is dead therfore, why take we not the payne
            To wayte vpon our Lord & king, and bring him home agayne.
            The people reconciled thus, the king to Sadoch sent
            And to Abiathar the priest, declaring his intent,
            Which was, to go and séeke with those of Iuda to perswade,
            Who ioynd themselues with Absalon in his attempts he made,
            And say to them, why haste ye not king Dauid to restore,
            As do the men of Israel who ready are therefore?
            Ye are by nature kinne to vs, our brothers as ye know,
            Why do ye linger last of all your loyaltie to show?
            And thus much say to Amasa, of all that may be found,
            He is the nearest kinne I haue that liueth on the ground,
            And that I sweare by God aboue I minde he shall succéede
            And be my Capteine generall to rule in Ioabs stéede.
            This talke of theirs did so perswade with Iuda, that they went
            And graunted him their present ayde, & that with one consent.
            And thervpon they sent him word to let him vnderstand
            That he and his might safely now returne into that land.
            So Dauid going with his trayne euen toward Iordane shore,
            All Iuda met him by the way for to conduct him ore.
            And Semei who had the king reuiled to his face,
            Came now with Iuda for to séeke his mercy and his grace:
            Who comming out of Bahurim with Iuda for to go,
            A thousand of the Beniamites he brought with him also.
            
               And Ziba of the house of Saul with all his sonnes fiftéene,
            And twentie seruauntes in a rowe, was there among thē séene,
            Who gat them ore the water brooke of Iordane, to abide
            The spéedy passage of the king, to méete him on that side.
            The king now béeing passed ore but euen a litle while,The wilines of Semei.
            
            There came before him Semei him selfe to reconcile,
            And falling flat vnto the ground in mild and humble plight
            Besought him pardon for his faultes and his great ouersight.
            Impute not now the wickednesse that then thy seruaunt did,
            And lay it not vnto my charge, but let it all be hid,
            I did misuse full wickedly my lord king Dauid, when
            He from Ierusalem went out and fled with all his men.
            I do it know, and now confesse that I haue done amisse,
            Beséeching thée my lord and king to pardon me for this.
            And now behold I am the first of Iosephs house this day,
            That am come down to méete my lord & bring him on his way.
            
               Abisai with grudging heart offended at his worde,
            Said to the king, shall not this dogge now dye vpon the sword?
            That matter doth not apperteine to you (quod Dauid than)
            I say this day in Israel there shall not dye a man.
            For I am king I know it well, therfore to Semei
            
            He spake & gaue him gentle words, and said he should not dye.
            So forth he went vntill he came Ierusalem vntoMiphiboseth meeteth the king in Ierusalem.
            
            Where that Miphiboseth him met as well as he could go,
            Who neither trimmed vp his beard nor yet did wash his féete,
            vntill the king in quiet peace returning he did méete.
            Then Dauid said as soone as that he cast on him his eye,
            
               Miphiboseth how chaunced it thou wentst not out with me.
            O my most deare and soueraigne lord my seruaunt was vniust,
            For falsly he deceyued me that put in him my trust.
            I wild him to prepare mine Asse and all things for the same,
            To ride vpon with thée my lord thy seruaunt béeing lame,
            But with his subteltie he hath thy seruaunt sore abusde,
            And vnto thée my lord and king vniustly me accusde.
            My lord thou as an Angell art that can iudge all things right,
            And therfore do as thou shalt thinke most méetest in thy sight.
            
               For where as all my fathers house was worthy for to dye,
            For that with thée and thine king Saul did deale so cruelly.
            Yet was thy mercy vnto me thy seruaunt then so great
            That at thy table with thy sonnes thou settest me to eate.
            But séeing mine inheritaunce by thée is giuen away,
            What right haue I to come before the king, or more to say.
            Thou néede no more to speake (quod he) we will that this ye do,
            That thou and Ziba shall deuide the land betwéene you two.
            Since that my lord (quod he agayne) is now returnd in peace,
            Let Ziba take all to him selfe and make his best increase.
            
               Berselai méeteth king Dauid.From Roglim comes Berzelai to méete the king also,
            In well appoynted wise to wayte and with his grace to go,
            Who for the space the king did lye within Mahanaim,
            
            Did friendly of his store conuay all néedefull things to him:
            For God had blest him very well with riches and with wealth,
            And he wisht Dauid great increase of honour and of health.
            The king requested that he would go with him if he might,
            And he would by all meanes he could his curtesie requite.
            I haue not long to liue (quod he) and néedfull tis that I
            Should not so much for honour séeke as learne how well to dy:
            For I am stept so farre in yéeres that I haue no good skill
            To iudge or yet discerne betwéene the good and that is ill.
            My stomacke is so weake it can away with litle meate,
            Thy seruaunt hath no tast at all of that which he doth eate.
            In musike I haue no delite, nor yet in skilfull man,
            Why should I to your maiestie be such a burthen then?
            Thy seruaunt will a litle bring the king forth on his way,
            And will beséech my lord that then returne agayne I may
            Unto the lande where I was borne, and there to lay my bones,
            Euen with my parents in the graue among the grauell stones.
            But if it please my lord the king Chimham my sonne shal be
            Thy seruaunt, vnto whom thou mayst do what it pleaseth thée.
            Then said the king, and for thy sake I will him so rewarde,
            That thou shalt well perceiue I do thy kindnes much regarde.
            So all the people passed foorth, the king with all his trayne,
            
               Berzelai then tooke his leaue and turned backe agayne.
            
               When Iuda and halfe Israel were passed Iordans bankes,
            And had ye king to Gilgal brought as men most worthy thanks,
            Then came the rest of Israel to Dauid and gan say,A strife betwéene ye men of Israel and the men of Iuda for king Dauid.
            
            Why hath all Iuda stole thée now so secretly away,
            And brought the king with al his house past Iordan riuer thus,
            And made not priuie therevnto so much as one of vs?
            Then Iuda hearing Israel this great complaynt to make,
            Did shape an answere out of hand to them, and thus they spake:
            The king is neare of kin to vs, we haue him therfore brought
            Of loue, and not for great reward or honour that we sought.
            They said againe, our part in him is ten times more thē yours,
            And being ten to one we say the greatest part is ours.
            Ye did not well for to despise our counsell in this thing,
            Ye might haue made vs priuie of restoring home the king.
            Thus they debated to and fro this quarrell of some grudge,
            But Iuda did preuayle therein as eury man might iudge.
            But now a man of Belial, one Seba cald by name,
                  Cap. 20. Seba maketh an insurrectiō against Dauid.
            
            Had got to him all Israel, and gan it to proclaime
            How they no part in Dauid had the sonne of Isai,
            
            Nor yet inheritaunce in him, and spake it scornefully.
            So when as Seba blew his trumpe ech man gat to his tent,
            All ready for to follow him which way so ere he went.
            But Iuda stucke to Dauid fast, and not a man did mis,
            From Iordan to Ierusalem were full and wholly his.
            Now while this geare a working was with them of Israel,
               Dauid shutteth vp his Concubines.
            
            King Dauid in his house at home not finding all things well
            Among his women Concubines, who had offence commit
            With Absalon while he was out, gan now to punish it:
            Yet not with death as was the law, but shut them all vp fast
            In prison close, allowing foode so long as life did last.
            Then hearing of these mutinies and stirres in eury place,
            Sent out all Iuda to prepare, and that in thrée dayes space.
            And gaue that charge to Amasa, but when he brake his day
            He grew in feare of some mishap, and thus began to say:
            Now Seba in this faction shall hurt and harme vs more
            Then did my deare sonne Absalon in his attempts before.
            
               Take thou therfore Abisai of Ioabs men a band,
            And presse on Seba least he get some succour out of hand.
            And Ioab tooke with him also his men the Corethites,
            
            With many from Ierusalem beside the Philethites.
            
            And as he marched on his way this Seba for to get,
            Euen at the stone of Gibeon with Abasa he met,
            
               Ioab slue Amasa. some think he did it for that Amasa tooke parte with Absalon, and that Dauid had made him captein generall in his stead.Who brotherly saluted him as nothing were amisse,
            And made as though he would him take about ye necke to kisse,
            But sodenly he smote him in the bely with his knife,
            That all his bowels gushed out, so ended he his life.
            Then Ioab and Abisai who were together met,
            To follow Seba at the backe away apace they get,
            And came to Abel, where he was got in with all his route,
            Which Citie Ioab with his hoast besieged round about,
            And thrusting at a certayne place to ouerthrow the wall,
            A prudent woman came and gan aloude to crye and call
            Unto the people, praying them they would it not deferre
            Their Capteine Ioab so desire to come and speake with her.
            Who béeing come she him beheld and askt him if twere he?
            I am (quod he) good wife the same, say what thou wilt to me.
            Then heare thine hādmaide what she saith, He said, I heare thée wel,
            And wil giue good attētiue eare to that that thou shalt tel.
            It was the vse of olde (quod she) and Marshall law I know,
            Before a peace be offered no towne to ouerthrow.
            The Citie here that I am in which called is Abel,
            
            Hath alwayes kept fidelitie with kings of Israel,
            
            And yet thou goest about with power a Citie to subuert,
            Who as a faythfull mother peace doth nourish in her heart,
            O Ioab this thy tyrannie with right doth not accorde,
            So to destroy the heritage perteining to the Lorde.
            God shield (quod he) I should attempt this Cities ouerthrow,
            It neuer came into my thought that crueltie to show.
            But this it is, there is a man, one of mount Ephraim,
            
            One Seba who remaynes with you, our quarrell is to him,
            Who doth rebell agaynst my lord king Dauid forceably,
            Deliuer him and we will then depart hence quietly.
            
               Then let my lorde but stay a while and I will forthwithall
            Prouide (quod she) ye shall receyue his head cast ore the wall.
            Then she with wisdome of her words among them in ye towne,
            Did cause his head be smitten off and hurld to Ioab downe.
            A trompet then he made to blow and from the Citie went
            With all the hoast he brought with him, ech mā home to his tēt.
            And Ioab to Ierusalem returned to the king,
            And told him of his good successe, and eury other thing.
            Now after these seditions the king new order takes
            Among his chiefest officers, and first of all he makes
            
               Ioab the sonne of Zaruia chiefe capteine of the hoast
            Among the men of Israel to leade in eury coast.
            
               Banaia a warlike man and one of perfect skill,
            The Corethites and Phelethites to guyde it was his will.
            The tribute which he had among the nations won with fame,
            He did commit to Aduram to gather vp the same.
            Now Iosaphat Recorder was to note vp eury thing,
            And Seua Scribe to write all that perteined to the king.
            But Sadoch and Abiathar were priestes of high degrée,
            And Ira was chiefe counsellor and great in dignitie.
            Now after this an hunger great the people fell among,
                  Cap. 21. The dearth that fell in Dauids time.
            
            Which dured in king Dauids time the space of thrée yeres long.
            The king enquired what ye cause of this great plague should be.
            The Lord made answere, twas for Saul and his great crueltie
            Which he had shewd ye 
               Gibeonites, with whō duke Iosua made
            A couenaunt both of peace and life, and bound them to a trade,
            Which trade they did obserue, & yet he sought their ouerthrow,
            Both Iuda and the Israelites he sought to pleasure so.
            None of the séede of Israel were now the Gibeonites,
            
            But were a certayne remnant left of all the Amorites,
            
            Of whom then Dauid did demaund what he for them should do,
            Or what attonement shall I make that ye will grée vnto?
            We will (quod they) no siluer haue nor gold of thée at all,
            Nor any man to dye for vs but of the house of Saul.
            
            Looke what ye will (quod Dauid then) haue me for you to do,
            Disclose your minde and you shall haue me ready therevnto.
            
               We do request that of the line and kinred of king Saul,
            
            In Gibeah before the Lord seuen may be hangd for all.
            The king had great compassion on Ionathas and his,
            And would not for his oth of olde his sonne should do amis,
            And was excéeding glad because they did no mo request,
            That he might saue Miphiboseth from hanging with the rest.
            Frō 
               Rizpa her two sonnes he tooke which she did beare to Saul,
            
            
               Miphiboseth and Armoni, these two and they were all.
            From Merob other fiue he tooke, which she by Adriel
            
            Had in her life, and after were by Michol brought vp well.
            Thus plaged were the sonnes of Saul euen for their fathers sin,
            Who did destroy the Gibeonites and had delite therein.
            But Rizpa that was wife to Saul made spéede without delay,
            To pitche her tent vpon the hill to kéepe the beates away,
            And would not suffer beast nor foule to touch her sonnes at all
            Frō haruest time, till God did make his rayne frō heauē to fall.
            The king when he did vnderstand her motherly intent,
            Their bodies to remoue away he caused one be sent.
            The bones of Saul and Ionathas he likewise brought away
            From Iabes, who did stealingly from Bethlem them conuay,
            Where they had by the Philistines bene hanged vp on hye,
            That day that Saul did loath his life and willing was to dye.
            And so the seuen that hanged were and eke the bones of Saul,
            
            With those of Ionathas his sonne, he did conuay them all
            Into the lande of Beniamin, and put them in a pit
            Where Cis the father of king Saul lay buried in it.
            When this was done as Dauid did commaund & giue a charge,
            The Lord withdrew the plague of derth, & plenty sent at large.
            Now after this God gaue to him alway the vpper hande
            Of all his foes the Philistines, which warred in his lande.
            He bet them downe in battels foure, & slue the Giantes stoute,
            Which to his prayse and honour great was noysed all about.
            
               
                  Cap. 22. Dauid for his victories prayseth God.Then Dauid for the victories which in his latter dayes
            God gaue to him, he thus began to giue him laude and prayse.
            O Lord thou art my rocke and fort that doest me well defende,
            My onely safe deliuerer from those that ill pretende.
            
               God is my strength, in him I will put all my hope and trust,
            For I do finde him vnto me both mercifull and iust.
            He is my shield, the horne of health, my tower that is so strong,
            My refuge and my sauiour from taking any wrong.
            I will on him call day and night who worthy is of prayse,
            Not doubting then but that I shall preserued be alwayes.
            The pangs of death gat me about and griped me full sore,
            The flowing floods of wicked men did fray me more and more.
            The sorrowes of the hell or graue me compassed about,
            The snares were set to trappe me in that I should not get out.
            Then in my trouble did I call vnto the Lord on hye,
            Who from out of his holy place gaue eare vnto my cry.
            God béeing wroth he made the earth to tremble and to quake,
            And all the bottome of the mount to totter and to shake.
            A smoke out of his nosethrils came whē he to wrath was bent,
            Consuming fyre with kindled coles out of his mouth he sent.
            He bowed heauen as he came down mine enemies to confound,
            The misty cloudes beneath his féete made darknes on ye groūd.
            He rode vpon the Cherub and the Cherubin also,
            And on the wings of all the winds his flight was to and fro.
            He framed darknes as a tent him round about to be,
            With waters gathered into clouds that no man might him sée:
            But when he list his presence shew and to appeare in sight,
            Then with the haile & flashing fire the clouds he maketh bright.
            God with his sundry thunder claps and fyrie dartes sent out
            With soden lightnings, maketh them to feare him all about.
            O Lord the sea vncouered was, whose surges rise and fall
            At thy rebuke, and at a blast thy foes were drowned all.
            The Lord hath frō the heauen aboue his help to me sent downe,
            And drawen me out of waters great which came on me to drowne.
            He by his might deliuerd me frō all my foes ech one,
            When I was weake and not of power to cope with thē alone.
            They went about me to preuent in my most heauinesse,
            But yet the Lord so wrought therin they could me not oppresse.
            He brought me foorth in open place to haue my scope at will,
            And of his fauour and his loue preserued me from ill.
            
               And as I was a giltlesse man and voyde of all offence,
            So to the cleannesse of my hands I gaue no recompence,
            For that I kept the wayes of God and walked in the same,
            Nor did not speake agaynst my Lord nor yet his holy name,
            But had an eye vnto his lawes to kéepe them in my hart,
            His statutes did I not cast off, nor from them once depart.
            An vpright life the eyes of God delighteth much in it,
            From wickednes I did refrayne, and would it not commit.
            Therfore the Lord requited all my doings done aright,
            According to my righteousnes appearing in his sight.
            The Lord with him that godly is will godly be also,
            And with the man that is vpright vprightly will he go:
            With those that are elect and pure he will with them so be,
            And with the froward he will deale with them as frowardly.
            The méeke and simple man of heart thou wilt not sée confound,
            As for the proude and lofty man thou pullest to the ground.
            Thou art (O Lord) my light & guyde to walke in all thy wayes,
            Thou wilt my darknes make to shine as clere as ye noone daies,
            For by thy helpe an hoast of men I shall them make to fall,
            And through my God shall batter downe the hard & stony wall.
            The wayes of God are vncorrupt, his worde must triall haue,
            and to the stedfast faythfull man he is a shield to saue.
            For who is God except ye Lord which made both heauē & earth,
            There is none other God but he that giveth life and breath.
            He is the God that girdeth me with strength to go to warre,
            And maketh playne the way and path that I may sée a farre.
            My féete he maketh like the hindes in swiftnes for to go,
            And setteth me vpon my place as pleaseth him also.
            My hands he teacheth for to fight, mine armes he makth strong
            To draw and breake a bow of stéele in compasse short or long.
            By thy good sure protection and by thy sauing health,
            And by thine ayde and mightie strength I do increase in wealth.
            Thou hast enlarged all my steps in stretching them awide,
            And eke my treadings made so playne my foote it can not slide.
            My foes I fiercely did pursue, and turned not agayne
            Untill I had put all to flight, and many of them slayne.
            
               I bet and wounded so my foes that in no maner wise
            Once vnder foote, they could agayne be able to arise.
            Thou didst me girde about with strength in battell for to fight,
            And hast dispersed all my foes abrode out of my sight.
            The neckes of mine ilwillers (Lord) thou didst bow downe and bend,
            That I on them might worke my will and pleasure in the end.
            They looked round about for helpe but no man did appeare,
            To God they cried in their distresse, yet would he not thē heare.
            I bet them still as small as dust that winde doth blow away,
            And trode on them as men do treade vpon the myre and clay.
            O Lord thou hast deliuerd me from all seditious bandes,
            And made me to be gouernour and head of diuers landes.
            A people straunge and eke vnknowen will humbly me obay,
            Where as mine owne will ouerthwart and stubbornly say nay.
            Now blessed be the liuing God and praysed be his name,
            The God of my saluation that worthy is of fame.
            It is the Lord that gaue me power reuenged for to be,
            And brought the people all into subiection vnder me.
            He saued me from all my foes, and set me vp aloft
            Aboue the wicked cruell men that rose agaynst me oft.
            I will therfore prayse thée O Lord among the Gentiles all,
            And sing vnto thy holy name, and thereon dayly call.
            Thou hast for thine anoynted king such mercies great in store,
            And them to Dauid and his séede hast giuen for euermore.
            When Dauid had now ended this his Psalme of thāks & praise,
            He speaketh certaine sentences for to conclude, and sayes.
            King Dauid which is cald the sonne of Isai hath sayde,
                  Cap. 23.
               
            
            And the annoynted man of God whose kingdome sure is layde,
            The holy spirite of the Lord my speach he doth it guyde,
            For to my tong his sacred worde is fast and surely tyde.
            The Lord my God of Israel hath this by promise made,
            That in his feare and loue I shall the iust men guyde and ayde.
            As morning light when sunne is vp & voyde of clowde & rayne,
            So shall my house in shining bright & clearnesse still remayne.
            For by his euerlasting bonde it shall so stande alway,
            That it may grow, but not as grasse that hath his quick decay.
            
               But wicked and vngodly men shall be like thornes that pricke,
            Pluckt vp and not be suffered within the ground to sticke,
            But yet the man that toucheth them he must be in that case
            Desenced well, that he may take and burne them in their place.
            
               Here Dauid numbreth his people.It came now into Dauids minde his people for to somme,
            To sée what number in his lande would rise thereof and come,
            Commaunding Ioab for to go throughout all Israel,
            
            And take a view of all his men that vnder him did dwell.
            The Lord thy God increase (quod he) thy people in thy lande,
            But what doth moue my lord ye king to take this thing in hand?
            The king would not be turned from his purposed intent,
            And therefore for to view his men his lords abrode he sent.
            And passing ouer Iordan brooke vnto the vale of Gad,
            
            They went and summed eury man from thence to Gilead,
            
            From thence to Iaan, and so foorth to Sidon and to Tyre,
            
            The Heuites and the Cananites their numbers to enquire,
            And so from thence to Iuda lande which in the south is plaste,
            And therein made to Beerseba their progresse at the laste.
            Now when they had bene thus abrode nine monthes & twenty daies,
            Thē home vnto Ierusalē
                they turne againe their waies,
            Where Ioab vnto Dauid gaue the summe of Israel,
            
            Which were eight hundred thousand men as he did count & tel,
            All fighting men, besides all those which Iuda well could yéeld,
            Which were fiue hundred thousand men all able for the field.
            When this was done, within his heart the king conceiued then
            A great misliking of his déede for numbring of his men.
            Wherfore with heauy hart and voyce vnto the Lorde he cryes,
            That he would pardon this offence committed in his eyes.
            That night the Lord commaunded Gad the Prophet for to go
            And breake with Dauid for his fault, and tell him so and so,
            And whē thou hast in eury point these plagues before him laide,
            Then will him for to make his choyse as I to thée haue saide.
            When Gad was come vnto ye king, the Lords will is (quod he)
            That of such plages I shall recite thou make thy choyse of thrée.
            Wilt thou haue hunger seuen yeres space to ouerpresse thy lād?
            Or els thrée monthes to féele the smart of wars & mighty hand?
            
               Or with the plague of pestilence be visited thrée dayes?
            Choose which thou wilt, & I wil make report of that thou sayes.
            Hard is the choyce O Lord (quod he) yet Lord let be thy will,
            That I may fall into thine hands to saue or els to kill.
            Then did the Lord for thrée dayes space a pestilence prouide,
            Wherin of Dauids whole account a seuenty thousande dyed.
            But when vpon Ierusalem the Angell now began
            To smite and to destroy the same, the Lord repented than
            Of all the former faults commit, and bad him hold his hand,
            For he would haue compasson and pitie on the land.
            Then Dauid with a sory heart laments that grieuous case,
            And to the Lord with teares he cals for mercy and for grace.
            The people sinned not (O Lord) to haue this plague of thine,
            These shéepe (alas) what haue they done? the sinne (O Lord) is mine.
            Let not the harmles innocent be plagued now therfore,
            But me and all my fathers house destroy for euermore.
            The Prophet Gad to Dauid came, him willing in this caseDauid is plagued for numbring his people.
            
            To go and reare an Altar vp in Ornans threshing place.
            And when that Ornan saw the king and all his men so nye,
            He met him, and with reuerence fell downe vpon his knée,
            And said to him, why doth my lord come vnto me this houre?
            In sooth (quod he) it is to buy of thée thy threshing floore,
            To make an Altar to the Lorde, and pray to him for peace,
            That this great plague of pestilence may from the people cease.
            My lord (quod he) take what thou wilt, and do as séemeth good,
            Take Oxen, Charrets, & with them the instrumentes for wood,
            I fréely giue them to my lord, and do beséeche thy God,
            That he accept thée in his sight and do withdraw his rod.
            Not so (quod he) I will it shall be truely solde and bought,
            I will not offer to the Lord the thing which cost me nought.
            So Dauid bought the threshing floore and Oxe for sacrifice,
            And gaue to Ornan for the same as they agréed of price.
            Then offring vp peaceofferings vpon that Altar now,
            The plague did cease, and God the same did very well allow.
            Now Dauid béeing old & weake with yeres & troubles past,
                  3. Regum Cap. 1.
               
            
            Could not in bed get any heate with clothes vpon him cast.
            
               His seruauntes then did counsel him some yong & tender thing,
            Whose liuely blood with pleasant heat might cherish vp ye king,
            Should lye by him vpon his brest, not meaning any harme,
            But rayse a vitall heate in him and make his body warme.
            And so they made a carefull search throughout all Israel,
            
            And found at length one Abisag in Sunam that did dwell,
            Who béeing brought vnto the king her seruice did imploy,
            To call agayne that liuely heate which yeres and age destroy.
            
               Adonia aspireth to the kingdome.And now began Adonia for to aspire on hye,
            As had his brother Absalon before vsurpingly.
            And gan all things for his estate both horse and men to séeke,
            His father did not séeme at all with any thing mislike.
            The Capteine Ioab tooke his parte, and eke Abiathar,
            
            As chiefe of counsell eury way his matters to preferre.
            But faithfull Sadoch that good priest would neuer take his part,
            Nor Nathan, nor Banaia, would that way bend their hart.
            At Rogel was his sacrifice and all prouision had,
            And there vnto his brothers all and Iuda to he bad.
            But Nathan nor Banaia nor other mightie men,
            Nor yet his brother Salomon he called with him then.
            And herevpon to Bethsabe the Prophet Nathan goes,
            And what he sées, and what he heares, to her he playnly showes.
            Hast thou not heard what wicked séede Adonia hath sowen,
            And yet vnto our lord the king his purpose is vnknowen?
            But if you loue your owne estate or Salomon your sonne,
            Then marke what counsell I will giue, and sée that it be done.
            Go get thée forth vnto the king and thus vnto him say:
            My lord O king didst thou not make an oth to me for aye,
            That Salomon my sonne should sit vpon thy kingly seate?
            And now thy sonne Adonia thereof doth him defeate.
            And while thou talkest with the king about thy sonne alone,
            I will come after and confirme thy sayings eury one.
            So Bethsabe to Dauid went into his chamber bolde,
            Where Abisag was ministring because the king was olde.
            She bowing downe with reuerence and great humilitie,
            He then demaunded what the cause of her repayre should be?
            
               My lord (quod she) yu didst lōg since vnto thine hādmaid sweare,
            That Salomon should after thée as king the scepter beare.
            And now beholde Adonia he is proclaymed king,
            And thou my lord vnto this houre not priuy to the thing.
            His Oxen are all offred vp, his shéepe and cattell fat,
            And hath both Ioab and his priest Abiathar thereat.
            And all thy sonnes be there with him saue Salomon alone,
            With many other mightie men that vnto him are gone.
            And now my lorde the eyes of all the people Israel,
            
            Whō thou wilt haue succéede do looke yt thou thy self should tel.
            For els when that my lord doth rest, both Salomon and I,
            We shall trausgressours counted be as worthy so to dye.
            And while she thus stoode with the king debating to and fro,
            The Prophet Nathan commeth in his pleasure for to know,
            And when he had with reuerence obeisance duely made,
            He told his tale, and with the king gan wisely to perswade.
            My lord O king hast thou commaunde or so ordeined it,
            That after thée Adonia vpon thy seate shall sit?
            For he hath made his kingly feast, and thereto hath he bid
            Thy sonnes & Capteins of the hoast, which thing to thée is hid.
            
               Abiathar with many mo in bankets cheerefully,
            God saue our king Adonia, God saue our king, they cry.
            But me and Sadoch that good priest, nor Salomon thy sonne,
            Nor yet Banaia they cald to this they haue begonne.
            Is this the kings good pleasure now and made to me so dim,
            That of my lord I may not know who shall reigne after him?
            Then Dauid called Bethsabe and thus vnto her sware,
            As God doth liue who hath me rid from trouble and from care,
            Assure thy selfe that Salomon thy sonne shall after me
            Sit on the seate of Israel, and thereof king shall be.
            The Quéene then yéelding harty thanks & bowing him before,
            To God she prayde that he might reigne and liue for euermore.
            The king did call Banaia and Sadoch to him than,
            And Nathan to, and then his minde to breake he thus began.
            Go forth and take with you my men, and set vp Salomon
            
            Upon the mule whereon I rid, and leade him to Gihon,
            
            
               
               Salomon is proclaymed king.And there let Sadoch him annoint with trūpets blowing braue,
            And then with trumpets do you cry, king Salomon God saue:
            Then come you all and follow him, and set him on my throne,
            For I haue sworne and do appoynt he shall be king alone.
            Amen then said Banaia, the liuing Lorde permit,
            That on thy seate a happy king he many dayes may sit:
            And as the Lord hath bene with thée, so let him giue his strēgth
            Unto the seate of Salomon, and stretch it more in length.
            So they departed from the king, and set vp Salomon
            
            vpon the Mule as they were bid, and brought him to Gihon,
            
            Where Sadoch then anoynted him, and vp the trumpets blow,
            God saue our lord king Salomon the peoples voyce doth go.
            And comming after him with pipes they ioyfully do sing,
            Whose sound of voyce & instrumēts made all the earth to ring.
            The voyce was such that it did come to Adonias place,
            And made his gests to turne & chaunge the colour in their face.
            But Ioab gan to stirre, & said, what meanes this passing noyse
            Of trumpet blowing in the towne, and sound of men & boyes?
            He had no sooner spoke the word but in came Ionathan,
            
            Who in the presence of them all to tell him newes began.
            Our lord and king assuredly vpon some weightie thing,
            Hath caused Salomon his sonne to be proclaymed king:
            They haue him brought on Dauids Mule to Gihon regally,
            Where Sadoch hath annoynted him our king and lord to be.
            Wher at the people shoute for ioy that he shall ore them reigne,
            Which is the noyse & sounde ye heare of him and all his trayne.
            And furthermore the people hath giuen thanks to Dauid great,
            And pray to God the sonne may passe the father in his seate.
            The king likewise hath praysed God whose mercy brought to pas,
            That in his seate before he dyed his sonne inuested was.
            Then all the gestes Adonia had feasted that same day
            Were sore afrayde, and made great haste to rise and get away.
            And he him selfe as one that feard the sight of Salomon,
            
            Did flée and catch the Aulters hornes to saue him selfe thereon.
            Then one comes vnto Salomon and humbly doth begin
            To tell the daunger and the feare Adonia is in.
            
               Add makes request that he would sweare & promise by his word
            That he would not his seruaunt put that day vnto the sword.
            If that he may (quod Salomon) to me be faythfull founde,
            No haire that is vpon his head shall fall vnto the grounde,
            But if I finde vntruth in him or wickednes espye,
            He may make his account thereof that he shall surely dye.
            So béeing brought to Salomon he did him selfe submit,
            And home was sent vnto his house there quietly to sit.
            Now came the time that Dauid should passe frō this world away,
                  Cap. 2.
               
            
            Wherfore he called Salomon and thus gan to him say.
            My time drawes on for me to dye and passe an other way,
            Shew thou thy selfe a man therfore and on the Lord thée stay.
            Kéepe thou his watch with careful eye, & walke in al his waies,
            That thou in all thy good attempts mayst prosper all thy daies.
            So shall the Lord make good his worde & promise firmely laide
            Unto his seruaunt long ago, when thus to me he saide:
            If that thy children take good héede and guyde their steps aright,
            And walke before me in the truth with all their heart & might,
            Then shalt thou neuer want a man to sit vpon thy throne,
            To rule and gouerne Israel when thou art dead and gone.
            And furthermore thou knowest right well how Ioab serued me,
            And with a couple how he dealt farre better men then he,
            How Amasa and Abner to he falsly did betray,
            And shed their blood most cruelly, and cast them both away.
            Deale thou therfore with Ioab as thy wisdome shall increase,
            And let not his hore head be brought downe to ye graue in peace.
            But let the sonnes of Berzella be at thy table fed,
            For they came to me when away from Absalon I fled.
            Thou hast with thée one Semei a man of Bahurim,
            
            Who curst me all the way I went vnto Mahanaim,
            
            But yet at my returne he came and brought me home agayne,
            Wheras I made an othe to him that he should not be slayne,
            Yet shalt thou not him giltlesse count, but by thy wisdome good
            Sée yt his hore head downe be brought vnto ye graue with blood.
            Thus now whē 
               Dauid in his reigne had runne out al his race,
            His soule departed vnto God and left his sonne in place.
            FINIS
         
      
   